ONANIA; OR, THE Heinous Sin OF Self-Pollution, And all its frightful
Consequences, in both SEXES, Considered.

The Tenth EDITION.

Above Fifteen Thousand of the former Editions have been Sold.

ONANIA; OR, THE Heinous Sin OF Self-Pollution, AND All its Frightful
Consequences, in both SEXES, Considered.

WITH Spiritual and Physical Advice to those, who have already injured
themselves by this Abominable Practice.

And Seasonable Admonition to the Youth (of both SEXES) and those whose Tuition
they are under, whether Parents, Guardians, Masters, or Mistresses.

To which is added, A Letter from a Lady (very curious) Concerning the Use and
Abuse of the Marriage Bed. With the Author's answer thereto.

And ONAN knew that the Seed should not be his: and it came to pass, when he
went in unto his Brothers Wife, that he spilled it on the Ground, lest that he
should give Seed to his Brother.

And the Thing which he Did, displeased the LORD: wherefore he Slew him also.
Genesis 38. ver. 9, 10.

LONDON Printed: Reprinted at BOSTON, for John Phillips, and Sold at his Shop
on the Southside of the Townhouse. 1724.

THE PREFACE.
THE Sin of ONAN, and GOD's sudden Vengeance upon it, are so remarkable, that
every Body will easily perceive, that from his Name I have d^riv'd the running
Title of this little Book; and though I treat of this Crime in Relation to Women,
as well as Men, whilst the Offense, is SELF-POLLUTION in both, I could not
think of any other Word which would so well put the Reader in Mind both of the
Sin and its Punishment at once, as this.

THIS Practice is so frequent, and so crying an Offense, especially among the
MALE YOUTH of this Nation, that I have Reason to imagine, a great many
Offenders would never have been Guilty of it, if they had been thoroughly
acquainted with the Heinousness of the Crime, and the sad Consequences to the
BODY as well as the SOUL, which may, and often do ensue upon it. This was the
chief Motive that induced me to write on this Subject.

THOSE who are of Opinion, that notwithstanding the Frequency of this Sin, it
never ought to be spoke of, or hinted at, because the bare mentioning of it may
be dangerous to some, who without it, would never have thought of it, I hope
will find themselves fully Answered.

AND as I am fully persuaded, that there are very few Sentences throughout the
BOOK, which do not more or less tend to the Mortification of Lust, and not one
that can give Offense to the chastest Ear, so I dare recommend the serious
Perusal of it to both Sexes: And that it has been looked upon as Instructive,
without being hurtful, (by others as well as my self,) will appear from the
following LETTER sent me by a very Learned and Pious Divine.

SIR,
I Received the Favor of your little BOOK against SELF-POLLUTION, and have
given it, as it deserved, a Second Reading. I am much pleased with your
Arguments and Admonitions, which are both cogent and swasive, and I hope in
GOD, will answer your Design by it, in doing a great deal of Good in the World,
both to the SOUL and BODY, by awakening the Guilty, (who are Daily, and
oftentimes dangerously wounded by this foul Practice) and deterring the
Innocent and Unwary from falling into it. Would all Masters of Schools have but
a strict Eye over their Scholars; (amongst whom nothing is more common, than
the Commission of this vile Sin, the Elder Boys Teaching it the Younger, as
soon as ever they arrive to the Years of Puberty) tell them the Heinousness of
the Sin, and give suitable Correction to the Offenders therein, and shame them
before their School-Fellows for it; [or rather privately reprove and admonish
them of the Sin and Danger] I am persuaded it would deter them from the
Practice, and by that means save them from Ruin; Thousands of the Youth of this
Kingdom Learning it there, who probably might never have known it elsewhere.

Sir, Yours, etc.


AND I may add, would all Mistresses of Schools also, (those of
Boarding-Schools especially) have a watchful Eye upon the Conduct of their
Scholars, and pry more narrowly into their Behavior, in their secret
Retirements, the many sad Consequences here spoken of, might be prevented,
which to my own Knowledge, several of them, through such Wantonness, have
brought upon themselves; I having been consulted with about the retrieving of
such Abuses, more than once, by their sorrowfully Astonished Parents: And though
the seeming Modesty of those fair Pupils before their Superiors, may give no
room for their being Thought Guilty of such Practices, I am credibly informed,
it is now become almost as frequent amo^^st Girls, as Masturbation is amongst
Boys; and a Gentleman of great Distinction, (my good Friend) whose Veracity I
can depend upon, has told me some Years since, that the Governess of one of the
most eminent Boarding-Schools we then had, did, with Tears in her Eyes, inform
his Lady, that she had surpised and detected some of her Scholars, (to her
great astonishment and concern) in the very Fact; and who upon Examination
confessed, that they very frequently practiced it, cum Digitis and aliis
Instrumentis, and that chiefly those of them from the Age of about 15 and
upwards.

NOR is this abominable Sin, Practiced only by the Youth, but also by the Adult
of both Sexes, Married Men, as well as Single, Widows, and even Married Women
that are Lascivious, as well those whose Husbands are with them, as those that
are absent, as the many Complaints, that such have made of Injuries brought
upon themselves thereby, make manifest.

TO show the Inoffensiveness of this Treatise to the most Chaste, a certain
Grave and very Learned Divine and Physician, whose Judgment, none, with any
Justice, can call into Question having had the perusal of it, returned it, with
his Opinion of it, in these Words, This little BOOK, ought to be Read, by all
Sorts of People, of both Sexes; of what Age, Degree, Profession, or Condition
soever; Guilty or not Guilty of the Sin declaimed against, in it.

NOR is what is Writ Useful, in the Opinion of one CLERGYMAN, only, but
others, as the following LETTER amongst many more, left at the Book-seller's,
will show.

April 10. 1722. SIR,
I Bought your Author's BOOK called ONANIA, which I take to be the Best ever
Wrote on that Subject. I have read the Learned Ostervald upon Uncleanness, and
other Pious Authors, but they all fall short of what this explains in being the
fatal Consequences of that vile Practice, which is really a Service to the
World, and what I shall improve to Advantage in the Capacity I stand, not only
as a CLERGYMAN, but a SCHOOLMASTER; and I hope others of my Function, will do
the same, as now they have the Opportunity of this useful BOOK put into their
Hands. To me it seems to be Wrote by one of my own Cloth, but be it by whom it
will, it is a necessary and much wanted Discourse, to deter all, Youth more
especially, from that wicked Practice.

SIR, Yours, etc. T. B.


CHAP. I. Of the HEINOUS SIN of SELF-POLLUTION.
SELF POLLUTION is that unnatural Practice, by which Persons of either Sex, may
defile their own Bodies, without the Assistance of others, whilst yielding to
filthy Imaginations, they endeavor to imitate and procure to themselves that
Sensation, which God has ordered to attend the carnal Commerce of the two
Sexes, for the continuance of our Species.

IT is almost impossible to treat of this Subject so as to be understood by the
meanest Capacities, without trespassing at the same time against the Rules of
Decency, and making Use of Words and Expressions which Modesty forbids us to
utter. But as my great Aim is to promote Virtue and Christian Purity, and to
discourage Vice and Uncleanness, without giving Offense to any, I shall choose
rather to be less intelligible to some, and leave several things to the
Consideration of my Readers, than by being too plain, run the H^zard of raising
in some corrupt Minds, what I would most endeavor to st^fie and destroy: And
that every Body, who would write profitably against any sort of Uncleanness
whatever, and not do more Harm than Good by his Endeavors, ought to be very
careful and circumspect as to this Particular, we may learn from Bishop Tailor
in his Rules and Exercises of Holy Living: It Is too plain, says that Learned
Prelate, that there are some Spirits so Atheistical, and some so wholly
possessed with a Spirit of Uncleanness, that they turn the most prudent and
chaste Discourses into Dirt and filthy Apprehensions; like Choleric Stomachs,
changing their very Cordials and Medicines into Bitterness, and in a literal
sense, turning the Grace of God into Wantonness. They study Cases of Conscience
(as he proceeds) in the Case of carnal Sins, not to avoid, but to learn Ways
how to offend God, and pollute their own Spirits, and search their Houses with
a Sunbeam, that they may be instructed in all the Corners of Nastiness.

I am persuaded, that those who have defiled themselves by this Practice
already, or else by wicked Thoughts are tempted so to do, must understand what
I mean by SELF-POLLUTION, as I have defined it, without any farther
Interpretation. To them it is that I chiefly recommend these Pages, with my
hearty Desire of their most serious Consideration on what is contained in them:
And as to such who never contracted this Guilt, and being perhaps of small
Experience may be wholly ignorant of the Sin I would warn them against, I think
them happy in their Innocence; assuring them withal, that they shall meet here
with nothing but what shall more and more incite them to Chastity, and deter
them from all manner of Uncleanness.

SELF-POLLUTION we see remarkably punished in Onan, by a particular Stroke from
Almighty God, for it is not to be thought that his Guilt lay totally in not
raising up Seed to his Deceased Brother Er, though we'll own that this was an
aggravation of it, but the Way he took to prevent it would have been highly
culpable at any other Time; and from the Words of the Text, which informs us of
this Part of Sacred History, it is reasonable to imagine, that the greatest
Part of the Offense lay in the act of defiling himself, rather than in the
Neglect of his Duty; the thing which he Did displeased the Lord, wherefore he
slew him also, Genesis 38. ver. 10. It was therefore the thing he Did, rather than
the thing he omitted, which most displeased the Lord, as may be further seen
in, Deuteronomy. Chap. 25. from ver. 5, to 10. Be that as it will, this is certain,
that as it was, it proved so intolerable a Provocation, that Almighty God
could not bear with it, and therefore immediately cut him off by Reason of it.

SOME easy Casuists notwithstanding the Exemplary Punishment that has attended
this Sin, have made slight of it, and shamefully deceived those who consulted
them, several of them perhaps to their Ruin. Others, by being too open though
severe enough, have treated this matter so grossly in the learned Languages,
that it is impossible to translate any part of them, wihout offending Chastity.

THE Learned Ostervald, in his useful Treatise on Uncleanness in all its
Branches, has through an excess of Modesty, passed over this abominable Sort of
Impurity in Silence, or at least spoke of it in such general Terms, blending it
with lesser Trespasses of Uncleanness, that he has failed of Representing the
Heinousness that is in it. Having hinted at the Sins of Sodom, and spoke at
large of Adultery and Fornication, he adds, That, besides those, there are many
Actions contrary to Modesty and Chastity, some whereof, says he, by the
Violence of the Passion, and full Consent of the Will, or by Reason of the
Malignity and Infamy of the Action, almost equal the Crime to which they tend;
for some un^hast Persons are hurried by their Lust, to try in every thing to
gratify their Brutal Passion, as far as they can conceive to do it, without
committing the Fact. But here, continues he, I must be very wary, and leave to
my Readers, the Trouble of considering with themselves, what I may not say, and
apply to all the Actions of Impurity, what I may but just touch upon very
briefly, and only in general Terms -- And lower he says, Now forasmuch as I
cannot well repeat all those Actions which are hurtful to Purity, and yet my
Readers may be doubtful of some of them, and may question whether this or that
be unlawful, I shall lay down this one general Rule in this Place, whereby
these Doubts may be easily resolved. Let Natural Chastity and Modesty be first
consulted; because, provided a Habit of Wickedness has not quite extinguished
in us the sense of Modesty, which is natural to us as Men, we shall readily
discern whether an Action be unchaste or no. Next; this principle is to be
attended to, that a Christian is bound to shun whatever sensualizes the Soul,
whatever tends only to satisfy the Passions, and whatever is wont to excite
them in us, or other.

AND again, Enquiry should be made what is necessary, or at least, what is
expressly allowed. I say then, that whenever we are ashamed of what we do, and
dare not venture upon it in the sight of others, when it is only the Effect of
a disorderly Passion, and aims only at indulging Sensuality, and kindling
impure Desires, either in our own, or others Hearts; and when moreover it is
neither necessary nor expressly allowed, we should be sure to abstain from it.
--

THIS is admirable Advice, and excludes not the least Act of Impurity; but
there is wanting that Horror, with which the Reader ought to be filled against
SELF POLLUTION, above other Acts of Uncleanness less criminal. But that this
Author only forbore to pronounce his just Censure against this sort of Impurity
in particular, for no other Reason than his being too scrupulously modest, is
manifest from his own Confession, that he was forced to be defective in many
particulars. Some Points, says he, in his Preface, should have been more
enlarged upon; and some Objections more particularly considered; but this would
have necessitated me to touch upon some Things, which Decency forbids. There
are also diverse Things, which I am obliged to express only in general Terms;
others which I dare but just hint; and others again that I am forced totally to
suppress. --

THERE have been other Casuists again, who treating of this Subject, have been
neither too plain, nor too remiss, but by too much Subtilty strained their
Arguments beyond their natural Force, and done an Injury to Truth and good
Sense, by being too Sophistical. One of these having premised, that Lusts of
Uncleanness are committed first with ones self: Secondly with others, expresses
himself in the manner following: First, says he, we will begin with those
committed with ones self, which are greater in themselves (abstract them from
all other Circumstances) than with any other, as Self-Murder is worse than the
Murder of any other; so in and of it self, this is worse than polluting of
another. For the ^ule is, that the Sin that does break the Order of Love most
is the worst, Love being the keeping of the Commandments. I must not defile my
Neighbor, because I am to love my Neighbor's Chastity, but I am to love my
self, and my own Chastity, before the Chastity of any else; and this is a foul
Sin, much against Nature, and therefore the worse; for the more unnatural the
Sin is, the greater the Guilt is still in that respect; and whereas it is
thought, that there is not that wrong in it, as in taking away the Chastity of
another, I urge it, that there is most Wrong when a Man does Wrong to himself;
and as the Thief does in the Candle, so these Self-Defilements do ^ot and
weaken the Body by the Curse of God exceedingly. Besides, (as in all such
inordinate Practices) there is a secret kind of Murder, what if not in the
intention of the Doer, yet in the Condition of the thing done; wherefore God is
much displeased with these kind of Sins. --

TO all the latter Part of these Assertions I could readily agree; but in the
beginning of them this Casuist has been grossly overseen in his way of
Reasoning. The Difference he states between the Murder of another, and that of
ones self, is very just; but then he has forgot to consider, that that
difference ceases, when the Murder of another necessarily includes the Murder
of ones self: Thus by endeavoring to prove too much, his Argument has not
proved what it might have done. At this rate, SELF-POLLUTION would be more
criminal than the most unnatural Abomination with others, which is false,
because it is impossible to defile others without defiling ones self at the
same time in as high a Degree.

TO condemn and expose a Sin so displeasing to God, so detrimental to the
Public, and so injurious to our selves, requires no Flights of Wit, nor any
other way of arguing, than what is agreeable to the plainest Truth, and can
stand the Test of the severest Reason. To prove the many Injuries it may do to
our selves, as it is the whole Business of the next Chapter, so I refer the
Reader to it; and that it is very detrimental to the Public, will soon appear,
if we consider what is undeniable, that it hinders Marriage, and puts a full
stop to Procreation. What remains, is to demonstrate, that it is displeasing to
God; and that it is so in a very high Degree, is evident both from the Holy
Scripture, and our own Reason.

THERE is not a Place either in the Old or New Testament, where Uncleanness,
the Lusts of the Flesh, or the Abominations of Sodom are condemned, but this
Sin is hinted at among others; and there is no doubt, but those who are guilty
of it, are comprehended among the Abominable, who shall have their Part in the
Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21. v. 8. What! know ye not,
says St. Paul, that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you,
which you have of God? And this is a very powerful Consideration to dissuade
from Uncleanness, being taken from the Glory whereto God has raised us, even in
regard as to our Bodies. They are the Temples of the Holy Spirit, because the
Holy Spirit dwells in us, and pours forth his Benefits upon us, sanctifies us,
and consecrates us to the Service of God; wherefore our Bodies partaking of
this Honor, we are bound to preserve them in purity, and to employ them to
holy Purposes; for if the Temples dedicated to the Worship of God, may not be
profaned by any POLLUTION, but must be kept pure and undefiled, how great
ought the Holiness of our Bodies to be, seeing God has condescended to make
them the Temples of His Holy Spirit? This Reflection of St. Paul lets us see
plainly, that whenever any give themselves over to Uncleanness, they cease to
be the Temples of the Holy Spirit, just as the Apostle had said before, that
they cease to be the Members of Jesus Christ, which shows this Sin to be the
Occasion that the Holy Spirit of God withdraws from the Hearts of such as are
guilty of it, because his Spirit cannot dwell with POLLUTION. He tells us
afterward in the same Chapter, Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a
Price, therefore glorify God in your Bodies, and in your Spirits which are
God's.

THE same Apostle affirms of the Heathens, that being given up to Uncleanness,
they dishonored their own Bodies between themselves. And in another Place,
that it is the Will of God, that we abstain from Uncleanness. But it would be
endless to quote all the Texts, which tend to the same Purpose. Let any Man
examine all the Places of the New Testament, where mention is made of Vices and
Sins, and he will find, there is not any one other Crime so many times named as
Uncleanness; and how can a Person be more superlatively unclean, than when he
is guilty of SELF-POLLUTION.

BUT if it was not revealed to us that God is highly offended at all manner of
Uncleanness; when we reflect on the End of Marriage in all Countries, and in
all Societies, and the manner after which God has ordained that our Species
should be continued, natural Religion, and our own Reason would instruct us,
that to destroy that End, must be very offensive to God, if there is one; for
whether we commit Abomination with those of our own Sex, as the Scripture says,
Men with Men; or with Beasts; or that we defile our own Bodies our selves with
this shameful Action, the Consequences are the same to the Society and our
Species; and what a learned Divine has said of the first, is equally applicable
to all three, That the Crime in it self is monstrous and unnatural; in its
Practice filthy and odious to Extremity; its Guilt is crying, and its
Consequences ruinous; It destroys conjugal Affecti^n, perverts natural
Inclination, and tends to extinguish the Hopes of Posterity.

FOR Fornication and Adultery it self, though heinous Sins, we have Frailty and
Nature to plead; but SELF-POLLUTION is a Sin, not only against Nature, but a
Sin, that perverts and extinguishes Nature, and he who is guilty of it, is
la^ouring at the Destruction of his Kind, and in a manner strikes at the
Creation it self. That this Sin, and all the Mischiefs that may attend it, are
equally ruinous in either Sex, in regard to the civil Society, as well as
themselves, shall be demonstrated in the following Chapter. In the Remainder of
this, I shall examine into the Causes of SELF-POLLUTION, and offer some
Thoughts to prevent at least the Frequency of it.

I Shall not here meddle with the Causes of Uncleanness in general, such as
Ill-Books, Bad Companions, Love-Stories, Lascivious Discourses, and other
Provocatives to Lust and Wantonness; as these are sufficiently treated of in
most Books of Devotion and Practical Divinity, so I refer the Reader to them,
and design only to speak of those peculiar Causes, which belong to this Sin,
and hardly any other.

THE first Cause is Ignorance: There are Thousands among the Youth of both
Sexes Ingenious, Docile, Diligent, and Tractable, who either by the Example of
their Intimates; through their own Wantonness; or by being idle and alone; and
some by mere Accident, have learned to Pollute themselves after this manner,
that would have abhorred the Thoughts, had they understood the Nature of the
Sin, and been acquainted with the Heinousness of the Crime. There are likewise
many adult Persons, both Men and Women, who are guilty of this Sin, and perhaps
Reprobates enough to Commit any, as to Religious Fears, that would never have
ventured upon this, if they had known what Bodily Suff^rings and Infirmities it
may be, and often is the Occasion of.

THE Second, is the Secrecy, with which SELF-POLLUTION may be committed: All
other Actions of Uncleanness must have a Witness, this needs none. Some lustful
Women of Sense, have made all the outward Show of Virtue and Morality that can
be required; they have had Prudence enough, in the midst of strong Desires, to
refuse disadvantageous Matches, and yet have abandoned themselves to this Vice,
when at the same time, they would rather have died, than betrayed a Weakness to
any Man living, as afterward becoming Penitents they have confessed
themselves. And again some young Men of vicious Inclinations, have either
naturally, or for want of a liberal Education, been shamefaced to Excess; they
have not dared to look upon a Woman, and their Bashfulness has secured them
from every Act of Impurity, but This. From all which, it is evident, that the
Secrecy of this Sin has betrayed many into it, whom hardly any thing else would
have tempted.

THE third and last Cause I shall allege, is Impunity. Though the Laws against
Fornication and Adultery, are in many Places either very remiss, or ill
executed, yet the Dread of them keeps the fearful in Awe. The Punishment for
unnatural Impurities committed with others, is Capital. But the Laws are not
the only thing which vicious Persons are afraid of. Some are withheld from
Prostitutes by their Covetousness only. Others again abstain from Fornication
for nothing else but the fear of Diseases, or the having of Children.
Lascivious Widows, who understand the World, have reason to scruple second
Marriages, on many Accounts; some love their Liberty; others their Money; and
if they value their Reputation, they will not dare to venture on unlawful
Embraces; whereas in SELF-POLLUTION, neither the cautious, nor the covetous,
imagine that they have any thing to fear.

IT is not easy to determine, whether it be more monstrous or unaccountable,
that rather than commit a Sin before others, who would be their Accomplices,
and uphold them in it, Men should choose to be guilty of a greater before God,
who has vowed to revenge it. To say that this proceeds from Atheism, and want
of Faith, is contrary to Experience, for let us take a thousand People to task,
that shall have all been guilty of this or any other the most Heinous Crime,
and we shall hardly find one, but what will not only acknowledge a Deity, but
likewise tell us, that he is convinced of his Ubiquity and Omniscience, his
Wisdom, Justice, and Omnipotence, and that he is ready to subscribe to every
Article of Christianity. What can be said of this, is, that Man contradicts
himself, and acts directly against his own Principle. What could be more absurd
in humane Affairs, than that a Thief designing to steal a Horse, should
endeavor to shun the Eyes of all the World but the Owners; especially if he
was fully persuaded, that this Owner could catch him whenever he would, and
instict what Punishment upon him he pleased? What Spiritual darkness must
surround Man, that should be stark blind in his greatest Concerns, and clear
sighted only in Trifles? When a Man shows Bashfulness, and the utmost Cowardice
to the most impotent Wretch of his Fellow Creatures, is it not unconceivable he
should behave himself with giantick Boldness and Impudence, to affront the
Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth? Yet there is one thing more contradictory
still, which is, that at the same time he will affect to be thought Brave as to
Principle, and a Christian as to Religion.

IT is the general Opinion, that the Shameless are the worst of People; yet
Shame when ill placed, has often wrought worse Effects than the Reverse alone
has ever been able to produce. When a Bastard Infant is found dead, and the
Mother lately delivered without Witness, is not able to prove either that she
had made Provision for it, or during her Pregnancy, imparted the Secret to
another besides the Father, our English Law, without any other Evidence,
presumes the Woman to have Murdered the Child. From whence it is evident the
Legislators must have supposed that some Women may have Cruelty enough to
commit the utmost unnatural Murder of all, and at the same time want Courage to
bear Shame: But is there no Remedy to be found against this preposterous Shame?
Is it impossible to imbue Youth with better Notions of it than are commonly
received either by Example or Instruction?

WOMEN for the generality, are more Bashful and reserved than Men, and there
are things that a Man of the strictest Morals shall not scruple to do in
Public, which yet would shock most Women, even after Prostitution: From hence
to imagine, that Women are naturally more modest than Men, is a Mistake; all
the Difference between them, depends upon Custom and Education; and I am much
mistaken, if this great Power of Fashions and Instruction does not point at a
Remedy, that would be very serviceable against SELF-POLLUTION. It is a Rule I
know among the most prudent People, never to mention any thing concerning this
Vice, to the Youth of either Sex, for fear that either the Desire after Things
forbidden, or else Curiosity itself, might prompt the Pupils to what perhaps
they never might have thought on, had it not been for the too instructive
Caution of the Teachers. But there are other Methods: The Instruction of Youth
I hint at, should commence from their Infancy. If Children were strictly
forbid, never to touch their Eyes or Nose, but with their Handkerchief, and
that only upon very urgent Necessities; if likewise they saw every Body comply
with this Custom, and it was counted abominable to touch them with their naked
Hards, I cannot see why this might not be so shocking to 'em when grown up, as
now the most guilty Denudations are to well-bred People.

I Would have the Reader reflect on the Matter I treat of, which differs much
from other Points of Morality; for in handling other Topics, a Man may safely
say whatever he thinks any way advantageous to his Design; and has nothing to
hinder him from rallying together whatever he apprehends necessary, and
proposing his Arguments in their utmost Extent and Force, making them as plain
as possible, and answering all Difficulties imaginable. But in arguing against
Uncleanness, especially this sort of it, which of all, as it is the most
loathsome, the same Liberty is not to be taken, but a Man is extremely
confined, and is obliged to express himself with the utmost Circumspection and
Caution, for fear of intrenching upon Modesty; which as I promised I would not
be Guilty of doing, I shall all along with the greatest strictness observe, as
knowing I should be obliged to name some Things that might betray my Readers
into the remembrance of what it is much better that they should for ever
forget, as they would not then be able to set such a watchful Guard upon their
Thoughts and Fancies, but that some soul or filthy Desires would in Spite
creep in; the least imagination only of which, would render them Odious in
God's sight, who sees the Heart, and Delights in none but those who are pure
and upright there; with which Apology, hoping it will be thought sufficient for
what Omissions and Obscurity I have been guilty of, I conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of the Frightful Consequences of SELF-POLLUTION.
HAVING set forth the Heinousness of this Sin in the preceding Chapter, one
might justly imagine, that the Impression which the Ugliness of Incontinence
and Uncleanness in general there represented must make, would not so
immediately wear out, as not to secure, for some small time, the Imagination
even of vicious Persons against any slight Attacks of Unchastity; but there are
Lascivious People of such corrupt Minds, that at no time excepted, they may be
raised to impure Thoughts by bare words, without Coherence, and the Names of
Parts, even when made use of in the Description of Calamitous Cases and
Nauseous Diseases; Therefore as I shall be forced to make use of some
expressions in this Chapter, which though spoke with a Design the most remote
from Obscenity, may, working by the reverse, perhaps furnish the Fancies of
silly People with Matter for Impurity; therefore I say, I beg of the Reader to
stop here, and not to proceed any further, unless he has a Desire to be chaste,
or at least be apt to consider whether he ought to have it or no.

THE Afflictions which may, and often do fall upon those who are or have been
guilty of the sinful Practice of SELF-POLLUTION, belong either to the Soul or
the Body: I shall begin with those of the least Concern. In the first place, it
manifestly hinders the Growth both in Boys and Girls, and few of either Sex,
that in their Youth commit this Sin to excess for any considerable time, come
ever to that Robustness or Strength which they would have arrived to without
it. In Men as well as Boys, the very first Attempt of it has often occasioned a
Phymosis in some, and a Paraphymosis in others; I shall not explain these Terms
any further, let it suffice that they are Accidents which are very troublesome
and painful, and may continue to be tormenting for some time, if not bring on
Ulcers and other worse Symptoms; especially if managed by raw unskilful People,
whom to employ, it is most commonly the Fate of young Men, who being conscious
of their Guilt, have not the Assurance to address themselves to Men of Worth
and Experience. Whoever wants to know the Signification of those Words, any
Surgeon will imform him.

THE frequent Use of this POLLUTION; likewise causes Stranguries, Priapisms,
and other Disorders of the Penis and Testes, but especially Gonorrhaea's, more
difficult to be cured, than those contracted from Women actually laboring
under soul Diseases. When the Seminal Vessels are first strained, and
afterward relaxed, the Ferment in the Testes is destroyed and the Seed grown
thin and waterish, comes away unelaborated, without any provocation; this
Distemper often proves fatal, even under the Hands of the most skilful. These
Gonorrhaea's are chiefly occasioned, says Etmuller (a famous Physician) a
damnata Mastupratione, from that damnable SELF-POLLUTION; and as Dr. Baynard
also confirms, (speaking of this Practice) by that cursed School-Wickedness of
Masturbation (Res faeda dictu)

IN some it has been the Cause of fainting Fits and Epilepsies; in others of
Consumptions; and many young Men who were strong and lusty before they gave
themselves over to this Vice, have been worn out by it, and by its robbing the
Body of its balmy and vital Moisture, without Cough or Spitting, dry and
emaciated, sent to their Graves. In others again, whom it has not killed, it
has produced Nightly and excessive Seminal Emissions; a Weakness in the Penis,
and loss of Erection, as if they had been Castrated. Many a young Gentleman
(says the same Dr. Baynard) has been for ever utterly undone by it: The Reason
he gives for it, is, That used when young, it so forces and weakens the tender
Vessels, that when they come to Manhood, it renders them ridiculous to Women,
because impotent, a Curse half tanti to Castration; many of them not being able
to touch a Woman, but ad primum labiorum contactum semen emittunt, etc. In some
Men of very strong Constitutions, the Mischiefs may not be so visible, and
themselves perhaps capable of Marrying; and yet the Blood and Spirits impaired,
and the Seed rendered infertile, so as to make them unfit for Procreation, by
its changing the Crafts of the Spermatick Parts, making them become barren, as
Land becomes poor by being over-till'd; and few of those that have been much
accustomed to this Vice in their Youth, have ever much reason to boast of the
Fruits of their Marriage Bed; for if by Nature's extraordinary Helps, they
should get any Children, which happens not often, they are commonly weakly
little ones, that either die soon, or become tender, sickly People, always
ailing and complaining; a misery to themselves, a dishonor to humane Race, and
a scandal to their Parents.

WITH what Encouragement to Virtue therefore, says a certain Author, may young
People, behold in a Man at the Age of Fourscore, with a Wife of the like
Antiquity, both blessed with healthy hail Constitutions, and fresh wholesome
Countenances, with sound Minds, and perfect Senses, with active Limbs, and of
cheerful Tempers, presiding over a healthful Progeny, perhaps to the third or
fourth Generation; and all these Blessings, owing under Providence, to their
Temperance and Continence; when if we turn our Eyes upon licentious
Masturbaters, we shall find them with meagre Jaws, and pale Looks, with feeble
Hams, and Legs without Calves, their Generative Faculties weakon'd, if not
destroyed in the Prime of their Years. A Jest to others, and a Torment to
themselves.

IN Women SELF-POLLUTION if frequently practiced, relaxes and spoils the
retentive Faculty, occasions the Flour albus, an obnoxious as well as
perplexing Illness attending that Sex, which upon account of the Womb, may draw
on a whole Legion of Diseases; among other Disorders, it makes 'em look pale,
and those who are not of a good Complexion, swarthy and hagged. It frequently
is the Cause of Hysteric Fits, and sometimes, by draining away all the radical
Moisture, Consumptions. But what it more often produces than either is
Barrenness, and at length a total ineptitude to the Act of Generation it self,
Misfortunes very afflicting to them, because seldom to be redressed.

THE Reason why I am not more particular in describing the many Calamities and
bodily sufferings, which this Practice may be the occasion of in Women, I hope
will be obvious to every Reader that is capable of making Reflections. It would
be impossible to rake into so much Filthiness, as I should be obliged to do,
without offending Chastity. One thing I shall add, addressing my self to young
Women, who have any Esteem for their Honor, and would keep their Reputation
unspotted, which is, that many of them who thus defile their Bodies, by being
needless, or perhaps more filled with impure Desires than ordinary, actually
deflower themselves, and foolishly part with that valuable Badge of their
Chastity and Innocence, which when once lost, is never to be retrieved. This
may be the fatal Cause whenever they marry, of endless Jealousies and
Family-Quarrels, and make their Husbands suspect more than they have deserved,
wrongfully imagining, that there is but one Way by which Maids may forfeit
their Virginity.

THE next evil Consequences to be apprehended from SELF-POLLUTION, are all
those other Vices which it may lead the way to, and in time be the Occasion of:
Let us once suppose, what some raw ignorant People imagine, that this is only a
silly Practice, that there is no such great harm in it, and, if it be a Sin, it
is at least less criminal than Fornication. Let us, I say, suppose this, though
not grant it, and after that, seriously consider what Effects this foolish
Trick of Youth (as some favorably term it) is like to have on either Sex, and
what Impression it must necessarily make on the Minds of those, that have given
themselves over to it.

AS we are conceived in Sin, it is impossible but lustful Desires will now and
then arise, especially in young People that are in Health. By the Reluctance
which all innocent Persons feel against complying with them, it is easily to be
discovered, that they are evil, and that the more violently they attack us, the
more vigorously we ought to resist them. While this Conflict betwixt Lust and
Chastity last, we are Proof against many Temptations, and our Virtue remains
triumphant. But when once we abandon our Guard, and allow those wanton Thoughts
the Liberty of roving and wandering wherever they please, and loose Fancy can
lead them, we make the first step to our Undoing; and our Chastity is always in
Danger, as soon as our Dread and great Apprehen^^^^ of losing it, is gone. We
ought not to trust to frail Reason, because it is no Match for our
Inclinations, which are infinitely stronger. All carnal Temptations ought to be
carefully shunned, if it be possible; but if met with, boldly defied; for
whoever admits of a Parley with Lust, will be vanquished at last, and is
already capitulating with the Enemy. Therefore for our lives, ought we to
forbear all Parley with the Flesh, observing the different Rules the Scripture
give, between mortifying those Sins the Devil would put us upon, and mortifying
those Lusts the Flesh would tempt us to; the former is done by resisting,
resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. There when a Man grows stout and
courageous, Satan grows cowardly, but it is not so with the Business of the
Flesh; there our greatest Safety is in flying; when we have to do with Satan,
the Enemy is without us; but when we have to do with Lust, the Enemy is within
us.

THE Devil may suggest to the Haughty and the Bashful, that in SELF-POLLUTION
they will run no Hazard of their Reputation, and that no body in the World shall
know it but themselves; and to the Covetous, that they shall lose nothing by
it; or else represent he Impunity of it to the Cautious and Fearful; but he
will not tell them that the All-seeing God must be a Witness to an Act, which his
Holiness so much abominates, that the greatest Loss that can be sustained, is
that of the Divine Favor, which, to Balance, the Gain of the whole World is
not Equivalent? and that eternal Damnation infinitely exceeds all Temporal
Punishments that can be invented. When the first plausible Suggestions are once
admitted, the latter Consequences, which are at least as certain, are not
suffered to intrude, or are presently should out as troublesome Companions. But
whatever Reservedness before others, they may flatter themselves with, whenever
the Fact is once committed, if it was but a trifling Sin, they can have no
Innocence to boast of afterward. The Barrier that fenced their Chastity is
broke, and the Enemy to Purity and Holiness makes daily Inroads, and ravages
through every Passage of the conquered Soul.

THE Sensuality of such, by being the Occasion of abundance of inordinate
Inclinations in them, hurries them on to many Instances of Lewdness, for
satisfying this brutish Passion. But the State of the Soul is chiefly to be
considered; whilst it is ordinarily possessed by lustful Thoughts and Desires;
the unchaste Person has his Mind rarely free from lascivious and shameful
Imaginations and Fancies, His Heart is a continual Spring of evil Thoughts,
bubling up in it every Moment: So that there needs only the Presence of an
Object to inflame his Desire. Let him but see or hear any thing relating to his
beloved Sin, and his Lust is presently kindled by it. And not only so, but at
other times when none of these Obj^cts present themselves, his Memory serves to
furnish him with such former Passages as had gratified his Sensuality; these he
recalls to his Mind, and pleases himself with the Though^s of them, instead of
reflecting upon them, as he ought with Sorrow of Heart, and Confusion of Face.

WHERE this Sin is become habitual, there must be a Distaste to Godliness and
Virtue in general, and whatever Wantonness, obscene Discourses, shameful
Actions, and fi^thy Representations are to be met with, (how cautiously soever
they may to the World seem to be avoided) are treasured up with Care,
constantly to feed this Flame of Impurity. For no sooner has Uncleanness got
the Mastery over the Heart, but forthwith it pursues the Man every where, and
keeps its Possession of him at all Times, and in all Places. Upon the most
serious Occasions, and in the very Acts of Religion, he ever and anon finds
himself transported with lustful Conceptions and Desires, which incessantly
follow him, and take up his Thoughts. I shall not need to say, how great a Part
of Mankind find their Mind flag and languish, and wander from their Business,
and are full even of wicked Thoughts, when they should be praying to God, or
hearkening to his Word. But it is certain, that in many, Impurity is the Cause
of this Disorder, a Soul that is not chaste, will not know how to be devout. To
such an one, the holy Exercises of Prayer, Meditation, Reading, etc. are
insipid and unpleasant. A Love of Voluptuousness is inconsistent with spiritual
Delights, and those pious Affections, and Joys, and Raptures, which accompany a
sincere Holiness of Conversation.

I Have in the foregoing Chapter spoke of some, who gave themselves over to
this, and yet were Proof against any other gross Sin of Uncleanness, but it ^s
not so with all: Thousands have been guilty of Adultery, as well as
Fornication, who would never have yielded to those Temptations, which overcame
them, if they had never been initiated in Lasciviousness, and acquired to
themselves a Habit of Impurity by SELF-POLLUTION first. In such, not only the
grosser Crimes of Uncleanness I just now named, but likewise all others that
may be occasioned by them, as Lying, Forswearing, perhaps Murder, and what not,
must be laid to the Charge, and brought in as the Effects and Consequences of
their first darling Sin, by which they were infected with a stronger Habit of
Impurity, than they could ever have contracted from any other Frailty.

AMONG the Consequences of the Sin I treat of, ought not to be forgot the
Troubles and Agonies of a wounded Conscience, whenever it is roused, and makes
the polluted startle, affrighted at the Enormity of their Crime. To let the
Reader see how this Guilt of unnatural Impurity can alarm the Offenders, when
they awaken from their Lethargy of Sin, I shall insert the Preface to a little
Book, entitled, Letters of Advice from Reverend Divines, to a young Gentleman
about a weighty Case of Conscience. This Preface, wrote likewise by way of
LETTER, is addressed to all young Men, who have or may be tempted to this great
Sin in the following Manner.

INTO such a deplorable Condition, had the frequent Polluting my self brought
me, that I was considering, whether I had not deserved the Judgment that God
sent to Onan, and so apprehensive I was of it, that it brought me into a kind
of Despair, till I had Recourse to two most excellent and pious Divines; (whose
Works praise them in the Gates) and when I received their Advice, I was
resolved to break off this Sin, by Repentance and Mortification, as the only
Remedy to prevent my sudden Destruction: For whatever you may at present think,
that it is only a Relief of Nature, yet I must say, that it has been of horrid
Consequence to me, God having attended me with Judgments ever since, in most of
my Affairs in the World; and I cannot be satisfied 'till I have let you know
it, in order both to prevent your Danger and Ruin: For though the Sins of
Adultery and Fornication, be now the open Practices of most Men, to the Shame
and Reproach of Christianity, yet I am sure this Sin of SELF-POLLUTION bespeaks
you equally notorious Sinners, and puts you into a State of Enmity with God,
unfits you for those great Duties you owe to him, renders you mean spirited,
destroys the very End of your Creation, and will leave a Sting upon your
Conscience, which will cost you dear. In all Humility, let me beseech your Care
to peruse those excellent LETTERS, which I have published on purpose, as a
Warning to all such who thus defile themselves: And as you tender your own
Welfare in this World, as well as your Souls Good in the World to come, you
will as much hate and abominate this horrid Wickedness, as it will certainly
lead you to Ruin; and then I shall have my Design in the Publication of these
excellent Counsels.

Your Friend, B. P.


THE Substance of the LETTERS mentioned in this Preface, shall be communicated
to the Reader, in the following Chapter; whom I entreat to lend his serious
Consideration, on what shall be further said is this.

THERE are many heinous Offenders, who are hardened in Sin, and continue in it
and all worldly Enjoyments, without relenting; but few go so to their Graves;
most great Sinners before they die, feel a deep Remorse, and are tormented with
the bitter Stings of Conscience, upbraiding them with their Guilt, and
representing it to them in its true Colors, and most frightful Forms. What
Comfort must a Man have, in reflecting on the past Actions of his Life, who
hardly comes to half the Age he might reasonably have expected to arrive at,
finds himself enervated by the practice of SELF POLLUTION, his Spirits sunk,
his Body wasted, and his Strength decayed; in continual Danger of being forced
to resign his impure Breath, upon the least Rigor of the Season, or any other
small Accident? What Comfort, I say, must a Man have, when his Crime,
representing it self before him, in its most ghastly Shape, Conscience shall
upbraid him, that by so many repeated Acts of Murder, he has at last destroyed
himself before he is Thirty Years of Age, as by my own Experience I have known
it the case of several? It such great Misfortunes happen but seldom, there are
other infirmities that may occasion very disagreeable Reflections. When Persons
of good Estates, in the Flower of their Age, find themselves bereft of their
Manhood, and conscious of their Impotence, and the cursed Cause of it, are
forced to decline the most advantageous Matches, and without the least Hopes of
Posterity, remain the Contempt of others, and a Burden to themselves; to which
perhaps, the Mortification shall be added, that the Name and Honor of an
Ancient Family, extinct with themselves, must be for ever buried in Oblivion,
whilst the magnificent Seats and venerable Structures of their more virtuous
Ancestors, are inherited or pulled down by Strangers.

OTHERS again, who cannot be said to die without Offspring, have puny lingering
Children, more brought up by Physic than Kitchen Diet, which they are forced
to leave at Fourteen or Fifteen Years of Age, perhaps younger, without any
probability that they shall ever come to Maturity: When Persons of large
Possessions have no better Views to turn to, than these, and withal so much
Reason to lay all the Blame upon themselves, as the frequent practice of
SELF-POLLUTION in their Youth, can furnish them with, the Prospect can be but
Melancholic. Some Women likewise, though married to ki^d and fertile Husbands,
who through the vileness of their Affections, have changed, as St. Paul
expresses it, the natural use into that which is against Nature, are all their
Lifetime wishing for Children in vain; every Year perhaps they change the Air,
try all the Baths in Christendom, and follow the Advice of most Physicians, and
yet are either subject to frequent Miscarriages before the Fifth Month, or else
are never impregnated at all. If ever such Women were guilty of SELF-POLLUTION
to Excess, and are wise enough to know the Consequences of it, with what Sorrow
and Anxieties must the Remembrance of it fill them, even when their Troubles
are not extended beyond Temporal Affairs? But when once they are touched with
the quick Sense of their heinous Offenses to GOD, how must the Reflection on
the Things I have named confound the Guilty of either Sex? What Aggravations
will they not heap on their Crimes, even to their own Imaginations?

LET no Body imagine that the Consequences of this Sin, and all other Acts of
Uncleanness, will be less Calamitous to those, whom either the bodily
Sufferings and Infirmities I have spoken of, never reach, or no Temporal
Afflictions make any Impression upon, in order to Repentance. Those who never
feel any Trouble for their Sin, are oftentimes as insensible of the Punishments
of it, such Punishments I mean as befall them by reason of it in this Life.
Sometimes one may perceive the Judgments of GOD hanging over the Heads of the
Unchaste, and threatening to fall upon them; sometimes actually and visibly
pursuing them in their own Persons, or in their Relations, or Affairs in the
World, making them groan under the Miseries, Sorrows, and diverse Evils they
have brought upon themselves; and yet we may see how little Sense they have of
the Reason, why these sad Afflictions are laid upon them, and how ready they
are to attribute their Misfortune to any other Cause, rather than to
themselves; some of them continuing in their Security, till the Judgment of GOD
seizes them, and they die in their Impenitence, which is the most deplorable
and most dangerous State a Man can fall into. For so long as the Sinner has a
Sense of his Guilt, and the Vengeance justly due to him for it, there is some
hope of him; but when he is come to this Degree of Obduracy, there is very
little to be expected from him; for he is then upon the very Brink of Misery,
and but one Step from everlasting Destruction.

FROM what has been said last then, it is manifest, that neither our escaping
the Bodily Sufferings which so often ensue upon this Crime, nor our
insensibility of the Sin, or the Temporal Punishments of it, make any Amendment
in our Condition; and on the other Side, as evident, from what has been said
before, that the Consequences of this Crime, may on several Accounts render the
Reflection on the Cause of it, most terrible to the Offenders, and excite in
them such an Inconceivable Indignation against themselves, as (without GOD's
Mercy) cannot possibly end but in Despair.

LET us now consider, once, That these Pangs of Conscience (terrible as they
are) are most necessary to Repentance, which yet no Body can be sure that it
will be accepted. But if those Anxieties to be suffered on Earth, are most
frightful to all that will reflect on them, how much more ought the Guilty to
stand in awe of those other more inevitable, and more intolerable Punishments
which are reserved for the other Life? The unclean are not always punished in
this World, but they will be most certainly in the next, unless they take Care
to prevent it, by a timely and hearty Reformation. This the Holy Scripture
teaches, as expressly as may be; Neither Fornicators, says St. Paul, nor
Adulterers, nor the Abominable, shall inherit the Kingdom of God; cautioning
also at the same time, that we don't abuse our selves, nor flatter our selves
in this respect. And the same Doctrine he repeats, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. I have
told you before, as I have told you in times past, that they who commit such
things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. So Ephesians. 5.6. Let no man deceive
you with vain words, for because of these things, comes the wrath of God upon
the children of disobedience. St. Peter likewise, in the 2d Epist. Chap. 2.
ver. 9. declares and proves by many Examples, that God reserves the Wicked, and
chiefly the carnal and impure, unto the Day of Judgment, to be punished.

THESE are the Consequences of SELF-POLLUTION; this is that dreadful State to
which it brings Men; and these the Sins into which it drives them, and the
Punishment to which it renders them obnoxious. And one would think them enough
to inspire all Persons with a Detestation against this Vice. I am sure, every
one has Reason to dread the Thoughts of falling into that Bruitishness and
Hardness of Heart, of which all are in great Danger, who at any time pass the
Bounds of Modesty, and part with their Chastity; and should therefore seriously
study to prevent that Remorse, which sooner or later will be the Portion of the
Lascivious; and to keep at a Distance from a Sin, that draws so many others
after it, and in a Word, casts its Slaves and Votaries into an Abyss of Evils.

CHAP. III. Spiritual and Physical Advice to those who have injured themselves
by the abominable Practice of SELF-POLLUTION.
IN the foregoing Chapter, it has been proved, that the Hurt which either Sex
may receive from SELF-POLLUTION, is Corporal as well as Spiritual: But because
every Body, who but once has committed this Fact, has in a grievous manner
offended GOD, and wronged his Soul, and many of strong Constitutions may for
some Time have been guilty of this Sin, without any considerable, or at least
perceptible Harm to their Bodies, yet how to redress the spiritual Injury
received, shall be our first and chiefest Care. There is no Christian who can
be ignorant, that no Pardon can be obtained for this as well as other Sins,
without Repentance in general; but many are apt to deceive themselves
concerning the Nature of Repentance, as not well knowing in what it consists;
wherefore, it is requisite I should say something of the Manner after which
this Duty ought to be performed, as well as the Necessity of it.

THE first Branch of Repentance, and the first Duty of the polluted, is a
Sorrow for what they have done; after this, it is very necessary that the
Sinner should examine himself, to know what Principle it arises from; for if
his Sorrow only proceeds from any Corporal Affliction, which this Sin already
has brought upon him; or the Fear that it may do so in time to come, it is not
saving, unless the Sinner makes a further Progress, and improves the Almighty's
Chastisements, to beget in him an unfeigned Abhorrence of his Transgressions.
Wherefore, the principal Cause of his Grief must be the greatness of the Sin it
self, and the woeful Estate whereinto it brings Men, in relation to GOD and
their own Salvation; for it is certain, that no Repentance is acceptable in the
sight of GOD, that does not arise from such Meditations as these.

NEITHER is it sufficient to be somewhat grieved and ashamed; but this Grief
must be affecting, such as enters deep, and pierces the very Heart, filling it
with Sadness and Remorse, Detestation and Fear; or if it be not such at the
beginning, it must be such at length. This is above all others the one
infallible Mark of a hearty Sorrow, and sincere Repentance; that the Sinner
finds no longer any Pleasure or Satisfaction in the things he had formerly
delighted in, but seeks to withdraw and get out of the way of them, and finds
more Comfort in his Sadness and Tears for them: Sometimes those that have
renounced this and other Sins of Uncleanness, have turned aside another way;
and betaken themselves to Pleasures of another Nature. But so long as they
retain an Affection for worldly Pleasures and Joys of whatsoever kind, this is
a certain Sign of their not being touched with a true Repentance.

BUT above all, Care must be taken, that this Grief be lasting; for Men's Sorrow
is oftentimes but light at the beginning of their Conversion, as will easily be
apprehended, if we but call to mind that there are two sorts of Sins. Some
there are for which a Man is apt to have an extreme Concern, as soon as he ever
has committed them, and they are such as he is not betrayed into by his own
Inclination, nor can take Delight in. Thus, when one has committed Murder, or
spoken Blasphemy, he will perhaps be immediately struct with the Horror of his
Crime, and a stinging Remorse, by reason of it. But it is quite otherwise with
those Sins into which Men are drawn by Pleasure, and which gratify their
Inclinations, and especially when they are become habitual. Though they take up
a Resolution of quitting these, they do not at first look upon 'em with the
Aversion due to them; they could yet please themselves with them, and it is not
without doing Violence to themselves, and resisting their own Inclinations,
that they get rid of them. So that their Dislike of these sorts of Sins is but
small at first, the Fire of Lust not being yet wholly extinct. But the chief
Commendation of it, is, that it is lasting. And this is what they ought to have
an especial regard to, the cause of most Men's Failings in these Attempts,
being, that in time the sense of their Crimes abates, and at last wears quite
away.

THE Repentance of those who are polluted by this Sin, or any other sort of
Uncleanness* should remain with them to their Lives end. These are not Sins
which a Man can forget, and the Memory of them ought to be always fresh, that
the Penitent may truly say with David, My Sins are ever before me. Not only the
time that has past since the Commission of it, but even an Amendment of Life
does not take away the Sense of so great a Fault; but on the contrary he
becomes more and more sensible of it. Even this Thought, that the Sinner has
had the Happiness to obtain the Pardon of his Guilt, will render the
Remembrance of it the more bitter, and the greater Progress he makes in
Holiness, the more abominable will his wickedness appear. The greater
Experience he has had of GOD's Mercy, the more he will accuse and loath
himself; and the more hope he has of Salvation through GOD's Goodness, the more
will he be affected with the danger of being excluded from it to which he had
exposed himself.

ANOTHER great Duty that belongs to Repentance, is Conversion and Amendment:
The Guilty must forsake their Sin, and continue no longer in it. When our
Blessed Savior pardoned the Woman taken in Adultery, he said to her; Go and
Sin no more. The Crime must therefore be totally renounced; and they which do
not this, but relapse into it, have not repented of it. Every Act, and every
repetition of their Sin is an Aggravation of both their Guilt and Punishment.

BUT this is but the beginning of Conversion; and this first step will be to no
purpose, if the Offenders stop here; it is not enough to renounce their Crime,
without renouncing likewise all the Approaches to it: All the several Species
of Imp^rity, and all the Defilements of either Body or Mind; all lewd Actions,
wanton Glances, impure Thoughts and Desires, together with such Familiarities
as expose to Temptations; all obscene Discourse, or Expressions, and the like,
which are contrary to Chastity, must be entirely laid aside.

IT is true, This Re^unciation may appear Difficult at first, and will occasion
no small Trouble to those that have contract^^ a vic^ous H^bit of giving
themselves up to all sorts of Passions. But People must courageously resolve to
overcome themselves, it being far better to deny themselves in those things,
and to cross their own I^clinations for a time, then by pursuing them, to
perish Eternally. It is profitable that One ^f their Members should perish, and
not that their whole Body should be cast into Hell, St. Matthew. 5.29.

THERE are two Reasons why it is necessary to renounce all th^se Species of
Impurity: First, because they will be apt to make Men fall again into the
Crime; and then, because a true Repentance is inconsistent with Defi^^ment. The
Soul is not changed, whilst it is not pure, but preserves a Kindness for those
filthy and shameful Passions. In a Word, wheresoever there is any Love of Sin,
there is no true Reformation.

IT suffices not barely to fly Impurity, but they likewise must show forth
their Repentance, by a Life of Mortification; and if it be a general Doctrine
among Christians, not to take Care of the Flesh but to mortify the Body, and
keep it under, and bring it into Subjection, none have more reason for the
Observance of these Injunctions than those whom the Passions of the Flesh have
drawn into Sin. A love of Pleasures and compliance with the Flesh, are no where
more highly blameable, than in such as are guilty of Impurity. And it must also
be granted, that when any one is touched with a lively Sense of this Crime, he
goes on no longer in quest of his vain Delights, he is not then in a Condition
to rejoice and please himself, but places his Consolation rather in the
Exercises of Repentance: Diversions, and frivilous Entertainments, reading vain
Authors, Dressing, and the Care of the Body; all these make but vain
Impressions up^o him. And on the contrary, when chose that have been impure and
dissolute, and who have left off to Sin, as they have grown into Years, do not
mortify themselves; when they lose their Ease, and make it their study to
obtain the Pleasures and Advantages of Life, passing their time in Idleness, or
at Play, and setting their Minds upon Dainties and sumptuous Entertainments,
most certainly these are yet in a State of Impenitence, and have never been
truly sensible of their Fault, not duly set themselves to make amends for it.

THE Sincerity of Conversion, must not only appear in the things which have
relation to Impurity, but in the whole Course of their Conversation. So great a
Fall should render a Man Wise, Pious, Circumspect in all things: All that is in
him is to become new: He would take occasion from every thing to show his
Repentance, to discharge his Duty toward GOD, to edify his Neighbor, and to
purify himself more and more. He ought with the greatest Exactness and
Sincerity to practice the Duties of Religion, to give himself to Meditation and
Prayer, and to be constant in Holy Exercises, casting himself, as St. Austin
advises, upon GOD, who will not withdraw himself from him, nor leave him to
fall, but will help him, if he relies upon, and puts confidence in him: There
are only two things required of him, one, that he would fir^ly resolve, to make
the Glory of GOD, and his own Salvation his chief End, regarding nothing in
Comparison with it; and the other, not to trust in his own Strength or
Prudence, but in the Omnipotence and infinite Love of GOD. He ought likewise to
do all the Works he shall be able, and especially to employ his Goods to the
Uses of Piety and Charity, following the Counsel of the Prophet Daniel,
Redeeming their Sins by Alms, and their Iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor.

HAPPY are the Guilty who discharge these Duties aright, who with the sinful
Woman in St. Luke's Gospel, weep bitterly for their Faults, who have renounced
and forsaken them, and are altogether converted, Their Sins, though great shall
be forgiven them. These are by no means to be despised: For there is a great
deal of Love due to all Sinners, but more especially to such as forsake their
Wickedness, and cause Joy in Heaven by their Return.

BUT he that allows himself in any known Sin, is a wicked Man, and he that
teaches, or any ways encourages another to commit a Sin, as is too customarily
done in the Practice of SELF-POLLUTION, is likewise a wicked Man, for he is
Partner with him in that Sin which he tempts him to, and consequently without
sincere Repentance, must expect to share with him in the Punishment; and no
wicked Man has any Portion in the Kingdom of Heaven.

The following Three LETTERS are those recommended by the Preface, as
afore-mentioned.
The First is an Answer as Desired, concerning the Sin of ONAN.
SIR,
AS to the Business of Onan, my Opinion is the same with theirs, That think the
Lewdness of the Fact was composed of Lust and Murder; the first appears in that
he went rashly upon it. It seems he staid not till Night for the time of
Privacy for such a purpose, else the Bed might have been named as well as the
Ground: the Second is the Honor of his Dead Brother, and therefore would not
be Father of any Child that should be reported his, and not his own: the Third
is, that there is a Seminal vital Virtue, which perishes if the Seed be spilt,
and to do this, to hinder the begetting of a Living Child, (as he did at the
very time, when she was in full expectation of being embraced by him,) in
directing in another way, and not in its proper place, is the first Decree of
Murder that can be committed; and the next unto it is the Marring Conception
when it is made, and causing of Abortion. Now such Acts are noted in the
Scripture, as horrible Crimes, because otherwise many might commit them, and
not know the Evil of them. It is conceived that his Brother Er, before, was his
Brother in Evil thus far, that both of them satisfied their Sensuality against
the Order of Nature, and therefore the Lord cut them off both alike, with
sudden Vengeance, which may be for the Terror of those, who in the neglect of
Marriage, live in secret impurity with themselves; and to those who in
Marriage, will satisfy their Lust, but hinder the Product of Children, which is
the Principle use of the Conjugal Estate, but not for the mere gratifying the
Concupiscence.

The next is a LETTER of Advice from another of the Divines.
SIR,
THOUGH I am a Stranger to your Person, yet you have made me not to be a Stranger
to your Soul, which indeed I find to be deplorable enough, and there is no
Sorrow great enough for it, except such Sorrow as drives you from GOD: Exigit
autem ille dolor plusquam lex ulla dolori concessit. Let your Anger be infinite
against your Sin, watch against it with all the Caution that is imaginable, and
now that your State is such, that you can scarce Sin any more in that Instance
where your Evil lies, show Zeal and Indignation against your self, and judge
your self severely for what is past, and while you live never be reconciled to
your Self, but pray for Pardon perpetually; but then be sure to hope for it
Humbly, or else you can never pray for it acceptably.

DO not think a few Tears, or some short Penances are enough in your Case; take
no Measures but even all you can, and give your self up to a very Holy Life,
and remember that your Sin is too great for any thing but GOD's Mercy; this
indeed is infinite, and must needs infinitely exceed your Burden and Calamity.
Sir, Your Sins have been carnal, take heed you do not add Despair; for it is a
spiritual Evil, ten thousand times worse than the other. They dishonored your
Body, but this dishonours GOD, and speaks reproachfully of him. Once more,
begin a true Repentance, and finish it, and be afraid to provoke GOD any more;
for there is a time in which GOD will be no more entreated; the oftener any Man
breaks his Vows of Repentance, the nearer he is to that State. If GOD gives you
Life and Grace of Amendment and Repentance, it is certain you are not yet
fallen into that State; but I pray tempt GOD no more, your Soul is too precious
a Concern to be put so often to the venture. Sir, You have only spoken to me in
general, and I have given you a proportionable Answer; if in any particular
Question you desire to be resolved, I will decline no Troubl^ you shall require
of me, nor think it any, if I may do Comfort or give Instruction to your Soul.
Pray GOD bless and sanctity your Penitential Sorrow to you, make it sincere,
and increase it to an excellent and perfect Repentance. Remember that all the
Pains and C^re which Repentance can put you to in this World, are not half so
bad as one Minute of the Eternal Pains of Hell.

The other LETTER from the same Divine, has this.
SIR,
NO doubt but you have committed a grievous Sin, and the more because you did
it knowingly, frequently, with deliberation, with delight, and against many
Resolutions, (as I perceive) to the contrary; and therefore it is but necessary
you should lay it to Heart, and look upon your self as an inordinate lover of
carnal Pleasure, as one that has defiled your own Body, and in some sort
stained your Baptism, offended the Spirit, unhallowed and desecrated its
Temple, and that deserves to be destroyed: Mistake me not, I do not equal your
Sin, with that of Fornication, concerning which the Apostle speaks these
dreadful things, but I say, in some sort, in a lesser degree, you have incurred
that Guilt, by Fornicating with your self, and that after you were instructed,
and had purposed Amendment; yet all this does not make your Crime unpardonable,
but only more difficult to Cure. Sins of Deliberation, often repeated against
Vows, and with Delight, are very dangerous; but the Danger consists in this,
that they are hard to be forsaken because of an habitual Pleasure in them. You
will agree, I suppose, to the Doctrine following, which I take to be infallible.

1. That there is no Pardon to be hoped for without Repentance.

2. That Repentance is forsaking the Sin totally.

3. That it is abandoning of all Sin whatsoever.

4. That though this forsaking of Sin, does not make us clean as to what is past,
yet it has a Promise of Mercy and Forgiveness annexed to it, which we cannot
fail of, 1 John 1.7. If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have
Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of JESUS CHRIST his Son cleanses us
from all Sin. Observe that it is from all Sin; and likewise take notice that in
the 9th Verse he says, GOD is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. From whence no may draw another certain
Conclusion, that Pardon may be claimed as a matter of Right and Justice, by him
that forsakes his Sin.

GOD should not be just, if he should deny it to such a Person suing for it; it
consists not with his Faithfulness to withold it. Then add this further, that
if Sin be forgiven, GOD must needs treat us as his Friends, and use us as
kindly, as if we were in Innocence, for it is Sin only that makes a Separation
between GOD and us. From whence it follows, that his Spirit, which he has
promi^'d to those whom he loves, must also return again, and forget the former
Affronts that were offered to it.

YOUR first Question then is resolved, and you may be at peace, if you but
forsake this Sin and all others; for you see, the Blood of Christ cleanses us
from all Unrighteousness, when we turn from the Works of Darkness, and walk in
the Light. And together with our cleansing, the Holy Ghost comes again, and
resumes his former Dwelling, which is no more offensive to him. Now I doubt not
but there is a possibility (though perhaps some difficulty) of forsaking this
Sin, and so becoming the Habitation of GOD, through his Spirit, because you
have the Spirit of GOD in some of its Operations, viz. as the Spirit of
Illumination and Understanding, though not in all other that belong to it. You
discern and acknowledge the Sin, the heinousness of it, its evil Consequents,
the Injury it does to GOD, to his SON and HOLY SPIRIT; I doubt not therefore
but the Spirit will further communicate it self to you, if you will but follow
my Advice.

LABOR to understand the Gospel, and to have as comprehensive a Sense of your
Duty contained therein, as you can; and hereby (those being the Words of the
Spirit) the HOLY GHOST will sanctify that part of you which the Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. calls the Spirit, i. e. the Mind and Understanding, which is
cleansed by these new Principles assented unto: Then bring your Heart to
consent to be governed and led by the holy Rules of Life; press them with all
the Reason you can upon your Heart and Soul, receive them and love them, in the
Life of it, as the very Words of the HOLY GHOST, the Spirit of Life. Hereby
that part of you which the Apostle calls the Soul, i. e. the Will and
Affections, will be sanctified also. Next to this, that which he calls the
Body, i. e. all the outward Actions of Life, will inevitably be sanctified, and
prove conform to that Determination of your Soul or Will, if you do but
constantly follow the Counsel of another Apostle, Building up your self in your
most Holy Faith, praying in the HOLY GHOST, keeping your Soul in the Love of
GOD, and the Mercy of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, to Eternal Life.

I Believe in some Constitutions, the Stimulations to this Sin, may be very
vehement and hard to be resisted, and therefore it will not be amiss to tell
you that you must call in the Assistance of all other natural Remedies to which
a Christian must not think it below him to be beholden. As first; Meditate much
upon sad and doleful Objects; get your fancy painted with such kind of Images
as have little of Light and G^iety in them; for such things do inspire the
natural Spirits of all sorts: and in all Parts, making them more brisk and
nimble; whereas more dark Thoughts are apt to blunt and stupify them, making
them long for nothing of Pleasure.

Boccalini, as an Antidote against Whoredom; advises those that way inclined,
to carry about with them a well-drawn Picture, of the most perfect and
faultless Beauty that ever appeared in Flesh and Blood, pencill'd over again
with rotten Teeth, blear Eyes, no Nose at all; in fine, rendered as loathsome
as Venom and Corruption can make it, and that whenever Desires of the Flesh
stir, they would take a sober view of it, and seriously consider what they are
about to do, and the Consequents; and no doubt but it would effectually damp
their Inclinations. So in SELF-POLLUTION, would Transgressors that way, of
either Sex, but set before their Eyes (at the time their Inclinations to
pollute themselves stir) what woeful Miseries and Calamities, both to Soul and
Body, others have drawn upon themselves thereby, and they, by the like
Practice, will in all likelihood upon themselves; and seriously consider, that
whilst they vainly strive to please themselves* they displease GOD, exhaust
their own Strength, and are hastening themselves to the Grave, it must surely,
one would think, deter them from the Evil; more especially, if they further
consider, how that being thereby enervated, should they in that State marry,
they would instead of that Love and Delight expected between Man and Wife, find
nothing but Quarrels, Jealousies, bitter Hatred and Discontents.

2dly. YOU must use a spare Diet, but not totally abstain. Fasting I believe
some use as a Remedy against the Provocations of Uncleanness; but I think in
some Tempers it rather sharpens the Humor, and makes it more Itching and apt
to irritate.

3dly. HAVE a Care of the Kind and Quality of your Meat. As 1st. Salt Meat you
must forbear, which you may know by the Nature of the Word makes Men salacious.
A Learned Physician of our own observes, that in Ships which are laden with
Salt from Rochel, the Mice breed thrice as fast as in those Ships laden with
other Merchandise. Pigeons, you know, have Salt laid for them to pick upon and
the Egyptian Priests, being Votaries to a single Life, abstained from all Salt
whatsoever; but that is an Error on the other Hand, and may have dangerous
Effects. 2dly, All windy Foods, for the Flautuousness of them, do puff up the
Humor, and make those Parts more turgid; such as Beans and Pease, Artichoaks,
etc. You know Phythagoras forbid his Scholars to eat a Bean, and this was one
Reason, I do not question, of his Prohibition. 3dly, According to the
Description you make of your self, I must add, that Butter is naught for you,
all Physicians agreeing that it is to be avoided by those who labor under a
Flux of any Humor whatsoever. There is too great an Unctuousness in it; and in
some Bodies, by the Resolution of those oily Parts, it creates Fumes also,
which hinder the Command of the Mind over those lower Parts.

4thly, I would advise you to be most abstemious about the Full and Change of
the Moon, for then the whole Body is fuller of Moisture than at other Seasons.

5thly, IT will be good only to eat dry Suppers, unless it be Water Gruel, and
such like cooling Diet.

6thly, TAKE proper Medicines, as well as Food, and use pretty much Exercise,
(though not too violent) for that spends much of the superfluous Moisture in the
Body; and likewise, if it be to a small Weariness, (which is necessary) spends
some of those Spirits that will else evacuate themselves at other Places. The
Bed is too great a Friend to this Sin, therefore let me advise you, to make no
further use of it than for sleeping; for whilst you lie awake, at your ease,
your Flesh will be egging you on to this sinful Pleasure, therefore employ your
self with some good Book, till you find Sleep a coming, and in the Morning,
quit your Bed as soon as you awake. I know it is more healthful to the Body to
continue in Bed some time after Sleep, that the Vapors may have time to
scatter, and the natural Spirits recover their Strength and Activity; but for
you, who are prone to this Lust, it is better to deny your Body that
Convenience; than suffer your Soul to be punished through Sensuality. Sleep
also on one Side, and not on your Back, for that beats the Reins, and causes
irritations to Lust. I know it will cost some Violence at first to Nature, to
be flung so suddenly out of a warm Bed upon a cold F^oor, but the difficulty
will soon vanish after 5 or 6 times Practice of it, and the comfort you will
have in your own Breast by it, will much more than make amends. The Church
History, tells us of a young Man in danger of being overcame by a beautiful
Harlot that was with him, to betray him into her Embraces, bit off a piece of
his Tongue, that so the Anguish and Pain possessing his Thoughts, Lust might
have no room there. Do not handle those Parts at any Time, but when Necessity
of Nature requires, for handling of them puffs up, irritates and raises Fleshly
Inclinations; and I should think likewise, that it will be good, after you have
humbled your self so far for this Sin as to forsake it, then not to think of it
any more, or as little as ever you can; for even the thinking upon that Sin,
does but renew the Desire of it. Any thoughts concerning Things belonging to
those Parts, do but excite and provoke Lust. For then the Thoughts send the
Spirits to those Parts, and make them swell, even as upon other Occasions, they
send them to the Muscles in the Legs or Arms, when we would use them. Forget
therefore as much as you can, that there has been any such thing done by you,
and employ your Thoughts otherwise, till you may think of it with more safety,
that is when you are Married.

BUT if after all your most exact compliance with the injunctions here
enforced, involuntary POLLUTIONS in your sleep, should still infest you, I
would advise you, whenever you are apprehensive, or in fear of them, to do what
Forestus, a noted Physician in his time, lays down, as certain when every thing
else has failed, which is, to tie a string, when you go to ^ed, about your
Neck, and the other end of it about the Neck of your Penis, which when an
Erection happens, will timely awaken you, and put an effectual stop to the
seminal Emission.

THESE are excellent Advices, and Marriage the chief Preventative, it being an
Institution appointed by the Almighty, as a Remedy against Incontinence, and to
preserve us from the Guilt of Impurity, as well as for the Propagation of our
Species; whereby the united Pair may with Honor use that Freedom with one
another, as was by no means lawful for them to do while they were single, yet
there are Restraints in that State also. Bounds set, that they are not to
exceed. And though the married State is the most happy and comfortable State in
the World, where there is (as there ought to be) an Union of Souls, as well as
Bodies, and notwithstanding Holy Writ advises it to those that have not the
Gift of Continence, yet we too often find them rather inclined to pursue their
Lusts, than enter into it; some by vowing Celebacy think themselves excused;
others through Libertinism, and to be less confined in their Passions; others to
avoid some Inconveniences or Restraints they apprehend to accompany the
Marriage-Life; and others again, because they cannot meet (...) Fortune* to
their Mind; their Circumstances in the World, as they plead, not allowing them
otherwise to alter their Conditions; and in the mean time, all of them (not
being chaste) do expose themselves to the continual Danger of Temptations that
way, and cannot avoid being ever and anon overcome by them, and more especially
if they indulge Idleness, and high living, which more immediately exposes them
to lustful Thoughts, when Business chases them away, by employing the Mind to
better Purposes. It was an Idle and Luxurious Life, that gave Occasion for a
certain young Gentleman of Birth and Fortune, as well as Parts, to lament
himself upon an advantageous Offer of Marriage made him by his Friend.

THAT he was now, through his Follies altogether incapable of the married
State, having been from his Youth most inordinately addicted to the shameful
Practice of SELF-POLLUTION, so hateful to GOD and injurious to himself, and
which neither his Reason, Conscience, Education, or Prayers were of force
enough to master that unruly Passion, which had plunged him, not only into the
reproachful Infirmity of an irreperable Weakness of the Genitals, so ridiculed
by Men, and so detestable to Women kind, but also into most dreadful Horrors of
Conscience, and well nigh Despair.

AND no doubt, but from the same Cause it is, that so many very likely
Gentlemen of Fortune, that we see or hear of Abroad, do refuse the Offer of
Advantageous Matches, being Conscious to themselves of their Infirmity, which
as they are ashamed to own, they as industriously take Care to conceal,
excusing themselves with the Answer of being too young, or not yet disposed to
marry; and as they a little advance in Years, that they are then too old. I
must confess, whenever I hear or know of such refusing to enter into the State,
whom nothing, to Humane Appearance, can hinder, they having plenty of all
Things this World can afford them, I cannot help thinking, that either
Incapacity as to Manhood, or the Fear of Communicating some ill Disease which
they are apprehensive of in themselves, by their former Follies, or a Mistress
must be the Cause; and I may dare venture to say without being thought
Censorious, that where it is otherwise than so in One, Ten if they dared, could
subscribe to my Belief; and this may cease the Wonder of the Relations and
Friends of such Gentlemen, why they don't marry? Several within the Verge of my
own Knowledge having declined it, and but justly, for the two first Reasons I
have named, and many, many more, to their Shame be it spoken, by reason of the
last.

EARLY Marriages would be a means of preventing many of those Mischiefs, and
the Disgrace which oftentimes the Guilty this way bring upon themselves and
Families. A noted Physician of our own, in his Book of the Parts of Generation,
advises to it, and says, That for want of it, as the Stream is damm'd up with
untemper'd Mortar, it does and will rage the more, and a vent one way or other
it will and must have, for that all, of both Sexes, from a natural Instinct,
when arrived to the Years of Puberty, and enjoy their full Health and Strength,
have amorous Motions, especially those of Sanguine Complexions, and Hot
Temperaments; who for want of Marriage, and a due awe upon themselves, are
prompted to commit unlawful Actions, or else are subject to involuntary
POLLUTIONS, which if frequent and profuse, do a^ certainly breed Diseases, (in
Men) as those that are done with the Consent; and if they are kept from
Marriage by a kind of force, as many are when their Inclinations are strong
toward it; they are the more eager for it, (it being a corrupt Humor, to be
stronger in our Passions, when we are denied) and so oftentimes for want of a
natural Stream, are overrun into unnatural Practices: And not only the Male
Youth in particular, but the Female, when arrived to the Years of Puberty, and
give themselves up to Plays, Balls, Men's Company, wanton Discourse, high living
and the like, whereby the Humors are heated, and the Desire augmented, have
Inclinations to Venery, and sometimes so insuperable, that if Marriage be
denied them, it puts them upon easing themselves Propria Pollutoine; or brings
them into Chachexies, Hysteric Fits, the Green Sickness, or other Maladies not
presently to be Remedied: And this great Inconvenience, says he, would be more
frequent than it is, did not pious Education, regard to Reputation and Health,
and inbred Modesty, temper, and assuage those inordinate Commotions of the
Mind. Wherefore he advises Parents to instill wholesome Principles in their
Children, and not neglect marrying them in time, as the best way to secure to
them a good Conscience, perfect Health and Strength, and the Honor of their
Families.

ST. Paul, Counsels Parents, Not to suffer their Virgins, (both Sexes) to pass
the Flower of their Youth; but not meaning, as I suppose, to encourage too
early, or unseasonable Marriages; for when so young, that either of them, have
neither Mind nor need, it exhausts their vital Moisture, nips them in the Bud,
stunts their Growth, and renders them for ever after weak and enfeebled; but
when the Man is in his 25th, and the Woman in her 20th Year, and both have
retained their Virginity till then, and were born of Healthy, Sound Parents,
not tainted with any ill Stamen, and each in perfect Sanity, of good
Constitutions, full of ardent Love and Vigor, Those I would advise to marry,
and from their Loins, there will result the best, most Vegete, Lovely, Strong,
and Healthy Posterity.

TO secure Youth from wasting their Strength by SELF-POLLUTION, or Venery, till
that Age, they are so careful in some Countries, that they Ring the Men, when
they are young. And for the Female Sex, Paracelsus advises to a famous
Emplastick Liniment, both of which, being used as I have seen described, (...)
Health, Strength, Beauty, and Credit, to say no more, of Hundreds, I may say
Thousands of young People of both Sexes in this Kingdom, would be preserved,
and consequently our puny half gotten Breed, in a great Measure amended.

MARRIAGE, as it is Honorable in all Countries, so it has been held in great
Esteem from the beginning of the World, among all Sorts and Sects of People;
the Romans, and especially the wise Emperor Augustus, did what they could to
encourage it, the same did the Jews. The Lacedaemonians at their Festivals,
would not admit of any single Men; and if those that were unmarried, ventured
to come amongst them, they were, as soon as discovered, ordered to be whipped by
the Women as unprofitable Members of the Republic; nor were any but Married
Men, suffered to b^^r any Office; so that throughout the World, as an
encouragement to Matrimony, the Married Men were highly preferred, excused from
going to the Wars for the first Year after Marriage, and in every thing had the
Advantage of those that lived single.

THOSE who have not only injured their Souls, but likewise their Bodies
visibly, by this Practice of SELF-POLLUTION, if the Case be Chirurgical, ought
immediately to repair to a skilful Surgeon. Of Impotency, Infertility, and
other Infirmities of this kind, as there are several Degrees, in some (...)
difficult to be Cured than others. Where the Strength is but in Part decayed,
the Blood not altogether dispirited, and the Tone of the Parts but lately
relaxed, Cold-^athing has been beneficial to many; in some only accompanied
with a Milk-Diet, in others with a more nutritious manner of Living, gentle
Exercise, and a few Restorative Medicines. But as every Body cannot bear the
Cold-Bath, and Milk does not agree with all Constitutions, in such Cases, as
well as others more stubborn and deplorable, as it is impossible to give
general Rules for so many Particulars, I would advise every Body to apply
themselves to a learned and experienced Physician, and without Hesitation open
their Case, which, if he be a sagacious Man, may be done with very few Hints,
and so contrived, that the Physician shall not know the Patient.

SOME People are of Opinion, that in Diseases proceeding from Uncleanness,
wh^^ver points at a ^emedy, encourages the Sin; but ^ leave every impartial
Reader, after he has perused this little Treatise, to judge whether it be
reasonable to think, that any Mortal should be induced to run the Hazard of
drawing upon themselves the frightful Consequences of SELF-POLLUTION, as here
related, by what has been said of the Possibility of being Cured, when
laboring under them: More especially, when I shall have added the Caution I
intend to conclude with, and which is, That whatever Remedies may be applied,
or Physicians made use of, no Rule nor Prescription, can ever be effectual in
removing the Bodily Infirmities occasioned by SELF-POLLUTION, without they are
likewise accompanied with an entire Cessation of this Practice, a total
Abstinence from the Sin it self, and an unalterable Resolution of never falling
into it again, and that all Relapses are ever fatal in those Cases.

WITH this Caution, I should have closed, but that the following LETTER came to
my Hands from a Lady unknown, concerning the Use and Abuse of the Marriage Bed;
which as it is very Curious, and may, with my Answer to it, be of Service to
many in the married state; I thought it proper to give the Reader, one and the
other before I dismissed him.

To the Author of ONANIA.
June 5. 1717. SIR,
THOUGH I am altogether a Stranger to your Person, yet having read a little
Book of yours, I am become acquainted with your refined Notions, and like what
you have said against one particular Species of Uncleanness: I bought your Book
in hopes you had said something concerning the Married State; what Decorum
there must be observed not to defile the Marriage Bed; I wish you had said
something more on that Point, for the sake of some of my own Sex, I have
disputed with: They have such gross Notions, they imagine the Marriage Bed
cannot be defiled unless they commit Adultery. I fancy, Sir, you have finer
Thoughts than to think Marriage a Provision for the Man's Brutality, therefore
I have used the Freedom to address my self to you, hoping you will vouchsafe to
tell me whether I am not right in this Particular. First then* I consider those
Inclinations were given for the Continuance of our Species and no other end,
and Marriage instituted that it might be in a decent regular manner; therefore,
Fornication was forbid, not ^s it is in it se^f ^vi^, but it not making for the
Good of Society; it is fitter one Man abide by one Woman, that there may be ^
due Care of the Offsprings Education. To be Instrumental to introduce poor
Creatures into the World, and not to take Care of them is worse than the
Brutes. SELF-POLLUTION you have proved a Sin, because it is deo^ninate from the
End; it is an Abuse of the Creative Power, and very properly I think you term it
Murder. Now what is in self Evil, Marriage cannot make Good, therefore I
conclude the Marriage Bed defiled, the Man and Wife committing Sin, when the
End cannot be had for which that Sensation was given; for though the Man be at all
Times capable of Generation, the Woman is not, as when she has Conceived; and
when she, accoring to the Course of Nature, is past it, it then centers in the
Pleasure of Sense, and is a Frustraneous Abuse of their Bodies, the same in my
Opinion with SELF-POLLUTION and SODOMY. The Man being at all Times capable of
Generation, has made me sometimes think the Men might have Plurality of Wives;
but then I consider, GOD made but one Woman for the Man. Sir, I Will tire you no
longer with my Impertinency, only to beg Pardon for this Freedom, and to crave
the Favor of a Line or two, which I assure you Sir, will infinitely oblige her
that is

Your unknown Friend and Servant,

The ANSWER.
MADAM,
THE Reason why in the ONANIA, I did not meddle with any Part of Uncleanness
relating to the Married-State, is, because I always did as I still do conceive,
that no Branch of it could have any Affinity with the Sin of ONAN, and
consequently was foreign to my Purpose. But as your ingenious Letter, and the
Scruple you seem to labor under, are well worthy of the most serious
Reflections, I shall endeavor, as far as I am able, to satisfy you in the
Particular on which you require my pinion; and in order to it, desire you to be
referred to the following Answer.

IN the first Place I am altogether of your Opinion, and think it undeniable,
that the Inclinations you hint at were given us for the continuane of our
Species, and no other End. Secondly, I am forced to allow, that where that End
cannot be had, as when the Woman has conceived or by the Course of Nature is
past it, all embraces are Frustraneous, and can center in nothing but the
Pleasure of sense, and I would think my self obliged to subscribe to all the
Consequences you can infer from it, if I was not assured that you are mistaken
as to the End of Marriage and the Sinfulness of Fornication. In Relation to the
latter you imagine that it is forbid, not because it is in it self Evil, but as
it is destructive to the good of Society: This is a dangerous Assertion, and
gives too great a handle for Deists and other Libertines, who would persuade
the World, that Religion is only a Political Invention, and no farther to be
minded, than as it is Beneficial to the Order and Government of Society.

THE only Rule a Christian is to walk by, is the Word of God; where his Precept
is Plain, we are restrained from any other Standard of the Lawfulness or
Unlawfulness of an Action whether it brings a visible Good or a visible Evil,
either to our selves or the Public. The Justice of GOD is as incomprehensible,
as his Mercy. What could, to humane Understanding, be more innocent than the
Eating of an Apple? And yet what Crime was ever more severely punished? The Sin
of Adam was not Luxury, nor Wantonness, but Disobedience, and consisted solely
in the Transgression of a direct Command of his Creator; that Fornication is
forbid, is plain from Holy Writ; but why is it forbid, is Arrogance to
determine. When our Notions are too much refined, they are apt to lead us into
Error. You say that Fornication not making for the good of Society, it is
better one Man abide by one Women, that there may be a due care taken of the
Offsprings Education: This is as strong an Argument against Poligamy, as it is
against Fornication, and therefore is not calculated for the good of Societies
in general; for among the Mahometans, and those Heathens whose Religion allows
them a Plurality of Wives, there are Nations as Flourishing and Populous as
there are among the Christians, and the Neglect of the Offspring is no greater
Complaint among them than it is among us. What you add to strengthen your
Argument, that to be Instrumental to introduce poor Creatures into the World,
and not to take Care of them, is to be worse than the Brutes, I will easily
grant, but am apt to think, that in saying this, you made not a due Reflection
on the true Reason why Fornication among us, is so often the Cause of this
Piece of Inhumanity which you justly condemn.

MARRIAGE is honorable throughout Christendom, not so much on a Religious
Account, and because it is a State entered into by the Institution of GOD; but
chiefly as it is a Fashion and Custom every way countenanced and encouraged by
the Laws of the Land, a Formality, which we see that even those of the highest
Rank, Kings and Emperors not excepted, are proud to submit to. Among all Ranks
and Qualities of People, there are Women deeply involved in Sin, and wholly
neglectful of almost every Christian Duty; yet those of them who are
Fashionable, and would be counted to understand themselves, will, out of Pride
only, without any other Consideration, always refuse to converse with any of
their Sex, that are openly known to have forfeited their Honor. As by this
caution Strumpets are rendered despicable, so becomes their Offspring, and all
Bastards must infallibly bring Shame and Ignominy, which prove so often fatal
to the Lives as well as Fortunes of illegitimate Children. But notwithstanding
all this, those who are Spurious, and born out of Wedlock, are only infamous in
Comparison to those who are born in Wedlock from the same Parents, or others of
the same Degree: The natural Son of a great Prince, will always have the
Precedence of the most legitimate Child of a Peasant; from whence it is plain,
that in a Country where one Man was not to be confined to one Woman, and no
Body was to be Married, the Issue of one Woman would not be less honorable to
the Father, than the Issue of another, and consequently no Man could be awed by
that Ignominy and Reproach, which with us are certainly the chief, if not the
only Causes of the little Provision you complain, is generally made for the
Offspring of Fornication.

IT is not to be imagined, that Men or Women should take less Care of their
Offspring than other Creatures, if they were not diverted from it by a more
pressing Motive than Brutes are capable of acting from. Avarice is sometimes
more powerful then the strongest Ties of Nature; and the Fear of Death it self,
is overcome by the fear of Shame only: However our Passions may impose upon us,
Men generally love every Thing for their own sakes, and Self love is,
conspicuous, even in Suicide. The Love of rational Creatures to their Children,
arises not so much from a natural Instinct, as is commonly imagined, and
depends very much on the Delight they take in, and the various Comforts they
receive from them; and if we would enter into the true Cause why illegitimate
Children are generally more neglected than others, we must compare the Scandal
of having half a dozen Bastards, to the Applause and Credit which People
receive from the Education and all the good Qualities of so many lawful
Children, and we shall find that it is altogether owing to the Shame and
Ignominy of it, occasioned by a Custom, which never could be introduced in any
Society, before Marriage had been Time out of Mind in fashion among them. I
have urged this so far to make it evident, that you are mistaken as to the End
of Marriagei; because it would be absurd to imagine that Marriage was
instituted to prevent a Mischief, which could have no Being, if People did not
Marry at all. Marriage then is of a more Sacred Original, and was instituted
for Reasons more worthy of the Holiness of GOD, than the procuring of temporal
Felicity, the Good of Society, or any other political Consideration. Throughout
the Scriptures it is manifest, that GOD has no greater Aversion to any Thing
than Uncleanness of all Sorts; it would be inconsistent with his Purity, that
he should suffer rational Creatures, made after his own Image, promiscuously to
mix themselves with one another like brute Beasts: For this Reason he has
willed, that one Man should abide with one Woman, and, vice versa, till the
Death of either; and to render this Agreement for Life more solemn, he has
honored it with that Institution which we call Marriage.

FROM what has been said, it will easily appear, that the most palpable End of
Matrimony to be traced from Holy Writ, is to prevent the Sin of Uncleanness,
that is, hinder all People in whom Carnal Desires are stirred up, from
Fornication, SELF-POLLUTION, and other sorts of Defilements. From this End of
Matrimony I argue thus; Whatever, instead of promoting, is destructive to the
sacred End of Marriage, could never be required from us by GOD; but the
Forbearance you plead for is such, Ergo, it could never, etc. As for Instance,
could you imagine that a young lustful Man, full of Health, after having lain
four or five Weeks with a Woman he likes, should now be more able to restrain
and curb his carnal Appetites, than he was before he had touchd a Woman?
Matrimony at this Rate, instead of rendering People more chaste, would serve
rather to whet their Lust, and prompt them on to all manner of Uncleanness. If
it be objected, that a lasting Sickness of the Wife, or the long Absence of the
Husband, to which most Military, and all Seafaring Men are subject, may produce
the same Inconveniency, I answer, that there is a great difference between
Accidents and Misfortunes, that may put a stop to the Commerce between a Man
and his Wife, and a settled Abstinence as it were entailed on the State of
Matrimony, and which you imagine all married People ought to comply with.
Besides, the Sickness of the Wife is a Calamity inflicted by the Hand of GOD on
the Husband, as well as her self, and may serve to put them both in mind of
their Duty: And those who are exposed to the Sea, or engaged in other perilous
Enterprises, may even from thence reap Materials to subdue Lust and other
disorderly Passions; and in these Cases, to overcome all Temptation, they shall
have the express Word of GOD to assist them: The Hope of everlasting Glory may
excite them to the Obedience of the divine Commands, as the Fear of eternal
Punishment may deter them from doing Evil, for whether the Man or his Wife be
Sick or Well, present or far off, the nuptial Vow, till the Death of either
separates the Union, cannot be broke, and GOD's Command against Adultery is as
plain as it is strict.

BUT what shall we say to a young Couple, both in Health, that live in Peace
and Harmony, and have been a considerable Time striving to render themselves
delightful and endearing to each other? How shall they practice this
Forbearance, when every Night, naked, they lie in the same Bed together, as
most mean People can make no other Shift? This to some would be an
insupportable Temptation: But what Reasons, what Inducements, shall make them
undergo this severe Abstinence, or rather excruciate themselves with this
intolerable Penance? What Hope have they to excite them to this extraodinary
Piece of Purity, or what can frighten them from an imaginary Sin, against which
there is no express Command of GOD? Nay, which way shall they imagine That to
be a Transgression, concerning which the Scriptures are altogether silent, both
Old and New Testament?

IT is inconsistent with the Goodness, nay the Justice of GOD, that any Action
in his Eye should be so heinous a Sin as Sodomy, and that he either by his
Precept, or the Example of Punishment in others, should not have warned us
against it. There are many Duties incumbent on married People that are expressly
commanded, and not so easily observed: The real Difficulties that may occur in
that State, are sufficient; we need not, by being over nice, invent any more.

I Am of your Opinion, that there is a Decorum to be observed as to the
Marriage Bed, and therefore think that all Excesses and Indecencies, that are
destructive either to Health or Chastity, are Sinful, and from this I have my
Warrant from Scripture; but I likewise think that it cannot actually be defiled
without a third Person, and then my Sentiment is, that all shameful Freedoms
with others, defile it almost equally with Adultery it self. The Compliment you
design me, by fancying that I have finer Thoughts than to think Marriage a
Provision for the Man's Brutality, I cannot accept of, for I sincerely believe
that State to be a lawful Refuge to all, who from a Fault either of their
Constitution or manner of Living, find themselves incapable of remaining single
without Sin; therefore I would not scruple to call Marriage a Provision for
Incontinence in either Sex.

BUT I am at a loss for the meaning of the word Brutality; for if you give this
Name to all Embraces in general, you include the most Lawful ones, even those
tending only to Procreation, and then the Expression is very injurious; but if
you call so all Commerce with Women after they have conceived, or are past it,
the Word is the most improper in the World; for how can that be Brutality, what
Brutes are not will not to do?

I WOULD not have you tell me, that what I say now, shows the Practice to be
against Nature, and that Men, always refining upon their Passions, have by
their Luxury wrapped the very Bent of their natural Appetites, and so accustomed
themselves to Enormities, which Beasts themselves are not guilty of. There is a
vast difference betwixt irrational Creatures and our own Species; we may often
observe the same Operations in both from very different Principles. It is true,
that the Females of most Brutes never admit the Males all the Time of their
Pregnancy. But at the Seasons when their procreative Appetite stimulates them
to Coition, such a Ferment is stirred up within them, as Advertises all Males
round them, and some at a great distance, of their Salacity. The Females that
are affected with this, are always capable of being impregnated, and without it
no Male sollicites them. I need not tell you that our Species is destitute of
this Piece of Knowledge; but shall only observe, that the very want of this
Instinct in Men, is another Argument against you. For is it to be imagined,
that GOD should have denied us a Faculty, (granted to Brutes) if it was of so
great a Concern to our eternal Happiness, as this would be, if what you urge
was true? Would it not be clashing with the divine Justice, to have made an
Action heinously Criminal, of which we are not sure whether we commit it or not?

THE Business of Conception is full of Uncertainty; Many Women, even such as
had been Mothers before, have been imposed upon by Flatulencies and other
Ailments, and thought themselves with Child, and to be Delivered, when at last
they have brought forth nothing but Wind; others again have attributed that to
Diseases, for Months together, which has been really owing to their being
impregnated, and fallen in Labor before they suspected themselves to be with
Child: And in some the only Sign to be relied on that Women have not Conceived,
has continued to appear regularly all the Time of their Pregnancy. Multitudes
of Women likewise, have had reason to think themselves past Childbearing, and
after that brought fine Children into the World: From whence it is evident,
that if what you condemn, was so heinous a Sin as Sodomy, and by every Body
believed to be such, Procreation it self would suffer very much. The Danger of
committing so capital a Crime, would render good People cautious beyond
Necessity. The Uncertainty I have spoke of, would raise a thousand Scruples to
obstruct the nuptial Enjoyments, and the Fear of having conceived already,
would in many Cases hinder them from conceiving at all.

THERE is in the History of the Old Testament likewise a Circumstance that
seems to make against you, and which I would have you seriously to consider. If
GOD has willed, that Men should practice the Forbearance you urge, it is not to
be thought that the Patriarchs, to whom GOD has from Time to Time revealed
himself in so peculiar a Manner, could have been ignorant of it. Abraham then
we'll say was well acquainted with GOD's Will as to this particular; but how
comes it, that in this Part of the sacred History, there is not the least
Shadow of Reason to make us believe, that Abraham had left off all carnal
Commerce with Sarah, when it had ceased with her to be after the Manner of
Women, but rather the contrary? For had Abraham discontinued the nuptial
Embraces, there is no doubt but he would have acquainted Sarah with the Reason
of it, which alone would have been sufficient Ground for her Disbelief, when
the Angel foretold that she was to a have Son. She knew that when she was
young, and her Husband likewise in the Prime of his Age, and there was no
visible Impediment why she should have no Children, she had all along remained
infertile, which made her wonder how she should now conceive, when she had such
manifest Tokens of being past Childbearing, and her Husband was of a declining
Age, and his Vigor much diminished. It was this that provoked her Laughter;
she was far from reflecting on the Forbearance of Abraham's Benevolence, and
seemed rather, when she laughed, conscious of the many fruitless Endeavors
they had made since their Youth. It is likewise to be observed, that when Sarah
said that her Lord was likewise Old, she could not mean that he was impotent by
Age, and incapable of performing the conjugal Rites: The contrary appeared
after Sarah's Death; for he married another Wife, and had at least six Children
by her, so that she only called him Old in respect to his first Vigor, which
certainly was decreased.

BESIDES, if Sarah had the least Suspicion that it was a Sin for Men to meddle
with their Wives after they were past Childbearing, she would never have
alleged, as a Reason of her Unbelief, that her Lord likewise was Old; for if
the Act it self had been an Indecency, a Thing never practiced, what had it
signified whether Abraham was Old or Young?

WHEN in the beginning of this LETTER, I allowed the Embraces you condemn to be
frustraneous, I would only be understood as to Procreation; for else it is
manifest they are of great use to Society: They are the Bond of conjugal Amity,
and by their means a thousand little Differences and petty Quarrels are made up
between a Man and his Wife, which without them would become wide Breaches, and
often render the married Couple for ever irreconcilable. That (as you say)
they only center in the Pleasure of Sense, is true, but so does Music, yet it
is not forbid us. What I say of SELF-POLLUTION, you would apply to this, which
is wrong. SELF-POLLUTION is not Murder, because what is wasted might prove a
Child; if it were, all nocturnal POLLUTIONS, which no Body can prevent, would
be so many Murders: But because the Seed is wasted in a sinful Manner, it is a
Crime, which GOD has punished with Death. This ought not to be confounded with
an Action which GOD allows of, if not encourages.

BESIDES, from the Time the Woman has conceived, till she is brought to Bed,
and got up again, the procreative Faculty in the Man is of no Use: The same man
be said, when the Wife is past Childbearing; therefore it is plain, what I
have said before, that the Forbearance you commend, would destroy the End of
Matrimony, as it is manifestly explained by St. Paul; for after he had told the
Corinthians, that it was good for a Man not to touch a Woman, he goes on thus:
Nevertheless to avoid Fornication, let every Man have his own Wife, and let
every Woman have her own Husband. The Apostle names the End of Marriage to
them, to avoid Fornication: And as he knew very well, that the Ceremony, or
having the Name of being married, would not suffice for this, but that the only
means to keep People Chaste, and hinder them from Fornication, was carnal
Copulation, and even the frequent Practice of it; therefore he adds, Let the
Husband render to the Wife due Benevolence, and likewise also the Wife unto the
Husband. He speaks of it as a Duty, which both owe to each other, and which
ought never to be neglected but by common Consent, and that only for a little
while, and a religious Purpose. Defraud ye not one another, except it be with
Consent for a Time, that ye may give your selves to Fasting and Prayer; and
come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your Incontinency.

IF what you induce us to believe, at the Close of your LETTER concerning your
Sex, be true; and the Scruple you propose and which seems to Grave! you, be
real, then Madam, I am persuaded you are convinced of your Error before now;
and I would not have taken so much Pains, or been so diffusive on this Subject,
was I not assured that the same Difficulty is often started, and the same
Arguments are used by Libertines and other lewd Profligates to perplex
conscientious People: For the openly Wicked, who neither can, nor endeavor to
hide their own evil Co^^^ses, are always pleased when they have an Opportunity
by the least show of Reason, to insinuates; as if all Men were bad alike, and
the soberest Part of the World no better than themselves.

I Began my LETTER by telling you, that I thought no Part of Uncleanness,
relating to the married State, had any Affinity with the Sin of ONAN; but I
have since considered better of it, and am assured, that there are married
Persons, who commit a heinous Sin to GOD, by frustrating what he has appointed
for the Multiplication of our Species, (...) commonly such, as think Children
come too Fast, and distrust Providence for their Maintenance and Education.
They indulge themselves in all the Pleasures of Sense, and yet would avoid the
Charges they might occasion; in order to which they do what they can to hinder
Conception. What I mean, is, when the Man, by a criminal untimely Retreat,
disappoints his Wife's as well as his own Fertility. This is what truly may be
called a frustraneous Abuse of their Bodies, and must be an abominable Sin. Yet
it is certain, that Thousands there are in the Married State, who provoke and
gratify their Lust, as far as is consistent with this their destructive
Purpose, and no farther.

FINIS.

