Mr. Sewall's Election SERMON. May 27th. 1724.

Rulers must be Just, RULING In the Fear of GOD.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable, The Lieutenant GOVERNOR, the COUNCIL
and REPRESENTATIVES of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
May 27.1724.

Being the Day for the Election of His MAJESTY's COUNCIL.

By Joseph Sewall, Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston

Psalm. 45.6, 7. -- The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter. Thou love
Righteousness, and hate Wickedness. -- BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green,
Printer to His Honor the Lieut. GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. Sold by Samuel Gerrish,
at his Shop near the Brick Meeting House in Cornhill 1724.

At a Council held at the Council Chamber in Boston, upon Friday, May 29th.
1724.
Ordered, THAT Thomas Fitch and Daniel Oliver, Esqrs; give the Thanks of this
Board to the Reverend Mr. Joseph Sewall, for his SERMON Preached to the General
Assembly the 27 th. Current, being the Anniversary for the Election of
Councillors; and that they Desire a Copy of the said Sermon for the Press.

J. Willard, Secr.

RULERS must be Just, Ruling in the Fear of GOD.
II. SAMUEL XXIII.3, 4. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me,
He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God:

And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun rises, even a
morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear
shining after rain.


THE last Words of great and good Men, are accounted Worthy of an attentive
observation, and affectionate Remembrance. The Words now read are called the
last Words of David, i. e. say Expositors, Some of the last which he spoke by
the Spirit of God, assisting and directing him in an Extraordinary Manner; or
such as he often repeated to his last breath, Mr. Pool, Mr. Henry
But indeed a greater than David is here: He was a Royal Prophet, and spoke as
inspired by the Holy Ghost. v.2. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his
Word was in my Tongue. The Spirit of God suggested these words to him, and
governed him in the delivery of them: 2 Pet. 1.21. For the Prophecy came not in
old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost. They were under the unerring guidance of this Divine Person as
to the Matter and Words of the holy Scriptures; so that what they thus spoke
must be received not as the Word of Man, but as it is in truth, the Word of GOD.

AND here I may observe by the way, That inasmuch as it follows in the Words of
my Text, The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me -- Some suppose
here is an intimation of the Three glorious Persons in the Trinity; The Father,
the GOD of Israel, the Son, the Rock of Israel, and the Holy Spirit, proceeding
from the Father and the Son, who spoke by the Prophets, and particularly by the
Mouth of his servant David. Whether this be the Truth of this Place or no, It
is certainly a fundamental Article of our holy Religion, to be firmly believed
because GOD has revealed it. 1 John 5.7. For there are Three that bear record
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are One.

IN the Words of my Text, We may observe, 1. The Persons speaking: The GOD of
Israel said. GOD is in a peculiar Manner the GOD of his Israel, their Covenant
GOD. The Rock of Israel; etc. by whom, as we have already hinted, some
understand the Son of GOD, who is One with his Eternal Father in the Divine
Essence, and is the Rock on whom the Church is built, the Strength and Support,
Defense and Safety of his People. 2. We may observe, to, or of whom --. To me,
i. e. To David, by way of Precept; or of me, i. e. of him, or his House, by way
of Prediction and Promise. 3. What is said. He that rules over Men --. Some
understand these Words as a Prophecy, and read them after this manner, There
shall be a Ruler over Men, or among Men, viz. The Messiah, who though he be the
invisible GOD, yet shall visibly appear and Rule among Men. Thus the words
contain a Prophecy of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of David, and of his
Kingdom, who is in an appropriate Sense, the Just One, and being filled with
the Spirit, deserved this Character in Perfection, both respecting his Personal
Qualifications, and the Blessed Fruits of his Reign; which are truly more
Pleasant and of greater and more extensive Usefulness than the Light or Rain of
Heaven. And thus it may be supposed that David reflecting on the Calamities
already brought on his House, and foreseeing by the Spirit, that the Glory of
it would still further decay and fade as a Leaf; refreshes himself with the
Consideration of the Coming of the Messiah, his Son and Successor, and his
Lord, in whose most righteous and happy Government, not his Family and People
only; but even the whole World were to be Blessed. And this Sense may seem to
be favored by what immediately follows, Ver. 5. Although my house be not so with
God; yet he has made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things
and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it
not to grow. But then, others understand these Words as spoken to David by way
of Precept, and so they are a Declaration of the Duty of Kings, particularly of
Solomon his Son and of his Successors the Kings of Israel, for whose
Instruction he gives this Rule. Our Translation favors this Interpretation.
And indeed these Words contain an Excellent Description of the Duty of Civil
Magistrates, of the King as Supreme, and of such as are under him in place of
Power. They must be Just toward Men, which in the large Sense of the Word,
comprehends the whole of our Duty toward our Neighbor, according to the Place
and Relation we sustain, and so includes Clemency, Mercy, and the like, which
in some Cases are Justice. And then this Justice to Men must flow from an
inward Principle of holy Fear toward GOD, who is the Fountain of all Power,
and be regulated by it. And then, the 4th Ver. He shall be as the light of the
Morning --. May be a Description of the Prosperity and Glory of such Rulers,
and of the happy Fruits and Effects of their Administrations with respect to
the People under their Government. God will be Present with such to uphold and
succeed them, so that they shall come in, and go out before God's People in the
Strength of the Lord, as the Sun when he goes forth in his might; and come
down upon them as the Rain, as the showers that water the Earth, Psalm. 72.6.
They shall be to the Moral World, what the Sun and Rain are to the Natural,
Great and Extensive Blessings; and their Wise and Just Government will, by the
Blessing of GOD produce Fruits no less grateful and beneficial to their People.
Now, it is with an especial regard to this Reading that I have chosen these
Words; however the other, which may well enough consist with it, taking Solomon
as a Type of Christ, is so noble and excellent in it self; and so profitable
for us all, and particularly for Civil Rulers to M^ditate upon, that I shall
not wholly omit it. In the words then we may observe these Four Doctrines.

1. GOD is the Rock of Israel. II. The Lord Jesus Christ has the Supreme
Government over Men by God's appointment, and his People are most happy under
his holy, just, and prosperous A ministrations. III. They that Rule over Men
must be Just, Ruling in the Fear GOD. IV. Such Rulers shall prosper themselves
by GOD's Blessing upon them, and be made great and extensive Blessings to their
People.

DOCT. I. GOD is the Rock of Israel.

THE Rock of Israel spoke to me. This is One of the Names and Titles whereby
God is pleased to make himself known to his People. GOD is in Scripture
frequently spoken of and shadowed forth to us under this Metaphor, in which we
have some imperfect Representation of GOD's Everlasting and Unchangeable Being,
whose Name is JEHOVAH, and I AM THAT I AM; of his invinsible Power; of the
Stability and Firmness of his Counsels, Promises and Providential Dispensations
in the World. Deuteronomy. 32, 4. He is the Rock --. This Title is given him about Six
times in this Chapter. And then, He is the Rock of Israel, of his
Vovenant People. His Ancient People call him their Rock, v.31. GOD is the
Strength of Israel. their Defense and Strong Tower, in whom alone they have a
sure Place of Refuge when pursued with threatening Evils. If it be demanded how
that GOD who is a Consuming Fire to Sinners, becomes a Rock of safety and
refreshment to any of the Sinful Children of fallen Adam, It must be said, That
the Eternal Son of GOD, who is the Great GOD our Savior, was in the fullness of
Time sent forth made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were
under the Law --: He is God-Man Mediator, and in Him GOD is the Rock of
Salvation to his People. He is in Scripture called a Rock, 1 Cor. 10.4. -- That
Rock was Christ. The Son of GOD was prefigur'd by the Rock mentioned, Exodus
17.6. which being smitten gave forth waters in abundance, which followed the
Israelites in their Marches through the dry and barren Wilderness: For thus the
Son of GOD in our Nature, having been smitten by GOD, when he was made a Curse
for his People, became a Fountain Opened in the Merit of his Obedience, and in
the abundant Effusions of His Spirit, whose Graces and Comforts are as Streams
and Rivers of living Waters for the comfortable supply and refreshment of his
People, Job. 7.37 -- 39. Again, Our Lord Jesus is laid in Zion -- a tried
Stone, a precious CornerStone, a sure Foundation, Isai. 28.16. 1 Pet. 6.7. On
him, God's Spiritual House the Church is built, and by him the several parts
are united and supported. The Lord Jesus Christ as he is revealed in his Word,
and declared to be the Christ, the Son of the living GOD, is the Rock on which
the Church is built, and therefore the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it, Matthew 16.17, 18. Again, The Son of GOD is unto his People as the Shadow of
a great Rock in a weary Land, Isai. 32 2. If these and the foregoing words
refer to Hezekiah; yet they are supposed by good Expositors to look through him to
Christ the great Antitype, who affords his People a cool and most refreshing
Shade under which they may sit with great delight, being defended from the
scorching heat of GOD's wrath, from the Curse of the fiery Law, and from all
those Calamities which their Sins have deserved In a Word, He is the Fortress
and Strong tower to which they may fly for Refuge to lay hold on the hope set
before them, when pursued by Revenging Justice, and in which they may be safe
from all their Enemies.

USE. LET what has been said Excite and Encourage perishing Sinners to fly to
GOD in CHRlST, as the Rock of their Salvation.

AND thus we all are by Nature, dead in trespasses and sins, and Children of
wrath. Let as then fly to GOD's Name as to our Strong Tower: Let us make that
Prayer, Psalm. 61.2 -- Lead me to the Rock that is higher than I. O make have to
Jesus Christ, and by Faith lean and rest upon him alone for Salvation! He that
believes in him shall not be confounded, I Pet. 2.6. But if the Son of GOD be
a stone, and rock of offense to you, You will stumble and fall into Eternal
Perdition; and when he shall in the Great Day of his wrath fall upon you, He
will grind you to powder. Let us then not be at rest, till we find rest in
Jesus Christ; who will Save to the Uttermost all that come to God by him; for
He is a Rock, and his work is perfect. Let us build our hopes of Eternal Life
upon this Rock, that so whatever Storms of temptation and trouble arise and
beat upon us, our building may stand: See Mat. 7.24.-27. If we are interested
in CHRIST, and vitally United to him by his Spirit dwelling in us, and by a
true Faith, we may then amidst all the Changes and threatening Evils of this
Life, rejoice in Christ Jesus, and sing with the sweet Psalmist of Israel, 2 Samuel 22.47. The Lord Lives, and blessed be my Rock; and Exalted be the God of
the rock of my Salvation.

2. LET the Enemies of God's Church and People be afraid, and desist from their
wicked Enterprises.

IN opposing God and Christ, you run against a Rock, and can expect nothing but
to be broken in pieces. We read of the Stone cut out without hands, that it
smote the Image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to
pieces Dan. 2.34.
. Let the Combinations of the Enemies of God's People be ever so strong and
numerous, that word shall in the Conclusion be fulfilled in them; Isai. 8.9.
Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces --.

3. LET this People be Exhorted and Encouraged to Look to, and Trust in the
LORD for Salvation.

OUR Fathers trusted in the Lord, and he delivered them. Let us then be
encouraged under all the dark Providence which pass over us, to Trust in the
Lord, and Stay upon our God: Who is Eternal and Unchangeable in his Wisdom,
Power, Goodness, Mercy and Covenant-Faithfulness. Isai. 26 4. Trust ye in the
Lord for ever: for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting Strength. Heb. The Rock
of Ages. Though we are a very degenerate People, yet we may humbly Call upon the
Lord, as our Covenant God He has stretched out our Heavens, and laid the
foundation of our Earth, and form d us a People for himself. It is true, we
have by our great degeneracies given GOD reason to complain of us something as
of his ancient People, Deuteronomy. 32.15. But Jeshurun waxed sat and kicked --, then
he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation.
We have been in an high degree unmindful of the Rock that begat us, and
forgotten God that formed us. We have provoked God to Jealousy by our heinous
iniquities, and now God provokes us to anger with a foolish Nation. We must say
of our Enemies, Their Rock is not as our Rock; But alas! Out Sins have in a
dreadful measure separated between us and our God, and he refuses to give us
those Tokens of his gracious Presence, and to fight our battles, as formerly
has been Experienced, when our Enemies were numurous, and we but a few
comparatively. And shall we go on to provoke the Lord by our Sins till our Rock
fell us, " quit his interest in and relation to us". O let us not do it? For if
God leave us, our Defense and Glory are departed. Let us not go from God with a
perpetual backsliding; but let us Return to him by sincere Repentance; lay hold
of his strength and make Peace with him. Then we might hope to see that good
word fulfilled in us. Deuteronomy. 33.27. The Eternal God is thy refuge: -- and be
shall thrust out the Enemy from before thee, and shall, say destroy them.

DOCT. II. THE Lord Jesus Christ has the Supreme Government over Men by God's
appointment, and his People are most happy under his Holy, just, and Prosperous
Administrations.

WE have already observed that some Read these Words as a Prophecy; There shall
be a Ruler over Men, etc. and apply them to our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of
David, in whom the Covenant of Royalty made with David, in which GOD promised,
That his Throne should be as the days of Heaven, Psalm. 89.29. had it is full
accomplishment. Agreably, We have that Promise of the Messiah, our Lord Jesus
Christ, Isai. 11.1-4. There shall come sorth a Rod out of the stem of Jesse: --
And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge, and
the fear of the Lord: And shall make him of quick Understanding in the fear of
the Lord, and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, -- But with
Righteousness shall be judge the poor. -- And we have the happy fruits of his
Government described in the same Chapter, 6-9. v. Here I would speak to a few
particulars very briefly.

1. THE Lord Jesus Christ has the Supreme Government over Men by G0D's
appointment. The Son of GOD is the King of Glory. He is Over all God blessed
for ever, Romans 9.5. All things were made by him, Joh. 1.3. And therefore his
Government over all Creatures, as he is GOD, is natural and necessary, for he
is essentially One with the Father and the Spirit, Equal in Power and Glory.
But besides this, our Lord Jesus Christ has a Delegated and Mediatorial
Kingdom as he is the Son of GOD Incarnate, the only Mediator between GOD and
Man, and the Savior of his People. Isa. 9.6, 7. Unto us a child is born --,
and the Government shall be upon his shoulder: and his Name shall be called,
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace. Of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no End, upon
the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it
with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever: The Zeal of the
Lord of hosts will perform this. Now in this respect the Messiah is GOD's King
in a singular and most transcendent manner, and is Exalted by GOD the Father as
the Reward of his meritorious Obedience in his Humiliation. Phil 2.8, 11. And
being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him,
and given him a Name which is above every Name. That at the Name of Jesus every
knee should bow -- Not as if we were obliged to bow our Bodies whenever the
Letters and Syllables of the Name Jesus are pronounced; for Joshua is called
Jesus in Heb. 4.8. And some of the Creatures here mentioned, have no Knees to
bow. It must signify therefore, that all must pay homage to the Person
signified by this Name, and be in Subjection to him either freely or by
constraint. This Kingdom of CHRIST of which we are now speaking is a Universal
Kingdom, a Dominion which Rules over all. He is the King of Kings, -- Rev.
19.16. The Son of GOD is the Supreme Ruler of Heaven and Earth: All power is
given unto him in heaven and in earth, Matthew. 28 I8. The holy Angels are
subject to him: They Worship him and stand about his Throne as ministering
Spirits, Heb. 1.6. Isa. 6.1, 2. The Devils are subjected by Conquest: Col.
2.15. Having spoiled principalities and powers, -- triumphing over them --. Our
glorious Lord, who is the Seed of the Woman, has bruised the Serpent's Head.
Again, The whole World of Mankind is under the Government of CHRIST. The Father
has given him Power over all flesh, Joh. 17.2. Whether they be Elect or
Reprobate, Good or Bad, our Lord Jesus is in a large sense King over them all.
He Rules in the midst of his Enemies, Psalm. 110.2. He has a Rod of Iron to
dash in pieces his implacable Enemies, and must sit at God's Right Hand, till
all of them are made his footstool, ver. 1. The Shields of the Earth belong to
him, even all Rulers, who ought by their Office to be as Shields to protect and
defend their People from Injuries. All Governments are under him, and belong to
him, who is the blessed and only Potentate, -- I Tim. 6.15. It is owing to his
good Providence that there is any good Order and civil Peace among sinful Men,
and that some heathen Rulers have been Benefactors to their People. GOD the
Son, who is called the Wisdom of God, Luke 11.49. speaks, Prove. 8.15. By me
Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. When ever they are enabled to Execute
Justice, this is from CHRIST, though the Heathen know him not. But then, our Lord
is in a peculiar sense, the King of his Church and People, whom he Governs by
his Word and Spirit Psalm. 2.6. -- I set my King on my holy hill of Zion. And He
has a peculiar Respect to their Welfare in the Exercise of his Government,
Ephesians. 1.22. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head
over all things to the Church. And here we may take notice of Christ's visible
and invisible Kingdom, as the Church falls under a twofold consideration in
Scripture. The Visible Church is in Scripture called the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 25.1. which consists of those that Openly profess subjection to Christ and
his Laws, and of their Seed. CHRIST is the Lord of his own House, the Church,
and has in his Word, which is his Rod or Scepter, given those Laws and
Ordinances by which he will have it governed; to which are annexed Promises and
Threatenings, as Sanctions. The Gospel is the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The Lord
is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, Isai. 33.22. Accordingly, He charged
his Apostles, and their Successors to the End of the World, To teach his
subjects to observe whatsoever he had commanded, and then promises them his
gracious Presence always even unto the End of the World, Mat 28.19, 20. His
Will revealed in his Word is the Rule and Measure of our Obedience; from which
nothing may be taken, to which nothing may be added, if we would avoid that
dreadful Curse, Rev. 22.18, 19. Again, Our Lord in the Execution of his Kingly
Office, has appointed Officers in his Church to feed and rule his People in
his Name, and according to his Word, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, whose power is not lordly,
but stewardly and ministerial under Christ, 1 Pet. 5.3. Now, these things
belong to Christ's visible Kingdom upon Earth, in which he governs his People by
his own Laws, Officers Censures, etc. And therefore it is most intolerable
Presumption for any to require the Church and People of GOD to observe the
Traditions of Men, and so to do what in them lies to make void Christ's Law. As
Christ says to the Pharisees, Mat. 15.6. -- Thus have ye made the Commandment
of God of none effect by your tradition: Or unlorded it, as the word signifies.
This is indeed to snatch at a flower of Christ's Crown, how light soever Men
may make of it; and when he comes to Judgment, will be found Crimen laesae
Majestatis, High Treason against the King of Heaven. Such is the Usurpation of
Antichrist, who Opposes and Exalts himself above all that is called God, --
Whom the Lord shall Consume with the Spirit of his Mouth, and shall Destroy
with the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2.4 -- 8. Surely then, it much
concerns the subjects of Christ, as they would approve themselves loyal to him,
and consult their own safety, to stand a great way off from Roman
Antichristian, in their Principles and Practices, left when she shall fall,
(as.we are sure she shall and rise no more, Rev. 18.2, 21.) they be terribly
shaken: Rev. 18.4. -- Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of
her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

BUT to proceed, the things but now mentioned belong to the visible
dispensation of Christ's Kingdom upon Earth, under which Multitudes are
comprehended that are not savingly Converted. But then, there are a Number whom
GOD has chosen in Christ, before the foundation of the World, that they should
be holy, and without blame before him in love, -- Ephesians. 1.4. who are in all Ages
effectually Called by the Holy Spirit, and made willing in the Day of God's
power. Now of these it may be said that the Kingdom of God is within them, Luk
17.21 When this glorious King rides forth prosperously on the Word of Truth, He
subdues his Elect, who were Enemies in their Minds to the obedience of Faith,
according to the working of his mighty power. These Experience the Renewing of
the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.6. They are born again, from above, born of water and of
the Spirit, and so enter into the Kingdom of GOD, Job. 3.3, 5 There Is a Saving
and Supernatual Change wrought on all the powers of their Souls, whereby they
are delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of
GOD's dear Son. Their Understanding is Enlightened, their Wills, Renewed, and
they are enabled from their hearts to Receive Jesus Christ as their Prince and
Savior, and to submit to him; saying with them, Isai. 26.13. O Lord our God,
other lords besides thee have had dominion over us: but by thee only will we
make mention of thy Name. The Lord Jesus Christ Rules in their hearts by his
Spirit dwelling in them, and causes them to walk in his statutes and keep his
judgments --,Ezekiel 36.27. And inasmuch as by his Grace they come up to the Terms
of the New Covenant, He gives them a sure title to all the Privileges and
Immunities, Blessings and Benefits of the Gospel Charter; such as
Justification, Adoption, support under Temptations and Afflictions, Victory
over all Enemies, the Consolations of the Spirit, Perseverance in Grace, etc.
To which I may add, The Protection and Provision of his good Providence,
respecting their outward Man. Again, Such are the Rest of their departed
Spirits in the Paradise of God, their glorious Resurrection, when their vile
Body shall be changed and fashioned like to Christ's glorious Body; and they
shall obtain Salvation with Eternal Glory. For when the Son of Man, to whom all
Judgment is committed, shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with
him; when he shall be Revealed in flaming Fire, -- taking Vengeance of those
that know not God and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Then
will he appear to their Salvation, Mat. 25.2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. Heb. 9.27.

2. OUR Lord Jesus Christ is most Holy and Righteous in all the Administrations
of his Government. He is in Scripture often called the Just Righteous One, Isa.
53.11. Acts 3.14. -- The Holy One, and the Just. The Man Christ Jesus was
anointed with the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit in an Extraordinary manner.
GOD gives not the Spirit by measure to him. In a particular manner, He was
most eminent for his holy Fear of GOD, and Justice to Men. Yea so perfect and
excellent was the Obedience of this Divine Person in our Nature, that he is of
God made unto his people righteousness. He is Jehovah our Rightousness, Jer.
23.6. And as to what concerns his Government, of which we are now speaking, it
must be said unto him, Psalm. 45.6, 7. -- O God the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a
right Scepter. Thou love Righteousness, and hate wickedness --. The Son of
GOD is the true Melchisedeck, the King of Righteousness; and in this respect is
the Man after God's own heart in a more Exalted sense than David ever was.
Isai. 11.5. And Righteousness shall be the girdle of his wins. -- q. d. It
shall adorn him, and be the Glory of his Government; and it shall constantly
cleave to him in all his administrations Mr. Pool in Lcc.
. The Laws of Christ are holy and righteous altogether, and so are all his
Administrations. The Laws of his Kingdom are every way suited to make his
Subjects good and happy, and he is most just and impartial in the Execution of
them. Shall not the judge of all the Earth do right? most certainly he will.
Being God and Man in One Person, he cannot Err. Even when the Son of GOD goes
forth against his Enemies it is to Execute Judgment. Rev. 19, 11. -- In
righteousness be does judge and make War.

3. HIS Obedient People are most happy under his Righteous and Prosperous
Government. He shall be as the light of the morning --, as the tender grass
springing out of the Earth by clear shining after Rain. Apply these Metaphors
to Jesus Christ, who is the Light of the World, that great Light which makes
and rules the Gospel Day, and they are perfectly outdone. The Sun in the
Firmament in all it is Light and Glory, is but a dark shadow of this Sun of
Righteousness who is Light, and in whom there is no Darkness at all, the
Brightness of the Father's Glory, and the Fountain of all Divine Knowledge,
Life and Comfort. When he arose the Day spring from on high, visited his
People, to give light to them that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
Luke 1.78, 9. We have the flourishing happy State of the GospelChurch
described, Isa. 60.19. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, -- but the
Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. When the
Son of God is pleased to cause his Face to shine upon his People, then their
Righteousness goet forth as brightness, and their Salvation as a lamp that
burns. What are the precious Fruits brought forth by the Sun? surely not
comparable to the Fruits of Christ's Kingdom, which is Righteousness, and
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. We read, Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord God is a
Sun, -- the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will be withhold from
them that walk uprightly. And thus we have the blessed Influences of Christ's
Government compared to the Rain, Psalm. 72.6, 7. He shall come down like Rain,
-- as showers that water the Earth --,In his days shall the Righteous flourish.
By his Doctrine which drops as the Rain, and by the sweet and benign Influences
of his Spirit, he causes his People to abound in the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness. We have the Blessings of Christ's Kingdom described, Isa. 32.1.
Behold a King shall reign in Righteousness, -- a man shall be -- as rivers of
water in a dry place. ver. I5. Until the Spirit be poured out upon us from on
high, and the wilderness be a fruitful Field. ver. 17. The Work of
Righteousness shall be Peace, etc. Thus Isa 44.3, 4. I will pour water upon him
that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: And they shall spring up as among
the grass, as willows by the water courses. As the Earth is enriched with the
River of God which is full of Water; so our Lord by pouring out his Spirit in
plentiful measures, Creates a River the Streams whereof makes glad the City of
God; and his Churches are as fruitful Fields, as watered Gardens which the Lord
has blessed, bearing all manner of pleasant Fruits.

APPLICATION.
I would improve this Doctrine in a Word of Exhortation. And that particularly
directed,

1. TO our Honored Rulers with all Humility. Give Glory to the Son of God by
submitting to his Government, and by employing all your Power for the
Advancement of his Kingdom. GOD speaks to Rulers whether Supreme, or
Subordinate, in their limited Dominions; Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son lest he be
angry, and ye perish from the way --. You must bow down and adore this glorious
King, and Submit to his Government. This you are obliged to as much as the
meanest under your Government; and the rather because in his Governing
Providence he has set you over his People. You must yield an hearty Obedience
to the Laws of CHRIST's Kingdom in the Exercise of Faith, Repentance and New
Obedience; and by a professed Subjection to the Government and Ordinances he
has appointed in his Church. Particularly, you should look to it, that when
the People of God are called to sit with the King at his Table, your Seat be
not empty.

INDEED it does not pertain to you to Administer the Ordinances of Christ's
House; however it is your Province to be as Guardian Angels round the Church
and People of GOD, to defend them in their Religious as well as Civil
Privileges, that they may lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all godliness and
honesty. Furthermore, It ought to be your Care and Endeavor to Enlarge the
Kingdom of the Great GOD our Savior, by taking proper Methods to Gospelize the
dark Corners of this Land; and to spread the Savor of the Knowledge of CHRIST
among the Aboriginal Natives, that they who dwell in the Wilderness may bow
before him. If you do thus fall in with GOD's great design of Glorifying his
Son JESUS CHRIST, he will Honor you; for in so doing you Honor GOD himself, and
the Lord says, -- Them that Honor me, I will Honor --, 1 Samuel 2.30.

2. I would beseech my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry to suffer
the Word of Exhortatation. Use your best Endeavors to Promote the Interests of
CHRIST's Kingdom. You are by your Office in an especial manner obliged to seek
the Prosperity of Christ's Kingdom upon Earth. Permit me then, though most
unworthy, to suggest a few things very briefly. CHRIST's Kingdom is not of this
World, and consequently, our Work is Spiritual, and lies principally with the
Souls of Men, about their Eternal State. The great and important Errand upon
which the Son of GOD sends you, is to turn Sinners from Darkness to Light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of Sins,
and Inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith in him, Acts 26.18. As
also to build up his obedient Subjects and followers on their most holy Faith.
Now for this End, we must. Preach the Word of the Kingdom, and not shun to
declare the whole Counsel of God. We must Preach not our selves, but CHRIST
JESUS the Lord. The great Scope and Design of our Preaching must be to Glorify
GOD, by winning Souls unto CHRIST, and advancing his Kingdom more and more in
the hearts of his People. We must therefore determine, as the Apostle Paul did,
I Cor. 2.2. Not to know any thing save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Jesus
Christ in his Natures, Divine and Humane, in the Mysterious and wonderful
Constitution of his Person, in his Offices, and in the inestimable benefits of
his Kingdom; especially in that Great and Comprehensive One, the sending his
Holy Spirit; must be the great subject of our Preaching. Yea, whatever subject
we insist upon, as we ought to Explain and Enforce the great duties of the
Moral Law, we must speak the Truth as it is in JESUS; for, as a Learned Divine
Observes, Christ Jesus the Lord is the Sum and Center of all revealed Truth;
neither is any thing to be preached unto Men, as an object of their faith, or
necessary element of their Salvation, which does not some way or other, either
meet in him, or refer unto him. Dr. Edw. Reynolds.
. We must declare unto Men the absolute Necessity of their being United to
Christ, by his Spirit dwelling in them, and by a living Faith, that so they may
be justified through his perfect Righteousness imputed to them; of their being
Created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, and of their living by the faith of
the Son of God, if they would serve God acceptably in this World, and Prepare
for his heavenly Kingdom.

AND then, if we would approve our selves loyal and faithful to Jesus Christ,
we must take Care to Teach his People to Observe whatsoever He has Commanded;
doing our utmost in our Places that his Worship and Ordinances may be kept Pure
and Entire according to Scripture-pattern; for indeed all Unscriptural
additions to the Worship of God, are Corruptions of it; agreeably we have that
threatening, Isai. 29.13, 14. -- Their fear toward me is taught by the precepts
of Men: Therefore behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous work among this
people: -- for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish --. The Word of GOD
must be our Rule and Directory respecting Doctrine, Discipline and Worship. We
must take Care to maintain a godly Discipline in the Churches of Christ,
observing that Word, Jer. 15.9. -- If thou take forth the precious from the
vile, thou shall be as my mouth: let them return unto thee, but return not thou
unto them. In a word, We must be Ensamples to the Flock over which the Holy
Ghost has made us Overseers, going before God's People, in an holy, humble,
blameless, fruitful Conversation, being our selves Conformed to the Image and
Example of our glorious Lord. 1 Timothy 4.12. -- Be thou en Example of the
Believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in
purity. We are in an especial manner obliged to take heed we be not conformed
to this World in its evil Customs and corrupt Practices; but that we be
transformed by the Renewing of our Minds, that we may prove what is that good,
and acceptable and perfect Will of God. That word of our Lord is seasonable for
us, Rev. 16.15. Behold, I come as a Thief, Blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

I would here ask leave further to mention a few things by way of humble
Inquiry.

IS it not needful that the Word of Christ, which is the Rod of his Strength
whereby he subdues those that were Enemies, and then Rules them as his willing
People, Should be Publicly Read in our Churches? I suppose it will be readily
granted that Reading the Scriptures is a part of Religious Worship; and does
not GOD require that we should own Him as our Lawgiver, by making this a part
of Public Worship? Is not this an Ordinance by which, together with Preaching,
this glorious Light of the Gospel should be held up and held out in the
Churches which are compared to golden Candlesticks? The Teachers Endeavoring,
as there may be need of it, to Cause the People to Understand the Reading,
Deuteronomy. 31.11. Act. 15.21. Col. 4.16.

Again, ARE these Churches sufficiently furnis'd with Officers to attend the
weighty Services of feeding, Ruling and Watching over the Flocks? When as there
is but One Elder in by far the greatest part of them. Is not the Work too heavy
for One Man? And are there not some Cases in which it will be very difficult if
not impracticable for the Church to act according to our Constitution, as when
the Pastor is personally Engaged in a Controversy with any of the Brethren? It
was the declared judgment of these Churches, as appears by the Platform, that
there are Officers belonging to the Eldership, who are to attend the Work of
Spiritual Rule in the Church, together with the Pastors; Though they do not
Labor in the Word and Doctrine. Now our Forefathers were holy Men, and gave
themselves very much to the Study of these Things. However there is room for an
Appeal. Neverthless, What says the Scripture? Romans 12 7, 8 9. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1
Cor. 12.28.

Again, OUGHT there not to be some further Care taken of the Children of the
Covenant, in the Exercise of the holy Watch and Discipline of these Churches?
We have been seeking to GOD to pour out His Spirit upon the Rising Generation.
What is further to be done? Might not a general Agreement for Pastoral Visits,
by the Blessing of God, serve this, and other good Purposes in a Day of
Temptation and Degeneracy.

Again, DOES not the Institution of the Office of a Deacon, as a standing
Office in the Church, necessarily suppose that the Head of the Church, who
said, the Poor ye have always with you, requires his Churches to declare their
professed Subjection to his Gospel, by this particular Expression of Love, the
Charitable best wing Alms on his poor Members? And is it not required that the
Deacons should be solemnly separated to their Work by Prayer with the laying on
of Hands? Acts 6. Phil. 1.1.

DOES not GOD in his Word and by his Providence call aloud to these Churches to
be Zealous and Repent, and do their First Works? Is it not high time for us to
Inquire into the ground of the Controversy between GOD and us, in that his
Spirit is so far withdrawn from us; and to consider what is incumbent upon us
in a way of Duty, that GOD may draw nigh to us in a way of Grace and Favor,
and Revive his Work among us --. That the Son of GOD may continue to walk in
the midst of the Golden Candlesticks, and to hold the Stars in his Right Hand.

I speak these things in weakness and fear, under the sense of my great Defects
in the Work of the Ministry, upon the account of which I am unworthy to be
called a Minister of CHRIST.

3. LET this Word of Exhortation be directed to the Body of this People, Be
persuaded to submit to Christ's Righteous and Equal Scepter, and to approve your
selves his dutiful Subjects and obedient People. We are highly favored in that
we have the Means of Grace and Salvation. CHRIST's visible Kingdom set up among
us: Psalm. 144.15. -- Happy is that People whose God is the Lord. The
flourishing of Religion among us ought therefore to lie nearest our hearts, and
to be our great Aim and Endeavor in our several Capacities and Stations. In a
particular manner, Heads of Families should give Glory to GOD in CHRIST, by
Worshipping him in their Houses, and by Commanding their Children and Household
after them that they keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment: And
take Care that the Laws of GOD be not accounted as a strange thing in their
Houses. Then do we take the best Methods to Promote the true Prosperity of our
Zion, when we zealously Endeavor as far as our influence reaches, that the
Gospel of CHRIST, which is the Word of the Kingdom, may be rightly understood,
professed, and practiced. And we are under the strongest Obligations to this,
because the great Errand upon which our Forefathers came into this Land, when
an howling Wilderness, was that they might set up Christ's Kingdom in the power
and purity of it, where Satan the god of this World ruled from time immemorial;
and leave their Children in the Possession of the Spiritual Blessings of it.
Hear the Excellent Mr. Mitchel upon this Head, The Cause of the People of GOD
in New England, is, Religion; i. e. The Profession and Practice of the Truths
and Rules of the Word of GOD, more particularly, Reformation of Religion --.
The Erecting of CHRIST'S Kingdom in whole Societies (whereby CHRIST is seen
Ruling all in an open, in a prevailing and peaceable manner,) was our Design,
as is our Interest in this Country: though with respect to the inward and
invisible Kingdom, as the Scope thereof. The public setting up of CHRIST's
Kingdom, and Enjoyment of those Ordinances and Ways of His, which can only be
enjoyed in whole Societies, and that with Purity and Liberty, was our End in
coming hither. -- In the Church, CHRIST's Kingdom is clearly and gloriously set
up, when only, and all his Institutions, both in Worship and Discipline are
attended and observed in their Purity and Power, according to
Scripture-Pattern, [ Matthew. 28.18, 20.]. This is the great Cause and Interest
of GOD's People in this Country, and was the great End of their Undertaking,
and has been the great matter of their Testimony in their Synodical Acts, and
other Writings publis'd to the World. Hence our great Duty is to keep and seek
all the Commandments of God, (I Chron. 28.8.) in that respect; that is, all the
Institutions and Ordinances of his House; to hold fast what we have attained,
that is according to Scripture-Pattern therein, and to come up unto what we yet
want, or are defective in. To which I may add the late Testimony of that aged
Servant of God, the Memorable Dr. Increase Mather, The Principal Design upon
which these Colonies were at first Planted, was to Prosess, and Practice and
Enjoy, with undisturbed Liberty, the Holy Religion of GOD our Savior,
Exhibited in the Sacred Scriptures, and Reformed and Rescued from the
Inventions and Abuses which the Man of Sin has introduced; And more
particularly, to set up Churches (even of the Aboriginal Natives, as well as of
English Christians) for our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that should keep themselves
Loyal to to him their glorious King, in his Word, giving Law unto them, and
faithful to the Religion of the Second Commandment --. This was the great End
for which our Ancestors followed the Lord JESUS CHRIST into this part of the
New World, that they might keep themselves Chaste and Loyal to Him in the
Profession and Practice of undefiled Religion. And God wonderfully owned,
succeeded and blessd them in this vast Undertaking. But there is now reason to
take up that Lamentation, Lam 4.1. How is the gold become dim! how is the most
fine gold changed! Alas! There is much of a Lukewarm Spirit in matters of
Religion, much of a Worldly, selfish, carnal Spirit prevailing among us. We are
a degenerate and backsliding People, and there are many provoking Sins against
the Lord found among us. This has been long since declared in a Public and
Solemn manner, by the Synod for Reformation, Convened 1679, 80. In Answer to
that Question; What are the Evils that have provoked the Lord to bring his
Judgments on New England? Answer, There is a great and visible decay of the
power of Godliness among Professors --; Pride, whence proceeds a refusing to be
subject to Order -- And Contention: Excess in Apparel, Persons going above
their Estates --. The neglect of Divine Institutions --. Profane Swearing and
Cursing, Sabbath-breaking --. Neglect of Family Worship, Instruction and
Government. -- Inordinate Passions, Sinful heats and hatreds --. Backbitings,
Tale bearing --. Much Intemperance. That heathenish and idolatrous practice of
Health-drinking. That shameful iniquity of sinful Drinking; there are more
Temptations to this Sin publicly allowed of, than any Necessity does require
--. It is a common practice for Town-Dwellers, yea, and Church Members to
frequent Public Houses, and there to mis-spend precious Time, unto the
dishonor of the Gospel, and the scandalizing of others, who are by such
Examples induced to Sin against GOD --. Sins against the Seventh Commandment,
and Temptations thereunto indulged, as immodest Apparel, mixed Dancings, light
Behavior, sinful Company-keeping with vain Persons, and abundance of Idleness
--. The Want of Truth, Promise-breaking --. Inordinate Affection to the World.
Covetuousness which is Idolatry; which appears in Oppression, and
strait-handedness as to public Concerns --. Opposition to the Work of
Reformation. Incorrigibleness under Judgments --. A Public Spirit is greatly
wanting in the most of Men --.Sins against the Gospel, Impenitency, Unbelief,
Unfruitfulness under the Means of Grace, Christ is not prized and embraced in
all his Offices and Ordinances as ought to be. --

SUCH Sins as these those Worthies judged were the procuring Causes of GOD's
Judgments in that Day. And certainly, if we duly consider what we now are, we
shall be obliged to acknowledge that these Sins are not generally Reformed; but
rather that we are grown worse and worse, and have Revolted more and more;
notwithstanding the many Mercies we have received since that time, which should
have led us to Repentance, and the many Judgments whereby GOD has testified
against us. And now GOD is pleading the Quarrel of his Covenant with us by the
Sword of the Wilderness, and other wasting Calamities Yea, threatens to take
away the Hedge, and pull down the Wall, by which this his Vineyard has been
Enclosed and defended. And his Voice to us is, Prepare to meet thy God, O
Israel. Let us then Consider the necessity of making our peace with GOD, and so
of Engaging him on our side; for when He gives quietness, who then can make
Trouble? and when he hides his face, who can behold him? The Son of GOD will
overcome when He Judges, and therefore we must either submit to him, or be
broken in pieces. To cry the Temple of the Lord -- while we go on in our Sins,
is to boast in lying words. Gospel-Privileges can be no Sanctuary to such as go
on obstinately in their Sin. Amo. 3.2. You only have I known of all the
Families of the Earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. Let
us then be Convinced of the necessity of Repentance and Reformation. And now
while GOD waits to be gracious, let us lay hold of his Strength, and make Peace
with him. Now that GOD says unto us, O Israel, Return unto the Lord your God;
for thou have fallen by thine iniquity. Let us as we are directed, Take with us
Words, and turn to the Lord, saying unto him, Take away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously --, Ashur shall not save us --, for with thee the
fatherless finds mercy. O that there were such a Spirit in us! O that we
could once at length put away our provoking Sins, which are our worst Enemies,
the accuresd Achans that trouble us. Then we might Rejoice in our Redeemer and
say, Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is
our King, be will save us.

TO Conclude, Let us be sensible that no man can come to the Son, except the
Father which has sent him, draw him Job. 6 44.
; and accordingly seek to God to open our hearts by his Holy Spirit. Behold!
The Son of GOD stands at the door and knocks; and his Voice to us is, Open to
me: Lift up your heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up, ye Everlasting doors,
and the King of Glory shall come in.

Again, LET the Obedient Subjects of Christ Rejoice in this, that their Lord
Reigns. Let this Comfort you under all dark Providence, when there is a Wheel
within a Wheel, that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Man above upon the Throne
Ezekiel. 1.26.
, who governs all the Wheels of Providence in unerring Wisdom, and will make
all things work together for good to them that Love him.

AND let us now Wish Prosperity to the Son of David, who is the Son of GOD,
Gird thy Sword upon thy thigh, O most Mighty: with thy Glory and thy Majesty.
And in thy Majesty ride prosperously --.

MAY the Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ! May our glorious Lord take to himself his great Power and Reign! Come
Lord Jesus.

I proceed to consider the Words as they may contain a Declaration of the Duty
of Civil Rulers, and a Description of the happy Influence of their Government,
when they answer the Character here given.

DOCT. III. THEy that Rule over Men must be Just, Ruling in the Fear of GOD.

HERE I may by the way observe something implied in the Words, viz. That Civil
Government is of Divine Appointment. The GOD of Israel said, he that Rules,
etc. Now this supposes that there is a Rule over Men which GOD has
constituted. Accordingly we have that Command, Romans 13. 1, Let every soul be
Subject to the higher Powers. For there is no Power but of God, the Powers that
be, are ordained of God. v. 2. Whosoever therefore resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God --. Indeed this or that particular Form of
Government may be of humane determination; but not Government it self: The Most
High has declared his Will, that there shall be a Rule over Men. Here we also
see, That the management of Civil Government is not left to the Arbitrary will
and pleasure of men. No! Rulers, must walk by Rule in their Administrations,
taking care that the Ruled enjoy their Rights and Properties. This they must do
in the fear of GOD, who clothes them with Authority, and will call them to an
account whether they have improved their Power agreeable to his declared Will,
and for his Glory. The principal End of Government next to the Glory of GOD,
the last End of all things, is the Good of Civil Societies and Communities of
Men. Let Rulers remember, that they Rule over Men, not over Beasts whom they
may enslave and abuse at pleasure, but over reasonable Creatures, and of the
same Rank with themselves Mr. Henry in Loc.
.

PROP. I. THEY that Rule ever Men must be Just. The Word here used sometimes
comprehends the whole of our Duty. It may here include their Discharge of all
the duties of the Second Table according to the Place and Relations they
sustain. They must take care to maintain and promote Justice among Men,
especially among those over whom GOD has set them.

1. THEY that Rule over Men must be Examples of Justice and Righteousness in
their whole behavior. Rulers are in the Providence of GOD set upon an hill,
and they must take care that their light shine before Others. Particularly,
they must be Patterns and Examples to their People in a conscientious
attendance on the Duties of the Second Table. Though they Rule over Men, yet they
are under the Law of GOD as well as others, and must teach others Obedience by
their ready and cheerful Subjection to it. There Is a great force in Example,
especially in the Examples of Rulers: 2 Chronicles. 12.1. Rehoboam forsook the law
of the Lord, and all Israel with him It is a Proverbial saying, All men will
conform to the King's Example Regis ad Exemplum --
. When such as are in Authority do therefore set a fair Copy by their honest
and good Behavior, there will be ground to hope that their People will imitate
them. Rulers then must be just to their own Character, and show forth the Image
of God in them, if they would have others duly regard the Image of God which is
upon them, in their high Station of Dignity and Power. They must do their Duty
toward themselves, or they will not be capable of attending their Duty aright
toward their People. They must by the Grace of God govern their own Appetites
and Passions, and Exercise a Rule over their own Spirits. Thus, they must be
temperate in the use of Meats and Drinks, or they will pervert Judgment, and
Expose themselves to Contempt. Prove. 31. 4, 5. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel,
it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink: Left they
drink, and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted. If
this Vice be indulged it will in a peculiar manner unfit Rulers to discern and
execute Judgment; it will make them vile, and lay their honor in the dust; for
it will bereave them of that Wisdom which causes the face to shine, and which
in an especial manner commands Respect and Reverence in Persons of a superior
Character. Again, They must know how to possess their vessels in sanctification
and honor, and not in the lust of uncleanness, for this is one of those Sins
which especially corrupts and infatuates the Mind. Hos. 4.11. Whoredom, and
Wine -- take away the heart. Accordingly we have that Dehortation given to
Lemuel, that is to Solomon as Interpreters generally agree; Prove. 31.3. Give
not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroys Kings. How
pernicious were the fruits of this Sin in David's and Solomon's Reigns; how
great a Blot to those famous Kings! Again, They must Rule their own Spirits,
and regulate their Anger according to the Rule of GOD's Word. Such as have the
Sword of Justice put into their hands, had need be Men of a meek, sedate, and
calm Spirit; for the wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God. It is
true, They must be Zealous in GOD's Cause, and for their Country's Safety; but
should be patient and forbearing in their own. Moses's Meekness was one eminent
Qualification that fitted him to bear the burden of his Government over a
froward People. We read, Prove. 17.27. -- A man of understanding is of an
excellent Spirit. Or as others render it, is of a cool Spirit, calm and
moderate, not easily provoked. In a Word, They that Rule over Men must be Just
and Fair in their Dealings, consider them in their private Capacities and
Employments. And this is called Commutative Justice, in which there is a mutual
giving and receiving of that which is each one's due, as Men are Nei'bours and
Brethren. And in this respect Rulers must observe that Rule, Romans 13.7. Render
to all their dues. Ver. 8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another. These
Commands reach Men in an high Station as well as others. They must do to
others, as they would have them do unto them; they must not seek their own
only, but also another's Wealth; and take heed they take no Advantage from the
higher ground they stand upon, to overreach or oppress their Brethren of low
Degree. They should not endeavor to engross all Advantages to themselves; but
declare by their Practice that they are desirous that their Nei'bours should
thrive and grow in their Estates also, in some Equitable Proportion. Yea, they
should be Examples of Charity and Beneficence, being ready to give a portion to
fix and to seven, as their Neighbor's necessity and their ability require;
yea, they should be ready to deny themselves, if they may thereby eminently
serve their poor Brethren, and put them in a way of getting an honest
livelihood. Thus such as are in public Place should go before others in a
Conspicuous Example of Righteousness, that they may Call upon their People to
follow them, and stir them up to attend their Duty in these respects. Thus they
should do their Endeavor to bring the Duties of the Second Table into Repute
among their People. O there might, by the Blessing of GOD, be a great deal of
Good done this way, if such as are called gods would be imitators of GOD the
Just One, and followers of that which is Good. Such Examples would be likely to
attract the Eyes and Hearts of Men, and would have an Excellent tendency to
promote Justice among a People; and the setting them is a Debt which Civil
Rulers owe to GOD and their Country.

2. THEY they that Rule over Men, must take Care that Righteous Laws be Enacted
for the Maintaining of Justice between Rulers and Ruled, and among their
People. I am sensible that all in Authority have not the Power of making Laws
betrusted with them; but then such as have the Legislative Power committed to
them must use it lawfully, by taking Care that such Laws be made as are
Conformable to the Law of GOD, Just and Good. Such as may be a just and equal
Boundary between the Prerogative of the Ruler, and the Privilege of the Ruled.
Such as are suitable and sufficient to maintain that which is Right among their
People, and to discountenance and Punish all Injustice. As, open Disobedience
to and Contempt of Parents, Murders, Adulteries, Thefts, Robberies,
FalseWitness bearing, Drunkenness, etc. [I shall not here particularly mention
those Laws which immediately relate to the First Table, though Justice to Men, as
well as Piety toward GOD, require that the Civil Magistrate be in this respect
the Keeper of both Tables.] Due Testimony must be born against such Sins, and
Provision must in this way be made, that every one may enjoy his own Right and
Property without molestation from the injurious Sons of Violence. As was said
of Judah and Israel under Solomon's peaceable and happy Government; 1 Kings
4.24. Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his Vine, and under his
Fig Tree. If Civil Rulers would approve themselves Just to their People, they
must exert their Authority that the Wicked may not devour the Man that is more
Righteous than he. And that Men may not be as the Fishes of the Sea which have
no Ruler over them: And for this End they must take Care that Good Laws be made
to Restrain and Curb in the impetuous Lusts of those Men who are as the Horse,
or as the Mule, which have no Understanding; --; that such as have not the Fear
of GOD before their Eyes, and are not awed by the Judgment to come, may be
terrified by the Fear of present Punishment from the Magistrate, and so be
deterred from executing their wicked Purposes. Distributive Justice, which
consists in the Equal distribution of Rewards and Punishments, by the Civil
Magistrate to the People under his Government, cannot be duly exercised, unless
just Laws be Enacted as the Rule and Measure of it; for where there is no Law,
there is no Transgression. It is an Eminent Act of Justice therefore in Rules
to make righteous Statutes and Judgments, in which the Sanction of the Law, or
the Penalty annexed to enforce it, shall bear a due proportion to the Nature,
Aggravation, and Degree of the Sin forbidden: That Men may not be emboldened to
gratify their vile Lusts, because the Punishment to be inslicted is some small
Fine or light Punishment, which they can bear almost without feeling it. No!
Rulers must be a Terror to Evil Works, Romans 13.3. and must make Sinners afraid
of the Power, by adjusting the Punishment to the Crime, that when others hear
of the Judgment Executed according to Law, they may Fear, and not do so
wickedly. But after all, due Care must be taken that the Laws be put in
Execution when Enacted, otherwise the Proclaiming them will be but an empty
Sound, that will rather Expose a Government to Contempt, than render it
terrible to hold Transgressors. And this brings me to the third particular:

3. THEY that Rule ever Men, must take Care that the Just Laws made, he duly
Executed, and look to it that they be Righteous in all their Administrations.
It is not enough that good Laws be made, they must also be faithfully and
vigorously Executed by those to whom the Executive Power belongs, or the Law
will be made void, and of none Effect. The Seat of Judgment must be the
Habitation of Righteousness. Rulers must look to it that the dreadful Evil
spoken of, Eccl. 3.16. be not found in their Government, -- I saw under the
Sun, the place of Judgment, that wickedness was there --. For this is an
abomination to the Lord. Prove. 17.15. He that justiseth the wicked, and be that
condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord. The justifying
here spoken of signifies, The acquitting him as innocent by a judicial Sentence
--. They must not bear the Sword in vain; but should stir up themselves against
the Evil-doer, and Execute Judgment in the Gates with Courage and Impartiality,
not being afraid of the Faces of Men: Job 29.14. I put on righteousness, and it
clothed me: my Judgment was as a Robe, and a Diadem. He was Righteous in all
his Administrations, as a Garment covers the whole body; he was Just in a
continued Course, and did not put off this Garment from any partial respect, or
for any sinister ends, yea so Righteous were his judicial Sentences, that they
were the principal Honor and Ornament of his Office Vid. Mr. Caryl, and Mr.
Pool, in Loc.
. But above all, Rulers must labor to imitate the Glorious GOD according to
their measure The Charge given to the Judges in Judah by Jeboshaphat, is
enforced after this manner; 2 Chronicles. 19.7. -- There is no iniquity with the
Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. Here is their great
and perfect Exemplar, and they must endeavor that their Rule may be a fair
Copy and Transcript of the Justice and Equity of the divine Government. And
here several particulars may be briefly spoken to, which are implied in this
third Head, and so may fitly be considered under it.

(1) RULERS must take Care that such be Entrusted, with the Executive Power
under them, as are best qualified, and spirited to Execute Justice. There are
various orders and degrees in Civil Government, and accordingly some are
entrusted with Authority to Commission others for the Administration of Justice
in this or the other Post of Civil Trust. Now if such would approve themselves
just, they must diligently endeavor to find out and improve such persons as
are most capable and best inclined to give to every Man his Right, and protect
him in it. The Rule of proceeding in this matter must not be, Who will give
most for an Office, or who has the most powerful and wealthy friends to
commend him to it; but, Let it be given to the most Worthy. For if Men are
obliged to Purchase and Maintain themselves in their Places by Money, they will
be under a sore temptation to Sell Justice, to the great damage of the Public.
Such then as are any ways concerned in appointing or choosing Persons to Places
of Trust and Profit in the Government, must do their part that the Officers of
their People may be Peace, and their Exacters Righteousness, by observing that
excellent Rule, which was given to Moses by Jethro, Exodus 18. 21. and approved
by GOD, Numb. II.I6. -- Thou shall provide out of all the people, able men,
such as fear God, men of truth, hating covertousness; and place such over them
--. Rulers must do their utmost, according to the trust reposed in them, that
such may be set over the People as are Men of Piety, Men of known Ability, Men
of Integrity and Valiant for the Truth, Men that hate Coveteousness; for where
the love of Money prevails, it will be the root of many pernicious Evils, and
will incline Men to pervert Judgment for Reward.

(2) THEY that are in Place of Power must take Care to Understand the Law, and
then to keep to it in Administering Justice. The Legislative and Executive Power
are many times put into the same Hands. Now such as have Power of Executing the
Laws are then Just when they lay out themselves to Maintain and Uphold the good
Laws which are made, in their full force and vigor: for these are the Rule of
their Government, and of the Subjects Obedience; yea very much the foundation
of the Commonwealth, and the Pillars upon which it stands. Now in order to
this, Civil Rulers must study the Law, and endeavor to furnish themselves with
a sufficient Knowledge of it for the right discharge of their particular Trust.
For unless they understand and observe the Law, they will neither be able to
attend their own Duty, nor yet to bear due Testimony against the Transgressions
of others. This is a matter of so great moment, that in the Jewish State, The
King himself was commanded by God to write him a Copy of the Law, and Read
therein all the days of his life, -- Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. Now this Law comprehends
in it, the Judicial Laws, which were then immediately appointed by GOD, and
must for ever be conformed to the Moral Law which is an eternal Rule of
Righteousness A Magistrate without the Law, (says an excellent Divine,) and a
Minister without the Bible, are equal absurdities: A Magistrate unskilful in
the Law, and a Minister ignorant in the Scripture. And indeed unless Rulers
know the Laws by which they are to govern, and then take heed to observe them
in administering Justice, they will not be able to say with Job 29 15. I was
eyes to the blind, and seet was I to the lame. It may be of very
hurtful'consequence, if such as sit in Judgment have not a spirit of discerning
as to the Rule they must go by in passing Sentence; but must depend on them who
plead before them. They must in this respect know what Israel ought to do, and
be able well to distinguish between Right and Wrong; and then must act with a
strict regard to the Law.

(3) THEY must shake their hands from Bribes; Administer Justice freely and
without respect of persons. Covetousness, which consists in an immoderate
esteem of and love to this worlds goods, and appears in using unlawful Means to
Enrich ourselves, is an heinous Sin, and of most pernicious tendency in those
who are especially concerned to look to it that the Commonwealth receive no
damage. Civil Rulers must therefore avoid this Sin, and be careful they do not
in any measure deserve that ill character, Mic. 3.1. The heads judge for reward
--. Hos 4.18. -- Her Rulers with shame do love, Give ye. For thus the Great GOD
speaks, Exodus 23.8. Thou shall take no gift: for the gift blinds the wise,
and perverteth the words of the righteous. And GOD threatens that fire shall
consume the tabernacles of bribery, Job 15.34. Rulers must look at the public
profit more than at their own private gain, and endeavor that Judgment may run
down at waters, freely and plentifully; that so all that thirst after
Righteousness may come and be refreshed. They, to whom this trust is committed,
must see to it that such as serve the Public, attend their duty faithfully,
and then take Care that they have their just Wages paid them without any
unnecessary delay, and without making any private gain to themselves.

IN a word, they must observe that Rule, Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall not respect
persons in Judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the great --. It
is their duty to administer Justice impartially, and to beware of being biased
by favor and affection; or by fear of Men which brings a snare. They must look
to the Merits of the Cause, not to the Parties concerned Fuller speaking of the
good Judge has this ingenious observation, When he put on his Robes, he put
off his Relations to any; and like Melchisedeck becomes without Pedigree. Holy
State, p. 259.
. And in this respect resemble GOD, Who without respect of persons judges
according to every man's work --, 1 Pet. 1.17. They must resolutely oppose the
most Potent Offenders, and relieve the oppressed that have no helper. Judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow, Isai. 1.17.

4. THEY that Rule over Men, must Exercise Clemency and Mercy toward their
People. A learned Expositor observes on this place, That we have here the Two
principal Parts of a King's Duty, answerable to the two Tables of God's Law,
Justice toward Men, and Piety toward GOD --. To which if you add Benignity
and Clemency, whereby a King renders his Government not frightful and
burdensome, but acceptable and amiable to his People --. Here is a complete
Character of an excellent Prince or Governor Pool.
. Now Righteousness in Scripture sometimes signifys Benignity and Mercy: Thus,
Psalm. 103 17. -- His Righteousness unto Childrens Children, Either his
Faithfulness; or his Mercy or Benignity: This Word being frequently used in
both these Senses id.
. And in as much as this is what Rulers are obliged to, if they would discharge
their Duty aright toward their People, it may well enough be considered under
the general Head of Justice. Indeed there is a Pity, falsely called Mercy, which
is injurious to the Public. As when such are spared against whom the public
Safety calls aloud for Vengeance. Such pretended Mercy to private Persons is
Cruelty to the Public. But then, there is also the Exercise of Mercy which is
of great Benefit to a Community, and to Rulers themselves. It was the Character
given of the Kings of lsrael, that they were Merciful Kings, 1 Kings 20.31.
Above all, the Son of GOD is so, infinitely Gracious and Merciful. The King's
Favor is said to be as a Cloud of the latter Rain, Prove. 16.15. It is very
acceptable, and a great Refeshment to his People. And oftentimes the Exercise
of Clemency and Mercy is of great use and advantage to Rulers as it
establishes them in the high Esteem and sincere Affection of their People:
Prove. 20.28. Mercy and Truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upheld by
Mercy. And as these are under God, very much the Supporters of the Throne; so
of Inferior Rulers in their Station. I shall mention one Head more, like to
the former.

5. THEY that Rule over Men, must be of a Public Spirit in the Exercise of a
fatherly Love to their People, and generous Concern for their Welfare. It is
very unbecoming for Persons in Public Station, to Seek themselves
inordinately, and such a vicious Self Love in them, bodes ill to the
Commonwealth: 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. -- Perilous times shall come. For Men shall be
lovers of their own selves --. It is a most unjust thing for Persons to seek
after Places of Public Trust that they may Serve themselves rather than the
People over whom they are appointed Rulers; and then to make it their great aim
to seek their own, not the Public Good. Even the Light of Nature condemns
this. An Heathen Moralist could say, That to make a Gain of the Commonwealth is
not only base, but also wicked and detestable Habere quae stui rem pub non modo
turpe est, sed Sceleration etiam et nefarium. Cicero de Offic, p. 95.
. Certainly then such a thing should not be so much as named among those that
call themselves Christians, and Rule GOD's professing People. e.c. They should,
as Mordecai, when advanced to the highest Seat next to King Abasuerus, Seek the
weal of their People, and speak peace to all their Seed Esth 9.3.
. Rulers should in some sort look upon the Commonwealth as their Family, and
accordingly Consult and Provide for the Safety and Comfort of their People, as
tender Parents. Rulers are Political Fathers, and as Reverence, Obedience and
Recompense are due to them, so all proper Expressions of dear Affection, tender
Concern, and anwearied Care for the Good of their People are due from them.
This the Fifth Commandment requires, which has this remarkable Promise annexed
to it; -- That thy Days may be long upon the land, which the Lord thy God
gives thee. Thus some suppose that they cried before Joseph, tender Father, as
the word may be rendered Clamaverunt coram eo A^^ech Margin. Quidam tonerum
pat^em, interpretantur. Tig. Bible.
. And agreeable to this we have that Promise, Isa. 49.23. Kings shall be thy
nursing Fathers. In a word, They should with a generous Concern sympathize with
their People under all their pressures, and do their utmost to Relieve them.
Thus Nehemiah when he heard that the remnant of the Captivity was in great
Affiction, -- He wept and mourned certain days, Neh. 1.3, 4. And left the Court
of Persia, where he lived in Honor and Plenty for he was the King's Cup bearer,
and took a difficult Journey that he might build Jerusalem. They should be
ready to say to GOD's People, when under the most afflicting Circumstances, as
Psalm. 137.5, 6. If I forget thee, 0 Jerusalem, let my right band forget her
cunning. If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.

HOWEVER, It is not eno that Civil Rulers be Just in their Administrations in
the Exercise of Moral honesty toward Men, which may be in some fort, from
civil respects and considerations the Kings of the Gentiles were called
Benefactors, Luke 22.25. No! they must act in their Exalted Station from an
inward principle of Religion; the Fear of that GOD, who is the Fountain of all
Power, must influence and regulate them in the Exercise of Justice toward Men.
Which brings me to,

PROP. II. THEY that Rule over Men must Rule in the Fear of G0D. The Fear of
GOD as used in Scripture, may sometimes be taken more stricly for that
particular Grace of the Holy Spirit, whereby we stand in awe of GOD, his
infintie Excellencies, and threatened Judgments; and from an holy dread of his
Displeasure, fly from all Sin. And in as much as this filial, reverential Fear,
which is drawn forth by a believing sight of GOD, is of such great usefulness
in our Religious Serving of God; it is also put for the whole inward Principle
of our Worship and Service of God, and so contains in all Graces of the Spirit,
which are wrought in the Soul at once and are never separated. Eccl. I2.I3. --
Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man. The
whole of Man. Where it seems plain that Fear is put for the inward Principle of
Obedience, and so comprehends other Graces. Again, It is sometimes put for the
outward Worship of God as prescribed by him in his Word. Isa. 29.14. Their fear
toward me is taught by the precepts of Men compared with, Matthew. 15.9. Yea it
seems to Comprehend both the inward Principle, and outward Practice of
Religion. Psalm. 130.4. There is forgiveness with thee; that thou may be
feared. The Service of God must be performed with Reverence and godly Fear,
Heb. 12.28. Now we need not exclude either of these Senses in considering the
Subject before us; but may improve them all as there shall be occasion. The
Glorious GOD speaks, Psalm 2.0, 11, 12. Be wise, O ye Kings; be instructed ye
Judges of the Earth. Serve ye the Lord with fear --. They must fear this
glorious and fearful Name, the Lord their God. They must tremble for fear of
him and his Judgments, who cuts off the Spirits of Princes, and his terrible to
the Kings of the Earth: They must fear the Lord, and his Goodness, who has in
his Sovereign Providence made the difference between them, and the meanest
under their Government; and take heed their Hearts be not lifted up above their
Brethren, as if they were not of one blood with them. That word is very
suitable for them, Be not high minded but fear. They who may think themslves
above the fear of Punishment from Men, and above Reproach, must stand in awe of
that GOD who pours Contempt upon Princes; Who by terrible Dispensations makes
them to know that the most High GOD rules in the Kingdom of Men; Who can in
the midst of their sinful Pleasures loose the joints of their loins, and cause
their knees to smite one against another, by Writing, Alone, Tekel, upon them
and their Kingdoms. Surely it is their great Duty and highest Wisdom to Fear
GOD, Psalm. 111.10. The Fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom Or the Head
Caput Sapien^iae Junius.
, the Chief part of Wisdom It is so in Rulers, as it teaches them to take the
best Measures to promote the Glory of GOD, and the Good of their People; that
when they shall die like other Men, and stand upon a level with the meanest
Subject before the Judgment Seat of JESUS CHRIST, they may give up their
Account with Joy; and not be in the Condition of those Kings and great Men of
whom we read, Rev 6.I5, -- 17. -- They said to the mountains fall on us, and
bide us from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is come. Rulers must Sanctify the Lord
of hosts, and make him their fear --. They must Worship GOD in Secret, with
Reverence, and look to God for his Grace, that his Fear may Rule in their
Hearts: They must fear God with all their House; and pray to God always, Acts
10.2. They must Resolve with Joshua, that as for them and their houses, they
will serve the Lord: They must with David, Bless their Households, and that by
offering up the Morning and Evening Sacrifice of Prayer to GOD with them and
for them. They must be Examples of Reverence and Devotion in the Public
Worship. And to speak more directly to the Subject before us, They must in all
their Administrations as Rulers, Act under the governing influence of the Fear
of GOD, and Regulate themselves by it. Now their Ruling in the Fear of GOD may
imply such things as thief in it;

1. THEY that Rule over Men must be under the abiding influence of the Fear of
God in their Administrations. This holy Principle must be implanted in their
Hearts by the Spirit of God, or they cannot Serve God acceptably in their high
Station; and it must be Operative in them to move and incline them to abide
with GOD in their Calling. Thus when that Excellent Governor Nehemiah had
mentioned some Mal-Administrations of former Governors whereby they oppressed
the People, he vindicates himself, and says, But so did not I, because of the
Fear of God, Chapter 5.15. This awed and kept him, that he did not rigorously Exact
upon the People, and suffer his Servants to Rule them with Rigor, as others
had done before him. The Fear of God must have a governing influence upon
Rulers in accepting of Places in Government, and in discharging the Duties of
them; in making and Executing Laws; or in Committing the Executive Power to
others: They must in this respect Honor them that Fear the Lord. Thus Nehemiah
gave Hananiah together with his Brother Hanani Charge over Jerusalem; and why?
For he was a faihtful Man, and feared God above many. Chap. 7.2.

2. THEY must have a Religious Regard to the Revealed Will of God, and take
Care that their Administrations be conformed to his Word. The Word of God is
the insallible and perfect Rule, according to which our Fear of him is to be
Regulated, and accordingly it is called, the Fear of the Lord: Psalm. 19 9. The
fear of the Lord is clean --. i. e."The Law and Word of God," of which the
Psalmist is here speaking. Now this Law, or written Word of God is profitable
for the Instruction of all Men in their several Places, that they may be
furnished to every good Work. Particularly, Here are most Excellent Rules and
Precepts given to all in Authority; and they Rule in the Fear of God, when they
Rcligiously observe them, and thus Serve their Generation by the Will of God,
which is given as the Character of that Pious King David, Acts 13.36. Agreeably
the King of Israel was Commanded to write a Copy of the Law, and to Read
therein all the Days of his Life: that he might learn to fear the Lord his God;
and to keep the words of the Law --, forementioned Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. Indeed I do
not say that the Constitution of Civil Government is just the same now, that it
was then, when Gods People were under a Theocracy, and had their judicial Laws
appointed immediately by God. However there are those Rules laid down in God's
Word, which are of general Use and Obligation to Rulers. They must not forbid
any thing which God has required in his Law, nor command any thing which he
has forbidden; for this would be to establish Iniquity by Law, in Defiance of
the most High. It is the Duty of all in Authority, who have God's Statutes, to
make them the Rule of their Government, and to have a strict regard to them, in
Making and Executing the Laws of the Land. This is to Rule in the Fear of
God:And thus must Rulers acknowledge their Subjection to Him, who is over all,
God blessed forever.

3. They must Imitate and Resemble God in their Rule and Government. GOD is the
Supreme Ruler of Heaven and Earth, and Civil Rulers, as they bear at least some
outward Characters of his Majesty, his Image upon them, are in Scripture called
Gods;, Psalm. 82.6. I have said, ye are Gods --. Now this is a strong Obligation
upon them to labor after the Image of GOD in them, that they may resemble GOD
in Knowledge, Rightousness and Holiness; and then Govern their People in
Conformity to that perfect Pattern which God sets them in his Government of his
People. Indeed it is contrary to this Fear of God, for them to affect to be
like GOD, in his Dominion over the Consciences of Men; by setting up their
Wills as the Rule and Measure of right and wrong. It was blasphemous
Presumption in Darius to make a Decree, That every Man that should ask a
Petition of any God or Man, within Thirty Days, save of him, should be cast
into the Den of Lions.. And God did miraculously protect Daniel in his Pious
opposition to that wicked Decree. Rulers must be willing that their Subjects
should obey GOD rather than them. But then it is their Duty to behold his
imitable Perfections, and to be imitators of him as dear Children. That
Exhortation may be applied to them, who are called the Children of the most
High, Matthew. 5.48. Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect.

4. THEY must Employ their Power, to maintain and advance the Fear of GOD, or
true Religion, among their people. They must endeavor to deserve that
Character which is given the Royal Tribe: Hos. 11.12. -- Judah rules with God,
and is faithful with the Saints. And therefore they must improve their
Authority to maintain Religion in the Power of it. They must take Care that the
open Profession and Practice of Religion be kept up among their People, and
vigorously oppose whatever has a public tendency to subvert and overthrow it.
And for this End, it is their Duty to make sufficient Laws for the Punishing
open Profaneness and Irreligion, as Idolatry, Blasphemy, Profane-Swearing,
Sabbath-Breaking, and the like: And they must look to it, that such atrocious
Crimes have an heavy Punishment appointed them in the Law. They must draw the
Sword of Justice, and smite such heinous Transgressors, that their Iniquity may
be upon their own heads, (if they refuse to be reclaimed,) and not cleave to
the Public. Again, It is incumbent on Civil Magistrates to take Care, that the
pure Word of GOD be duly dispensed to their People. Here God teaches us how we
must Fear and Serve Him. And therefore if they would promote true Piety among
their People they must take heed that there be not a famine of hearing of the
Words of Lord, by improving their Authority and influence, that a Learned and
Orthodox, a Godly and Painful Ministry, be maintained and supported among them.
They shoud speak comfortably to them that teach the good Knowledge of the Lord;
and see that they have a sufficient Maintenance allowed them, that they may lay
out their Strength and Time in their weighty Work, without being necessarily
diverted and hindered by Worldly Cares and Business. Nehemiah's pious Care in
this matter is worthy their imitation. Neb. 13.10, 11, 12, 13. And then, They
should oblige their People to Attend the Public Worship; and as much as may be
prevent their Profaning the Lord's Day, either by Worldly business and
recreations; or by their needless customary absenting themselves when GOD's
People assemble together to Worship Him.

Again, THEY must take Care of the good Education of the Children and Youth
among their People, and look to it that suitable and sufficient provision be
made for it. GOD's ancient People had not only inferior Schools; but also
Colleges in which the Sons of the Prophets were trained up in the Knowledge of
divine Things, and so prepared for Public Service Thus at Ramah, as is
supposed, where Samuel presided; 1 Samuel 19.20. See, 2 Kings 2. The Schools of
the Prophets were little Universities, and Colleges of Students For their
Governor they had some venerable Prophet, inspired with the Holy Spirit, and
that partook of Divine Revelations. -- Dr. Lightfoot 2 Vol page 86. They had
Schools in every City and Province. -- Godwy^'s Moses and Aaron, page 82
. If our Children be ignorant and barbarous, it cannot be expected but they
should be profane and vicious; and therefore the Fear of GOD should Excite
Rulers to Exert their Authority that there may be Schools maintained for the
Instruction and Education of Younger Children in learning to Read, that they
may know the holy Scripture from their Childhood; and in learning the
principles of Religion contained in their Catechism, etc. And Grammar Schools
to prepare others for a more liberal Education. They should also take Care that
Colleges be Erected and Endowed, Maintained and duly Inspected; that hopeful
Young Men may be Educated in Useful Learning, and come forth furnished for the
Service of GOD and His People.

IN a Word, When their People are fallen under decays in Matters of Religion,
they should be Reformers, and zealously Endeavor to bring them back to the
Lord. Thus we find that when Josiah had Read in the Book of the Law, which
denounced dreadful threatenings against the Sins rise among his People, he rent
his Clothes, called for the Elders of Judah, Made a Covenant before the Lord to
walk after the Lord; and to keep his Commandments, 2 King. 22.10, 11. Chap. 23.
1 -- 3. And then put down the Ho'atrous Priests, d filled the high places, etc.
Thus, when Civil Rulers are under the influence of the Fear of GOD, they will
improve their Power to suppress those prevailing iniquities which provoke GOD,
who is the Defense and Glory of his People, to depart from them. They will
tremble for the Ark of GOD, and be afraid of his Judgments, so as to lead in
the necessary work of Reformation, that GOD may turn from the fierceness of his
Anger, and return unto them in Mercy.

5. THEY must make the Advancement of G0D's declarative Glory the chief End of
their Government. This is the chief and highest End of Man. The Command is, Do
all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Now, when Rulers are said to Rule in the
Fear of GOD, it intends that they subordinate all other views and designs to
this most excellent End, and Govern their People in such a manner that GOD may
be Glorified. Agreeably we have those put together, Rev. 14.7. Fear God, and
give Glory to him.

I might have said, That they must Own their Entire Dependence upon GOD by
seeking His Direction and Blessing in all their Public Managements; and by
giving the Praise and Glory of all (...) Him.

DOCT. IV. SUCH Rulers shall prosper themselves, and be made Great and
Extensive Blessings to their People.

HE shall be as the light of the Morning --; As the tender grass springing out
of the Earth, by clear shining after rain. These Words, as we have already
hinted, may be understood as a Description of the happy fruits and effects of
such a Government, both to the Rulers themselves, and also to their People.

Here then,

1. THEY that are just, Ruling in the fear of GOD shall Prosper. That Word,
Prove. 4.18. The path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more and
more to the perfect day, may be applied to Righteous Rulers, as well as others;
and that, Mal. 4.2. Unto you that fear my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness
arise --. Such as do thus Rule with and for GOD shall arise and shine, grow and
increase in the prosperous and flourishing State of their Government, as the
Sun shines to the perfect day. Glory and Honor shall be given to such, as thus
honor GOD. The King of Glory will delight to honor them, by giving them the
Evident tokens of his gracious Presence, and royal Favor, by Commanding his
Blessings on their Administrations, and crowning them with the desired Success;
by giving them a great interest in the Esteem and all actions of their People;
by establishing them in their Government, and building them a sure house. Such
Blessings as these shall just and pious Rulers obtain as the gracious Reward of
their Obedience and Fidelity, when it shall be for GOD's Glory, and their good.
Thus GOD said to Joshua, Chap. 1.8. This Book of the Law shall not depart out
of thy Mouth, -- that thou may observe to do according to all that is written
therein: for then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then thou (...) ^^ve
good success. They shall prosper that love Jerusalem. Thus Mordecai expres'd a
generous concern for GOD's People when their bloody Enemies had their necks on
the block; and by a wonderful interposition of Providence, his pious endeavors
were succeeded, and he was highly advanced in the Kingdom of Persia, next to
King Abasuerus. David was an illustrious instance of Piety and Justice: He sed
Gods People according to the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the
skilfulness of his hands. And GOD gave him great success, and made him a Name
like that of the great Men of the Earth. Hezekiah was a great Reformer, and it
is said, 2 King. 18.7. The Lord was with him, and be prospered wither soever be
went forth. Daniel was a bright Example of unshaken fidelity to GOD, and love
to his People, and justice in Government; and we read of him, Chap. 6.28. This
Daniel prospered in the Reign of Darius, and in the Reign of Cyrus the Persian.

BUT especially shall such prosper upon Spiritual accounts, while they lay out
themselves to promote Piety and justice amorg their People: GOD will enrich
them with his Grace more and more. And in a little time GOD will dismiss them
with honor, as he did Daniel, Go thou thy way --, for thou shall rest. While
their Memory is blessed on Earth, their Rest shall be glorious in Heaven. At
the great Day they shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.
The Son of GOD will then own them as his Servants, and graciously accept what
they have done to his People as done to Himself: And the painful cares, burdens
and fatigues of their Government, shall through the rich Grace of GOD in JESUS
CHRIST, work for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

2. SUCH Rulers will be great and extensive Blessings to their People. Such a
Government in the happy fruits of it, is a great and comprehensive Blessing,
like the Sunshine and Rain in their season, whereby the Fruits of the Earth
are made to spring and flourish in abundance. Thus David is called the Light of
Israel, 2 Samuel 21.17. When Civil Rulers are Just, Ruling in the fear of God,
our Lord Jesus Christ may be said to govern in and by them, and accordingly
some of those Texts which we have already quoted as Describing the Blessings of
His Government; may in a large Sense be applied to Solomon's and Hezekiah's
Reigns, who were Types of CHRIST. The Just Administration of Government in
Making and Executing Righteous Laws, has a natural tendency to promote civil
Peace and Order; to make a People prosperous in their trade and business, etc.
Righteousness exalts a nation. Prove. 14.34. Such a People will become great
and honorable in the sight of GOD, and the Nations round about them. Deuteronomy.
4.6, 7. Deuteronomy. 28.13. They shall be the Head. And the Blessings of Religion
which such a People enjoy, are inestimable; for Godliness is profitable unto
all things, having promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to
come. The genuine tendency of Religion, when it generally prevails among a
People, is the best Peace and Prosperity. And such a People enjoy the especial
Blessing and Favor of God, which is the Sum of all. Many and very Precious are
the Promises made to Such both respecting temporal and spiritual Blessings:
Lev. 26. Psalm. 81. 13, -- 16. Isa. 26.1, 2. We have a strong City, -- Open the
Gates, that the righteous nation may enter in. Certainly then such Rulers as
employ their Power to promote Justice and Piety among a People, are the
Ministers of God to them for Good; like the Sun, they dispense their Light and
Influence, to the great Benefit and Refreshment of their People. They come down
upon them as the Rain, as showers that water the Earth. Indeed the Glory of all
is to be given to God, who alone can make such Rulers, and Command his Blessing
on their just and pious Administrations: They are but Instruments; He is the
principal Efficient and Author of all Good. Every good gift, and every perfect
gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17.
Moses, David, Solomon, all shone by a light derived from the Sun of
Righteousness.

APPLICATION.
USE I. WHAT has been said teaches us several important Duties incumbent upon
the People of God. As,

(1.) THEY should Depend on God in the way of Duty, and earnestly seek to him
for Just and Pious Rulers. GOD and he alone can give these Qualifications to
such as are in Authority, and enable them thus to Promote the Weal of His
People. Thus God led his People like a Flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron,
Psalm. 77.20. He chose David his Servant, and anointed him with the Gifts and
Graces of his Spirit. And thus God promised, Jer. 3.15. I will give you Pastors
after my own heart, which shall feed you, i. e. "Rulers either in the State or
Church" Eng. Annot.
. Agreeably Calvin gives this as the Sense of the latter part of the Verse; And
shall feed you with knowledge and understanding, i.e. "Intelligently and
Prudently" Scienter and Prudenter.
. We should then ask this great Blessing of God. We should seek to God that
such Rulers may be set over us from time to time; and that such as are in
Government may be thus Blessed, and made Blessings. Let us attend this Duty,
and take heed we do not provoke GOD by our Sins, to bring that dreadful
Judgment on us; Psalm. 106. 41. They that hated them, Ruled over them. Let us
observe that Rule, 1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort that Prayers be made for Kings, and all
in Authority.

(2.) WHEN God gives a People such to Rule over them as in any good measure
deserve the Description given; They should Bless God for his Favor to them.
And surely We are in this respect favored of God above most of the
Plantations, in that our Zion has so many of her Sons at this day to take her
by the Hand, of whom we may hope that they are Just, Ruling in the Fear of God.
Let not the troubles we are under make us unmindful of, or unthankful for such
a Blessing.

(3.) GOD's People owe to their Rulers Reverence, Obedience, and Recompense.
The most High has said. Let there be a Ruler over Men; and the Fifth
Commandment requires us to Honor our Political Fathers, who are set over us in
place of Authority; and we must attend this Duty if we would hope that God
should prolong our Days in the land he has given us. We must give Honor to
our Rulers, to whom it is due, and take Care to treat them with all that
Respect and Deference which is due to their Character and Station: Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not Revile the Gods, nor Curse the Ruler of thy people. They are
GOD's Vicegerents, and therefore for Men lightly to speak Evil of them, is to
reflect dishonor upon GOD himself, and he will not hold them Guiltless. Yea,
suppose they are fallen into Sin, we must not look upon their Nakedness with
scorn and contempt, and needlessly Expose it to others; but should rather cast a
Covering over it. Fear God, Honor the King. Again, We must Obey them in the
Lord. The Commands of God, obliging us to yield Subjection to Rulers in lawful
things, are very plain and forcible: R^^. 13.1. Let every soul be subject unto
the higher powers. -- v.5. Ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but
also for conscience sake. 1 Pet. 2.13 -- 15. The Sin of disobedience to Rulers
proved fatal to those Rebels. Numb. 16. Yea, when the Children of Israel
Murmured against Moses and Aaron, GOD sent a plague among them, v.46. A
levelling Spirit is a very evil Spirit, and highly provoking to GOD. Let us
beware of it, and wherein we have been guilty, be deeply humbled before GOD.
Again, The People must Recompense their Rulers with a Reward which shall bear
some just proportion to the weight and difficulty of their Service. They should
not be straithanded toward their Rulers, but cheerfully Reward their Care and
Labor for the Public Good, with a liberal and honorable Maintenance,
becoming the Dignity of their Station, and sufficient for the Expenses which
the Honor of the Government, or their own Comfort demand of them. This is not
an Act of Charity, but Justice: And the Law of GOD requires it. Romans 13.7.
Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due --.

(4.) THEY ought in all proper ways to Assist and Encourage their Rulers in the
Right Discharge of their Duty. They must in their several Places stand up for
them, while in the Execution of their Authority. As they said to Ezra, Chap.
10.4. Arise, for this matter belongs unto thee and we also will be with thee
--. Thus Heads of Families, should in their Places be helpful by Maintaining
Religion and good Order in their own Houses, That there may not from thence
proceed Sons of Belial that shake off the Yoke, and despise Government.
Particularly, Such as keep Public Houses, should be careful that Temperance,
Sobriety and good Hours be observed, that no Disturbance may arise by excessive
Drinking, Quarrelling, etc. Again, Under Officers, and others should be ready
to aid and assist their Rulers, and Defend their Pesons, when they may have to
do with such as are spoken of in our Context, v. 6, 7. The sons of Belial shall
be all of them as thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands.
But the Man that shall touch them, must be fenced with iron, and the staff of a
spear. Again, Such who are in the Providence of GOD, called to inform and give
Evidence against Offenders, that they may be brought to Justice, ought in their
Places to attend their duty without fear or favor, or foolish Pity. Again,
Wherein Civil Rulers attend their Duty in the fear of GOD, the People should
Accept it with all Thankfulness, and not discourage them by groundless
Jealousies and uncharitable surmises.

USE 2. WHAT has been said affords seasonable Direction to those that are
especially concerned in the Business of this Day. This Day is a Witness of
GOD's Patience exercised toward us, notwithstanding all our Sins whereby we
have provoked Him. We have, blessed be GOD, this great Privilege of choosing
our own Councillours continued to us. May GOD long Preserve this and our other
CharterPrivileges, and enable us wisely and faithfully to improve them. May our
Glorious LORD, in whose hand the King's heart is, incline our Rightful and
Lawful King GEORGE, to Favor His People! May this People, who have ever
Expressed their Joy and Satisfaction in the Prosperity of his Royal Person and
illustrious House, find life in the light of his Countenance, and not be called
to weeping and mourning under the loss of their precious and pleasant Things.
We lift up our Eyes unto thee, O GOD! from whom must Come our Salvation. Save,
Lord, let the King hear us when we call But to return. Let those to whom this
weighty Trust is committed, Consider what GOD the LORD says; They that Ru'e
over Men must be Just, Ruling in the Fear of GOD; and direct their choice
accordingly. Take heed you be not biased by personal favor, or a
party-Spirit. Let such be preferred in your Choice as are most Capable and best
inclined to Promote Piety toward GOD, and Justice toward Men. This is a
divine Rule, and therefore there is no danger of being mislead by it.

USE 3. LET the Truths delivered be improved in an humble Address to the
Honorable, the LIEUT. GOVERNOR, COUNCIL and REPRESENTATIVES. Hear and Obey
the Message which the Great GOD sends unto you this Day, how mean soever the
Messenger may be. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, He
that Rules over Men must be Just, Ruling in the Fear of God. The glorious
JEHOVAH who is your Judge, your Lawgiver, and your King, speaks to you in
these Words, and it most nearly concerns the welfare of your own Persons, and
of your Government, that you obey his Voice. You have a Price put into your
Hands to promote the Honor of GOD, and the Good of your Country: City to GOD
for Wisdom to improve it, that you may be great and public Blessings while you
Live, and be Blessed forever with the Lord, when a short Life shall come to an
End. We are a degenerate People, iniquity abounds, and GOD is going on in a way
of Judgment against us. His Voice to us in his Providence may be that, Ezekiel.
22.30. I sought for a man among them that should make up the hedge, and stand
in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it. Do you then
stand in the Gap and do your utmost to keep off Wrath from this People, by
Promoting that most necessary Work of Reformation. Lead in this Work by being
your selves conspicuous Examples of Sobriety, Justice and Godliness. Whatever
Laws may be further needful to Encourage Virtue and Piety among us; or to
suppress Vice and Profaneness, let them be Enacted; and let those good Laws
which are made, be duly Executed. Here I would ask leave to mention a few
things. Be Entreated to Guard against all Neglect or Corruption of the Worship
of GOD. Be jealous for the Lord of hosts; for the Lord our GOD is a jealous
God, visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children. Let all due Care
be taken that God's People may fear this glorious and fearful Name the Lord our
God. Alas! Profane-Swearing is become in a dreadful degree Customary with many.
There are those that set their Mouths against Heaven, and rend the Sacred Name
of GOD, by Profane Oaths and Curses. May not something further be done to
suppress this Heaven-daring Sin? Does it not deserve a heavier Penalty than is
affixed to it in the Law? Ought not this part of Religious Worship, the calling
GOD to Witness in Swearing, be attended with greater Reverence in our Courts of
Judicature, that Men may be taught to Fear an Oath Improve your Authority that
the Lord's Day Sabbath may be strictly observed. GOD gives his Sabbath to his
People as a Sign between him and them; and strictly requires them so to
Remember it, as to keep it holy; Exodus 20. Jer. 17.21, 23, 27. And it has been
often observed that as the Sabbath is Sanctified or Profaned so Religion is
will not to flourish or decay. This then is most worthy your Pious Care. Blessed
be GOD for the Good Laws we have to bind us to this Duty; and for that Care
which is taken to Execute them. However, There is need that some further Care
be taken, that under a pretense of keeping the Night before or after the
Sabbath day light, both Evenings be not used as common Time. And is not the
Evil Custom of keeping open Shops on the Evening before the Day, a Profanation
of the Sabbath, which ought to be Reformed? And then, As there ought to be no
Recreations, no carrying of Burdens, no needless Journeys on the Lord's Day, so
it might be a very acceptable Service to GOD, if some effectual Means were used
to suppress Disorders between Meetings in our Country Towns, where they live at
a considerable Distance from the Place of Public Worship, and tarry at or near
the Meeting House. As also to prevent all unnecessary Harnessing of Horses, and
Driving of Coaches on the Lord's Day; that both Man and Beast may Rest
according to the Commandment. Yea to prevent the attending of Funerals when no
present Necessity requires it. Let the Means of Education be esteemed worthy
your highest Concern. In a particular manner I would most humbly Recommend the
College to your Parental Care. It is an abiding Testimony of the Pious Concern
our ForeFathers had for the flourishing of Religion, that they so Early Erected
that Society, which has been a great Blessing to the whole Land; a Fountain
continually sending forth streams that have made Glad the City of our God; yea
have refreshed distant Places also. But the Sovereign GOD has In a sudden and
awful manner taken their Master from their Head; the Reverend and Learned
President The Honorable John Leverett Esquire;
. And it is a matter of great importance to the Land, and particularly to these
Churches, that this Breach be repaird with One who is of eminent Learning,
Prudence, Piety, and a fast Friend to the Interests of CHRIST's Kingdom among
us. My humble Request therefore is, that all needful Encouragement may be
given to such a Person to Reside at the College, and lay out himself in that
Excellent Work of training up the Youth in Pure Religion, and good Literature.
May that GOD with whom is the Residue of the Spirit, fill that Chair with One
who shall be a Rich Gift to that Society, and a Blessing to the whole Land. May
the College Flourish so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure!

AGAIN, Endeavor in all proper ways to Promote Union, and good Agreement among
this People. Heats and Animosities, Divisions and Contentions are very
provoking to GOD, especially when found among Christians; and very hurtful to
the Commonwealth. For where there is Contention, there is Confusion, and every
Evil Work. Now it is a weighty Word which I find delivered by a great Divine,
and shall ask leave to borrow it. If Magistrates would Unite the People, then
take heed, agree among your selves, if you would have Union among the People:
if the Corner-Stones once fall asunder, you may easily expect many Cracks in
the building: differences amongst Governors must needs cause strange
distractions among the People --. But I should further desire, That if any such
be, you would keep them among. your selves: If such differences come abroad,
they cause great divisions among the People Mr. Strong. Select Sermons, p. 411,
412.
. Let me then beseech you to Follow Peace, and to Unite in promoting the
Public good, each One being ready to deny himself where the Honor of GOD, and
the safety of the Commonwealth call for it. The true and faithful Witness
testifies Mat. 1^.25.
, That every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolution; and
every City or House divided against it self, shall not stand. And surely this
dark and stormy day requires you to Unite hearts and hands for the Preservation
of the Country. The LORD grant that our Jerusalem may be builded as a City that
is compact together, and that by your Means; That you may have much of the
Wisdom which is from above, which is first pure, then peaceable --. And Unite
as One Man in Consulting and Promoting the Public Welfare.

AGAIN, Let me humbly Inquire, Whether something further may not be done, to
put a stop to the the growth of Intemperance, and Excessive Drinking, which
threatens us with an overflowing Scourge of Woes and Miseries. Isai. 28.1, 2.
Woe -- to the Drunkards of Ephraim --. Where this Sin prevails, it provokes GOD
to withdraw even the common Restraints of his Spirit. Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk
with wine, wherein is Excess; but be filed with the Spirit. Sensual, having not
the Spirit, Jude v.I9. Now it is Notorious that this shameful Vice is
dreadfully predominant in this Land. And it is high Time to inquire, Whether
the numerous Licenses given to Tavern-keepers and other Retailers of Strong
Drink, do not greatly provoke GOD, and cause the guilt of this heinous Sin to
lie heavy upon the Public? Is not the good use of Taverns mischievously
perverted? Is it not Scandalous to the Profession of Christianity, that Public
Houses should be so much frequented by Town-dwellers? Undoubtedly it is. And it
is your Duty by your Example and Authority to testify against this Abuse.

Lastly, MY Text leads me to Commend it to Your Endeavors, That the Public
Faith and justice be preserved, relating to our Bills of Credit, which are sunk
much below the Value of their Denomination. The Eighth and Ninth Commandments
require You to take effectual Care that the Bills of Public Credit, which are
in a manner the only Medium of Trade, be not made a Cruel Engine of Oppression.
They that Rule over Men must be Just. But I shall now Conclude in a Word; Let
us all Cry to GOD to Pour out upon us the Spirit of Repentance and Reformation.
O that GOD would Unite the hearts of this People to fear big Name, and work
Righteousness! Then we might Hope to have that good Word fulfilled in us: Isai.
58. 8, 9. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health
shall spring forth Speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee, the
glory of the LORD shall be thy rere-ward. Then shall thou call, and the LORD
shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I am: --.

FINIS.
THE Reader is desired to take Notice, That the First Doctrine, and several
Paragraphs were omitted in Preaching; and to Correct the following mistakes:

Page 5. line 26. f. invinsible, r. invincible, p. 9. I. 22. f. numurous r.
numerous, p. I4.I.20.f. Roman r. Rome. p. 26.I.11.f. as r. and. p. 29. I 2. f
that r. their, p. 55. I. 3 from the bottom, f. Blessings r. Blessing.


