Mr. Dickinson's DEFENSE OF Presbyterian Ordination.

A DEFENSE OF Presbyterian Ordination.

In ANSWER to a Pamphlet, entitled, A MODEST PROOF, OF THE Order and
Government settled by Christ, in the CHURCH.

By Jonathan Dickinson, M.A.

Minister of the Gospel at Elizabeth-Town, New Jersey.

1 Cor. III. 5. Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but Ministers, by whom ye
believed?

Ephesians. IV. 14. That we henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and
carried with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of Men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

BOSTON: Printed for Daniel Henchman, and sold at his Shop, over against the
Brick Meeting House in Cornhill. 1724.

THE PREFACE.
THOUGH the preaching of the Cross, be to them that perish foolishness; and the
Ministry of the Gospel, is by the World esteemed a mean and contemptible Thing:
Tet Infinite Wisdom has contrived, and Infinite Grace improved this Engine, for
the beating down the strong ^olds of Sin and Satan, in the Hearts of Men, for
the rescue of Sins miserable Captive's, for the advancing the kingdom of Grace,
and erecting Trophies, on the Ruins of Satan's Interest in the World. This it
is, that has dissipated that Darkne^^ of Heathenism, which heretofore covered
the face of the Earth: This, that has demolished the Temples, laid waste the
Altars, and extirpated the Votaries of the Heathen Gods; and seat the Gentile
Worship packing to Hell: This, that notwithstanding its Original mean
Appearance, has conquered and baffled all the proud Philosophy of Greece and
Rome: This, that so stoutly withstood, and finally triumphed over the fiercest
Opposition of the haughty Monarchs and Potentates of the Earth: By this, are
Christ's Ways made known in the Earth, and his saving Health among the Nations:
And in a Word, By this, are the Eyes of poor perishing Sinners opened, and they
turned from Darkness unto Light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that
they may have an Inheritance among them that are sanctified.

AND as this sacred Institution, is of last Importance to the Souls of Men; so
it is of (...) Concernment, that they th^^ take this Office upon 'em, are
called of God, as was Aaron. For, as on the one Hand, it has pleased God, by
the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe; so is it an awful
Truth on the other Hand, That whosoever enters not by the Door, into the
Sheepfold; but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thief, and a Robber.
He that appointed the Ministry of Reconciliation, as the ordinary Means of
Salvation, That we cannot believe in him, of whom we have not heard nor hear
without a Preacher; has also hedged in this weighty Trust, from the Intrusion
of vain Pretenders, that none may Preach, except they be sent.

HENCE it appears a most d^ring Usurpation, for any to assume the Character of
Christ's Ambassadors, that have not their Mission from him. And it would
therefore be a commendable Zeal, in the High Church Party, to depreciate our
Ministry, and to decl^^^^ against our Invasion of the sacred Function; if their
Arguments were answerable to their Confidence. (...) for such a small upstart
Sect, gravely to attempt, by Arguments a hundred times ^^^^^ed, to Unchurch all
the Protestant World, but themselves; and to nullify all their Ordinances;
Rather exposes their Bigottry to Contempt, than their Zeal and Charity, to the
envy of any thinking Person.

I have no Solicitude, to find out more of the Author of the Discourse herein
impugned, than is discovered p. 5. by his Jacobi^e Principles, of Passive
Obedience, and Non-resistance: nor should I have esteemed his Arguments worthy
of Notice, were it not for the malign Influence, they may have upon the Laity,
for whose Use they were calculated, and into whose Hands, they are so carefully
put. But for their sakes, an Antidote was thought Needful.

AN Apology may be justly expected from me, for undertaking a Task, that should
have been left to some abler Hand: But I have none but this to make, That I
could bear of no other, like to appear in the Cause; and therefore thought it
necessary, to hold up the Shield.

IF some Arguments occur in this Dissertation, that have been used before, in
the same Controversy, it must be remembered, that Truth is always the same; and
that the same Thing must be repeated, to those that are dull of hearing.

I know that this Discourse must stand or fall, by the Reader's Censure; and
therefore shall say nothing about it, but that I hope, it will not be wholly (...).

A DEFENSE OF Presbyterian Ordination.
THERE is nothing more necessary, in the right managing of Controversy, than a
fair stating the Debate; that Men fight not with their own Shadows, nor combat
in the Dark: But of this, our Author had especial Reason to be cautious, since
he designed his Discourse for the Use of the Laity, who are not to be startled
with such Questions, least they stumble at the Threshold.

BUT though his Province was to Harrangue, and not to Argue, on which score, he
may be excused from once mentioning the Question in debate; yet it may be of
some Service to the clear understanding of this choice Discourse, to know the
state of the Controversy. I shall therefore briefly, and fairly state the Case,
in these two Propositions.

I. WHETHER Bishops are by Divine Right, Superior to Presbyters, and have by
virtue of that Superiority, the sole Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction.

II. WHETHER the English Diocesan Bishops, that have some scores, and even
hundreds of Congregations under their Inspection; with their lordly Dignity,
and (...) Power, are the only Scripture Bishops, on whom (...) ministerial
Authority, and sacred Administration ^o necessarily depend.

BOTH of these, should have been most clearly, and fully proved in the
Affirmative, before ou^ Author had erected his Trophies, and concluded his
Pamphlet, with such confident Boasting, and pathetical Admonitions.

It Is my present Business to examine his Performance, and if in the Conclusion
it appears, that he cannot find one Word in the Bible, to support this Prelacy;
nor add^ce any Commission from the King of the Church, for this extensive
Dominion, or lordly Dignity; I hope Pre^by^er, may yet deserve, a more
favorable Character in the World, than Intruders into the sacred ^unction, or
(...) of the sacred Service; as the Prefacer of this Discourse, modestly styles
them.

THE first Thing that offers to our Consideration, (after some Account of the
noble Views of this Author is a remarkable piece of History, which take in his
own Words. p. 2. Now the Church, however ^arrassed and disquieted, with a great
variety of Disputes and Debates, about Points of Doctrine and Discipline; yet
heard little or no Noise made, for above 1400 Years, about this Point of Church
Government. One ^erius sta^^ed a Debate, but had so few to second him, that it
died with himself, and left his Name on Record among Heretics. This deserves
particular Consideration; for he would doubtless hereby insinuate, that
Di^cesan Epis^opacy, universally obtained in the Church, for the first fourteen
hundred Years; and met with no Opposition, but by Aerius, who got nothing by
his upstart Opinion, but the infamous Character of Heretic. But

1. WOULD it not have been more to his Purpose, to have proved, that Diocesan
Episcopacy of the modern Stamp, was ever known in the Church for the first
three hundred Years, or ever once asserted by any Author of Note, within that
Time? This would have been an acceptable Performance; such I dare say, as the
World was never yet blessed with. But what occasion of Proof? He no doubt
concluded, that the Laity were obliged to take his Word.

2. WAS there no Noise about this Point of Church Government, for fourteen
hundred Tears? Can ^e have the Front, to publish such a Story to the World! I Am
sure, he is not exceedingly well qualified to write upon this Subject, if
ignorant, that Jer^m, one of the most learned, and judicious of all the
Fathers; did as exprestly assert, and vindicate the co-ordinacy of Bishops and
Presbyters, as ever Aerius did. Does he not in his Epistle to Evag^i^s,
expressly tell us, that the Apostle clearly teches, that Presb^ters are the same
with Bishops; and that afterw^rds, One was ^lected, and put before the Rest,
for the remedy of Schism? -- And does he not in his Commentary on Titus,
largely prove the Identity of Bishop and presbyter, by the very same Arguments,
that are used by the Presbyterians now? and plainly affirms, that a Presbyter
is the same with a Bishop; and before that by the Devil's Instin^^, there were
^arties in Religion, and it was said among the People, I am of Paul, I of
Apollo^, and I of (...); the C^^rches were governed by the common Council of
Presbyters, etc. And was Jerome the only Person among the Ancients, who
maintained this Doctrine? Don't our Adversaries themselves acknowledge, Dr.
Morton's Apol. Cath Lib. 1. P 118, 119, 120. Dr. (...) Letter to Wadsworth, in
Dr. Burnet's Li^e of B^dei. (...) Iren. P. 276.


That St. Ambrose, Augustine, Seduli^s, Pri^ati^s, Crysost^^, Theo^oret (...)
and T^eop^ilact, all of 'em asserted the parity of Bishops and Presb^ters?
Don't the World know, that the (...); and W^ckle^ in England, with his
Followers, were persecuted for this very Doctrine, before the Peri^d he Speaks
of? Hear Medi^^ the (...), on the whole, as cited by Be^^ermine De^ter. Cap.
15. (...) affi^ma^, Sanctum Hierony^^^, idem omnino cum Aeranis (...), ^eque
solum H^erony^um in (...) Here^^ (...); sed etiam (...) (...) que ita (^^quit
Medma) istiviri, alioqui Sanctissimi, (...) ^acrarum Scrip^^rarum
consuiti^^imi, quorum (...) Sententiam, (...) in (...), de^nde in W^ldens^bus,
postremo in Johanne Wickl^^o, (...) etc.
Michael (...), affir^s, that S^. Jerome, was altogether of the same Opinion
with the Aerians, and that Jero^^ was not alone in that Heresy; but also
Ambrose, Augustine, Sedul^^s, Primasi^s, Crysostom, Theodoret, Oec^meniu^, and
(...): And though these were otherwise very holy Men, and most studious of the
holy Scriptures, yet the Church condemned their Opinion, first in Aerius, then
in the Waldenses, and la^^ly in John Wickle^.

I could besides, bring him sufficient Documents, from Authors much more
Ancient than any of these, to disprove this Assertion: But he not putting the
Deba^e upon this Iss^e, I shall net spend Time to heap up Authorities; but only
enquire, whether Prelacy when it did obtain in the Church, was so very
grateful, that there was no Noise made about it. Hear Gregory N^zienz^n, on
that Point. Would to God, (says he) there were no Pre^^cy, no Prerogative of
Place, no Tyranical Privelleges, that by Virtue alone we might be discern^d.
Now this right and left Hand, and middle Rank, these higher and lower
Dignities, and this state like Precedence, have caused many ^ruitless Conflicts
and Bruises, have cast many into the Pit; and carried away Multitudes to the
Place of the Goats. And just Cause there was for this Complaint; for does not
every one, that has the least Acquaintance with Ecclesiastical History know,
what dread^ul Convulsions, the primitive Churches were thrown into, by the
Pride and Emulation of the Clergy, after this prelatick Power and Superiority
had obtained among them: And what ^umultuary Uproars, and blood^ Ma^sacres,
those who would be deemed the Ambass^dors of the Prince of Peace, have
occasioned, by their ambitious Pursuit of Ecclesiastical Dignities.

AND now let the Reader judge, how agreeable, is the Title of A mod^st Proof,
to a Pamphlet which begins, with so bold and notable an Escape.

THUS I Am come to consider the Character of Aeri^s; whose Name, he tells us, is
left on Record among Heretics, for his Opposition to Prelacy. But who has
recorded him among Heretics? It was Epip^anius, Bishop of Constanti^ in
Cyprus; a bright Instance of the Pride, Emulation, and Ambition of the Clergy,
at that Time; as appears from his haughty and malicious Conduct, toward
Crysostom, Bishop of (...) Vid. Soc^at. Eccles. His^. Lib. 6. Cap. 9. 11.
and a most pitiful, weak, tri^^ing Author: That (...) Episcopal Writers
themselves own, that ^e spoke Nonsense, on the Subject before us; Reignolds
Letter to Sir Francis Knolls.
and that he was of acknowledged Injudiciousness, and Unaccuracy Brok^sby Hist.
of the Govern. of the Prim. Church. P. 108.


BUT was it only for his Opposition to Prelacy, that Aerius was left on Record
among Heretics? Were there not greater Articles against him than this? viz.
His condemning of Lent, of Prayers and Sacrifices for the Dead; and the like
Superstitions, then received in the Church: which Epiphanius attempts to
justify against him; and thereby proves him more Orthodox, than himself.

I should now take my leave of this Historical introduction, were it not for a
pleasant Continuation, (or rather Contradiction) of this Story, in the very
next Word: The goodly Order, (says he) and Government instituded by Christ,
stood firm for many Ages, and under it the Church flourished, and the Christian
Religion mightily prevailed, notwithstanding the violent Persecutions of those
Times: But at length it was invaded and suppressed, by the Usurpation and
Tyranny of the Roman Papacy, a secular Power and Dominion was set up, and c.
Was there no Noise for fourteen hundred years, about this Point of Church
Government, and yet this Government invaded and suppressed, by the Usurpation
and Tyranny of the Roman Papacy; and a secular Power and Dominion erected upon
its Ruins? These Consequences do then, most naturally follow.

1. THAT the Church Government he contends for, is the same with the Papal
Hierarchy, according to the Pattern of the Church of Rome, before the Year of
Christ 1400. For until that Period, there was no Noise about this Point of
Church Government; nor was it suppressed by the Roman Papacy.

2. THAT the Usurpation and Tyranny of the Roman Papacy, did not commence till
the fifteenth Century. For by this, the Government he propugns, was suppressed,
and a secular Power and Dominion set up.

BUT it is time I dismiss this History, and consider another, no less
Remarkable; which I find in p. 3. where after a just Lamentation of the unhappy
Differences, by which the Church at the Reformation, was disturbed, and the
common Enemy diverted; he proceeds to tell us, that among other Differences,
this was one, that while the greatest and most considerable Part of the
reformed Church, retained the ancient Order and Government; and vindicated it
from the Usurpations, and Encroachments of the Papacy; others, (upon what
Consider^tions I shall not en^uire) were pleased to set up a new Form, and
Model of Policy.

HAVE I quite mistaken this Author all this while, and supposed him pleading
for Prelacy, whilst it is the An^iqui^y of the Presbyterian Government, which he
a^asserts? Truly this Paragraph, That the greatest and most considerable Part
of the reformed Church, retaind'd the ancient Order and Government, would tempt
me to think so; had it been reconcilable to the rest of his Discourse. For
does not every Body know, that the Divine Right of Prelacy, was a Doctrine
unknown in all the foreign Churches, at the Time of the Reformation? and that
they universally maintained the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter? And ^an't the
bitterest of our Adversaries, acknowledged this? Hear one of them, Howel.
Famil, Letters. vol. 3. P. ^9^.
who after he had proposed Calvin, as the first Founder of the Presbyterian
Principles, proceeds, Thus Geneva Lake swallowed up the Episcopal See; and
Church Lands were made Secular, which was the White they levelled at. Th^s
Geneva Bird flew therice to France, and ha^^h'd (...) (...), which make about a
tenth Part of that People, it took Wing also to Bobemia, and Germany High and
Low, as the palatinate, the Land of Hesse, and the con^edera^e Provinces of the
States of Holland, etc. I would therefore (...) this Author to read the (...),
French, Dutch, Scotch, Helvetian, etc. Confession^ of Faith; with all their
Authors of Note upon this Subject, whether Systematical, or Polemical. And
he will find, that he has once (whether willingly or not) spoken Truth; That the
greatest and most considerable Part of the reformed Church, retained the
ancient, (that is the Presbyterian) Order and Government. Some of the foreign
Churches, did indeed early set up Superintendents; but never once dreamed of
their Superiority by Divine Right, over their Brethren. But even these (as Dr.
Stillingfle^t testifies, Iren. P. 411.
) stiffly maintain Jerome's Opinion, of the pri^itive ^quality of Gospel
Ministers. And in Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, they have nominal Bishops. But
as for those of Denmark, they have their Succession from B^gen^agiu^, who was
but a Presb^ter, and therefore, according to our Authors Scheme, are so far
from Di^cesan Bishops, that they are not so much as Gospel Ministers. And they
of Sweden and Norway, will no better serve his Purpose; for the Lutheran
Religion, has deprived those of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and these are but
p^imi inter pares, says the Author of Present State of Europe, for the Year
170^. P. 134, and 147.

THUS we see, that the Divine Right of Episcopacy, was not known in the
primitive Church; nor once professed by any of the foreign Reformers; and I may
add, as little believed by the Church of England her self, in the beginning of
the Reformation.

AND now, since we find o^^ Authors Confidence, thus far outgoing his Mod^sty
in this; we'll see how he acquits himself, in his following Essays. -- And the
next thing that offers, worthy of particular Consideration, is his Account of
the Order and Government, institued by Christ and his Apostles, in the
Christian Church Which being cast into four Heads, I shall consider them each
distinctly.

The First HEAD considered.
HE first undertakes, To (...) what sacred Offices were instituted by Christ
and h^s Apostles, in the Church. And the Sum of what he offers on this Head is,
That these Offices were threefold.(I) The Twelve Aposties, whose Commission (he
tells us) we have at large, Mat. X. (2) The Seventy Disciples, sent forth with
the same Com^ission, and the same Power: But though; their Commission was ^uch
the same, with what was given to the Apostles, (who had not as yet received
their full Commission) yet it is most certain, that they were two distinct
Orders of Gospel Ministers. (3). Deacons, who were invested with some share of
the Apostolic Office, particularly of Preaching and (...), as well as managing
the public Stock of the Church.

I shall first take Noti^e of his Instance of the Twelve Apostles, and the
Seventy Disciples. Is it most certain, that they were two distinct Orders of
Gospel Ministers? How does this appear? The Twelve (says he, P 10.) were
particularly honored with the Title of APOSTLES; but the Seventy, though they
were sen^ forth immediately by Christ, are no where so called. But what is the
meaning of the Word APOSTLE? Does it not signify a Messenger, or one Sent? And
was it not because they were sent forth, that our Lord gave to the Twelve, the
Title of APOSTLES? And were not the Seventy also said to be APOSTELEIN^ Sent,
Luke X. 1. ^? Which every Body that understands any Greek, knowns to be the
Word, from whence APOSTLE is derived. And does not the Evangli^t, with Allusion
to the Mission of the Twelve, tell us, fore cited Luke X. 1. That after these
things, the Lord appointed other Seventy also, and SENT them? Other Seventy
What? Not Disciples: he did not appoint 'em such now, they were so before: But
other Seventy Apostles, or Messengers, which is the same thing. These indeed,
were not sent out as the Twelve, to Gospelize the Nations after Christ's
Resurrection. And therefore, were never APOSTLES, in the Gospel Dispensation:
But for this Temporary Mission, had the same Commission, the same Powers, and
the same Denomination with the Twelve. If they were not expressly called
Messengers, they are said to be SENT, which implies it.

BUT there is one invincible Argument yet to be considered; and that is, When a
Vacancy falls in the College of Apostles, by the Apostasy of Judas, what a
solemn Work was there, at the translation of one from the Number of Disciples,
(of the Seventy I suppose he means) that he might be reckoned and numbered with
the Eleven. But who told him, that Matt^ias was one of the Seventy? Is it
possible to prove this? If not, it is not put beyond all Question, as he vainly
boasts: But on the contrary, it is beyond all Question with me, that instead of
being two dis^i^ct Orders of Gospel Ministers, they were neither of them Gospel
M^nisters at all, by virtue of the Commission he speaks of. For how could they
be Gospel Ministers, before there was any Gospel Church? Certain it is, that
they were then under the Jewish Economy; and that the Christian Church was
founded on Christ's Resurrection, and therefore, could not have Officers, before
it had a Being. But what need I insist? These Do^ages are effectually answered,
beyond all possibility of Reply, by two of his own Party. Hear what they say.

WHEREAS (says Dr. Whitby Anno^. on Luke X. ^
) some compare the Bishops to the Apostles, the Seventy to the Presbyters of
the Church; and thence conclude, that diverse Orders in the Ministry, were
instituted by Christ himself. It must be granted, that the Ancients did believe
these two to be diverse Orders; and that those of the Seventy, were inferior to
the Order of the Apostles; and sometimes they make the Comparison here
mentioned: But then it must also be granted, that the Comparison will not
strictly hold. For the Seventy received not their Mission, as Presbyters do
from Bishops; but immediately from the Lord Christ, as well as the Apostles;
and in their first Mission, were plainly sent on the same Errand, and with the
same Power. Thus he. And

Mr. Sage Vind. of the Prin. of the Cypr. Age, Cap. 6. Sec. 5.
has more plainly and fully cleared the Cause. It is obviously observable (says
he) in the Evangelical Records, that the Christian Church was not, could not be
^ounded, till our Savior was risen; Seeing it was to be ^ounded on his
Resurrection. Our Martyr C^^rian, as appears from his Reasonings on diverse
Occasions, seems very well to have known, and very distinctly to have observed,
that the Apostles themselves, got not their Commission to be Governors of the
Christian Church, till after the Resurrection; and no Wonder, for this their
Commission is most observably recorded Joh. XX. 21, 23, 23. No such thing any
where recorded, concerning the Seventy. Nothing more certain, than that that
Commission which is recorded Luke X. did constitute them only Temporary
Missionaries, and that for an Errand, that could not possibly be more than
Temporary. That Commission contains in its own Bowels, clear Evidences, that it
did not Install them, in any standing Office at all, much less, in any standing
Office in the Christian Church; which was not yet in being when they got it.
Could that commission which is recorded Luke X. any more constitute the
Seventy, Standing Officers in the Christian Church, than the like Commission,
recorded Mat. X. could constitute the Twelve Governors of the Christian
Church? But it is (...), that the Commission recorded Mat. X, did not constitute
the Twelve, Governors of the Christian Church; otherwi^e, what need of a new
commission to that purpose, after the Resurrection?

NOW let the Reader judge, whether the disparity of the Twelve and Seventy,
ben't a very tottering Foundation, to build their Episocopacy upon.

BUT it is Time I take notice of his Third sort of Officers; and consider
whether Deacons were invested with some share of the Apostolic Office,
particularly of pre^ching and (...). The only way to know what was their
Office, and what their Power, is to have recourse to their Original
Institution; we find it in Acts VI. 2, 3. It is not reason, that we should
leave the Word of God, and serve Tables; therefore Brethren look you out, seven
Men of honest Report, full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom, whom we may appoint
over this Business. Is here the least shadow of Authority, for their preaching
and (...)? Is not is proposed as the whole of their Work, to serve Tables? And
is it not plainly insinuated, that they had no Authority to preach or baptize,
in that the care of the Church Stock, was commi^^ed unto them on purpose, to
disentangle those from secular Encumbrances, whose Business this was; that they
might not be forced to leave the Word of God? I would therefore, with respect
to these Deacons, remind this Author of the Apostles Challenge, Romans X. 15. How
(...) they (...) except they be sent?

BUT he tells us, (...) That Philip by his preaching, converted (...) and
initi^ted the Converts there, into the Christian (...) by Baptism. To which
it is sufficient Answer, that philip was an Evangelist. Acts XXI. 8. and in that
Capacity, preached and b^ptized. He infinuates indeed, that he was dignified
with that honorable Title, on account of his Preaching and baptizing: But I Am
sure he cannot find the least hint in the Bible, to countenance such an
Insinuation. But were it granted, that Deacons as such, may be Evangelists;
they must then have Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction: For the Work of an
Evangelist (says Dr. Whitby from (...)) was this, to lay the Foundations of
the Faith in barbarous Nations, to constitute them Pastors, etc. and so at
length, according to his own Scheme, Deacons are become superior to
Presbyters,and even coordinate with the Apostles themselves.

THUS we see, that there is not such a difference as he pretends p. 12. between
these Gospel Deacons, and those so named under the Presbyterian Model. If any
of these want Ordination, it is in those Congregations, where there is not
Church Stock to commit to their Care. And I confess, we are not very fond of
ordaining Men to a Work, that we know 'em not furnished to discharge.

HAVING thus undermined his Foundation, his Fabric must necessarily fall. I Will
however take the Pains to pull it to pieces, and see what Materials it is made
of.

REMARKS on the Second HEAD.
HIS next Business, he tells up P. 13. is, to make it appear how these Offices
were distinguished, and to demonstrate an Imparity among them. This he essays,
by such a tedious and impertinent Harrangue; that di^s estinvenire, quam
vincere. It Is much more difficult to know what he would be at, than to answer
his Arguments, if there be any thing under this Head, which deserves that Name.

BUT that I may make way for a distinct Consideration of what he ought to have
proved under this Head, I Will state the Case particularly.

THE Office of Apostles, was either Extraordinary and Temporary, or Ordinary
and Perpetual. 'Twas by virtue of their extraordinary Office, that they were
denominated APOSTLES. Which appears from this, that this Title was given them,
on Account of their being sent abroad, of their unfixed Charge, and itinerary
Circumstances; and therefore, none but these thus extraordinarily sent forth,
are any where in Scripture, distinguished by that Appellation. But even they
themselves, as ordinary Officers in the Church, are styled Presbyters. 1 Pet.
V. 1. and 2 Feb. V. 1. and 3 Job.V. 1.

THAT the Apostles were extraordinary Officers, he himself grants; and tells
us, p. 33. (as such) what their Powers and Gifts were, which take in his own
Words. It Is acknowledged, that some Things peculiar to the first Apostles, were
Extraordinary and Temporary, and expired with their Persons: such as, their
having been Eye and Ear Witnesses of Christ's Life, Doctrine^ Miracles,
Suffering, Resurrection, and Ascentio^; their having received their Commission
immediately from Christ, their being infallible Guides, in delivering the
Doctrines of the Gospel, their unlimitted commission to all the World, and
Jurisdiction over all churches, their Power (...) confer miraculous Gifts on
others, to discern, Spi^its, and to back their Censures with corporal
Puni^^ments, as on Annanias and Sapp^ira, and Elimas. Thus for their
extraordinary Power. But besides this, they had ordinary Functions, common to
other Ministers of the Gospel; Such as Preaching, dispensing the Sacraments,
ordaining others to the Work of the Ministry; and governing the Church. These
things premised, I come now to consider the Question, which should have been,

WHETHER the Apostles in the exercise of their ordinary Function were Bishops,
superior to presbyters. This he ought to have demonstrated, if he would have
done any thing to the Purpose: But what his Performance is, we shall see by the
Se^uel.

THE first Method he proposes for clearing the Cause, is indeed the only right
one, and if duly prosecuted, will infallibly answer. It is to consider their
Commissions. Let us then consider them.

As for the first Commission he speaks of, I Have already shown, all Discourse
upon that subject to be mere tri^^ing. But true it is, that when Christ was to
leave the Earth, having finished the Work of our Redemption, be gave the
Apostles their Commission, and p^t 'em into the actual Exercise of their
Apostolic Power and office. Mat. XXVIII. 18, 19, 20. and Joh. XX. 21. Upon
this he makes a long commonplace, in which he dexterously acquits himself. But
it is to be observed, that he all along considers the Apostles, as acting by
virtue of this Commission, in the exercise of their extraordinary and temporary
Power; and therefore, (as we heard before) spends his Breath to no Purpose
Wherefore, since I have no Controversy with him, about their extraordinary
Power, I shall not waste Time, in animadverting on the Imperfections of his
Discourse, on that Subject: But immediately consider, whether he finds any
distinct Commission for Presby^ers, whereby their Authority appears subordinate
to that of the Apostles^ in their ordinary Function. He promises P. 18. To
consider the Commission, given to the other Order of Church Officers instituted
by Christ, the Seventy Disciples, in whom the Order of Presbyters, and ordinary
Pastors and Teachers, is supposed to be founded. And why does he not produce
it? If there were any such Commission, it is easy to tell us where we may find
it. But the plain Truth is, had he searched till Doomsday for a Commission for
Presbyters distinct from what was given to the Apostles, he must have returned
with a Non (...) inventus. And where it is not to be ^ad, the King must lose
(...) Right.

THIS Consideration, of the Unity of the Commission, furnishes me with an
Argument, unto which I challenge the whole Tribe of the Prelatists, to give a
Rational Answer. It is this.

THEY that are authorized by the same Commission, have the same Office and
Authority.

BUT all the Ministers of the Gospel, (the Apostles themselves, in their
ordinary Capacity not excepted) are authorized by the same Commission.

THEREFORE, it necessarily follows, that they have (...) the same Office and
Authority.

THE Major of this Argument is self evident; and the Minor must stand good,
until our Adversaries can produce two Commissions, by which Gospel Ministers
are authorized to the discharge of their Trust.

ENOUGH has been said already, about the Succession of ordinary Pastors and
Teachers to the Seventy; that there needs no more Words about it.

BUT he has one old threadbare Argument, to prove the Imparity he pleads for,
which has been so often exploded by those of his own Party, and so often
resuted by the Presbyterians; that the mentioning it at this time of Day, is
perfectly ridiculous. However, let us hear what he has to say. From the Account
we have (says he, P. 19, 20.) of them, and their Ministry, in the Sacred
History; we cannot frame a more just and true Notion of this second Order of
Church Officers, than that they were instituted to be Assistants and Helpers to
the Apostles in the Work of the Gospel. And I know nothing which will give us a
better Reason for this Notion, than this Consideration; that as it is the same
Lord and Lawgiver, the same Master Builder, who had framed the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Policy among the Jews, under the Legal Dispensation, who does
erect this new Fabric of the Gospel Church; so it is reasonable to expect as
great Symmetry and proportion between the one and the other, as the Difference
of the two Dispensations will allow, and c. Unto which he adds Instances of
Aaron and his Sons, installed in the Priests Office, and the Levites
subordinate unto them; and Moses in the State, and the Seventy Elders
subordinate unto him.

THIS Argument, (as indeed most others, adduced by the Party) was consecrated
in the (...) School Vid. Bellarm. de Cler. Cap. 14.
. And the Romanists have more Reason to be fond of it, than our Episcopalians;
unless they also, are for an Universal Papacy. For as the High Priest in the
Jewish Church, and Moses in the State, were but one; with the other Orders
under them, so should there be (by this Argument) but one Bishop (the Pope) in
the Christian Church; to whom all others should be subjected.

BUT let the Cause be duly weighed, and I think neither of these can get much
by it.

1. THEN, has not our Lord dissolved the Jewi^h Polity, changed their
Priesthood, and erected another Constitution? Hear the Apostle on this Head,
Heb. VII. 12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity, a
change also of the Law.

2. THE Jewish High Priest was appointed for a particular Function, which no
Officer in the Gospel Church, has any Concern with. He was daily (says the
Apostle) to offer up Sacrifices, first for his own Sins, and then for the
People. Heb. VII. 27. and to enter into the T^berna^^e alone, once every ^ear,
not without Blood; which be offered for himself, and the Errors of the People.
Heb. IX. 7. Whence it necessarily follows, that the Occasion of the Office
ceasing, the Order must be abolished.

3. THE whole A^^nick Priestbood was Typical, and had its full Accomplishment
in Christ the Antitype; it cannot therefore, have any Continuance under the
Gospel. The Apostle call's this Legal Priesthood, with all its Appendages, a
Shadow of Good things to come. Heb. X. 1. And when the Substance is come, the
Shadows are done away. But after all,

4. I Am willing to grant, that the same Lord and Lawgiver, (to use this Authors
Words) and the Same Master Builder, who appointed his Worship and public
Adoration in the Jewish Synagogue, has translated the same into the Christian
Church; and thereby has maintained a great Symmetry and Proportion, between the
one and the other. But this is so far from being any Service to the impleaded
Hierarchy, that it utterly destroys it. Let us hear what two of the most
learned and judicious Divines the Church of England could ever boast of, say on
this Subject.

THE first is Dr. Bur^et Observat. on the 1 Can. p. 2^
. Among the Jews, (says he) he who was the chief of the Synagogue, was called
CHAZAN HAKENESETH, The Bishop of the Congregation, and SHELIACH TSIBBOR, The
Angel of the Church. And the Christian Church being modeled, as near the Form
of the Synagogue, as they could be; as they retained many of the Rites, so the
Form of the Government was continued, and the Names remained the same. And
again Observat. on the 2 Canon P. 83.
, In the Synagogues, there was first one, who was called the Bishop of the
Congregation; next the three Orderers and Judges of every thing about the
Synagogue; who were called TSEKENIM, and by the Greeks Presbuter^i, or
Gerontes, that is Elders; These ordered and determined every thing that
concerned the Synagogue, or the Persons in it. Next them, were the three
PARNASSIN, or Deacons, whose Charge was to gather the Collections of the Rich,
and ^^tribute them to the Poor. Thus he, than which, nothing can be a more
exact Description of the Pres^yterian Form of Government.

THE second is Dr. Stillingsleet Iten. P. 257.
, What show of Reason (says he) can be given, why the Apostles should slight
the Constitution of the Jewish Synagogue, which had no dependence on the Jewish
Hierarchy, and subsisted not by any Command of the Ceremonial Law? The Work of
the Synagogue not belonging to the Priests as such, but as Persons qualified
for instructing others. And again, bid. p. 264.
We are to take Notice, that the Rulers of the Church under the Gospel, do not
properly succeed to the Priests and Levites under the Law; whose Office was
Ceremonial, and who were not admitted by any solemn Ordination, unto their
Function. Thus he, with much more to the same Purpose. By which we see, that if
our Author Knows nothing that will give us a better Reason of his Notion, of
the Imparity of Gospel Ministers ^ than the different Orders in the Jewish
Priest^ood, (as he tells us P. 19. he does not) we are not like to be much
distressed with his Arguments.

THUS having done with the Consideration of the Commissions given to the
Apostles, and those of a distinct Office and Order, he promises P. 23. To show
next, the Apostles Authority over other ^astors and Teachers in the Church,
from Several Instances of their exercising it, in several Respects and Ways, as
is recorded in the sacred History. And he gravely undertakes for eight Pages
together, to exemplify this. But what need of this Pains? Since it is what was
never yet called in Question; nor ever like to be, unless his weak trifling
Reasons on the Subject, give occasion for it. But has he brought one single
Instance to prove, that the Apostles as Bishops, in the Exercise of their
ordinary Office, were superior to other pastors and Teachers? Not one Syllable
to this Purpose! But on the contrary, we find him P. 25. mentioning Timothy, (a
Bishop, as he afterward tells us) as an Instance to prove, that those inferior
Pastors served with the Apostles in the Work of the Gospel, as Sons with their
Fathers. And also bringing in the Rulers of the Church among these inferior
Orders, P. 29. And what then becomes of the Succession in the Apost^ate, if his
Bishop Timotby was inferior to the Apostles? Or what becomes of his Diocesan
Episcopacy, if Presbyters were Rulers in the Church?

There Is no need I should longer attend upon his impertinent Discourse on this
Subject; I will therefore hasten to some

ANIMADVERSIONS on the third HEAD.
WHICH is to examine, whether any of these Offices were Extraordinary and
Temporary; and to prove that they were not: But designed to be perpetual, and
standing in the Church. And this he tells us P. 32. is The Hinge, on which the
whole Controversy depends; ye^, all the Authority and Obligation of Christ's
Institution, as to the present Church. One would think, that we are now in a
fair way for compromising all the Controversy between the Prelarists and the
Presbyterians; and of procuring general Releases from both Parties; for he
acknowledges, That the Apostles extraordinary Powers (as we have heard him
before describe them) are ceased; and that it was only the ordinary Power and
Authority of the Apostles, which was to serve the Edification, good Order and
Government, of the constituted Church in all succeeding Ages; which he pleads
for. And if the perpetual Permanence of the Apostles ordinary Office, will
satisfy; I Will be Security for all the Presbyterians in the Realm, that they
shall heartily acknowledge it: And demand no other Terms in order to their
Co^^ormity, than this very reasonable one; that the Episcopalians shall plead
for no other Powers, as belonging to the Apostles ordinary Function, but what
they can prove from Scripture. But it is well, if this don't prove a Bone of
Contention at last; for I find this Author, without the least Shadow of Proof,
P. 34. a^^erting it to be part of their ordinary Office, To superintend both
Pastors and People, to settle good Constitutions, agreeable to the Word of God,
for the orderly and decent Performance of all the Ordinances of Religion,
public Worship, and other Affairs of Discipline, as the Exigence of the Church
should require, and c. And if these things be not granted him, all his fine
Scheme will come to nothing, and his ^^aborate Treatise may be even used for
waste Paper. And yet the Presbyterians can by no Means by brought into these
Concessions.

1. THEY cannot allow, that the Apostles as ordinary Officers, were to
superintend both Pastors and People; because there is not one lisp in the
Bible, of such a Superintendency belonging to any ordinary Officer. But on the
contrary, the whole Government is committed to Presbyters, without any to
superintend them. See 1 Pet. V. 1, 2. The Elders who are among you I ex^ort,
who am also an Elder, etc. Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the
Oversight (Episcopountes) thereof. Whence I argue,

IF presbyters are not only to Feed the Flock of God; but to take the Oversight
thereof, or to discharge the Bishops Office over it, as the Original Word
signifies. They are under the Superintendency of no ordinary Officer in the
Church.

BUT the former is the Words of the Text; and therefore the latter true.

2. NOR can the Presbyterian^ grant, that Christ has left it with any ordinary
Officers, to settle any Constitutions in his Church. Because (as our Author
himself truly tells us p. 39.) We know what a dreadful curse is pronounced
against them, who either add to, or take away from, the Institutions of Jesus
Christ, in the 18 and 19 Verses of the XXII Chap. of the Revelations of St.
John.

BUT if the Presbyterians are so incredulous, as not to take his bare Word in
this Case, though given with the most positive Air; yet they have such Sparks
of good Nature left, as to agree with him in this Conclusion; That there is
nothing more evident, upon the (...) Examination; than that Christ in
instituting these Orders and Offices (in their ordinary Exercise) designed,
that they should be standing and unalterable Constitutions in his Church, to
continue to the end of the World. And we will allow him too, the
unalterableness of the (...) Office; if he intends no more, (as he tells us P.
^4. he does not) than their ordinary Power and Authority, which was to serve
the Edification, good Order and Government of the constituted Church, in all
succeeding Ages. But is he means, as it seems he does, that the Apostolate
(properly speaking) is a standing Order in the Church; here we must part ways,
and he must bring very good Arguments to prove it, before he can make me his
Proselyte. And whether he has such to offer, I Will now particularly consider.

HIS first Argument is taken from their Commission, and the Promise subjoined,
Lo I am with you always, to the end of the World! But how could that be, (says
he) if their Office was to expire with themselves? How indeed? We must
therefore (as he says) understand it as a Promise not to them only; but to
their Successors also. But the Question is, What is this Succession, unto which
the promise is made? Is it a Succession in the Apostolate only? If so, there is
then no Commission given, nor Promise made, to any but Apostles, and so
consequently, there is but one Order of Gospel Ministers in the Church; none
but Apostles, to discharge any Ministerial Function. But I hope he will allow
us enough of these, to Disciple all Nations, to Baptize and to Teach 'em,
whatsoever Christ has commanded. And I AM sure, the Presbyterians will be no
loosers by that Bargain, let these Paroc^ial Apostles be called Bishops,
Presbyters, or what else our Author pleases. In a Word, this Argument is so far
from establishing an Imparity among the Ministers of the Gospel, that it
plainly proves, that there is but one Order in the Church, since the Commission
is but one; and the succession to the Apostles by virtue of that Commission,
but one. If Bishops be the Apostles Successors; there are no Presbyters
inferior to them. If Presbyters be the Apostles Successors, there are no
Bishops Superior to them. Let which will be assumed, the Consequence is the
same. Thus we are prepared to attend his second Argument.

WHICH is taken from 1 Cor. XII. 28. God has set some in the Church, first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then
Gifts of Healing, Helps, Governments, diversities of Tongues. Whence he
triumphs, God ^ath Set, -- even he who settled the Ordinances of Heaven, which
none can alter, has fixed these different Orders in the Church. If this be so,
that these Orders are fixed in the Church, these Consequences must necessarily
follow.

1. THAT there are not only Apostles and Teachers, but also Prophets distinct
from both, fixed in the Church: For these are not only named with the others;
but forced into a Class, distinct from them both. First Apostles, SECONDARILY
Prophets, thirdly Teachers. And thus, he who the last page, would allow us but
One Order of Ministers, has now furnished us with Three, and by both spoiled
his own Scheme.

2. IT will also follow, that Miracls, Gifts of Healing, and diversities of
Tongues, are (...) in the Church, and of perpetual Permanence. This Consequence
cannot be evaded, by saying; that they are not distinct Offices from these, but
extraordinary Gifts conferred on them. For (to use his own Words) God has Set,
even he who settled the Ordinances of Heaven, which none can alter, has as
well set Miracles, Gifts of Healing, and diversities of Tongues, as Apostles,
Prophets and Teachers. To say that these are Extraordinary, the others not, is
to quite destroy his Argument, from God's having SET those in the Church. For
the Text assures us, that he has SET these there also.

HIS third Argument, is taken from Ephesians. IV. 11, 12, 13. He gave some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evan(...), some (...) and Teachers; for the perfecting the
Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ; till
we all come in the Unity of the Faith, etc, where it is plain, (says he) these
Offices were to ^^^inue till the Church should be perfected, fully brought in,
and fully advanced; and till it should be beyond all hazard of being seduced;
that is to say, until the end of the World. This Text is very agreeable to the
former, and the Answer may be the same; that if these Offices are to continue
to the end of the World, they are all of 'em to continue so long, and then we
shall have four Orders of Church Officers, besides Deacons, when he pleads for
but three in all. And were that absurd, and even ridiculous Assertion of his p.
38, granted him, That these different Designations, don't import different
Offices, but different Exercises of the same Office: yet the Text makes these
as permanent as the other. His Apostles therefore, must (according to that
Notion) be Prophets, and Evangdists, to the end of the World, as well as
Bishops. And when we find these fixed Di^cesan Bishops, whilst such, not only
endowed with the Gift of Prop^^^y, but travailing through the World, to
Evanmgelize the Nations; we'll allow 'em to be the Apostles Successors.

BUT the plain Truth of the Business is, that the Apostolate was a Temporary
Office, calculated only for the in^ant State of the Church; and as Such,
treated of in both these Texts. And the ordinary Office of Pastor and Teacher
only, to continue until we all come in the unity of the Faith. That the
Apostolic Office was Extraordinary, and admitted of no Succession, I thus
Prove.

1. THE Apostles had an extraordinary Call to their Office; and were never
brought into it, in an ordinary Way, and therefore when a Successor was
appointed to Jud^s, Act. I. they chose him by L^^, that the Affair might be
left wholly to God's Decision; and did not presume to separate him to the Work,
by Ordination. Nor indeed, did the Apostles ever ordain any, to their own
Office and Order. I Challenge the World to produce one Instance of such an
Ordination. But on the contrary, it is essential to the Apostolical Character,
that they be Apostles, not of Men, nor by Men: but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father, who raised him from the Dead, Gal^ I. 1.

2. THERE were extraordinary Qualifications necessary to the Apostolic Office.
We have them particularly mentioned, when a Successor was to be chosen to (...)
Acts I. 21, 22. Wherefore of these Men which have companied us, all the time
that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the Baptism of
J^b^^, unto that same Day, that he was taken up from us; must one be crdain'd,
to be a Witness with us, of his Resurrection. Whence it plainly appears, that
none could be admitted into the Apostolate, but such as had seen Jesus, both
before his Death, and after his Resurrection.

3. THE Apostles had an universal and unlimited Commission; and were sent to
the (...) Kingdoms, to Gospelize the Infidel Nations. On which account
especially, they are distinguished by the Title of APOSTLES, as we heard
before. It is the (...) but Nonsense, to talk of Diocesan Bishops succeeding
them, whose Power is limited.

4. THERE were extraordinary Gifts conferred on the Apostles, to qualify them
for the Exercise of their extraordinary Power and Commission; such as the Gifts
of Miracles, of Tongues, infallibility of Doctrine, transcendent E^^icacy and
Energy in Preaching, and c. And as Spanbe^ius truly affirms (...). 3. Number. 25
and Seq.
^ Every one that was e^dued with a proper Apostolic Power, had, and could give
visible Proof, and occu^ar Demonstration of these Gifts. I Will therefore
conclude this Argument, with his Challenge to the Pope, with but little
Variation. Let the Bishops as did the Apostles, declare, that they have the
Gifts of Tongues divinely insused; let them bring visibly the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost from Heaven, let 'em work like the Apostles, such illustrious Miracles,
and then we shall ^ield, that they have Apostolic Authority.

THUS having seen, what Cause of Triumph our Author has on this Subject. I Will
leave him to clap his Wings, and crow over the poor ba^^led Schismatics, and
proceed to some.

REMARKS on his Fourth HEAD.
Which is to show, who succeed in these Offices, and rightly execute them to
this Day.

HE teils us p. 41. That be need but do it, of the successers to the Apostles;
for when that is done, the other come in of course. But I enquire, how do they
come in? Do they come in at the Door, or climb over the F^ld? I Am ^ure, except
they are Successors to the Apostles, in their ordinary Office, he can find no
Commission in the Bible, to bring them in. However, let us follow him in his
own Path.

AFTER a triumphant Narrative of the Feats he has performed, under the former
Heads; (which I think I have sufficiently animadve^^ed upon already) he
proceeds to this Argument:

EITHER Bishops must be the true Successors to the Apostles, or else they have
no successors at all; and the Apostolic Order and Office is quite extinct; and
the Church is totally deprived of the prime and chiefest Office, instituted by
Christ, for its Edi^ication, good Order, and Government.

THIS Argument I acknowledge, is invincible; and therefore, I must yield the
Cause, that Bishops are the Apostles true Successors; and that none but they
have any Powers from the Commission, or any Claim to the Promise given to the
Apostles. But then, the Question is, who these Bishops are, whether the
Arch-Bish^p of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, who superintend many
hundred Congregations; and none but such: Or whether it be the Pastor of each
particular Congregation. If the latter be granted, we have no Quarrel with him
on this Subject. If the former be supposed, he would have done well to have
offered some Proof upon that Head. For though the Presbyterians do allow the
Succession of Bishops, to the Apostles; they are not so good humored as to
grant, what he in^inuates P. 44. Without the least shadow of Proof; that these
Bishops are superior to ordinary Pastors and Teachers; or that they properly
succeed to the Apostolic Office. But whether we'll allow it or not, he is
resolved to stand by the Cause, and defend it i^ possible. And could he justify
what he further offers, as an Argument for his Episcopal Succession, he would I
confess, bid very fair for it.

It Is evident(says he) also from Scripture, that the Apostles in their own
Time, did con^er on others the Apostolic Power and Authority. But how is this
evident? He makes it evident to any Man that is resolved to believe it, from
the Election of Matthi^s to the Apost^late. Their (the Apostles) first work
(says he P. 45.) was to ch^se one to succeed Judas; and by the direction of
God, Matt^^^s is received into the Number of the Apostles. Did the Apostles
con^er on Matth^^s, the postolick Power? No! It plainly appears that they
neither did, nor could do it; in that they so solemnly refer the C^^se to God,
by a Lot, and depend upon his immediate Direction. If they could (as (...)
in^inuates) have committed the Aposto^^ck Office, into the Hands of other
faithful Persons, why did they lot ordain Matthias to the Charge, without
referring the Election to God's immediate Decision? or why did they number him
among the eleven Apostles, without Ordination? The Reason of this plainly is,
because this Office was Extraordinary, and the Call to it must therefore be so
too.

BUT he has more Evidence to produce, well worthy of our most serious
Attention! It is this. So when James the Brother of John, is killed by H^rod,
another of that Name, was Bishop of Jerusalem. And is not this an invincible
Argument, to prove, that the Apostles (who according to him were all of 'em
Bishops) did confer upon others, the Apostolic Power and Authority, because
James, who was one of the Apostles, was Bishop of Jerusalem? But he tells us.
That this James, some will have to be another, than James commonly called the
les^, one of the first Twelve Apostles. But who are these some? and why will
they have it so? I Am sure no Man living can give a good Reason, why this James
he speaks of, was not the Son of Alpheus, numbered with the Twelve. Mat. X. 3.
And I Am as sure, that there is not one Word in the Bible to support this
chimerical Notion, of his Episcopacy. And this, I think every body will be
convinced of, when they see what is offered for the Proof of it. I will
therefore give the Reader the Entertainment, of every Word this Author offers,
to confirm this Point. And

FIRST he tells us 'Twas be, to whom St. Peter (as Bishop of Jerusalem)
notifies, his miraculous Deliverance. Acts XII. 17. A most convincing Argument!
For we know, Peter could not notify his Deliverance, to any but Bishops.

HE subjoins, 'Twas he, who presided in the Council of Jerusalem. Acts XV. But
how does that appear? I Am certain, there is not the least li^p of that kind, in
the place referred to, unless his declaring his Sentence, or Opinion, of the
Affair debated, be supposed an Evidence of it; and if so, Peter must also be
President of that Synod; for he, as well as James, declares his Opinion of the
Case before them. But were it granted, that James presided in the Synod at
Jerusalem, what will he get by it? Is every Moderator of a Synod a Bishop, in
the Sense he pleads for? If so, there are many more Bishops, than he is willing
to allow.

THUS we are come to the last Proof, of James's Episcopacy, and that is, It was
He to whom St. Paul made his Address, when he came thither; and ^e of whom he
speaks, in the 19 Verse of the first Chap. of the Epistle to the Galations,
whom he calls an Apostle, and the Lord's Brother. The Argument stands thus,
Paul went in unto James; therefore James was a Bishop Paul calls him an
Apostle, and the Lord's Brother; therefore he was Bishop of Jerusalem. Risum
ten^^^^s amici. Can Men pretend to found their Faith upon such ridiculous
Whimsies, the very mention whereof, is enough to excite Mirth, in the most
fl^gmatick Complexion.

AND now let us see, what more he can offer to make it evident, that the
Apostles did in their own time, con^er the Apostolic Power on others. Certain
it is, (says he) that Paul and Barnabas, were received into the Apostolic
Office; Paul immediately called thereunto by Christ, at his Conversion; but
Barnabas in the ordinary manner, when he received that new Name from the
Apostles, which signifies Son of Consolation. I hope he will not pretend, that the
Apostles con^er'd the Apostolic Power on Paul, since he acknowledges his
immediate Call: And the Apostle himself informs us, 1 Cor. XV. 8. That Christ
was seen of him, as of one born out of due time. By which it appears, he had
that necessary Qualification for the Apostolic Office, a Sight of Christ.
Though his Vision of Christ, and Commission of his (...), were late, and
miraculous, on which account h^ styles himself an Abortive. And as to Barnabas,
does he bring the least hint from Scripture, to prove his mediate Separation to
the Apostolate, though he so confidently asserts it? Did he think, that his
bare Word would be taken in this Case, without the least pretense of Proof? Or
that it was a sufficient Argument, to prove his mediate Call, that he received
a new Name from the Apostles, which signifies Son of Consolation? By a like
Argument, this Author may expect to be an Apostle himself? he having so
famously merited the Name of Boanerges, by his Thunder against the
Schismatics. But I Am weary of such trifling, and will therefore see, if he can
find any thing more to the purpose; when he comes to give Instances of some
raised from among the ordinary Pastors, to the Apostolical, or Episcopal Order.

HIS first Instance is, The most Reverend Father in --, his Grace, Timothy,
Lord Archbishop of Ephesus. Of whom he tells us, p. 47. That Paul actually
gave him an Episcopal power, over the Church of Epi^sus, and the Presbyters and
Pastors thereof. To which I Answer:

1. THE Scriptures no where give so much as the Title of Bishops, to Timothy
and Titus; and how then came they by that Character? The Postscripts do indeed
call 'em Bishops; but every one conversant in Books, knows, that they are no
part of the Canon of Scripture, nor to be found in any ancient Copy of the New
Testament.

2. Timotby was so far from being Bishop of Epbe^^, that it is abundantly
evident from Scripture, he never was fixed there at all. Particularly, it is
unaccountable if Timothy was there, that Paul should make no mention of him, in
his Epistle to the Ephesians; as he does in all his other Epistles to the
Churches, that to the Galati^ns only excepted. It Is a sure Evidence, that he
was neither Bishop there, nor resident there. But let us take a particular View
of his Peregrinations, as we find them recorded in the Scriptures; and it will
thence plainly appear, that if he was a fixed Bishop at any place, he was a
pattern of Nonresidency. We find him at Corinth, when Paul wrote from thence,
his Epistle to the Romans. Romans XVI. 21. He was with Paul at Phillippi, when he
wrote his first Epistle to the Corinthians. 2. Cor. I. 1. He was with Paul at
Rome, when he wrote his Epistle to the Phillippians from thence. Phil. II. 19.
And also when he wrote his Epistle to the Collossians. Col. I. 1. He was also
his Companion when he wrote both his Epistles to the Thessalonians; as appears
from the first Verse of each Epistle. We find him likewi^e invited by the
Apostle to Rome, to be helpful to him in the Ministry. 2 Timothy IV. 9, 10, 11.
From whence, he intened to take him along with him, to visit the Churches of
Judea. Heb. XIII. 23. To all which I may add, he was a preacher for some
considerable time, to the Corinthians. 2 Cor. I. 19. And now, would it not make
a Man smile, were he never so serious; to hear of a Bishop of Ephesus, who has
the whole World for his Diocese; especially, when there is not the lea^t Word
in the Scripture, to countenance his having any fixed Charge there. Ou^
Adversaries do indeed urge to that purpose, 1 Timothy I. 3. As I besought thee to
abide still in Ephesus, that thou might charge some, that they preach no
other Doctrine. But the Argument is the quite contrary way. For to what end
should the Apostle entreat a Bishop, to tarry in his own Diocese, when he could
do no other, without offending God, and neglecting his Duty?

3. It Is certain, he was no Bishop of Ephesus, when the Apostle Paul took his
last leave of that Church. For then he commits to the Presbyters the oversight
thereof, and gives 'em a most solemn Charge of the Church, as the proper Bishop
of it. Acts XX. 17. 28. And yet this is the last time they ever saw the
Apostle's Face, as is evident from Verse 25. But it is time I consider, what our
Author adduces, to prove this Episcopacy of Timothy.

HE is instructed (says he) in all the Exercises of the Episcopal Power,
particularly to command and charge them, (the Pastors) that they Preach sound
Doctrine. And han't every Minister Authority, as Christ's Ambassador, to charge
his Brethren as well as others, to be faithful?

HE was also (says he) to prescribe Rules for public Worship; particularly
that Prayers be offered up for all in Authority. That is, he was exhorted, 1 Timothy II. 1, 2, To Supplications, Prayers, and giving of Thanks, for all Men;
for Kings, and for all that are in Authority. Therefore was to prescribe Rules
for public Worship. The meaning no doubt is, that he was by his Episcopal
Authority, to put out a New Common Prayer Book; since there is no praying for
kings, and all in Authority without.

ANOTHER Instance of his Episcopal Power, assigned by this Author, is, That he
was to examine and judge, Persons duly qualified for the Sacred Offices of the
Go^pel; and give imposition of Hands to, or to ordain none, but such as are
found duty qualifiedand c. And what Inferrence would he make from hence? But
that Timothy had the Power of Ordination, which he would have had, were he but
a common Presbyter. If he would infinuate, that because Timothy was admonished,
to lay Hands suddenly on no Man; he had the sole Power of Ordination; it is just
as much to the purpose, as if he should argue, that he had the sole Power of
exhorting and teaching, because the Apostle charges him, to be instant, in
season, and out of season, in preaching the Word.

A further Argument of this (...) Authority, ^e thus proposes. He was to guard
di^gently against false Doctrines, and ^educing Spirits, and to put the
Brethren in mind, and command them, that they give not heed to such Doctrines
and Seducers. And is not this the Duty of every Go^pel Minister, without this
superior (...) Authority?

HE was also (says this (...)) To judge, correct, and confute (...), eve^
(...) after due Examination, and (...). But is ^here a Word of ^^^^ering
Pres^^ters, in the Text (...) to? He is indeed there (...), no to receive (...)
(...) But were i^ granted, that he had this Authority, and what further is
plea^ed for, of (...) Deac^ns to a (...); This will nothing distinguish him
from other (...) who in (...) with others of their Order, might exercise all
these Powers. After all, if we low, (what I Am sure can never be proved) that he
had a Power over other (...) (...) vested (...) his own Person, he was an
(...)2 Timothy IV. ^. and as such, was desired to carry a while at (...) to
regulate Affairs in that instant Church, and give a check to those Wolves,
which the (...) foresaw Acts XX. 29. would enter (...) as well as to direct and
(...) who wanted the influence of such an extraordinary Person. How vain
therefore, is all Argument from such an extraordinary,to an (...) Church
Officer?

OUR Author foresaw this Objection, and attempts the removal of it, by telling
us, P. 49 It Is altogether groundless; for we find no such Office of an (...)
instituted, distinct from that of Apostle, Presbyte^ or (...); but that it was
a common Designation to all, who were the first Planters of the Gospel, among
Jews or Heathens. What Doctrine is this? Does not the Apostle plainly tell us,
Ephesians. IV. 11. That our ascended Lord gave to his Church, not only some Apostles,
some Prophets, same Pasters and Teachers; but some Ev^ngelists also? And
agreeably, the Ancients always esteemed Ev^ngelists to be extraordin^ Officers,
distinct from other Past^rs. Hear what (...) says of them (...)
They obtaining (says he) the first Step of Apostolic Succession; and being as
divine Disciples of the chief and principal Men, builded the Churches every
where, plan^ed by the Apostles. -- Next taking their Journey, (...) the Work
and Office of (...) that is, they preached Christ unto them, that had not yet
heard of the Doctrine of Faith; and published earnestly the Doctrine of the
holy Gospel. These Men, having planted the Faith in sundry new and Strange
Places, ordained there, other Pasters, committing unto them the ^illage of the
new Ground, and the over^^ght of such as were lately converted unto the Faith;
passing themselves, unto other People and Countries, etc.

THUS I Have gone through what he has to offer for the (...) of (...). And now
let us hear, how he proves (...) to be Bishop of (...). The like Power and
Authority (says he) is conferred on (...). Over the Churches of Crete, that he
should set in order the things that are (...), and ordain Elders, or Pre^byters
in every City; and that he should stop the Mouths of the (...), who taught
things which they ought not; and that he should rebuke them sharply, that they
may be (...) the (...). To which I answer, crete being at this time unsettled
with Pastors, the very Errand he was left there upon, was to ordain Elders in
every City; and these Elders so ordin'd, were all of 'em Bishops, Tit. I. 6, 7.
And therefore, there was no need of his continuance with them, under the
Character of a Bishop; nor did he tarry long with them, as Dr. w^^by not only
acknowledges, but proves from Scripture. As for Titus, (Says he) he was only
left a^ Crete, to ordain Elders in every City, and to set in order the things
that were wenting; and having done that Work, he had done all that was assigned
him in that Station; and therefore, St. Paul sends for him the very next Year,
to Nicopolis, Tit. ^ll. 12. Thus he, to which nothing need be added, since
whatever occurs on this Head, has been particularly answered already.

THUS having quit out Hands, of the Episcopacy of Timothy and (...), his
Hierarchy has but one Refuge more to (...) to, and that is the Apocaliptick
Angels, who I suspect will also fail him, and not prove his Guardians in this
conflict.

What has been hitherto observed, makes it to me very evident, (says he) and I
think, may make it to any other unprejudiced Person, at least highly probable,
that the Angels of the Seven Churches of the (...) were Persons of the
Apostolical and (...) Order. For since there was such an Order of (...) and
Bishops instituted by Christ in his Church -- who else could these Angels be,
but Officers of this higher Order? In answer to which, I Will endeavor to
imitate his Brevity, and waving all other Arguments, to disprove this fond
conceit; will only offer plain (...), that these Angels are (as the Word (...)
frequently is) taken in a collective Sense, as including not only the Ministers
of the (...); but even the whole Churches themselves. Thus the Epistles are
directed, unto the Seven CHURCHES in Asia, Rev. I. 4, 11. and always concluded
with this Epiphonema, He that bath a^ Ear to bear, let him bear, what the
Spirit says unto the CHURCHES. And thus in the Epistle to the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus, is there such a commendation for Labor and Patience, such a
Complaint of the lo^^ of their first Love, such an Exhortation to Repentance,
and threatening to remove their Candlestick out of its place, as are altogether
incompatible to a single Person. And what clears this Case, beyond all
possibility of Reply, is the Plural Expressions, so frequently applied to these
Angels. For Instance; When the Angel of the Church of s^^rna, is exhorted to
fear none of there things, etc. it is subjoined; The Devil shall cast some of
YOU, into Prison, that YE may be tried, and YE Shall have Tribulation, etc.
Chap. II. Verse 10. Was it some of the Bishop, that was to be cast into Prison,
and a number of him, to be tried, and to have Tribulation? So likewi^e verse
13. Antip^^ (...) faithful Martyr, was stain among YOU, where Satan ^welleth.
Was he slain among the Bishop, and had the Bishop only, such bad Quarters,
where Satan's seat was? And to the same purpose, Verse 24. But unto YOU I say,
and to the rest in Thyatira. With several other like Passages, which can by no
means agree to a single Person. And how then did it become so very evident to
this Author, that these Angels were of the Episcopal Order? I confess, I cannot
envy him the Satisfaction he obtains from such Evidence, but will leave him to
the fruition of it, while I take a short View of the History, with which he
concludes his Arguments, and see, whether he has been more happy in this, than
in that, with which he began his Dissertation.

ALL the Records (says he) we have of the ancient and primitive Church, do
harmoniously attest, that this Order, and these Offices instituted by Christ,
were inviolably preserved for many Ages, and so positive are they, as to that
prime Office of Apostles and Bishops, that they give us particular Catalogues
of the Bishops, who succeeded the Apostles, in governing the most famous and
principal Churches in the World. It would have been a needles Toil, for this
Author to have given his Reader any Documents of this, or to have produced one
of th^se ancient Records, or so much as one of the Fathers of the Church, to
prove this bold Assertion; for he knows that the Laity are easily put off with
Confidence and Assurance. And it is also needless for (...), to heap up
contrary Authorities, against bold and blind Affirmation. I shall therefore
only propose to his Consideration, the Answer of their own Dr. Stilling fleet
Iren. part, 2 cap. 6.
, to these frivolous Pretenses. Who observing, that Eusebius makes it a most
hard Matter to know, who succeeded the Apostles, in the Churches they planted;
adds, Say you so, is it so hard a Matter to find out, who succeeded the
Apostles, in the Churches planted by them, unless it be mentioned in the
writings of Paul, what becomes then, of our unquestionable Line of Succession,
of the Bishops of several Churches, and the large Diagrams made of the
Apostolic Churches, with every one's Name set down in his Order, as if the
writer had been Cl^renceaul to the Apostles themselves? Is it come to this at
last, that we have nothing certain, but what we have is Scripture? And must
then the Tradition of the Church be our Rule, to interpret Scripture by? An
excellent way to find out the Truth doubtless, to bend the Rule to the crooked
Stick. And the same Author justly observes Ibid. p. 300.
That from such Reasonings of the Fathers, and their mentioning of Successions
of Bishops, it can never be proved, that Bishops were of a higher Order, or had
any Power over Presbyters; nor that in all places, there was so much as any
Difference at all between them; nor that they mean'd ought, save a succession
of Doctrine. Thus Dr. Stillingfleet, unto which nothing need be added.

I will therefore proceed to consider Calvin's Authority, whom he brings for
his Voucher in this Case, and would no doubt by this, and several other
Quotations from him, have his Lay Reader suppose he is wholly on his side. He
indeed finds him acknowledging, that the Ancients had Bishops and ArchBishops;
and he might have added, Lectors and Acolyths, for Calvin mentions these too
among the rest, in the place referred to. But why did he not tell us, that
according to Calvin, The Bishop had no Dominion over his Colleagues, the
Presbyters; but was among them as the Consul in the Senate, to propose Matters,
to enquire the Votes, to preside in Counsels, Admonitions, and Exhortations; to
direct the Affair by his Authority, and to put in Execution, what was decreed
by common Council. And that even this is introduced by Humane Consent, is
confessed by the Ancients themselves. I say, why did he not inform us of this
also? The Reason is obvious, it would quite have spoiled his Argument, and who
would be an Evidence against himself?

THUS, I Have gone through all his Arguments, for the Proof of the Jus Divinum of
Prelacy; and must submit it to the Readers Judgment, whether any of 'em remain
unanswered.

HIS next Business is, to propose three Objections, against the Doctrine he
propugns; and he discovers his Prudence and Caution, in proposing 'em as
favorably as possible to his own Cause, that he might find something to
answer. But it would have been kindly done of him, to have allowed the
Presbyterians, to state their own Objections: And I dare say, if he had
undertaken to have given any satisfying Answer to the Reasons brought by them,
against his Doctrine; he would have found Work enough for his Life time. I Will
take liberty to propose some few to them, which he may consider at his Leisure.

Arg. 1. IF the Scriptures ascribe, not only a community of Names; but also of
Office and Order, to Bishops and Presbyters; they are necessarily coordinate.
BUT the Scriptures do ascribe, a Community both of Names and Office, to Bishop
and Presbyter.

1. THEY ascribe a Community of Names, Acts XX. 17, 28. Where those called
Presbyters, in the 17 Verse, are styled Bishops in the 28. And the same thing
appears with meridian Luster, from Tit. 1. 5, 7. Where those called Presbyters
in the 5th Verse, are also denominated Bishops in the 7th. And

2. THE Scriptures also ascribe, an Identity of Offices, to Bishops and
Presbyters. Thus 1 Pet. V. 1, 3. The Elders which are among you I exhort, who
am also an Elder, etc. Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the
Oversight thereof. I Am sure, the Consequence is inevi^able, that if Presby^ers
are to take the Oversight of the Flock, or as the Original Word signifies, to
discharge the Bishops Office over it; there is a Community of Order and Office,
as well as of Name, between Bishop and Presbyter, which was the thing to be
proved.

Arg. 2. IF there be no Gospel Ministers in a regularly constituted Church, but
Bishops; then Bishop and Presbyter, must be the same Order and Office.
BUT, there are no Gospel Ministers in a regularly constitued Church, but
Bishops. As is abundantly evident, from Phil. I. 1. Paul and T^m^tbe^s the
Servants of Je^us Christ, to all the Saints in Christ Jesus, which are at
Phillippi, with the Bishops, and Deacons. From which Text, we not only find
Bishops and Deacons all the Officers belonging to the Church of Phillippi; but
it also appears, that there was a plurality of Bishops in that Church; and that
they were therefore such Bishops, as would make but a very whiggish Figure, in
our Times.

Arg. 3. IF Presbyters are the only ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, given
unto the Church by our ascended Lord, for the Perfecting of the Sain^s, for the
work of the Ministry, and for the edifying the (...) of Christ; then Bishops
and Presbyters are coordinate.
BUT that Presbyters are the only ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, given unto
the Church by our ascended Lord, appears true, from Ephesians. IV. 11, 12. Where
Pasters and Teachers are enumerated, as the only ordinary Gospel Ministers. And
therefore the Consequence is unde^iable, that there are no Bishops given by
Christ to the Church, distinct from these (...) and Teachers. Enough has been
said already, to satisfy any Man, that will not shut his Eyes against clearest
Convictions, that the Offices first enumerated in this Text, were Extraordinary
and Temporary. I need therefore take no Notice of that Objection now.

Arg. 4. IF Presbyters have power of Ordination; Bishops and Pesbyters are
coordinate.
BUT that pr^^^ters have power of Ordination, is most undeniably Proved, from 1 Timothy IV. 14. Neglect not the Gift that is in th^e, which was given thee by
pro^^esy, with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery. Our Author raises
two mean and trivial Objections, against the pertinency of this Text, to the
Purpose for which it is adduced. The first is, that the presbytery is not to be
understood of the Assembly, or Consistory of Presbyters; but of the Mun^^, or
Office it self. Very pretty! Then Timothy was ordained by the leying on of the
Hands of the Office of a Presbyter. The first Office I presume, that ever had
Hands. His second Objection is, that the Presbytery did but (...) and assist,
at the Ordination of Timothy, as is evident, from 2 Timothy I. 16. Where the
Apostle says, the Gift was (...) on him, by laying on of (...). But does not
the Text expressly say, that he received this Gift by the (...) of the Hands of
the Presbytery? And I know of no Consequence, that can be drawn from the
Apostle's joining in this O^dination, but this; that he was himself a
Presbyter, and therefore not a Bishop of the modern Stamp. Which brings me to

Arg. 5. IF the Apostles themselves, as ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, were
Presbyters; then Bishops are not Superior to Presbyters.
BUT the Apostles themselves, as ordinary Gospel Ministers, were Presbyters.
Thus ^ Pet. V.^. The Elders which are among you, I ex^ort, who am also an
Elder. ^ Joh. ^ The Elder, unto the El^ct Lady. And 3 John 1. The Elder, unto
the well ^^loved Gains

Arg. 6. IF there be no mention of Bishops superior to Presbyters, in the whole
Book of God; then Bishops and Presbyters are coordinate.
BUT I challenge the World to show any mention, of Bishops Superior to
Presbyters, in the Book of God.

IT is therefore a just Conclusion, that there is no such thing. Since it cannot
be found in the sacred Records; especially, since the Word Bishop no where
occurs in the New Tes^^ment, but in direct Opposition to Pre^acy.

BUT whither do I run? It Is high time to con^ider, that my Province is to be a
Respondent, and not an Opponent; I will therefore only besp^^k my Readers
Patience, (...) I just propose two or three Scruples, with respect to the
Modern Bishops, which I can by no means get rid of. Hoping this Author will be
so Charitable, as to resolve 'em in his next.

1. THE first is, How the Ambassadors of our lowly Jesus, and the Successors of
his humble self-denying Aposties, came by a Lordly Dignity, when expressly
discharged from being Lords over Gods Heritage. 1 Pet. V. 3.

2. HOW Bishops came by secular Business and Authority, when expressly required
to give themselves wholl^ to the Work of their Ministry. 1 Timothy IV. 1^.

3. WHETHER those Bishops that are found so^very seldom in the Pulpit, are the
proper Successors to Timothy, who was so strictly charged, To preach the Word,
be instant, in Season, and out of Season. 2 Timothy IV. 2.

CONCLUSION.
AND now, having finished my Remarks upon this Pamphlet, I shall only add by
way of Conclusion, a short Expost^lation with the High-Church Party.

WHOSE Interest Gentlemen, do you think you are driving on, while you are not
only d^mning almost all the Pretestant Churches, for want of a regular
Ministry; but what in you lies, bringing a Contempt upon the Persons, and a
Blast upon the Labors, of so many of Christ's faithful Servants? Is it a light
thing, to wound the Consciences of the weak, to strengthen the Infidelity of
the (...) Lib^rtine, and to give such matter of Triumph to the Papis^s, by
rend^ing the very Baptisms, and all other sacred Institutions in most reformed
Churches, matter of Question and Debate; and even sapping the Reformation, at
the very Root? Would not Mode^^^ oblige you to question your Arguments, since
(...) against so considerable a Part of Christ's Mystical Body; so often
refuted by the Presbyterians, and all of 'em condemned, by some or other of the
most eminent of your own Party? Is not the condemning of Presbyterian
Ordination, an egregio^s Reflection upon the Legislature of the Nation, who
have established Presbytery in North Britain? Nay, is it not an equal
Reflection upon the Fidelity of our Blessed Savior, that he should leave so
great a Part of his Church, without either Ministry or Ordinances? Do you think
that our Lord Jesus Christ will disown his faithful Servants, in the Day of his
Kingdom, for their want of external State and Grandeur, and for not submitting
to a Government, whereof there is not one Word in the Scriptures?

TRULY Gentlemen, some small Allay of Charity in your Principles, would render
'em nothing less amiable, to the Protestant World; who maugre all the
Anatbema's of Rome, or Imputations of Schism from HIGH-CHURCH, will Suppose,
that The Opinion which wants Charity, is not from God, but that the Error is of
the damning side.

OUR Comfort is, that we are not to stand or fa^^, by your Judgment; but can
cheerfully go on in our Work, with a refreshing Expectation, that when the
chief Shepherd shall appear, we shall receive the promised Crown of Glory, that
fades not away.

FINIS.

