A Vindication OF THE Appendix to the Sober Remarks.

A VINDICATION OF THE Appendix to the Sober Remarks. Being a Reply to some
ANIMADVERSIONS upon it, in the Appendix to the Defense of the Modest Proof.
Wherein The Ruling and Ordaining Power of Congregational Bishops, or
Presbyters, is further Defended.

In a Second Letter to a Friend.

Prove. 15.1. A soft Answer turns away Wrath.

BOSTON in N.E. Printed for S. GERRISH, and Sold at his Shop. MDCCXXV.

A VINDICATION OF THE Appendix to the Sober Remarks.
SIR,
YOU cannot easily imagine what a grateful Entertainment I always have, when
any Lines come to me from your obliging Hand. I am particularly bound to thank
you for your last very acceptable Letter; which was the more welcome, for the
kind Presents that accompanied it. The Defense of the Modest Proof, which you
sent me, appears in my Eyes, as you say it does in yours, A Piece of so
singular a Complexion and Make (surely perfect in its kind) that I know not how
to model my Countenance when I read it, whether for Laughter, for Indignation,
or Compassion. An extraordinary BOOK it is, as well for the Style and Method,
as for the peculiar Vein of Argument running through the Body of the Work; and
must needs therefore make a very admirable Appearance on the Stage of
Literature. Undoubtedly the Author is some mighty Chief; some great Master at
the Art of Wrangling, and used to throw the Ball of Contention; a Man fit to be
the Champion of so distinguished a Party, and doubtless the most accomplished
Hand they could pick out to undertake the Rescue of their baffled Cause. Pity
indeed but that such rare Talents should be displayed, and not lie rusting in a
Corner. Though equally a Pity it is, they had not been employed on a more worthy
and defensible Subject. For I doubt he will shrink in his Figure, and come off
with Shame: Since we often see the greatest Wits miscarry in a bold Dispute for
want of a good Cause, as well as others of less Skill, for want of a good
Conduct. However it seems He was resolved for once to venture, and comes into
the Field with an unequaled Zeal and Courage; perhaps trusting in his Armor
more than in his Cause. He bravely enters the Lifts with several Adversaries
together: And upon a view of them, taking 'em to be little impotent Animals,
capable only to biss and spit their Venom, he despises and derides them, as
Goliath (the famous Philistine of Gath, that proud Giant, who desy'd the Armies
of Israel) disdained his Antagonist, David, as a puny STRIPLING; by no meant an
equal Match for such a valiant, experienced Warrior as He. This Hero finds a
strong Reluctance in encountering them; and scorns to be in Earnest, to put out
his Strength, or show his Skill: but only makes a few insignificant Flourishes,
and harmless undesigning Passes. He appears continually, like a Man in Jest,
only to sport and play with them as Children: thinking perhaps, that it would
be too a great an Honor put upon Them, and too much an Abuse of his own
Intellectual Powers and Learning, to go to reason and debate with Them in
Earnest. -- Or else He suspected, that a Rational Defense of the Mod. Proof and
the Discourse might possibly prove a laborious Task, that would cost him a
great Deal of Time, and be too long a Diversion from his better Employments.
Therefore he generally contents himself with peremptory Assertions, warm
Harangues, and witty Descants: summing up all (O the happiness he must needs
feel*) in glorious and triumphant Conclusions; though (alas) supported by little
other Evidence, than the Assurance wherewith he lays them down.

INDEED, in that part of his Performance, which concerns me more particularly,
and which the following Sheets are pointed against, (I mean the six last pages
of his Appendix) He here varies his Mine and Shape very wonderfully; puts on
some Features both of the Gentleman and the Scholar; and not only regales me
with unusual Airs of Civility, but also makes some Efforts to state and argue
matters like a Disputant. For when a Man's Passion, or his Humor of Jesting,
has talked it self out of breath, many times his Reason recovers, and takes its
turn to speak. -- Now therefore, to retaliate his Kindness, I shall study,
through the whole of my Reply to him, to preserve a due Temper; and shall do him
the Justice to represent his Arguments fairly, allow 'em their utmost Force,
and give 'em a sober Consideration, a distinct Examination, and more large and
particular than is really needful: because I Am willing to spare no pains in
searching out the Truth in this disputed Subject; and that (if possible) I may
help cast such a Light on the Controversy, as to satisfy impartial Inquirers.
Therefore I shall make use of the Hints in my Antagonist, as occasions to speak
largely to things. Indeed, were the Dispute between us already drawn out to any
considerable Length, I should pass over his brief Animadversions with general
and short Glances. For I suppose all that is necessary in a way of Reply to
Them, might be comprised in a very few Pages; as few, I presume, as those he
has bestowed on me. It Is but a small part of the Appendix, that is affected by
what he has advanced against it; and what he has offered, seems to have so
little Strength in it, that some have thought a labored Answer would be too
great a Complement to him. However, for the Reasons hinted, I shall take
occasion from his Animadversions, to handle the Points, that may fall in my
way, somewhat largely. This must be remembered, or else I fear you will censure me
in many places, as laboriously and vainly skirmishing with a Shadow. Which
being premised, let me now without any further Ceremony or Apology come to the
Remarks I have to offer.

I can easily forgive him the Blunder he begins with, in saying, The Author
often varies Shapes and Characters, for now he personates an Independent, and
anon a Ruling Elder: -- as if there were no Ruling Elders among the
Independents.

I will also pass over his next Reflection, which carries in it a Random-Shot
at the Sectaries, who (he says) do all militate under the same common Standard
of Schism and Rebellion: -- for I am no more concerned in this Observation than
himself. Dismissing it then as wholly foreign; I come to his three
Preliminaries, which are designed to give a just Turn of Thought to those that
have been under an unhappy Biass in the Controversy.

1. AND here I concur with him, in the Substance of his first Preliminary,
touching the Nature of the Apostolical Commission, where he observes, That it
is on all hands agreed to be the Grand Charter for the Evangelical Ministry;
That it contains more in its Nature than is expressed; and that the Intent and
Purport of it must be gathered from the Practice of the Apostles, as they
understood and explained it in their acting by and upon it. Here, I confess, is
a just Turn of Thought, but such a one as gives an unhappy Blow to his own
Cause.

OBSERVE, He allows the Apostolical Commission to be the grand Charter for the
Evangelical Ministry. By which, if I understand him right, he means, That this
is the Diploma Regium, the Royal Warrant, License, or Patent, by which every
true Gospel-Minister claims, or is authorized and empowered. I suppose He will
consent to the Words of his Friend (and perhaps Countryman) Barclay, who thus
expresses his Sense of the Matter, (in his Persuasive, page 91.) It is by
virtue of the Commission given to the Apostles by our Savior, that any Man is
an authorized Minister: And if it is not by virtue of this Commission, that ALL
Gospel Ministers are authorized, I desire any one to show what Authority they
have and where it is founded. -- Here is a good Comment on that Concession of
my Animadverter. But perhaps it may be better to compare it with another
Passage of his own elsewhere, which sufficiently explains his Sense. It is in
his N.B. I call it His, (and shall go upon this Presumption in some further
Observations afterward) because of the near Affinity betwixt the strain of
Reasoning in the Def. and in the Animadv, and because there are some very
peculiar Turns of Language common to them both, etc. which speaks them to be
hammered on the same Anvil.
Defense of Mod. Proof, (page 61.) where speaking of the Apostolical
Commission, he affirms, That there are several Things contained in it, and
several Offices warranted by it, as the Powers of Preaching, administering the
Sacraments, Ordination, and Government by proper Officers, and that ALL that
discharge ANY of those Functions, act by virtue of THIS Commission. -- Now I do
assert, He has by these Concessions given a fatal wound to the Cause of
Prelacy; and must think so, till he shall refute my Remarks on the like
Expressions of Mr. Barclay's, (See the Appendix, page 31, -- 38.) where I have
shown, That hereby he has disarmed himself of his Herculean Argument, from the
Seventy, and has put it entirely out of his power, by any other Medium
whatsoever, to prove the Divine Right of Prelacy. I desire my Animadverter
would consult the Pages cited, and let us have his Animadversions upon them, as
he would do Justice to his Cause.

I agree with him, in the Remainder of his first Preliminary, viz. That the
Apostles Commission contains more in its nature than is expressed, and that the
Purport of it must be gathered from their Practice upon it --. But then we must
carefully observe the allowed Distinction between their ordinary and their
extraordinary Powers and actions. It is acreed on all sides, That the Apostles
had some peculiar Powers, that were extraordinary, and temporary, and expired
with their Persons: by virtue whereof they did this and the other extraordinary
Action, that cannot be drawn into a President for After-Ages, which afford only
such Officers, as succeed them in their ordinary Powers. -- Under this head,
the Author of Mod. Proof (page, 33.) enumerates their Jurisdiction over all
Churches and Pastors, their backing their Censures with Corporal Punishments,
and perhaps their instituting new Gospel Officer, etc. These Things we find in
Fact they did: but that they did them by virtue of their Commission (in Mat.
28) as acting immediately by and upon it, I scarce believe my Animadverter will
assert; because it is plain they were extraordinary Actions, and could be done
only by virtue of their extraordinary Powers. Whereas that Commission contains
nothing beyond the ordinary Duties and Powers, not peculiar to the Apostles,
but common to all their Brethren and Successors in the Ministry. Agreeably
Bishop Hall, speaking of the Promise annexed, observes, Christ was with them,
not in the Infallibleness of their Judgment, nor in the Universality of their
Charge; but in the effectual Execution of those Offices, which should be
perpetuated to His Church for the Salvation of Mankind. Such were the Preaching
of the Gospel, and the Administration of the Sacraments, the Ordaining
Church Officers, the ordering of Church affairs, the Infliction of Censures and
the Power of the K^y^. -- As to any Inspection and I^fluence over the
Presbyters and constituted Churches, that the Apostles might have, and if they
be supposed to exercise a Jurisdiction over them, this must be founded in the
extraordinary Powers, which were peculiar to themselves, and temporary; as I
have argued elsewhere ( Append. to Sob. Rem. p. 26, 27.) unto which I cannot
find the Animadverter has said any thing, to take off the force of my Reasoning
there: I shall think it stands good then, till I hear further from him; and
upon a review, perhaps it may appear to him not unworthy of some serious
Reflections.

AND now I shall hint three or four things to set the Nature of this Commission
in a true Light, from the Practice of the Apostles by and upon it; which I
doubt not will make the Presbyterian Hypothesis as clear as plain Fact can make
a thing.

IN the first place, we may observe, While the Apostles remained at Jerusalem,
after Christ's Ascension, (which Eusebius reports, was for several Years) they
acted in a complete Parity: and even Peter and John (who seemed to be Pillars,
as much as James, pretended to be Bishop of Jerusalem) were sent out by their
Brethren, upon a particular ^rrand to Samaria. ( Act. 8 14) And afterward we
find this Equality continued among the Bishops and Pastors in the Church at
Jerusalem; Hence it is said, Act. 11.22. THEY sent forth Barnabas. The Act
passes not in the name of a Prelate, nor of the Apostles. So in Act. 15. we
read of a matter of Controversy referred to the Decision o^ the Apostles and
Elders at Jerusalem; and it is said. The Apostles and Elders came together to
consider of this matter: and there was much Disputing: and when they were come
to a Determination, the Result passed in the Names of them all without
Distinction. [The Decrees are said to be ordained of the Apostles and Elders.]
Then they all agreed to send chosen Men or their own Company, with Paul and
Barnabas, to carry their Letters to Anticch. So that in all the managements in
the Church at Jerusalem hitherto, there appears not the least sign or shadow of
a Prelacy. And doubtless all other Churches were formed after the same Model
with that.

MOREOVER, observe, when the Apostles planted a Church in any Place, they
settled a Plurality of Presbyters in it. Thus we read, Act. 14.23. Paul and
Barnabas ordained them Elders in every Church. A number of Elders; and no
mention of a Bishop set over them.

THESE Elders were themselves Bishops, and Church-Rulers. My Animadverter
himself shall be my Voucher for this; who tells us, that the Presbyters, which
the Apostles settled in the Churches, and particularly those at Corinth, had
the Powers both of Sacraments and Censures: and for proof he alleges 1 Cor.
5.5, 7, 12, 13. and 2 Cor. 2 6. If we consult these places, we shall find the
Apostle speaks to the Corinthian Elders as Church-Rulers, vested with the Power
of the Keys. We shall find they passed the highest Church-Censure on the
Incestuous Person; and then absolved him again upon his Repentance. So that
they exercised the power of the Keys both in Binding and in Lo^sing. My
Animadverter therefore well ascribes unto them the Powers both of Sacraments
and Censures.

AND indeed this is but agreeable to the Doctrine of the Church of England, as
it may be gathered out of the Public Offices; where we find Presbyters
receiving a pretty advanced Character, as Rulers and Pastors. Thus, They seem
to have Authority over the Deacons, as appears by the Deacons Ordination-Vow,
wherein They promise Reverently to obey Their Ordinary [the Bishop's Suffragan,
who is at best but a Presbyter] and other chief Ministers of the Church
[Presbyters still] AND Them to whom the Charge and Government over them is
committed: By whom, I suppose, was originally intended the Pastors of the
respective Congregations, to which those Deacons were employed to minister. As
seems very probable, if we compare the Promise here, with that of the Priests;
which runs in a different strain: The Priest promising to obey his Ordinary,
and other chief Ministers, unto whom is committed etc. Where the Form of
Expression is altered. Here it is -- Chief Ministers, unto whom --. Whereas in
the former Office, it is -- Chief Ministers, AND Them to whom --. Which
material Variation of the Form seems plainly to speak the Presbyters, who are a
superior order unto Deacons, to have committed to them a Government over Those
of this inferior Office, who minister in their Congregations. -- But however it
be in that Case, be sure the Presbyters have (according to the English Model) a
governing Power over the Flock. If we look into the Form of ordering Priests,
we shall find a great deal to countenance this Assertion. Thus in the Charge
that is given them the Figures of Shepherds, Watchmen, Messengers, and Stewards
of the Lord, are pursued, and the Places of Scripture, relating to These are
applied to them. And then in the Ordination-Vow, the Bishop takes a Promise of
them, That they will give their faithful Diligence so to minister the Doctrine
and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, --
unto the People committed to their Cure and Charge: -- and that they will be
ready with all faithful Diligence to Banish and DRIVE away all erroneous and
strange Doctrines, etc. And then, it is remarkable, at the Imposition of Hands,
the Bishop says to the Priest ordained, -- Whose Sins Thou do forgive, they
are forgiven; and whose Sins thou do retain, they are retained. Which are the
express Words of the Apostolical Commission, John 20 -- And though these words
are ordered to be read for the Gospel, at the Consecration of a Bishop, yet
they are not repeated in the Form of Ordination, or at the Imposition of Hands:
for which I cannot think of a more natural Reason than this, viz. Because the
Office of Presbyter still subsists in the Bishop, unto which all the Power
implied in those Words do properly belong; and the Presbyter receives no new or
superadded Power, as of Divine Right, at his Consecration to the Episcopate,
but only is advanced to a Degree of Dignity and Authority, that has arisen out
of some prudential Constitutions Ecclesiastical and Civil: and therefore the
Repetition or Delivery of the Apostolical Commission to him, upon this
Preferment, is though it unnecessary. So that (as I hinted in the Appendix, page
24.) it should seem that the Church of England supposes her Bishops and
Presbyters to be equally vested with the Power of Discipline, according to the
Word of GOD; and what Difference there is in the Exercise of it, must be
grounded on Human Constitutions. And indeed this Distinction is hinted to us,
when the Bishop, at his Consecration, promises -- to correct and punish the
Criminous within his Diocese, according to such Authority as be has by God's
Word, and as to him shall be committed by the ordinance of this Realm. -- Upon
the whole it appears that my Animadverter has spoken the original Sense of his
own Church, as well as confessed to a Scripture-Doctrine, in asserting the
Presbyters having the Powers both of Sacraments and Censures. -- But if I
mistake not, this Concession, which the force of Teach (more perhaps than the
want of Thought) has extorted from him, will prove the utter Subversion of his
Cause, For it is one of the first Principles in his Scheme, That the Powers of
Government and Ordination are annexed, alia^, connected. This is a Maxim the
Gentleman often inculcates, and is what Episcopalians generally maintain. Now
they that have the Powers both of Sacraments and Censures, must be owned to
have the governing Power in their Hands. He that denies this, must certainly
have a very odd Turn of Thought; and my Animadverter must needs be under an
unhappy Biass (indeed) in the Controversy, if he denies Presbyters the power of
Ordination, after he has thus asserted their governing Power, and proclaimed
them Parochial Bishops.

BUT perhaps he may object: This Arguing is vain; for there must this necessary
Distinction be observed, That the Government, with which Ordination is
connected, is not that of mere Presbyters over their single Flocks, but that of
Diocesan Bishops over a Plurality of Churches and their Pastors. The Government
of Prelates, and that of Presbyters, are two different sorts of Government; and
the Government which the Power of Ordination was annexed to, is that of
Prelates taken in its proper present Ecclesiastical Sense, and not that that
mere Presbyters have over their single Congregations. So he distinguishes in
his Def. of Mod. Proof, p. 21.

TO which I answer, That this Distinction appears to be without any just
Foundation. For there are not two such different Species of Church Governors,
as he speaks of. Either Presbyters have the complete Power of Ecclesiastical
Rule, or they have none at all. The latter is contrary to the declared Sense of
my Animadverter: He expressly allows them a Government over their Flocks, even
the Powers both of Sacraments and Censures; which implies, I think, no small
Degree of Authority vested in them: But how fatal to his Argument, is this
Acknowlegement! He here lashes his own Error; and turns Traitor to his own
Cause. -- For I ask the Gentleman, how he supposes the Presbyters came by so
much ruling Power? What Commission is it founded in? For, if it does not result
from some Divine Commission, that they are invested with, it is a very criminal
Presumption and an unsufferable Insolence in Them to lay claim to it: a daring
Offense it must needs be, equal at least to what They are guilty of, who
approach before God's Altar without the appointed Rites of Consecration. I ask
then, What Commission it is founded in? Is it the Commission of the Seventy? No
surely; for that does not contain the Powers both of Sacraments and Censures.
Where then shall we look to find the original of this their governing Power?
Shall we repair to Matthew. 28. and refer it to the Apostolical Commission? Yes;
for if it be not implied there, it is no where in the Bible. And besides the
Gentleman himself, (in his Def. of Mod. Proof, p. 61.) vouches this for their
Warrant, and expressly affirms, That it is by virtue of this Commission, that
Presbyters discharge the Function of Preaching and Administering the Sacraments,
and exercise the Powers of Absolution and Censures. Well but if that Commission
belongs to them, which is the highest in the Church, how can there be any
supposed of a superior Order to Them? And how come the Presbyters to have any
Title or Relation at all to that Commission; which was given immediately to the
twelve Apostles, and not to the Seventy Disciples? Why truly here is the
Difficulty, and the Self-repugnance, in our Animadverter's Scheme. For it is a
Paradox to me, That Presbyters should have a governing Power in the Church, by
virtue of the Commission given to the Apostles; and yet really be no more than
Successors to the Seventy Disciples, whose Commission contained nothing of such
an Ecclesiastical Authority. I wonder by what new Logic the Gentleman will be
able to accommodate these two jarring Principles of his. He has cast his Cause
upon a palpable Contradiction; and while he essays to gore us with both Horns
at once, we may hope to escape without Harm from either.

FURTHERMORE, As to these governing Presbyters it may be observed, we find none
of them claiming a Superiority over their Brethren; nay, the very Apostles
themselves made no pretensions to any Supremacy, or Prelatical Power over them,
as Officers of another and higher Order. We do not find that the Apostles
claimed a Negative upon the ordinary Pastors, and the Churches, in matters of
Government, nor so much as a Right of Precedence, as superior Officers. They
owned Presbyters (as in the forementioned case of the Corinthian Elders) to
have the Power of the Keys, and seem to know nothing of their being limited to
exercise them by Apostolical Direction and Consent. -- And in the case of
Missions, the Apostles used no coercive Power over the Presbyters, but took
their free Consent; without which they went not. Thus the Apostle Paul told the
Corinthians (1 Epis. 16.12) As touching our Brother Apollos, I greatly desired
him to come unto you with the Brethren, but his Will was not at all to come at
this Time; but he will come, when he shall have convenient Time. Now, according
to the Author of Mod. Proof, (page 30.) Apollos was but a Presbyter; and yet
you see he acted his own Inclinations, in opposition to Apostolical Entreaties:
which betokens but little Sense of any Subjection to the Apostle, as his
Superior and Ruler.

BUT, in a word; whatsoever clear Indication may be pretended of a Distinction
and Subordination between the Presbyters and the Apostles, the same is equally
clear with respect to some others that are supposed to be Prelates; who appear
to be as much in Subjection to the Apostles, as the Presbyters. For Instance,
Timothy is said to minister unto Paul, to be sent by him hither and thither, to
receive Commandment from him etc: Which carries as plain Signatures of Paul's
Jurisdiction over this supposed Prelate, as are any where to be seen of his
Jurisdiction over Presbyters. Now, (supposing that to be in fact a proper
Exercise of Authority) I put it to my Animadverter, -- Whether he looks on the
Apostle as therein acting by an ordinary Power, or by an extraordinary? Or, in
other words, Whether or no He looks on this Apostolic Practice as giving us any
Explanation of the Commission? And take it which way he will, I ask how he can
reconcile it with his Scheme of Things. For, if he supposes the Apostle to act
herein by and upon his Apostolical Commission, and so explaining it, and
leaving a Precedent; then it seems (according to the Animadverter's way of
arguing) we must not only have Prelates in the Church, but also another order
superior to Them: and thus there will be more than three orders; which is
contrary to his own Scheme. -- But if he determines the Apostle's Practice, in
regard of his Jurisdiction over Timothy, not to be an Explanation of the
Apostolic Commission, then say I, no more is the Jurisdiction, that the
Apostles are supposed to have exercised over Presbyters. For (to borrow here a
short Parenthesis from the Remarker Sob. Rem. p. 38. Edit. 2.
) No man is able to give me any tolerable reason, why their Government over
Bishops should be grounded on an extraordinary Power, and yet their Government
over Pastors be by virtue of their ordinary Power. Whatever Authority over them
the Apostles may be supposed to have had, it did not result from their ordinary
Commission: and so affords no Pattern to succeeding Ages, nor gives the least
Countenance to Prelatical Usurpations.

SO then, upon the Whole, I may very justly draw up this Conclusion (the
Reverse of my Animadverter's) That if following the Explanations given of this
Commission by Apostolic Practice be warrantable, the Assertors of Presbyterian
Parity are undoubtedly in the Right. --

BEFORE I pass to his next general head, I might take Notice of what he
insinuates here (1) concerning the Deacons, That we find in Fact, that the
Apostles ordained them; besides some lower Offices, to preach and baptize. --
By this he must mean, Either that we find they in fact ordained the Deacons to
the works of Preaching and Baptising; which is directly contrary to the Account
we have of their Institution, Act. 6. begin. -- Or else that we find in Fact
the Deacons did preach and baptize, and from thence must infer they were
ordained to these Offices. Now if this be his Meaning, let him consult the
Appendix (page 38, etc.) and he will find I have sufficiently exposed the
Vanity of such Pretenses, in a way of Arguing too somewhat different from the
Remarker; so that the Answer to him will not suffice for a Reply to Me: and yet
the Animadverter silently passes over my Observations on this Head, as he has
done in many other Instances -- And now, as to what he affirms in the next
Place, concerning Presbyters, That those which the Apostles settled in the
Churches (as at Corinth) had the Powers both of Sacraments and Censures; -- I
shall add nothing to the Remarks made upon it (...): save, that Here is an
implicit Condemnation of His own Church; which (whatever are it is Principles
and Doctrine, before hinted; yet) does i^ fact and practice not only strip the
Presbyters of those P^st^ral Powers, but reduces them to a degree of Subjection
and Servility, scarce fit to be mentioned. For, as to Ecclesiastical Censures,
these (it is said) are entirely managed in the Bishops Court, without the
Concurrence, or so much as Knowledge many times, of the Presbyters, ^ver those
more immediately concerned in the Case. The Bishop does not ordinarily so much
as consult with them about the matter. Nay, he turns it over to a Lay
Chancellor, and other Officials of that Court, who have not any inherent and
proper Ecclesiastical Authority, but are deputed by the Bishop; and whose Acts,
though they always run in the Bishop's Name, yet are not always pass^d with the
Bishop's Consent: but however must be submitted to, and complied with by the
Clergy, who are in a manner only the Bishop's Curates, and divested of all
their share in the Government. -- And then as to the Sacraments, the Power of
these is not so lodged with the Presbyters, as that they may administer them to
those Subjects, and in that Manner, which their own Judgment directs 'em to;
but if they go to pursue this, they expose themselves many times to great
Inconveniences, as the History of SIXTY-TWO very loudly testifies. -- Hence,
when my Animadverter affirms, Presbyters had originally the Powers both of
Sacraments and Censures, He asserts a Truth, that casts no little Reproach on
the Practice of his own Church, as well as gives an oblique Stroke, fatal to
his Cause. -- And now as to what he observes, in the last place. That Diocesan
Bishops, in whom the Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction over a Plurality of
Presbyters and Churches were annexed, were settled by the Apostles, in their
respective Sees; for Evidence of which he alleges the Instances of Timothy, and
Titus, and the Apocalyptical Angels, and refers us to his Defense of the Modest
Proof: I shall make no Observations upon it, but leave the Remarker to say how
fully he has made this to appear.

II. HAVING thus adjusted the first Preliminary, I pass now to the Second,
which concerns the Nature of the Gift conferred in Ordination; where he affirms
that thereby is unquestionably meant the Office and the Power whereby to
discharge it, and not the Holy Ghost. Upon which I shall not enter into any
Controversy with Him, but taking him in his own way, will pass it over, with
only two or three Reflections.

IN the first place, I think, the Gentleman delivers his Opinion with too great
an Air of Assurance, as if it were unquestionable; when he does or may know,
that some of the greatest Doctors of his own Church are against Him. Thus Dr.
Hammond paraphrases on 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the Gift that is in Thee etc.
i. e. Make use of those Gifts, which in order to thy Function were given thee
at thy Ordination --. And Dr. Whitby calls the Charisma here mentioned, a
Spiritual Gift, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, an extraordinary Gift, conferred
only in those Times, by the Hands of an Apostle, and now wholly ceased. [ See
his Notes on 1 Timothy 4.14. and 2. Tim 1.6] Notwithstanding (as he observes, on
Act. 8.15.) This may well be deemed a fit Pattern for Bishops to follow in the
Apostolical Rite of Confirmation and Ordination by laying on of Hands; by which
THEY, as Successors of the Apostles, CONFER the ordinary Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, as the Apostles did the extraordinary Gifts of the same Spirit. Thus you
see both these learned Expositors thwart my Animadverter; and yet he lays down
his Opinion as unquestionably certain.

BUT in the second place, I would observe, As he is too sanguine and dogmatical
in his Assertions, so he is too loose and careless in his Language upon this
Point. What crude and uncouth (not to say, criminal and profane) Expressions
are those; when, speaking of the HOLY GHOST (a Divine Person) he says, Its
Influences are conveyed by its glorious AUTHOR, -- and -- Its self must flow
from the Fountain of it! -- These, I suppose, are Errata, that cannot be charged
to the Account of the Printer: or, I admire they should escape the critical
Corrector's Eye.

IN the last place, we may observe the Impertinence of the Reason He here
assi^ns for his Opinion, That by the Gift mentioned is not meant the Holy
Ghost; viz. Because This never was, nor is it possible to be, in the Power of
Man to bestow. For He had no manner of Occasion, from my Discourse on this
Head, to make any such Remark, since I never asserted such a Power (in his
Sense) to be in the Apostles, or any others: neither do I believe it ever was,
or is possible to be, in the Heart of any Man, to imagine such a Thing; unless
Simon Magu^ may go for an Instance of such Whimsy and Distraction. -- And then,
It is a Reason that may be easily turned upon Himself, and will be as valid an
Objection against his Interpretation of the Gift mentioned, i. e. The Office
and the Power whereby to discharge it. So that here in effect he does but c^ff
his own Ears. -- To set this in its just Light, let us for once admit the
Hypothesis of the Divine Right of Prelacy; and apply what the Gentleman says,
to the Office of Bishops, (which I the rather choose to do, because Timothy the
Person receiving the Gift mentioned, is voted a Prelate) and by his own way of
arguing, it will appear, that every authorized Bishop derives his Office and
Power from our blessed Lord Himself, and not from his Ordainers. For though
indeed in the Conveying of it, Means and Instruments are made use of, and He is
solemnly consecrated to it by Fasting and Prayer, with Imposition of Hands; yet
no Creature, in a proper sense, can be said to confer it. And therefore when
any speak of the Bishops conferring Orders, or of their consecrating any to the
Episcopate, it must not be understood as if they did actually bestow it: their
Action indeed is the Conduit of its Conveyance, but its self must flow from the
Fountain of it. -- I cannot but think our Animadverter is of opinion, That
Bishops are commissionated immediately by their great Lord and Master; or, that
it is He who gives the Power by His Commission (the same that was given to the
Apostles, the first Bishops) and that no Creature on Earth is nor can be a
Principal Cause, or authoritative Donor, and Efficient in that Case: but that
the Electors only determine the Person or Recipient, and the Ordainers only
invest him, and solem^ize his Entrance into his Office. The Apostolical
Commission is what this Gentleman himself calls the Original Charter, and so
allows to be the Fundamentum Juris, the Scource and Measure of the Bishop's
Right and Power: who claims by this, and acts upon it. And hence they that
consecrate Him, are but Ministerial Deliverers of Possession; are but the
Channels of Conveyance, and not the immediate Fountains of the Power vested in
Him. He derives this from a higher Original, from the Magna Charta, the grand
Charter of CHRIST; as the Mayor of a Town-Corporate derives all his Authority
from the King's Charter, which upon his Election authorizes and obliges him to
the Execution of his Office, instituted and described in the Charter; Though this
directs also to a public and solemn Instalment of Him; before which he is not
to exercise Authority, nor claim Obedience: and yet the Mayor's Power
originates wholly from the Royal Charter. Even so the Bishop's Power must draw
it is Origin wholly from Christ's Charter: and if they that consecrate him to
his Office, do pretend to confer it upon Him, it is as if the Recorder, who
installs my Lord Mayor, should feign himself the Fountain or Donor of the
Majoral Power; which would be unpardonable Arrogance in him, equal to the
intolerable Ignorance, which any one would betray, that should credit him. --
These Thoughts, I Am persuaded, cannot but be very agreeable to one of my
Animadverter's Genius; so warm an Assertor of Episcopal Dignity! For, as our
Lord said to the Pharisees, Ye Fools and Blind! Whether is greater, the Gift,
or the Altar that sanctifies the Gift? So say I, Whether is greater, Human
Ordination, or Christ's Commission, that alone enforces it? And, which reflects
most Luster on our Bishops, to say, Their Authority is of Men, or that it is of
God; from their Imposition of Hands, or from the Charter of CHRIST; Judge ye.
-- However, if any one will insist upon an external visible Commission given by
the Ordainers, is the immediate Principle and Support of Prelatical Power, He
shall not have me at present for his Adversary. For, as the Apostle said to the
Corinthians, These Things, Brethren, I have in a figure transferred to my Self
and Apollo; Even so I have used such a Scheme o^ Speech, in arguing with my
Animadverter, to gild over the Pill, that it might go down with more ease, and
work with efficacy. And I hope I have said enough to make him sensible, that he
has built his Opinion (about the Gift mentioned) on a weak and sandy
Foundation. -- Though as to the Opinion it self, I suspend; and it shall be no
matter of Contest between us at present. But I Will now dismiss the Second
Preliminary, and come to the Third and Last.

III. AND here I fully agree with him, That the Apostles were not mere
Presbyters [in the modern Sense] but were vested with proper Episcopal Powers,
even the Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction. And I further grant, that they
had some sort of Influence and Inspection over the Presbyters and the Churches
too; yea, and over his supposed Prelates likewise.

BUT then ^o adjust this Preliminary, I must add an Observation or two. As,

(1.) THAT the Episcopal Powers mentioned, were not peculiar to the Apostles,
but common to all Pastors or Presbyters: As plainly appears from what I have
said above, and have further to offer. And then it must be observed, --

(2.) AS to the Superiority over Presbyters, ascribed to the Apostles, it is
granted by me only in a restrained and qualified Sense. Here,

First. I would not be understood to assert a Superiority of proper imperative
Prelatical Power, founded in any peculiar Office or Commission held by Them;
but a directive or declarative Power; Whereby they had a Right to instruct
Presbyters in the revealed Truths and Laws of the Gospel, and inculcate their
Duty upon them, to rebuke the Scandalous and Heretical, to pronounce 'em (if
impenitent) unworthy of their Office, and warn the People to avoid them etc.
But as to any proper Imperial, Judicial, and Coercive Power over Them, I cannot
find any Footsteps of it, either in the Acts or Letters of the Apostles; nor
any Foundation for it, either in their Commission, or in any Rules of Reason.
So that I cannot at present but conceive of the Apostles as being in relation
to the Christian Church, and the Pastors of it, very much what the inspired
Prophets in former times were to the Jewish Church and its ordinary Teachers.
But however, --

Secondly. I would have it observed, that whatever governing Power the Apostles
might have over Presbyters or ordinary Pastors and the Churches. (Yea admit, if
you will, it amounted even to a proper Legislative and Compulsive Power) yet I
do not suppose it to be Successive, or derived to Those who succeed the
Apostles; and that for this Reason, -- Because Such a Power must be founded in
their extraordinary Mission and Inspiration, and could not be any part of their
ordinary and standing Character, or belong to them in that Capacity, wherein
only they are allowed to have Successors. -- I have had occasion to say
something before, that might suffice for the Proof of This. But I will add, for
the further Clearing of it, this Observation, That the Apostles ordinary
Capacity was SINGLE, and but one; or such as wherein they could represent but
one Kind of Church-Ruler, and that is a Parish Rector or Pastor of a particular
Congregation, and not the Diocesan Bishop. Which I shall essay to prove, in
such a Gradation of Thought, as will make it Mathematically evident: and for
the better Distinction, I will make use of Ordinal Numbers, in laying down my
Propositions, which are these.

1. THE Apostolical Commission is the grand Charter for the Evangelical
Ministry. This we have heard our Animadverter already confessing. Therefore,

2. THE whole Complex of Apostolical Power, in the ordinary and permanent
Branches of it, was included in that one Commission. And,

3. THE Ministerial Powers, contained in that Commission, were by the Apostles
preserved undivided, and delivered without any Limitations, to all the
Recipients of it. As I Have proved in Appendix to Sob. Rem. (Vid. p 32 -- 36.)
which my Respondent having not taken notice of, nor brought any thing to
invalidate the Arguments there offered, this Conclusion appears to me still
very well grafted on solid Reasons.
Hence,

4. THEY to whom this Commission truly belongs, are actually invested with all
the Powers given in it. Now,

5. THOSE who are invested with one Commission, in all the Powers of it, must
be of one and the same Order or Kind. Therefore,

6 AS the Apostles Commission was but one, so their ordinary Capacity was but
one, and such as in which they could represent but one kind of Church-Ruler. Q.
E. D.

And now --

7. THIS Church-Ruler is not the Diocesan Bishop, but the Congregational
Bishop, or Presbyter: As will appear, if we duly weigh things. For consider, in
the next place,

8. THE Government of Prelates and that of Presbyters are two Sorts of
Government. This the Defender of the Mod. Proof takes notice of, page 21.
Hence, in the

9th place, THE Prelatical Bishop, and the Parochial, are two distinct Species
of Officers. And consequently, in the

10th place, THEY cannot both subsist on one and the same Commission, nor could
the Apostles represent them both in their ordinary Capacity: but one or the other
must necessarily be excluded. But now, in the

11th place, WE are agreed on all sides, that Congregational Bishops, or
Presbyters, do act in the discharge of their Office, by virtue of the
Apostolical Commission, and by it are vested with the Powers of Preaching, and
of Sacraments and Censures. To this we have a repeated full Confession from the
Animadverter. And hence, in the

12th place, PRESBYTERS have a just Claim to all the Powers contained in that
Commission, (according to Prop. 3 and 4) and must be voted Successors to the
Apostles in the whole of their ordinary Capacity. Which, by an unavoidable
Consequence, infers, (agreeable to Prop. 8.9. and 10th.) in the --

LAST place, That Praelatical Powers were not comprehended in the Apostles
ordinary Capacity, nor the Episcopal Throne erected upon the Apostolic
Commission: and so the Diocesan Claim must fall to the ground. For though
Praelates are not excluded by Name (to allude to an Observation of our
Answerer's -- Def. page 65) Yet they are, by the Nature of Commissions; all
Commissions being exclusive of all but those to whom They are granted.

Thus I have impartially weighed the Gentleman's three Preliminaries, adjusted
'em, and corrected the undue Turn of Though It, which his Discourse upon them might
tend to give such as are looking into this Controversy: and hope I have left
him no Room to raise any more Dust, on these Topics, to cloud and darken them.

I proceed now to consider what he has advanced on two or three Texts, which he
would have the World believe I have mistaken and misapplied: and by setting of
which in their true Light, he says, all that I have offered, will be fully
replied to. He resolves now to take bold on the Impartial Hand, if it is not
too nimble or ill-natured to be taken in its own way. Well, let him take what
Hold he pleases, (where and how he will) I hope the Impartial Hand will be
nimble enough to manage him; and that without being so ill-natured as to offer
any foul Play. Let unprejudiced Standers-by judge between us. To begin then,

1. THE first Text he mentions, is 2 Timothy 1 6. (which speaks of the putting on
of Paul 's Hands) But is the wrong Text: it should have been 1 Timothy 4.14. which
speaks of the Laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery.

AND here the Gentleman, in an Excess of good Nature, (shall I say? or through
the force of Conviction) is willing to take me in my own way, by condemning
Calvin 's Institutes [tho' in so doing, as it unhappily falls out, he condemns
his own Defense of Mod. Proof, (page 28.) which interprets the word Presbytery,
of the Office transferred on Timothy, at his Ordination by St. Paul's own
Hands,] and admitting my Comment on the Text, viz. That Timothy was ordained by
a College of Presbyters. But then, he tells me I must grant also, that those
Presbyters were either Apostles, or mere single Presbyters, and Paul presiding
among them in either case.

IF the First, then he concludes, his Point is gained; for (says he) the
Apostles were not only Presbyters, but Bishops also in the full and strictest
Sense of the word, by the third Preliminary; and this will save the Credit and
the Evidence of the first Epistle to Timothy for Episcopacy, and be exactly
agreeable to the practice of the Church of England.

To which I answer,

1. THAT, by Presbytery here, to understand a number of Apostles, joining with
Paul, in the Ordination of Timothy, is very irrational. It Is an Exposition
entirely Conjectural, and carries not the least shadow of Probability with it.

FOR (besides other Reasons) it is extreme unlikely that Paul should bestow on
a College of Apostles no higher Denomination than this of a Presbytery: and
then (agreeably to what I observed in Append. to Sob. Rem. page 18. -- though my
Animadverter has made no Return to me upon it) it is equally improbable, that
Paul (so humble an Apostle) should have the Vanity to distinguish himself from
his Brethren, and exalt himself above them, in the manner our Opponents make
him to do, by the Sense they put upon 2 Timothy 1.6. where they suppose him to
affirm, That Timothy was ordained by the Laying on of His Hands; as if it were
his Sole Act, and the whole Virtue and Efficacy flowed from his Hand. Which if
it be true, I cannot imagine Them to be Apostles, that are meant by the
Presbytery: For the Apostles were all equally vested with ordaining Power: And
it would not be consistent with the usual Modesty and Humility of this
Apostle's Language, in all other Cases, when speaking of Himself, for him to
use such a Speech in this Case, as excludes the Rest of his Brethren from any
share in the Ordination of Timothy; which must be judged very vain, as well as
false.

However,

2. ADMIT that by the Presbytery is meant a College of Apostles, yet my
Animadverter is very short in his Reasoning, and labors of a grand Mistake,
when he concludes his Point to be gained thereby: nor will that Concession at
all hurt the Presbyterian Claim and Argument from the Text under Consideration.

FOR thus I argue upon the present Hypothesis: These Apostles acted in
Timothy's Ordination, either in their ordinary or extraordinary Capacity. Not
in their extra-ordinary; for then it affords no Example or Argument for
Ordination by ordinary Officers. Whereas, on all sides it is allowed and
pleaded as a sufficient Warrant for Ordination by ordinary Officers: --
therefore it was their ordinary Capacity in which they ordained. And hence they
who succeed the Apostles in their whole ordinary Capacity, must be entitled to
the Power of Ordination.

NOW here lies the Difficulty, to know who are their proper Successors: which
can be determined only by inquiring what the Apostles in their ordinary
Capacity were; what Powers they had, and what Acts they did. And for our
Information here we must look into their Commission, and into their History:
both whereof have been already consulted; and it appears from them, That the
Apostles, considered in their ordinary Capacity, were only Presbyters. This has
been made evident from the Accounts of Fact and the Practice of the Apostles:
And it is a most genuine Deduction from the original Charter, given them by our
Lord, that describes their Work, in the superior and main permanent branches of
it, and prescribes nothing expressly but what is the allowed and undoubted Duty
of ordinary Ministers or Pastors: which affords a strong presumptive Argument,
that the Apostles, in their ordinary and abiding Character, were really but
Presbyters. Therefore all those who are truly ordained to the Office of
Presbyters, do succeed to the Apostles in the full Extent of their ordinary
Capacity, and are to be looked upon as invested with the Plenitude of their
ministerial and continuing Powers: One of which being Ordination, this
necessary Inference plainly arises, and forceably urges our Assent, That
Presbyters have the Ordaining Power committed to them, and lodged in their
Hands, as their Peculiar, exclusively (in common Cases at least) of all others
not rightly ordained to the Office of Presbyters, and so not truly sustaining
the ordinary Character of the Apostles. -- Upon the whole then it appears, We
offer no Injury at all to the Plea for Presbyterian Ordination, taken from the
Laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, although we allow this to refer to a
Company of Apostles: Because it must be granted, if they were Apostles, They
ordained by virtue of their ordinary Power, which I Have proved amounted to no
more than that of Presbyters.

INDEED my Animadverter tells us, The Apostles were not only Presbyters, but
Bishops also in the full and strictest Sense of the Word. To which I reply; If
he intends here the sound Sense of the Word, as used in Scripture, I have
nothing to object. But, I think, invincible Objections lie in the way, if he
intends the modern Ecclesiastical Sense of the Word. For, thus taken, it is
applicable to none but Diocesan Prelates; whom the Animadverter describes (
page 10.) as those that have in them the Power of Ordination, and Jurisdiction
over a Plurality of Presbyters, and Churches, annexed, and are settled in their
respective SEES. Now I desire to know whether He will apply this Definition to
the Apostles, and so make them Bishops in the full and strictest Sense of the
Word, as used by the Moderns. And after he has resolved us on this head, I must
give him the further Trouble of producing some good Evidence, that the modern
Ecclesiastical Use of the Word is agreeable to the Scripture-Sense of it:
Because for my own part, after my best Inquiries I cannot light of any one
place in all the New Testament, where the word is used in the modern Prelatical
Sense, to mean a Church Officer vested with Jurisdiction over a Plurality of
Churches and their Pastors: but find it every where necessarily to be
understood in the Presbyterian Sense, as convertible with the word Pastor,
Teacher, Elder etc. Yea, the Names of Bishop and Presbyter are promiscuously
applied to the same Persons, in several places: which Persons do, by the
Description of their Essential Qualifications, and by the Works and Offices
assigned 'em, in those places, evidently appear to be the Pastors and Overseers
of particular Congregations: As the Remarker has excellently argued; whose
Reasonings on these Heads are (I think) the most clear and strong that I ever
met with, and do make the Inference from a Community of Names (in this case) to
an Identity of Office, and from the undistinguished Applications of the same
Character and indifferent Injunctions of the same Work, unto the Sameness of
Order, appear very good and genuine. And I presume, neither the Light of his
Arguings is obscured, nor the Force of his Consequences at all enervated, by
any thing the Defender of the Mod. Proof has been able to offer.

WE may then allow the Apostles to be Bishops, in the full and strictest Sense
of the Word, as used in Scripture, and yet our Animadverter gain no Advantage
by it; because that is but to allow 'em to be Presbyters: seeing Bishop and
Presbyter are in Scripture-Use Synonimous.

YEA, we may call 'em Bishops in the modern Ecclesiastical Sense, as having
Jurisdiction over Presbyters and Churches; and yet the Gentleman will gain
nothing by it, to serve the Cause of Prelacy: because such a superintending
Power could not belong to Them, in their ordinary Capacity, merely as stated
Commission-Officers; but must be exercised by them in their extraordinary
Capacity, as Divinely inspired Ministers, under an infallible Conduct of the
Holy Ghost, and endowed with Supernatural Powers. [Which I have said enough to
prove, both in the Appendix, and in this Vindication.] Therefore although we
should grant T^^y were Apostles, and such only, that ordained Timothy; yet no
Conclusion can be drawn from this, in favor of Prelatical Ordinations,
exclusively of Presbyterial. For the Apostles (supposed) Power of Jurisdiction
over Presbyters, and their offered Power of Ordination, did not belong to Them
under the same Nation, but were exercised by them in two different Capacities;
the former, in their Extraordinary Capacity, and so must be voted a temporary
and distinct^ve part of Their Character: but the Latter, in their Ordinary
Capacity, according to which They were Bishops, in no other than a Presbyterian
Sense; and so the Power of Ordination, which was one of the common and
permanent Parts of their Character, must be adjudg'd to Presbyters, who succeed
them in the whole of their ordinary Capacity. And indeed the Ordaining Power of
Presbyters receives a great deal of Countenance from the Style of our Text,
where this supposed College of Apostles are denominated a Presbytery, which
plainly hints their acting (in Timothy's Ordination) under the Character and
Quality of Presbyters. And however light any may make of an Inference, from the
Use of that Phrase, in favor of Ordination by Presbyters; yet (as I observed
in the Appendix, page 19.) at least there is so good Color for such an
Inference, that if it had been said, By the Laying on of the Hands of the
Assembly of Bishops, I doubt not, our Opponents would have made great
Improvement of it, would have deemed the Text Conclusive, and a full
Confutation of the Presbyterian Hypothesis. -- But however that be, it is clear
from the Premises, that our Animadverter must lose his Point, even though we take
him in his own way, by admitting his Comment on the Text, That Timothy was
ordained by a College of Apostles: And if the Credit and the Evidence of the
first Epistle to Tim. for Episcopacy, depends on this Text, that is lost too.

IN short, let him consider the Text in what Light he pleases; whether as
referring to Apostles, or to ordinary Ministers, he will never be able, by the
most finished Artifice in Logic he is Master of, to wrest it to his purpose;
but either way it will be the Confusion of his Cause. Let him torture the Text
ever so much, I am persuaded, ^e'll never make it confess to his Notions. As
for the First Sense, enough has been said.

LET us now hear what he offers, with respect to the other Construction.

IF the Second, says he, (that is, if the word Presbytery be taken for a number
of Pastors or Parish-Presbyters, then It is plain, that Paul alone conferred
the Gift, that is, the Office and the Power of executing it, -- and that the
Presbyters only gave their Assent, it being impossible in the nature of the
thing, that the Presbyters could have any other Influence on the Act.

BUT let it be observed here: The Gentleman has forgot (what I intimated in the
Appendix, and what many learned Men do agree to, viz.) That it is probable,
Paul's putting on of his Hands was not in Conjunction with the Presbytery, but
at a distinct Time, and upon a different Design; his Imposition of Hands being
in order to the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and theirs for Ordination, and so might
be at several Times. Or, as I hinted in the Appendix (p. 9.) They might both
respect Ordination, and yet not be at the same Time; if our Opponents be in the
Right on it about Reordination. For so, Timothy might be ordained first a
Presbyter by the Presbytery alone, and afterward a Bishop by Paul. And if my
Animadverter had given us his Thoughts on this, He would have much obliged us.

HOWEVER, I will take the Gentleman in his own way, and will suppose them to be
at the same Juncture, and upon the same Occasion. Yet, I trust, this will not
any whit d^sserve my Cause.

AS to Paul's presiding in Timothy's Ordination, if this must be affirmed in
either Case, as the Animadverter observes; I would observe further, It must be
owned o^ equal weight in both Cases, and so may as well be made use of in
Objection to Ordination by Bishops (the Apostles pretended Successors) without
a Superior, as against Ordination, by Presbyters, without a Superior. -- But, I
think, Paul's Presidency in either Case, imported no more than the Power and
Province of a Moderator, appointed for Order's sake. In the first Case, or upon
Supposition They were Apostles, who joined in Laying on of Hands, I am prone to
believe my Animadverter will ascribe nothing more to Him, seeing They all had
an inherent Power of ordaining as well as he. And why any more should be
ascribed to him in the other Case, or supposing them to be Presbyters, I cannot
divine. For, that Paul laid on Hands (under his common Notion) as a Presbyter,
and not under any distinctive Character, as a superior Officer, or Head, is a
Consequence very fairly deducible from the chosen Style of the Text; where he
speaks of the whole Consistory of Ordainers, as a Presbytery, taking in Himself
among the Rest, without any mark of Distinction: which, as it carries with it
an Intimation, that all the Members of the Body had a proper Agency in the
Ordination; So it naturally leads us to infer, That Paul exerted no more
ordaining Power than any common Member, and had not the Influence of a supreme
Head, as some vainly dream. And indeed, if I mistake not, the fixed notion of a
President (the Name, my Animadverter applies to the Apostle in this Case) can
carry his Power to no higher a pitch than that of a Moderator, who (as I hinted
before) is constituted only for order's sake, and has no more intrinsic Power
than any others belonging to the Society.

I might illustrate this to our Animadverter, by the Consecration of a Bishop
in his own Church: in which the Archbishop presides, but yet is only the Mouth
of the Assembly, and has no more authoritative Influence into the Ordination
(by any superior Degree of ordaining Power inherent in him) than the Rest of
his Fellow-Bishops, that join with him in the Action; as appears by the Form of
Consecration of Bishops, and in that the Archbishop claims no Superiority of
order to other Prelates, nor indeed any superior Degree of Power, as of Divine
Right, but as arising only out of Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws and Customs.
And hence, in that Case, the Practice of the Church of England is exactly
agreeable to the Practice of the Churches of New England, in the ordination of
a Minister; in which we have a Moderator to preside, who is of the same Class
with the other Pastors.

SO that Paul's Presidency in Timothy's Ordination, can afford our Opponents
nothing of an Argument to plead against Presbyterian Ordinations. And truly (to
borrow a Hint from the Remarker) That gives us no more grounds to suspect that
the Presbyters had not full power and authority to ordain by themselves, than
it does to suspect whether the Apostle had power to ordain by himself. At least
it can be no more an objection against Ordination by Presbyters alone (without
Bishops) than by Bishops alone, without Presbyters. And yet how constantly is
this practiced in the Church of England, in all Consecrations to the
Episcopate! Here only the Archbishop, and Bishops present, are concerned* no
mere Presbyters are admitted to join. But how disagr^eable this, to Scripture
Example, in the Consecration of Timothy, the supposed Bishop of Ephesus? Indeed
my Animadverter observes, if they were Apostles, who laid their hands with
Paul's on Timothy, this will be exactly agreeable to the Church of England. --
But then, he has been so uncautious, as nor to offer one single word in proof,
that they were Apostles; nor indeed has he so much as asserted it: but seems
willing to allow, they were only Presbyters; as I had argued, and I think,
proved. Hence he has left the way open for one or other of those Consequences
to take place, that I have pursued his Friend with (in my Appendix, p. 10, 11)
either of which, I think, grate hard enough on him. Though I imagine he judges the
last to be the most harmless, viz. That the Church of England has departed from
Scripture-Pattern, in excluding Presbyters from laying on hands in the
Ordination of Bishops; whence her Prelates must be owned not Regularly
consecrated; and so far at least She must look uncanonical and unprimitive,
notwithstanding her boasted Apostolic Constitution.

BUT now to proceed; the great Objection, bro't by my Animadverter (and
pompously set forth, as what he lays peculiar Stress upon) is taken from its
being impossible in the Nature of the thing, that Presbyters should have any
other Influence on the Act, than only to give their Assent. -- This, I must
confess, has two Circumstances to recommend it, -- Novelty and Singularity.
It Is of a very fresh Date, a perfectly new Thought, a Proprium (too) of our
Animadverter's; and he shall be allowed the (...) Ho^cu^ o^ it. But then it is
only a S^^^, which can never sa^e up his Hypothesis: a mere Metaphysical
Cobweb, which the ^ullest Eye may easily see through; an airy Bu^ble, and the
slightest Touch will dash it to nothing. I ^eel but repeat his own Words,
mutato nomine, c^anging Presbyters into Apostles or Bishops; and he must be an
Ign^ramus indeed, who does not see, or intolerably wilful who will not own, that
the Objection carries as much Force in the one Case, as in the other; though
indeed in both Cases, it is manifestly big with Absurdity, and must needs sink
and perish under its heavy Burden -- Well, with that Alteration, the Argument
runs thus:

IF the Gift conferred was the Holy Ghost, ( which by the way I do not grant,
says my Animadverter; and which by the way, say I, was never asserted by me,
concerning the Gift spoken of in 1 Timothy 4.14. as conferred with the Laying on of
the Hands of the Presbytery: So that the Gentleman is very much out for once,
when he pretends ^ere to take me in my own way.) and if Paul alone did not
confer it, then every single Apostle or bishop did that as well He: and hence
it will follow, that the more ordaining Apostles or Bishops there were, the
more of the Holy Ghost did the ordained receive. And in that Case, who would
not have coveted to be ordained by an ecumenical Council of them, and with
such vast Collations of it such a Person might be fitted also to be Pastor of
the ecumenical Church; and in proportion, those who had fewer Ordainers, had
fewer shares in this Gift of the Holy Ghost, and proportionably would be of
less use to the Church.

OR, if by Gift be understood the Office and the Powers for its Execution, as
seems most evident, then if Paul did not alone cons^^ it, it will follow that
each ordaining Apostle or Bishop conferred a Part, or the Whole of this Gift.
If a Part, it would gratify the Public to condescend upon (alias, instance in)
what Part, or (say) how many there must be to make up the Whole. If each
Ordaine^ conferred the whole Gift, then in proportion to their Number, must the
Offices be multiplied; and then instead of one, there might be a Dozen or more
Offices conferred, according to the member of Ordainers.

THUS you see the Animadverter's Argument most unluckily recoils in his Face,
and turns its Sting into his own Bosom For nothing can be more evident than, if
any Absurdities flow f^^m my Construction of the Word Presbytery, that the very
some absurd Consequences must inevitably be charged on his too. And how
extremely silly (it I may retort his own decent Language) must He be, who makes
use of such a Way of Arguing to put by another's Comment on a Text, (as if
there he any force at all in it) may with equal force be made use of in
opposition to his own.

BUT that there is no Force at all in his Reasoning here, affix what Sense you
please to the controverted Word, (take it either for Apostles, or for ordinary
Presbyters) will very plainly appear, i^ we consider the Nature of the Action.
Now if my Animadverter will take the Opinion of the Author of the M^d. Proof
(which, methinks, ought to carry some Authority with him, since he has
undertaken to be his Defender) be may find that modest Gentleman expressing his
Sense of the Matter, in terms very agreeable, in the 12th page o^ his Book;
where he observes that this Ceremony of Prayer and Imposition of Hands was
usual in designing and appointing Persons to any sacred Office, in separating,
in setting apart, and investing them --; all which Phrases he makes use of.
Whereas there is nothing here about conferring the Office and the Powers for its
Execution (according to the Animadverter's Notion) but only the Designation and
Investiture of the Person; which gives us the true Nature of the Action. For
that Power, which the Ordained receive, is not the Gift of their Ordainers, but
derives wholly from the Institution and Commission of CHRIST. Even the Apostles
themselves went no higher than a Ministerial Investiture or Separation. As
Doctor Willet (a learned Church of England Man) observes Synop. Papism. p. 199.
, The Apostles laid on their Hands in the ordaining of Bishops or Pastors, but
their Office they received of God: That external Rite was only an outward
Testimony of the Church, That such Men were marked and sealed of God, for that
Office. -- This was the outward Sign that God's Spirit had set such Men apart.
-- This is the outward Approbation and Consent of the Church, which gives them
not their Office, but only corfirmeth it outwardly unto Them. The Apostles gave
no Power or Jurisdiction to Pastors or Elders, but it was the Ordinance of God
--. And for Proof, he alleges 1 Timothy 4.14. and Acts 13.2. -- And concurrent
with this, is the Doctrine of a late Judicious Writer of the Established Church
of England, I mean Mr. Ollyffe, who thus gives the World his Thoughts on the
Case. -- The Call (says he) to the Ministry is from Christ, which he gives by
conferring an Ability for it, and Inclination to it. Ordination is the
Investiture into this Office before Men, by a Declaration or public approving
a Man to be a Minister; or is a solemn Allowance of his preceding Call and is
a Rite to give a Man the current Repute and Valuation of a Minister coram
Hominibus. -- His Call from Christ is his Commission coram Deo. Ordinatio
(says Amesius) nihil aliud est quam solennis Declaratio, ut Coronatio Regis et
Inauguratio Magistratus. -- Est solennis quaedam Introductio Ministri in ipsius
Functionis liberam Functionem. An Adjunct, consequent to his Call from Christ,
to make it current among Men. Thus that learned Divine. Vid. Def. Min. Conform.
Postscript. Page 128, 129.


AND conformable to the Opinion of these Episcopal Writers, is the Sense of the
Church of England itself in this Matter, as we have it declared in the Bock of
Ordination. The whole Tenor of the Preface speaks it very plainly: which makes
use of Consecration, and Ordination, as convertible and univocal Terms; and
describes an authorized Minister, to be such an one as has been first Called,
Tried, Examined, and Known to have such Qualities as are requisite; and also BY
public Prayer, w^^ Imp^sition of Hands, approved and admitted to his Office by
some lawful Authority. And if we look into the Forms themselves, we shall find
them all speaking the same Language. Thus particularly in the ordering of
Priests, the Bishop over and over recognizes the Person's Divine Call to the
Ministry, before he imposes Hands on him: And Ordination is there continually
spoken of in such Terms as only imply an Allowance of his preceding Call, and
solemn Admission of him to the public Exercise of the Office, which he has
already a Right unto, by his Divine Call. Indeed, at the Imposition of Hands,
our Savior's Words are repeated, Receive the Holy Ghost etc. But (if Bishop
Burnet's Account of the Matter may be accepted Vid. Pastor. Care. p. 95. Edit.
4.
) The Church, by making our Savior's Words the Form of Ordination, must be
construed to intend, that it is Christ only that sends, and that the Bishops
are only his Ministers to pronounce his Mission; otherwise it is not easy to
justify the use of this Form, Receive the Holy Ghost: which as it was not used
in the Primitive Church, nor by the Roman, till within these 500 Years, so in
that Church it is not the Form of Ordination, but a Benediction given by the
Bishop singly, after the Orders are given by the Bishop and the other Priests
joining with him: For this is done by him alone, as the final Consummation of
the Action. But our using this as the Form of Ordination, shows that we
consider ourselves only as the Instruments that speak in Christ's Name and
Words; in si^uating that He only ordains. Pursuant to this, in the ordaining of
Priests, the Questions are put in the Name of God and of his Church, which
makes the Answers to them to be of the Nature of Vows and Oaths. -- Orders are
of the Nature of a Covenant between Christ and the Clerks; in which so many
Privileges and Powers are granted on the one part, and so many Duties and
Offices are promised on the other Page 103.
. Ordination is the Consummation of this Compact Page 106.
. -- And from the same learned Hand, we have it; That the Forms of Ordination
in the Greek Church, which we have Reason to believe are less changed, and more
conform to the Primitive Patterns, than those used by the Latins, do plainly
import, that the Church only declared the Divine Vocation: -- The Grace of God
that perfects the Feeble, and heals the Weak, promoteth this Man to be a
Deacon, a Priest, or a Bishop. Where nothing is expressed as conferred, but
only as declared Page 95.
. So our Church (says the Bishop) by making our Savior's Words the Form of
Ordination, must be construed to intend --. Now as He observes Page 91.
, The truest Indication of the Sense of a Church, is to be taken from her
Language in her public Offices. And therefore I have made use of this way of
Reasoning, on this Occasion, and I hope it will appear with great Advantage,
and minister Conviction.

IT is plain, the Ordainers do not confer the Power, but only confirm, approve,
invest, and the like. They are at most but Instruments of Conveyance, or rather
of Confirmation and public Installment. As in Civil Cases, when the
Archbishop performs the Ceremony of Coronation* the King does not derive the
Regal Authority from Him in the least. So when my Lord Chancellor seals a
Patent, he gives no Power at all. So the Mayor of a City derives all his Power
from the Prince's Charter, and not at all from the Recorder or Steward, who
performs the Ceremony of Inauguration. Which Things may very, much help to
adjust and settle our Notions of Ecclesiastical Ordination: And we may call it
a public Recognition, and Attestation, or solemn Inauguration and Investiture.

THUS I have given you a rational Account of the Nature of Ordination, from
some of the Writers, and Public Formula's of the Church of England, and
illustrated the Matter by various Similitudes. I Have insisted on this Point the
longer, because my Animadverter's mistake about the Nature of the Action [as if
it were the Conferring an Office, and Giving the Powers for its Execution] is
what I apprehend to be the (...), the grand Fallacy in his Scheme. Do but
rectify this, and matters will come to Rights. Let him get this Notion once out
of his Head, and entertain those just Idea's that his own Church and his
Brethren have formed for him; and it must needs go a great way toward
convincing him, that Presbyters are capable and very proper Persons to perform
the business of Ordination: at least I Am persuaded, He Will never more imagine it
impossible for a Plurality to ordain together, nor ever again attempt to
demonstrate it to be so from the Nature of the Thing. For, what is there in the
Nature of the Action, as it has now been described, that should speak it
impossible to be performed by a Number of Persons in Conjunction? Where is the
Difficulty? Whence the Absurdity? Is it impossible for a Society to make one
Prayer, and one Declaration, and the like, together? I pray, why may not a
Community of Pastors separate and ordain a Minister, as well as a College of
Physicians approbate and license one of their Profession, as the known Custom
is!

BUT now for once I am willing to drop the Notion I have bee^ contending for,
and allow that the Ordainers do not merely recognize the Authority given by
Christ's Charter, but really confer the Office and the Powers for its
Execution, (as my Animadverter words himself) yet I cannot see but that This is
very reconcilable with a Plurality of Ordainers, It Is observable, When the
Deacons Office was instituted, and a Number of Persons appointed over this
Business, (as we read Act. 6.) all the Twelve Apostles concurred in it. And
among all the Ordinations we have an Account of, in the Acts of the Apostles, I
don't remember any Instance of Ordination but by a Plurality of Hands: which is
pretty wonderful, if it be so impossible for more than one particular H^nd to
convey the Power. -- But what a So oecism is this! How ridiculous the Notion,
if we apply it to other Ca^es! I fancy, the Roman Senate could grant a single
Commission as well as the Roman Emperor. And I pray, Could ^ot King William and
Queen Mary (or immortal Memo^y) give one Royal Charter in Conjunction^l Or, our
National Laws, are they not the Result of a numerous and mixed Legislature,
King, Lords, and Commons, being jointly the Enacting Power of the Nation! This
is the English Constitution: And is there any Absurdity in it! Is it impossible
in the Nature of the Thing, that such a Constitution should be acted upon! Or
will Mr. Animadverter say, the Supreme Power must necessarily be vested in the
sole Person of the Prince, and that there can be no proper Government but an
absolute Monarchy! I hope no Englishman among us, and at this time of day
especially, will advance a Principle, which if carried into it is just
Consequences, will appear so swelled with Reproach to the happy Revolution, as
well as a glaring Affront to the Wisdom of our Nation, and to the common Reason
of Mankind. -- Indeed I should not be much surprised, if my Animadverter should
espouse that Highflown Notion; since on the head of Ecclesiastical Ordination.
He is so very Chimerical in his Talk: pretending as not were demonstrable even
from the Nature of the Action, that if they were Presbyters, who laid their
Hands with Paul's on Timothy they could not do it as Ordainers, but it could be
only to express their Consent to the Action. Truly it is all over a Visionary
Flight, mere Amusement! You have seen, that there is nothing at all in the
Nature of the Action (take it in what View you will) to render it impossible
for a Plurality to ordain together: And consequently nothing to exclude the
Presbytery from having a Hand in Timothy's Ordination, as well as Paul.

BUT since the Gentleman is for an Argument from the Nature of the Action, I
must observe to him, that Imposition of Hands has always been looked upon as an
ordaining Act, and importing an ordaining Power, in the Person performing it.
Insomuch that it is commonly thought the Apostle expresses the whole Business
o^ Ordination by this sacred Rite, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay Hands suddenly on no Men.
And hence our Opponents urge this Text, in favor of Timothy's Episcopacy.
Which they would not do, if the Laying on of Hands were not judged an
invariable Rite of Consecration. And has not Dr. Cave (a learned Antiquary,
whose Authority with the true Sons of the Church, is become almost
indisputable) told us, That Imposition of Hands has been constantly used as the
Rite of conferring Ordination upon the Ministers of Christ! -- When, I pray,
was this Ceremony ever used only to express Assent to an Ordination? And would
our Animadverter allow mere Laymen to use this Ceremony, for that end! Which
perhaps they might innocently enough do, it it may be used at all for that end.
Methinks, had the Presbyters been mere Consenters, an audible Amen at the close
of the Apostle's Prayer, or giving the Right Hand to Timothy, after his
Ordination, would have sufficiently answered the End, without their Laying on
Hands with Paul, which (besides the needless Trouble to them) would be likely
to prove a Snare in future times, by leading Presbyters into bold Pretenses
under Color of a primitive Example. Hence we may well think the Apostle (that
wise Master Builder) would not have allowed the Presbyters to join with him in
Imposition of Hands, unless they had been really vested with the Power of
Ordination, as well as he: -- Agreeable to what I suggested in the Appendix,
(page 11, 12.) though my Respondent has not thought it worth his Notice. Neither
has he made any Remarks on my 13th page, where I have argued upon his own
Hypothesis of Paul's being the sole Ordainer (in Exclusion of the Presbytery)
That nevertheless this Text will not serve the Cause of Prelacy: Because that
from an Apostle's, to a Bishop's, assuming the whole Power in Ordination
(exclusive of the Presbyters imposing Hands with him) there is no rational
Inference, not so much as the face of one; Since Bishops pretend not to succeed
the Apostles in any other than their ordinary Capacity (in which also
Presbyters do equally succeed them) and Paul cannot reasonably be supposed to
have ordained in that Capacity, if the whole Virtue of the Act lay in the Touch
of his Hand. -- I must not enlarge here. Please to turn to the Appendix Page
13, 22, 23, 25, 29 etc.
, and I doubt not you may gather up very convincing Proofs, to support this
Argument.

BUT to bring the Dispute to an Issue; if we should let all the foregoing
Arguments pass for nothing, yet one thing I have to add, that must needs
silence my Animidverter: I mean the declared Sense of his own Church, which we
shall find to be full against Him, if we consult the Form of Ordination of
Priests. For thus run the Words at the laying on of the Hands of the Bishop,
and the Priests present -- Receive the Holy Ghost for the Office and Work of a
Priest in the Church of God, new committed unto Thee by the Imposition of OUR
Hands. -- You see there is a Plurality of Ordainers, and the Presbyters are
associated with the Bishop in the Action, as laying on their Hands for the same
End, without any Distinction. So that the Church of England her self looks on
the Presbyters, joining with the Bishop in laying on of Hands, as being active
or influential in the sacred Investiture; owns their ordaining Power, and does
not make their Concurrence with the Bishop such an insignificant Cipher, such
an impertinent Ceremony, as our Animadverter's Principles infer it to be. I
cannot then but look upon this Gentleman as flying in the face of his Mother
the Church of England, when he denis the ordaining Power of Presbyters; and as
loading his Fathers, the Bishops, with the Imputation of a grand Absurdity, in
their saying to the Priest ordained, -- Receive the Holy Ghost for the Work now
committed to Thee by the Imposition of OUR Hands; -- when he asserts it to be
impossible, in the Nature of the Thing, for a Plurality to have a joint
Interest or Instrumentality in the ministerial Conveyance of the Priests
Office. And how his Episcopal Brethren will relish it, I do not know: but this
I know, That they have just Grounds to resent it, as a very gross affront
offered 'em by him, in thus putting such a contemptuous Interpretation upon
their Concurrence with the Bishop, as if it were a needless and empty
Formality, and of no real Significancy, as to the matter of Ordination, any
more than if a number of Deacons joined, or than it so many mere Laymen put on
their unhallowed Hands. -- And now I leave him to the Correction of his
Brethren; who, if they should take him to Task, would perhaps use him with
greater Soverity than I care at present to do. -- But here let my Defense of
the first Text conclude: which, though it may have been longer than was
necessary; yet, I hope, not longer than will be profitable. What remains, shall
be studiously drawn into a narrower Compass.

2. I proceed now to the Vindication of the second Text, viz. Acts 13. begin.
Where we find Paul and Barnabas separated to their Ministry among the Gentiles,
by the Hands of certain Prophets and Teachers at Antioch.

NOW I took these Men to be Presbyters; and laid it down, That we have h^re an
Instance of Ordination by such as were neither Apostles nor Diocesans. But I
did not stand to prove their Character, because I thought there was enough
observed in the Sob. Remarks (page 116. Edit. 2.) to which my Performance was
designed as an Appendix; Enough, I say, to prevent all Cavils upon that head,
from any one that should undertake a proper Defense of the Mod. Proof.

BUT the Animadverter blows upon my Notion, and will not allow me the Supposition.
He tells us, The Assertion appears plainly false: While yet he has been able to
bring no better Evidence, than a bare Conjecture [purely his own too] which at
best can only conclude it possible to be so. And he says he cannot believe us,
when the Assertion appears plainly false. Truly he must be one of a very odd
Make, if he could: very few in the World have attained to believe what appears
to 'em plainly false. All that we desire, is, that he would believe us, when
the Assertion appears plainly true: As I hope it will in the present Case,
after I have considered the Proof he brings to make it appear false. Which we
have in these Words* -- For in that Text we find Persons there of a superior
Character to mere Presbyters, and yet only there said to be Prophets and
Teachers; for it is certain Paul and Barnabas were Apostles, and as such of a
superior Character to mere Presbyters, and no Reason can be given to question
it in the others, for Bishops not being always mentioned under the Title of
their highest Office and Order, it will not follow, that though sometimes named
under the Character of their lowest Order, that they have no higher; and
therefore it will follow, that if Paul and Barnabas were (notwithstanding their
being called there Prophets and Teachers) really Apostles or Bishops, that the
others were also really such, though with them also mentioned under inferior
Characters.

I have set down his Argument here at length, that you may see the whole Force
it carrys in Bar to my Character of those Ordainers: And I must confess, if he
had not put his Conclusion in such strong Terms (but instead of really were,
had said, might be) it would have been the most handsome Evasion that I ever met
with on this head. But that it is only an Evasion, a thin Sophism, and contains
nothing of solid Reason, I hope will (upon a cool debate of the Matter) appear,
even to his own impartial Reflections. Here then to put it in it is genuine
Light,

1. LET us try how this way of Reasoning will hold in other Cases of the like
Nature.

FOR Instance; Suppose the Government of the Colony of Rhode Island (which I
particularly mention, for a good Reason) were spoken of, and their Names set
down in some public Records; -- but all under the common Style of Magistrates
and Rulers: Would our Animadverter now, because he finds a Governor and
Deputy Governor among Them, hence conclude them all to be of such superior
Characters? How absurd! How ridiculous!

BUT a Scripture-Instance may perhaps be more agreeable. We have one in 1 Cor.
3.5. Where we find Paul and Apollos spoken of together under the general Name
of Ministers. Now it is certain, Paul was an Apostle, and as such of a superior
Character to a mere Presbyter; and yet is only said there to be a Minister. But
will my Animadverter add in this Case. -- and no Reason can be given to
question it in the other Person, though with him also mentioned under an
inferior Character! I hope he will not. For so he will dash against the Modest
Proof, which calls Apollo but a Pastor, and ranks him among those of the
inferior Order (Page 29, 30.) Unless then he will contend here with that Modest
Gentleman (as he calls him) he must own I Have brought a parallel Case, in which
his way of arguing is very lame and inconsequential. -- But I may mention
another Instance we have in Acts 15, which is still more clear and parallel, if
it be possible. We there read, that Paul, and Barnabas, and Judas, and Silas
were at Antioch together; and they are all called Prophets. Compare ver. 30.
and 32. -- This new comes up full to our Text. But will the Animadverter's way
of Reasoning bea^ in this Case? No verily^ For although Paul and Barnabas were
Apostles; yet the other two were not so. For, in the first place, observe the
Character they have ver. 22. Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders, with the
whole Church, to send chosen Men of their own Company, -- Judas and Silas,
chief Men among the Brethren. They belonged to the Eldership at Jerusalem, and
were only Presbyters, though of chief Note there. But if this does not satisfy, I
hope the Opinion of the Author of Modest Proof will: Where we find Judas and
Silas, by Name, spoken of as Two Presbyters, and called merely Ministers of the
Word and Sacraments, and ranked in the Order of the Seventy; said to be of a
distinct Office and Order, and inferior to that of the Apostles. (Page 14. and
38.)

THESE Instances may suffice to show how precarious, how ambiguous, and
illogical, the Animadverter's way of arguing is; since it will by no means
hold, when applied to other Cases of the like Nature. But we must excuse him;
for he has used the best Shift he could fine out: and obliged he was to invent
some very cunning and plausible Elusion, or else to give up his Cause!

AND now I might very fai^ly withdraw my Hand, and give over the Consideration
of this Text. For, the Business of Proof here is incumbent on my Animadverter,
he being upon the Affirmative Side, And since he has not been able to prove his
Assertion, my Negative stands good, and he cannot reasonably expect I should
labor in the Proof of it. However left my Silence here should be
misinterpreted, I will not decline the Task: for I don't despair of Success.

2. THEN, let us see if we cannot make it out, by some clear and pregnant
Proofs, that the Prophets and Teachers, who separated Paul and Barnabas, were
not Apostles nor Diocesans. This, I think, will appear very plain, and we shall
find enough to convince every impartial Inquirer, if we consider the Style of
the Text, or if we look into the Context.

(1.) LET us consider the Language of the Text, which runs thus, -- Now there
were in the Church that was at Antioch, certain Prophets and Teachers. In the
Original it is -- (...): -- which is capable of various Translations, and all
accommodable to my purpose. I shall not trouble you with all the different
Readings, but will single out two eminent Expositors among the Animadverter's
own Brethren, to give us the Critical Lection, I mean, Dr. Hammond, and Dr.
Whitby.

Dr. H. so renders it, -- Now there were Some in Antioch. BELONGING to the
Church that then was, Prophets and Doctors. -- That is, that then was at
Antioch, as I think the Rules of Construction do oblige us to explain it:
although the Doctor in his Paraphrase stretches the Sense, and takes in the
Churches of Syria of that Age, of which he supposes those Prophets and Teachers
to be Bishops. Which is a Construction I cannot devise what should lead him
into, but an odd Notion he was so fond of, as if Every City had a Bishop, and
could have no more than one. But I think, His critical Note, as I have
explained it, is preferrable to his Paraphrase, and carries abundantly more
rational Probability with it. For observe, among those Prophets and Teachers we
find Paul and Barnabas, who cannot with any color of Reason be called Bishops
of Syria. And then the phrase of the Text is such as speaks it to be a
particular Church, that those Persons are said to belong unto. For it is, the
Church, in the singular number; a particular Church; and must (by the most easy
and natural Interpretation) mean the Church at Antioch, which is mentioned
immediately before. Whereas, when Provinces and Countries are referred to, the
Plural Number is used. So we read of the Churches of Judea, the Churches of
Asia, the Churches of Galatia etc. And therefore it is very unlikely that the
Apostle should refer to the Churches of Syria, in our Text. But by comparing
this with other places of the like Importance, the Case will appear plainer.
Thus, 1 Cor. 1.2. (...) --. So in 2 Cor. 1.1 we have the same Words repeated.
Which are by the Doctor without any difficulty translated. To the Church which
is at Corinth. And why by the Church in our Text we should not understand, The
Church which is at Antioch, (notwithstanding a little Transposition of the
words in our Text) I know of no significant Reason. For ought I can see, the
Text may very well be read thus. -- Now there were certain Prophets and
Teachers belonging to the Church, that was in Antioch; or, There were Teachers
in Antioch, belonging to the Church then being, in that City. I may here allude
to some of my Animadverter's Expressions (in another place Def. p. 35.
) and say; -- The Sense will not suffer at all by this Translation; There is
nothing in the Original that hinders its being exactly so rendered; unless it
be the Cause of Episcopacy.

AND correspondent to my Reading is that of Dr. Whitby, who so translates it,
-- There were some Prophets and Teachers in Antioch belonging to that Church.
And he vouch^^ the learned Grotius for it.

IT appears then, in the Judgment of these great Men, that the Church spoken of
was that at Antioch; and it is agreed to by Dr. Hammond, that (whatever the
Church was) These Prophets and Teachers did BELONG unto it.

NOW it is a fixed and invariable Maxim, in our Opponents Scheme, -- But one
Bishop in a Church. -- Whereas, here is a Number of Teachers, belonging to one
and the same Church. Therefore they could not be Diocesan Bishops. And that
they were not in the strict Sense Apostles, or of equal Figure with Paul, the
inspired Doctor of the Gentiles, I believe my Animadverter himself (upon his
recollected Thoughts) will readily allow me. Surely he can have no Temptation
to suppose them Apostles or Prelates, save that he finds them laying on of
Hands: but this carries no Print at all of either Character; because it is an
Action we find performed by Presbyters (as I have shown before) in the
Ordination of Timothy, and in the Ordinations of his own Church.

BUT here enters in upon me an Objection, that seems to lie against the
Construction of our Text, given above, making those Prophets and Teachers to
belong unto the Church at Antioch: And we may imagine our Animadverter to be
laying it down thus, --

Obj. WELL but Paul and Barnabas were among those Prophets and Teachers. And
they cannot be said to belong to that Church, because Apostles: And therefore
it will follow that no more did the others.

To which I answer,

THAT, since the greater Part belonged to that Church, it makes no such
Alteration, as to hurt my Argument, although we should allow an Exception of one
or two out of the Number. Paul was an Apostle, and was so at that time, I
confess. But that Barnabas was an Apostle before his going with Paul to the
Gentiles, upon the Mission our Text relates to, I never yet could see any
sufficient Evidence. My Animadverter's Party indeed affirm it: but has he, or
they, proved it? No, (if I may borrow some of his own pretty Turns here) That
is an unusual method with the Writers on that Side; however, we cannot believe
them, when the Assertion appears plainly false as it does in this Case. For
before that Mission, we don't hear of Barnabas's doing any thing more than the
common Work of a Preacher. In the last Account we have of him, before that in
our Text, we find the CHURCH at Jerusalem SENDING him forth, that he should go
as fat as Antioch: who when he came there, exported them all; -- for he was a
good Man etc. Then, after he had preached to them awhile with good Success, he
departed to Tarsus for to seek Saul; and when he had found him, he brought him
unto Antioch. ( Acts 11.22 etc.) Now for the Reason and End of this, I will
refer my Animadverter to one of his own Brethren (Dr. Whitby) whose Paraphrase
on the place runs thus, -- Then departed Barnabas (from Antioch) to Tarsus, to
seek Saul, (perhaps that he being an Apostle might lay his Hands on some of
them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost, Acts 8.17.) And when he had found
him etc. -- Here we have this learned Prelatist hinting his Opinion, that
Barnabas at that time was not an Apostle. And if so, then only Saul is left,
appearing to be of that Character: and he is mentioned last. Barnabas begins
the Catalogue: and Saul finishes it, who might be placed after all, because (
He being an Apostle, and They only Prophets and Teachers) they did more
strictly and properly belong to the Church at Antioch, than He. However, I am
willing for the present to humor the matter, and take my Antagonist in his own
way, by admitting Barnabas to be an Apostle, before the Mission our Text
relates to: which will make two of the Prophets and Teachers spoken of,
Apostles. Nevertheless the greater Number still remains, who in a strict Sense
belonged to that Church, as the ordinary Teachers of it. And on that Account,
Barnabas and Saul might be mentioned under the Character they sustained in
common with Them: according to the known and allowed Practice of Men, in the
like Cases, who use to denominate the whole, from the Majority.

AND then, if we reflect a little, we shall find occasion to think it no such
Absurdity, though we reckon Barnabas and Saul among the Prophets and Teachers, AS
belonging then to the Church of Antioch. Let us hear Dr. Whitby's Thoughts upon
the Propriety of it, who thus vindicates his Reading of the Place, (which, as I
told you before, is) -- There were some Prophets and Teachers in Antioch,
belonging to that Church. He notes, -- And indeed Barnabas and Paul might well
be reckoned such; Barnabas being sent thither by the Church of Jerusalem,
(Chap. 11.22.) and He and Paul preaching there a whole Year (ver. 26*) and
being sent by that Church to Jerusalem, with their Alms. ( ver. 30.) -- And it
is to be observed, when they had completed their temporary Mission to preach
to the Gentiles, (that being the Work to which they were called, ver. 2.) they
then returned to Antioch, and gave an Account of it to the Church there,
declaring what they had done in Prosecution of it, Chap. 14.26, 27.

THESE Considerations, the learned Doctor judged to be a full Vindication of
his Reading; and do sufficiently show us, that it carries in it no such
Impropriety of Speech (as at first view one might be apt to imagine) although
according to it, Paul and Barnabas be reckoned among the Prophets and Teachers,
said to belong to the Church of Antioch.

NOW to sum up the Evidence: since the Whole might be denominated from the
Major Part, and especially since Barnabas and Paul might well enough be said
(in a manner) to belong to the Church of Antioch at that time; it follows that
their being Apostles can be no forceable Plea in Bar to the Doctor's Reading,
nor to my Argument grounded upon it. And thus we see, by a little Attention to
the Words of the Text, that those who separated Paul and Barnabas, were neither
Di^cesans nor Apostles. But further to strengthen the Argument,

(2.) LET us take a View of the Context; and see if we cannot trace their
Original, and fix their Character, by comparing Things a little.

IF we look back to Act. 8.1. we shall read of a great Persecution of the
Church at Jerusalem, by which They were all scattered abroad, except the
Apostles. And then in Chap. 11.19. we have this account, That they which were
scattered abroad, traveled as far as -- Ant^och, preaching the Word --. Now,
if we throw together a few Circumstances, it will appear highly probable, that
the Ministers, who separated Paul and Barnabas, were some of these dispersed
Disciples. For we find, by Act. 11.20. That Some of them which came down to
Antioch, were Men originally of Cyrene. And in our Text, Lucius (one of the
Ordainers) is expressly said to be a Cyrenean. Dr. Whitby therefore, by a very
just and easy Consequence, positively concludes him to be one of those that
then came down to Antioch. And as to Niger, he vouches Epiphanius for his being
one of the Seventy; and so probably one of the Dispersed from Jerusalem, who
are said to travel as far as Antioch, preaching the Word; some of whom were Men
of Cyprus: and accordingly Dr. Lightfoot conceives this Niger to be a Cypriot.
Finally, as to Manaen, our Text tells us, he was brought up with Herod the
Tetrarch, bred at Court: but turning Christian, he was persecuted with the
Rest; and it is likely was one of those that were scattered abroad by the
Persecution. -- Thus I have reduced it to a moral Certainty, or rational
Probability, that the three Ordainers were some of the Dispersion: and I think
it needs no further Scrutiny, to discover, that they were neither Prelates nor
Apostles, but Pastors and Ministers of the Word. -- This may suffice for the
Confirmation of my Point: and let not my Animadverter complain again, for want
of Proof on our side; until he is able to produce as probable Evidence in
favor of his own Assertion.

BUT perhaps he may start an Objection here and say,

WHAT though it be granted they were of those that were dispersed, and at that
time were but Presbyters! Yet this argues nothing; because they might
afterward be advanced to the Episcopate.

TO which I reply; --

THAT they could not all be Diocesan Bishops, I have proved before, when I
observ^^, that They all belonged to the Church of Antioch, and that our
Opponents Scheme allows of but one Bishop in a Church at the same time, And
now, --

THAT not so much as one of them was a Bishop (of such a Stamp) I hope will
appear to every one's Satisfaction, upon a considerate View of two things. Let
us,

First, Reflect on the forecited Story Acts 11.22 etc.
of Barnabas. We are told, the Church which was in Jerusalem sent forth
Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch: who when he came, -- exhorted
them all etc. Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus for to seek Saul: and when he
had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. -- But now what Need of this, if
there were already at Antioch, either Apostles, or a Prelate? Observe it, I
have before produced such Considerations, as carry in them a good force of
Argument, that They who separated Paul and Barnabas, were of the Number of
those who were scattered abroad by the Persection at Jerusalem, and who then
went down to Antioch; preaching the Word there: and that therefore at that time
they were but Presbyters. And now that they were not any of them advanced to
the Apostolate or the Episcopate, when Barnabas and Paul went to Antioch, seems
a rational Conclusion; for that otherwise Barnabas and Paul's going thither
must have been needless, as to any thing that peculiarly concerned the Work of
an Apostle, or the Office of a Bishop. But whatever may be the Strength of this
Plea, in Objection to my Animadverter's precarious Hypothesis: let me add,

Secondly, I am sure, In the whole Affair of Barnabas and Readiness Mission, there
is not the least Intimation of any thing that carrys even the Shadow of
Prelacy; no Hint of any one that had the Supremacy over the Rest. The Direction
runs in the Plural Number: The Holy Ghost said, Separate YE [(...)] The Address
is to a collective Body of Presbyters, and not to a single Prelate, -- And the
Transaction was managed by a Plurality, a Triumvirate. THEY fasted and prayed
and laid on Hands: And THEY sent them away. And it is observable, when Paul and
Barnabas returned to Antioch (from whence they had been recommended to the
Grace of God, for the Work which they had fulfilled; as we have the Report,
Acts. 14.26, 27.) They gathered the Church together, and rehearsed all that God
had done with them -- They gave this Account, not to the Bishop, (as it might
have been expected, had there been one there) nor to the Apostles, (as Barnabas
had done at Jerusalem, in another Case before. Acts 9.27.) but to the Church,
comprehending both Officers, and Members. -- So that there is not the least
Inkling of a Prelatical or Apostolical Character upon any of those that
separated Paul and Barnabas.

UPON the whole then it may very rationally be inferred, We have here an
Instance of Presbyters ordaining; and that without the Presidency of any
Superior, whether Apostle, or Diocesan Bishop: which was the Proposition my
Animadverter charged with want of Proof. But I believe he will find no Grounds to
complain again on this head. For I suppose my point now pretty well proved. And
if so, then of Consequence, that great Question is decided, in favor of my
Cause, viz. Whether the Power of Ordination was originally annexed to the
Government of Prelates, in opposition to that of Presbyters? The Discussion
whereof (our Answerer observes Def. 21 --.
) determines the Controversy. I cannot see then but that the Controversy must
now be finally shut up. For I dare appeal to any one, who is not bias'd by a
design to serve an Hypothesis, whether I have not sufficiently proved my Point,
and set it in a very unexceptionable Light. My Antagonist himself, I think,
must needs own he was under a mistake, at least, in saying, That if Paul and
Barnabas were (notwithstanding their being called there Prophets and Teachers)
really Apostles or Bishops, NO Reason can be given to question it, that the
others were also really such. -- You see I Have brought to view some very strong
Reasons for Suspicion (at least) that they were neither Apostles nor Diocesans.
-- But now if he shall turn me off (as in another Case, he has done the
Remarker) with bluntly saying, We deny all these groundless Surmises; I may
then presume to tell him (in his own Words Def. of Mod. Pr. page 25, 27.
which perhaps will found as well in my Mouth as his) That it was most unjust
and against all the Laws of Reasoning, to put me upon the proof of a Negative;
The (bringing of) Proof belongs to himself, the positive Affirmer; which,
because there is no ground to go upon, we are assured can never be done. In
Points of so great Consequence, we must go upon certain Facts, and not upon
mere Conjecture, supported by no Reason or Evidence. And when nothing of this
Nature appears, it is intolerable Boldness to conclude confidently. -- Very
just Observations! Would he had acted always upon his own Rules! But happy and
rare is the Man that condemns not himself, one way or other, in that thing
which he allows. I hope he will take Care, the next time he writes, to bring
some positive Proofs of his Assertion; or else my negative Arguments (at least
without a solid Refutation) must needs, in the Judgment of the impartial World,
remain of Force against him: and so he will lie open to a too just Imputation
of what he calls the Remarker's Iniquity, Adding to the Scripture, and creating
Apostles at his pleasure. I shall securely wait his Answer: and hasten now in
the last place to consider --

. 3. THE other Text he has attempted to set in a true Light, viz. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor; Especially
they who labor in the Word and Doctrine.

A large Stride, you may observe it is, my Animadverter here takes; there being
above a dozen pages, between the other Text and this, which have entirely
escaped his Remarks: although some things are there said, which bear pretty hard
upon the Author, and the Cause, he has undertaken to defend, and nothing he has
offered any where (either in his Defense, or in his Animadversions) that I can
discern, will possibly serve for a Reply. However the Gentleman skips over all
(for what Reason, I cannot tell; unless it were, because he saw such
Difficulties thrown in his way, as he despaired of ever being able to grapple
with) and by one great and sudden Leap, comes to a Text, which, though I laid
some Stress upon it, yet belonged not to the main Argument, but was brought in
only occasionally, in arguing upon an Hypothesis, that I did not actually grant
my Author, though I was willing for once to take him in his own way.

THE Design, upon which I used this Text, was to prove, that Teaching is a more
honorable Office than Ruling: and that therefore, admitting Bishops and
Presbyters to be two distinct Orders, yet Bishops are not Superior to them. And
here after several Hints premised, I came to argue from the Distinction which
the Apostle (in 1 Timothy 5.17.) puts upon the Elders that labor in the Word;
requiring peculiar Honors to be paid Them, above the Elders that labor in
Rule: which I presumed, He would not have done, if the Elders that rule (yea
and rule well) had been more honorable than their Brethren. -- Now the
Animadverter singles out this Text, and makes his Exceptions against my Remarks
upon it. I had observed, Either there must be but one Sort of Elder here spoken
of; or there are two Kinds intended, one ruling, and the other teaching: (Which
is but agreeable to Bishop Burnet's Pastoral Care. Page 6.
Remark on the Place, who seems to speak with the like Uncertainty as I did,
saying, St. Paul divides this Title of Elder, either into two different
Performances of the Duties of the same Rank, or into two different Ranks; those
that rule well, and those that labor in word:) and taken either way, it makes
against the pretended Superiority of Bishops unto Presbyters. -- Now the
Animadverter tells us, He is ready to think I am so far in the Right as to be
for the former Exposition, and that I allow, 1 These. 5.12. to be a good Comment
on that Text. Indeed I did not declare positively which of the Expositions I
was for; and on that Account he is pleased to tax me with acting the
disingenuous Part here. (By the way, suppose I have; yet it is no worse than he
himself has done (upon Act. 13.1.) in not saying positively whether he took the
Antiochian Teachers for Apostles, or for Bishops.) But I cannot see the Justice
of this Accusation; for it was sufficient to my purpose, if the Text could
neither way be reconciled to the Prelatical Scheme, particularly as exhibited
in the Modest Proof, and M^ Barclay's Short Proof. However, since he has
suppos^ me to be for the former Construction, and to be so far in the Right, I
am willing to take him in his own way (without disputing whether that be right,
or wrong) and hope to make good my Argument from it against Prelacy: which runs
after this manner, -- If these Elders are one and the same, then here is a
Comparison between the several Parts of their Office, Ruling and Teaching; and
the Preference is given to the Latter: or to allude to my Animadverter's
Construction of this Passage, That Part of their Office which is Doctrinal, is
more honorable than that which is Ruling; and though as Rulers, They are to be
accounted worthy of double Honor, It is an egregious Blunder in my Antagonist,
to make the Sense of the Text according to me, to be, That You are [He meant,
He is, i. e. an Elder is) to be honored as a Ruler, but with half the Honor
of a Teacher.
yet more especially as Teachers. Now this Exposition (however silly my
Animadverter may imagine it) is capable of one very good Consequence at least,
viz. That they who are vested with the Powers of Preaching, [supposing there to
be a distinct Order of mere preaching Presbyters] are instated in that Office
which is of the greatest Dignity, and hence by good Rights ought to go shares
with others of the Clergy ( vested with the Powers of Ruling too) in the
highest Honors due unto them. So that, although I should not be able to prove
our Bishops to have renounced the Powers of Preaching, when They were vested
with the Powers of Ruling, (but should allow it to be false in Fact) Yet, since
They are CHIEFLY to be honored for that Office, which they sustain in common
with other Clergymen, it will follow that they are to be honored with no
greater Honors than what are due to mere Presbyters, vested only with that
single Office. For the additional Powers of Ruling cause no new Accession of
Dignity to the Bishop; and so can challenge no higher measures of Respect to
him, than are owing to his Fellow-Presbyters. The Complication of the Offices
(whatever my Animadverter may pretend) can have no Consequence, to his Purpose,
unless he can prove our Bishops to have received some superior Office ( when
they were vested with the Powers of Ruling) to which are annexed Honors
superior to Those, decreed by the Apostle, unto the Office of Laboring in the
Word. And here I may illustrate this by a familiar Comparison: We Will suppose
(what is known Fact among us) that there are two Gentlemen of the Civil Order;
agreeing in this, that both of them belong to his Majesty's Council, but
differing in another Circumstance, viz. That one of them is also in the
Commission of the Peace, and the other not. Now, I pray, Is this Complication
of Offices in the Justice cumulative to his Dignity? Does it intitule him to
greater Honors than are due to his Brother-Counsillour? I trow not. But why
not? The Reason is obvious, -- Because the super added Office, which he holds,
is inferior to that which is common to them both. Now, if it bespeaks no
Accretion of Dignity, how can it give him a just Pretense to any superior
Respects! -- It Is easy to apply this to the Case in Hand.

I have now said enough, I suppose, to satisfy every unbias'd Person of the
Weakness of my Animadverter's Reasonings upon 1 Timothy 5.17. and that he has by
no means been able to reconcile the Apostolical Canon here, with the Prelatical
Scheme of Things. So that I find as much ground still to say it, as before.
That if any Man will do this, and make Sense of the Text, He must have a better
Knack at solving Paradoxes than I can pretend to.

I fear I have by this time tired you, as well as myself. Nevertheless, I must
beg your Patience, while I add a few auxiliary Hints upon the Argument: which
will leave my Antagonist without any Reserves of Object^on; and I think,
effectually preclude all ways of Escape: and then I Will draw to a C^ose.

IT may be observed that when the Elders spoken of in our Text are called the
same, this admits of a double Meaning, and may be understood as referring
either to the Species or to Individuals.

First IF it refers to Individuals or Singulars, and the Elders in both parts
of the Text are understood to be numerically the same; Then we may suppose the
Sense to run thus (as I am ready to think my Animadverter would have it
carried) Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double Honor;
especially They laboring in the Word and Doctrine. And so we may understand
the Apostle here to state the Dignity of the Clergy in this (as Bp Burnet
observes Pastoral Care. Page 72.
on another Text) That they ought to be accounted of as the Ministers of
Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God: and he sets down this part of
their Character, as the more special Foundation of that Law, which provides for
the Maintenance of the Clergy, That the Lord has ordained that They which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. The two comprehensive Branches of
the Episcopal Function are Preaching and Governing: and as that excellent
Prelate elsewhere 112.
observes, The constant Sense of all Churches, in all Ages, has been, that
Preaching is the Bishops GREAT Duty. This is truly the primary Business of
their Calling, and the most shining part of their Character. They should give
themselves continually to the Ministry of the Word and Prayer, as the more
special Design of their Order. The Apostles thought this to be Their grand
Duty, and made it their chief Employment. ( Act. 6.4.) Government, and
Discipline, and Ordination, are but subordinate and more occasional or
incidental Businesses, and designed to be subservient to the great and more
stated Work, the Ministration of the Word. Here therefore our Text places the
Accent, and states the Dignity of the Clergy in this; demanding a double Honor
for them especially as considered under the Not on of Teachers of the Word.
Bishop B^ son [ Perpet. Gov etc. p. 132.] tells us, This is the Inte^pretation,
that Chrysostom (...) Greek Writers embr^ce. Now, if this be the Scope of the
Apostle in the Words under Consideration, it then very strongly infers several
important Consequences; viz

1. THAT, by the Elders spoken of, we are not to understand any Office^s
superior to the (supposed mere) Teachers of the Word: because this is the
highest and most worthy Character, that any can sustain. And then,

2. THAT there are no s^nd Grounds so the Hypothesis (we are arguing upon) of
stated mere teaching Presbyters, distinct from Bishops voited with the Powers
both of Preaching and Ruling. For, it the Office of Teaching be the principal
and most noble Part of the Ministry, it affords us a strong presumptive
Argument, That all who are invested with this, have also the Powers of
Government and Ordination belonging to them; because no substancial Reason can
be assigned (in this Case) Why they who have the Greater, should be denied the
Lesser.

But thus much for the first Thing.

Secondly, WHEN the Elders in our Text are said to be the same, it may only
mean They are specifically the same, and belong to one and the same Order.

NOW these Elders, though in this general-View the same, yet may in regard of
some particular Circumstances differ.

And accordingly, -- Either,

1. WE may understand by (...). or Elders that rule, Fixed Pastors, or Prefects
of Churches already constituted, (such as we suppose the Elders of Ephesus to
be) having the oversight of the Flock: and by Elders that labor in Word and
Doctrine, Itinerant Preachers, or Evang^lists, (which according to the Author
of Mod. Proof Page 14.
are at the most but Presbyters) such as Apollos, Judas, Silas, Mark and
others; and thus some learned Men (Dr. Hammond Annot. on Act. 11. Let. b.
, Bp. Bilson, etc.) do interpret the Phrase, (...) -- i. e. Traveling in
preaching the Gospel to such a^ ha^ not heard it before. (...) Or,

2. WE may understand by Elders, in both parts of the Text, the settled Pastors
of particular Churches; though spoken of as distinguishable from one another, and
to be estimated, by their Gifts and Labors in Preaching. So Bp. Stillingfleet
in his Ordination-Sermon, carries it.

AND take the Text in either Sense, I cannot see how it (...) ^^^ally be applied
to serve the Cause of Prelacy.

FOR, if the first Sense be admitted, then it follows there have been
Presbyters (not taking the Oversight of any particular Charges, but chiefly
employed in preaching the Gospel in one place and another, who yet were
accounted by the Apostle) worthy of Honors superior to those due to the
Bishops of the Flock. From whence we may fairly argue that such as are vested
with the Powers of Preaching, have a just Title to Honors, equal to what are
owing to Bishops, whose governing Powers can give them no Claim to any peculiar
Respects.

OR, if the second, then by the Apostle's Rule here, a special Regard is to be
paid unto those Pastors, that excel in the best Gifts, and most useful Labors;
which be determines to be those of Preaching. Ministers are to be honored for
their Work sake; which comprehends those two great Lines of Duty, Governing and
Preaching. But Preaching is the main and more eminent part of their Work. --
Now some excel in one of those, and others in the other. And All are to be
accounted worthy of double Honor; but especially they who excel (as to Skill,
Fidelity, and Application) in Preaching, which is the Work that carries in its
Nature, the greatest Dignity, and gives any the more exalted Character. And
accordingly our Animadverter does elsewhere ( Def. of Mod. Proof, p. 24.)
interpret the Text, as a Rule not only to the People, for the Direction of
their Conduct toward their Ministers, but also as a Rule to Timothy, for the
Direction of his Conduct toward Them, To prefer the deserving. And at the same
time, it is observable, the Apostle declares those to be the most deserving,
who approve themselves the most skilful, faithful, and laborious Preachers. He
singles out These for the first Preferments, and recommends them to Timothy, to
receive the special Marks of his Favor.

IT remains now only to show (if the Elders spoken of, be of the same Order)
that one or the other of those Senses must be admitted; by proving that the Sense
my Animadverter is for, who (by a strong Effort of Imagination) supposes them
to be Diocesan Bishops, is entirely wrong, and must be rejected. And to prove
they were not Diocesan Bishops, I will choose out three Arguments, which the
Gentleman himself has furnished me withal; enough to plunge him into
inextricable Labyrinths.

1. THIS Notion is superseded by his own Gloss upon our Text, but now
mentioned, making it a Rule to Bishop Timothy, for his Direction in the
Government of his Presbyters, To prefer the Deserving. -- Which may at least
have the Force of an Argumentum ad Hominem.

2. THE Gentleman has effectually dismounted that Hypothesis, by a Concession
He has made elsewhere Def. p. 21. Append. p. 10.
, viz. That Presbyters have a Government over their single Congregations, and
are vested with the Powers both of Sacraments and Censures. By allowing of
which, he has thrown a fatal Block in his own way, and put it out of his Power
to prove, That by the Elders that rule well, are necessarily to be understood
Diocesan Bishops, and not Congregational Pastors.

3. IT must be conclusive in this Dispute, to observe, He himself tells us
here, That he thinks I am so far in the RIGHT, as to grant that the Elders in
both parts of our Text, are the same, and that I allow 1 These. 5.12. to be a
good Comment on the Text. -- For, if I am so far in the Right, then I Am sure I
shall be in the Right also, if I affirm the Elders in 1 Timothy 5. are of the some
Species with those i 4 1 These. 5. -- And I am equally sure then they could not
be Diocesan Prelates: Because the Thessalonian Elders were but Parishional or
Congregational Bishops; as will plainly appear to every one, upon the sedate
Consideration of a few Things. (...) As,

(1.) THERE was a Plurality of these Presidents or Overseers in that one
Church. Therefore they could not be Diocesan Bishops.

(2.) THERE is no special Mark put upon any single Person among them, as having
a Prerogative above the Rest: but they are all spoken of under one common
Denomination of Presidents. (...) It denotes Superintendency, or Episcopacy.
Which being attributed to them all, without distinction, it argues they were a
Company of Congregational Bishops, acting in an Equality: no one Man being Head
of the Presbytery; unless it were under the notion of a Moderator, for Order's
sake. (...) And then,

(3.) THEY are described, not only as being over the Flock, but as laboring
AMONG them, and admonishing them: which imports a Personal Communica, and
immediate Watch, in execution of the Pastoral Charge.

(4) THE Church is required to know Them, and to esteem, and love Them, for
their Work's sake: which necessarily presupposes their Residence in the City,
and argues them to be Parochial Bishops. (...) Add to this,

(5.) THE Church is required to love them in the highest Degree, (...). The
Word carries an Emphasis, that cannot well be expressed in English. The same
Phrase is used in Ephesians. 3.20. and translated Exceeding abundantly. So then They
are required to abound, yea to superabound, in the Expressions of their Esteem
and Love to their Teachers; Which surely cannot imply any thing less than the
Double Honor, demanded in our Text. As then it must needs result, that the
Elders in both Texts are of the same Species, and mean Congregational Bishops:
So likewise the Consequence is clear to a Demonstration, that there are no
other Bishops of a superior Rank; inasmuch as the highest Honors and Respects
of the Church are by an express Apostolic Decree (and by my Animad^erter's own
implicit Concession) due unto that sort of ^^shops.

THUS, I have rescued my last Text out of our Opponent's hands; and made it
appear, that by allowing 1 These. 5.12. to be a good Comment upon it, he has
pushed hard at his own Breast, and given himself a mortal Wound, while he
thought of nothing but a fatal Thrust at me. O amazing, dreadful Mistake! While
he dreamt of casting up a mighty Trench for his Security, in the Defense of an
expiring Cause, he was really digging a profound Grave, to bury it in. And now
he will surely pardon me, if I have been, doing a faithful Part, to ease his
Task, and facilitate the Funeral. -- However, I know (my Friend) that you will
put the kindest Meaning upon any good Offices I may have done to that End.
(...) To conclude,

I think I have now dissipated all the Exceptions, that our Answerer has
brought against my Appendix; and fully vindicated as many of my Arguments, as
he was pleased to attack. I Am sensible I have been too diffusive on several
heads, and in general transgressed the Rules of Proportion; but hope I Have every
where kept within the Bounds of Truth and Soberness. I trust I have not broken
over the Laws of fair Disputation, nor made a forfeiture of the Gentlemanly
Treatment, with which my Animadverter has begun to distinguish me. I may justly
therefore expect, if he sees fit to reply, that he will return me the same
Measure: And if he advances any thing new, I shall (if I have Opportunity) give
him my Thoughts upon it. But if he only repeats the old Story, or falls from
solid Reasoning (to use an Expression of his own) I shall suppose Enough is
already said on both sides, and shall hardly think it worth while to write a
third time. For I am not at all fond of giving the last Word.

PARDON me now (my Friend) this long Interruption, and let me once more feel
the Influences of that Goodness and Candor, which endears you to all your
Acquaintants, though to none more than

SIR, Your Brother And Servant.
Sept. 22. 1724.

