THE Proclamation of the HONORABLE Joseph Jenks Dep. Governor, Answered; AND
THE PROCEEDINGS Of a JUSTICE's COURT Held at Norwich, July 26, 1725 therein
Referred to, VINDICATED. By JOSEPH BACKUS, Esquire

Printed for the AUTHOR: Sold at Several of the Booksellers Shops in Boston,
and N. London 1726.

Advertisement.
IT appears to me but a piece of Justice, to acknowledge, that this Performance
has in some respects received advantage by a Friend well knowing to the
Subject and occasion hereof.

And I would further Advertise the Reader, that what is here said as
Historical, or relating to matters of Fact, is capable of Legal Proof; and may
be received as undoubted Truth.

J. B.

Deputy Governor Jenks's PROCLAMATION Answered, etc.
HAVING lately received a Copy of an unaccountable PROCLAMATION predicated upon
the Legal Punishment of some Notorious Offenders at Norwich in July last)
issued out by the Honorable Joseph Jenks, Dep. Governor, and ordered to be
Exposed to public View in the Town of Providence; And humbly supposing it to
proceed from a wrong Principle in the Author, as well as his mistaken
apprehension of the matter of Fact alleged as the occasion of it; as also
Judging it to be of a dangerous and pernicious Consequence to the Common People
in respect of the most Important Concerns:

I Though It my self obliged (at the Importunity of some people about Providence)
to make a public Reply to it, both to rectify the Mistakes of the Author,
vindicate my proceedings in that matter; And in a word to give a true
Declaration of the whole Case, undeceive the World and deliver people from the
unjust Prejudices which they have conceived against our Government, Religion
and Ministers by said Proclamation

And for as much as the Author of it was not so Just to the common Interest,
Kind to himself or Civil to me, as to desire an account of the true state of
the matter to Regulate his Judgment by; But upon the bare Inspection of one
Copy of Record, and the Information (as I suppose) of one of the Incensed
offenders, without knowing the Notorious Aggravating Circumstances of their
offense; has proceeded to this Public Method of Advocacy for those offenders:
Let none wonder, that I omit a Private Letter to Him, and take this method as
in the following Essay, which is now become necessary for our Vindication and
Defense: where in, I shall be Merciful, as before, and use as much moderation,
as I Think the nature of the Cause will admit of.

I shall here Faithfully repeat the words of his Proclamation, according to the
Copy sent me, and distinctly attempt some Reply to Each part of it.

The Preface to the Proclamation.
HERE follows a Copy of a Record of the Proceedings of a Justices Court Held
in Norwich in July last; with one of John Rogers his Brethren who to gether
with him and several others, I am Informed were going on the First Day of the
Week from New London and Groton to a religious meeting at Lebanon, in order to
Baptize, or see a person Baptized, and were all apprehended as Malefactors and
unmercifully Whip't.

The REPLY to it.

Here,

First, This Honorable Proclamator says truly that the Person here Named was
one of John To ers's Brethren; being such by Visible Profession, and no less
evidently such in iniquity and Trans ressi^n as their ^ctions uncon^e^ibly
demo^st ate. (...) as he^aith truly, the were Trave^ing on the (...) of the
Week from NewLondon and ^on, and as they owned with a design ^or Lebanon, and
all this as perniciously as needlessly shall be made Evident.

In this place it will not be amiss to tell the World who were the Brethren of
this John Rogers, from their Relation to whom they are here mention^d with that
distinguishing mark of Honor, or rather (i^ you please) Infamy. The names of
them all, are with John Rogers; John Bolls, and Joseph Bolls, from New London:
John Culver, Andrew Davis, James Smith: John Waterhouse, and Sarah Culver (the
singing Si^e, to make up the Solemn Community) from (...): All of them (for
ought appears) in their own Imagination Equally ve^ed with an Apo^olical
Commission and Authority; for the account here given, says not, but that they
were equally concerned in the Administration of Baptism their pretended
business at Lebanon: and knew not who should be immediately called to do it,
when they came there. There was not any one among them that pretended to be an
Officer more than the rest, and surely their general design to officiate
without knowing that it belonged to any of them, argues them very Ignorant or
unbelieving of that text, Heb. 5.4. And no man takes this Honor unto himself,
but he that is called of God as was Aaron. Any Body may guess what a religious
Meeting they were like to have, who thus Presumptuously designed a Solemn
Thing, without any Real and Manifest call from God.

But then,

In the next Place, He don't say Justly, that this Brother, (viz) Andrew Davis,
was Traveling together with John Rogers; for they came in distinct Companies
from their respective Places, and came into Town at a different Time, and this
so exactly according to the Visible aspect of their common Design, in the
whole; as if it were ordered on purpose, that one company might Disturb the
People as they were returning at Noon from the more public Exercise; and the
other, the Residue that were about an Hour after returning from the Sacramental
Solemnity (it being the Day for that special Attendance) But whatever they
designed by such a critical timing of their Travel through the Streets; or
whither it was purely Accidental: It seemed to be the more Insolent in them
(when they might have gone another way) and was the more Disturbing and
Offensive to us The first Company bringing a Chair with them to aggravate the
offense, and some of the other Company calling out to the People, Did ye not
hear, There is a solemn Ordinance to be Administered to morrow upon a Person at
Lebanon, According to Christ's Institution? Neither of which could be necessary
to the peaceable Enjoyment of their own persuasion, but designed as I justly
suppose to give the greater Disturbance to our usual quietness on the Sabbath.
And though it cannot be justly though it a matter of Conscience in them to come to
us, in such Time and Manner, when they knew it was contrary to the Law of the
Government, and would be offensive to us, the troublesome consequents of which
they might have spared themselves, and us from, without any Injury to their
Religion (if it may be so called.) Yet I think we are obliged to take due
notice of them, when they did so come, except we might tamely resign up the
sacredness of the Sabbath, and our peaceable Enjoyment of it, and forbid our
Consciences and the Laws of God and Man to Express their just resentments of
such daring Iniquity committed against all Order and Reli^ion; The neglect of
which resentments, would but strengthen these people in their Insolence, and
Expose both our Religion and Laws to all Contempt, And if this instance of
their Transgression had passed unobserved and unpunished, we have just reason
to Conclude, that they would have soon proceeded to give us disturbance in the
Public Worship of the Sabbath, as they have others in the Neighborhood, by
Rushing into their Assemblies with all Clamor and Contradiction, and
Superfluity of Naughtiness.

And,

Again, Their Honorable Advocate don't do fairly to insinuate, as tho^ they
were designed for Lebanon to attend a religious Meeting there on that Day, as
that it has been received by the People in and about Providence: For by their
own Confession they designed to attend that the Second or Third Day of the
Week; And therefore since they did not intend to have their religious Meeting
on the Sabbath, and any other Day would have Accomodated their design (who own
no Sabbath) as well as that Day: It must be Supposed that they chose this Day
to Travel near Thirty Miles, for nothing in the World but to Express their
Malicious Abhorrence of the Sabbath and to disturb hose who Religiously observe
it, as also to bi^ defiance to the Law injoyning the observation of it, as by
their own Confession will ^ently appear, And what Mortal can solve ^ch an
unscriptural and no less irrational Contradiction? Is there any Law of Nature
or revealed Prescript under Heaven that bi^ds Men's Consciences to such
Absudicies? And yet they pretend Conscience in what they do, which i^ in plain
terms, to make Conscience of doing Iniquity, and what Conscience this is, and
whence it is informed. Let all (save the blackned World,) Judge.

But then,

Again, He ingeniously owns, a cording to his Information, that they scarcely
knew their business when they should come there. It was (says he) In order to
baptize or to see a person baptized, and I may add, and they knew not what:
They knew not it seems who, or whether any of them, was to baptize or whether
any person would be baptized; and so it proved the next time, when they
actually went to Lebanon under the same pretense: Baptism was not administered,
there was no Subject, or no Officer, or they were Indifferent about it, however
zealous in pretense before. Wherefore, it appears that their Infallible Spirit
does sometimes deceive them, as it did their Great Apostle the late John
Rogers; who pretended from the Inspirations of it, that he was proof against
all Infection of Body (as well as mind,) which the Wicked only (he said) were
susceptible of, and to put the matter upon trial, daringly ventured into Boston
in the time of the Small Pox. But received the Infection and Dyed of it, with
several of his Family, taking it from him; so the Trial of his Impassibility
issued. More Instances of their Deception might be mentioned, But it is Enough
here to Instance in this relating to the present Case, for it seems their
Spirit (notwithstanding all their pretenses to Certain Immediate Direction by
it (did not tell them what was their Business at Lebanon, any more than it did
what should be their Sufferings at Norwich, which it did not, inas much as they
Expected according to their Insolent Boast to buy our Sabbaths for five
shillings a piece, but finding them risen in the Price, yet with a greater
Liberty granted to offenders than they used to have, They (without any previous
advices from their Spirit) did wilfully choose the Corporal Punishment, rather
than the Expense of Money, and to the wonder of all sober Men were more sparing
of their Purses than of their Backs. But there might be this in it, to
determine their Choice, according to their Boast of Extraordinary defense, they
Expected to feel no pain, and so they would have saved their Backs and Money
too, but they were evidently Disappointed and fel^ nothing the less for the
cause. And then they hoped to acquire to theselves the Honor of Martyrs, and
gain some Proselytes by their Courageous Suffering as they pretended for the
sake of Christ, but were also disappointed in this, and I believe got no more
Honor than ease by their foolish choice. Which makes me think how wittily a
Lawyer ridiculed the folly of one of these Sufferers, who declared that he
would not for the sake of Fifty Pound, (or a greater Sum) Endure the same
again, and yet cheerfully endured this in hope of a reward in the other World,
who was told of his sad mistake and poor bargain; In short, at most he coudn't
expect more than the value of Twenty Shillings, since that was the full Price
of his Scourge; and with that he might have escaped it, without any damage to
his Religion. And it appeared by their whole Management that their hearts were
more upon their Travel, and Contempt of the Sabbath, than upon their Religious
Meeting, which shows that the very end and design of their first motion was to
Offend and Disturb us; For when they had done this, and got their Backs whip^
for it, they were content to return back again yea to Prison, rather than pay
the just Charges of their Prosecution, and proceed to their Religious Meeting
at Lebanon, which they might have done, if they would. Hence,

Lastly, I may boldly confess, that they were apprehended as Malefactors and
punished as such, and speak of it with a humble Assurance that all Sober
Unprejudiced Men will Justify what was done, as they receive the full History
of the matter. Let the World Judge, whether they were not Notorious Malefactors
and worthy of App^ehension and Stripes, which after Legal Prosecution and
Trial, they had, But not Unmercifully, either in respect of any Imposition
thereof upon them, as was before hinted (for by their Resolute Choice, they
constrained me to Order this Pun^hment, or disregard the Law; so that in a
Moral and Proper Sense, they Whipped their own Back, and may Thank themselves
for it; and ought not to Complain of our Unmercifulness toward them) or, in
respect of the Instrument, being (...) a Single Cord without a Knot in it, or
in respect of the Number of Stripes not exceeding Ten, (Except upon one for a
very good reason) when they all might have Legally received more, or finally,
in respect of the force of the Application, for I stood by and saw every
Stroke, and discovered not a drop of Blood, save only from some Strokes with
the End of the Whip under the Arm of some of them, -- And put cularly
concerning the Woman which has been Represented as the most Eminent Sufferer,
and the Cruelty aggravated in respect of a special Circumstance, I tho's it
just to the cause of our Defense, to say, that she received the slende^est
Scourge of them all, and that in favor of her tender Sex, but not at all in
regard to a state of Pregnancy, being justly supposed as free of that, as the
Post ^he so wilfully Embraced. And farther, I saw no persons Insult them, or
Triumph in their Correction, But the whole multitude of Spectators with a
becoming aspect of Grief, at their wretched Delusion Folly and Ma^ness, gravely
looked on, wondering that any Persons should thus obstinately choose their own
Misery and yet pre end it was Suffering for their Consciences and Religion. And
though it was not gra^eful to a Humane Principle, to see Creatures, in humane
sh^pe, Suffer Stripes, yet it was Enough to raise a Holy Indignation at their
Wild, unscriptural Zeal, to hear such clamorous Invocations of the Name of God
and Christ, for Assistance and Support, in a Cause so contrary to Religion; as
if they were wholly lost to Humanity and the Remains of Natural Light

I have said more in this First Part, than was Necessary to Answer the Preface
of the Proclamation, to give some just Narrative of the matter, and (...)
Character of these Offenders; that the World may see what manner of persons
these are for whom such advocacy is proclaimed with the stamp of Authority, and
what little reason would they have to expect such Privileges from the Roy^
F^vour which they Boast of if His Maje^y knew how Vilely they Contemn His Laws
and Officers, and Even all that is Sacred amongst us.

Now follows the Copy of Record, inserted in the Proclamation.

Norwich, July 26. 1725.
At an Inferior Court, Present Joseph B^ckus Justice of the Peace, for the
County of New London, Andrew Davis of Groton being bro't before this Court,
upon the presentment of the Kings officer, for his transgression of Law in
Norwich, by traveling upon the Sabbath or Lords Day, being the 25th Instant,
and the said Andrew acknowledging that he did travel from Groton to Norwich,
and was going to Lebanon on said Day, This Court have Considered the Case, and
do sentence the said Andrew Davis to pay Twenty Shillings as a fine for his
Transgression for the use of the Poor of this Town, or upon his refusing to pay
the same, or to tender Estate to answer Execution, then to be Whip't Ten
stripes on the naked B^dy, not Exceeding, and to pay the Charge of Prosecution
and to stand Committed till this be performed; said Davis refusing to pay his
fine received the stripes, and was Committed for the Charges.

Cost allowed is 00 18 07

A true Copy, Test. Joseph Backus Justice of the Peace.
A true Copy of the aforesaid Copy, Test. Joseph Jenks Dep. Governor.

I am humbly of Opinion, that this Copy of Record which his Honor grounds his
Proclamation upon, is not a just occasion of it, nor a proper and sufficient
support to it; and the Information received by the offender, I think adds
nothing to it, But rather if regarded, betrays the weakness and precipitancy of
the Proclamation, for who knows not, that the ^cens'd offender in his own Case
ought not to be heard as an Evidence, and who can Think him unprejudiced and
Impartial in his Declaration! And Then what nakedly appears by the Copy of
Record if Duly considered, rather shows this offender and the Company, to have
been justly Prosecuted and Punished, than either Maliciously Persecuted or
Unmercifully Scourged. Which further appears by another Copy of Record
concerning one of these Brethren, which I shall here take the liberty to
insert; and the rather, because it is a Just Comment upon the rest, and is good
Proof of their Notorious Insolence.

This is it

Norwich, July, 26th. 1725.
At an Inferior Court, Present Joseph Backus Justice of the Peace, for the
County of NewLondon John Bolls, of New London being bro't before this Court,
upon the Presentment of the King's Officer, for his Transgression of Law, in
Norwich, in traveling on the Sabbath or Lord's Day, being the 25th Instant,
The said Bolls acknowledging that he came from New London on said Day and was a
going to Lebanon, and that he knew it was Contrary to our Law, and and that
they did it in Defiance to the Law: This Court having Considered the Case, do
Judge that the said Bolls is guilty of Transgressing of Law in a high Degree;
and therefore do Sentence the said John Bolls to pay a Fine of Twenty Shillings
for his Transgression, for the use of the Poor of this Town, and upon Refusal
or Neglect to pay said Fine, or to tender Estate to answer Execution, to be
publicly Whipped on the naked Back, Fifteen Stripes, not exceeding; and to pay
the Charge of his Prosecution; and to stand Committed till this Sentence be
performed. Said Bolts resusing to pay his Fine, received the Stripes, and was
Committed for the Charges.

Cost allowed, is 00 18 07

A true Copy of Record. Test Joseph Backus Justice of the Pe^ce.

And now to give this Copy of Record its due Force, as an Evidence in our
Defense, against both the Deli^quents and there Advocate, let it be Considered;
That this Man ^e^ks the minds of them all, some of them Verbally, others
Tacitly Consenting to what he said, for himself and them, That they did it in
Defiance to the Law. Whence I shall only Observe here, That it is obvious they
came from Home with a design to put open Contempt upon the Laws of the
Government, and in Defiance of the Authority thereof: Which Confession of their
own, speaks them to be most Daring and Malicious Offenders; utterly
disregarding those Scriptures, Romans 13. begin. Tit. 3. begin. and 1 Pet. 13, --
17. Not only Refusing Obedience to Lawful Authority, such as His Majesty
Approves and Lstablisheth by Charter; but Spurning at the Authority of all
Degrees, with the most significative Expressions of Contempt, Disdain, Revenge
and Rebellion that can be.

And their professed design here was to bear down with Contempt, the Authority
in this Town, as they Boasted they had trampled upon the Authority in other
places, and now must they be reckoned unmercifully Abused Persecuted, and what
not, because the Authority will not be insulted by them and tamely ^ield to
their insolent contempt and boastings? Methinks this judgment, of John Bolls s,
sho^s the high ^omp^exion o^ the ^ffence, and vindicates the proceedings with
them to the (...) Degree.

I shall now proce^d to Repeat, and make Reply to the roclamation it ^elf.

Proclamation,
I order this to be set up in open view in some public place in the Town of
Providence, that the Inhabit^nts may see and be sensible of what may be
expected, from a Presbyterian Government, in case they should once get the Rule
over us.

REPLY,

Here I cannot forbear humbly observing that his Honor appears to assume unto
himself a Prerogative something beyond the limits o his lawful Authority, and
seems to act as a Primate, in ^he seat of Government, or as a Plenipotentiary,
independent on his coun^el without any thing Expressive of their Concurrence,
which is not usual for Superior Governors to do in cases of great and public
Importance. I (I alone) Crder this -- And by the tenor of it, may it not be
supposed that this, is a Creature of his heated and ungoverned Fancy, and an
effect of Injudicious Zeal and Prejudice, for not considering the approved
maxim of the wise Man Prove. 18.13. He that answers a matter before he hears
it, and so exposes himself to the Imputation of the natural consequence of
prejudicing a cause, (or judging a matter before it has had an impartial
hearing,) which is properly Prejudi^e. The concern and Zeal he here shows for
the Inhabitants of the Town of Providence would be commendable, were it
necessary, or the grounds of it just and weighty: But as I conceive, He appears
so sagacious as to foresee a Danger where there is none and appears lavish of
his fidelity, in warning the People to avoid that which they had no reason to
be afraid of; And therefore he might have improved his Sagacity ano her way,
and spend his Zeal and Fidelity for better service It Is not easy, precisely to
determine, what he here means by a Presbyterian Government, which he supposes
is invading them, for by some subsequent strokes in his Proclamation, it
appears to have a various me^ming: (...) supposing, that he means ou^ Civil
Government and ca^ed Presbyterian from the general Profession of the ^nlers and
People ^ cannot see what danger there is of its get^in^ the Rule over them in
respect of any their Civil Rights and Privileges, for we Rejoice in their
Prosperity as a Government distinct from us, and especially in the good and
wholesome Laws they have (as well as we) for the Suppression of Immorality and
Profaneness; Or it he means the Presbyterian Ministry and Interest, in respect
of Religion, threatening to prevail among them in the Town of Providence, I see
not why he should represent this as such a Dangerous and Dreadful evil,
especially when those in Providence that have had experience of it, do approve
of it, and are desirous of the advancement thereof among them who I think ought
to have the Liberty to Judge for themselves but there are none that design to
Impo^e the P^esbvterian Religion upon the people in Providence, neither can
think it just for an by their Authority, to impose an ill tho (...), upon them
whose Judgments direct to (...) it, and (...) by improving my Proceeding at
N^rmich with those offenders, as a means to (...) their Abho rence and dread
thereof^ Which ^ cannot conceive does at a^ affect the (...) pein Providence in
any of their interests and (...) or that it should be frightful to any Persons
that (...) as becomes Christians or Men (...) th^nk his loud and public Alarm
was on the (...) irrational and unnecessa^ (...) have been spared for a time of
more Imminent Danger.

Proclamation,
Their Minsters are creeping in amongst (...) with a dulatious pretense, and
declare their great Abhorrence to their forefathers sanguinary Proceedings with
the Quakers, Baptists and others.

REPLY,

Here, it seems, He falls directly upon the Presbyterian Ministers, and
represents them as Dangerous Creatures, and Sneaking wi^hall, which I think is
not civilly and fairly done since what these (...) inisters have attempt^ed for
the good of men's Souls in Providence, (upon which great Town, (I believe) they
have looked with concern and compassion) they have done publicly, and with the
consent, yea, at the desire of some people there, that are sensible of their
need of Preaching, to know, the way of Salvation truly: Wherefore it is ill to
represent them, as fly, insin^ating, and Sneaking Creepers, when their coming
is known, and they proceed publicly in all their endeavors for the good of
the people. And ho^ this is, with a Dulatious Pretense (Adulatory pretenses (I
suppose) the Gentleman means I canno conceive his argument for, unle^ss it be
their Declaring (as he says) their abhorrence to their forefathers Sanguinary
proceedings, etc. Which I think is as foreign to the purp^se, as it is unju^st
^o remind them of, i^ they had so (...) themselves; or it the had been sensible
of any public (...) in their Ancestors and par(...) in (...) with the Quakers,
etc, and have acknowleged it with their abhorrence thereof; I think they should
not be blamed for that; And if they fo^nd it necessary to express his in
Providence for the better Success of their Ministry there, among some that (for
this ^eaton) were prejudiced against the Presbyterians, (which I have never
heard they did, or that there was occasion for it) I don't see how this
overthrows the Truth and Since^ity of their Pretenses, or renders them
Adulatory and Fawning, as is charged, to be sure, when they have done nothing
more to fasten that soul Imputation upon them; Most certainly my proceedings of
late with those nominal Quakers, cannot (if it were a Crime) be charged upon
these Ministers as a contradiction of their specious pretenses.

Wherefore it appears to me, (and I believe it will to the World) a very unjust
thing, to erect such a fightful Shadow, as is reared up in the Proclamation,
and to represent the Presbyterian Ministers, such Flattering and Dangerous
Engines of Mischief, or very Tools of Civil Policy; merely from my punishing a
Company of Miscreants, for the Transgression of the Laws of God and Man. And
must the Ministers be banished their Coasts, unless they will prevent all the
Justices in the Country, punishing such disorderly Persons that will Travel
Twenty or Thirty Miles on the Sabbath, to Molest and Trouble their Neighbors?
Strange Logic! Absurdest Consequence!

Proclamation.
I am unwilling to apply Prove. 26.25. to any of them; but we have a Specimen of
what has lately been acted in a Presbyterian Government; which I think may
suppose it sits a Queen, and shall see no Sorrow.

REPLY,

This Zealons Combatant is still mauling the poor Ministers, and begins to
throw their Bibles at them but yet would be though it very tender of them,
Expressing a Cautionary unwillingness to apply that Pass^ge in Proverbs to
them; perhaps, left he should give them a fatal Blow, and have the whole
Presb^terian Cause to answer for. But I cannot Imagine what should force him to
it, if he were so unwilling, unless it be the sam number of Abominations in his
Heart which he supposes to be in the Ministers. However he has const^ain'd me
humbly to desire his serious Consideration of Psalm 50.16, and 20. and I wish he
had no Cause to think it Applicable, not that I do Justify the using of
Scripture after this manner in ordinary Cases, neither should ^in this, were it
not necessary for his Conviction and reproof.

And now whether he thinks he has laid the Ministers gasping, or no, he
abruptly leaves them, and turns to the Presbyterian Government, Sallying
toward the Presbyterian Rulers, for he seems resolved to clear the Coasts of
all Invaders. But (says he) we have a Specimen of what has lately been acted in
a Presbyterian Government, etc: Arg^ing the Corruption of the whole Government
from an action of one single Justice; which if that were Corrupt, could not be
f^ir arguing unless he k^ew the ^overnment did Justify and approve it But as
for the Specimen be here refers to, I Think it mu^ be owned, as a Specimen of
Justice, if good and Wholesome Laws, (necessary for the preservation f^order
and defense of Religion,) be the Rule of Justice, for this was but the
Execution thereof: And have they not in that Government', the same Laws for
Substance with ours for the Defense of the Sabb^th, though not with so much
Liber^ to the Transgressors; For our La's give them the Liberty to pay their
fine with their Back, which these Transgressors abundantly chose, and is it not
a saving way? yea, a grateful way to these that delight in suffering for the
sake of their wills, when their Religion could not oblige them to it, Except it
be their Religion to suffer needlessly, and wilfully Expose themselves to
Condign Punishment, as they did; Wherefore I am sure, this is no Specimen of
our Cruelty, for it is an approved maxim That a freeman cannot be wrong^d when
in the full possession of his Liberty, and his power of Exerting it not
restrained by any External force, as was the Case here. And now as to the
Supposition, that we Sit as a Queen and shall see no Sorrow, I Think it may
appear so groundless to him that he has no reason to suggest it to us; when he
knows that there are such Disturbers of our Peace, and such Advocates for them,
which threatens us with Sorrow upon Sorrow, and if he here Banters us with the
notion of sitting as a Queen, and seeing no Sorrow, when we have no little
reason to suppose it, I Think he might have no great heart to banter us, it he
duly Consider the forementioned Cause of our Sorrow.

Proclamation,
I may fairly say of some of the Presbyteri^n Rulers and Papists, as Jacob once
said of Two of his Sons Gen 49 56 verses. They are Brethren, Instrumens of
Cruelty are in their Habitations. Oh! my S^ul, come not thou into their Secret:
unto their Assembly mine Honor be not thou United. Ames 5 and 7 They who turn
Judgment into Wormwood and leave off Righteousness in the Earth: chap. 6 and
12. For they have turned Judgment into Gall, and the fruit of Righteousness
into A venomous Herb.
Hemlock. --

REPLY,

This Anti-presbyterian is here preparing a shot, for the Presbyterian Rulers,
at least some of them, (let us thank him that he will spare any of them, though
he was not so merciful to the Ministers) and when he has got these Presbyterian
Rulers and the Papists together, ^t seems, be thinks he has a fair Shot; b
(...) I Am sure he cannot ^o much Execution while he aims at Both at once. For
I Am Confident ^ at they are so far asunder that they cannot be both his with
one Charge, unless his piece disc^arge both wa^s, and then he will be in danger
himself But we have no reason to thank him for the little Execution ^e does,
for his will is good Enough, and There ^s scarce any thing too bad for the
Presbyterian, it seem, none are bad Enough to be rel^ed to them but the
Papists, and these together, are like Jacobs Sons Instruments of Cruelty, the
(...) of whom drives him upon his knees, with a great Concern for his Honor,
and it would be well if something would keep him there, But not in such a frame
as this, for it would be as much for his Honor and Health too, to be United to
the Presbyterians, as them of no Religion at all.

But lest we should yet vainly fancy our selves to sit as a Queen and see no
Sorrow, he is resolved to make Us sensible of our Error: For if it be true, that
we are so nearly Related to the Papists, as he says, and that all the
Scriptures he here quo^eth be rightly applied, we have Cause Enough of Sorrow,
But I am humbly of the opinion that our Textuary is for once ^taken in applying
these texts, if not guil^y of perverting them; for these offenders, that
p^e^end so much Cru^lty acted upon^en, had their own free Choice, as has been
observed, and might have Escaped the Stripes if they would, and have satisfied
the Law as well by paying their fine, as by receiving the Stupes, Nay, They
were urged by some of our Princip ^ Men to pay their fine which did not Exceed
Twenty Shillings. Moreover some of the People freely offe^ed it to some of them
to pay their fine for them But they refused the Kindness with Disdain and
saving in some such Significative Exp^ssions as these, that they would not take
up a Pin from the Table or give the Dust of their nails to be discharged; and
fu^her, Declare ^at they would not (...) of the Stripes (...) great Sum, (much
more I belie (...) they will ge^ by them) They would Suffer, (...) there was no
hind^ing them, unless we had ^ffe^ed vi^lence to their Consciences which they
p^e ended told them, they must suffer.

And as much of Cruelty as there was in this, some of 'em did not with standing
their fore Backs, Zeal (...) exp^se themselves, by the like Crime, to the like
Punishment, the We k^after a Lebanon, and according to their choice, were ^ced
by the Authority there, to undergo the same Punishment, But when they
approached the place of correction, and were stripd to embrace that darling
piece of their Religion ( viz) Suffering, Their courage failed, and their Zeal
was so cooled, as to accept a discharge by other Men's Money. But lest this
sh^inking Bout should prove shocking to the Faith of same of their Adherents,
they challenged public Dispute with the Reverend Mr. Williams, on those
Articles, the Sabath and Baptism, and ^had a public Confutation by the
Reverend Mr. Wells, and Williams. Yet, after some breathing spell, Two or Three
of them were coming again, upon the Sabbath, but a part took wit seasonably and
returned, one of them the more Weak, but no less Zealous actually came riding
through Norwich on the Sabbath, to see whether the Temper of the Authority was
abated, or to add to his Sufferings as well as our trouble, and as before had
his Back whip't, and went about his business, professing himself thankful for
it. And now, for this Justice to the common Wealth, and kindness to them (as
they seem to accept it) must we be reckoned Brethren to the Papists and what
not? -- But I think, that our Author upon Second Thoughts, may find a nearer
Kindred to the Papi^ts, than the Prebyterians are, and be convinced that he had
no need to send out the above mentioned Scripture so far, to meet with a proper
Application And I cannot forbear thinking that his taking a large Dose of
Hemlock (that Venomous Herb) as he notes in the Margin, may have occasioned
his Mi^application; and by dipping his Pen very de^pi^ (...) (it seems) he has
published his Mi^ake, and it may be his Dishonor with it.

Proclamation,
And I think in whomsoever the Spirit of Persecution rests, there cannot be
much of the Spirit of God --

REPLY,

I am wholly of this Opinion too; and further, that there is in such nothing of
the Spirit of God, For, the Spirit of Persecution, is the Spirit of the Devil,
and what Communion has Corist with Belial? But I think he is mistaken in
Applying this to us, Either for what has been done he etofore or now, For the
word Persecute, Signifies to follow hard after, and when used in such a (...)
as is here in ended it Signifies to pursue Men with wild and ungove^ed Ze^, or
Malicious Designs upon them, for the sake of their Religion; And then we are
the Persecuted, and they the Persecutors as much as in them (...); For we ^ave
ever followed them to Distu^b them in the Worship or for the sake of their
Relation; They have met with nothing from us to (...) them at all, but when
they have brought it upon themselves, as by Breaking our Laws, and Contemning
our Authority, and c have forced us to Punish them as Criminals. Most assuredly
none have been allowed to Molest or Interrupt them in their pretended Religious
Meetings, whilst the kept themselves from us But on the other hand, they have
followed us, going from Town to Town, on the Sabbath Day, which they knew to be
offensive to us have come into some of our Assembly's in the Time of Public
Worship on the Sabbath making horrid Noises to the Surprise and Confusion of
the Congregation, openly charging the Ministers with Lying and False Doctrine,
and Blaspheming the Name of Christ; bringing fruits and other things to Sell on
the Sabbath Day, and going to Work on the Sabbath, in sight of the People going
to Meeting, on purpose that they might observe them, yea, calling out to them
to take Notice of them at Work. Thus they have expressed a malicious Abhorrence
of the Sabbath, and really Persecuted us for our Observation thereof; giving
great Disturbance to us on that Day.

When to persuade them to forbear, our late Honorable GOVERNOR has assured
them that if they would be quiet and worship God in their own way according to
their Consciences, he would punish any of our People that should Di^urb them in
their Worship. Now let the World Judge which are the Persecuters. How
Unaccountable is it, that they should act thus, and yet pretend that they are
Persecuted, when only justly punished for the violation of the good Laws of the
Government. But if it were Persecution, how strangely have they forgot that
Advice, when they Persecute you in one City flee into another, when Instead of
doing so, if they cannot be Persecuted (as they call it) enough in one Place,
they will go to another seeking more, and as it were daring us to punish them
for their Transgressions. Was there ever such a Sect in the World? Will any
Quakers or Baptists, or any own them? is it likely we should be guilty of
Persecuting such Men? I am Confident, there is nothing of this Nature, to Argue
that we have not the Spirit of GOD.

Proclamation,
And I must observe, that notwithstanding the Presbyterian pretended Zeal to a
strict observation of a First Day Sabbath was such, that those poor people
might not be suffered to Travel from Groton to Lebanon on that Day, on a
Religious Occasion, as has been minded, but must be apprehended, as gross
Malefactors, and Unmercifully Punished, yet when a Presbyterian Minister which
has had a great Fame for Abilities, has been to Preach in the Town of
Providence, why truly then the Presbyterians have come flocking in upon the
First Day of the Week to hear him from Rehoboth and the furtherest parts of
Attleborough and from Killingsly, which is much further than John Rogers and
his Friends were Traveling, and this may pass for a Godly Zeal; But the other
must be Punished for a Sinful Action. Oh! the Partiality of such Nominal
Christians.

Joseph Jenks, Dep. Gov.
Providence, January 29. 1725, 6.
REPLY,

And I must Observe too, That the pretended Reasonings of this Anti
presbyterian, seems to me, as Strange, as his Regard to the Professed Sabbath
and Public Peace, does Indifferent.

First, Because he would Argue in favor of his Clients Travel on the Sabbath
from their T^avel, who out of the Adjacent Towns to Providence, came there, on
the Sabbath Day. Or, because he would fasten the Guilt of Partiality upon us,
in Punishing the former, and not seeing to it that the latter were also
Punished, though out of our Province.

These things may be said to show the Weakness of his Reasoning.

1 The Cases are not Parallel; For these Quakers were Traveling upon the
Sabbath but with no design to have their Religious Meeting on that Day, as has
been showed from their own Confession: They came too in Contempt of the
Sabbath, and in Defiance to the law, as has also been showed. Moreover, They
had their Preacher with them (it there was to be any at all) and their Assembly
mostly with them and might have held their Meeting at either Place from whence
they came But these Presbyterians he speaks of, came on the Sabbath to Attend a
Religious Meeting on that Day came not in Contempt of the Sabbath and Defiance
of the Law, and Came To the Preacher.

And then,

2. If their Cases were (...), or however far those Presb^terians might be
guilty in I ravelling out of their own ^laces needlessly, and merely out of
Curiosity, is it were (...) though I am credibly Informed those that were ^o
^emo'e came to Providence on the Saturday] is did not belong to us to Punish
them, to be sure not all of them. We have Puni^ed our known Offenders and if we
had look^d to their Punishing their Offenders, we might have been Charged
indeed of getting the Rule over them.

But again,

Secondly, His Reasonings appear strange, because he would prove our Zeal a
pretended Zeal from those things that are Visible Evidences of its Sincerity.

Their pretended Zea' (says he ( to a strict observation of a first DaySa^th
was such -- Insinuating as though we were Hypocrites, for no other Reason, but
because we profess a strict observation of the Sabbath, punish those that
travel on purpose to profane the Sabbath, and don't punish those that travel on
purpose to attend the Worship of God on that Day; And so the sum of the matter
is represented thus, that when we do all we can to preserve the Honor of the
Sabbath, both by punishing those that profane the Day, and by taking pains
ourselves to attend the Worship of God on that Day, this shows our Zeal, to
be but a pretense, whenas if we had (...) Fither we might have deserved he
Imputation (...), Body hear such Reasoning (...) that a Gent^eman ^f such Fame
for Understanding as the Honorable (...), should give us the Characte of
Nominal Christians from such grounds as These whenas, if having (...) Laws to
injoin the observation of the Day which we believe and prote^s be the Christian
Sabbath, and having Authority to put these Laws in Execution, we thou would neglect
to observe it ourselves or to puni^ those that take pa^ns to pro^e it and thi^
in defiance of the Law, we might Justly be term^d Nominal and But Nominal
Christians.

Our Authors Reasoning appears the more strange because it comes from One that
has such a Spirit of discerning; Even to he discerning of Spirits, for he
seems to Conclude that we have not much of the Spirit of God But what if he
should improve his sagacious faculty reflectively, and Consider whether the
Spirit that moved to the sitting up of a Proclamation to incense the
Inhabitants of Providence against the Good Ministers that have been (with much
self Denial) laboring their Good; be like the Spirit of God, Or, that spirit
which ^nter'd into the swine and drove them into the Sea, that the People of
that Country might be so disturb^d at Christ, who came there to do them Good,
as to send him out of their Coasts? Oh the Mistakes of such Nominal Rulers.

To Conclude. I must Profess I Am Sorry that by this Proclamation there has been
given any occasion for this Reply and Vindi^ation, and that herein there has
been need of any Expressions which may seem somewhat harsh, unless they are
resolved into he Evident Extremity of the occasion, and which otherwise would
have been far from my ^ho't, It is desirable that this Gentleman do seriously
con^der his Mistake and in a proper manner retract it, and we shall be ready to
^oreive his unjust Censures, and think o^ him with a respect befitting the
Dignity o^ his station. I wish also that the People in Pro^idence or elsewhere,
would be Can^ious that he b^ no means be Prejudiced against the Ministers and
so be kept from Embracing Religion which will be fatal need -- let what has
been here offered, be heartily accepted, as meant for the Defense of Truth and
Justice, which should be dear to all Men.

J. BACKUS.
Norwich, April 23 1726.
ERRATUM, Page 8. Lin. ult. for, In short, Read, In that.


