All Mankind, by Nature, Equally under Sin. A SERMON Preached at The Public
Lecture IN BOSTON. On Thursday, Dec. 3. 1724.

By EXPERIENCE MAYHEW, M. A. Preacher of the Gospel to the Indians, in Martha's
Vineyard.

BOSTON, in N. E. Printed by B. Green, Jun. for Samuel Gerrish, and Sold at his
Shop in Corn Hill. 1725.

To the READER.
T HE following Sermon met with no little Approbation from the judicious
Auditory, to which it was delivered: And I hope will be as acceptable, from the
Press, as from the Pulpit; and more extensively profitable. To which end I wish
a Divine Blessing may accompany it into the World! It appears abroad, at the
Request of Many. 'Twas preached at my desire, and in my Desk, I mean, where I
was to have stood. For which Reason, the Reverend Author demands of me this in
Return, That I usher it upon the Stage with some Prefatory Lines: And it seems
but a just piece of Gratitude in me to comply; however they that know his Age
and Worth, may vote it a Trespass on Modesty.

I Am sensible 'twould be an unbecoming Attempt in me, to enter here into an
Encomium on the Author and his Performance, as is the manner of those that do
the like office of Respect for Others: Nor could any Character from me
illustrate his Personal Merits, or be of any Advantage to his Discourse; which
will commend it self to every serious judicious Reader. I shall therefore only
beg Leave to express my Thanks, to Him, for affording me his so seasonable and
kind Assistence: And to the Divine SPIRIT, who led him to bring us such a
Sermon, so calculated for general use; as to the Subject, of common concern;
and as to the Manner, Scriptural, rational, and pertinent; perspicuous, and
moving. -- I must be allowed also to express my Joy in the signal use God is
making of this his Servant, to spread Religion among the Aboriginal Natives, or
Indians; to which Service he has for these many years devoted himself* We are
bound to thank God always on their behalf, for the Grace of God which is given
them by Jesus Christ. Hereby of a truth we perceive that God is no Respecter of
Persons. But all in all nations stand on one common Level before God, both in
the Duty and the Privilege of Sanctification: Where there is neither Greek nor
Jew, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free. -- It must yield a very sensible
Pleasure to every Christian Soul, to hear of the Grace of God bestowed on the
Indians, those (once) forlorn and wretched Heathen, the very Ruins of humane
Nature! It is a refreshing Testimony, that this Servant of God bears unto IT,
in the ensuing Sermon: And we hope it will be abundantly confirmed in that
Narrative of the Lives and Deaths of some scores of our Christianized Indians,
which he designs ere long to give the Public. -- In the mean time, they who
want Satisfaction, are referred to the accounts that have already seen the
Light. For the State of Religion among them, as it was formerly you have it in
the Life of Memorable Mr. ELIOT, the Apostle of the American Indians. And for
later times, you may see the account given by the Rev. Messieurs Rawson and
Danforth; annexed to Mr. Noyes's Election Sermon. Also the appendix to Dr.
Mather's Funeral Sermon for Mr. Rawson, and others, entitled Just
Commemorations. Also our Author Mr. Mayhew's appendix to his Sermon on Isa. 1.
18. published in the year 1720. Consult these Prints, and you will find that one
of our Forefathers pious Errands into this Wilderness, has not been altogether
neglected, nor unsucceeded. The Lord revive his work both among English and
Indians! AMEN!

Boston, December. 19. 1724. Tho. Foxcroft.

Mankind, by Nature, Equally under Sin.
ROMANS, III. 9. What then? are we better then they! No in no wise: for we have
before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under Sin.
THE Pride, which Mankind have by Nature in their Hearts, does very much
dispose them to think too highly of themselves, and too meanly of others. It is
a case wherein People comparing themselves with others, are not equal Judges;
but are too apt to pass Sentence in their own Favor.

IT would doubtless be well, if we were herein more Cautious than we are,
considering how subject to be mistaken we be, and what inconveniences do or may
attend our being so. Hence that caution given by our Apostle, Romans 12. 3. For I
say through the Grace given unto me, to every Man that is among you, not to
think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly
according as God has dealt to every Man the measure of Faith.

IT is therefore very Necessary that People Labor after Humility, and take
care that their Hearts be not lifted up with Pride and Vainglory, but that
they be kept in a humble frame continually. And we ought at all times to
Meditate on such things as have a Tendency to hide Pride from us, and cause us
to see that we have nothing to boast of; Nothing on the account whereof we have
any reason to exalt our selves.

AND here one thing, the consideration whereof may be very Serviceable to us
is, That we are no better by Nature, than those of our Neighbors are, whom we
Prefer our selves before; for though it will not from hence follow, that we have
not now the Advantage of them; yet we may hence infer, that if we are any
better then they, we may not thank our selves for it, not having made our
selves to differ from them, and having nothing which we have not Received.

THE Proposition from whence this Conclusion is drawn, is very evidently
contained in the words now before us, as will appear when we have considered
their Connection with those in the context, and the true sense and meaning of
them.

HERE then we may briefly observe, that the Apostle having in the Beginning of
this Third Chapter of his Epistle, ver. 1, 2. Declared, what great Advantages
the Jews above others did enjoy, and Vindicated the kindness of God therein
Manifested unto them; as also His Justice in Punishing their Disobedience, in
what follows unto the end of the Eighth verse, He in my Text, Answers a
Question, which he proposes on this Occasion, and this, as I Suppose, that he
might prevent the Jews, from drawing such a Consequence from what he had been
saying, as was neither intended, nor implied therein; Namely, that they were
better than other People, unto whom God had not granted such Privileges as he
had done unto them. What then? says he, i. e. What consequence may their be
drawn from what I have said? Are we better than they? i e. Are we Jews, who are
so highly privileged, as I have declared, any better than others, who enjoy not
such Advantages as we do, and whose Wicked Lives expose them to God's just
Displeasure? Does it follow that because we have better Privileges, we must
needs be a better People! No, in no wise. i. e. Such a Consequence will by no
means follow from what I have delivered: I intend no such thing, nor can such a
Conclusion be fairly drawn from what I have said. And that such a Conclusion is
neither true, nor according to his mind, he further manifests in what follows
unto the end of the verse. For we have, says he, before Proved both Jews and
Gentiles, that they are all under Sin. i. e. If both Jews and Gentiles are such
Sinners as I have before proved they are, or charged them with being, in my
foregoing Discourse about them, it is neither true, nor can you suppose me to
intend, that we who are Jews, are any better than the Gentiles; but on the
contrary, we are all equally Sinful.

NOT that the Apostle here intends, that the Jews were Generally as bad in
their Lives as the Gentile Nations were; and that all People and Nations are
actually alike Wicked; for as bad as the Jews were, they were not Universally
so bad as the Nations that knew not GOD, and did not call upon his Name. And we
know well, that all Mankind are not equally Wicked; for there are some
Righteous Persons, who are more Excellent than their Neighbors, Prove. 12. 26.
and there are some Nations, whom Righteousness does exalt, while Sin is a
Reproach unto others. --

BUT what the Apostle here intends, is that Jews and Gentiles, and all Mankind
are, by Nature, equally under Sin. They are so considered as in their Natural
Estate; though otherwise, Grace may have made some difference betwixt them.

THE Words then will afford us this Doctrine.

DOCT. THAT, Mankind are all by Nature Equally under Sin; none better than
others. FOR the Clearing up of this Truth, there are three things to be
Considered; viz. (1) What is here intended and employed in Men's being under Sin.
(2) What is me'nt by Men's being by Nature Equally so. (3) How it appears that
this is the Condition of all Mankind.

I. LET us Consider what is intended and employed in Men's being under Sin.

NOW this implies Several things, As,

1. MEN'S committing Sin, or being Guilty of it. By their being Guilty, I here
intend their being Sinners, or that Relation, which those that have Sinned, do
stand in unto the Sins that have been Committed by them, on the Account whereof
they are said to be theirs, and by which the charge of Sining is justly
fastened on them. Men's being thus under Sin does imply that they have Sinned,
either by omitting something which they should have done, or doing something
which they should not. Without this, Persons cannot be truly said to be under
Sin. In this sense Persons may be said to be under Sin, or Guilty of it,
whether the Deserved Punishment of their Offenses be inflicted on them or not.
Thus those unto whom the Lord does not impute Sin, may be said to be under it,
when they have done that which they should not. Again.

2. MEN are said to be under Sin, as it dwells or abides in them, after they
have Committed it. Those Actions wherein Men Sin against God, are transient and
pass away as soon as they are done; as Adam did not continue Eating the
Forbidden Fruit; but having so done, his Act therein was gone and past: But
Men's Actions being thus finished, Sin remains in the Persons performing them.
There is after them a vicious Habit or Inclination left in the Souls of the
Persons Sinning, which is in it self truly and properly Sin; being the want of
a Conformity unto the Holy Law of God, in Men's Minds or Hearts, and so a
Transgression of it.

WHEN Sin is committed, the Soul is as it were Poisoned with it, so as to
Remain disposed to Vice and Wickedness, being depraved and Sinful. So it was
with Adam, when he had Sinned against God; and all his Posterity have been
Naturally full of Sin ever since; as will by and by more fully appear. Hence
that in Romans 7. 20. Sin that dwells in me.

3. PERSONS may be also said to be under Sin, on the account of that Stain and
Blot which it leaves on the Persons committing it, I mean the shame and
reproach which it brings upon them. For though this be properly rather an Effect
of Sin than Sin it self; yet the effects of Sin, or Punishment of it, being
sometimes in Scripture called Sin, Persons may not unfitly be said to be under
Sin, when under them. Hence it is said of a Person committing Sin, Prove. (...)
33. A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped
away. Agreeable hereunto is that in Prove. 14. 34. Sin is a Reproach unto any
People. Such as bear the Reproach, which Sin has brought upon them, may on that
account be said to be under Sin; and this seems evidently included in that
Expression, as used in the Text.

4. MEN'S being under Sin evidently intends their being under the Guilt of it.
By Guilt here I intend that Obligation unto Punishment, under which Men are
brought, when they Sin against God, by the Sentence denounced in that Holy Law
of His, which is trangressed by them; and not the Relation only, in which they
stand unto the Sins which they have Committed; of which before. And Guilt is
very frequently taken in the Sense, in which I here understand it. So in our
Context, verse the 19 th. Now we know that what things soever the Law says, it
says to them who are under the Law: that every Mouth may be stopped, and all
the World may become Guilty before God. Or* as it is in the Margin, Subject to
the Judgment of God. In this Sense, the word Guilt is to be understood, Psalm.
51. 14. Deliver me from bloud-guiltiness, O God. In this Sense, Persons
Iniquity is said to be upon them, when they are bound over to Punishment for it.

5. MEN are said to be under Sin, on the account of the Reigning Power of it in
and over them. This is something more than Simply their having Sin in them, of
which I have before spoken, for thus God's own Children may be the Subjects of
Sin, but Sin does not Reign in them, it has no Dominion over them, nor are they
the Servants of it, as the Apostle shows, Romans Chap 6. But on the Contrary,
such as are in a State of Nature, are under the Reigning Power and Dominion of
Sin. Sin reigns in their mortal bodies, and they do obey it in the Lusts
thereof, having their Conversation in the Lusts of the Flesh, and fulfilling
the desires of the Flesh, and of the Mind, being Foolish and Disobedient, and
serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, as is declared in Ephesians. 2. 3. Tit. 3. 3. For
we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one
another. Of Persons who are in this Sense under Sin, that is to be understood
Romans 7. 20. When ye were the Servants of Sin, ye were free from Righteousness.

We may consider,

II. WHAT is here intended by Men's being Equally under Sin (none better then
others) by Nature. Now that this does not intend that all Mankind are equally
bad in their Lives, has been already declared. And when it is said that Men are
by Nature alike it seems plainly employed, that by Grace they are or may be far
otherwise.

AND very true it is that since Life and Immortality have been brought to Light
by the Gospel, God has put a very great Difference betwixt one and another of
the Children of the first Adam, making some of them much better than others.
Nor has He only made a difference betwixt those that are Born again, and such
as are not, but also betwixt one and another of these; for as all the Godly are
not equally Holy, so neither are all unregenerate Persons suffered to run into
the same excess of Riot, or equally and alike to give up themselves unto a
Course of Sinning against God; but many of them are by common Grace restrained
from Committing Sin, with such Greediness as others do; and also enabled to do
many things that are Materially Good, and Beneficial both unto themselves and
others; though not such as are said to accompany Salvation. Heb. 6. 9.

IT is readily granted, that there is such a Difference betwixt the Children of
Men as that now declared; but then it must be affirmed that Grace and not
Nature has made it. By Nature they are all alike, in Respect of their Moral
Estate or condition, none either better or worse than others: Nor do I by
Nature here understand that of Man, in the State wherein he was Created, but
the Nature of Man considered as in that Estate which his Sin and Fall brought
him into, and as a Subject of those Sinful Inclinations which by his Apostasy
from God he has Contracted, and of which he Remains a Miserable Subject till
the Grace of God makes some change in him, or work some good Effects on him.

I may now Proceed to Consider,

III. HOW it appears that this is the Condition of all Mankind. Or, that by
Nature all Mankind are equally under Sin; none better than others.

AND this will be evident, if we seriously weigh a few things now to be
proposed unto Consideration. Here then I say,

I. THAT the Sin and Fall of the first Adam involved all Mankind in it. There
was no difference made here; one as well as another of Adam's Posterity Sinned
in him, and fell with him in his first Transgression. Eve sinned Personally as
Adam did, and was also a Partaker with him in His Sin, as Accessory to it, by
enticeing him to commit it and so at least equally Guilty with him.

BUT all Adam's Posterity, being in him, as Branches in the Root, or Stock, out
of which they proceed, or as Fruit is first in the Tree that bears it, before
it is brought forth, they most certainly Sinned in him when he sinned. They may
on this account be as well said to have done what he did when he eat the
forbidden fruit, as the Sons of Levi are said to have paid tithes in Abraham,
Heb. 7. 9. But if their being Naturally in him, in the manner now expressed,
did not Necessarily entitle them to the Guilt and Defilement of his Sin (as I
do not affirm that it did) (...) that rendered it most just and equal that he
should be made a Public Person, and moral (...) them, in whom (as such) they
should be and do and so stand or fall as he should do. Nor could their being
thus in, and represented by him, be any disadvantage unto them; for as they
acted in him, so they would have acted out of him. Their Nature being the very
same with his, they would have done just as he did, if put upon the same trial
as he was; and therefore could receive no wrong by his representing of them,
and acting for them as their Public Head. It was altogether as well for them
in this way, as it could have been if they had Personally acted for themselves,
and made their own choice.

NAY, it seems that they were in less danger of a Miscarriage in the way fixed
on, than they would have been in the other: for Adam had a far greater charge
lying on him, than any Person in a single capacity could have had: it is
certain that his own happiness was as much concerned in the affair as any
Persons could have been, who might have been left to a Personal Trial in a case
wherein their eternal safety did depend upon their doing as they ought. And
besides this, the welfare or Happiness of all his Posterity depended on his
obedience unto God, in the Instance wherein he was tried; which we cannot
suppose him to have been Ignorant of; for it is not reasonable to think that he
could be such a Public Person, and yet not be acquainted with it.

NOW the consideration of this laid a moral obligation on him, to take great
heed what he did, and not at once to destroy all his Posterity, together with
himself.

THAT the first Adam did as a Public Person thus represent, and act for all
those who in the way of ordinary Generation do proceed from him, and that they
fell with him in his first Transgression, the Scriptures do abundantly
testify. The Apostle Paul fully asserts and clears up this in the fifth
chapter of his Epistle to the Romans. In the 12 verse, he tells us, That by one
Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and so Death passed on all
Men, for that all have sinned in him. And in the following context, he declares
that through the offense of one, many are dead; and that Judgment was by one,
unto condemnation. And he further tells that by one Man's offense, death
reigned by one. (verse 15, 16, 17.) That Adam was the one Man here spoken of,
is declared in verse the 14 th. where we are also told that he was the figure
of him that was to come, even JESUS CHRIST, who is the head and representative
of his Seed, as the first Adam was of his. The Apostle accordingly tells us,
that as in one of these many were made Sinners; so in the other also many are
made Righteous, in verse the 18, 19, and 21: Agreeable unto this is that also
of the same Apostle in 1 Cor. 15, 21, 22. As by man came Death, so by man came
the Resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive.

II. AS all Mankind fell in and with Adam, so they were all Equally involved in
the Guilt and Defilement of his Sin. As they all fell in him, so they all fell
Equally in him. This must needs be granted; for all Adam's Posterity were
equally related to him both as their natural and appointed head. the covenant
of works was one and the same, to which they all in (...) consented, and
according to their obedience or disobedience unto which they were either to
live or die; and they were all Equally capable of the Reward promised, and of
the Punishment threatened in that covenant, and so of all the Effects or
consequents of Adams obedience or disobedience unto God, of what nature or kind
soever they were. And hence they were all equally involved in Sin and Misery.

Here I may more particularly affirm.

1. THAT all the Children of Adam did by the fall partake equally in the Guilt
of his Sin. I mean now that his Sin was equally imputed unto or charged on all
of them. Whatever Interest any of them had in it, they all had. They being all
in one condition, all Shipped on one and the same bottom, having all one and
the same Surety, or Public Person to represent them, and all falling by one
Offense of the same Man, at the very same time, and under the very same
circumstances; How can it be but that they must be equally Guilty? The Sin
committed must needs equally belong to them all. There is no room to suppose
that there could be any difference as to this, nor is there the least
intimation in Scripture, that there was any: but the contrary is therein fully
declared, as shall be presently made manifest.

And from hence it follows,

2 ly. THAT all Mankind are by Nature equally liable unto the Judgments,
threatened in case of disobedience. If all had the charge of Sin Equally lying
on them, were equally chargeable with such Crimes as do expose Men unto
punishment, then all must needs be equally liable to (...) the Punishments due
on the account of them.

THE Sin of Adam did accordingly expose all that were Guilty of it unto Death.
Genesis 2. 17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. And Death is
agreeably hereunto said to have reigned from Adam unto Moses, even over them
that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams Transgression, i. e. not
actually in their own Persons as he did, Romans 5. 13. Hence we are assured that
even God's own People were by nature Children of wrath even as others, Ephesians. 2.
3.

I go on and say,

3 ly. THAT Mankind are all equally Defiled by original sin. Or that the
Depravation of the Nature of Man by the fall, has equally affected all the
Children of Adam; the Holy child Jesus only excepted. The rest of Adam's
Posterity are equally infected with it. For,

(1) IF we consider the Depravation of the Humane Nature, which followed on the
fall of Man, as a Penal Effect of his first and great Transgression, this was
certainly a Punishment equally due unto all his offspring.

IT is not to be doubted, but that the moral distempers of Men's Souls, unto
which they have ever since the fall been subject, are a just Punishment of
Man's Sin in Eating the Forbidden Fruit. They are included in the Death
threatened, when God said unto Man, that in the day he eat thereof, he should
surely die: The Children of Adam have therefore been dead in sin, ever since
his Sin and fall: And that Children are disposed unto Sin from their very
Infancy, going astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies, as in Psalm 58.
3. is an invincible argument of their being Guilty of Original Sin; their own
actual Sin, not going before, but following after, this Propensity in their
Nature to Sin against God.

BUT now all the Posterity of the first Adam, being equally Guilty of that Sin,
which they committed in him, as has been showed, it plainly follows that so far
as the corruption of Man's Nature is to be looked upon as a punishment of that
Sin, it was equally due unto all those, who equally Partook in the Guilt of
Adams first Offense. And,

(2) IF we consider the corruption of Man's Nature, as Naturally Propagated (in
the way of ordinary generation) from Parents unto Children, all the Children of
Adam must needs in this way partake equally of it. The depravation of our
Nature as a natural result, or effect of our Apostasy from God, must needs
equally affect all those who were in and with Adam, plunged into the same mire
and dirt of Sin into which he fell. Those who were alike dipped in the same
corrupt Fountain, must needs be equally defiled by it.

THAT Original Sin is naturally propagated from Parents unto their Children, is
a truth whereof we have no reason to doubt. When Adam did eat of the forbidden
fruit, he took a dose of Poison, if I may so speak: Not that I assert that the
Fruit of which he partook was properly and naturally so; but the Sin which he
then committed was poison unto his Soul, and did most woefully infect it,
producing many grievous Distempers in it: Yea his very Body was also affected
with it. The Poison which he thus took, did immediately infect his whole Spirit,
Soul and Body: So that his nature was presently most grievously depraved, his
understanding darkened, his heart hardened, his affections disordered, and all
the members of his Body became the ready Instruments of unrighteousness: And
all his Posterity partook equally of the Diseases which he thus contracted: For
he being infected and defiled, they could not be clean, but as proceeding from
him were altogether Filthy: For the Distempers by Man thus contracted became
hereditary, and were necessarily propagated to his off spring. His Children
were accordingly begotten in his own Sinful Likeness. Cain was evidently so,
and Abel was a Sinner, and needed a Sacrifice. And of Seth it is expressly said,
that Adam begat him in his own likeness, after his Image; and this, after he
had lost God's Image, wherein he was created, Genesis 5. 3.

NOR where they only Adam's immediate Children, who were thus infected, but the
Distemper has kept spreading in the world, through all the Generations of the
Sons and Daughters of Adam, no one of them being free from it. Hence that in
Job 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one. And Chap. 25
4. How can he be clean that is born of a woman? There is not therefore a Man,
Woman or Child upon the Earth, but what may truly say with David, in Psalm. 51.
5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity; and in Sin did my mother conceive me.

AS the Sin is the same, by which all Mankind are defiled; so the way of its
conveyance to them all, is but one. It passes to them in one and the same
Channel of natural Generation: And so equally infects all unto whom it does
descend, even all that come into the World in that way.

III. AS Mankind do appear, from what has been already said, to be equally
under Sin; so God in his word speaks of all men, as equally Sinful by nature.
The Apostle having in our Text informed us, that none of Mankind are by nature
any better than others, but all equally under Sin; does in the following
context (from verse the 10 th. to the 18 th.) prove the Truth of what he says;
As it is written, (says he,) There is none Righteous, no not one: There is
none that under stands, there is none that seeks after God. They are all
gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable, there is none that
does good, no not one. Their throat is an open sepulcher; with their tongues
they have used deceit; the poison of asp, is under their lips: Whose mouth is
full of cursing and bitterness. Their feet are swift to shed blood. Destruction
and misery are in their ways: And the way of peace have they not known. There
is no fear of God before their eyes. These words the Apostle quotes out of the
Psalms, Proverbs and Isaiah, to prove that all Men are by nature equally
Sinful, and so very Sinful as is expressed in them: and then adds in verse the
19 th. Now what things soever the Law says, it says unto them, who are under
the Law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become Guilty
before God. The same truth is confirmed by many other Testimonies of Scripture.
As Genesis 6. 5. And God said that the wickedness of man was great in the Earth,
and that every Imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually. Jer. 17. 9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked; who can know it? Psalm. 58. 3, 4, 5. The wicked are
estranged from the womb, they go astray, as soon as they are born speaking
lies. Their Poison is like the Poison of a Serpent, they are like the deaf
Adder that stops her ear, which will not hearken to the voice of Charmers,
charming never so wisely.

THESE and many other such like Texts of Scripture must needs be understood as
spoken of Mankind considered as in their natural and unconverted estate, and as
left unto themselves, (for unto any others the description given will not
agree) and consequently what is unto this effect said of them, will hold
respecting all such as they are.

BUT thus much for the Doctrinal Handling of the Point.

THE APPLICATION or Improvement of the Truth insisted on, shall be briefly
offered in a few Inferences. And,

USE, 1. IF, as we have now heard, none of Mankind are, by Nature, any better
than others, but all equally under Sin; we may from hence very naturally infer,
That they are all exceeding wicked, and their condition very miserable. If we
consider what the very worst of Men on Earth actually be, we may in them see
what all Men, and so even the best, by nature are. When we see or hear of any
Persons that are extremely wicked, we are apt to cry out against them as very
Ministers of Impiety, and such as are hated of God, and justly to be abhorred
of Men; (and indeed so they are) but do we duly consider, that we our selves,
and even the best Men in the world, are as had by nature as they. Our hearts
are by nature as desperately wicked as theirs; and we should have run into the
same excesses in our Lives, as they have done, had not the Grace of God
restrained us from it. If we see, hear or read of, Covetous Persons, Liars,
Thieves, Adulteres, Murderers, or Blasphemers of God, etc. and thereupon ask
this question, Are we better then they? The answer must be, No, in no wise; for
it plainly appears, that we are all by nature, equally under Sin. If one of the
blackest Catalogues of Sinners that could possibly be thought of (suppose that
Romans 1. 21, -- 32.) were set before us, we must own that we are by nature
altogether as bad as they: Nay, we are naturally as bad as the very Devils are:
Even worse than we are able to Imagine. ( Jer. 17. 9.) And our Misery, while we
are in our natural Estate, is proportionable to our Wickedness. While
unconverted, we are in estate of condemnation, and the wrath of God abides on
us. We are, by nature children of wrath even as others; are under God's wrath
and curse, and so liable to all the Miseries of this Life, to death it self,
and the pains of Hell for ever. We may see how this our forlorn and wretched
Estate by Nature is set forth in Ezekiel. 16. 2, -- 4.

USE 2. WE may from the Truth before us infer, That Sinners cannot be
Justified, and saved by any Legal Righteousness of their own, but must be made
Righteous, by the Righteousness of another, even Jesus Christ the Righteous, if
ever they obtain Life Eternal. This conclusion the Apostle himself has already
drawn to our hands from the Proposition, which we have had under our
consideration. His inference from it we have in our context, ( v. 20, to the
28.) which I choose to express in his own words. Therefore (says he,) by the
deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified in God's sight: for by the
Law is the knowledge of Sin. But now the righteousness of God without the Law is
manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets. Even the righteousness
of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that
believe; for there is no difference: For all have sinned and come short of the
glory of God; Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that
is in Jesus Christ: Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through says
in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God; To declare I say, his righteousness: that
he might be just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Where is
boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay: but by the law of
faith. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the
deeds of the Law.

THE sum of the matter is, that Mankind being fallen into such a Sinful and
Miserable Estate, as their Apostasy from God has brought them into, they can
never be justified by any Righteousness of their own, nor by any other than
that of Jesus Christ, provided by God, and revealed in the Gospel. And this
truth is also confirmed by other places of Scripture, as Romans 4. 2, to 8, and
11. 6. Gal. 3. 11. 12. and phil. 3. 9.

IT is evident from Scripture, (1.) That unto Man's Justification before God,
it is required, That he have a Perfect Righteousness; such a Righteousness as
the perfect Law of God requires: And consequently that such as would be
Justified by a Righteousness of their own performing, must perfectly fulfill
the whole Law, without out being guilty of any failure. Gal. 3. 10, 12. (2.)
That Mankind having once broken God's holy Law, they can never in their own
Persons fulfill it; for however exact they might be supposed to be in their
obedience, after their Repentance yet they must needs still remain Sinners, in
respect of their past offenses: And therefore such a Righteousness cannot
Justify them in God's sight, Gal. 3. 10, 11. Romans 3. 20. (3.) That therefore
the only Righteousness, by which Sinners may be Justified, is that wrought out
by Jesus Christ, and revealed in the Gospel. As the Apostle plainly and fully
shows, Romans 3. 21, to the 26. and chap. 5. 18, 19. And hence it follows (4)
That that Faith, by which we are said to be Justified, (whatever it may be
supposed to comprehend or include in it) cannot be our justifying
Righteousness; nor is it is being so, intended, when it is said to be accounted
for righteousness unto such as have it, Romans 4, 5.

FOR it is certain, that faith, by which we are said to be justified, is in
Scripture plainly distinguished from that Righteousness, which is received by
it, and said to be unto and upon them that believe; and which is said to be
without works ( i. e. works of Men's own doing) imputed to them, Rom 3. 22. and
4. 5. 6.

USE 3. WE may from the Doctrine justly infer, That if there be now any
difference betwixt one and another of the sinful race of Mankind, Sovereign
Divine Grace has made it, and not they themselves. It is not denied, but that
there is now a great difference betwixt people, in respect of their
Qualifications and Actions: and it is well if the difference that is betwixt
them, be duly observed and acknowledged. There are some Righteous Persons that
are more excellent than their Neighbors; Those Saints in the Earth, and
Excellent ones, in whom all our delight should be. ( Psalm. 16. 3.) There should
certainly be a respect shown unto such, proportionable to the virtue and
goodness appearing in them. It is said concerning a Godly Man, That in his eyes
a vile person is contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord.

BUT now from whence arises this difference, which we see betwixt one Person,
or People, and another? If some are now better than others, is it owing to
themselves, that they are so? No surely, this cannot be: For being by nature no
better than others, they can by nature do no better than others do. If Persons
Hearts be just alike, their Tempers or Inclinations the very same, and have
none of them any means and helps from without them, more than the other have,
they will still be and act both alike. But if some of those, who are alike by
nature, do become better than others, we may conclude that some Influence upon
them from without, has made that odds: and this can be ascribed unto no other
cause than the Sovereign and Distinguishing Grace of the Blessed God. Hence
that in 1 Cor. 4. 7. What makes thee to differ from another? and what have
thou that thou did not receive? And that in Romans 9. 16. So then it is not of
him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy. If
then there be any that are better than others, that God has made them so, who
has told us, He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and will have
compassion on whom he will have compassion: And it becomes us to say as in
Matt. 11. 26. Even so, Father, for so it seems good in thy sight.

USE 4. WE may learn from the Truth insisted on, That Humility and Self
Abasement does very well become all the Children of the first Adam: and that
even the best had need to take heed of Spiritual Pride, and be careful lest in
comparing themselves with others, they be puffed up with Vainglory, while they
reckon themselves better than they.

IT is certain that Mankind have generally a great propensity this way. Such as
enjoy extraordinary advantages, are apt to value themselves too highly on the
account of them, and to think that they have good qualifications answerable to
the Privileges, with which they are favored; when perhaps it is far otherwise.
And then being puffed up in their own mind, they are apt to contemn and disdain
others, as though they were vile, compared with them. This was too much the
temper and guise of the Jews, while they were lifted up to Heaven in
Privileges. They reckoned themselves a most holy People, and Esteemed others as
unclean. In our Savior's time and after it, they seemed to think they had
gotten the Monopoly of Religion, so that others had scarce any the least Share
of it. Nay, they could scarce endure that the Gentiles should have the means of
Salvation offered unto them. It is certain that such a temper as this is very
offensive unto God: He observed it with displeasure in some of his own visible
People of Old, who said unto others. Stand by thy self, come not near me; for I
am holier than thou. ( Isa. 6^ (...).) And of such he there says, These are a
smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day. There be some that live very
Vicious Lives, and by their Sins expose themselves unto God's Judgments; But
what then, says the Apostle, are we, who are now reformed, any better than
they? i.e. are we by nature so? No, in no wise: We are all equally under Sin.
Those who would keep Spiritual Pride out of their Hearts, should seriously
consider this: and not forget, that if they do now at all differ from those
with whom they compare themselves, it is GOD that has made them so to do. Such
thoughts have a natural tendency to keep Men humble and low in their own Eyes;
which it is our duty and interest to be. We should not be High minded but fear,
(Romans 11. 20.) and take heed that we do not think ourselves something, when we
are nothing, deceiving our own Souls. (Gal. 6 3.) But if we are indeed in any
respect become better than others, let us not be proud of it, but say unto GOD,
as in ( Psalm. 115. 1.) Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give
Glory. And we should take the caution given us in 1 Cor. 4. 7. partly before
recited, what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive
it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it?

USE 5. WE may from the Doctrine discoursed on, draw this conclusion, That the
Sinfulness of any People ought not to be looked upon, as a sufficient ground of
discouragment unto the People of God, from setting upon, and diligently
prosecuting proper methods, for their Conversion and Salvation.

CHRISTIANS should consider, That being themselves by nature as bad as the
worst, if this had been sufficient to discourage others from attempting their
Conversion, they might have perhaps still remained such as by nature they were,
and not have been made such as through the Grace of God, they are now become.
But we bless God, we have not been thus dealt withal.

WHY then should we be discouraged from endeavoring the Salvation of others;
though they at present appear to us to be as bad, as all Men by nature are,
according to the account in the Word of God given of them.

MANY such have been Converted and Saved. 1 Cor. 6. 1. Such were some of you,
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. The Sovereign Grace of an
Omnipotent God can cure the Blindness, and overcome the obstinacy of any
People, and make them willing in the day of his Power. If he has done this for
us, why should we be discouraged from using the proper means with others; that
so we may see what free and rich Grace will in this way do for them? And though
we should not presently discern such good effects of our Endeavors as we
desire, we should not presently give over our Essays to save our perishing
Neighbors from Eternal ruin.

HERE I cannot but think it proper to make a more particular Application of
what I am saying under this Head unto the case of a miserable People dwelling
among us, and bordering upon us: I mean the Aboriginal Natives of this Land.

THE Preaching of the Gospel unto many of these, and the Success which it has
had among them, has been formerly looked upon as none of the least of the
Glories of this Country, and GOD Himself has been Glorified on the account of
it.

NOW, though this work was formerly carried on with much of Life and Vigor, yet
it must be confessed that there seems not of Later Years such a Spirit among us
to promote the good of the Indians: But on the Contrary, the work now goes on
heavily, and many seem to labor under discouragements with respect to it; yea
some will speak as if there was scarce any good to be hoped for concerning the
People here intended.

BUT why should we be so discouraged about them! They are no worse by nature
than others, or than we our selves. They are as capable Subjects of good
impressions, as the People of any other Nation; And when it pleases God to
bless means for their good, there are the same effects produced thereby, as the
same means do produce on others.

I do not deny but that the number of such as are vicious among them is very
great; but then I should not give God the Glory of his Grace manifested in, and
toward many of them, if I did not on this occasion say, That there are (to the
Eye of Christian Charity,) a considerable number of Godly People among them,
And I do now declare, that I do not doubt but that there have been many
hundreds (if I may not say some thousands) of them saved, since the first
Preaching of the Gospel to them in this Land. There is scarce a Year passes,
wherein there are not some, more or less, who as far as can be Judged, die in
the Lord. I am confident it is so with those, with whom I am concerned; and I
hope many are Saved in other Places also.

I bear witness for God, that I do not perceive but that he as readily
concurreth, by the operations of his Spirit, with the means used for the good
of the Indians, as with those enjoyed by any other People. Though it be true,
that as he delights to work by means, so the more suitable the means are, the
more grounds we have to expect his blessing to accompany them.

IN a word, I think we have no reason to be discouraged from prosecuting with
utmost diligence, the good design of Propagating the Gospel among the Natives
of this Land: And I take this opportunity (which is a more Public one than I
could justly have expected, Being a the Audience of the General Court.
) to entreat all such as are in any capacity for it, to endeavor a revival of
this work, and a removal of the things that do impede the successful carrying
of it on; yea and diligently to consider what further way and means may be used
for the most successful management of it.

THE Honorable COMMISSIONERS for the Propagation of the Gospel among the
Indians, will doubtless think themselves very deeply concerned herein. And I
here crave leave humbly, and with the greatest Submission to say, That I
believe this to be an Affair worthy of the serious consideration of the Great
and General COURT, or Assembly of this Province, and I am persuaded that some
things might yet be done by the Government here, which would have a very
favorable aspect on this work.

I conclude this head, with asking the Prayers of my Hearers, That the Blessing
of God may accompany all the means that are used for the good of the Indians;
and that He would please to direct all those that are more immediately
concerned with and for them, unto such measures as may be most conducive to
that end. I have frequently heard our Christian Indians praying fervently for
the English Churches and Ministers here, and else where: And I hope we shall
not neglect to pray for them also. Let us entreat the Lord on their behalf,
that his Spirit may be poured upon them from on high whereby of a Wilderness
they may be made a Fruitful Field; and that they may yet be a People formed for
him to show forth his praise, and that he would please to say concerning them,
that he will set his Sanctuary in the midst of them, -- and that his Tabernacle
shall be with them, yea that he will be their God, and that they shall be his
People!

USE 6 and last. IF Mankind be all in such a Sinful and Miserable Estate, as
has been declared, should we not all of us be greatly concerned, that we may
not fail of getting out of it! It is a most dreadful thing to be under Sin,
under the Guilt and reigning power of it. We have all of us reason to cry out,
as in Romans 7. 24. O wretched men that we are! Who shall deliver us from the
body of this Death. And we should give our selves no rest, till we have
attained unto some comfortable assurance, that we are delivered from the Guilt
and Dominion of Sin, and are able to rejoice as not being under the Law but
under Grace.

WE should look upon Sin, unto which we are naturally subject, as the worst of
all Evils; that abominable thing which God hates; and the procuring cause of
all the penal or afflictive evils that do or can befall us: And we should bless
God for sending his SON, the Lord from Heaven, to redeem us from our Sins; and
bless Him for undertaking the admirable work of our Redemption. We should also
be very thankful that the way of Salvation by a Redeemer is revealed unto us in
the Gospel, and should all of us be deeply concerned, that we receive not the
Grace of God in vain. As all Mankind are by nature equally under Sin, so they
should be all equally concerned to get deliverance from it. This is a concern
which none may think themselves too high for; and which the meanest persons are
invited to attend.

LET us then every one of us look to our selves, giving all diligence to make
our calling and election sure. Let us be sensible in how bad an estate we by
nature are: And let us abhor our selves for all our Sins, and repent in dust
and ashes. And let us prize Jesus Christ, who saves his People from their
Sins, and let us repair unto him for Salvation: Flying for Refuge, to lay hold
on the Hope set before us.

I Conclude with that good and comfortable word, in 1 Cor. 15. 56, 57. The
sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law: but thanks be unto
God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

