A LETTER FROM Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of PENNSYLVANIA, To Mr. James
Logan, Secretary to the Proprietorship of the said Province, ON Occasion of Mr.
Logan's having sent to Sir William a Copy of his Printed Paper, called the
ANTIDOTE.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by Andrew Bradford, 1725.

A LETTER, From Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of Pennsylvania, To Mr.
James Logan, Secretary to the Proprietorship of the said Province, on Occasion
of Mr. Logan's having sent to Sir William a Copy of his Printed Paper, called
the ANTIDOTE.
Mr. James Logan. SIR,
I Lately received a Printed Paper of yours, called The Antidote, which I
understood, was left with my Secretary, by your Servant, for my use; and
therefore, I was willing to bestow some Pains on considering it, in the most
Serious, Grave and Friendly manner, without the Intermixture of any Prejudice,
Passion, or Partiality, as far as I can be allowed to judge of my self,
Referring these my Thoughts, nevertheless, unto more Indifferent Persons, than
either You or I can be supposed to be, in treating of a Subject, which so
nearly concerns our Respective Interests and Characters, as they seem to stand
in this light opposed to each other.

The Points in Question then, which have given Occasion to so much Wrangling,
appear unto Me simply to be these Two, viz.

1. Whether, by virtue of the Powers Granted in the Proprietor of this
Province, in the Royal Charter, or from the nature of the Thing it self, He,
the Proprietor and Governor in Chief, and by Instructions, or any particular
Orders, at a Distance, Restrain his Deputy Governor, from Exercising all or
any of the same Legal and often necessary Acts of Government, which He himself
might or Lawfully could do, if He was present?

2. Whether, when a Constitution is, by a Royal Charter, in plain, clear words
Established, to Consist only of Two parts, in the Legislative Body; The
Addition of a Third part or State; with a Negative upon the Acts of that
Legislature, without the Consent of Parties, be not an Infringement of the
first Constitution? and therefore without such Consent, viz, the Legislative
Authority, it cannot be permitted, or safely complied with.

As to the First, We find that the Royal Charter Confers the Powers of
Government; on the Proprietor, with the Assent of the Freemen, or a Majority of
them; and by the Powers of Government, here is to be understood, a Legislative
or Coercive Power over some Community, which, in it is nature, does admit of no
other Limitation; but what the Government of Great Britain (on which those of
all the Colonies naturaly depend) either has already Imposed, or shall
hereafter think fit to Limit.

Now, this is not only the indivisible and unlimited Nature of that Power,
which; by the same Royal Charter, the Proprietor is enabled to Transfer, by
special Commission unto his Deputy, or Representative in Government, but We
shall, by Examining the particular Words of the Commission, transferring it
upon the Deputy, also find, That the aforesaid Powers of Government are,
without any Limitation or Reserve whatsoever made by the Proprietor, absolutely
given to his Deputy, to Act in all Cases relating to Civil Government, as amply
and freely, as He the Proprietor himself might or could lawfully do, in his own
(...) which Commission or Power there (...) derived, being afterward approved
by the Crown without any manner of Limitation specified, We must Conclude in a
fair way of Reasoning, That all subsequent Instructions coming from the
Proprietor to Restrain or render ineffectual, the general and necessary Powers
of Government, granted by his Commission, or any one essential Part of them,
cannot but be interpreted, either to vacate the Commission, or to be
inconsistent with it, and consequently in themselves Void. And although You would
^^tfully seem to insinuate, that there is a Difference, between the Case of a
Negative reserved to the Proprietor Himself, by the Clause mentioned in Col.
Evans's Commission, and that of Imposing one afterward by positive
Instructions to the Deputy Governor; yet laying aside Prejudice, it is evident
to the most Common Understanding, That as to their Effects in the
Administration of the Government, they are entirely the same: And in the
present Disputed particular Case, of Passing Bills from the Assembly into Laws,
they equally, either destroy the Powers contained in the Deputy Governor's
Commission for that Purpose, and thereby Vacate the whole, or such prohibitory
Instructions, because of their Contradiction to those Legal and Necessary
Powers, must be taken as in themselves Void. And notwithstanding the mighty
pains, You are at, in many Words to Demonstrate as You would make us believe,
That by this just and legal Interpretation of these matters, the Proprietor is
put under a very unreasonable and great Hardship, I must take leave to differ
widely from You in Opinion on that Head: For so long as the Proprietor very
prudently Commissionates his Deputy Governors, during his Pleasure only, and
that such Acts of Assembly, as in any Case appear to be hurtful, may on the
least Application, be immediately Repealed, if his Interest was at any Time to
suffer by his Deputy's misconduct, there is a fair and a sure Remedy at hand,
without involving himself into such Contradictions and Unnatural Measures, as
You have inconsiderately proposed, and imprudently Contend for, at this Time.

But because perhaps You may like that way of Arguing, still better than Cases
of Law, which I do not pretend to a Capacity of applying so well as those who
are more Conversant with Books of that kind, I shall conclued this Article,
with a Syllogism, which I am persuaded will be found in some degree applicable
to the Point in Question.

If any Commissioner or Deputy from a Great King and Sovereign Prince, unto
whom the Regal Power of Enacting Laws with a Parliament has been transferred,
can pass any Law or Statute in plain Contradiction to his Royal Master and
Constitutions positive Instructions, and at the same Time, this Commissioner or
Deputy, shall not be understood to be punishable by Law for his so doing? Then
most certainly the Powers of Legislation, Conferred by Special Commission on
such Deputy, must be understood in Law, to be unlimited and not restrainable by
the Principal, any other way, than by revoking the Commission or Deputation.

But in the Reign of our late Sovereign King William the 3d. of Glorious
Memory, The Earth of Tweed-dale His Majesty's Lord High Commissioner to the
Parliament of Scotland, did in Contradiction to the King's positive
Instructions, Pass an Act for establishing the Scots Affrican or Darien
Company; The Earl well knowing that He was not punishable by Law for so doing.

Ergo The Powers of Legislation, Granted to a Deputy in that Case by the King
himself, were in their Nature and Construction of Law, understood to be
unlimited, and not restrainable, by any Instructions contradictory to the
Substance and Import of such a Commission.

Now although it might reasonably be expected, that a Deputy, who had a due
Regard and Respect for his Master, would carefully Observe Instructions,
concerning any particular and lawful Thing; yet if such Instructions, (...) in
the Case now before us, were coceived (...) general Terms, viz. That such
Deputy shall Pass no Laws whatsoever in his Legislative Capacity, without the
Consent of such and such particular Men; it is impossible to Con^^ive how he
could comply, any other way than by voluntarily divesting himself of the ^owers
contained in his Commission, and ^indly following the Dictates of Persons, who
without any Commission or Pretense of authority whatsoever, must, it seems, be
quietly admitted to Usurp the Deputy Governor's Share in the Legislature;
Notwithstanding that He himself, and not these Perpersons, must stand
accountable under very high Penalties in Law, for all that is Mis-done.

I come now to the 2d Point in Dispute,

The Nature of our Constitution, as it is established by the Royal-Charter, and
an Uninterrupted Practice for above Twenty odd Years.

I agree with You, That the Charter of Maryland, with respect to the Powers of
Legislation, is conceived in the very same Words with That of Pennsylvania: But
I absolutely deny, That there are any Words to be found (...) either of them,
whereby a Negative Couned in the Legislature, can without an Act of Assembly be
established, or Admitted, even by Implication. And therefore I am at (...)
Loss, how to Discover the Sense and Meaning of your Assertion in these Words,
viz.

And to Close the whole, That in Maryland, (as well as in all the other English
Colonies, this only excepted) They have, and ever had a Legislative Council,
upon the Foundation of the same Words, and no other, etc. For it would be
strange indeed, if the Legislative Councils of all the other English Colonies,
were founded o^ Words to be found, as You say, in the Charters of Maryland and
Pennsylvania: But until You are pleased to show us what these Words are in
those Charters, which infer by a Rational Construction, the Establishment of a
Legislative Council; I can by no means Acknowledge my self to be Satisfied with
your ipse dixit.

How the People of Maryland have formerly been drawn in, to concede to the
Practice of a Legislative Council, and what Legal Foundation there may be at
this Time, for the Establishment of such a Council there, is not my Bussiness
to Enquire. It is Sufficient that in my Printed Defense of the Constitution of
Pennsylvania, I have fully proved, That the Words of our Charter, plainly
confer the Powers of Legislation, upon the Governor in Conjunction with the
Freemen's Delegates, without mentioning any other Person or State to be joined
with them; So that you must look out for some other Foundation, than the Royal
Charter, upon which to build your Notions of a Legislative Council here; and so
soon as You are able to Discover or Obtain a Legal Establishment for any such
Thing I shall very respectfully Acquiesce, and Submit to it. But the Wrangling
Disputes and Contention, which by Common Report, have lately happened between
the Council and the Representatives of the Freemen in Maryland, and indeed the
Circumstances of the People of that Province in many other Respects, are such,
That it is hardly to be expected the People of this Province will show any
Fondness of Inclination to follow exactly their Example in the Administration
of our Provincial Affairs.

Moreover, That the Governor's Council in Pennsylvania, never had a Negative
upon the Legislature of that Province, but on the contrary, that the Majority
of the Members at that Board, ever disclaimed all manner of Pretense thereto,
is Evident, from the Constant Practice of these Gentlemen's being always
admitted to Vote at the Yearly Elections, or Assembly Men, and even to be
frequently Elected themselves, to Represent the Freemen upon Assembly, and to
be Chosen, Speakers of that House: And how inconsistent it is with Common
Sense, as well as with the Freedom and Beauty of an English Constitution, so
much in your Esteem, That one Man can be doubly Represented in the Legislative
Body; or that it shall be in his Power to Dissent in one part of the
Legislature, from the same Things which he has Assented to in the other, is
Obvious, and wants no Confutation. Since then it appears from what has been
said, that the Council of Pennsylvania, have at this Time, no just Claim to a
Negative upon the Legislature, they being already Represented there in another
Capacity, and consequently Incapable at present, of Exercising any such
Negative; We must on fair Reasoning, here also Conclude, That to add the
Members of this Council, as an Independent Third part, to the Legislature,
otherways than by Act of Assembly, would certainly be, an Infringement of the
present Constitution of the said Province, and consequently a Breach on the
People's Rights and Privileges, as they now stand Secured by Law and Charter.

Having finished what I had to offer, on the Argument as above Stated; I have
not the least Inclination to interfere in the Dispute betwixt You and the Chief
Justice, concerning Things which were transacted before my Time. The Freedoms
indeed which You take, with so Great and Universal a Character as that of Sir
John Holt, by setting up your Reason, as You call it, above his Law, which will
ever be understood by Men of Knowledge, to be Founded on the Greatest Reason;
and the manner wherein You give your self the Liberty to treat a Book of such
Established Authority, as Sergeant Salkeld's Reports, and Weaknesses, wherein
You are more to be Pitied than Answered: And notwithstanding the overflowing
Excess of Rancour and Venom which You have Spewed out against Our Chief Justice
Lloyd, You cannot but Acknowledge that upon my Arrival to this Government, He
was by the Council, of which You was Then a very Active Member, unanimously
Recommended to Me, as a Person every way well Qualified to receive that
Commission, in the Execution whereof, for above these Eight Years, it must be
Owned, he has showed a Judgment and Capacity, not inferior to any of that
Rank in America: So that, was there any Truth in what You allege, concerning
in Order from the Lords Justices in the Year 1699, it is very strange that I
never heard of it before. But neglecting to dwell on Things, in a Missive
Letter, which do not immediately belong to my self, and finding here and there
throughout your Paper, several Glances upon my Character and Conduct, in some
pariculars; I must crave your Leave to make a few Modest Observations, in Order
to withdraw that Curtain, wherewith You labor in vain to Cover the Truth.

Although then, I do acknowledge my self to be very justly Bound to follow the
Proprietor's Instructions, which to the best of my Understanding I have to this
Day punctually done; yet I cannot hereby think my self Obliged to fall in
Simpliciter with your Misinterpretation of the Rational consistent Sense and
Meaning of them; For I do say, That, according to the Duty of my Office, I have
ever Advised with the Council, on all Occasions of Moment, where it was in my
Power so to do; and although, for the above substantial Reasons, I could by no
means understand, That the Council had any Just or Legal Pretense to a Negative
upon Me in the Legislature; yet I have been so Happy, as in a General Way, to
obtain their Assent, even to my Actions of that Kind: And in all other Matters,
I ever Concurred with their Opinion, although sometimes contrary to my own
Sentiments; so that You may be assured, I think my self very well prepared to
Answer any Demands that the Proprietor can justly make on that Score; and, as
to the Dispute lately betwixt You and Me, concerning the Minute of Council
April 16th, 1722. Since That Board, on a full hearing on both Sides, were
Unanimously pleased to Order, That above one Half of the Paper drawn up at that
Time by your self in your own Hand Writing, under the Form of a Minute of
Council (although never before Communicated to any of that Board) should be
Struck out of the Minutes; I cannot enough Admire, how You can have the Vanity
to Assert that You obtained any Advantage over Me in that Point: For as it
plainly appears by this Unanimous Order or Decision, That You had Endeavored,
without the Council's or my Knowledge, to Insert a whole Page upon the Minutes,
which ought not to have been there; it is Sufficient to prove the Substance of
my Charge, which for fear of discomposing that Spirit of Meekness, You very
justly recommend to Others, I shall avoid repeating here or elsewhere; for I
rest fully Satisfied with what has been done in that Matter.

I cannot however but take Notice in this place, of the great pains You take in
all your Performances of this kind, to load the Arguments adduced by your
Adversaries, either in Defense of the Public or themselves, with the
Imputation of Enmity to the Proprietor and his Family; Whereas the plain
intelligible Meaning and Sense of them, is intended as Real Service and
faithful good wishes to that Worthy Family, by Endeavoring to open their Eyes,
so as that they may Relieve themselves, from the Crafty Insinuations, and
Baneful Delusions, wherewith You have for so many Years imposed upon Them: And
as a Remarkable Instance of this kind, let us suppose, that a Legislative
Council and likewise that Part of your Private Instructions from The Widow
Penn which on every Turn you call a Security to the Family, have taken Place,
viz. That no Person be called to the Council Board, and Admitted a Member of
it, without being first proposed and approved in Council; and if any Person has
been called to that Board, without having been first approved of, as aforesaid,
That He be Excluded till such Time as He shall be so Approved; and that the
Number of Acting Members Consist not of less than Eight.

Now the Members of this Council not being Directed by the said Instructions,
or Obliged by Law or Ordinance to attend on the Public Service, but left to
their own pleasure, let the Occasion be never so pressing, to Come or not, as
They think fit how Easy would it in that Case be, for a Gentleman of your
Spirit and Station, by a Haughty Sullen behavior, either with your Friends to
Absent your self from the Council or to Withdraw, as You did in the Years
1717-8. Whereby the Governor and Representatives of the People, Convened at
(...) Great Charge, to Deliberate upon the Public Exigencies of Government,
would be Incapacitated from proceeding to any Business without your Leave;
nevertheless this elegant Proposal, only Calculated to put an Arbitrary and
Destructive Power into your Hands, must be called a Security forsooth to the
Proprietor and his Family; viz. For Preventing a Person whom he has Entrusted
with the Greatest and most Important Power He has to give, and his Dear Friends
the Representatives of the first Adventurers, and Settlers of this Province and
their Children from entering upon any Business, either for the King's, the
Proprietor's, or their own Service; until James Logan should think fit to give
them Leave, or that His trifling Private Affairs would allow him to Attend, in
Order to Direct their Counsels.

Far be it from Me to find fault with anything that can be said in Defense of
the Characters and Conduct of any of my Predecessors; for I abominate such an
indecent Method as that of Detracting from One, and claiming Applause to
another, by Invidious Comparisons: If my Superiors cannot Charge Me with
Injustice, and Those who are proper judges of the Matter, do but acknowledge,
That I have Acted in my public Capacity, with Probity and Honor; I am
perfectly indifferent about what is said of the Advantages which You are
pleased to give former administrations beyond Mine. But of all that as dropped
from your Pen on these Occasions, I think Your Letter to John Salkeld, which
You direct him to Publish, is the most extraordinary Piece: For if those
Private Instructions from the Widow Penn to Me, were (as You here acknowledge)
such, as would not bear the Light, without reflecting on Those who had
Contrived them; Who, before an unprejudiced Judge, do You think will have the
most Blame? You that Hatched the Mischief, or I that in my own Just and
Necessary Defense, Communicated them to the Assembly, as Private Instructions,
fit only to be perused by Those whose Interest was nearly Concerned in them?
For they were not Published by any Direction of Mine; neither do I believe
would the House of Representatives have done it, if a Spurious and False Copy
Printed by your Direction, had not first come Abroad: And This being a
Notorious Matter of Fact, What must the World think of your Great Probity, and
all those other fine Epithets with which You are pleased to Adoth your own
Character?

But I find, your favorite Maxim in Politics, is Calumniare audacter, and
where such People have any Share of Art or Skill, it is commonly racked in
perverting the true Sense and Honest Meaning of other People's Words and
Actions; To prevent which, and also to give You an Opportunity of Reflecting
seriously upon yourself; I shall Conclude this Letter, in a few of your own
Words, unto which I very heartily Agree, viz.

Let us therefore be Grateful and Quter, without hazarding any of those
Privileges We really Enjoy, by endeavoring to be better than very well; Which
has ever been attended with Danger: Nor, Led by Sounds only, make ourselves the
Property of Designing Men, who to Compass their Own Ends, amuse with the Charm
of Mis-understood Words, and empty deluding Prospects. Let us cheerfully
Support and Obey the Regular Powers of Government, and as far as possible,
preserve our Public Credit. These Things (if I mistake not) will truly redound
to our Honor; and my Hearty and Constant Endeavors for These, will be found
the only Crimes, for which I can be Charged, in Relation to this Province.

And when You, Sir, are pleased sincerely to Act that Part, which in your own
Words is so handsomely Described, You will find Me to be, with Cheerfulness and
Hearty Good will,

Your most Faithful and most Obedient humble Servant, W. KEITH.
Phila. Dec. 13th, 1725.

