Mr. Thayer's Election-SERMON May 26th 1725.

In the House of Representatives, May 27. 1725.
Ordered, THAT Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lewis and Mr. Tay, wait on the Reverend Mr.
Ebenezer Thayer, with the Thanks of the House for his SERMON Preached Yesterday
before the Great and General Court, and desire he would please to give a Copy
of the same for the Press.

Wm. Dudley, Speaker.

Jerusalem Instructed and Warned.
A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE the Lieutenant GOVERNOR, COUNCIL and
REPRESENTATIVES of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, May
26. 1725.

Being the Anniversary Day for the ELECTION of His Majesty's COUNCIL there.

By Ebenezer Thayer, A.M. Pastor of a Church in Roxbury.

Hos. ix.2. Yea, woe also to them when I depart from them.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, Printer to the Honorable the Lieutenant
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, for S. Gerrish, at his Shop in Cornhill 1725.

AN Election-SERMON.
JER. VI.8. BE thou instructed, O Jerusalem, left my Soul depart from thee:
left I make thee desolate, a Land not inhabited.
THE words are a moving Exhortation from GOD to a provoking People, whose
multiplied and heinous Transgressions had ripened them for the Vengeance of
Heaven, and for Disolating Judgments. If we look back to the preceding
Chapter, we shall find a heavy Charge drawn up against a Professing People of
GOD, as an Evidence of their woeful Apostasy and Declension: Yea their Case is
represented as if there was scarce a Godly Man to be found among them all.
Ver.I. Run ye to and fro through the Streets of Jerusalem, and see now and
know, and seek in the Broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be
any that executes Judgment, that seeks the Truth, and I will pardon it. A
sad Case truly, if there were not one such to be found. Jerusalem would then be
worse than Sodom that was destroyed by Fire from Heaven, for even there a
Righteous Lot was found. But doubtless the Words are to be taken not
absolutely, but in a comparative sense, to denote the fewness of the Godly
there, and the general Corruption reigning among all Ranks and Orders of Men.
More particularly, they are Articled against for their false swearing, their
Incorrigibleness under the Judgments of God, their Idolatry and Adultery, their
contempt of God's Word and Prophets, together with their criminal
regardlessness of him whose Power is great, and for which he is to be feared,
their Deceit, Injustice and Violence, and delight in false Prophets. The
Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so. And in the midst of these Charges we have once and
again such sharp Interrogatories, as one would think should have awakened and
wounded them. How shall I Pardon thee for this? Shall I not visit for these
things? says the Lord: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as
this? Hear ye not me? says the Lord: Will ye not tremble at my presence? And
again, Shall I not visit for these things? says the Lord: Shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this? In this Chapter therefore we find a justly
offended GOD giving a Commission to the Chaldeans the Enemies of His People, to
go up against and destroy them for their very great Wickedness: which
Commission, with the ground and reason of it, we have opened, Ver. 6, 7. Thus
has the Lord of Hosts said, Hew ye down Trees, and cast amount against
Jerusalem: this is the City to be visited, she is wholly oppression in the
midst of her. As a Fountain casts out her waters, so she casts out her
wickedness: Violence and spoil is heard in her, before me continually is grief
and wounds. Thus is Jerusalem convicted and threatened. Nevertheless, such are
the Compassions of a Merciful GOD, that before he brings the threatened Ruin
upon a sinful People, he will give them warning and advise them of their
Danger; that they may Repent of their wickedness, and thereby prevent the evil
coming upon them, which he threatens to do unto them.

BE thou Instructed, O Jerusalem; or as it is in the Original, Be thou
Corrected, O Jerusalem: i.e. By the Correction thou have felt already, and
which is further threatened, Be persuaded to Repentance before it be too late.
Let the Rod and Reproof teach thee Wisdom. Nor were they at any loss what to do
in this Case, being well enough acquainted with what GOD tells them by this
Prophet, Chap. 18.7, 8. At what Instant I shall speak concerning a Nation and
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down and to destroy it: If that
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of
the evil that I thought to do unto them.

LEST my Soul depart from thee; or according to the Marginal Reading of our
Bibles, be loosed or disjointed from thee: which doubtless, as our English
Annotatours observe, is a Metaphor taken from the Dislocation of a Limb, the
loosing it from it is natural Place and Posture, and putting it, as we say, out
of Joint: intimating what a Pain and Grief it is to GOD to leave or cast off a
People, whom he has taken into Covenant with himself, and with how much
difficulty he is drawn thereunto.

LEST I make thee Desolate, a Land not Inhabited. Lest I both cast thee off,
and cut thee off. So that the Exhortation is grounded upon the most Important
and weighty Considerations Imaginable.

THERE are Four Doctrines I shall offer you and briefly speak to from the Words.

DOCT. I. THAT the Happiness of a People consists in having the Gracious
Presence of GOD with them.

DOCT. II. THAT GOD is not so engaged to any People, but that upon Just
Provocation given him, his Soul may Depart from them.

DOCT. III. THAT the Departure of GOD from a People, opens a Door for
Desolating Judgments to enter in upon them.

DOCT. IV. THAT it is both the Duty and Interest of a People, to do all that in
them lies, to prevent so great a Calamity, as the Departure of GOD's Soul (...)
them will certainly carry in it.

DOCT. I. THAT the happiness of a People consists in having the gracious
Presence of GOD with them.

THIS Doctrine, though not expressed, is yet necessarily implied in the Words.
For if the Departure of GOD from a People be threatened as the sorest Judgment
that can befall them, and they be earnestly called upon to use their utmost
endeavors to prevent it, then nothing can be more plain than that his gracious
Presence with them is their Happiness and Glory.

AND this is a Truth very easily proved and evidenced. It is not the Confluence
of all the Blessings of Providence, the abounding of Peace. Plenty, and every
other common Mercy desirable, that does so denominate a People Happy, as the
having GOD with them; whose Presence is All in All to their Felicity: Their
Decus ac Tutamen; their Ornament and Safety, their Defense and Glory. This is
the comprehensive Sum of all GOD's gracious Promises to his People, as he told
Joshua, Chap. 1.5. I will be with thee: I will not sail thee, nor forsake thee.
Yea we find the Phrase sometimes used as expressive of all the Good that need
to be requested for. Thus by Pious Jacob, Genesis 28.20. If God will be with we,
and will keep me in the way that I go. What Benediction can be more (...) than
that, The Great G0D be with (...). Every Blessing is included in such a Wish.
Thus Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto his Reapers, The Lord be with you:
And they to be even with him in Blessing, answered, The Lord bless thee, Ruth
2.4. With this also we find good old Israel comforting his Sons a little before
his Death; Genesis 48.21. And Israel said, Behold I die: but G0D shall be with
you. So that the best thing which GOD can Promise, or we can desire, either for
our selves or others, is, That GOD will be with us and them. Agreeable whereto
is that Prayer of Solomon, at the Dedication of the Temple, I. Kings 8.57 The
Lord our God be with us, as he was with our Fathers: let him not leave us, nor
forsake us. If the Divine Presence be once obtained, all other Blessings both
Temporal and Spiritual will be consequent thereupon.

Particularly,

IF GOD be with a People, he will favor them with all that Guidance, Conduct
and Direction that they need. It is one Character given; of the Blessed GOD,
Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun. And when he is thus styled in reference
to his People, it denotes that he will afford them all that Light and
Direction, which their Darkness and Difficulties may render needful for them:
That he will instruct and teach them in the way which they should go, and guide
them with his eye; that when their way is hedged up with thorns, and their
Perplexities such that they know not what to do, he will acquaint them with
their Duty, and make their way plain before them.

Again, GOD's Presence with a People supposes that he will both Support under,
and extricate them out of their Difficulties: That his Wisdom, Power and
Goodness shall be singularly concerned and employed for them; that he will be
to them a present help in every time of trouble to support them under their
Burdens; yea that in the mount of their Difficulties he will be seen, working
Deliverance and Salvation for them. And O that in these respects there were
more visible tokens of GOD's Gracious Presence with this People!

Again, GOD's being with a People implies his Prospering and giving Success to
all their lawful Undertakings. We read concerning Joseph, Genesis 39.23. The Lord
was with him: and that which he did, the lord made it to prosper. And of
Uzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.5. That as long as he sought the Lord, God made him to
prosper. The Success of all endeavors is from the Lord alone, and if a People
once engage the Presence of GOD with them, they may be assured of all kind of
Prosperity. Salvation then will in every respect be nigh unto them, and Glory
dwell in the Land.

I might further have said, That where GOD is present with a People, he will
multiply Spiritual Blessings also upon them. He will be graciously present with
his own Ordinances, and give abundant Success to the Means of Grace. He will
pour his Spirit upon the Seed of his People, and his blessing upon their
Offspring: Yea such shall be the remarkable smiles of Heaven upon them, that
all shall take Notice, That they are a People whom the Lord has Blessed. This
and much more than this is implied in the Presence of GOD with a People; and if
so, we may well draw up the Psalmists's Conclusion, Psalm. 144, ult. Happy is
the People that is in such a case: yea, Happy is that People whose God is the
Lord. And may I not say, that GOD is thus with a People, and will continue to
be so as long as they continue Faithful to him? 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Hear ye me, Asa,
and all Judah and Benjamin. The Lord is with you, while ye he him. Hag 2.4. Yet
now be strong, O Zerubbabe, says the Lord, and be strong, O Joshua, son of
Josedech the High Priest, and be strong, all ye people of the land says the
Lord and work: for I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts. And the People of
GOD may while they keep close to their Duty, glory in this, and triumph over
all the Difficulties and Dangers that may await them, as the Church does, Psalm.
46. ult. The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our Refuge. Selub.

DOCT, II THAT GOD is not so engaged to any People, but that upon just
Provocation given him, his Soul may depart from them.

THE People of the Jews were once the only Professing People that GOD had in
the World; a People whom he chose to himself above all People that were upon
the Face of the Earth, and upon whom he bestowed special Marks of his Favor.
Nevertheless these he warns, to take Care lest by their unsuitable Carriage
they should provoke him to abandon and cast them off; left his Soul should
depart from them: Which Phrase imports not only his suspending the former
manifestations of his Love; but even his utter loathing and abhorrence of them.

For clearing this, I shall

I. SHOW when a People may be said to provoke GOD to depart from them.

II. THAT upon such Provocation given, his Soul may depart from them.

I. I am to show when a People may be said to provoke G0D to depart from them.

AND although it be true that all Sins are displeasing to GOD, and what his Soul
hates you there are some particular Evils which are more provoking, and have a
more direct tendency to cause him to depart. I Will Instance here only in a few
of them; and hint at some others afterward.

1. A Low Esteem of the Presence of GOD with a People, will be a just
Provocation to him to depart from them. If that which is the highest Favor of
GOD to a People be undervalued and meanly accounted of by them, how Just must
it be with him to take the same from them, that they may learn to know the
worth of it by the want thereof? What Person would burden others with his
Company, that neither value nor desire it? Now this is too often the Case of a
Professing People with respect to the gracious Presence of GOD with them. They
don't set that Value upon it, which the Excellency of the Blessing calls for:
they are not so Thankful for it when enjoyed, as they ought to be: they are not
so desirous of the Continuance of it, as indeed they should be: nor are they so
concerned at the awful Tokens of it is withdraw from them, as it might be
reasonably expected they would be: not yet so Prayerful to him as the solemn
Dispensation calls upon them to be like him, Psalm. 90.13, 15. Return, O Lord,
how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy Servants. Make us glad
according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the years wherein we
have seen evil. When a People are so regardless of the Presence of GOD, and
look upon it as a matter of Indifferency whether they are favored with it or
not, no wonder if a Jealous GOD be provoked to withdraw the same from them.
Here is Just Provocation given him to depart.

2. A Departure from the Pure Instituted Worship of GOD will provoke him to
Depart. The Glorious GOD who is the sole Object of Religious Worship, has given
sufficient Direction in his Word, how he will be Worshipped by his Creatures.
And to Worship him after a way of our own devising, will be found very
provoking to him, who is a GOD Jealous for himself and his own Glory. Now as to
a Professing People, it is but reasonably supposed that they have been
instructed in the Purity of Divine Worship; that unto them has been shown the
Form of GOD's House, and the Fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and
the comings in thereof, with all the Ordinances and Laws thereof. ( Ezekiel.
43.11.) That they have often been urged to hold fast the form of sound words,
and contend earnestly for the Faith delivered to the Saints: to remember how
they have received and heard, and hold fast: and beware lest being led away
with the Error of the Wicked, they should fall from their own stedfastness. To
leave then the Commandments of GOD for the Traditions of Men, and introduce
those Ceremonies into his Worship, and add those Inventions of our own thereto
which he never Commanded, will be found a plain encroachment upon the Divine
Prerogative. And such as are guilty in this respect would do well to consider
what Answer they shall give in to GOD another Day, when he shall demand of
them, as in Isa. 1.12. Who has required this at your hands? Matthew. 15.8, 9.
This People draws nigh unto me with their mouth and honors me with their
lips: but their heart is far from me. But in Vain they do worship me, teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. This will be looked upon as a Departure
from GOD.

3. AN unsuitable Carriage toward G0D's Messengers and Servants, will have a
dreadful tendency to provoke him to Depart from a People. Where his Gospel is
priz d, and his Servants meet with a kind Entertainment, with such a People GOD
will continue his gracious Presence. With them he has given his Servants Orders
to abide; and a Temporal Blessing has been wont to go along with the Gospel.
But if a People grow cold in their Affections to Divine Truths, and misuse the
Messengers of the Lord, he who has sent them, will look upon it as a Contempt
cast upon himself, which he will not bear. There were many crying abominations
in Jerusalem; but yet her Destruction seems to bear Date from the prevailing of
this Sin. 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. And the Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by
his Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending them, because he had compassion
on his people, and on his dwelling place. But they mocked the Messengers of
God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the
Lord arise against his People, till there was no Remedy. Be thou Instructed, O
NEW ENGLAND, and let Jerusalem's Ruin be a Warning to thee.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cantum.

4. INCORRIGIBLENESS under the Judgments of G0D has also a direct tendency to
provoke him to depart. This we find to be an Article in the heavy Indictment
brought in against that People, whom God in the Text calls upon to be
Instructed, left his Soul depart from them. Jer 53. O Lord, thou have stricken
them, but they have not grieved: thou have consumed them, but they have refused
to receive correction: they have made their faces harder than a Rock, they have
refused to return. lsa, 42.25. He has poured upon him the fury of his anger,
and the strength of Battle; and it has set him on fire round about, yet he
know not, and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. The Design of GOD in
the Calamities he brings upon his People is to humble, reform and do them good:
whereas if these prove ineffectual to reclaim them, if in the very face of
Judgiments, they will continue to provoke him, what can be expected, but that
being grieved for the hardness of their heart, he should withdraw from them?
The abuse of his Goodness, with the Contempt of his Rod, is certainly a
sufficient Provocation to him to take his leave of such a People, and to
resolve against them; as in Ezekiel. 24 13. Because I have purged thee, (i e. used
Means for thy Purgation and Reformation,) and thou wast not purged, thou shall
not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest
upon thee.

5. THE general Unprofitableness of a People under Gospel Ordinances, will be a
sad Prognostic of GOD's Departure from them, Barrenness under the Means of
Grace is very provoking to GOD, and what he will by no Means dispense with.
However it may be born with in the Wilderness, yet in the Vineyard it is
Intolerable. Luke 13.6, 7. A certain man had a Fig Tree planted in his
vineyard, and he came and sought fruit there on, and found none. Then sail he
unto tbe Dresser of his Vineyard, Behold these three years I come seeking fruit
on this Fig Tree, and find none: cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground?
Agreeable where to are those awful words of our Savior, Matthew. 21.43. Therefore
I say unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a
nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And how much greater the Danger is,
when instead of Good Fruits, there is an abounding of Evil Fruits, may be seen
from, Isa. 5.1, -- 7. My well beloved has a vineyard in a very fruitful bill.
And he senced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted with the
choisst vine, and built a Tower in the midst of it, and also made a wine press
therein: and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth
wild grapes. And now 0 Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and wen of Judah, judge, I
pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard, what could have been done more to my
vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore when I looked that it should
bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? And now go to: I will tell
you what I will do to my vineyard; I will take away the hedge thereof, and it
shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden
down. And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned, nor dug, but there
shall come up briars and thorns: I will also command the Clouds that they rain
no rain upon it. For the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the House of Israel,
and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for Judgment, but behold
Oppression; for righteosness, but behold a Cry.

6. DECAYS in Religion, as to the life and power of it, have a sad tendency to
provoke GOD to Depart from a People. When Men abate in their Love to GOD and
his Service, decline in Grace and as to a close Walk with GOD; become Formal in
Duty, lukewarm and remiss in Religion, this is most hateful and abominable to
GOD, and what we often find him warning his People against. Hear how he
bespeaks the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.4, 5. I have somewhat against thee,
because thou have left thy first love. Remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen, and repent, and do the first works: or else I will come unto thee
quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place. Thus the Church of
Sardis, Rev. 3.2, 3. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain that
are ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect, or filled up, before
God. Remember how thou have received and heard, and hold fast and repent. And
again, Ver. 16. to the Church of Laodic^a; Because thou art lukewarm and
neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth, Other things might here
have been mentioned, but the time will not allow it.

I pass therefore,

II. TO show that upon such Provocation given, GODs Soul may depart from a
People. He is not so bound to them that he must needs continue his gracious
Presence with them. He may depart from them. The thing is possible, as may
easily be made to appear.

I. IT is painly supposed in the Threatenings of GOD thus to deal with his
People in case they depart from him. He has given them sufficiently to
understand what they may expect and look for, in Case they provoke his Holy
Anger and Displeasure against them. The Text supposs that GOD may depart from a
People, or else the Admonition had been of no force at all. Yea there are many
express threatenings of this Nature in the Word of GOD. So GOD told Moses, Deuteronomy.
31.16, 17. Behold, thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, and this People will rise
up and go a whoring after the gods of the strangers of the land, and will
forsake me, and break my Covenant which I have made with them. Then my Anger
shall be kind^ed against them in that Day, and I will forsake them, and hide my
face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall
befall them, so that they will say in that day, Are not these Evils come upon
us, because our God is not amongst us? Josh. 24.20. If ye forsake the Lord, and
serve strange gods, then he will turn, and do you hurt, and consume you, after
that he has done you good. Jer. 23.39, 40. Behold I, even I will utterly
forget you, and l will forsake you, and the City that I gave you and your
Fathers, and cast you out of my presence. And I will bring an everlasting
reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame which shall not be forgotten.

2. GOD has actually departed from a People upon their forsaking him. The
Threatening has been verified in a most awful and terrible manner upon those
that have stood in as near a Relation to GOD as ever any People did. Yea thus
in particular he has done by the Nation of the Jews. He has cast them off, and
given them a Bill of Divorcement. 2 Chronicles. 24.20 Because ye have forsaken the
Lord, he has also forsaken you. Psalm. 78.58, etc. For they provoked him to
anger with their high places, and moved him to Jealously with their gr^v^n
Images, when God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel, So that
he forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the Tent which he placed among men: and
delivered his Strength, (as the Ark was called) into Captivity, and his glory
into the Enemies hand. And now they are set forth as an Example, to deter and
warn others against the like Evils, Jer. 7.12, etc. But go ye now unto my place
which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to
it, for the wickedness of my People Israel. And now because ye have done all
these works; says the Lord, and I spoke unto you rising up early and speaking
but ye heard not. Therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my
name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you, and to your
Fathers, as I have done to Shiloh. And I will cast you out of my sight, and my
fury shall burn and not be quenched. And indeed it is but a Righteous thing
with GOD to abandon and depart from a People that have first forsaken him, 2 Chronicles. 12.5, 6. Thus says the Lord, ye have forsaken me; and therefore have I
also felt you. Whereupon the Princes of Israel, and the King humbled
themselves, and they said, The Lord is Righteous.

I pass,

DOCT. III. THAT the Departure of GOD from a People, opens a Door for
Desolating Judgments to enter in.

LEST my Soul depart from thee, lest I make the Desolate, a Land not Inhabited.
^^ter. Desolation will be the sure Effect of the Lord's Departure from a Land.

WHEN GOD departs from a People he throws down the Wall of his gracious
Protection over them. While he is with them, he is as a wall of Fire round
about them, and the Glory in the midst of them. His watchful eye is continually
over them for Good, and his Almighty Power always engaged for their Safety, to
keep off Troubles from them. Isa. 27.2, 3. In that day, ( i.e. the Day when GOD
is present with his People, in that Day,) Sing ye unto her, A vineyard of red
wine, I the Lord do keep it. I will water it every moment: lest any hurt it, I
will keep it night and day. He is on their side when Men rise up against them;
and all that would devour them shall be found Offenders; Evil shall come upon
them, says the Lord, ( Jer. 2.3.) But WOE unto them, when he departs from them.
Then may they set up their Ichabod and inscribe upon it, The Glory is departed
from Israel. The Hedge is broken down, and a Gap opened for an Inundation of
wasting Calamities to enter in. No wonder if then they mourn out their sad
Complaint, Psalm. 80.12, 13. Why have thou then broken down her hedges, so that
all they which pass by the way, do pluck her? The Boar out of the Wood does
waste it, and the wild Beast of the Field does devour it.

Again, WHEN GOD's Soul departs from a People, he withdraws from them that
Guidance, and Direction he was wont to favor them with: he hides his Counsels
from them, and leaves them in the Dark. Deuteronomy. 28.29. And thou shall grope at
noonday, as the Blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shall not prosper in thy
ways. Their Case is the same with Saul's, who once complained, I Sam. 28.15. I
am sore distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God is
departed from me, and answers me no more, neither by Prophets, nor by Urim,
nor by Dreams. Thus the Church laments this Effect of GOD's Departure, Psalm
74.9. We see not our signs, there is no more any Prophet, neither is there
among us any that knows how long.

AND what should now hinder, but that Sword and Fire, Famine and Pestilence,
Inundations, Earthquakes, and all sorts of Desolating Calamities should rage
among them? That all the Temporal Curses threatened in the Book of GOD against
Disobedience, should be inflicted upon them? When GOD departed from Israel, we
read of nothing but perpetual Desolations, the Enemies roaring in the
Congregations, and Burning up all the Synagogues of GOD in the Land, while He
himself seemed unmindful of their Grief, and regardless of their Prayers

Again, WHEN GOD departs from a People, Spiritual Plagues and Judgments will
slow in upon them. If he remove not his Gospel, yet the Continuance of it will
be in Judgment to them. He will suspend the Influences of his Spirit and
Blessing from it, so that it shall prove a favor of Death unto Death to them.
He will verify those awful Words upon them, Isa. 6 9, 10. Hear ye indeed, but
understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not, make the Heart of this
People fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
convert and be healed. Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still;
and be which is futhy, let him be filthy still. The work of Conversion is now
at a dreadful stand, and the Gospel it self proves ineffectual to the doing any
Good upon the Souls of Men. They are sealed up under Judicial Blindness and
Hardness; penally given over by GOD to their own Hearts Lusts, to walk in their
own Counsels. No Means used to reclaim them shall be of the least Service to
them. The Curse is gone out against them. Let Fruit grow here no more forever;
and so they languish, pine away and die in their Iniquities. A way is now made
for GOD's Anger, and the Floodgates opened for the Billows of his Wrath to
over-whelm and destroy them.

THIS, in short, is the deplorable Case of that People, from whom GOD's ^oul
departs, and over whom we must take up the Lamentation; and say Oh! that thou
had but known, even thou, at least in this thy Day, the things that belong
unto thy peace; but now they are hid, Alas! for ever hid from thine eyes. All
Good goes when GOD departs, and all Evil follows upon his Removal.

DOCT. IV. IT is both the Duty and Interest of a People to do all that in them
lies to prevent so great a Calamity, as the Departure of GOD's Soul from them
will will certainly carry in it.

BE Instructed, O Jerusalem: Be advised, be counseled and warned; for the
thing is not a matter of Indifferency, but of the highest Importance. It is not
a vain thing, because the whole of your Happiness is concerned in it.

FOR clearing this Doctrine, I shall

1. CONSIDER what is implied in being thus Instructed; or what a People are to
do, if they would prevent the sore Calamity of GOD's Departure from them

2. GIVE you the Grounds of the Point, as they are laid down in the Doctrine.

I. I am to show what is implied in being Instructed; or what a People are to
do, if they would prevent the sore Calamity of GOD's Departure from them.

AND to hint only,

I. IT implies that they be sensible of, and humbled for the least tokens of
his Withdrawment from them. GOD's Departure from a sinful People is not sudden
and at once. He is Infinite in his Patience, and endures with much
long-suffering, being loath to leave and give them over to Ruin. And when he is
as it were compelled to do so, he proceeds very leisurely in such an Act of
Judgment. He gives a People timely notice of it, that so they may stir up
themselves to take hold of a Departing GOD.

THUS he dealt with Judah. Ezekiel. 9.3. The Glory of GOD goes first from the
Cherub, to the Threshold of the House; and stays there, as if it had a mind to
be invited back again: then it goes from the Threshold of the House, and stands
over the Cherubims, as if upon a penitent Call, it would drop down again to
it is ancient Station and Seat, over which it hovered, Ezekiel. 10.18. And when he
was not solicited to return, he departs out of the City, and stands upon the
Mountain, which is on the East part of the City, (Ezekiel. 11.23.) looking still
toward, and hovering about the Temple, as if loath, to depart and abandon the
Place and People. As the Learned Mr. Charnock observes upon the Places.

NOW to be Instructed, in the sense of the Text, is for a People to take Notice
of the first Tokens of GOD's going from them, and to be humbled under the sense
of it: to see his hand lifted up, see it and be afraid, trembling at the
Thoughts of his Departure from them.

2. THAT they Repent of and Reform those Evils, that have given him just
Provocation to forsake them. GOD does not leave a People for nothing, or upon
any trivial occasion: He has reason sufficient to J^stify him therein; and he
will make them to know, that he has not done without a cause, all that he has
done unto them. Ezekiel. 14 ult. And if they would be Instructed to engage the
Presence of GOD still with them, they must Repent of, and put away all those
GOD-provoking Evils that have excited his Holy Anger against them. Jer. 26.2,
3. Stand in the Court of the Lord's house, and speak unto all the Cities of
Judah, which come to worship in the Lord's house, all the words that I command
thee to speak unto them, diminish not a word. If so be they will hearken, and
turn every man from his Evil way, that I may repent me of the Evil which I
purpose to do unto them, because of the Evil of their doings. Ezekiel. 18.30, 31.
Repent and turn yourselves from all your Transgressions, so Iniquity shall not
be your ruin. Cast away from you all your Transgressions whereby ye have
transgressed: for why will ye die! GOD is ready to return to a People upon
their sincere Repentance, and reforming what has been the matter of Offense. An
Evidence and Instance whereof you have, Judge. 10 15, 16. And the Children of
Israel said unto the Lord, We have sinned, do thou unto us, whatsoever seems
good unto thee; deliver us only we pray this day. And they put away the strange
gods from among them, and served the Lord: And his Soul was grieved for the
misery of Israel. He acted toward them like one that felt their Sufferings,
pitied them and to speak after the manner of Men, repented of his own
Proceedings against them. Reformation is the only way to recover the Presence
of a Departing GOD, and obtain Deliverance from a Threatened Destruction. Hence
the King of Nineveh exhorted and argued with his People after this manner,
Jonah 3.8, 9. Let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily
unto God: Yea let them turn every one from his Evil way, and from the violence
that is in their hands. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away
from his fierce anger, that we perish not? And the Effect was answerable, ver.
10. God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and God repented
of the Evil that he had said he would do unto them, and he did it not.

3. IT implies the most earnest Cries and Entreaties; that he would not utterly
forsake or cast them off. That they unite their Prayers and fervent
Supplications for his gracious return: expressing themselves in some such
Language as that, Psalm. 80.14, 19. Return we beseech thee, O God of Hosts: look
down from heaven, and behold, and visit this vine. Turn us again, O Lord God of
Hosts: cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. Jer. 14.20, 21. We
acknowledge, O Lord, our wickedness, and the Iniquity of our Fathers, for we
have sinned against thee. Do not abhor us for thy names sake, do not disgrace
the Throne of thy Glory: remember, break not thy Covenant with us. This, GOD
reasonably expects from a sinful People; and for this very end, he threatens to
remove from them. Hos. 5.14, 15. For I will (says GOD,) be unto Ephraim as a
Lion, and as a young Lion to the house of Judah: I, even I will ^^ar and go
away: I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their Offense;
and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early. And unless a
People do this, they are far from receiving Instruction, and doing what in them
lies to keep GOD yet among them. But I come,

II. TO give you the Grounds of the Point, as they are laid down in the
Doctrine.

And,

1. IT is the Duty of a People thus to be Instructed: thus to repent of and
reform every thing that has been amiss, and earnestly cry after a with drawing
GOD, that he would please to stir up his Strength, and come and save them.
Without this, a sinful People frustrate the Design of GOD, and lay themselves
open to his most terrible rebukes. Zeph. 3.6, 7, 8. I have cut off the nations,
their Towers are desolate, I made their streets waste, that none passes by:
their Cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is none
Inhabitant. I said, surely thou will fear we: thou will receive instruction, so
their dwelling should not be cut off: but they rose early, and corrupted all
their doings. Therefore wait ye upon me, says the Lord, until the day that I
rise up to the prey: for my determination is to pour upon them mine
Indignation, even all my fierce anger. A Refusing to be Reformed by the more
gentle Strokes of GOD's hand, both adds to the People's Guilt, and exposes them
to heavier and much sharper Dispensations; for GOD will by one means or other,
attain his End upon a provoking People. And if Rods will not do, he will Chastise
them with Scorpions, yea Chastise them till he has consumed them. But this
brings me to say,

2. IT is for the Interest and Safety of a People, to do their utmost to
prevent the Departure of GOD's Soul from them. As long as he is with them, they
are Safe and Happy. He will ride upon the Heavens for their help, and in his
excellency upon the Skies: He will keep off wasting Judgments from them, or
whatever might prove an annoyance to them. Zeph 3.16, 17. In that day it shall
be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to Zion, let not thine hands be slack.
The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty: he will save, he will rejoice
over thee with joy; he will rest in his Love, he will joy over thee with
singing. But O who can express the very sad and lamentable Condition of a
People, that have once been Happy in the Enjoyment of GOD's Presence, but are
now deprived of it, cast out of his sight, and called by him Loammi, Ye are not
my people, and I will not be your God! There is nothing now to secure them from
desolating Calamities, but they may continually expect those Judgments which
shall root out their Memorial from under Heaven.

SO that if a People have any regard to their own Interest and Welfare, they
can manifest it in no better way, than in a hearty Concern and strenuous
Endeavor to obtain and keep the Presence of GOO with them. For if he Depart,
they will soon be Desolate.

APPLICATION.
1. FROM what has been said we learn upon whom a People are to lay the blame,
in case GOD should at any time depart from them. He never breaks first with
them; but in case they would continue Faithful to their Engagements with him,
he would ever be mindful of his Covenant for them. Psalm. 105.8, etc. He has
remembered his Covenant for ever; the word which he commanded to a thousand
Generations. Which Covenant he made with Abraham, and his Oath unto Isaac; and
confirmed the same unto Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an Everlasting
Covenant: saying., unto thee will I give the Land of Canaan. And
notwithstanding the manifold Rebellions and Provocations of that sinful People,
for which he did punish them in the Wilderness; yet had he a respect unto his
Promise and fulfilled it. Hence Joshua appeals to their very Consciences for
the Proof of this, Josh. 23.14. Ye know in all your hearts, and in all your
souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good things, which the Lord
your God spoke concerning you: all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing
has failed thereof. The Lord is with his People, while they are with him; but
they are ever first in a Departure. And therefore whatever the sorrowful
Effects may be of GOD's Soul's Departing from them, they can blame none but
themselves, and must charge the whole Fault upon their own Prevarications and
treacherous Dealings in his Covenant. So Israel of old were forced to do. 1 Samuel 12.10. They cried unto the Lord, and said, We have sinned, because we have
forsaken the Lord. Dan. 9.11. Yea all Israel have transgressed thy Law, even by
departing, that they might not obey thy voice: therefore the Curse is poured
upon us, and the Oath that is written in the Law of Moses the Servant of God,
because we have sinned against him. -- O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto
thee, but unto us Confusion of faces as at this Day.

2. MAY GOD's Soul Depart from a Professing People? What a Vanity then must it
be for such to Presume upon his Presence with them, merely because of their
Covenant Relation to him? And yet thus it was with the People of the Jews:
because GOD had chosen them above all other People, and taken them near to
himself, they would not believe, that ever he would reject them, though they were
guilty of the grossest abominations. Hence it was that they so readily listened
to what the False Prophets said, That the City should not be delivered into the
hands of the Chaldeans. But what a Vanity it was, you may see from what GOD
commanded the Prophet to say unto them, Jer. 7.2, etc. Stand in the gate of the
Lord's house, and proclaim this word, and say, Hear the word of the Lord, all
ye of Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship the Lord. Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, amend your ways and your doings, and I will
cause you to dwell in this place. Trust ye not in Lying words, saying, The
Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord are these.
Behold, ye trust in Lying words that cannot profit. If a Professing People will
allow themselves in those things that are a violation of the Covenant, will
revolt and backslide from GOD, their External Relation to him will be no
security at all to them. He will as the Prophet's Expression is, Zech. 11.10.
Cut asunder the staff, even Beauty, that he may break his Covenant which he had
made with the People. It is Obedience and Faithfulness to GOD, that will
engage, his Presence with a People, and not any Profession or Covenant
Relation, that they may make, or stand in to him.

3. DOES the Departure of GOD from a People, open a Door for Desolating
Judgments, and is it their Duty and Interest to do all they can to prevent his
Removal? This then plainly Instructs us what the Duty and present Business of
this People is.

THAT GOD is Departing, and upon his way from us, is too plain to be denied.
Every one that observes any thing cannot but see and take notice of it.

GOD has been marching up and down the Land in Indignation and Wrath, visiting
our Iniquities, and punishing our Transgressions by a Series of Judgments; and
yet we are not Humbled nor Reformed to this very Day. He has given us frequent
and solemn warning of his Departure, and there are those things most certainly
to be found among us, which are awful Presages of his forsaking us.

IF we compare our selves with Israel of old, our manners with theirs, we shall
find that there was scarce any Sin they were chargeable with, (save their more
gross Idolatry,) but the same may be found among our selves. And what can we
plead why GOD should not leave us as he did them? Are not our forgetfulness of
GOD and Disobedience to his Commands, our Rebellions and Lustings, our Perfidy
and Murmurings equal to theirs? And besides the Evils mentioned under the
Second Doctrine; and as to the more heinous Transgressions of the Law,
Oppression and Injustice, Drunkenness and Uncleanness, Lying, Swearing, and
Profaning the Name and Day of GOD, we must confess that the Land is full of
Sin, and deserves to be forsaken of the Holy One of Israel.

WE have in a very shameful degree forgotten our Fathers GOD, and the (...) for
which that Pious Generation follow^d him into (...) then waste and howling
Wilderness. And GOD may now expostulate with and chide us just as he did
Backsliding Israel, whom we are so very like unto, Jer. 2.2, 5, 31. Go and cry
in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus says the Lord, I remember thee, the
kindness of thy Youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou iventest after me
in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown. Thus says the Lord, What
iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and
have walked after vanity, and are become vain? 0 Generation, see ye the word of
the Lord: have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? Wherefor,
say my people, We are lords, we will come no more unto thee? Iniquity abounds,
and the Love of many waxes cold. Where is that Zeal for GOD, and Affection to
his Ordinances and Ways, which our Fathers were eminent for? Real vital Piety
is under a dreadful decay, and languishes daily. Men content themselves with a
form of Godliness, without the power of it, with a name to live, when really
they are dead. A Carnal, Selfish and Worldly Spirit prevails, and threatens to
eat out the heart of Religion and a Formal Liolicean Indifferency is what the
most of Professors are dangerously Sick of, and it will be well if they don't
Die of the Distemper. The SPIRIT is withdrawn, and there is but little of that
Power and Efficacy attending the Word and Ordinances which formerly there was.
All which are Evidences of GOD's Departing.

AND is our GOD going from us, and shall we be secure and quiet? Shall Not we
bitterly resent the awful tokens of it? and cry more earnestly after him than
ever an Idolatrous Micah did after the Children of Dan, when they had taken
away his Dunghil-Deities?

O let it not be said of us under such a Dispensation, as it was once
complained of, Isa. 64.7. And there is none that caileth upon thy name, that
stirs up himself to take hold of thee.

AND therefore in the last place,

4. LET it be of Instruction and Exhortation to all, in their several
Capacities, to do what they can to prevent GOD's Total and Final Departure from
this People.

AND to Encourage you hereto I will say, That GOD is not wholly gone from us;
and as to the Degrees of his Presence that seem to be removed, they also are
recoverable.

GOD has still a Favor for our Land; and if we would but Repent of and Reform
the Evils that are in the midst of us, he would soon cause his Anger toward us
to cease. Yea he would revive us again, and cause his People to rejoice in him.
Let every one then cheerfully lend a hand, and contribute all he can to so good
a work as that of Reformation is.

AND here,

1. LET what has been said be applied in an Humble Address to his HONOR, our
Commander in Chief; the Honorable his Majesty's COUNCIL; together with the
Honored Gentlemen of the ASSEMBLY, who contrary to my own Expectation and
Inclination, have ordered me into this Desk to Day.

AND the Message, which now arrives unto you from HIM who stands in the
Congregation of the Mighty, and judges among the Gods, is

THAT you Improve all your Power, Interest, and influence to engage the
gracious Presence of G0D with this Poor People.

CIVIL Rulers are GOD's Vicegerents on Earth, and in Scripture Language wear
the Honorable Title of Gods, (Psalm. 82.1, 6.) Which speaks not only their
Dignity and Authority, the Honor and Obedience which is their Due; but also
the special Obligations lying upon them, to Imitate the Great GOD by whom they
Rule, to be concerned for his Glory in the World, and be the most Extensive
Blessings unto others.

AND in what way can you better Evidence your selves so? than by doing all that
in you lies, that there may be a Reformation of those Evils, which threaten us
with the Loss of God's Favor, and due Encouragement given to those things,
which will be so many Tokens for Good that GOD will not leave and forsake us.

IF then you will permit the meanest of the Lord's Servants to be your Monitor,
to put you in Remembrance of those things which we trust you know and are
established in the Belief of, I would with all possible Deference suggest a few
things briefly.

IT is without Controversy a Duty indispensably Incumbent upon the Civil
Magistrate (who is Custos Utriusque Tabula) to see to it, that the Glorious G0D
he acknowledged and worshipped according to his own Prescription and
Institution, without the addition of Humane Inventions.

THAT the Religion of the Second Commandment be maintained and kept pure,
especially where a peculiar Regard to it has been the principal Foundation of a
People's Settlement, as is our own Case most certainly.

THAT the Great and Dreadful Name of G0D be reverenced and feared; and that the
Breakers of the Third Commandment by Profane Oaths and Hellish Curses be not
suffered, to escape a just Punishment from Men.

THAT the Holy Sabbath of the Lord, which he himself has Sanctified, be
Religiously observed, and every thing tending to the violation of it
discountenanced and suppressed: that his Public Worship be attended, and the
Ministry of the Word suitably provided for.

AND this leads me naturally to say, It is incumbent upon YOU the Rulers of our
People, to take effectual Care, that those who are devoted to the Service of
the Sanctuary, and called to wait at the Altar, be partakers with the Altar. I
mean as the Apostle expounds it, 1 Cor. 9.14. that according to Divine
Ordination, they which preach the Gospel, should live of the gospel. That the
Ministers of CHRIST and Religion should have an honorable Support from those
among whom they spend their Thought, Time and Strength; and not be forced, in
ways unbecoming their Station and Character, to provide for themselves and
Families: or else be reduced to Penury and Want, which in this Worldly-minded
and Gospelglutted Age, will effectually bring not only the Clergy themselves,
but the very Office of the Ministry into the greatest Contempt. It is recorded
to the Everlasting Honor of that good King Hezekiah, (2 Chronicles. 30.22.) that he
spoke comfortably unto all the Levites that taught the good knowledge of the
lord. He assured them of his Princely Favor and Paternal Care, and that
nothing on his part should be wanting for their Encouragement and Comfort. And
of that Excellent Governor Nehemiah, who truly sought the Welfare of the
Children of Israel, it is observed, Neh. 13.10, etc. That when he perceived
that the Portions of the Levites had not been given them, he contended about
it, and took speedy Care for the redress of their Grievances. And from the
Steps already taken by the Government, will our Honorable Rulers now allow the
Oppressed Ministers of JESUS CHRIST humbly to hope, that this Matter shall have
a Thorough Consideration with them: that by means hereof, through the
Thanksgiving of many on your account, Glory may redound to GOD.

Again, IT lies upon yon our Fathers in the Government, to have a singular
Concern for the Means of Education, and training up of Youth for Future
Service: that Religion and Learning, which have been our Distinguishing Glory
among the Provinces, may flourish abundantly. That Inferior Schools may be
cherished, and the College in special, which GOD has made so great a Blessing
to this People from the beginning, tenderly regarded and encouraged; the True
Interest of it; ever lie ^^ar your Hearts, and be vigorously pursued. May that
Society always live before GOD. -- May the wide Breach made upon it be happily
repair^d. -- And may it ever be a Seminary of Piety and the most useful
Knowledge.

Again, THE Honor of GOD calls for it, that you exert all that Authority and
Power he has vested you with, for the Suppression of those growing Evils, such
as horrible Injustice and cruel Extortion, Uncleanness, Intemperance, Lying,
Stealing and the like, which like a mighty Torrent, threaten to carry all
before them. Thus must you be a Terror to Evildoers.

Furthermore, IT concerns Civil Rulers to see to it that the Public Faith be
preserved Inviolate and Sacred; that the Public Credit be as good or better
Security than any Private Bond can be; that those who serve the best Interests
of it, be no sufferers by a Failure herein, but may be able with just reason
and propriety to use this Speech, The Lord bless thee, O Habitation of Justice
and Mountain of Holiness.

In fine, CIVIL Rulers are to be themselves shining Patterns of Religion and
Godliness; to go before their People in every thing that is virtuous and
praiseworthy, and by their holy unblameable Conversation provoke others to an
Imitation of them; This will be a good Means to promote the Blessed work of
Reformation among us, which will be for the lengthning out of our Tranquillity.

SUFFER then the word of Exhortation, which speaks to you as unto Rulers,
Ezra 10.4. Arise, for this matter belongs unto you. And may all the Lord's
People be with you, in their earnest Supplications and Payers, that the GOD of
Heaven would put this Honor upon you, of making you the Instrumental Saviors
of a sinful sinking People, that are in many respects brought very Low. so let
the Lord our God be with you, and let all the People say, Amen.

2. LET me apply my self to my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry:
who, it is to be hoped, will look upon themselves in this Day of sad Degeneracy,
peculiarly obliged to do their utmost, that GOD may not be provoked finally to
depart from this People. This is no more than what GOD and Man justly expect
from us, and our Office binds us to.

WE are Watchmen upon Jerusalem's Walls, whose proper Business it is to des^^y
Dangers, and give seasonable Notice thereof: to observe the Sins of the Times,
and the awful Symptoms of GOD's Departure, and thereupon to Cry aloud, an spare
not, lift up our voices like a Trumpet, and show the People their
Transgressions. Nor can we hold our Peace, and be Guiltless. We are to warn the
wicked, that they turn from their Evil ways, and by Promises and Threatenings,
Counsels, Exhortations and Entreaties, do what we can to engage them to
Repentance, as ever we would be Pure from their Blood, and obtain the Divine
Favor for them. A Flaming Zeal for the Honor of GOD and against Sin, should
ever inspire and influence us. We must rise up against the Evil Doers, and
stand up for GOD against the Workers of Iniquity; and whether Men will hear, or
whether they will forbear, we may not fail to bear a due Testimony against the
GOD-provoking Evils that are to be found in the midst of us.

NOR is all this enough, but it concerns us also by the peculiar Sanctity of
our Lives to condemn the Practices of the World and show Men the way to Heaven;
that others in following us may not fail to obtain Eternal Blessedness. We
should shine in our Conversations, as well as burn in our Doctrine, and be
Patterns of good Works.

A Difficult Service we truly have, attended with more than ordinary
Temptations and Discouragements: however it is a Good Work, and we serve a Good
Master in it; and therefore let us not sink under our Burden of Service for
GOD, or of Suffering from an ungrateful World, but in an humble Dependence upon
the Strength and Grace of CHRIST, labor to approve our selves Faithful unto
him that has Called us. Let us heartily grieve and mourn for the Evils which
we cannot Reform, and at the same time improve all the Interest we have in
Heaven, that GOD's Soul may not be disjoynted from us. Joel 2.17. Let the
Priests the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar, and
let them say, Spare thy People, O Lord.

YEA though we may have too much reason to bewail the unsuccessfulness of our
endeavors, that we labor in vain, and spend our strength for noughts: Yet let
this be our Comfort, that surely our Judgment is with the Lord, and our work
with our GOD. Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall we be glorious in the
eyes of the Lord, and our GOD will be our Strength and exceeding great Reward.

IN the last place,

3. LET it be a solemn Call to this whole People, to return every Man from his
Evil way, and amend his doings, that GOD's Soul may not abhor us.

AS ever we value the Favor of GOD and desire to be Happy in the Enjoyment of
it, let us put away our abominations out of his fight, and beware of every
thing that may provoke him to leave us: complying with that his voice to us at
this Day, Isa. 1.16, 17. Wash ye make you clean, put away the Evil of your
doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well. Let every one
Repent of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Be as a Dove in the valley,
mourning for his own Iniquity, and besufre to Reform what has been amiss in his
own Heart and Life. -- And Oh that there were this token for Good among us,
that GOD will not forsake us, even the pouring forth a Spirit of Supplication
and Reformation upon this whole People, that being sensible of his Anger, we
may follow hard after him, by fervent Prayer hold him fast, and resolve that we
will not let him go! -- Oh that it might be said of us, as of those, 1 Samuel
7.2. And all the house of Israel lamented after the Lord.

WERE it once come to this, he would soon arise for our help, and redeem us for
his mercies sake. -- Then would the Lord awake as one out of sleep, and like a
mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine; then would he smite our enemies as
in the binder parts; and put them to a perpetual Reproach. -- Then should the
Earth yield her increase, and God, even our own God would Bless us. -- Then
would he extricate us out of all our Difficulties, and continue to us the
Enjoyment of all our Pleasant things. In a word, then would he cause the
Righteousness of our Jerusalem to go forth as brightness, and the Salvation
thereof as a Lamp that burns: Yea in every respect it would be said of us, as
of Israel of old, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee,
O People saved by the Lord!

NOW the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth, bless yen all out of Zion: and
cause you to see the good of Jerusalem, all the Days of your Lives. -- And
Return O Lord to the many Thousands of Israel!

Soli DEO Gloria.

