Mr. Gay's SERMON At the ORDINATION of Mr. Joseph Green, At Barnstable, May 12
th. 1725.

MINISTERS ARE MEN OF LIKE PASSIONS WITH OTHERS. A SERMON Preached at
Barnstable, May 12, 1725. The Day on which a CHURCH was gathered in the East
Part of the said Town, AND Mr. Joseph Green was Ordained Pastor of it.

By Ebenezer Gay, A. M. And Pastor of a Church in Hingham.

Heb vii. 28. The Law makes Men High Priests, which have Infirmity 2 Cor. iv.
7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels --. BOSTON. Printed by B. GREEN.
1725.

TO THE READER.
THE Excellent Sermon, which you have here put into your hands. (I Am told) met
with great and due Applause from a numerous and judicious Audience, in the
Preaching of it: and I doubt not will have equal Acceptance, in the Reading. It
is a Sheaf of First Fruits from my worthy Brother, by the (...) of the Press;
and I believe will be found very good, even like the Pigs that are first ripe,
and cannot fail of a singular Relish with all such as have their Senses
exercised to discern what is good, and to approve the Things that are
excellent. (...) at the great Importunity of so many, who tasted the Sweet and
Benefit of it in the Hearing, for a further Publication thereof, an order to
many others having a share with them. I Am persuaded the governing Aim of the
Author in this Discourse was to give GOD the Glory of His surprising Goodness
and Wisdom in the Method He has chosen, of instructing (...) People by Men of
like Passions with Themselves, and to lead (...) a just and pious Application
of a Thought, which it may be has seldom and (...) but Few had its proper
Weight and Improvement. (...) bless GOD, who directed His Servant to such a
Text, and (...) these Meditations upon it, and disposed him to give '^m the
Public -- It is not the design of this Preface to enter into the (...) of the
Reverend Auth^^^, or give a Recommendation of his Performance. His Modesty
F^r^ids the former; as well as my own, the (...) are needless -- However, I
must be allowed to say, That we have a Subject here treated of that is very
instructive has to Ministers and People. It was certainly the best (...) was
preached, as well as for the Occasion. It seems to (...) (...) spoken The
Preacher sought out acceptable Words, faithful Sayings, and worthy of all
Acceptance. Here we have a Variety of the wisest Lesson ^e'd to us; many just
and seasonable Caveats and Admonitions given; with weighty and moving
Exhortations; which if well entertained and applied, would be of no common
service, to promote the great Interests of Religion, the Designs of the
Evangelical Ministry. -- And here also we are taught how to make use of this
Subject for our Consolation in several Cases. Here Auditors are told how they
may apply it to compose their Minds, to sit quietly under the Administrations
of such as are not altogether agreeable to their Wishes. And here also
Ministers are put in mind, to apply it for their Support and Encouragement,
under the dark Prospect of an Unsuccessful Ministry. An inexpressible Grief
this! But we must eye the Hand of GOD in it. If we have Success it is not to be
ascribed to our own Power or Holiness. For who is Paul? and who is Apollos? But
Ministers by whom Men believe, even as the Lord gives to every Man. So then
neither is he that planteth, any thing; nor he that waters: but GOD -- *To
Him we should give all the Glory of our Success. And when denied that, if we
are faithful, we may take Comfort in this; knowing that we are but Men, Men of
like Passions with others; and that with Men it is impossible.

Though (suffer me to add) we should be very jealous of our selves in this Case,
and examine strictly into our own Temper and Conduct; lest by any means we
should have been accessory to our own Unsuccessfulness and deceive our selves
with a groundless Presumption of our unblamable Fidelity. Ministers are too
often the faulty Causes (at least in conjunction with their People) of their
want of Success. We are Men subject to like Passions with others. The brightest
Angels of the Churches are but Spirits in Flesh; and have in them the same
Principles of moral as well natural Corruption, common to others. And by their
own Infirmities, They too often grieve the Holy Spirit, and provoke Him to deny
His Blessing on their Endeavors. And as to many of Us, it is to ^e feared, we
may justly charge our selves with th^se Personal S^n^ which do deservedly
provoke GOD to frown on our Minister, and blast our Labors. I desire to smite
on my own Breast in the (...), and wish we may all (especially, such of us as
(...) Youth, the Age of Levity and indiscretion) examine whether (...) not (...)
and Miscarriages, that (...) not (...) of us ch^^ge our selves with (...)
Ignorance; (...) shameful Negligence; with a scandalous want of necessary
Boldness and Resolution in the Cause of GOD; or with criminal Imprudence; with
very culpable Defects, in point of Conduct; with very sensible Defects in
Grace, in true Holiness, and the Power of Godliness; having little of the Love
of GOD in us, little of the Faith of CHRIST, or Fellowship of the SPIRIT;
little compassion to Souls; little Regard to another World; little of the
Spirit of Devotion, cold in our Prayers, formal in our Administrations, etc.
--. And now if this be our true Character, have we not abundant Reason to
condemn our selves as the guilty Instruments of our own Unsuccessfulness! O
Melancholy Reflection! -- Would to GOD we may all bring our selves under a
solemn Trial, try our own Spirits, and prove our own Works; repair all our too
evident Defects, and study more to show our selves approved unto GOD, Workmen
that need not to be ashamed --. Thus will the most fatal Impediments to our
Success be happily removed; and we may more groundedly expect the Divine
Blessing on our Ministry, and the more comfortably reflect on the want of it. O
that both Ministers and People may sincerely unite in Lamenting after GOD, and
in vigorous Endeavors to recover His Favor and Presence, by removing the
Grounds of His Controversy, and Withdraw from us!

But I will no longer detain the Reader from his better Entertainment in the
following Discourse. -- I shall only add my humble Wi^hes, for the worthy
Author, that he may long be continued a rich Blessing in the Place (which so
rejoices in his Light at present) and see the Fr^^ of his Labors (of this in
particular) to his great Joy. -- Also for our dear Brother, at whose Ordination
it was P^^^h'd, That he may enter into (and long continue in) his Ministry,
with the fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Peace. Finally, (...) the
good People over whom he is set; That they may every (...) receive him in the
LORD with all Gladness, and make their Profiting by him, appear to all Men. Our
Lord JESUS say AMEN to these best of Wishes; the same that I desire of my
Friends, for my self, Who a^^ the Unworthiest of Ministers,

Thomas Foxcroft
Boston, May 29 1725.
AN ORDINATION SERMON.
ACTS XIV. 15. -- We also are Men of like Passions with you --.
THIS Chapter is a Continuation of the History of Paul and Barnabas, their
united Endeavors to Gospellize the Pagan World. We have an account that their
Preaching in Iconium was at first remarkably successful. A great Multitude both
of the Jews, and also of the Greeks, believed their Report. But there (as in
every other place) Satan had his active Instruments to oppose them. The
unbelieving Jews maliciously and industriously sought to render those holy
Preachers of the Word, and all who embraced the Christian Doctrine, vile and
contemptible in the Eyes of the Gentiles. The Enemy of Souls and Father of Lies
never devised a more effectual way to hinder the progress of the Gospel, than
to prejudice the Minds of People against the faithful Dispensers of it, by
representing Zion's Nazarites in a Visage blacker than a Coal. Notwithstanding
the ill treatment which these Apostles met with, yet they for a long time abode
in that City speaking boldly in the Lord. A Minister is not presently to go
from a People, nor Cowardly to spare them in declaring the Counsel of God, when
there are many among them unreasonably disaffected to him. But when Paul and
Barnabas saw the whole City in Confusion, and that there was a Murderous design
on Foot against them, then they fled into other Cities: as CHRIST Commands,
or at least allows his Ministers to do, Mat. 10. 23. When they persecute you
in this City, then flee ye into another: And as GOD opens to them a door of
Escape out of one Place, so he does a door of Opportunity in another. Paul and
Barnabas coming to Lystra, Preached the Gospel there, and wrought a Miraculous
Cure for the confirmation of their Doctrine, and to the astonishment of all who
beheld it. A poor Cripple, who had been so from his Mother's Womb, and never
had walked, Hearing Paul preach, was so affected with the Sermon, that he
believed, the Speaker could not only say, but do great things, in the Name of
Christ Jesus the Lord, whom he preached. The Apostle looking Steadfastly and
Compassionately upon him, perceived by the Spirit of discerning, that he had
faith to be healed. He therefore with a loud voice said unto the lame Man,
Stand upright on thy feet. He doubtless said this in the Name of Jesus Christ
of Nazareth: The Word was sent forth from him; for by it the Cripple was
immediately and perfectly healed, which he discovered by leaping and walking.
And so an ancient Prophecy which relates to Gospel Times, was liter ^ly
fulfilled: Isa. 35. 6. Then shall the lame man leap as an heart. This wonderful
work was very surprising to the People who saw it and occasioned an idolatrous
Admiration of the Instruments of it: They lift up their voices, saying in the
speech of Lyca^nia, The Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men. They
thought that the Gods whom the Nations worshipped, were come down in the
Appearance of Men, and had done this extraordinary Cure. They pretended to know
which of the Heathen Deities these Persons were: Barnabas they called Jupiter;
and Paul M^rcurius, because he was the Chief Speaker. Probably Barnabas was one
of a more Majestic Countenance and Deportment than Paul; therefore he was
taken for Jupiter, the Supreme God, according to the Pagan Theogonie: and Paul
speaking more than Barnabas, he was looked upon as Mercury, the Interpreter of
the Gods, the God of Eloquence. The People being so fully persuaded of the
Divinity of these Persons, they presently resolved to honor them as Gods. Then
the Priest of Jupiter which was before their City, (i.e. whose Statue and
Temple were erected before the Gate of the City: Jupiter being accounted the
Guardian and President of the City) the Priest of that Idol brought Ox^n and
Garlands to adorn the Victim with, and would have done Sacrifice with the
people. As soon as Barnabas and Paul perceived this, they manifested a great
displeasure at it and detestation of it, They rent their Clothes, and ran in
among the people, crying out, and saying, Si^s, why do ye these things? They
were earnest and Zealous to suppress the Idolatry of the foolish people. They
rebuked them sharply for attempting to deif them. And to convince them of the
Absurdity of giving Divine Honors unto them, they said, We also are Men (...)
like passions with you. -- We, the Apostles of Jesus, the Ministers of the
Gospel, who Preach and do wonderful works in Christ's Name, are not Gods, as Ye
ignorantly suppose us to be, although we are in God's stead. And it is a gross
abomination to do such Service unto th^se who by Nature are no Gods. Neither
are we Angels by Nature, though we are so by Office; and therefore are far from
deserving of Religious Worship. We are Men, and but Men; Creatures of the same
Nature with you unto whom we Preach: we are Men of like passions, both physical
and moral, bodily and mental. We are not impassible and immortal as GOD is, but
frail and mortal as Ye are. We are subject to the same Infirmities of the
humane Nature, and liable to the same Calamities of the humane life Therefore
it is Blasphemous Folly in you to call us Gods, and to Sacrifice unto us as
such.

The DOCTRINE which may at this time be Illustrated and Applied is this, viz.

DOCT. THAT the Ministers of the Gospel are Men of like Passions with others.
THE Gracious GOD has in infinite Mercy vouchsaf^d a Revelation of his Nature
and Will, of Man's Duty and Happiness; and in his adorable Wisdom he has
appointed and improved Men to Publish the same unto their Fellow Creatures. The
Law was given by M^ses, the Man of God, Joh. 1. 17. He declared it to the
People. Indeed the Israelites are said to have received it by the disposition
of Angels, Act. 7. 53. But this intends no more than that the holy Angels were
present at the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai. The Original Word, which is
here rendered Disposition, is of the ^^^ral Number, and (as Just Critics have
observed) signifies Companies disposed together or ^e^ in order. The Chariots
of God were twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, when he came down to
Sinai: And so the Israelites did receive the Law among the Hosts of Angels. And
this may be the meaning of the Law's being ordained, and spoken by Angels, Gal.
3. 19. Heb. 2. 2. That the glorious Angels attended the Lord in his delivering
of it on the Mount. But God authorized Men to be the standing Teachers of the
Law. Moses and the Prophets were Men Jam. 5. 17. Elias was a man subject to
like passions as we are. The Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, were taken
from among men, Heb. 5. 1. Even Melchisedec was so, notwithstanding he was
without Father, without Mother, without descent, i. e. his Genealogy was not
known. The Law made Men High Priests which had Infirmity, Heb. 7. 28. And the
Gospel likewise Constituteth such the Ministers of the New Testament. Men were
some of those purchased Gifts, which our Lord ascended into Heaven to receive
for, and give unto men. GOD does not personally or immediately declare his Will
to us; nor send his Angels, those Ministering Spirits, in this way, to Minister
unto the ^^^rs of Salvation; but he Commissionateth Men, and those not perfect,
to this Sacred Office of Preaching the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. 7. We have this
treasure in earthen vessels. The rich treasure of the Gospel is put into
brittle Vessels: it is brought unto poor perishing Sinners by frail Men like
themselves.

NOW, although we cannot see to the bottom of any of God's Counsels, yet there are
some obvious Reasons of his appointing Men of like passions with others, to the
Ministry of the Word, which do Justify the Wisdom, and display the Goodness of
GOD herein, and much of the Duty both of Ministers and People may be learned
herefrom. Let the following Reasons therefore be weighed.

1. GOD appoints Men of like passions with others to be the Ministers of his
Word, because he will treat with us about the things which belong to our
everlasting peace, in such a familiar way, as is most accommodate to the Humane
Nature. He knows our frame: Remembers that we are dust, and suits his
Dispensation accordingly. It is an Instance and Argument of the Condescending
Goodness of GOD that he does not preach Personally unto us, nor send his
Glorious Angels; but Men of the same Nature and of like passions with
ourselves, to reveal his Will unto us, and to treat with us about our spiritual
and everlasting concernments. The Consideration of the weakness of the Humane
Nature in its present state of Imperfection and Mortality, determined the
Alwise and Gracious GOD to this method of dealing with us for our Instruction
and Salvation.

IF the Great and Dreadful GOD should speak Personally unto us, how could our
weak faculties bear the overwhelming Glory and Majesty, in which it becomes him
to speak? When JEHOVAH thundered on the Mount, and the Highest gave his voice
from Sinai, the People could not endure. And so terrible was the sight of the
Mount burning with fire, and the sound of the Trumpet waxing louder and louder,
and the voice of words, that Moses himself cried out, saying, I exceedingly
fear and quake. And the People entreated that they might not hear the voice of
the Lord again, least they should die; but that Moses, and not God, would speak
with them. And GOD approved of their Request. Should the Lord come down in such
Splendid Equipage, and Preach the Gospel to us in the like Divine Glory, we
should be no more able to endure, than the Israelites were at the Promulgation
of the Law. We should be so troubled at his Presence, that we could not hearken
to his Doctrine. The Terror of his Majesty would hinder the Attention of our
Minds, and put us into the greatest Confusion.

OR if GOD should send his Holy Angels (which are Infinitely Inferior to him in
Glory) to Preach unto us; yet the Luster of Seraphim would dazzle and confound,
rather then inform and edify us. Manoah's Wife said unto him, a man of God came
unto me, and his Countenance was like the Countenance of an Angel of God, very
terrible, Judge. 13. 6. An Angel brought the first Tidings of a Savior's Birth,
but his Appearance was so bright and glorious that the poor Shepherds were
amazed: Luke 2. 9. (...) the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and the Glory of
the Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid. GOD therefore
considers our frame, and sends Men clothed with Flesh and Infirmities, and not
Angels inrobed with light and glory, to preach unto us, that so knowledge and
faith might in a familiar way be instilled into our Minds and Hearts. And the
Preacher can say unto the Hearer, as Elih^ did unto Job, (Job 33. 6, 7.) Behold
I am according to thy wish in God's stead: I also am formed out of the ^^ay.
Behold my Terror shall not make thee afraid^ neither shall my hand be heavy
upon thee.

2. MEN of like passions with others are appointed to be Ministers, because
such can be Examples unto the ^lock. It is very requisite that the Preachers of
Religion should be Patterns of it. An Exemplary Life of Gospel-Obedience is an
Excellent means to bring People to the Knowledge and Practice of true Godliness.

THIS is the shortest and easiest way of Instruction: And without this our
Preaching is commonly in vain. The Mind is soonest and most sweetly informed of
the nature and worth of Virtue, when it is represented by good Example. This
way of Teaching is adapted to the lowest Capacity. It is difficult for some
Understandings, clearly to apprehend; for some Memories, long to retain; and
for some Judgments, rightly to apply, the Rules of Holy Living, when they are
only Doctrinally prescribed: But when they are Exemplified in a Sober,
Righteous and Godly Conversation, all this becomes easy. A Traveller, who has
only oral directions given him concerning his way; is in greater danger of
wandering out of it, than if he had a (...) guide to go before him. It is easier
to learn to write by looking on a fair Copy, than by hearing the Discourses of
the most accurate Scribe.

AND as good Example is useful to inform Men of their Duty, so it is likewise
to incline and engage them to the performance of it. Examples do more forcibly
strike the Affections, and influence the Practice of Men, than Precepts do. The
Beauties of H^liness are never set off with so great advantage, as when they
are displayed in a regular and upright, a holy and heavenly Conversation.
Virtue dressed up in all the artificial Ornaments of Speech appears not so
lovely and charming, as when by a Religious Life it is exhibited in its Natural
Graces. All the Oratory of the Pulpit don't commend it to Persons Esteem, so
much as does a plain representation of it in a well ordered Conversation.
Suadet Loquentis Vita, non Oration. The holy Life of the Speaker has a more
persuasive energy in it than his moving Expression. Such as obey not the word,
may be won by the Conversation. In this way the believing Wife (who is not
allowed to speak in the Church) may gain the unbelieving Husband, whom the
Preacher cannot, (1. Pet. 3. 1.) It is therefore necessary, that he who
Preaches to others, and presses holy Duties upon them, should be an Example
to his Hearers; agreeable with that Divine Injunction, 1. Tim 4. 12. Be thou an
Example of the Believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in
faith, in purity.

AND consequently a Minister must be a Man of like passions with others. Indeed
we are to be Imitators of Angels, and ought to do the will of God on Earth, as
they do it in Heaven. But were the holy Angels sent to preach the Everlasting
Gospel, they could not be so complete and encouraging Examples to us, as they
may be who are of the same Nature, and of like passions with us.

ANGELS could not set us a Pattern complete and entire in all the parts of it.
For we have Bodies as well as Spirits: and it is a Christian's daily Exercise
to keep under his body, and bring it into subjection. Humane Virtue consists in
acting agreeably to the Humane Nature in its primitive constitution; that is,
Right Reason's maintaining a proper Dominion over the Brutal part. But how
could Angels (which are Spirits only) be Examples of Virtues, which consist in
the due government of Sensitive Appetites? Could they be Patterns of
Temperance, Chastity, and the like? None can by their Example teach us how to
behave our selves in the circumstances of men, unless they communicate with us
in the passions and circumstances of the Humane Nature.

FURTHER, the Example of Angels would not be so Encouraging, as that of Men,
who are of like passions with us. For Angels, who excel in strength, to be
constant, exact and universal in their Obedience; for them, whose Nature is
pure and perfect, to shine as Lights in the World; what great Encouragement
would this afford to weak and polluted Creatures, that they shall attain to the
high pitch of Virtue and Holiness, which is required of them? Would the
illustrious Virtue of Spotless Angels provoke the Emulation of fallen
Creatures? If Men that are sensible of the Weakness and Impurity of their
Nature, should hear Angels vehemently inculcate the precepts of Religion, and
propound their own Pattern as a Motive to Conformity, would they not think that
such Rules were calculated only for the Angelical Nature? and that such great
and difficult Duties were impracticable to Men? Would they take any pains to
write after an Angel's Copy! But when they see the Doctrines of their
Preachers, who are Men like themselves, in some good measure exemplified in
their Lives, this raises their Hopes, excites and enlivens their Endeavors.
To see Men which have the same weak and depraved Nature that they have, Men
Compassed with Infirmities, and assaulted with Temptations as they are, yet by
the Help of Divine Grace (which is offered to all) surmounting the difficulties
of a Christian Course, this is a great Encouragement unto them, to engage and
continue in it: for this is a Convincing Evidence that the Things enjoined them
are not utter Impossibilities. The Apostle thus excites Christians to fervent
Prayer: Jam. 5. 16, 17. Pray for one another --. Elias was a man subject to
like passions as we are, and He prayed earnestly, and effectually.

3. MEN of like passions with others are appointed Ministers of the Gospel,
because such are equally Concerned with the People in the Message which they
bring, and the things which they teach. Infinite Wisdom saw it best, that the
important Truths of the Gospel should as necessarily relate to the Preacher's,
as to the Hearer's welfare: that the eternal Interest of Ministers, as well as
of People, should be wrapped up in them; and therefore the former must be Men
of like passions with the latter. Since Ministers are Men, the weighty Matters
which they come to publish unto, and treat with others about, do as nearly
concern their own Souls as their Hearers.

AND this gives a considerable advantage to their Ministry: for by reason
hereof, People may with greater Confidence Commit their Souls to the Care of
their Ministers; knowing that if they are wise for themselves, they will be
faithful unto those whom they take the oversight of. Ministers being Men, if
they imbibe and vent any Error, they poison their own Souls as well as their
Hearers. If they gather wild Gourds, instead of wholesome Herbs, for the Pot,
they endanger their own Lives as much as Their's whom they are to feed. If the
spiritual Guides mislead people, they will inevitably fall with them into the
ditch of perdition; yea, they will be plunged deepest in Hell. If the spiritual
Watchmen do not stand always upon their guard, and be not attentive to espy and
give notice of approaching Dangers, they are as likely to be taken away by the
sword as others. So that their Interest is the People's Security. This is an
Argument persuading us of their Integrity and Faithfulness; and renders our
Confidence in them more reasonable. Our spiritual Pilots do not stand on the
shore, looking upon us, and only Calling to us in a Sea of Dangers; but they
embark with us, and venture their Souls with ours in the same Bottom^

AND Ministers being as Men so deeply concerned in the things, which they are
to treat of, this does excite them to Earnestness of Affection in Preaching
unto, and striving with others for their Salvation. 1 These. 2. 8. So being
affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not
the Gospel of God only, but also our own Souls, because ye were dear unto us.
An Ambassador of Christ ought to deliver his important Messages in a lively
manner, with an agreeable Fervor. He is to communicate not only light to the
Understanding, but also ^eat to the Affections: to be a burning as well as a
shining light. And in order to this, it is requisite that his own heart should
be warm, and that he should speak as One whose Lips are touched with a coal
from the Altar. For in preaching "there is intended a Communion of Souls": and
the Impression, which divine Truths make on the heart of the Preacher, is apt
to be Communicated to the Hearer's Now Ministers being Men of like passions
with others, and so equally Concerned with them in the important Truths which
they preach, they have the Advantage of another order of Creatures,
uninterested in these Matters of infinite Consequence, to be affected therewith
themselves, and so to treat of them, as to move the affections of others
"Passions are the best Orators". And what has a greater tendency to excite
them in the Speaker's breast, than for him to see himself equally Concerned
with his Hearers, in the Truths which he preaches, relating to an (...) World?
"This gives Accents of Vehemence to his Exhortations." 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. (...)
^ath Committed unto us (has put in us, who are earthen vessels) the Ministry
of reconciliation. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
BESEECH you by us: we PRAY you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

4. MEN of like passions with others are made Ministers because such may have
Experience of the things which they preach unto others. Ministers being Men of
like passions with others, they have not only a Speculative knowledge of, but
also an Experimental acquaintance with those great things, which they are to
instruct the people in. Their own Experience teaches them the Corrupt
Inclinations and Dispositions of the vitiated Nature in all Men. Prove. 27. 19.
As in water face answers to face, so the heart of man to man. The hearts of
all Men living are in regard of natural Corruption, as like one to another, as
the shadow of a Man's face in the water, is like to the face whose shadow it
is. So that from what Ministers, who are Men, observe in themselves, they are
able to speak unto others of the depravity and deformity of their Souls by
Nature, and to affect them with a sense thereof. Although self-acquaintance does
not fully, yet it does in a great measure inform them, how deceitful and
desperately wicked the Carnal heart is; and in what ways it opposes the Work
of Grace; and so they are the fitter Instruments of Conversion. And although the
regenerating Operations of the divine Spirit are very mysterious, (the Wind
blowing where it lists: and no Man can tell whence it comes, and whither it
g^^th,) yet such as are born again (and thus Angels could not be) are the
better qualified to relieve others, groaning under the pang^ of the New Birth.
Psalm. 51. 13. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be
Converted unto thee. Such may conduct Men to Christ and Holiness, by those
Methods in which they were brought thereunto themselves Gal. 1. 15, 16. When it
pleased God, who separated me from my Mother's Womb, and Called me by his
grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen;
immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood. Ministers being Men of like
passions with others, they know what it is to be assaulted and foiled by
Temptations; They are not ignorant of Satan's devices; and therefore may the
better direct others how to stand against the Wiles of the Devil. Luke 22. 32.
-- When thou art Converted, strengthen thy Brethren They know what it is to be
afflicted inwardly and outwardly: Knowing therefore the Terrors of the Lord,
they are the fitter to persuade men. And from their own experience of divine
Consolations are the more meet Helpers of others joy: They will the more
naturally care for their State, and be more able, with the Tongue of the
learned to speak a word in season unto weary Souls. 2 Cor. 1. 4. Who Comfort
us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to Comfort them which are in any
trouble, by the Comfort wherewith we our selves are Comforted of God.

5. MINISTERS are Men of like passions with others, because they are to
discharge the Sacred Office with great Condescension and Compassion. Ministers
ought to stoop to the Capacities, and to bear with the weaknesses of People. 1
These. 2. 7, 11. But we were gentle among you, even as a n^rse cherishes her
children: you know, how we exhorted and comforted, and charged every one of
you, as a father does his children. They should feed them with Milk, when they
are not able to bear strong meat: and must speak to them after the manner of
men, because of the Infirmity of their flesh. They should pity them under all
their Infirmities; and sympathize with them under all their Afflictions. These
Servants of God must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach,
patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. They must, if a
Man be overtaken with a fault, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness;
considering themselves, le^t they also be tempted. They ought also to deny
themselves for their Hearers good: and to make themselves Servants unto all (as
Paul did) that they may gain the more: willing to be made all things (that are
lawful) to all men, that they may by all means save some. This I do (says the
Apostle) for the Gospel's sake, that I may be partaker thereof with you. They
should please all Men, so far as they can without displeasing GOD: and comply
even with some humors of a People, for their spiritual advantage. They should
take upon them every Man's Affection, and accommodate themselves to every Man's
temper. 2 Cor. 11. 28 Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended and I
burn not?

NOW that Ministers might with such Gentleness, Condescension and Compassion
behave themselves in their Office, it is convenient and requisite that they
should be Men of like passions with others: That they should have experience of
the frailties and infirmities of the humane Nature in their own persons. This
softens their hearts, and teaches them Compassion toward others. Heb. 5. 1,
2. For every high Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices for Sins: who
can have Compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way; for
that he himself also is Compassed with Infirmity.

MINISTERS are liable to the Temptations, Griefs, and Miseries of their
Brethren, that so they might pity them and sympathize with them, and not be too
harsh and severe in dealing with those that are fallen into error and sin. As
Dr. Edwards observes, 'GOD has made the Speaker subject to the same
Infirmities with his Hearers, that by this Means there may be a bridle on his
Tongue, to Check him from an inordinate and too bitter inveighing against the
offenses of others.

6. MINISTERS are Men of like passions with others, because they are sometimes
called to Suffer for the Gospel which they preach. The great Prophet, whom GOD
raised up to us, of our Brethren, sealed his Doctrine with his blood. And those
whom Christ sends to preach the same doctrine, He sometimes will have, in
attestation of the Truth of it, to lay down their Lives. Hereby Ministers have
given the highest pledge of their Integrity, and have been gloriously
instrumental of Propagating the Gospel, and strengthening the ^aith of
Believers. The victory, which the primitive Preachers obtained over the Devil,
was partly by means of their dying for the Gospel. Rev. 12. 11. They overcame
him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony; and they
loved not their Lives unto the death. This their Courage and Zeal helped to
Confound their Enemies, and to Convince many of the Spectators, and to Confirm
the Souls of the faithful. In this way (in which Angels could not) Ministers,
being Men of like passions with others, may promote the Gospel, and help the
faith of GOD's Elect: and they should readily and cheerfully do so when Called
thereto. Phil. 2. 17. Yea, and if I be offered upon the Sacrifice and Service
of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all.

7. MINISTERS are Men of like passions with others, because GOD will have all
the Success of their Work to redound to the honor of his own Name. GOD's Glory
is the Supreme Reason and ultimate Aim of all his Dispensations. This he
intends and advances by ordaining of imperfect Men to the work of the
Ministry. Great and mavelous things are done by means of the Word preached.
Hereby the Eyes of blind Sinners are opened; hard hearts are softened, dead
Souls are quickened; Satan's strong Holds are cast down, and his kingdom
demolished. Miserable Souls are rescued out of his hands: and Believers are
defended against his rage and strength: The Saints are built up: The body of
Christ is edifyed: Till we all come in the Unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. Now the Glory of these great Effects does
belong unto GOD: and that it might the more evidently and undeniably appear so,
He has commissionated weak imperfect Men to be the Preachers of his Word.
Indeed were the Mighty Angels the Ministers of the Gospel, th^se things could
not be accomplished by all their powers: yet the honor thereof is more
effectually secured to the Name of the Lord of Ho^^s, by his employing and
succeding of frail impotent Men, in this glorious Work. 2 Cor. 4. 7. We have
this Treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the Power may be of
God, and not of us. The Ministers of the Gospel are in respect of their
weakness, fitly compared to Babes and Sucklings: and in their weakness GOD's
Strength and Praise are perfected, to the greater Confusion of his Enemies.
Psalm. 8. 2. Ou^ of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings ^^st thou ordained
strength, because of thine enemies, that thou might still the enemy and
avenger.

THUS you see in some measure, how the Wisdom and the Goodness of GOD, in
appointing Men of like passions with others, to be the Ministers of the Gospel,
are displayed, and do approve themselves to our Understandings --. And now what
Influence this Dispensation of GOD ought to have upon the Hearts and Conduct
both of Ministers and People; what use of the Doctrine is to be made, and what
abuse thereof is to be guarded against by us; I proceed to show, under the

APPLICATION.
1. ARE Ministers Men of like Passions with others? Hence it is unreasonable
for people to look ^or absolute Perfection in them. They are Men, and not
Angels by Nature: and are in the State of Common Imperfection. The wisest of
them know and prophecy but in part: and the Best of them practice but in part,
what they do know and teach. After all their laborious study of the Scriptures,
their knowledge is defective, and what is wanting, cannot be numbered. After
their highest Improvements in Virtue and Holiness, their Graces are all
Imperfect; and what is lacking to them, will not be fully supplied in this
World. After all their painful endeavors for the good of Souls, they cannot
say, We have done all that which was our duty to do. Faults and failures they
will have; and if people will not receive them as Ministers, with these, they must
refuse all such whom GOD sends unto them. To reject them, because they are
not perfect, is to impeach the Wisdom and Goodness of GOD, from whom they
receive their Commission. -- It is a common saying, -- The Best must have their
Grains of Allowance. And the frailty of humane Nature is to be considered in
Ministers, as well as in other Men. Not but that Sin committed by them, has
its peculiar Aggravations: and gross Miscarriages are more odious in them, than
in others: And if they fall into scandalous Enormities, they unfit themselves
for the sacred function, and may not execute the same, till by a visible
Repentance they are recovered. Yet their Sins of Infirmity, and of daily
surreption, ought not to be pried into, with Eagle eyed Malice: nor exposed, to
their disgrace, when they are no other than such as are common to Humanity.
Their Failings should be covered with the Mantle of Christian Charity: an
Accusation must not be received against them, unless supported by two or three
Witnesses. Ministers have the same depraved Nature, which their people have;
and the Tempter most violently assaults them, as knowing What a Rout he may
make among the Common Soldiers, if the Leaders fall, before their Eyes.
Therefore People should forbear all invidious Reflections, and harsh Censures.
They should not insult over, nor inveigh against their Ministers for every
little failing, as they are too apt to do: but should always manifest a tender
pity of their Infirmities, and not labor to expose and aggravate those faults
in them, which may be no other nor greater than the Spots of God's Children.

2. ARE Ministers Men of like passions with others? Hence People are to be
cautioned against a Superstitious Reverence of their Persons. The words of our
Text were at first spoken to convince People of the sin and folly of this.
There is an idolatrous Admiration of Men's Persons, which we ought to beware
of. People are guilty of this, when they ascribe Divinity, Infallibility, or
Angelick Perfection unto their Ministers: When with an implicit faith, and
blind obedience, they believe whatever their Teachers say, and practice what
they bid them do, without examining whether they speak according to the Law and
the Testimony. People give undue Respects to Ministers, when they cry them up
as the Ablest and Godliest Men in the World, not acknowledging and praising the
Father of Lights, from whom every one receives his Gifts and Graces, according
to his measure. People are to be cautioned against this evil: for they who
bestow undue Commendations on some of Christ's Ministers, do pour unjust
Contempt on others. They are commonly Murmurers, Complainers, who speak great
sw^lling words, having Men's Persons in Admiration, because of Advantage, Jude,
16. And GOD may be provoked to blast a Minister's Gifts, when he sees a People
idolize him; and to deny him success, when they are ready to give the Glory of
it to the weak Instrument, and not to the Almighty Agent. And the Air of
popular extravagant Applause is very infectious. It tends to puff up Ministers
with pride, and so to make them fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. And
such as overvalue a Minister, do commonly the soonest under-value him. The
Hearts of Men are disposed to Extremes and do easily pass from one to the
other: undue Respects are usually followed with unjust Complaints. They who
deify Ministers one day, are apt to vilify them the next, often they who Cry
H^sann^, soon change their note, and say, Crucify, Crucify. -- Brethren, we
need and ask your Prayers for us, more than we deserve or desire your Praises
of us: let us have the former, and we can do without the latter. -- And yet,

3. PEOPLE must take heed of despising Ministers, because they are Men of like
passions with themselves. Although Ministers in respect of their frail
Condition, are on a level with the rest of Mankind yet in regard of their
Office, they are distinguished and di^nified by GOD. He puts honor upon them,
above what he does on others, by adm^t^ing them to a nearer attendance upon
him. They are his Domestics, his Special Servants: They are the Messengers of
the Lord of Hosts: The Ambassadors of the King of Kings. They come in GOD's
Name, and speak in Christ's stead: they represent his Person, and negotiate the
Affairs of his Kingdom. We should therefore hold such in reputation, and
account them Sacred and Venerable. Because of their Office and Employment, Men
should set a high value on them, and pay a deference to them. 1 These. 5. 12,
13. We beseech you, Brethren, to know them which are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you; and to est^em them very highly in love for their works sake. It
might shame many professed Christians to be told with what respect and
reverence Heathens have treated those of their Priestly Order. Among the
Romans, if principal Magistrates (says a Learned Writer) did meet with one of
Vesta's Priests, they caused immediately their Ensigns of Authority to submit,
and they themselves respectfully gave place, as if they meant to confess them
in a manner their Betters. Nor did those of the highest Dignity in the
Commonwealth, scornfully disdain, but rather ambitiously affect, to be
admitted into the College of Priests. And the Sacerdotal Robe has been often
died with Purple. Now surely the Office and Persons of CHRIST's Ministers, the
Stewards of the Mysteries of God, are more honorable; and Heathens may rise in
Judgment against those, who despise the same. And where the contempt and ill
usage of Christ's faithful Ambassadors terminate. People may see in Luke 10.
16. He that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises
him that sent me.

4. ARE Ministers Men of like Passions with others? Let not this prejudice the
due reception of the Truth, which they Preach. Many seek to excuse their
Disregard of the Message, by their dislike of the Messenger. Persons are too
prone to think that Ministers being imperfect Men, will justify their
neglecting to hear or obey the Word. When Sinners will not give Entertainment
to the Gospel, then they find fault with the Preachers of it; and are ready to
flatter themselves, that this will bear them out, in the neglect of the great
Salvation; and such will always have something to object. Matt. 11. 16, 17, 18,
19. Whereunto shall I liken this Generation? It is like unto Children sitting
in the Markets, and calling unto their fellows, and saying, We have piped unto
you, and ye have not danced: We have mourned unto you, and ye have not
lamented. For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He has a
Devil. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man
gluttonous and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners. Persons that
approve not of the method, which GOD has chosen, to reveal his Will, and to
treat with Sinners about their Eternal Happiness, would quarrel at any other
dispensation, which they may now think would be better and more effectual. If
GOD should humor their Peevishness, and send perfect Men, or glorious Angels,
to Preach unto them, this would not avail. Luke 16. 30. 31. Nay Father,
Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent. And he said
unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded, though one rose from the Dead. People should take heed of despising
the rich Treasure of Gospel Light and Grace because of its being put into
Earthen Vessels. The Treasure it self is not the less valuable, by reason of
the meanness of the Vessel, in which it is brought to us. Although the
Preachers of the Gospel are Men, yet we ought to receive it not as the word of
m^n, but (as it is in truth) the Word of God, 1 These 2. 13.

5. ARE Ministers Men of like Passions with others? The cons^^eration of this
should keep them Humble. Pride is a chief part of the Devil^s Image upon Man.
We all brought it into the World with us, and the best are not wholly free from
it until they leave the World. No Men have stronger Temptations to Pride than
Ministers have: and it is in none so unseemly and intolerable, as it is in
them, who are most strictly obliged to resemble the Great Teacher, who was meek
and lowly in heart. They ought therefore to be very watchful against this Evil:
and the consideration, that they are men of like passions with others, may be a
good Preservative from it. This should make them to abase themselves, when they
magnify their Office. This should keep them from being Concei^ed, either in any
Prerogatives belonging to their function, or in any Abilities bestowed on them
for the execution thereof. This Title, Son of Man, was frequently given to
Ezekiel, (who was often among Angels, and enjoyed the high Visions of GOD) that
so he might not forget, that he was subject to the Imperfections of Mortal
Nature. Paul had a Thorn in the flesh given him, some trouble or temptation, to
put him in mind that he was flesh, a weak and frail man, le^t he should be
exalted above measure, through the abundance of the Revelations, 2 Cor. 12. 7.
Let Ministers duly Remember that they are Men of like passions with others:
then will they humbly seek to GOD through Jesus Christ, for the a sufficient Aids
of his Grace, in every work, which they undertake, for the honor of GOD's
Name, and the good of Souls: Then they will not arrogate to themselves the
glory of any success, which they may have: Then they will patiently bear
contempt and obloquy, which they must expect to be loaded with: and will study
to approve themselves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, etc. Then they will not Lord it
over God's heritage: They will not take state upon themselves, and carry it
with a Supercilious Haughtiness toward their People; but will be affable and
easy of access, and ready to stoop unto any service, whereby they may profit
the Souls of their Hearers, and may be able to make that appeal which the great
Apostle did, Act. 20. 18, 19. Ye know, from the first day that I came into
Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all seasons, serving the Lord
with all Humility of mind.

6. ARE Ministers Men of like Passions with others? This may yield them some
Comfort, when they are unsuccessful in their work. It is an inexpressible Grief
to faithful Preachers of the Word, to see that they labor in v^in, and spend
their strength for naught. It occasions great sorrow and continual heaviness to
their Spirits: God is their Record. It makes them ready to wish with the
weeping Prophet, Jer. 9. 2. Oh that I had in the Wilderness as lodging place of
wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them: for they be all
Adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men. They tremble, le^t their
Unsuccessfulness should be owing to some Unfaithfulness in them; and so they
should have their hands stained with the blood of lost Souls, and their ears
filled with the doleful cry thereof for ever. But if upon strict Examination,
they have ground to hope that they have obtained Mercy to be faithful, it may
comfort them to think that it was not in their power to render the Word and
Ordinances, which they administered, effectual; they being frail and impotent
Men. The ablest Minister (our Lord Jesus excepted, who was more than a Man)
never could do this. From the blood of the s^ain, from the ^at of the mighty,
the Bow and Sword of the greatest Warriors under Christ, have often returned
empty: It is not to be wondered at then, that ours do so. Unless the BREATH
come, and breathe upon the s^ain, we cannot make them live: but must prophecy,
to no purpose, upon dry bones. If the Lord reject our People, they will be
reprobate Silver, and the Founder must melt in vain. And GOD may justly Send a
Minister to an obstinate irreclaimable People with that dreadful Commission;
Isai. 6. 9, 10. Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not;
and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: le^t they see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert and be
healed.

7. THE Truth which has at this time been spoken to, might serve to quiet and
compose the Minds of Persons, who Sit under the Ministry of One not in all
respects Agreeable to their Desires. It is readily granted, that no Man should
account it a matter of Indifferency, what Preacher he commits his precious
immortal Soul unto, to be instructed, and guided in the way to eternal Bliss.
For although the Efficacy of any One's Ministry depends upon the blessing of
Heaven, and GOD can save Persons by Means least suited to the End; yet it is
the ordinary Practice of his Sovereign Grace, to do most for and upon the Souls
of Men by the fittest Means. But notwithstanding this, if by the disposal of
the wise providence of GOD, a Man is placed under the Ministry of One, in whom
there is not every thing that he may wish for; yet this Consideration, that all
Ministers are Men of like passions with others, might serve to compose his Mind
to a quiet and dutiful submission to the Ordinance of GOD, and may keep him
from being Contentious. When there were envyings, ^^rifes and divisions in the
Church of Corinth about their Ministers; one saying, I am of Paul, and another,
I am of Apollos; the Apostle propounded this, which we have been treating on,
to their serious Consideration: 1 Cor. 3. 5. ^^ho then is Paul, and who is
Apollos; but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man?
They were no more than Instruments, used by the GOD of all Grace. Such whom we
account the best Ministers, cannot be the Authors, and those whom we may think
inferior to them, may be the Instruments, or Faith and Salvation to us. When a
Person's Inclinations are not answered in the Settlement of a particular
Minister (competently qualified) over him, Methinks he should silence
Discontent thus, GOD's Thoughts are not as Man's; and he may intend more good
to my Soul, and to the Souls of my Children, by the Ministry of one, not every
way pleasing to me, than should have been obtained by another's, which I more
highly valued. GOD might see that I had too raised Expectations from Man, and
too great a dependence upon Means, and therefore I am denied those which I
apprehended most suitable, and others (though they should be really weaker) may
be greatly blessed to me, when they are the best that I can peaceably enjoy,
and be attended upon from a sense of duty to GOD, in obedience to his Will, an
with dependence upon and Prayer for his Blessing. 1 Cor 12. 31. Covet earnestly
the best Gifts: and yet show I unto you a more excellent way.

8. ARE Ministers Men of like passions with others? Hence a suitable Provision
ought to be made for their outward Subsistence. They are not Angels by Nature,
but Men; and are not here clothed with spiritual Bodies, as the Saints will be
in the Resurrection-World. They now stand in need of Food and Raiment, as well
as others. They are Men, and should live as Men. They ought to be liberally
Supplied, by those among whom they labor, with the Necessaries and
Conveniences of humane Life.

THIS is requisite to their Comfortable fulfilling of their Ministry.

HOW can they well discharge their Office, whose Minds are depressed and
discomposed with the Griefs and Cares, which unavoidably attend a state of
Penury? Do not pinching Wants dispirit Men, and unfit them in a great measure
for any public Service? Certainly Ministers being Men, they need outward
Encouragement to their work; that he that ploweth, should plow in hope, 1 Cor.
9. 10. That Exemplary Reformer King Hezekiah thought this necessary for the
Priests under the law, they being taken from among Men. 2 Chronicles. 3^. 4. He
commanded the People that dwelt in Jeru^alem, to give the portion of the
Priests, and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord:
that is, That they might be heartned to study, to teach, to perform all the
duties required of them by the div^^e Law --.

AND a necessitous Estate is accompanied with many Temptations to
Unfaithfulness. Not that Ministers are free from such, in a plentiful
Condition: neither will their outward Circumstances, whatever they be, excuse
their Unfaithfulness. Yet when People keep their Ministers poor and low, they
Strongly tempt them to Negligence and Cowardice, to Discontent and Worldliness,
to Flattery and unworthy Courses: and let them consider whose work they are
doing, while they tempt their Ministers unto such Evils.

BUT supposing a Minister be faithful (as we trust many are) while oppressed
with Poverty, yet it is not likely that he should be so Successful. For his
indigent beggarly condition procures him the contempt, even of those, who are
the faulty causes of it. How highly soever the affected Poverty of mendicant
Friars has been reputed and reverenced among the Papists; yet experience
shows, that the poverty of Protestant Ministers is that for which their
Persons are often despised, and their Instructions, Reproofs and Exhortations
disregarded. It is an ancient observation, Eccl. 9. 16. The poor man's Wisdom
is despised, and his words are not heard. The Brightest Lights are very much
obscured, to the Eyes of the World, by the interposing Cloud of Poverty. Not
only the Grandees of the Earth, but the very Abjects are prone to contemn even
very worthy Ministers, for their mean outward Circumstances. If the Preacher's
Condition (faith one) be not, as well as his Pulpit, somewhat elevated above
the lowest Station, few will mind his words or obey him.

AND since Ministers are Men of like passions with others, they ought to be
provided with something of a worldly Estate to transmit to their Posterity. A
parental Affection and provident Care for their Children is allowable in them,
as well as in others. They do not show themselves Christians, but inhumane and
worse then Infidel Parents, who take no care to provide for their Children,
whom they expect to leave in the World, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Ministers are endued with
humane Resentments, and it must be grievous unto them, to think that their
Families will be left by them some of the most destitute on Earth --.

THUS from GOD's appointing men of like passions with others to be the
Ministers of his word, unanswerable Arguments may be drawn to prove that a
liberal Maintenance should be afforded them. And the People who complain of
this as an insupportable Burden, do Constructively Murmur against GOD for
sending to them frail Men, and not Angels, or unbodied Spirits, to Minister
unto them in holy things. If there were nothing to be found in the BIBLE
concerning this Duty of People toward their Ministers, yet if they would but
wash off the dirt, which blinds the Eyes of natural Reason, they might easily
read it in the very frame of humane nature. But say I these things as a man? or
says not the Law, yea and the Gospel, the same also? 1 Cor. 9. 8.

9. ARE Ministers Men of like Passions with others? We may hence learn, that it
is a tremendous Charge which they undertake. If we consider the weakness of the
Shoulders, on which so heavy a Burden is laid, we must see and own that the
Pastoral Charge is solemn, yea dreadful. The Work of the Ministry is not less
difficult and dangerous, than it is honorable to those who are employed in it.
It is a Charge like that, in 1 Kings 20. 39. which a Minister has given him of
every Soul committed to his Pastoral Care, -- Keep this man: if by any means he
be missing, then shall thy life be for his life. -- To watch for Souls, as they
that must give account, is no easy task. Arduous and Important are the Duties
belonging to the Ministerial Office. -- Whoever engages in it, must give
himself continually unto Prayer. He must offer up Public Prayers, such as may,
if possible, express the Desires of every silent Suppliant, whose Mouth he is
unto GOD. He must not cease day nor night praying in secret for his People,
that they may be saved. The state of every Soul under his care, must, so far as
he can know it, be by him made mention of at the Throne of Grace. -- A Minister
of the Word is solemnly adjured to Preach the word, in season and out of
season; and so to reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine.
He is by assiduous Study to Prepare Orthodox, Judicious and Seasonable
Discourses for his Hearers, and be always furnished with beaten Oil for the
Sanctuary, that his light may shine therein. He is to propound and explain the
great Mysteries of Godliness, and to press the necessary Duties of
Christianity. He is to show unto people their transgressions: to cry aloud,
without fearing of any face, or sparing of any Sin. He is to alarm sleepy
Sinners, and to refresh weary Souls: to change his voice, and speak sometimes
in the thundering accents of the Law's threatenings, and sometimes in the sweet
strains of Gospel-promises. -- He is to administer the Sacraments to the duly
qualified for the reception thereof. -- He is to guide and govern all under his
Inspection, by the Laws of the great King, whom GOD has set on his holy hill.
Ecclesiastical Authority, which he is vested with, must be exercised by him in
loosing and binding, as there shall be occasion. The holy Discipline, which
Christ has instituted, must with Courage, Prudence and Impartiality be managed
by him. -- He is in his private converse to instruct and admonish, to warn and
exhort: to resolve the scrupulous, to comfort the dejected; to confute the
erroneous; to establish the wavering; to seek the lost, and bring back the
straying sheep. He is to visit the sick, and help them to improve their
Affliction, and prepare for their Death. He is as the Pilot of Souls, to direct
them, when launching into the Ocean of Eternity, that they may not dash against
the Rock of Presumption on one hand, or of Despair on the other. -- Such like
are the weighty Duties which a Minister has to perform. This is the Work which
he must do, maugre all the opposition of Earth and Hell. He must be sincere and
faithful in all this, or he incurs a punishment more dreadful then Tongue can
express, or Heart imagine. -- And now is not this a Work that might employ the
strength of mighty Angels? and yet it is required of weak and imperfect Men.
Who is sufficient for these things? Not a glorified Saint; not an Angel of God;
much less is frail Man in the state of common Impotency. The Ministerial Charge
is a burden too heavy for any Creature of himself to stand under. Onus
angelicis humeris formidandum. And if the Shoulders of Angels would shrink and
tremble under it, well may theirs, who are frail Men, which are crushed before
the Moth. There is no Man who knows himself, and what the Work of the Ministry
is, but will undertake it with fear and trembling, when he is called thereto.
It is an Argument of wretched Ignorance and Self-conceit, for a man to intrude
himself into this hard and hazardous Office. Unqualified Persons, who presume
that they are fit for this work, and vain-gloriously seek to be improved in it,
never rightly considered the nature and difficulty of it. There is no thinking
Man engages in it, but with a deep sense of the vast disproportion that there
is betwixt his Duty and his Strength; and is ready to Apologize with the
Prophet, Jer. 1. 6. Ah, Lord God, behold, I cannot speak, for I am a Child. And
the longer faithful Men are exercised in this function, the more insufficient
they find themselves for it, and the greater are their fears of miscarrying in
it; and they would sink under this Burden, were not the divine Aids, which are
mercifully promised, congruously afforded. [We have that great and precious
Promise of Christ, to encourage us, Matthew. 28. 20. Lo^ I am with you always. And
we may improve it to our Consolation, under all our Infirmities, that CHRIST,
who in his humbled State here on Earth, was a Man, of like passions with us,
and in all things made like to his Brethren (Sin only excepted) is even now n
his exalted State touched with the feeling of our Infirmities. He considers our
frame, and remembers that we are but Dust. And having himself experienced the
frailties of humane Nature, when he was sent in the likeness of Sinful flesh,
he is most tenderly concerned for us, sympathizes with us, makes all necessary
allowances, and is ever ready to succor us. Wherefore let us be daily looking
unto JESUS, and consider him, le^t we be wearied and faint in our Minds.]

10. ARE Ministers Men of like Passions with others? We hence infer the
Necessity of their TAKING HEED unto Themselves. Act. 20. 28. Take heed
therefore unto your selves. -- Now O ye Priests, this Commandment is for you,
Mal. 2. 1. Ministers being Men of like passions with others, they need take
heed to themselves, as well as to their fl^^ks. They are appointed to be the
vigilant Overseers of others Souls: To watch over all Committed to their Care,
le^t they should continue in the State of Nature, or fall into Sin, and so into
everlasting ruin. But while they are looking to the Souls of others, they
should not forget their own. If they are (as they ought to be) Regenerate
Persons, yet Sin dwells in them, and retains much of its strength, though it
has lost its plenary dominion; and the Graces of the Best are weak and
imperfect: And they may be overtaken, and overborn by the suddenness and
violence of Temptations, so as to fall foully, to the great dishonor of GOD's
Name, discredit of Religion, Reproach of the Ministry, and Damage of other
Men's Souls. They, as well as others, have a Corrupt Nature within, and a busy
Adversary without, to guard against. Their treacherous Hearts will betray them,
and their subtle Temper beguile them, into great and scandalous Sins, if they
do not take heed to themselves.

THE Ministers of Christ are Sons of Adam, Children of Men, and by Nature
Children of wrath, even as others: And notwithstanding their high Office, may
fall finally, and perish for ever. Judas was an Apostle, and yet the son of
Perdition. A Man may authoritatively and profitably preach unto others, and yet
be himself a rejected Wretch at last. And if he be so, there will not in Hell
be found a more miserable Creature than He. The hottest part of the fiery Lake
will be the portion of graceless, ungodly Ministers. Surely then such as watch
for the Souls of Others, need watch over their own. Men. Brethren and Fathers
in the Ministry, should we not daily consider, that we have Souls of our own as
we as Others, to take Care of! That we have a Hell to avoid, and a Heaven to
obtain for, our selves, as well as to help Others to do so? That we must stand
at the same Bar with our People, and that the righteous GOD, who Judges every
Man according to his works, will not be less strict with us than with them; but
if we be unholy Men, notwithstanding our holy Calling, our Doom will be
heavier, our Damnation greater, than that which our ungodly Hearers shall
receive! Let us frequently revive and impress this serious Meditation on our
hearts; and preserve in them a deep sense of the great need we have to take
heed to our selves, and let us work out our own (as well as labor for Others)
Salvation with fear and trembling. The Consideration that we are Men of like
passions with Others, should instigate us to that personal Circumspection,
which blessed Paul used; 1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection: lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self
should be a Castaway. So he exhorted Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Take heed unto thy
(...), and unto thy doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this, thou shall
both save thy self, and them that bear thee.

THUS we, in some measure, see how the Truth, which has been explained, ought
to be improved both by Ministers and People.

AS for a Particular Application thereof unto my worthy Brother, who is now to
be Ordained a Minister of the Gospel, it is doubtless already made by himself,
as the things which concern his Duty and Peace, have (in a poor manner) been
suggested by his unworthy Monitor.

WE trust that he will be a JOSEPH unto his BRETHREN, whom he is to feed with
the Bread of Life; and that GOD sends him here to preserve their Souls from
Perishing.

THE Lord make him a fruitful Bough, even a fruitful Bough by a well, grafted
into the Tree of Life, and always GREEN, and flourishing in the Courts of our
God: that under the refreshing shadow of his Ministry, weary Souls may sit down
with great delight, and that the Fruit which shall continually drop from him,
may be sweet to their taste, and nourish them to Eternal Life. -- If the
Archers do sorely grieve, and shoot at him, and hate him, yet let his Bow abide
in strength, and the Arms of his hands be made strong by the hands of the
mighty God of Jacob: from thence is the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel! -- May
the Blessings, which prevail to the utmost bound of the everlasting bills, be
on the Head of Joseph, and on the Crown of the ^ead of Him that is to be
separated from his Brethren, or to be the Nazarite among them.

I shall now Conclude with a Brief Address unto the People of GOD, who have
called this Servant of his to Minister in holy things unto them.

HONORED and DEARLY BELOVED IN THE LORD,
WE heartily rejoice with you this Day in the Manifestation of the Divine
Favor to you, after the long Frowns of Heaven you have been under, respecting
the Settlement of Gospel Ordinances in this ^ace.

YOU have here built a house to the Name of the Lord* have provided a
Habitation for the Mighty God of Jacob: [though not without the Noise of
Metaphorical Axes and Hammers, which is matter of Humiliation and Penitent
Reflection.] And the Ark of the Covenant is now with Religious Solemnity to be
brought into this Tabernacle: the Worship of God in all the Ordinances thereof
is to be set up in this House. ARISE, O LORD, into thy Best: thou, and the Ark
of thy Strength. Let thy Priests be clothed with Righteousness: and let they
Saints shout for Joy.

YE also YOUR SELVES are to be Erected and Consecrated a Spiritual Temple unto
GOD. Upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the Chief Cornerstone, Ye are to be fitly framed together: and in Jesus
Christ built together for an Habitation of God, through the Spirit. LIFT up
your ^eads, ^^pe ^ates, and be ye lift up, ye Everlasting ^oo^s, and the King
of Glory shall come in.

AND as a pledge, that the Lord God will dwell among you, our ascended Savior,
the Glorious Head of the Church, this Day bestows a precious Gift upon You: A
Pastor (we trust) according to his own heart. Therefore do Ye Receive him with
Thankfulness and Joy. -- You have heard that the Alwise and Gracious GOD
consults his own Glory, and his People's Advantage, in Ordaining of Men subject
to like passions with others, to the Ministerial Office, and may not you be
rationally assured, that you shall be well supplied with the Food that is
proper for your Souls, since he is JOSEPH YOUR BROTHER, whom GOD appoints
Steward of his Family, to give to every one of you his Portion in due season.

LET me warn you against a Captious prying into, and a Malicious divulging and
aggravating of Humane Infirmities and Failures, which he is liable unto with
the rest of his Brethren. -- Let the Time and the Breath, which too many are
apt to spend in Censuring of their Minister, be rather improved by You in
earnest Prayers for yours. Live in Peace, as with one another, so especially
with your Minister, and be not like the People Uncharacterized, Hos. 4. 4.

LET the Nature of the thing, and the express precepts of the Gospel concerning
it, be the Rule to your Consciences, directing of you in the Affair of his
Maintenance, rather then any obligation you may by promise have laid your
selves under unto him.

ATTEND upon his Ministry, as GOD's Institution, and with Prayer for GOD's
Blessing; and so will it be profitable unto you.

In fine, SEE that you imitated the believing Galatians, in their Affection to,
and Reverence for their Minister, who was a Man of like Passions with them, and
compassed with Infirmities; which kind and dutiful Behavior of theirs toward
him, be mentions to them, Gal. 4. 13, 14. YE know how through Infirmity of the
flesh, I preached the Gospel unto you at the first. And my Temptation which way
in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected, but received me us an ANGEL OF GOD,
even as CHRIST JESUS.

LET us all the Exhorted and Excited so to demean our selves in the Sacred
Relation of Pastor and People, as that when we shall (as within a few Years we
all must) be taken from the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ on Earth, we may
go unto Sion which is above, unto the Glorious City of the LIVING GOD, the
Heavenly Jerusalem; to the General Assembly, and Church of the firstborn which
are written in Heaven to GOD the Judge of all and to an innumerable Company of
Angels, and to the SPIRITS OF JUST MEN MADE PERFECT.

FINIS.

