A Vindication of the Legislative Power, Submitted to the Representatives of
all the Freemen of the Province of Pennsylvania, now sitting in Assembly.
May it please this H^^^^^able House,
HAving perused James Leng^n's Memorial and other Papers lately published by
your (...) Authority, I find the Governor has indicated the Powers of our
Legislature (...) and the (...) you are now (...) with (...) convincing
Arguments, urged with (...) good (...) needless to say any more; yet, I hope,
(...) will be no (...) to often some legal Authorities to prove what has been
so Excellently (...) in favor of the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, as
well as the regular Powers and (...) of Government in the Points now under
Consideration.

It is (...), that the Royal Charter granted to our late Proprietary William
Penn, under (...) great Seal of England, (...) the Fundamental Constitution of
our Legislative Authority, by which (...) the late King CHARLES the second, in
a very gracious and (...), was pleased to signify his Royal Will and Pleasure
in (...) T^^^ we, repo^^^ng special Trust and Confidence in the Fidelity,
Wisdom, Justice and provident Circumspection of the said William Penn, for Us,
Our H^^rs and Successors, Do Grant free, full and absolute Power by Virtue of
these presents, to him and his H^^rs, to his and (...) Deputies and
Lieutenants, for the good and happy Government of the said Country, to Ordain,
Make and Enact, and, under his and their Seals, to publish any Laws whatsoever,
for the raising of Money for the Public uses of the said Province, or for any
other End, appertaining either unto the public State, Peace or Safety of the
said Country, or unto the private Utility of particular Persons, according unto
their best Discretion, By and with the Advice, Assent and Approbation of the
Freemen of the said Country, or the greater part of them, or of their
Delegates or Deputies, Whom, for the Enacting of the said Laws, when and as
often as need shall require, We will, That the said William Penn and his Heirs
shall Assemble in such sort and form as to him and them shall seem best.

By Virtue of this Clause the Proprietor had Power to make Deputies and
Lieutenants, in which Case (as it is in all other Cases where a Deputy may be
appointed) the Law says, he has full Power to do any act or thing which (...)
Principal may do: And that is so essentially incident to a Deputy, that a Man
cannot be a Deputy to do any single act or thing, nor can a Deputy have less
Power than his Principal, and if his Principal make him Covenant, That he will
not do any particular thing which the Principal may do, the Covenant is void
and repugnant; as if the Undersheriff Covenant, that he will not Execute any
process for more than Twenty Pounds without special Warrant from the
High Sheriff; this is void, because the Undersheriff is his Deputy, and the
Power of the Deputy cannot be (...) to be less than that of his Principal, save
only that he cannot make a Deputy, because it implies an Assignment of his
whole Power, all which was adjudged by the Court of King's Bench, the 13
William 3. in the Case of Parker and Kett, where the Debate arose concerning
the Steward of a Mannor-Court.

The Case of the Undersheriff here cited by H^l^, is reported by the late Lord
Chief Justice Hobart thus, viz. If a Sheriff will make an Undersheriff,
Provided that he shall not serve Executions above 20 l. without his special
Warrant, this Pr^vis^ will be void: For, though he may choose whether he makes an
Undersheriff at all, or may make him at his will, and so remove wholly, yet he
cannot leave him an Undersheriff, and yet abridge his Power, no more than the
King may in Case of the Sheriff himself: But it was said, that the Case here
was not so, that the restraint of Executions above 20 l. grew not on the part
of the Sheriff, but on the part of the Undersheriff by his Covenant, which
might stand for good, notwithstanding the repugnancy to his Office; but the
Covenant here was holden void, as being against Law and Justice. For (...) by
being made Undersheriff, he is (...) by Law to Execute all Proc^^^ he could,
no more than the the Sheriff himself, Covenant (...) to Execute Process without
another's special Warrant, for that is to deny or delay Justice.

This last Case was that which Governed the opinion of the Council (when Judge
Mem^^ss^^n assisted) to declare that part of Col. Evan's Commission void, which
reserved to the Proprietor the final Assent to all (...) he passed into Laws in
this Province. Therefore, I (...) how James Logan (being not only present at
those Debates, but other drew up or copied and signed that solemn Resolution of
the Council, and knows how it was approved of by the Assembly at the same time)
can so strenuously insist upon the Restriction now in Debate, which is as much
against Law and Justice as the Instances in the above quoted (...) could be.

The next thing observable in the above recited Clause of the Royal Charter, is
the Right and Power of Legislation, granted to the Proprietor and his (...) and
to his and their Deputies and Lieutenants, by and with the Assent of the
Freemen of this Provice; which being expressed as amply as any Liberty or
Privilege of that kind can be granted, I am induced to conclude, that, by
Virtue of this Grant, there was such a Right originally vested and become
inherent in every Freeman of this Province as wanted not the help of any Grant
or Chapter from the Proprietary to confirm it.

But the Proprietor, pursuant to the ^a^d recited Clause, made Charters which
prescribed the (...) of Assembling the Freemen to act in Legislation after the
Modes mentioned in the Memorial; and it may be the People were regardless of a
new Charter after the Resignation of the first, not out of any liking they had
to be conv^ned by Writs, but as the Right of Meeting together to make Laws was
virtually in them by the said Royal Grant, so the form of their Elections and
Assembling might be settled by Law, which was effected afterward by an Act to
Ascertain the number of Members of Assembly and to regulate Elections, which
(...) in the fourth Year of Queen Anne's Reign, and settled yearly Elections of
Representatives in Assembly without Writs, and appointed the Time when and by
whom those Elections should be made, as also the Time of the Assembly's
Meeting, and how they should qualify themselves to act, choose their Speaker,
and be Judges of the Qualifications and Elections of their own Members, sit
upon their own Adjournments, appoint Committees, prepare Bills in order to pass
into Laws, Impeach Criminals and redress Grievances etc.

By this Law and last Charter (wherein the Proprietary, according to his Right
made one side of the agreement, which he could not alter or avoid without the
Concurrence of the parties concerned on the other side) it is evident, That the
whole Legislative Authority here is lodged in the Governor and Representatives
of the People; and I have met none so senceless as to say, that the Governor
is thereby concluded of having a Council to advise and assist in Legislation
and other matter relating to the State, and I have known diverse of the Members
of that Board very serviceable in that Station, and, I doubt not, may be so
still, therefore I desire they may not withdraw from their Service nor insist
upon a Negative to the Acts of those that Represent them, which, by a
reasonable Construction of the said Law and Charte^, is lodged with the
Governor, and is so vested in him by his Commission stamped with the Royal
Allowance and Authority of the King's Lett^rs Patent, That the Proprietary
could by no Instruction or other Act whatsoever, without the Governor's
Consent, divest him of his Right to Govern, unless by resuming the Government
or Deputing another in his st^^d. And if the Governor has given any Bond or
Covenant to observe (...) that abridge or restrain the Authority granted him by
Commission to Exercise the Powers of Government in this Province, the same is
void, as appears by the above cited Resolutions, from whence it may be observed
how careful the Law is to keep Powers entire, as the best means to preserve
good Order in States and Governments, where no such absurdity can be admitted,
as to allow the Persons Represented to control the Acts of their
Representatives, especially in those Matters which the other Branch of the
Legislature may think to be reasonably Proposed.

And although the Law declares, that Bonds and Covenants (given to Guard the
Principal, when he would diminish or abridge the Power of his Deputy) are
Repugnant to his Office, and therefore void and against Law, having a tendency
to d^ny or delay Justice (as in our Case) yet, if the Governor came under any
Security to observe the Directions of the King's Grant, which forbids to depart
from the Faith and Allegiance due to the King, or to maintain Correspondence
with his Enemies, or to commit Hostility against such as are in League with
him, or Transgress against the Laws of Trade, and Navigation, (...) for
discharging of his Trust and Duty in the Administration of the Government
according to the purport of the said Royal Grant and the Laws and Constitutions
of this Province; I conceive that in those Cases such Security is binding upon
the Governor and will be most effectual and available in Law, unless some
illegal or repugnant Condition be ^^^ed thereunto.

As to the Power of making Ordinances with the assertance of other Persons that
the People's Delegates, it appears by the Patent, that those Ordinances cannot
be Extended, in any sort, to bind change or take away the Right or Interest of
any Person or Persons for or in their Life, Members, Freehold, Goods or
Chattels, nor are they directed to be made except sudden Accidents happen,
whereto it may be necessary to apply Remedy, before the Freeholders or their
Delegates can be assembled to make Laws, -- Besides our Lawmakers (who ought to
have Notice of such Occasions) may be convened as soon as the Magistrates and
Officers of the respective Counties, who are to assist in making Ordinances:
But if the Ordinance-makers should happen to get the start; yet when the
Delegates of the People come together and acquaint the Governor of their
readiness to assist him in the public Service of the Government, and to answer
the Exigences thereof, I think the Power of making Ordinances should then be
waved, and the Legislative Authority applied to, because their Acts are deemed
more Extensive and Binding, as appears by the express Words of the said Patent.

But if the Governor could be prevailed with not to Summon the Assembly upon
such Emergency, or when Assembled would not Concur^ with them in what may be
for the Public Good, as the Case was, when former Governors, being under ^n
^ll direction, withstood the Representatives proposals and cordial Advice, and
(contrary to Law and Charter) set up Ordinances instead of Laws, to the great
dissatisfaction of the Assembly then attending, who declared themselves ready
and writing to Concur in a regular Establishment, according to the Laws and
Practice of (...) of what was (...) by (...), which highly (...) the Lives,
(...) and (...) of the Subjects; (...) are diverse Worthy Member^ of this House
have been well (...) with these Proceedings, and if it were not so, yet the
Journal of that (...) will ^^nifest what I hint.

It may do well for the (...) to Consider, with what views he acted his part in
that Tragedy, and whether it was not designed to render the People's Power in
Legislation useless? whereby this Country, from a State of Freedom, should be
changed into an Arbitrary Government, subjected to the Power of one Person, as
the Secretary in another Cas^ ^^^ternally observes. I am apt to think by what I
gather from this Memorial and some more of these Printed Papers, that the ready
way to bring us under this Change must be by enjoining a Negative upon the
Governor and Assembly, (...) the (...) of Communication between them by
Speeches and Messages, and th^^ get a new Council, (for the present Members of
that Honorable Board will not give in to this Arbitrary Scheme) who must be
such as will assent to all the Secretary proposes, and when a Council Bo^^^
(...) thus ^urmined, any Body without much (...), may guess who that (...)
Person must be.

It is further to be observed, that although the main scope of the Memorial is
against the plain Rules of Law and Justice, yet the Author would seem to
applaud (...) Government, by King, Lords and Commons, supposing that to be the
Plan by which the Governments of the King's Plantations are Mo^^ed, and from
thence, or from the conceit he has of his own Scheme, he takes Occasion to
undervalue the Frame of our present Government, which the late Proprietary,
with the Advice and Approbation of the People's Delegates in a most Solemn
Manner settled, and of good Purpose and full intent Lodged ^he Powers of
Legislation in the Governor and Representatives of all the Freemen of (...)
Province in General Assembly; and not only so, but he (...) his most abusive
Reflections upon sooner Assemblies, and like an evil Minister and ungrateful
Servant would in^^n^ate, that the Proprietr's Intention did not Correspond with
the express Words and (...) Design of his Charter of P^^^^ege, and brings this
for Instances That the Proprietor never intended to bind himself, nor ever in
^act did bind himself up from a Right to lay his Deputy under Restrictions in
Legislation; I think this point is so fully cleared by the foregoing (...) of
Law, that it may satisfy that Secretary himself of the Falsehood of his
Position; for if it were true (as I believe it is not) that the Proprietor, by
his Charter Grants, did not intend to be bound by the Rules of Law (which must
be the main Support of all his Powers) it would render him Inconsistent with
himself, and prove him unworthy of the Trust and Confidence which the King, by
His Royal Grant, reposed in his Fidelity, Wisdom, Justice and Provident
Circumspection (...) the (...) is taken Notice of in the Charter of Privileges
to some purposes, (...) not to share in the Legislative Power, yet I know none
would be against their Advice (...) upon Bills brought up to the Governor, for
that they are Men embarked in the ^^me interest with the People, and for the
most part aim at the public Good, b^t not for the Reason given by the
Secretary, to (...), That they have as large an (...) in the Colony, as the
like number of any others. it is probable he may see a Service in (...), which
I cannot penetrate but, according to my Experience, a mean (...), of (...),
devoted to the faithful discharge of his Trust and Duty to the Government, may
do more good to the State, than a Richer or more Learned Man, who by his ill
Temper and aspiring Mind becomes an opposer of the Constitution by which he
should act.

However since an Interest in the Colony is pointed out as a Qualification to
act for the good of the Public, it may be supposed, that the Members of
Assembly will think it (...) ^^^o^able, that the Governor may be referred to
the Approbation of their House, consisting of some Ancient Settlers, who have a
good Competency, and others, who are descended from such as brought
considerable Estates (...) the Province, and went through great Difficulties in
the first Settlement of this Wilderness, to the hazard of their Lives and
Estates, amongst the Indian Natives, and spent their Strength and Substance in
Emproving the Country, and by their indefatigable Industry upon the Land,
which, you ^now, would have been of little worth to the Proprietary or any Body
else, if Divine Providence had not Blessed the Labors of the first Settlers
and succeeding Inhabitants, who made this City and Province of Value to the
Proprietary and his Family, and afforded a Competency to themselves, who in the
Enjoyment thereof, with the aditional favors of Peace and Plenty under a mild
Administration, have great reason to lay the good of the Public and it is true
Interest as close to Heart a any others.

And if we (...) this and much (...) of the first (...) this Pro^^^ (...)
R^^val Charter, and how (...) are made Sharers with ^re (...) in the (...) and
(...) that the (...) in the (...) would have been (...) the (...) the King to
be the (...) as well (...) of that (...) Charter, (...) could (...) nor the
true D^sign of the (...) to the (...) was (...) of any kind (...) there and the
like (...) this (...) the Learned (...) to another (...) into the (...) any
(...) to their (...) than (...) of their (...).

(...) that the (...) bought their Lands (...) exceeded (...) the Proprietors
of the (...) their (...) must p^^ (...) a Crown or a Crown English Money (...)
the (...) had (...) Purcha^^rs, expecting, as was (...) ^^^^ing per (...), for
every (...) of their (...) ^ines, (...) from all (...) and Repr^sals ^of
Digging and Refining the (...); Whereas the Royal (...) but one (...) part of
such Mines, clear of (...) You may (...) by your Journal diverse other Instances
of the Secretary's (...) and (...) People, to which (...) sake, I (...).

But in the (...) Paragraph of (...) Men (...), pretending that the Lieutenant
(...) was referred to the (...) for his Support. And in the Twenty-ninth
Paragraph he says, the Proprietor in (...) never (...) one Penny to himself o^
Family, from the Government, though others had large Sums. N^^ if this has any
(...) be concluded, Text (...) Support and out present Governor has had large
Sums (...) between acting at a free Agent in (...), and submitting to an ill
Management (...) to the whole.

I have by the foregoing Paragraphs, as (...) as I could, considered the (...)
State of (...) Case, with respect to the Powers of the Kings Letters Parent,
with the Law and Charter of the (...), and (...) of^e^ to this (...) House my
real Sentiments upon the whole (...) the (...), all whi^^ I freely submit to
better Judgments. There is (...) of the (...) that shows an (...) in the
Author, That (...) can be pleaded, (...) in Law: For my part I wi^h that (...)
so, it would have saved (...) which they unhappily Occasioned, (...) the ill
Blood it (...) amongst many of the I ^^^^tants.

There (...) which I could not avoid taking Notice of, as the Memo^^^^^^ (...)
of this Government, and (...) to the just (...), who carried on the
Administration of the Government and (...) of this (...) their own Charge, as
(...) the (...) and Neglect of his Duty toward the present Inha^itants, which
seem to be diffused all over his Paper, and to are the Imputations that he
^^laitly throws (...) forme^ (...), which with the Indignities there offered to
our Governor by an ^ffrontive Treatment, ^e^ve to the Censure of this (...)
House, where such matters are properly Cognizable. And so I Conclude,

Your Real Friend, DAVID LLOYD.
Philadelphia, the 19th of the (...) called March, 17^5.

