THE FIGHTING SAILOR TURNED Peaceable Christian: Manifested in the Convincement
and Conversion OF Thomas Lurting. WITH A short RELATION of many Great DANGERS,
and Wonderful DELIVERANCES he met withal.

First written for private Satisfaction, and Now Published for General Service.

Isa. ii. 4. They shall beat their Swords into Plow-Shares, and their Spears
into Pruning Hooks.

LONDON: Printed, and Reprinted by SAMUEL KEIMER near the Market-House in
Philadelphia. 1725

TO THE READER
SInce it has pleased God to make Way for me, through many very remarkable
Deliverances and great Preservations; I am not willing altogether to keep
silent; some whereof are mentioned in the following Treatise, which was first
written for private Satisfaction, and now offered to public View.

And having for several Years past left the Sea, and betaken my self to a more
solid Retirement, than that Hurry of Sea admits of; I have taken a View of my
former Transactions, and am willing to give some short Account thereof, and of
the many Deliverances and Preservations I met withal, (together with the Manner
of my Conversion, and the mysterious Workings of the Enemy to prevent the same)
that so others may be encouraged to a serious Consideration of their Ways, and
to stand still in the Counsel of God, and see his Salvation.

For as Silence is the first Word of Command in Marshal Discipline, so it is in
the Spiritual: For until that is come unto, the Will and Mind of God cannot be
known, much less done.

And as I know no Way so effectual to answer my End, than to expose the
following Treatise to public View, I commit it accordingly, hoping it may be
serviceable to some in this and future Ages: Which is the only Thing aimed at,
and sincerely desired by me,

Thomas Lurting.

THE FIGHTING SAILOR TURNED Peaceable Christian, etc.
In the Year 1646. I being then about 14 Years of Age, was impr^^s'd (or
forced) and carried into the Wars in Ireland, where I remained about two Years,
in the Time of the Long Parliament; then was carried to London, and I went into
the Wars against the Dutch and Spaniards; in which I had many Deliverances, too
long here too mention; yet they all at that time wrought but little upon me.
Then I was turned over into the Bristol Frigot; in which Ship, in process of
Time, it pleased God to convert me; as will appear in the following Treatise.

As I was Boatswain's Mate, I had the Command of about 200 Men in this Ship,
and it was my Place, to see that the Men attended, and were present at the Time
of Worship; and I was diligent in the Performance of that Service; and when any
refused to obey my Command, in that respect, I endeavored by Force to compel
them.

Now of the many Deliverances, I shall only hint at three or four that happened
in that Day, which wrought some Remorse upon me. The aforesaid four
Deliverances, was at a Place called Sancta Cruze, in the Island of the
Canaries; where I had not only those four, but many Deliverances.

News being brought to our General Blake, as we lay in Cales-Bay, that sixteen
Sail of Galeons arrived at Sancta Cruze from the West Indies, we instantly went
out, and in a few Days got thither, and found as it was reported; and several
Ships went in before us, to make Discovery how they lay, and anchoring at some
Distance, about half Gunshot from the Castle, which was large, and had 40 Guns
at least, and there was several Forts and Breast-Works, of about 8 or 10 Guns
each. The Wind blew very right on the Shore, and we coming in, in a later
Squadron, went under our General's Stern to know where we should be? and were
answered, Where we could get room. So we ran in, but could get no room to bring
up our Ship; so we went a-stern (...) our Ships, and the Smoke being somewhat
abated, we found our selves to be within half a Cable's Length of the
Vice-Admiral's Galeon, of about 50 Guns, and 300 Men; and not above a Cable's
Length from the Admiral, a Galeon of about 50 or 60 Guns, and having also about
400 Men, and within half Gunshot of a large Castle, of 40 Guns; and within
Musket Shot of some Forts and Breast-Works.

And when we had brought up our Ship, we were about half a Cable's length from
the Vice Admiral, just in his Weak, or in the Head of him; then our Captain
called to me, to make all ready, or get to veer nearer the Galeon: For I will,
said he, be on Board the Vice Admiral. So we veer'd to be on Board of him, and
so fast as we veer'd toward him, he veer'd from us, until he came about
Musket Shot of the Shore. Then the Captain called to me, to get a Hauser out
of the Gun-Room-Port, and clap a Spring on the Cable; when done, we veer'd our
Cable, and by just cross his Hawse, about half a Musket Shot from him; then we
run all the Guns we could on that Side toward him, which were in Number 28 or
30, and all Hands (...) to it in earnest.

And the second Broadside some of our Shot, as we judged, fell into his
Powder-Room and she blew up, and not one Man escaped, that we could perceive.

Then the Spanish Admiral, was going to serve us, as we had served his
Vice Admiral; which we perceiving, plied him very close, with about 28 or 30
Guns; and the third Broadside, all his Men leaped overboard, and instantly she
blew up.

And there was a small Castle on the other Side, which (after the Spanish
Admiral was blown up) we went to work against its Fort, and in a short Time
made them weary of it.

And as for the Castle of 40 Guns, we were got so far into the Bay, that they
could not bring upon us above two or three Guns.

But when we went off, they plied us close with their great Guns, but did us no
great Damage.

After this Expedition was over, and that we had blown up the two Spanish
Admirals, I took the Longboat, to go on Board a Galeon, that lay on Shore near
to another Castle, supposing that the Men were not on Board; but there were
some, and they lay close on Board, until we came within two or three Ships
length of them, and then they rose up and fired several Guns at us; but being
so near their Ship, all their Shot went over us: Which I call the first great
Deliverance. Then on our Return toward our Ship, they from several Castles and
Breast-Works, fired briskly at us with great and small Shot, which came very
near us; notwithstanding we all got safe on Board our own Ship: And this I call
the second great Deliverance.

In a little Time, the Smoke of their Guns being gone, I saw three Galeons on
Shore, all on Board one another; one of them along the Shore, and one cross her
Hawse, and the other cross her Stern, about a Musket Shot from our Ship; and
there was a Castle on one Side of them, and a Breast-work on the other, with
about 50 or 60 Men in it, as was supposed, and the Galeons lay about half a
Cable's Length from the Castle, and the same Distance from the Breast-work, and
about fifty Yards from the Shore: Then I took the Pinnace, and two Men with me,
and was going to set them on Fire; but the Captain saw me, and called me back,
and sent five Men more with me; and on our setting forward, our Ship fired a
Gun, and in the Smoke thereof we got on Board the Galeon, and received no Harm,
(the Spaniards having left them) and I instantly set one of them on Fire, which
burnt the other two Galeons. And when we could stay no longer, by ^^son of the
Fire, and our Ship's Crew not being as formerly, mindful of us, to fire some
Guns, that in the Smoke thereof we might have retired back, without being
discovered by any from the Breast-works; but they seeing of us, we were forced,
by reason of the Fire, to return presently toward our own Ship. The
Breast-work then having full Sight of us, discharged a Volley of about 50 or 60
small Shot, and killed two of our Men, and shot a third in the Back; and I sat
close to one that was killed, between him and the Shore, and close to him that
was shot in the Back, and received no Harm: And this was a third and eminent
Deliverance.

And coming out of the Bay, we came within three or four Ship's Length of the
Castle that had 40 Guns; and they kept them in Readiness, until we came
directly over against the Castle, then they fired, but we were so near, that
most of the Shot went over, and did us little Harm, only in our Rigging: And I
was on the Clue of the Main-tack, getting the Main-tack on Board, and the Shot
cut the Bolt-Rope a little above my Head: And this was the fourth Deliverance,
and all in six Hours Time, and never to be forgotten by me; but I desire to be
thankful to God, who from these and many other Dangers, has apparently
delivered me.

And the aforesaid 16 Galeons, were very large Ships, from 300 Tons to 1000,
and upwards; and the first that I burnt, as our Men judged, had a great deal of
Silver on Board, being a Ship of about 800 Ton, and the other two richly laden,
and about 7 or 800 Ton, and all perished together; and all the rest of the
sixteen being richly laden, not having Time to get their Lading out, we being
so suddenly upon them, were all burnt and destroyed, together with their
Lading. But then I neither was a Quaker, nor were any of the People so called
on Board our Ship; nor ever to my Remembrance, had heard of any called by that
name.

Now I shall a little (...) the first Rise of the People called Quakers in our
Ship: There was some Soldiers put on Board us, and one of them had been at a
Meeting in Scotland, of the aforesaid People; and there was two young Men in
the Ship, who had some Converse with him, but he was taken away from the Ship
in a little time, but the two young Men made little Appearance of any
Conviction or Convincement, until about six Months after. The first Thing
observable was, they refused to hear the Priest, or put off their Hats to the
Captain, for which they called them Quakers: These two met often together in
Silence, and their so meeting caused a serious Enquiry among others, and their
Number increased, and as they increased, so Persecution increased against them;
and the Captain was sore troubled and disturbed at their Increase, himself
being a Baptist Preacher; the Priest that officiated in our Ship was cruel and
bitter against them; crying out thus to me, O Thomas, an honest Man, and a good
Christian! Here is a dangerous People on Board, (that is to say the Quakers) a
blasphemous People, denying the Ordinances and Word of God. The which made me
as cruel as himself, and I gave them many a heavy Blow, and I was violent upon
them, and a great Persecutor of them; but the Remembrance of the aforesaid
Deliverances struck close to me, and the Lord wrought so much upon me, that I
could no more beat any of the People called Quakers, and in a little Time the
Lord gave me a true Sight of the Priest; for when I could not do his Work, and
beat and abuse the said People, then I was accounted neither an honest Man, nor
good Christian by him; so I began to look upon the said People with a single
Eye, for good. And the Lord by his in-shining Light, opened my Understanding,
so that I saw a great deal of Difference between them, and other Professors;
whereupon I made many Promises unto the Lord, to be better; but they being made
in my own Will, were of little Effect: Then the Lord showed me, that in those
many Promises, and not keeping them, I was not benefitted thereby, and that
caused much Trouble to me; so that I separated from all sorts of Professors,
except one Roger Dennis, who was called a Quaker, whom I entirely loved; and in
all my Cruelty exercised upon, and against the said People, I never struck him:
For he had a Check upon me, though he spoke not a Word; and many Times when I had
resolved to separate the People called Quakers, when met together in a
religious Manner, either by Blows or otherwise; then he looking upon me, I
durst not touch one of them. After some Time, I desired to be much alone, and
in my still and quiet Retirements, the Lord was very good unto me, and gave me
many a heavenly Visitation, and though it was in Judgment, yet that was my
Portion, and I patiently bore them, and came to love his Judgments and
Visitations, and they became to me very sweet and pleasant, and of more Value
than Rubies, and was my great Delight; and with them I was very well pleased,
because they brought me into much Tenderness for the which I loved them at my
very Heart, for it was a Heart-work; and many Times when alone, the Lord would
break in upon me, by the in-shining of his glorious Light in my own Heart,
melted me, and mollified me: Yea, so powerfully many Times, that I could not
contain, or forbear crying out, O Lord! Insomuch that the Professors could not
tell what to make of it: But I knew and felt it to be the mighty Power of God,
which brought and wrought Deliverance into my Soul; and with this Exercise, and
many more, I continued about six Months, being taken off all outward Concerns,
and being alone, some said I was mad, others I was distracted; and so wrote
Home to England.

Many came on Board to see me, thinking the Shape of my Body was altered, and I
heard some say, that my Body was of the same Shape, but I looked like a dumb
Saint. In short, I was a Scoff and Derision with all sorts of Professors,
except the People called Quakers; but I was one of them in my Heart, though not
yet joined to them, for the Cross was too hard for me as yet, but many a Time I
felt that living, eternal Power, which has made me both to tremble and quake,
and was glad when it was so with me; yet then I was no professed Quaker, for
the Cross was still too hard for me.

But it was the Lord's good Will, and blessed be his Holy Name for it; that
after the many Judgments and sore inward Afflictions, it was his good Will and
Pleasure, to bring my Will to be subject to his Will, for in those dark Times,
I was fully given up; yea, Life and all, to have Peace in my Conscience with
God, for that was the Thing, and the only thing that my Heart thirsted after.

And one Evening being alone, (for in that I took great Delight,) and being low
in my Mind, I was very earnest with the Lord to know what People I should join
my self unto, for then I was alone; and it was plainly showed me the Quakers;
of which Number the Man I loved so well was accounted; and being one that I
formerly highly esteemed, and who had the Check upon me, when I was in the
Height of Cruelty against the People called Quakers, then on Board, as is
beforementioned. But the Thing at that Time did startle me, that I desired of
the Lord, rather to die than live, for the reasoning Part got up: What to such
a People, that both Priest and Professors are against! What to such a People,
that I have been so long beating and abusing, and that without just Cause!
Death would be more welcome to me. And here the Enemy, that old subtle
Serpent, was not wanting to insinuate many Things into my Mind: But God was
pleased to put me in Mind of the manifold Preservations and Deliverances he had
brought me through; so I took up this Resolution, by the Assistance of the
Lord, Whether Quaker, or no Quaker, Peace with God I am for: Yet it cost me
many a bitter Sigh, and many a Tear, before I could give up to go to Roger
Dennis, my Friend, called a Quaker: But good was the Lord, and for ever blessed
be his worthy Name, who followed me with his dreadful Judgments and Reproofs:
Insomuch that I could contain no longer, but gave up and went to my Friend
Roger Dennis, and said, I would speak with thee, and he very mildly answered, I
will go with thee: I having a Cabin, we went down, and when in, I shut the
Door, and we sat some Time; and before he opened his Mouth, the Hand of the
Lord was upon me, and melted my Heart, and brought me into great Tenderness,
and then he spoke but a few Words, but they were in great Humility and
Tenderness toward me, hitting the Mark to a Hair's Breadth; so that I had
great Satisfaction, being quiet in my Mind, and we parted in great Love.

Not long after, the old Enemy, the Devil, was very busy: What! to join thy
self to such a foolish People! And many more of his Stratagems; for he was like
to lose his Dominion, which made him the more furious to attack me: So that I
was even weary of my Life, yet longed for the First Day, that I might go to the
Meeting; and it was the first that ever I was at: And at the Time appointed, I
went to the Meeting with a great Dread upon my Mind, and sat me down in great
Quietness amongst them, they being then but six Men.

I had not been long there, but it was reported in the public Place of
Worship, that I was amongst the Quakers, at which, many of them left the Priest
and his Worship, to come and see me: And they made a great Noise and Bustle.
When the Worship was over, the Captain asked the Reason of that Noise? and it
was told him, that I was amongst the Quakers: Then he sent for me to himself,
and diverse more of his Officers were there: The first that began was the
Priest, saying, Thomas, I took you for a very honest Man, and a good Christian,
but I am sorry you should be so deluded. The mean while the Captain turning the
Bible from one End to the other, to prove the Quakers no Christians. All this
while I was very quiet and still in my Mind; for I found therein was my
Strength: And when they saw they could not prevail upon me, then they fell to
slandering of me, saying, That at such and such a Time the Quakers came to me,
saying, Do such and such a thing: which was all false, by which I got great
Strength: For never any Quaker came to me, but Roger Dennis, one that I dearly
loved, and desired his Company, and that was but the Night before. So when they
had done, I went to my Friends in great Peace and Satisfaction, saying to them,
That when I went to the Captain, I was scarce half a Quaker, but by their Lies
and false Reports against me, they have made me almost a whole Quaker, or at
least I hope to be one. My Friends received me in much Love and Tenderness, and
ever after I kept to their Meetings.

After this, Truth prevailed very much, and had a great Sway in the Ship, and
several were convinced; so that when I came among them, there was but six; but
in less than six Months after, we were twelve Men and two Boys, of which one
was the Priest's.

There was such a Blow given to Persecution, that it never got up again, whilst
in that Ship, though much tried for by the Captain; for he got several Men out of
other Ships, on purpose to persecute the Quakers; who came with great swelling
Words, as though they would have devoured us at once: But, blessed be the Lord,
they never had Power to touch one of us; for their Horns were nipp'd in the
Bud, and several of them in a short Time were cut off by Death, insomuch that
Men were afraid to be in that Office to abuse us.

About this Time we had a great Sickness, which swept away above Forty in a
little Time; and most of us, called Quakers, had the Distemper, but none died
of it, yet were brought very low. We took great Care of one another when sick,
that nothing was wanting amongst us, but what one had, was free for all of us;
and our Diligence and great Care of the Sick amongst us, was such, that I have
heard some Men say, when upon a Languishing Pillow and Deathbed, Oh carry me
to the Quakers, for they take great Care of one another, and they will take
some Care of me. At this Time the Captain was very kind to me, and frequently
sent me Part of what he had, and order^d me a Cabin; for before I lay in a
Hammock. And now all was very quiet, no Persecution, but a general Love amongst
all sorts of Persuasions that were then on Board, and Truth had great Dominion,
and several were convinced.

After I began to be well, I sent to the Captain, to know if I might have that
Cabin I lay in before I was convinced; and he granted my Request, for no one
inclined to lie therein; alleging, it was (...) with an Evil Spirit, for no
less than three or four had died in it in a sho^^ Space of Time; and it proved
very serviceable; for I not only lay therein, but made Use thereof for our
Meeting Place.

Now all Things were in Quiet, and the Captain continued our Friend for some
Time, and showed us more Kindness than any other Professors; The Captain would
often say, Thomas, take thy Friends; do so and so, or such and such a thing;
and I took my Friends, and did it far beyond his Expectation, by which he got
great Credit: For as yet we were not brought to testify against Fighting; yet
we would take none of the Plunder. And in all our desperate Attempts, wherein
we were then concerned, we received no Hurt, though several others were killed
and wounded, who sat close by us; at which Time the Captain would say to other
Captains, that he cared not if all his Men were Quakers, for they were the
hardiest Men in his Ship.

In this Time of Liberty I looked upon it but as a Forerunner of farther
Exercise; for what was done in pretended Friendship, was but to serve their own
Ends: I expected a Time would come to try all Foundations, which accordingly
did, and drove every Man to his own. We being now at Leghorn, were ordered to
go to Barcelona, to take or burn a Spanish Man of War; and our Station was to
lie against a Castle to batter it, the which we did; and one Corner of the
Castle play^d some Shot into our Ship, and I was for beating down that Corner:
And we, called Quakers, sought with as much Courage as any, seeing then no
farther; and for my Part, I was st^ipt into my Waitcoat, (every one in fighting
Habit) and went to it in Earnest, and with as much Courage as ever; and I went
into the Fore-castle, and levell^d the Guns; but, said I, Fire not till I go
out to see where the Shot lights, that we may level higher or lower; and here I
was as great a Fighter as most: But he that has all Men's Hearts in his Hand,
can turn them at his Pleasure; yea, he in a Minute's Time so far changed my
Heart, that in a Minute before, I ^ecting my whole Strength and Rigor to kill
and destroy Men's Lives, and in a Minute after I could not kill or destroy a
Man, if it were to gain the World; for as I was coming out of the Fore-castle
Door, to see where the Shot fell, the Word of the Lord run through me, how if I
had killed a Man; and it was with such Power, that for some Time I hardly knew
whether I was in the Body or out of it; but when I came to see, and felt what
it was, I turned about, and put on my Clothes, and walked on the Deck, as though
I had never seen a Gun fired, under a great Exercise of Mind; and some asked
me, If I was hurt? I answered, No; but under some Scruple of Conscience on the
Account of Fighting, although I had not heard that the Quakers refused to fight.
And when Night came, we went out of the Castle-shot, and I much desired to
know, what the Friends would say to this: I sent for two of them, one was the
man I loved so well, and I queried much with them about Fighting; to which they
gave me little Answer; but said, If the Lord sent them well home, they could
never go to it again; my Answer to them was, with a Dread and Fear upon me,
That if I stood honest to that of God in my own Conscience, and if we came to
it to Morrow, that with the Lord's Assistance I would bear my Testimony against
it. For this I plainly saw, that inasmuch as we had been so great Actors in it,
now we must bear our Testimony against Fighting; not doubting but Way will be
made for my Delivery; but if not, the Will of the Lord be done. The next Day,
we heard that several were killed on Shore; the which added much to my Sorrow.
Some Time after, a Friend went to die Captain to be cleared; he asked his
Reason? His Answer was, He could fight no longer: Then said the Captain, He
that denies to fight in Time of Engagement, I will put my Sword in his Guts.
Then, said the Friend, thou will be a Manslayer, and guilty of shedding Blood:
for which the Captain beat him sorely with his Cane and Fist: Although he was a
Baptist-Preacher.

So here the Captain, who had been our Friend, and a Shelter to us from wicked
Men, is now become again our Enemy, and we left open to every wicked Spirit to
kill us, whenever we deny to fight: For the printed Orders fixed upon the
Ship says, If any Man flinch from his Quarters in Time of Engagement, any may
kill him: Yet for all the hard Things, I had a secret Hope and Belief, that if
we stood true to what the Lord had made known unto us, the Lord would deliver
us out of all their Hands.

Some Time after (about the Year 1655.) we were at Leghorn, and we were ordered
to go a Cruizing; and one Morning, we espied, a great Ship bearing down upon
us, which we supposed to be a Spanish Man of War, with whom we had Wars: So
Orders was given to make the Ship clear to Fight. Now comes a trying Time, to
prove every one's Foundation. I being then upon the Deck, a great Weight tell
upon me, and I desired very earnestly of the Lord for Strength, to bear what
was coming upon us to try our Foundation; and farther, I desired of the Lord,
what to do in such a Straight? and it was answered me, To have a Meeting. And
this seemed to be very strange; for all the Men were in an Uproar, one heaving
one Way, and another another; and then I queried, whether Friends would meet?
and it was answered, If they met not, I was clear. So then I went down, with a
Dread upon me, and spoke to two or three of them; and they met all of them in a
little Time, twelve Men and two Boys, at our old Meeting Place, to my great
Satisfaction; for only two of them knew of my Exercise, and how it was with me
at Barcelona: But blessed be the Lord, who opened my Mouth, and I declared to
them how Things was with me, and that Things seemed very dark and cloudy, or
Words to that Effect; yet my Hopes and Belief was in the Lord, that I had not
the least Scruple, but that the Lord would deliver me, and not me only, but all
such as were of my Faith and Belief; adding, I lay not this as an Injunction
upon any one, but leave you all to the Lord, to do as he shall direct you; yet
one Thing I have to advise you of, that you be not ensnared; in a little Time
they will call you to your Quarters; which if you go, you show your selves Men
for their Turns. And farther, I must advise you, that the Captain puts great
Confidence in you; therefore let us be careful that we give him no just
Occasion. Therefore, all that are of my Mind, let us meet in the most public
Place upon the Deck, in the full View of the Captain, that be may not say we
deceived him, in not telling of him that we would not fight; that he might have
put others in our room or Place. And as we were sitting together, one of the
Ship's Company came to a Friend, saying, I will put a Crow in thy Guts; and
another saying, I will kill thee; and as they had an Antipathy against them, so
they threaten^d. Then I went with a great Dread of God upon my Mind, but clear
of all Fear of Man; for blessed be the Lord, all Fear of Man was taken away.
And when I came upon the Deck, I set my Back against the Geer-Capstan, with my
Face toward the Captain, where he had a full View of me; standing there
awhile, I turned my Head to see who was coming after me, and when I saw my
Friends there behind me, my very Heart leaped for Joy, and I was overcome with
the Sight of them; for to me they were the loveliest that ever I beheld, and my
very Bowels rolled within me for them, and my Life was given up freely for
them, to see them given up as innocent Lambs, ready for the Slaughter, standing
all together. In a little Time comes the Lieutenant, and says to one of them,
Go down to thy Quarters; his Answer was, I can fight no more: The which was
what he looked for; for he was our great Enemy. Then he goes to the Captain,
and makes the worst of it, saying, Yonder the Quakers be all together, and I do
not know but they will mutiny, and one says he cannot fight: then he asked his
Name, and came down; He first heaved his Hat overboard, and took hold of his
Collar, and beat him with a large Cane, and then dragged him down to his
Quarters. Then the Captain goes upon the Half-Deck again, and called to his Man
to bring him his Sword; which done, he drew it in as much Fury and Indignation,
as ever I saw Sword drawn; for Passion had overcome him. No sooner was his
Sword drawn, but the Word of the Lord ran through me like Fire, saying, The Sword
of the Lord is over him: And if he will have a Sacrifice, proffer it him: And
this Word was so powerful in me, that I greatly quivered and shook, though
endeavored the contrary, fearing they should think I was afraid of the Sword,
but I was not: And when the shaking was a little over, I turned my Head over my
Shoulder, and said to the Friend I loved so well, That I must go to the
Captain: His Answer was, Be well satisfied in what thou do: My Answer was
again, There is a Necessity upon me to go. Then, his Answer was, I will go with
thee. Then watching the Captain, as he came forward with his drawn Sword in his
Hand, I fixed my Eye upon him, with the great Dread of the Lord upon my Mind; I
stepped toward him, and he furiously looked on me, to have daunted me; but I
was carried above all his furious Looks: I had about five Paces and six Steps
upon the Quarter Deck before I came to him, I still keeping my Eye upon him, in
much Dread, and stepped the five Paces, and on the third Step, his Countenance
changed pale, and he turned himself about from me, and went off, and called to
his Man to take away his Sword: I standing there a while, said to my Friend,
The Captain is gone, let us return to our Friends; who receiv^d us very kindly,
and were glad to see how we were delivered. In a little Time, the Ship we
thought to fight withal, proved a Genoese, our Friend; and before Night the
Captain sent the Priest to me, to desire me not to be angry with him, for it
was in his Passion; my Answer by the Priest to the Captain was, That I had
nothing but good Will to him, and all Men living; and bid him tell the Captain,
That he must have a Care of such Passions, for if he killed a Man in his
Passion, he might seek a Place for Repentance, and might not find it. And ever
after this the Captain was very kind and respective to me.

And thus the Lord brought me through many and various Exercises, for which I
bless his worthy Name; for if the Trial, or Exercise was ever so great, if I
was but made willing to give up to that he made known unto me, to be his Will
and Mind, he never failed to carry me through it; to whom be everlasting Praise,
faith my Soul.

In the Year 1660, about the time of King Charles the IId's coming into
England, for the Space of two or three Years, I met with many sorts of
Exercises, being forced or pressed diverse Times; all which the Lord brought me
through. And of the many, I shall hint a few, that if any should meet with the
like, they may not distrust the Lord's Goodness and Strength, for he is able by
his everlasting Power, to preserve to the uttermost, and will plead the Cause
of such who put their whole Trust and Confidence in him.

In the Year 1661, early one Morning, going from my Quarters toward the Ship I
belonged unto, I met four Press-Masters, and I might have shunned them, but
durst not; and when we met, they asked me, Whether I was a Master or a Mate? I
denying to be a Master, they replied, You must go with us: Not so, said I; then
they took hold of me, two under my Arms, and two under my Hams, and lifted me
upon their Shoulders, and carried me about three Hundred Yards, with my Face
upwards; So that by the Signs I could discern which way they carried me, which
was to Horsley-down, M^ll-Stairs; and then it was in my Mind, that they would
heave me over the Wharf; then I considered what Time of Tide it was, and being
young Flood, the Boat came to the Wharf-Side, and they heaved me from their
Shoulders over the Wharf, cross the Boat-thaughts, which was about five Yards
high, and had not Providence preserved me, they had killed, or else crippled
me, and I lying still for some Time, one of them cried out, What shall we do,
we have killed the Man; but getting up, I went into the Boat's-Stern, at which
they were glad and rejoiced; and so carried me over the Water, and put me on
Shore.

Another Time (in the Year 1662.) going to Harwich laden with Corn, and no
sooner we came to an Anchor, but a Press-Boat came on Board us; and the first
Man they laid Hands on, was me, saying, You must go with us. I hope not so,
said I. Then they swore that I was a lusty Man, and should go: Then they laid
Hands on me, and lifted me into their Boat, and carried me on Board the Ship
Mary, one Jeremiah Smith Commander, who was a very loose and wicked Man: So
when I came to the Ship-side, they bad me go in, the which I had not Freedom to
do: Then they tied a Rope about my Waste, and with a Tackle hoisted me, making
a Noise, as if I had been some Monster, and lowered me down upon the
Main-Hatches, where I sat about half an Hour, that all might have their full
View of me: Then I got up, and walked abaft (or behind) the Mainmast, amongst
the Officers, and when Night came, I went under the half-Deck, and laid me down
between two Guns on the Boards, and slept very well. The next Day the Steward
came to me, to know my Name; I asked him for what? He replied, That I might
have my Victuals. I told him, it was Time enough when I came for my Victuals.
So I continued without any Food Five Days, only at Times a Draught of Water;
for I was sensible, if I had eat of their Victuals, they would have kept me.
The Seamen were very kind to me, and many came in great Tenderness, and
proffered me of their Victuals: I accepted of their Love, but none of their
Victuals. The Captain was a very furious Man, and frequently in Drink, so that
I could not have Opportunity to speak with him; and I often desired of the Lord
for Strength to oppose him, or else to be still and quiet. And on the Sixth Day
in the Morning, from the Time I came on Board, I found much Exercise attending
my Mind to go to the Captain, and I spoke to the Master to tell him of it,
which he did. The Captain, having most of his Officers about him, sent for me
by his Man, himself being on the Half-Deck; and as I was going along the
Gallery, his Man turns about, saying, You must pull off your Hat when you come
to the Captain, whose Back was toward me; and his Man offering to pull it off,
I held it on, which caused a Bustle. The Captain said, Let his Hat alone, I
know the Quakers very well. What is thy Business with me? To which I answered,
I acquainted thy Men when they took me from my Employment, that I was not for
their Turns, and am come to acquaint thee; I also said, It is not unknown unto
some in this Ship, that I have been as great a Fighter as others, but now no
more so. I hear so, said the Captain, and that thou have had Command, and so
thou shall have here; or else thou shall stand by me, and I will tell thee what
I will have done, and thou shall call the Men to do it; or else thou shall
stand by the Fore-Braces, and I will call to thee to do so and so; and this is
not killing of Men, to hale a Rope. I answered, But I will not do That. Then,
said he, Thou shall be with the Coopers, to hand Beer for them, there is great
Occasion for it. I answered, But I will not do That. Then, said he again, I
have an Employment for thee, which will be a great Piece of Charity, and a
saving of Men's Lives, Thou shall be with the Doctor, and when a Man comes down,
that has lost a Leg or an Arm, to hold the Man, while the Doctor cuts it off;
this is not killing Men, but saving Men's Lives. I answered, But I will not do
That, for it is all an Assistance. Then he said, I will send thee ashore to
Prison. I answered, I am in thy Hand, thou may do with me what thou
please. But, said the Captain, I hear thou will starve thy self. Not so, said
I, for I have Money in my Pocket, and if thou will sell me any Victuals, I will
eat before thee. The Captain said, I cannot sell the King's Victuals. I
answered, Nor I cannot do the King's Work, therefore cannot eat the King's
Victuals.

In a little Time after, I was called to go into the Boat, expecting to be sent
to Prison, but when we came on Shore, contrary to my Expectation, the Captain
bad me, Go which Way I would. This done, I enquired for my Friend Mary
Va^dewa^l, who received me very kindly, and provided for me, such Things as
were necessary, my Teeth being (...) loose. And after two or three Days, I
returned to the Vessel I was pressed out of: And the next Day, being very hard
at Work, heaving out Corn into a Lighter, stripped in my Shirt and Drawers;
then a Man of War's Boat clapped us on Board, and the Coxon jumped in, and
swore, Here Is a lusty Rogue! come up, said he, but I took little Notice of him,
and continued heaving Corn, at which he sword, That if I would not come up, he
would lay me cross the Shoulders. Then I said, Strike me not, for if thou do,
I will not come up; if thou strike me not, I may come up. Then he swore to the
Captain, that I was a Quaker. Have him up, said the Captain, so I went upon the
Deck: Come near, says the Captain; so I went into the Lighter, into which we
heaved the Corn, close by him. Then the Captain, in a scoffing Manner, said,
Thou art no Quaker, if thou were, I would not take thee; for if thou were a
Quaker, thou should be waiting upon the Lord, and let his Ravens feed thee,
and not be toiling thy Body so: (my Shirt being then very wet with Sweat)
answer me, said he. The Seamen crying, The Spirit does not move him; one while
saying, Pull him in; another while, Let him alone: Thus it was for some time.
And I got very low in my Mind, not mattering what they said; desiring earnestly
of the Lord, that if I answered the Captain, it might be to the Purpose, or
else to be silent. And it rose fresh in my Mind to the Captain: I perceive thou
have read some Part of the Scriptures, did thou never read, that he is worse
than an Infidel, that will not provide for his Family? adding, I often heard
the Quakers blamed for not working) but thou art the first that ever I heard
blame them for working. Says the Captain, Turn him away, he is a Quaker. Being
gone a little Way, he calls out, Pull him again, he is no Quaker: Thou art no
Quaker; for here thou bring Corn, and of it is made Bread, and by the
Strength of that Bread, we kill the Dutch; and therefore no Quaker: Or art not
thou as accessory to their Death as we? Answer me. I kept very still and low in
my Mind: And after their many Scoffs and Jeers; then said I to the Captain, I
am a Man that have, and can feed my Enemies; and well may I you, who pretend to
be my Friends. The Captain replied, Turn him away, he is a Quaker.

In a few Days after, I was pressed out of the same Vessel, and carried on
Board a Man of War; and when I came on Board, was ordered to go into the Cabin,
where the Captain and several Officers were; and when I came into the Cabin,
the Captain appeared like a Madman, swearing and cursing against the Quakers;
often swearing, That if he did not hang me, he would carry me to the Duke of
York, and he would. But I said very little to them; for the Lord's Presence was
with me, and carried me over all their high Threats. And when he had tired
himself, then he said more mildly, What! do thou say nothing for thy self? My
Answer was, Thou say enough for thee, and me too; for I found it most safe
to say little, except I had good Authority for it. So, when they had done, I
went to my Lodging, between two Guns in the Half-deck, on the Boards; and being
betwixt sleep and wake, I heard a great Outcry, Where is the Quaker? Where is
the Quaker? And the Cry much increasing, at last I said, Here am I, what lack
you at this Time of the Night? (it being about the first Hour) Ho! said they,
you must come to the Captain presently. And when I came to the Cabin-Door; said
the Captain, Is the Quaker there? Yes, said I. I cannot sleep, said he: But I
slept very very well on the hard Boards. Then, said he, Thou must go on Shore,
I answered, I am in thy Hand, and thou may do with me, as thou please: So
the Boat put me ashore at Harwich. And this was the Man that said, Hanging was
too good for me; who, in six Hours Time was so weary of me, that he could not
take his natural Rest, whilst I was on Board.

These, and many more of the like Exercises, has the Lord carried me through,
too long here too mention; for the which, I bless his worthy Name: For he was
always, in the greatest Straits, ready to assist me, as I was made willing to
give up to him, and to be nothing of my self.

Thomas Lurting.

A true Account of George Pattison's being taken by the Turks; and how redeemed
by God's Direction and Assistance, without Bloodshed; putting the Turks on
Shore in their own Country, about the 8th Month, 1663.
I Thomas Lurting, was then George Pattison's Mate, and coming from Venice, we
heard that many Turks Men of War were at Sea, and that they had taken many
English Ships; and it was much in thy Mind, that we should be taken: and I was
very much concerned, as well for the Men, as for my self; at which I went to
the Master, and desired of him to go to Leghorn, and to stay for a Convoy, and
so long we would have no Wages; but the Master would not agree to this, but
kept the Sea, much contrary to our Minds: And coming near a Spanish Island,
called May-York, we were chased by a Turks Vessel, or a Man of War, called a
Pata^h, as some Time before we had been; and thought by our Vessel's well
sailing, to escape; but by carrying overmuch Sail, some of our materials gave
Way, by which Means the Turks came up with us, and commanded the Master on
Board; who accordingly went, with four Men more, leaving me, and three Men and
a Boy, on Board our Vessel; and so soon as our Boat came on Board the Turks
Vessel, they took all our Men out of the Boat, and put in Fourteen Turks. All
this while I was under a great Exercise in Spirit, not so much for my self,
because I had a secret Hope of Relief, but a great Stress lay upon me for the
Men, in this very Juncture of Time; for all Hopes of outward Deliverance being
then gone, the Master then on Board the Turks, with Four of our Men, and the
Turks just coming on Board of us: And being much concerned in Mind, I desired
of the Lord Patience under such an Exercise; and going to the Ship's Side to
see the Turks come in, the Word of the Lord ran through me, thus; Be not afraid,
for all this, thou shall not go to Algier: And I having formerly great
Experience of the Lord's Doings upon several Deliverances in Times of War, I
believed what the Lord did say in me. At this all kind of Fear was removed, and
I received them, as a Man might his Friends, and they were as Civil to us. So I
showed them all Parts of the Vessel, and what she was laden withal; then said I
to our Men, Be not afraid, for all this, we shall not go to Algier; but let me
desire you, as you have been willing to obey me, so be as willing to obey the
Turks; for by our so doing, we got over them: For when they saw our great
Diligence, it made them the more careless of, and favorable to us. So when
they had taken some small Matter of what we were laden withal, some went on
Board their own Ship again, and eight Turks stayed with us. Then began I to
think of the Master, and the other four, which were in the Turks Ship; for as
for my self, and the others with me, I had no Fear at all; nay, I was so far
from it, that I said to one of our Men, Were but the Master on Board, and the
rest of our Men, if there were twice as many Turks, I should not fear them. For
my earnest Desire was to the Lord, that he would put it into their Hearts to
send them on Board; and good was the Lord, in answering my Desire; for it was
as a Seal to what he before had spoke through me, and in me. Soon after this, the
Master was sent on Board, with the rest of our Men. Then all Manner of Fear was
off me, as to going to Algier; and some said to me, I was a strange Man, I was
afraid before we were taken, but now I was not. My Answer was, I now believe I
shall not go to Algier, and if you will be ruled by me, I will act for your
Delivery, as well as any own; but as yet I saw no Way for it, for they were all
armed, and we without Arms. Now we being all together, except the Master, I
began to reason with them: What if we should overcome the Turks, and go to
May-York? At which they very much rejoiced; and one said, I will kill one or
two; and another said, I will cut as many of their Throats as you will have me:
This was our Men's Answer; at which I was much troubled, and said to them, If I
know any of you that offers to touch a Turk, I will tell the Turks my self: But
I said to them, If you will be ruled, I will act for you; if not, I will be
still: Then they agreed to do what I would have them. Then said I, If the Turks
bid you do any Thing, do it without grumbling, and with as much Diligence and
Quickness as you can; for that pleases them, and that will cause them to let us
be together: to which they agreed. Then I went to our Master, who was a Friend
and a very bold-spirited Man, and told him our Intention; whose Answer to me
was, If we offered to rise, and they overcame us, we had as good be burnt
alive. The which I knew very well: But I could get him no Way to adhere to me,
in that he was fearful of Bloodshed, for that was his Reason: Insomuch that at
last I told him, we were resolved, and I questioned not but to do it, without
one Drop of Bloodshed; and I believed that the Lord would prosper it, by reason
I could rather go to Algier, than to kill one Turk. So at last he agreed to
this, to let me do what I would, provided we killed none. At that Time, there
being still two Turks lying in the Cabin with him; so he was to lie in the
Cabin, that by his being there, they should mistrust nothing: which accordingly
he did; and having bad Weather, and lost the Company of the Man of War, which
thing I much desired; the Turks seeing our Diligence, made them careless of us.

The second Night, after the Captain and one of the Turks went to Sleep in the
Cabin with our Master; then I persuaded one to lie in my Cabin, and about an
Hour after, another in another Cabin; until at last, it rained very much, I
persuaded them all down to Sleep; and when asleep, I got their Arms in
Possession; and all this was done by fair Means and Persuasions.

Then said I to the Men of our Vessel, Now we have the Turks at our Command, no
Man shall hurt any of them; for if you do, I will be against you; but this we
will do, now they are under Deck, we will keep them so, and go for May-York. So
when I had ordered some to keep the Doors, lest any should come out, strictly
charging 'em not to spill Blood; and so ordered our Course for May-York; the
which in the Morning we were near. Then my Orders to our Men was, if any
offered to come out, not to let above one or two at a Time; and one came out
expecting to have seen his own Country; but to the contrary, it was May-York:
Then said I to our Men, Be careful of the Door, for when he goes in, we shall
see what they will do: And as soon as he told them, we were going toward
May-York, they, instead of Rising, fell all to Crying; for their Courage was
taken from them, and they desired that they might not be sold; which I promised
they should not; and so soon as I had pacified them, I went into the Cabin to
our Master, he not knowing what was done and so he told their Captain, That we
had overcome his Men, and were going for May-York: At which unexpected News he
wept; and desired the Master not to sell him; which he promised he would not.
Then we told the Captain, we would make a Place to hide them in, where the
Spaniards should not find them; at which they were very glad, and we did
accordingly. So when we came in, the Master went on Shore, with Four more, and
^^t me on Board with the Turks, which were ten; but they could not come out,
except I let them: And when he had done his Business, not taking Product or
License, lest the Spaniards should come and see the Turks. But at Night an
English Master came on Board, being an Acquaintance; and after some Discourse
with him, we told him, if he would not betray us, we would tell him what we had
done; but we would not have the Spaniards know it, lest they should take them
from us; the which he promised, but brake the same, and would have had two or
three of them, to have brought to England; but we saw his End: And when he saw
he could not prevail, then he said, They are worth two or three hundred Pieces
of Eight each: whereat both the Master and I told him, That if they would give
many Thousands, they should not have one, for we hoped to send them home again.

But he looked upon us as Fools, because we would not sell them; which I would
not have done for the whole Island: But contrary to our Expectation, he told
the Spaniards, who threatened to take them from us: But so soon as we heard
thereof, we called up the Turks, and told them, They must help us, or the
Spaniards would take them from us: So they resolvedly helped us, and we made
all Haste to run from the Spaniards; which pleased the Turks very well. So we
put our selves to the Ha^ard of the Turks to save them. Thus we continued about
six or seven Days, not being willing to put into any Port o^ Spain, for Fear of
losing the Turks: We let them have their Liberty for four or five Days, until
they made an Attempt to rise; which I foresaw and prevented. All this while I
was very kind to them; insomuch that some of our Men grumbled, saying. I had
more Care for the Turks than them. My Answer was, They were Strangers, I must
treat them well. And when at (...), in the Day Time, we were going for Algier,
but when Night came, for London; and so we kept them in Ignorance, for about
eight or nine Days, by which Means they were quiet; and the ninth Day in the
Afternoon, we came by an Island called ^^rmet^re, an Island they knew very
well; and by that Island they knew we did not go for Algier, but for England:
in the Afternoon they were all upon Deck, and our Master with them, and they
threatened our Master very much, by reason he was gone by Algier; and none of
our Men were upon the Deck, but my self and the Man at the Helm, but most of
them asleep; and I sitting by the ^ain mast, taking good Notice of them; at
last their Countenance began to change, and to look very sourly; and a great
Weight fell upon me, and it rose in my Mind. How if they should lay hold in the
Master and heave him Overboard: They being ten lusty Men^ and (...) small Man;
and my Weight increased, then I ^^^^^ed up, and ^^^^p'd with my ^oo^ and our
(...) came up, saying, Where Is the Cr^w? Another, ^^ere's the Ax? And every one
the Thing they ha^ provided for their own Defense: So when I saw them all about
me, and heard these Men threaten the Master; I said, Let us have them down, we
have given them too much Liberty: But first, Lay thou down, said I, ^o one of
our Men^ the Cr^w and the Ax, and every Man of (...), what you have provided to
hurt them, they are Turks, and we are Englishman, let it not be said, We are
afraid of them; I will lay hold on the (...) (...) stepped forward, and laid
hold of him, and said, He must go down: which he did very quietly; and all the
rest. At this Time, and not before we discovered, that several of them had long
Knives, by which they might have done us much Damage: and afterward we were
more careful of them: and not long after, two of them differing, drew out their
Knives, one against the other, and our Men that kept the Watch, called me, and
I called their Captain, who took their Knives from them, and gave them to me,
and beat them. The beforementioned Passage, was the first Time of Resistance,
for what was done toward the Turks before, was done by fair Means or Threats;
not Violence; for I took great Care of them. And on the 9th Day, after we had
them on Board, I went to our Master, and desired him to go on the Coasts of
Barbary; for there we were like to miss of their Men of War, to which he
consented. And on the 11th Day, we were on that Coast and about six Miles from
Land, and in the Afternoon it fell calm, and I had much upon my Mind, to set
the Turks on Shore; then I went to our Men, and said, Who will go with me, and
set the Turks on Shore? One said, I will go, and another said, I will go, then
another the like; but three to ten is too little: Then I went to another, and
said to him Thou and I have been good Friends, will thou venture to go with me;
he answered, Yes, if my Master will give me Leave; This is enough, said I.
After this was resolved on, and they promised me, that they wou^d do nothing to
the Turks, until I said, (...) more; then they were to shift for their Lives:
This agreed on, I went to the Master, and acquainted him what we had resolved
to do, if he would let us have the Boat. After some Time together, and some
Tears dropped on both Sides, I told him I believed the Lord would preserve me for
I had nothing but good Will in venturing my Life and that I had not the least
Fear upon me, but all would do well. Then said I, if we give them the Boat,
they will get Arms and come and take us with our own Boat; and if we put half
on Shore, they will raise the Country, and surprise us, when we come with the
other half; but if he would let me go, and the other three would go with me, I
would venture to put them ^n Shore, to which he consented; so ambracing one
another in great Tenderness, we parted; but I saw no other Way, but to carry
them all at once; then I called the Turks up, and when they came up, they knew
the Place, there were two Towns about four Miles from the Waterside: But when
the Turks came up, one of the Men that promised to go with me was afraid, and
came to me, saying, he was not willing to go, except I bound them. To which I
answered, I was not afraid, and to bind them would but exasperate them, now,
they were quiet, let us keep them so: Come, let us h^ist out the Boat; and when
that was done, I went into her, and gave the Painter, or Rope into the Ship,
then I called in the Captain, and placed him first in the ^o^t's-stern, then
for another, and placed him in his Lap, and one on each Side, and two more in
their Laps, until I had placed them all. And when our Men saw how I had placed
them, they were willing to go without binding of them: So I gave two of our
Men, each an Oar, and one of our Men sat on the Bow of the Boat, with a
Carpenter's Ax on his Shoulder, and I sat on the other Side with a Boat-Hook in
my Hand, with two that rowed, one having a Carpenter's Addz, and the other, a
Cooper's Heading-Knife: These were our Arms, besides the Turks Arms we had in
our Command: and when all was ready, we took our Leaves one of another,
committing our selves unto the Lord, for Preservation: we being three Men and a
Boy, and ten Turks: So we set for the Shore, and having but two Oars, the ^ime
seemed long; but that which made it seem the longer, before we got half way to
Shore, our Men's Hearts began to fail them, and they began to reflect on me,
saying, This was n^^ Frolic. And as we came near the Shore, the more they were
afraid: so that every Rook, they made to be a Boat; so that I had very much to
do to keep them quiet: saying many Times, Give way my ^ads, we shall get a
Shore in a little Time. All this Time I had not the least Fear on me: At last
we came within 30 or 40 Yards of the Shore; then I commanded to turn the Boat;
then said I to one that I put most Trust in, To have a Care of those Bushes,
that there be no Men in them, for I fear not the Men in the Boat; and turning
my self about, with my Back to the Shore, to heave the Grappling, the very same
Man cried out, Lord have Mercy on us, there are Turks in the Bushes on Shore. I
having not hove the Grappling, turns me about, saying, What Is the Matter? Says
he, Positively, there is Men in the Bushes. And he speaking so positively o^ it,
it seized me, so that I was possessed with Fear: And so soon as the Turks in
the Boat saw I was afraid, they all rose at once in the Boat. And this was one
of the greatest Straights that ever I was put to: Not for Fear of the Turks in
the Boat, but for Fear of our Men's killing them; for I would not have killed a
Turk, or caused one to be killed, for the whole World. And when the Turks were
risen, I caused our Men to lay their Oars cross the Boat; for that was all that
was betwixt us, and bid the Men take up such Arms as they had: Then, said I to
them, I would have (...) be as good as your Word, for you promised me you would
do nothing, until I said, I could do no more: Now I desire you to keep to that.
(For there was nothing lacking but my Word to kill the Turks) then I sharply
reproved them, for their many Reflections; but more particularly, he that had
said, there were Men in the Bushes, but there was not. And your many Fears have
brought some on me also: therefore now behave your selves like Men, and be not
afraid. And when I had spoken these Words unto them; all this while the Turks
stood up; then I remained in Silence a considerable Time, and was very low in
my Mind: At last all Fear was taken away, and Life arose, and Courage increased
again; and it was with me, It Is better to strike a Blow, than to cleave a Man's
Head, or cut off an Arm, and I turned the Hook of the Boat-Hook into my Hand,
then I considered ^ strike them that was next me, which was the weakest, I
(...) have still the strongest to encounter; at which I got into the middle of
the Boat, upon the (...) ^aughts, then I ^^^ck the Captain a (...), and bid him
sit down which he did instantly, and so did all the rest, without any more
Blows; then I stepped forward, and said to our Men, Now you see what (...) to be
afraid, What shall we do now? Some was for carrying them on Board again? Not
so, said I, God ^illing I will put them to Shore, for the^'ll come quietly near
the Shore; but if we carry them on Board, there will be nothing but Refine: For
if it were my own Case, I would rise ten times, and so will they; on Shore we
must put them. And going along the Shore, there was a small Rock lay off the
Shore, which our Men would have me to put them on; but they not seeming
willing, I would not: At last I esp^ed a very convenient Place, in a small Bay,
wherein was a Water-way, and we could see a Mile; we went thither, and finding
it very convenient, turned our Boat, and hove out our Grappling; and with Signs
of great Kindness, they took Leave, and jumped out not very wet, and when on
Shore, we put our Boat very close in, and gave them about half a hundred of
Bread and Match, and other Things, and hove all their Arms on Shore to them:
And then they were not above 4 Miles from two Towns, and about (...) Miles from
Algier: and they would gladly have had us gone to the Town, telling of us,
There was Wine, and many other Things; and as for my Part, I could have
ventured with them: So we parted in great Love; and staid until they had all
got up the Hill, and they shook their Caps at us, and we at them. And as soon
as we came on Board, we had a fair Wind; which we had not had all the while the
Turks were on Board, nor many Days before.

And when we came for England, coming up the River of Thames, some Boats going
before us; and King Charles, and the Duke of York, and many of his Lords, being
at Greenwich, it was told them, There was a Quaker's ^a^^h coming up the ^^ver,
that had been taken by the Turks, and (...) redeemed themselves and had (...) a
Gun. And when we came near to Greenwich, the King came to our Ship's Side, and
one of the Lords came in, and discoursed the Ma^ter; and the King and the Duke
of York, stood with the Entering Ropes in their Hands, and asked me many
Questions about his Men of War; I told him, We had seen none of them. Then he
asked me many Questions, How we cleared our selves, and I answered him; He
said, I should have brought the Turks to him: I answered him, That I thought it
better for them to be in their own Country: At which they all smiled, and went
away.

I have wrote more large and particular than in my former Account, which I
wrote from Lever^oole, the 30th of the 5th Month, 1680, where I had not my
Papers.

So I rest in that which can do good for Evil, which ought to be the Practice
of all true Men.

Thomas Lurting
London, the 30th of the 11th Month, 1709.
FINIS.
Lately published,
WAYS and Means for the Inhabitants of Delaware to become Rich: Wherein the
several Growths and Products of these Countries ^^e demonstrated to be a
sufficient Fund for a flourishing Trade. Humbly submitted to the Legislative
Authority of these Colonies.

Baptismon Didd^^^^. Or the Doctrine of Baptisms, reduced from its Ancient and
Modern Corruptions; and restored to its Primitive Soundness and Integrity,
according to the Word of Truth, the Substance of Faith, and the Nature of
Christ Kingdom. By William Dell, Minister of the Gospel, and Master of Gonvil
and Gaius College in Cambridge.

Now in the Press, to be speedily Published,
A Dialogue betwixt a Quaker and Priest. Many Thousands of which have been sold
at England.

To be sold by S. Keimer, in the Market-street, Philadelphia.


