EDULCORATOR. A brief ESSAY ON THE WATERS of MARAH SWEETENED. With a Remarkable
RELATION of the Deporable OCCASION afforded for it, In the Praemature DEATH of
Captain Josiah Winslow, Who [with several of his Company] Sacrificed his Life,
in the Service of his Country; Engaging an Army of Indians, May 1. 1724.

Sane Voti mei me (...) Statuam, si vel uni Animae, uno Momento, una aliqua
(...) ei sancta Cogitatio eu (...) Lecti^^^ ex^^^gat. Gerhard. Med. BOSTON:
Printed by B. Green. 1725.

To the Honorable Col. Isaac Winslow, And his Religious CONSORT.
My Honored Friends,
WHEN the Offspring of Ephraim, felt the stroke of Death from the Men of Gath,
in an Unseasonable and Unsuccessful Salley upon the Can^an^tes we read; 1 Chronicles
VII 21. The Father Mourned many days, and his Brethren came to Comfort him.
What has befallen You in the Death of a Beloved SON, slain by the Men, whom a
Righteous GOD has Employ^d in the Dispensations of His Wine Press, threatens to
leave You Mourning many Days. Yea, you seem disposed, not altogether unlike the
Patriarch [the Father of Ephraim] who, upon the Apprehension of an Evil Beast
having Devoured his Beloved Son, refused to be Comforted, and said, I will go
down into the Grave unto my Son, Mourning: And you Apprehend nothing, but
having Your Gray-hairs brought down with Sorrow to the Grave.

AMONG the Brethren that come to Comfort You, here is One who is Your Brother
in Adversity; and who just before You, had the Praemature Death of His Eldest
Son, to add unto the Embitterments of his Pilgrimage. And he comes to Comfort
you, in your Trouble by the Comfort, wherewith he has himself been Comforted of
GOD; and invite You to join with him, in the Songs, which he has and Sings, In
the House of his Pilgrimage.

YOUR Dear Son had a GRANDFATHER, who was the Beauty and Safety of his
Country; and the General of all the Forces wherewith our United Colonies
performed the most Martial Exploit that ever was done in our Land. He had a
GREAT-GRAND-FATHER, who was One of the Finest Men that ever shone in these
Plantations; and who having done more than any man for the Animation and
Preservation of the First Adventures hither, advanced from (...) D^, and then
to Die, in a larger Field abroad for the Good of the English Empire. Both of
them, GOVERNORS.

IT IS too soon, and this is not a place for me to say any thing of his FATHER,
except what we find said on Joseph of Arimath^a, He has been, An Honorable
Counselor.

UNTO such an Honorable Descent, there being added the Liberal Education which
his FATHER bestowed upon him, to fit him for doing somewhat considerable in the
World, what Expectations might have been reasonably raised of his doing
something that should be worthy the Offspring of such Meritorious Ancestors!

BUT our Sovereign GOD has Determined it, That all shall be comprised in this
one Action; To lay down his Life in the Service of his Country: The Spark that
was Mounting Upwards, and we knew not what Luster he might anon arrive unto,
must only give this Coup^d' Eclat, and fall down into the common Heap of Ashes:
And instead of proceeding Master of Arts, as if he had Lived a Few Weeks more
he would have done, receive the Laurel of, One who Died Fighting the Battles of
the Lord.

THIS Alone is enough to bespeak a Grateful Commemoration of him; which is
accordingly now endeavored. But, how to Support You, that under so great a
Loss, You may not be utterly Inconsolable, I know no better way, than to throw
in, what I am here going to cast into the Bitter Waters. And hereupon, in
Offering the Sacrifice, whereto GOD is now calling You, I hope, He will help
You to Do Wondrously.

THAT the Consolations of GOD may not be small unto You, is the Hearts Desire
and Prayer, of

Your Cordial and Constant Friend and Servant, Co. Mather.

THE Waters of Marah SWEETENED. Upon the Death of that Hopeful Young Gentleman,
Captain JOSIAH WINSLOW.
Exodus XV. 25. He Cried unto the Lord, and the Lord showed him a Tree, which
when he had cast into the Waters, the Waters were made Sweet.
MOST certainly, the Best Course that ever could be taken; To cry unto the
Lord. It was the Best Man then Living in the World, by whom it was taken. It
was a MOS^S, who still took it, when Bitter Things were dispensed unto him.

THE People under his Conduct Expected Waters, upon their first entrance into
the Arabian Wilderness through which they were to pass unto the Promised Land.
But the Waters which they found, proved Bitter ones: Even such as Procured
hereupon the Name of Marah, to be given them. I do not suppose these to be the
Bitter Fountains that Pliny speaks of; According to Strab^, those were on the
other side of the Red Sea. But they seem to be of the same Nature with 'em. The
Spirits of the People, were as Bitter as the Waters which they came to.
Whatever grievous Things they meet withal^ a Moses must be Barbarously,
Unreasonably, Unaccountably Murmured at. But the Murmurs of an Absurd and
Froward People, against this Excellent Man, only excite his Prayers to the
Glorious GOD. Behold, How his Prayers are answered* GOD by special Inspiration
and Revelation directed him to a Tree; the casting whereof into the Waters,
took away the Brackish Tang of them, and marvellously sweetened them. What the
Tree was, it is unknown, because untold unto us. Doubtless, it was not
Naturally, but Miraculously that so sweetening a Virtue issued from it. And no
doubt, the Waters continued sweet forever after it. But whatever we may be
uncertain of, the Figurative Importance of the Tree, can Labor under no
uncertainty with us. The Affairs of that peculiar People, which GOD in the days
of old remarkably distinguished from the rest of the World, had in them notable
Figures of the My^^eries, which the People of GOD after the coming of our
SAVIOR were to be more fully acquainted withal. The Tree that sweetened the
Waters of Marah, was a Type o^ something to be found in the Gospel of our
Salvation, which will wonderfully sweeten all the bitter Things that we meet
withal. From that famous Tree I will gather a DOCTRINE, which, I hope, you will
give a Comfortable Attention to. It Is this;

WHATEVER we find Bitter to us in our Travel through the Wilderness of this
World; there is a TREE, the Application whereof will take away all the
Bitterness. THE first Thing which we have now to be sensible of, is a Thing
which we all cannot but ^e sensible of. It may be said, Behold, All we
ourselves have seen it. It is this* That in our Travel through this World, unto a
Better World, there are bitter Waters to be met withal. We are Travelers through
a Wilderness, toward a Better Country, that is, an Heavenly. Certainly we meet
with Occurrences enough, to convince us, That while we are in this present Evil
World, we are but in a Wilderness. Our Wants, our Fears, our loss about our
Way, and Thousands of Difficulties which in our condition we meet withal, are
the too livel Characters of a Wilderness. Yea, to this World, we may too aptly
apply the Characters of the Arabian Wilderness where the Israelites laid their
Carcases; A land of pi^ts and of droughts and of fiery Flying Serpents. In this
our Wilderness, we have a Thirst for many good Things. Our Thirsty Souls have
their Appetites to be satisfied. But, alas, They are Bitter Waters, which we
meet withal: Such Disappointments do our Thirsty Souls, relying upon Creatures,
meet withal. In the old Records of the Church, we find a Godly Woman, among the
Travelers through the Wilderness of this World; who said, Ruth I. 20. Call me,
Marah; Because the Almighty has greatly caused bitterness unto me. Truly, The
bitter Waters of Marah, are so dispensed unto them who Travel through the
Wilderness, that the Travelers themselves claim the Name of Marah too. Our
Wilderness will anon Terminate in a Pleasant Land. The Promised Land will be
found a pleasant Land; verily, in that Land, there will be found Fullness of
Joy, and Pleasures forevermore. The bitter Waters of the Wilderness are most
W^sely as well as Justly ordered for us; To prepare us for the Land flowing
with milk and honey. But, if we will be Inquisitive, What is the True Spring of
our bitter Waters? or, What lies at the Bottom of our Condition, to Embitter
it. I remember, that in the Visions of the Apocalypse, we read, Rev. VIII 10. A
great star^se upon the fountains of Waters; and the name of the star is called,
Wormwood; and the third part of the waters became wormwood, and many men died
of the waters because they were made bitter. The bitter Servitude wherein to
many Provinces of the Roman Empire were brought, when the Goths made their
Descent from the North upon it, may be thus pointed out unto us. Alluding unto
this, my Observation shall be, That Sin, Sin, shall be considered as the Star
that falls upon the Fountains of our Waters: This, as a Comet bears down upon
us, and its Influences reach to the bottom of our Condition in the World. O
Thou Star to be forever called Wormwood* It is thou that have infused a
bitterness into our whole Condition, and made our Waters as bitter as Wormwood.
Yea, we Die, we Die of the Waters, because they are made so very bitter.

BUT, What are the Bitter Waters of the Wilderness?

First, IN Repentance there are Bitter Waters which we must be brought unto. We
^ead o^, Repentance to Salvation* without Repentance there is no coming to
Salvation. We cannot come to the Enjoyment of GOD, in the sinless Mansions, if
we are not sorry for our Departure from GOD, and if we don't Bewail and Abhor
and Forsake the sin which disqualifies us for those Holy Mansions. Now there is
a bitterness of Soul, in that Contrition for Sin, which is in all true
Repentance. Of true Penitents, there is this Account given; Zech. XII. 10. They
shall be in bitterness. In Sin we venture upon Stolen Waters; and these at
first are sweet unto us. But in Repentance, they must be changed into bitter
Waters. The sweetest Pleasures of Sin, must become very bitter, in the
Reflections that Repentance is to make upon them. After we have Drunk in
Iniquity like water, it will by Repentance rise in our Stomach, and become then
as bitter as Gall unto us. One who had wallow'd in much Unchastity, was brought
by Repentance to say, I fined it more bitter than Death unto me! Of one come
unto Repentance we read, Mat. XXVI. 75. He wept bitterly. The Tears of
Repentance are bitter Waters. With a Repenting Soul, we are to look back and
s^e, I have sinned, and I have done very (...) See, I have sinned, and I have
denied (...) GOD that is above! See, I have sinned, and I (...) my own soul!
It Is with an Unspeakable bitterness that we are to look back upon it. Sinner,
Thy Wickedness, it is bitter; So it must be, when it reaches to thy Heart, in
thy Resentments of it. Alas, Thou art in the Gall of bitterness, until
Repentance render thy Sins more bitter than any Gall unto thee.

Secondly, IN Affliction, there are bitter Waters, which we shall be brought
unto. There will be Need of it, that we should be in heaviness; and we shall be
so. Affliction will cause us to be so. But we are in bitterness when we are so.
An Handmaid of the Lord being in much Affliction, we read, 2 Samuel I 10. She was
in bitterness of Soul. Affliction is Unavoidable. Every thing that Sojourns
upon the Earth, which has Thorns every where growing in it, is Afflicted with
them. O Man born of a Woman, Dream not that thy few Days will be free from
Trouble; No, they will be full of them. But Affliction will Produce those
Lamentations, Lam III ^5 He has filled me with bitterness. Of a certain time
we read, He saw the Affliction of Israel that it was very bitter. But indeed,
what Affliction is there, of which we say not, It is bitter! The Weeping Eyes
of People in Affliction, yield streams of bitter Waters. The Eyes that are a
Fountain of Tears, have a bitter Liquor flowing there. It is the Language of
the Prophet, They shall weep with bitterness of Heart. The Afflicted Prophet of
GOD said, I will weep bitterly. The briny Liquor distilled from the Eyes by
Affliction is a bitter Liquor Affliction causes one to say, I will complain in
the bitterness of my Soul. Affliction causes another to say, I shall go softly
all my Life in the bitterness of my Soul. O Thou Passenger through the valley of
Baca; Many sad things will befall thee here, whereupon thou shall say, Lord,
Thou writest bitter things against me. They to whom GOD gives Tears to Drink in
a great measure, these can tell of bitter Waters.

BUT can we come at nothing to sweeten the bitter Waters? Yes, there is a
Second Thing to be now Remarkable with us. We are to be advised of a Tree, by
the Application whereof, the bitter waters of our Wilderness, will be
wonderfully sweetened unto us. There is a Tree, on which let us employ our
Thoughts, and with Prayer and Faith let us make our Flight unto it, and let us
in this way apply it unto the purposes for which GOD has provided it: The
bitter waters of Marah, will now be wonderfully Dulcified, and lose all their
bitterness. There is a Tree whereof I may say unto you, It Is a Tree w^^^ fair
branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature. The height of
this Tree is Exalted above all the Trees of the Field; Nor is any Tree in the
Garden of GOD like unto Him, for his Beauty. I may also tell you for your
Satisfaction, It Is a Tree which you will be all welcome to: A Tree planted in
the Mountain of the Height of Israel; and under it shall dwell all Foul of
every wing. Yea, of this Tree, I may for a further Satisfaction tell you, you
need not go, or send unto a Foreign Country for it. The Tree is Nigh unto you.
You may easily come at it, and as often as you please. It stands just before
you.

CERTAINLY, you are willing to know, what this Tree should be; what the Blessed
Sweetener of all our bitter waters. And I make no Question, but that in your
own Minds, you already apprehend, What, and Where and Who the Tree is, that I
shall point you to. Truly, a CHRIST, a CHRIST, is what I must point you to. You
did expect that I would point you thither. A Glorious CHRIST, is the Tree.
Other Tree for the sweetening of our bitter waters, can no man tell of. The
Tree that is to take out the bitterness from the Waters of Marah must be the
Tree of Life; It can be no other than the Tree whereof we read, Rev. XXII. 2.
The Tree of Life, which yields its Fruit every Month, and the leaves of the
Tree are for the Healing of the Nations. The Beloved Man in the Visions of GOD,
saw close by this Tree of Life, A pure River of Water of Life proceeding out of
the Throne of GOD, and of the Lamb. You may be sure, there was no bitterness in
this water of Life. There is nothing but sweet water in this River of GOD. If
the Tree of Life be near it, it must be so. But O Believer, can any thing but a
CHRIST be the Tree of Life unto thee? There, There is the Tree! O Fly unto it,
for the Cure of all the bitterness, which the Forbidden Tree has brought unto
thee. But Behold How the Wonders grow upon us! Our SAVIOR does then most of
all prove the Tree of Life unto us, when we behold Him on the Tree of Death,
which He was ^^il'd unto. It Is a Crucified CHRIST that is the Tree of Life. I am
determined to know and Preach nothing so much as this among you! The Cross of
our SAVIOR, that Cursed, Ragged, Wretched sort of a Tree; This is the Tree,
which above all things, has the most Sovereign Virtue, to sweeten our bitter
waters. The Cross on which, when our SAVIOR cried out, I Thirst, they gave Him
a Bitter Potion; They gave Him Vinegar dashed with Gall, to Drink; This will
take out the Gall of every ^up in the Thing appointed for us. By casting the
Cross of our SAVIOR into the Waters of Marah, Which is done by Meditations on
a Crucified CHRIST, under all Embitterments, they will be Sweetened unto
Admiration. Let us a little enter into this Mystery of Godliness.

First. THE Bitter Waters of Repentance will be wonderfully Sweetened, when a
CHRIST is well-applied unto us. Declare, O Soul in the bitter Anguish of
Repentance; Will not the Hope and Joy of a Pardon mightily sweeten these bitter
Waters? Yes The sense of a GOD Reconciled, will be so sweet a Thing, that it
will even sweeten all the bitter Things that we can from any Quarter meet
withal. Now, Repair to thy SAVIOR, and Rely on the Sacrifice which he has
offered up unto GOD, for the Expiation of the Sins which thou d^st Remember as
the Wormwood and the Gall, thy Soul has them in Remembrance and is Humbled in
thee. The Blood shed by thy SAVIOR, in the Sufferings which He finished on the
Cross, This Blood Cleanses from all sin. Plead this Blood; Plead it with Agony;
Plead it with Dependence; Plead it with a most high Value for it, and a desire
to have it Operate unto all the Sacred Intentions of it. There will hereupon
come unto thee that Message from GOD; 2 Samuel XII. 13. The Lord has put away thy
sin. Thy Song may now be, Lord, I will praise thee; For though thou wast Angry
with me, thine Anger is turned away, and thou ^^st comfort me.

AND now, What is become of the Bitter Waters? They are strangely Sweetened.
The Sweet Hope and Joy of the Salvation of GOD; This gives to the Soul, the
Consolations that are not small. The Soul cannot but be of good Cheer, when
that Voice comes from GOD unto it, Child, Thy Sins are Forgiven thee! The
bitter Herbs of the Passover, did they not lose their bitterness by the Paschal
Lamb, which they were annexed unto! Repentance is a Diet of bitter Herbs; But
there is this to sweeten it; CHRIST our Passover has been Sacrificed for us.
Yea, more than This. A Soul thus Justified, will now be so Sanctified, that the
very Exercise of Repentance itself, shall be beyond all expression sweet unto
it. The Past of the Renewed Soul will be so altered, that it will find a
Thousand times more sweetness in the Repenting of Sin, than ever it found in
the Committing of Sin. Of Religion they that have tried it, bear this
Testimony, All the ways of Wisdom are pleasant ways. Repentance is the most
bitter Thing in Religion. But it is now found, that there is more Pleasure in
Mourning for Sin, than there is in Acting of it. It Is a sweeter Thing by far, to
Mortify a Lust, than it can be to Gratify it. Regeneration will bring such a
change upon the woeful Relish which we have had, when we have put sweet for
bitter, and bitter for sweet. The bitter Austerities of Repentance, will become
the sweetest Things in the World unto us.

Secondly. THE Bitter Waters of Affliction will be wonderfully Sweetened, when
a CHRIST is well-applied unto us. O Thou Afflicted and not Comforted, Converse
much with a CHRIST, under thy Affliction, and thou will soon be Comforted. Thy
Affliction comes to drive thee unto thy SAVIOR. The Storms that beat upon
thee, are to drive thee unto this Tree of GOD; The Tree whereof thou may sit
under the shadow with Delight, and the Fruit be sweet unto thy taste.
Especially, a CHRIST as Crucified, is now to be conversed withal. Thy
Affliction is the Cross which thy SAVIOR has assigned unto thee. Go with it
unto the Cross which thy SAVIOR has endured for thee. Throw as much as thou
can of this Tree into thy bitter Waters. 'Twill so sweeten them, that all the
bitterness thereof shall be to thee, but as Waters that pass away. One very
deeply concerned with bitter Waters, being able to say, I have poured out my
Soul unto the Lord; It is Reported, She was no more sad. Going to the Lord with
the Out-pourings of thy Soul, thou will put that into the bitter Waters, by the
means whereof, thou may be no more sad. Thou may now say, Call me not
Marah, but call me Naomi for I am very pleasantly accommodated. It was an
Uncomfortable Moan, Lam. I. 16. I weep, mine Eye, mine Eye runs down with
water. And whence these bitter Waters! Because the Comforter that should
relieve my Soul is far from me. But now, if in thy Adversity, thou do
Converse much with a CHRIST, the Comforter that will relieve thy Soul, is nigh
to thee. So there is no cause, no room for the bitter Waters.

WHAT we have now to do, is to show, How the Bitter Waters of Marah, will be
Sweetened, by a CHRIST Conversed withal? The followers of Gid^^n, that so those
might be discovered, whom GOD would Accept among them were to be brought unto
the Waters, that so a Trial might be made of them there. My Friends, You are to
be brought, even unto the bitter Waters, and it shall be tried, what Christians
you are, and whether GOD will Accept you, or no, by This.

HOW does a CHRIST Conversed withal sweeten the bitter Waters to you? I
remember what we read concerning the Afflicted People of GOD, [For so it should
be read,] Isa. ^XIII. 9. In all their Affliction, there was (...) Affliction. O
you that are of a sorrowful Spirit, Let a CHRIST be Conversed withal, and it
shall be said of all your Affliction, There are no bitter Waters in it.

First, IN Affliction a CHRIST Conversed withal, will take the Curse out of the
bitter Waters. They were bitter Waters indeed, which of old Conveyed a Curse
unto them, who had not been wronged in a Jealousy of their Adulteries. Truly,
when Affliction comes upon us, we have bitter Waters in it, if it brings a
Curse with it, and if it proceed from such a Wrath of GOD, as comes on the
Children of Disobedience, and if it comes merely to Execute a Vengeance of
Heaven upon us. Oh! most bitter Waters! But now, in a CHRIST Conversed withal,
we shall see, this Curse taken out of our Affliction, by our SAVIOR. He has
bore the Curse of it, when He was made a Curse for us. O Child of Affliction,
Embrace the SAVIOR who makes a Tender of Himself unto thee; put thy self under
His Conduct; entreat of the Glorious GOD, that for the sake of the Atonement
which He has made, Thy sins which are many may be forgiven to thee. Now GOD is
not in thy Affliction, only with a Punitive Justice Revenging Himself upon
thee. Now the Affliction comes from a GOD, who Propounds to Convey Blessings
unto thee with it. Now, in all thy Affliction, thy SAVIOR is fulfilling that
Word unto thee; Rev. III. 19. As many as I love I rebuke and (...). He is
Prosecuting Designs of Love, in what He does unto thee. The Cu^ of bitter
Waters, that is given to thee, thou have the Love of thy SAVIOR spicing of it.
Thou may make this Conclusion; A Gracious GOD who is at Peace with me, through
the CHRIST by the Faith of whom I am justified; HE it is that inflicts all my
Dark and Sad Things upon me. And is not the Harshness of the bitter Waters now
mightily taken off!

Secondly. IN Affliction a CHRIST Conversed withal, will show us how Kind an
Hand it is, which dispenses unto us all the bitter Waters. It Is very sure,
Affliction comes not forth of the Dust, nor does Trouble spring out of the
Ground. The bitter Waters have an higher Source than so. There is the
Providence of the Great GOD at Work, in all the Affliction that comes upon us:
Yea, in the least thing that befalls us. Not a Bird of the Air falls to the
Earth without the Will of GOD. There is His All Reaching Providence at Work in
all that befalls us. The very Hairs of our Heads as well as our Heads
themselves are under the Inspection of it. Now the Administration of this
Providence is committed into the Hands of our SAVIOR. The GOD-MAN, even our
Immanuel, or, the SON of GOD Incarnate in our JESUS, does administer the Divine
Providence. The Man upon the Throne Governs the motions of all the Wheels in
every Turn that happens in the World. He makes that claim; Mat. XXVIII. 18. All
Power is given unto me, in heaven and in Earth. Now O Son of sorrow, I^ thy
Affliction let there be a CHRIST Conversed withal. Then say, From what Hand are
the bitter Waters bro't unto thee?

IT may be, the Waters of a full Cup are poured out unto thee. But the Cup is
in the Hand of a SAVIOR who says unto thee, I will do thee no Hurt? Think, Who
is it that orders all my Affliction for me? It Is a SAVIOR, who has Loved me
with an everlasting Love. It Is a SAVIOR who has died for me, and ever Lives to
make Intercession for me, that I may be delivered from the Evil which my Sin
has made me worthy of. It Is a SAVIOR who has United me unto Himself, and will
permit nothing to be done unto me, but what a Member of His Body may have
befalling of it. Oh! Scarce to be called, bitter Waters, that are found in a
Cup, given by the Hand of such a SAVIOR!

Thirdly. IN Affliction a CHRIST Conversed withal, will Procure for us, Assure
us of, Illustrious Benefits by the bitter Waters O Mourner, who can say, I am
Afflicted very much: Get into a CHRIST, and keep nigh to a CHRIST; So thou
shall find, thy bitter Waters have no Poison in them. No; They will be Healing
Waters. In all thy Affliction, thy SAVIOR is but leading thee to Medicinal
Springs; Thou art carried unto the Waters; And the Effect shall be That; Isa.
XXVII. 9. Iniquity shall be purged, and all the Fruit is to take away sin.
Commit thyself unto the Care of a SAVIOR, who is, The Lord thy Healer. Follow
His Directions, for the use of the bitter Waters. Then be persuaded, the bitter
Waters, They are given thee to clear thine Ey^sight, and give thee a better
Knowledge of those Things which to know is Life Eternal: They are good for the
Eyes! They are given thee, to carry off thy Vicious Humors; to cleanse thee
from Impurities; to sweat out thy Corruptions. They are given thee, to sharpen
thy Appetite for the Best Enjoyments; to quicken thy spirits for the Work
before thee; to make thee Lively in the Things that are Holy and Ju^t and Good.
Think; All the Affliction, which for the present is not joyous but grievous;
What will it afterward yield unto us? My SAVIOR will hereby Teach me out of
His Law; will prevent my going astray; will make me a partaker of His Holiness.
And shall they be bitter Waters, that are so Sanative, so Balsamic, such Rich
and Potent Cordials?

Fourthly; IN Affliction a CHRIST Conversed withal, will show us a Conformity
to Him in taking the bitter Waters. The Affliction of our bitter Waters, is
that wherein we suffer with our SAVIOR, and like him: We are brought unto
That, Phil. III ^o. The Fellowship of His Sufferings, being made Conformable
unto His Death. O Disciple of the Cross, Here the Consideration of the Cr^ss
will come to be thrown into the bitter Waters of Marah, with a singular
^fficacy.

CERTAINLY our SAVIOR saw the bitter Waters, when He Cried out, Save me, O
GOD, For the Waters are come into my Soul. Will it not sweeten thy bitter
Waters, to see, These are but such Things as my SAVIOR, has before me tasted
of! Compare thy Affliction, with what befel^ thy SAVIOR, and see whether thine
have not some evident Signatures of His upon it. What befalls thee, which did
not after some sort, befall thy SAVIOR, when He was a Man of Sorrows and
acquainted with Grief^s? What Pains did He undergo in His Body? How meanly did
He fare, when He had not an House where to lay His Head! How basely was He
Despised and Rejected of Men, and made the Song of the Drunkard? How Maltreated
was He by the Rul^rs! How Reviled, Maligned, Murdered by the People! What
horrible Temptations was He assaulted withal! Surely, 'Twil do much toward the
sweetening of the bitter Waters, to consider, My Affliction makes my condition
more like that of my Humbled SAVIOR. Yea, The bitter Waters are to Kill thee,
that is to say, To Kill all thy Evil Inclinations in thee; and make thee Dead
indeed unto every Thing, but unto thy SAVIOR; and make thee so Dead with
CHRIST, that this World shall appear unto thee, as it does unto One a Dying
upon a Cross. In this Death lies the Life of thy Soul. And as thou find thy
Killing Things to carry on this Death, in thee, thou have more and more of an
Astonishing Token for Good upon thee: It Is a Token, which will enable thee to
say, Now I know that my SAVIOR has Died for me: Now I know, that I shall come
to all the Life which the Death of such a SAVIOR can purchase for me. Yea, Now
I know, there is a Life begun in me which no Death can ever give an Extinction
to. Yea, a strange Thing will now come to pass; This Killed Servant of GOD,
coming to^ly upon a Death Bed, when he goes to think, I have nothing to do but
to Die, he is presently and pleasantly surprised into that Thought, No, Nor have
I that neither, I am Dead already! So he falls Asleep in JESUS. Thus the bitter
Waters by their Killing of us, prove Waters of Life unto us. But Oh! how the
Waters are sweetened by such a Transmutation!

Fifthly. IN Affliction a CHRIST^ Conversed withal, will bring to us, That
which will so supply the Want of all Creatures, as to make us Insensible of the
bitter Waters. It Is an Essential stroke, in the Description of the Genuine
Christian; Phil. III. 3. To Rejoice in CHRIST JESUS. Christian, Make sure of
This; I have a CHRIST for mine. A Glorious CHRIST has taken me under the shadow
of His Wings. Now may it thou Rejoice, though every thing else be denied unto
thee; take Joyfully the Spoiling of thy Goods; and ^e not unease, though thy ^up
has none but Bitter Waters in it; Be Apprehensive of This; CHRIST is All; and
if I have CHRIST for mine, I ^a^e enough. In a CHRIST thou have enough to
supply all thy Need from Riches in Glory. In the withdraw of every thing that
thou could Ask or Wish for, see that thou have in a CHRIST f^r above all
that thou can Ask or Think. Thou art at the Bitter Waters, when Desirable
Relatives are gone from thee. But now say, My SAVIOR, He has said unto me, I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Thou a^^ at the Bitter Waters, when
thou art among the Poor of this World But now say, In my SAVIOR I have
Unsearchable Riches. Losses man bring thee to the Bitter Waters, But now say,
while I have such a SAVIOR, I have One who is Able to Give me much more than
is Taken from me. Bodily Languishments, may place thee by the Bitter Waters.
But now say, My SAVIOR is bestowing the Blessings of an Healed Soul upon me.
Thy Name vilified by the Floods of the Ungodly, may be aspersed with the Bitter
Waters: But now say, My SAVIOR makes a kind Mention of my Name unto His
Father. Yea, When thou feel thyself Approaching to the Dead Sea; Cheerfully
step into the Bitter Waters; and say It Is no matter, what I am going from, while
I am going to my SAVIOR.

WHAT Admirable Spectacles, has the Army of Martyrs afforded unto us! Ill call
forth Two or Three of them, and show them to you, with Branches gathered from
the Tree that Sweetens our Bitter Waters in their Hands. The Martyr Kirby, says
to his Friends, Be at my Burning, and you shall see a Soldier of CHRIST in the
Flames. They saw the Wonderful thing! How nobly did our Martyr Bradford enter
the Flames, with such Words, Behold, The way to Heaven in a fiery Chariot! How
nobly did our Martyr Noyes in the Flames Cry out, Blessed be GOD, that ever I
was born for this Day; My Coals will be turned into Pearls immediately! How
nobly do^s the Martyr Pas^^al^^ Complain; O^! It Is a small Thing to ^y bu^ once
^or CHRIST; if it might be, I would fain Die a Thousand times for Him.

THE Tree that Sweetens the Bitter Waters is what Sweetened the Fires also to
the Champions of GOD.

In Fine; MAKE the Experiment, and you will certainly find; That the Skill and
Will, to make a Glorious CHRIST the continual Resort of your Minds, by forming
some Suitable, Savoury, Precious Thoughts of Him, will Marvellously sweeten the
most Bitter Waters that ever can be met withal. A Servant of GOD may sweetly
say, O my GOD, I have parted with all the Things in this World; and I have but
one Thing left unto me. This one Thing have I desired, and This will I seek
after; That I may have a Glorious CHRIST, not only concerned for me, but also
possessing of me; and that I may have Him continually dwelling in my Thoughts,
and furnishing me with the Precious Thoughts, wherein I may perpetually Feed
and Live upon Him. I care not though I am dript of every thing else, if I may
but enjoy (...) F^licity. The Name of thy SAVIOR is, I AM. Think on all the
Good thou have Occasion for, and Hear Him, Yea, Feel Him saying, I AM all that
that thou have Occasion for.

CHRISTIAN, While thou have this Felicity, no Bitter Waters can do any Damage
to thee. GOD gives thee to Drink at the River of His Delights; The Lamb of GOD
leads thee to Fountains of Living Waters.

AND now, Returning back to an Evil World, whereof any one that has a Good Hope
through Grace of a Better, must say, Woe is me that I S^journ in it! -- I know
not what better Testimony to bring unto my Fellow-Travellers than This, Get as
Near to a Glorious CHRIST, and as Full of Him, as ever you can; Oh! the Peace,
Oh! the Joy, which you will find This to be the way of having your Souls
Replenished withal^ Oh! The Abundance of Consolations, with which it may be
hoped, a Gracious CHRIST will irradiate your Minds! The Bitter Waters of
Sickness, you will hardly Taste them! The Unkind Aspect of Neighbors, will not
be uneasy to you. The Hissing of Serpents Crawling in the Dark about the
Streets, will give you no Disturbance. Death itself will no longer be the King
of Terrors; but be Smiled on, be Closed with, be Longed for You will keep
Singing the Songs of the Lord in a strange Land, And long to be got further up
into the Tree, that so Sweetens all your Circumstances.

BUT I must have done.

IT IS to be now Hoped, That all who are Sitting by any bitter Waters, and as it
were hanging their Harps on the Willows there, will now consider every
Bitterness as having in it, a Call unto them to come unto thy SAVIOR.

O Heart knowing thy own Bitterness; There is that Call in it, Come to thy
SAVIOR, and Acquaint thyself more with Him, that Good may come unto thee. The
Bitter Waters make the loud Call of David's Water-Spouts. Oh! Do like the
Gracious Woman, when she Heard it said, The Master Calls thee.

THESE Admonitions and Consolations, are in a very Particular manner to be
Addressed unto the Sorrowful Parents of Captain JOSIAH WINSLOW: With whom a
Voice is Heard in Marshfield; A Lamentation, and Bitter Weeping, I hope, not a
Refusal to be Comforted.

IT must be Confessed, That in the Loss of such a Dear Son, and such a Pleasant
Child, They have Lost what nothing but a Glorious CHRIST can be a Compensation
for. And in the Grief which the Death of such a Promising Youth must give unto
them, there is what nothing but a Glorious CHRIST can Extinguish o^ Alleviate.

BUT, My Honorable Friends, Having a Glorious CHRIST now s^t before you, there
is Enough and Enough, to yield you an Immortal Satisfaction. I have said
ENOUGH, You must ask me to say, No more!

WE will now Proceed unto what has been the more Special Occasion, for the
Offer of these Meditations. --

THE Tragedy of Green-Island, And the Memorable End of Captain JOSIAH WINSLOW.
Non quicquam Sanctius habet Reve^entia Supersti^um, quam ut a^^ssos
ve^e^abiliter recordetur.
THE Barbarous and Perfidious Indians in our Eastern Country, being Moved by
the Instigation of the Devil and Father Rallee, have begun Hostilities upon us.
They did it, when the French Hopes of a fatal Revolution on the British Empire,
deceived them. And it was not long before the Hairy Scalp of that Head in the
House of the Wi^k^d, paid for what Hand he had in the Rebellion, into which he
Infuriated his Proselytes.

IN the War, there have been several Actions done full of Courage; and several
Disasters felt, full of Sorrow; and several Successes gained, full of Wonder;
by our Various Parties going out against the Rebels.

AMONG those who Generously exposed their Lives on the high Places of the
(...), in this War, a very Particular Commemoration is due, to Captain JOSIAH
WINSLOW; a Young Gentleman, who was the Flower and Hope of an Honorable
Family; and has fallen Universally Lamented.

CONCERNING this Young Gentleman, I have seen this Account given by a Credible
Person, that was Intimately Acquainted with him.

AS he was a Young Man of a Beautiful Countenance; of an Hail and Firm
Constitution of Body, which enabled him to act with much Vigor, and undergo
the Hardships of the War; So he was of a Pleasant and Spritely Wit; of a Sweet
Disposition; Of a Free and Generous Temper; Modest and Bashful in his
Behavior, Full of Life; and full of Love to every One: Of so Condescending a
Spirit, that it sometimes drew him into Inconveniences: Obedient and Respectful
to his Superiors; Kind to all; Far from Insulting over his Inferiors; which
gained him great Respect from those that were Acquainted with him; and
especially of the Soldiers that were under him; He was so far from taking any
Advantage, that in their Streights and Difficulties, he has given sometimes to
Poor Fellows that were in Necessity the Clothes off his Back, to supply them:
Which, together with his Forwardness on all Actions greatly endeared him to
them, and caused him to be much Lamented by them.

THE reach of the Mortal Si^^e at this Young Gentleman, is now to be Related:
But one must feel (...) as was of old said, Not one single, Commotion of Soul,
but a whole Assembly of Passi^ns, moved at such a Relation. The Account being
Obtained, partly, from a Christian Indian, that escaping out of the Slaughter,
and while he lay hid, saw some of the Transactions; and partly from a Captive
afterward Redeemed from the Indians that made the Slaughter; It Is an Account
that may be Depended on.

BEING left at Georges Fort, in command of the Garrison there, on the Thirtieth
of April, 1724. He went from thence, with Seventeen Men in Two Whale-boats,
down to an Island, called, The Green-Island, some Miles below the Fort; hoping
to come at some Indians there, inasmuch as there had several times been seen
In^^^ns pa^sing thither in a Canoe, it being a notable fowling-place. He was
observed for diverse Hours before he went upon this Action, to retire, very
Serious and Pensive; and no doubt, full of such Thoughts as might have a
Tendency to Prepare his Young Soul, for that F^licity, which would accomplish
the Particular Faith which the Travailing Soul of his Gracious Mother [a Sarah
now become a Marah!] had received and expressed for him* And he let fall Words
to the Company which he left behind him, that seemed somewhat Presagious of
what he was going to. When they came to the Island, they haled up their Boats
among the Bushes; and lay close all the Night, and the next Day until almost
Night. Not seeing any Indians, they then went off the Island in their Boats,
when the Sun was about Two Hours High (Friday) in the Afternoon. The Divine
Providence Ordered it* that this was what might be called, a Launching into the
Mare^mortuum. After their going down to this Island, a great Body of Indians,
of the Penobscot-Tribe, (with some others,) the party that afterward took the
Vessels at Cap-Sables, to the Number as was Judged, of Two or Three Hundred
Men, came down the River in their Canoes, and lodged themselves with their
Canoes, on both sides of the River betwixt the Island and the Fort. Here they
lay undiscovered by ours, as ours were by them, until they put off in their
Boats from the Island. After they had come some Distance from the Island, Capt.
Winslow being in the foremost Boat, and Sergeant Harvy in the other, there came
a Flock of Fowl within Shot of Harvy's, at which one of the Men Imprudently
made a Shot, and knocked down a Fowl in the Water. Harvy turning to take up the
Fowl, Capt. Winslow advised him, that it was best he should not follow the
Fowl, but that they should keep together; for, said he, We know not what we may
meet with, before we reach the Fort. Harvy replied, Sir, If you will go easy
upon your Oars, I will be presently up with you: But following the Fowl too
long, and going too near one side of the River, the Indians let fly from the
shore upon Harvy and killed Three of his Men. Sergeant Harvy found himself
obliged immediately to land; where he was quickly killed, and all the Men with
him, except Three of our Christian Indians that were with him in this
Expedition, who found their way to escape, and got safe unto the Fort. Harvy
fought with abundance of Courage; and so did the Men that were with him; The
Wolves found that they had Lions to engage withal. When the Indians Fired upon
Harvy, Capt. Winslow, though he had gone slowly on his Oars, was got near half
a Mile a head. But seeing the Indians Fire upon Harvy, his Manly, Friendly,
Ingenuous and Courageous Heart could not bear to leave them in their Distress;
but immediately put about his Boat, that he might hasten to their Succor.
Before he could get near them, he found himself Surrounded with between Thirty
and Forty Canoes; whereof several had four or six Men a piece aboard; which
came off from both sides of the River, and attacked him with great Fury. They
set up an hideous Yelling and Howling, expecting thereby so to have daunted
them, as to have taken our small Handful without much Resistance: But in this
their expectation failed them; for Capt. Winslow and his Brave Handful,
notwithstanding the Horror of their Approach, and though so out-numbered, and
like to be Overpowered, by such a Multitude of the Dragons of the Wilderness,
made ready to give them a warm Reception. The Indians enclosing of him with
their Canoes, intended at once to have him aboard: But when they were almost
come aboard him, he Fired upon them; Notwithstanding which, they came up to the
sides of his Boat where he and his few men defended themselves, and beat off
the Indians with the Butt-ends of their Muskets* This they did with such
Magnanimity and Resolution, that the Indians recoiled, retired, and fell off,
and fought at a distance. They were so struck with Admiration at Young
WINSLOW'S Courage, that they offered him Quarter, if he would Surrender himself
and Company; But he refused it: Knowing their Tender Mercies to be Cruelties,
and choosing rather to lay down his Life in the Service of his Country, than
fall into the Hands of such Faithless and Cruel and Bloody Salvages. Thus he
kept Fighting in his Boat, until the Dusk of Evening; when, the most of his Men
being Slain, he put ashore with Two or Three that were left; where being
waylaid by the Indians, they were all cut off.

WE are told, that he being shot down, and having his Thigh broken, the
Indians, when they saw him fall, ran toward him: And yet then he recovered on
his other knee, and shot down another Indian.

HOW many of the Enemy fell in this Encounter, we can have yet no certain
Account, But certainly, they had little to Boast off^^* except their having
bereaved us, of a Desirable Young Man, Of whom there were many, besides his
Honorable and Religious Parents, who said, This same shall Comfort us. Thus
Died a Valiant an Accomplished, a Good-natured, Young Gentleman, in the Twenty
Third year of his Age; in the Defense of a Country* and a People, for which how
many Brave Lives have been Sacrificed! At the same time, with him, there fell,

Nathanael Harvy; Ezra Briggs; John Dennis; John Lee. Joshua Ransom; John
Walker; John Allen; AND Six of our Christian Indians.
AN Occurrence, upon which, A Lacrymis nemo tam ferreus ut ten^at s^.

THE Survivors must not forget the MEN who have Deserved so well, and so Played
the Men for their People, and for the Cities of our GOD.

YEA, One can scarce forbear saying, If these should hold their Peace, the
Stones would immediately Cry out.

Epitaph. JOSIAH WINSLOW.
Dulce, pro Patria Mori.
His Ancestors did for their Country Live:
He'el of his Love a further Token give.
Hopeless beyond Them in a Life to fly,
He for his Country takes the way to Die.
Ti^^^o res digna Sepul^hri.
MANTISSA. A Copy of a LETTER Sent unto Colonel WINSLOW, and his Consort, from
a Minister at some Distance from them, on the first Advice of the Green-Island
Tragedy. Here Published for the Benefit of some others in the like
Circumstances.
My Friends,
IN the general Condolence with You, upon the Sorrow, which You have lately met
withal, I take a very Particular Share, and think it my* Duty to give you some
Expressions of it.

BUT how can I better express it, than in my earnest Supplications, which I
therefore make to the Glorious Lord, that he would enable You to Glorify him in
the Sacrifice, which he now calls You to?

IF not a Bird of the Air falls to the Earth without the Will of our Heavenly
Father; You may be sure that the Child Hatched under your tender Wing, is not
fallen without the Will of Heaven Ordering of it. And You cannot have a better
Proof that you are the Children of GOD, than by Your Patient Submission to his
Will on such an Occasion; and your Submissive saying, The Cup which my Father
has given me, shall not I Drink it? The Cup which is now given You indeed is
Bitter enough; But if the sense of the Hand which it comes from, and of the End
which his Wisdom and Goodness has in giving it, quiets You, His Comfortable
Voice unto You is, I will be a Father to You. And being thus His Children, You
have a Better Name, than what the Son and Daughter he has Obliged You to part
withal, could have helped You to.

IT is a great Sacrifice, that you are now put upon. But You will approve
yourselves the Genuine Children of Abraham: And so prove Your Claim to the
Blessings of His Covenant, if you overcome the Reluctancles of Nature to it. --
Withhold not the Child whom Thou have Loved, When GOD calls you to offer it up.
So it shall be said, Now I know, that thou Fear GOD. And verily, there is
more Solid Comfort in this Assurance, than there can be in the Enjoyment of any
Child, whereof You might say, This same shall Comfort us. Your Blessedness in
the World to come, will be in an Holy Priesthood. And that You may be in this
World, Initiated for it, Your SAVIOR, will now have You to be Holy
Sacrificers. You will be notably such, when upon the Death of Lovely and
Hopeful Children, You hold your Peace, and only say, The will of the Lord be
Done, and beg of Him, that the Influences of his Grace may effectually Subdue
all the Rebellion of yours against it.

A Trial, yea, an exquisite one, is now made, whether there be any thing, which
at the plain Call of GOD you cannot resign unto Him? or, whether you will not
now Seek and Hope to find that Satisfaction in having a Glorious CHRIST
Concerned for You, and Conversing with You, which we expect in ^ain from the
Creatures, that forever are found to be no better than Lying, Vanities. If
being thus Tried, you come forth as Gold, and approve yourselves Noble
Sacrificers, it will be an infallible Token for Good, that you have a part in
the Grand Sacrifice, which Your SAVIOR has offered for His People, and shall
have a Part among those, whom the Blood of the Lam^ will bring to walk in White
Robes and Serve Him in His Temple.

MOST certainly, if the repeated Strokes of Mortality on Your Family, be of Use
unto You* to bring Sin unto Remembrance, and carry on Repentance to its Perfect
Work; to animate Your Prayers and Cares that You may be Entire and Perfect in
Your Essays to Conform unto the whole Will of GOD; to Wean You from a World
wherein You see an End of all Perfection; and make You Seek the Things, that
are Above, and quicken Your Thorough Preparation for Your own Death, which the
Death of such Relatives does loudly Admonish You to be daily looking for (...)

THESE Blessings will be a Rich and Full Compensation for the Loss of what has
been taken from You. True PIETY will dispose You to count them so. Death in
such a way brings the Truest Life with it; yea, What is Better than Life. And
Light will arise unto You in the Darkness, which Death has brought upon Your
Tabernacle.

BUT, there is the less need of my expatiating unto You upon these Consolations
of GOD, since You have an excellent Pastor, who has You under his continual
Cultivations, and Loves Y^u exceedingly, and has the Tongue of the Learned,
able to Speak a Word in Season unto You; and from him You will continually hear
those good Words, which, I hope, will make Your Hearts Glad, when they are
Stooping with Heaviness.

I am, Your Sympathizing Friend.
Boston, July. 1. 1724.

THE Publication of this Letter is made, with a more particular View and Hope,
that it may in this way be also Addressed unto my Worthy Friends, the Parents
of Mr. Jonathan Fry; an Only Son, who after a Liberal Education, and a Temper
and Conduct, which made him universally Beloved, and raised considerable
Expectation of him, went out Chaplain to that Brave Company, under Captain
Lovewell, and with Admirable Expressions of Piety, and Magnanimity and
Resignation, Sacrificed his Life, in the Memorable Action at Piggwacket, May 8.
1725.

AS also unto the Parents of Mr. Jacob Full^m; an Only Son, and an Officer in
the same Company; who likewise Bravely made a Sacrifice of his Life to the
Service of CHRIST and his People, in that Meritorious Action.

Jer. XXXI. 16. WHAT now remains, is, Quod Voce d^^rat Plangore replere. TO
which, there will no where but in Heaven, be found a,

FINIS.

