THE Explanatory CHARTER Granted by His Majesty King GEORGE To the Province of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England.

Accepted by the General Court, Jan. 15th Anno 1725.

GEORGE by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain, France and Ireland KING,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
TO All to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas our late Royal Predecessors WILLIAM and MARY, King and Queen of
England, etc. Did by their Letters Patents under their Great Seal of England,
bearing Date at Westminster, the Seventh of October in the Third Year of their
Reign, for Themselves, Their Heirs and Successors, Unite, Erect and
Incorpoparate, the Territories and Colonies, commonly called and known by the
Names of the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay and Colony of New Plymouth, the
Province of Main, the Territory called Acadie or Nova Scotia, and all that
Tract of Land lying between the said Territories of Nova Scotia and the said
Province of Main into one Real Province by the Name of our Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England. And Whereas Their said late Majesty's King
WILLIAM and Queen MARY, Did by the said recited Letters Patents (amongst other
things therein contained) for themselves, their Heirs and Successors, Ordain
and Grant, that there should and might be Convened, Held and Kept by the
Governor for the time being, upon every last Wednesday in the Month of May
every Year for ever, and at all such other times as the Governor of their said
Province should think fit, and appoint a Great and General Court or Assembly,
Which said Great and General Court or Assembly should Consist of the Governor
and Council, or Assistants for the time being, and of such Freeholders of their
said Province or Territories as should be from time to time Elected or Deputed
by the Major part of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Respective
Towns or Places, who should be present at such Elections: Each of the said
Towns and Places being thereby empowered to Elect or Depute Two Persons, and no
more, to Serve for and Represent them respectively in the said Great and
General Court or Assembly, and that the Governor for the time being should
have full Power and Authority from time to time as he should judge necessary*
to Adjourn, Prorogue, and Dissolve all Great and General Courts or Assembly's
Met and Convened as aforesaid. And did thereby also for themselves, their Heirs
and Successors, Provide, Establish and Ordain, that in the Framing and Passing
of all Orders, Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, and in all Elections, and Acts
of Government whatsoever, to be made, passed or done by the said General Court
or Assembly or in Council, The Governor of the said Province or Territory of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England for the time being should have the
Negative Voice, And that without His Consent or Approbation, signified and
declared in Writing, no such Orders, Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, Elections, or
other Acts of Government whatsoever, so to be made, passed or done by the said
General Assembly, or in Council, should be of any Force, Effect, or Validity,
Any thing therein contained to the contrary in any wise Notwithstanding, As in
and by the said Letter Patents (Relation being thereunto had) may more fully
and at Large appear

AND whereas no Provision is made by the said recited Letters, Patents,
touching the Nomination and Election of a Speaker of the Representatives
Assembled in any Great and General Court of our said Province, nor any
particular reservation made of the Right of Us, our Heirs and Successors to
Approve or Disapprove of such Speaker by the Governor of the said Province
Appointed, or to be appointed by us or them for the time being: And no Power is
Granted by the said Recited Letters Patents to the said House of
Representatives to Adjourn themselves for any time whatsoever, By means whereof
diverse Doubts and Controversies have arisen within Our said Province, to the
Interruption of the Public Business thereof, and the Obstruction of Our
Service, Know ye therefore, that for the Removing the said Doubts and
Controversies and the preventing the like Mischief for the future, And also for
the further Explication of the said Recited Letters Patents, We of Our Especial
Grace, Certain Knowledge, and Meet Motion, Have Granted, Ordained and
Appointed, and by these Presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do Will,
Grant, Ordain, and Appoint, that for ever hereafter, the Representatives
Assembled in any Great or General Court of Our said Province to be hereafter
Summoned, shall upon the First Day of their Assembling, Elect a fit Person out
of the said Representatives to be Speaker of the House of Representatives, in
such General Court, And that the Person so Elected shall from time to time be
presented to the Governor of our said Province for the time being, or in his
Absence to the Lieut. Governor or Commander in Chief of our said Province for
the time being, for his Approbation: To which Governor, Lieut Governor and
Commander in Chief respectively, We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
give full Power and Authority to Approve or Disapprove of the Person so Elected
and Presented, which Approbation or Disapprobation shall be signified by him by
Message in Writing under his Hand to the said House of Representatives, and in
Case such Governor, Lieut. Governor or Commander in Chief, shall Disapprove
of the Person so Elected and presented, or the Person so Elected and Presented
being Approved as aforesaid shall happen to dye* or by Sickness or otherwise be
disabled from Officiating as Speaker, in every such Case, The said
Representatives so Assembled, shall forthwith Elect an other Person to be
Speaker of the House of Representatives to be Presented and Approved, or
Disapproved, in manner as aforesaid, and so from time to time as often as the
Person so Elected and Presented shall be disapproved of, or happen to Dye, or
become Disabled as aforesaid.

AND Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do by these Presents of our more
Abundant Grace for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Grant, Ordain, and Appoint,
that it shall and may be Lawful to and for the Representatives Assembled in any
Great or General Court of Our said Province for the time being, for ever
hereafter, to Adjourn themselves from Day to Day, (and if occasion shall
require) for the space of two Days; but not for any longer time, than for the
space of two Days without leave from the Governor, or in his Absence from the
Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in Chief of Our said Province for the time
being, first Had and Obtained in that behalf, any thing in the said Recited
Letters, Patents contained to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding

Provided always, THAT nothing in these Presents Contained shall Extend, or be
Construed to Extend, to Revoke, Alter, or Prejudice the Power and Authority by
the said Recited Letters, Presents, Granted to the Governor of the said
Province for the time being* to Adjourn, Prorogue and Dissolve all Great and
General Courts or Assembly's of our said Province.

And Lastly, WE do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Grant,
that these Our Letters, Patents, or the Enrolment, or Exemplification thereof,
shall be in and by all things Good, Firm, Valid and Effectual in the Law
according to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, Notwithstanding the not
Rightly, or Fully Reciting, Mentioning, or Describing, the said Recited Letters
Patents, or the Date thereof, or any other Omission, Imperfection, Defect,
Matter, Cause or thing whatsoever to the Contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

IN Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents,
Witness, WILLIAM Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and the Rest of the Guardians and
Justices of the Kingdom at Westminster, the Six and Twentieth Day of August in
the Twelfth Year of Our Reign. By Writ of Privy Seal, Cocks.
The Great Seal of Great Britain in Green Wax Appending.
In the House of Representatives, January 15th. 1725.
Whereas His Honor the Lieut. Governor has laid before this Court in their
present Session for their Acceptance, an Explanatory CHARTER, received from his
Grace the Duke of New Castle, with a Copy of His Majesty's Order in Council
concerning the same, wherein His Majesty has been pleased to confirm the
CHARTER Granted by their late Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, in which
former CHARTER there being no express mention made relating to the Choice of a
Speaker, and the House's Power of Adjourning, as to both which Points in the
said Explanatory CHARTER His Majesty has been pleased to give particular
Direction:

We His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects being very desirous to Signalize
our Duty and Obedience, which we at all times Owe to His Most Excellent
Majesty, have and do hereby Accept of the said Explanatory CHARTER, and shall
Act in Conformity thereto for the future, not doubting but that thereby we
shall recommend His Majesty's Loyal and Faithful Subjects the Inhabitants of
this Province to His further most Gracious Favor and Protection.

Sent up for Concurrence.

