Mr. Colman's SERMONS ON THE Holy Sabbath.

The Doctrine and Law OF THE Holy Sabbath: In the Order wherein it lies through
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. IN TWO SERMONS, Preached at the
Lecture in Boston, October 15. and December 10. 1724.

By Benjamin Colman.

Sint oculi, manusque vestrae toto illo die ad Deum expansae. BOSTON: Printed
by T. Fleet, for Thomas Hancock, and Sold at his Shop in Ann-Street, near the
Drawbridge. 1725.

TO THE READER
IT is only the Scriptural way of treating this Noble Subject, that has
inclined me to make public the following Discourses. It seems to me the Method
most easy and perspicuous, most natural and just, most profitable and
acceptable to them that value the Subject; which all serious Christians will
do. You have here almost the whole voice of Scripture concerning the Holy
Sabbath of the Lord in a very small compass, and the several Texts almost in
the same Order wherein they lie in the Holy Bible. I would hope by this means,
as through a Burning glass (under the Blessing of the sanctifying Spirit) to
collect the rays of the Divine light, and bear them down with heavenly heat
upon the Reader's mind and heart. -- Not that by any Art of mine the Glass of
the Word can be thus formed and fashioned; but I have found it thus formed and
fashioned to my hand by the Blessed Inspirer of it, and bring it a sacred Mite
to the Treasury of the Sanctuary from whence I received it. May the Lord of
the Sabbath please to accept the Offering, and effectually own it by blessing
it to its desired End; which is to enlighten us more in, and animate us more
unto, this great and singular Duty of Man through out all Generations, the
keeping holy the Sabbath Day. -- I have not gone formally into Directions and
Motives on this Head, which are abundant in many Treatises already in your
hands; but I hope the Reader will find these every where suggested to him through
the Discourses before him; and in a particular manner be led and excited to
consider and improve his Sabbaths as a Sign and Memorial of the Covenant of
Grace, and the blessed Seasons and Means of Sanctification. -- So our Fathers,
like wise and good Men, began with God in the planting of these Churches: They
covenanted with God to be his People and to keep his Sabbaths, and they found
Him to be the Lord their Sanctifier. The reverend Observation of the Lord's Day
was their distinguishing honor and glory, and the fruits of holiness to the
praise and glory of God abounded among them. -- As the World grows upon us in
its numbers and trade, we are growing out of this our primitive purity and
beauty; but it is visible that the decay of Sanctity bears proportion to our
declension in Sabbath Sanctification. We had need therefore to remember how we
have received and heard, and hold fast and repent; let no man take our Crown. I
know no one Rule more compendious, comprehensive and effectual for the revival
and perpetuity of Religion among us than this, that we keep the LORD's
Sabbaths, as a Sign between Him and us through out our Generations, that HE is
the Lord that does sanctify us.

Exodus 31.12, 13. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak thou also unto
the Children of Israel, saying,

Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep; for it is a sign between me and you through
out your Generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord that does sanctify
you.


IN these words the great Law of the Sabbath is repeated to Moses, and by him
unto the Children of Israel, with an awful preface and a most powerful reason
annexed. The preface is much the same with that from Heaven, and Sinai, before
the ten Commandments; And God spoke all these Words saying, I am the Lord thy
God. Let us reverently attend and answer, I will hear what God the Lord will
speak.

THE Commandment is here given in the most august, authoritative and peremptory
manner: Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep. More Authority and Commandment cannot
well be put into fewer words.

Lastly, HERE is a special and most weighty reason annexed, to enforce the
precept: for it is a sign, etc. It is great condescension and grace in God to
us, to annex a reason to any of his Commands. His sovereign Will is the highest
reason. But there is much of Majesty and much Grace in this reason: It is a
sign between me and you: And will God in very deed give us such a sign and
token between Himself and us? will he in very deed deal so with man upon earth?
And give a standing sign too through out all the Generations of man on earth? O
the favor and grace to dust, while he humbles himself to behold the things
that are above!

BUT what is the Lord's Sabbath a sign of through all our Generations? Why it
signifies and lets us know 1. that he is the Lord: Lord of the world, Lord of
our time, Lord of our lives; the great Proprietor and absolute Disposer of
them. And 2. that he is the Lord our Sanctifier: that I am the Lord that does
sanctify you.

BUT how the Sabbath is a sign of this, and why this is a reason for our
keeping and sanctifying the Sabbath, is to be said under the Doctrines, which
are these two: 1. That the Great GOD vehemently requires of us the
Sanctification of his Sabbath. 2. That it is a sign between Him and us that He
is the Lord our Sanctifier.


1. D. THE Lord our God has most strictly and vehemently required the
Observation and keeping Sabbath. Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep. Words cannot
be stricter than these are. And in this manner the precept is always given: Ye
shall keep my Sabbaths, I am the Lord. Lev. 19.30 -- I shall only observe to
you how strictly and vehemently this law of the Sabbath is insisted on through
the whole Bible.

I. IT was a Law to man from the beginning of the world, and the first Law (and
second Blessing) that was given to man, even in Paradise, in his state of
innocence. For if man had never sinned, yet there would for ever have remained
to him the keeping of a Sabbath, every seventh day: As you read, Genesis 2.1, 2,
3. Thus the heavens and the earth were finished and all the host of them, and
on the seventh day God ended his Work which he had made, and he rested on the
seventh day from all his work which he had made; and God blessed the seventh
day and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all his work which
he had created and made. So from the Creation of the world God instituted a
weekly Sabbath, for the perpetual solemn praises of the Creator from the Sons
of men. He sanctified the Day, to be the special Time of their blessing Him and
his blessing them. Bp. Patrick.
The seventh day was ordained a Universal and Everlasting holy Festival from
the Day wherein Man was created. This magnifies the Sabbath and makes it
honorable, and sacred for ever to us, that it was the first of God's Laws to
man. Thus we keep the Earths birthday Dr. Edwards.
: It is a sacred Festival in memory of the Worlds nativity. And it leaves us no
room to question Adam's keeping the Sabbath day.

THIS solemn and early Injunction of a Sabbath to man is a Circumstance that
puts great honor and dignity upon the Sabbath Day. It was ordained for the
special honor and perpetual worship of the Lord our Maker, immediately upon the
Creation of our first Parents, and in their paradisaic state.

WE read of Noah, Genesis 8.10, 12. that he staid yet other seven days, and again
he sent forth the Dove out of the Ark. It appears by this, says Bp. Patrick,
that on the seventh day Noah expected a Blessing rather than on another day; it
being the day devoted from the Beginning to religious services.

II. THE sanctification of the Sabbath was one of the first things given in
Commandment to Israel upon their leaving Egypt. God was now gathering and
forming to himself a Church in the earth, and it was fitting and necessary to
remember them of his Sabbath upon their setting out toward Canaan, the Type of
the everlasting Sabbatism. They had it may be almost lost the Remembrance of
his Sabbaths in Egypt, at least many of them; but Moses is directed by God to
mind them of it, and that not as a novel but an ancient thing. See Exodus 16. It
was upon the first provision of Manna for the Camp of Israel: In the 4 and 5
verses of that Chapter, the Lord said to Moses, Behold I will rain bread from
heaven for you, and the people shall gather a certain rate every day; but on
the sixth day they shall prepare twice as much as on the other days:
Accordingly, as we read on from the 22 verse of that Chapter, on the sixth day
the people gathered twice as much bread, two Omers for one man; and the Rulers
came and told Moses: Then he said unto them, This is that which the Lord has
said, To morrow is the Rest of the Holy Sabbath to the Lord; then ye shall not
find it in the field; six days ye shall gather it, but on the seventh day
(which is the Sabbath) in it there shall be none: See, for the Lord has given
you the Sabbath; therefore he gives you on the sixth day the bread of two
days: Abide every man in his place, let no man go out on the Sabbath day. So
the people rested on the seventh day.

YOU will easily observe from the whole of this passage, that it supposes the
people of Israel acquainted with the Law of the Sabbath. It was not now
Instituted, but the Institution was improved and acted on; first by God in his
Providence for the magnifying the Day to Israel, a double portion of Manna
falling (it is likely) on the sixth day; and then by the People, they gathering
thereon the portion of two days.

THIS was before the peoples arrival at Sinai, even upon their entering into the
Wilderness; and it remained to them through it a lasting Sign and Miracle from
heaven in honor of the Sabbath day. For if on any other day of the week they
left of their manna till the morning it bred worms and stank, but it kept good
and sweet when they laid it up for the Sabbath day.

"THUS the Law of the Sabbath was given to Israel before the delivery of the
Law from Sinai, and the Day was kept before the Decalogue was given: the
Institution was before the Law of Moses. Dr. Edwards.


III. THE Law of the Sabbath was one of the ten Words, the ten Commandments,
given from Sinai, in that august and fearful manner as you all know. On Sinai
God repeated this his Law out of the midst of the fire. God himself came down
that day from Heaven with his mighty Angels; he came down in thick darkness and
flames of devouring fire: Sinai was altogether in a smoke and the mountain
quaked greatly; the Congregation below were ready to die with fear lest the
lightnings should consume them. Who of all flesh, but they in that singular
day, ever heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the
fire and lived? In this manner did the great God give the fourth Commandment
unto his Church, that they should remember it and keep it for ever, and not
dare to forget it. Deu. 4.9, 10. Only take heed to thy self and keep thy soul
diligently, lest thou forget the things which thy eyes have seen, and lest they
depart from thy heart all the days of thy life; especially the day that thou
stoodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Gather
the people together, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to
fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and that they may
teach their Children. -- O that we and our Children may ever remember how, in
what majesty and terror, God has commanded us to keep holy the Sabbath day.

I need not add, how that after the great God had spoken this Law from heaven,
he also wrote it on a Table of stone, with his own finger, to perpetuate the
Remembrance and observation of it; and to imprint it upon the harder hearts and
consciences of men: And he only who wrote in the Table of stone, can write it
on the fleshly tables of our hearts. And that the whole might be yet more
reverend and sanctifying to us, he laid it up within the Holy of Holies, under
the Mercy-seat.

Moreover, It pleased the Holy God to enlarge, in many weighty words, on this
Law of the Sabbath, when he came down on Sinai. He charged them to remember
this Law: he called it the Sabbath of the Lord their God: he told them when,
and how, and why he sanctified it. There is something very awful in God's using
all these obliging and constraining words. 'Twas a Law worthy to be thus
solemnly revived and long insisted on: a very important point for the honor of
God and our Salvation. -- Wherefore let the Majesty of that Day be evermore in
the eyes and ears and hearts of the people of God. -- To go on,

IV. THE Law of the Sabbath was repeated and inculcated upon the delivery of
the Ceremonial and Judicial Law; yea it was inserted into the latter, as being
indeed a line and hedge about all the Statutes and Judgments of God given by
the hand of Moses; to keep them all from being broken. For indeed piety and
religion, and also justice and righteousness, flourish or decline among the
Covenant people of God, as the Sabbath is sanctified or profaned among them. A
special honor is put upon the fourth Commandment, and a special reverence to
it is required from us, by God's repeating it to his Church on these great
Occasions. I will name them distinctly.

1. WE have in my Text and Context the Law of the Sabbath repeated upon the
delivery of the Ceremonial Law. God having finished here his Orders and
directions to Moses concerning the Tabernacle of the Congregation, the Ark, the
Mercy-seat, and all the furniture of the Tabernacle; the Table, the Candlestic,
and the Altar of Incense, the Altar of burnt-offering, the Laver and his foot;
the Holy Garments, the anointing Oil and the sweet Incense; Then the Lord
added, -- Speak thou unto the Children of Israel, Verily my Sabbaths you shall
keep; it is a sign between me and you through out your Generations, etc.

NOW the most learned Expositors upon my Text agree, that this Commandment is
here repeated on this Occasion, that so the people of God might not think that
even the sacred work of the Tabernacle might be done upon the Sabbath day. Even
that Work of God, of whatever importance, necessity and haste it were, would
not warrant them to break the holy Rest of God's Day. Mr. Clark therefore gives
the Sense of my text thus, Verily my Sabbaths you shall keep; i. e.
notwithstanding the work of the Tabernacle be holy, and diligently and speedily
to be done, yet I Will not have any of it done on the Sabbath day. And so Mr.
Henry, Even Tabernacle-work must give way to the Sabbath rest: Sic volo ista
fieri, ut nihilominus opifices cessent Sabbatho opere. Pareus in loc. They
might not think this sacred Work would warrant them to break the Sabbath. Bp.
Patrick.


It means the work and labor of preparing and rearing the Tabernacle; not the
Holy Services of it afterward; for so the Priests profaned the Sabbath and were
guiltless; their Labors being in themselves holy, like the work of Ministers
on the Lord's days under the Gospel. So God himself has given the distinction
between servile and holy work or labors. Lev. 23.25.

BUT the true and great Reason, as it seems to me, why God repeated the Law of
his Sabbath unto Israel upon his giving the Ceremonial Law to them, was this --
Because the Ceremonial law was originally designed by God, and always
subordinated and subservient unto the Sanctification of the Sabbath, in the
worship and services of the Tabernacle and Temple. It was eminently instituted
for this one end, the solemnizing of the Lord's Sabbaths at the Tabernacle.
Then the offerings and sacrifices were doubled, and therefore necessarily the
Services of the Priests. These were made for the Sabbath; and therefore no
wonder that when these were instituted the Law of the Sabbath was repeated. But
then,

2. THE Judicial Law which God gave to Israel by the hand of Moses, had the Law
of the Sabbath inserted into it This forensic or judicial Law was for the Civil
Government of that People of God, and contained a Body or System of Laws to be
observed by the Magistrates and Rulers, for the good order and peaceable and
quiet living of the people, in all Godliness and honesty. These Judgments Moses
began to set before them, by order from God, presently after the delivery of
the moral Law or ten Commandments. You have a great part of them in the 21, 22,
and 23. Chapters of Exodus: And at the 12. verse of the 23. Chapter you find an
abstract of the fourth Commandment, inserted thus, -- Six days shall thou do
thy work, and on the seventh day thou shall rest, that thine ox and thine ass
may rest, and that the Son of thy handmaid and the stranger may be refreshed.
Here, as I take it, the fourth Commandment was made a Law of the State to
Israel, whose Legislature was properly a Theocracy, and their Rulers and
Magistrates had the Executive power and trust committed to them. And doubtless
God thus honored the Law of the Sabbath to Israel his people, by inserting it
in the Body of their Judicial Laws, to teach civil Governments to do the like
in all parts and ages of the World, to whom the knowledge thereof should come.
And accordingly the good Government over us have in their wisdom and piety
Enacted the strict Sanctification of the Lord's day, and have forbid the
profanation of it under such and such penalties; wherein they have but done the
part of a Christian Government.

THUS the sacred Law of sanctifying the Sabbath stands in Scripture as a hedge
about the whole Mosaic Law, both Ceremonial and Judicial. For (as One says)
where no Conscience is made of keeping the Sabbath, farewell both Godliness and
honesty. God in his wisdom and gracious care has therefore set the fourth
Commandment (as it were) between the two Tables of the moral Law; and also
drawn it (as it were) as a line about all his positive laws, statutes and
judgments; that none should break over this and violate them. -- But I go on,

V. GOD has from the beginning very dreadfully threatened, and terribly punished
the violation of the Sabbath. Laws are of little force without a Penalty, nor
that without an Execution. The Threatenings of God, and his Judgments on
sinners, are as a flowing sword to guard his Holy Sabbaths from profanation,
and to keep men in the way to the tree of life. And here, 1. VERY dreadful are
the Threatenings of God against those that profane his Holy Sabbaths. In our
Context the threatening is, v. 14. Every one that defiles the Sabbath shall
surely be put to death; whosoever does any work thereon, that soul shall be
cut off from among his people. This was the penalty then incurred by
Sabbath Breakers, and then inflicted by the Lord of the Sabbath. How severe a
penalty! If any dared openly to profane the Sabbath in Israel, so that the
Crime came to the notice of the Judge and were proved upon the offender, "the
Magistrate "must cut him off by the sword of Justice: But if the profanation
were more hidden and could not be proved upon him, or if the Magistrate were
remiss and did not do his duty, then God would take the work into his own hand,
and cut him off by a stroke from heaven. This the Sabbath breaker might justly
fear, and no doubt often suffered. But the spiritual Judgment of God and his
Eternal punishment of this Sin, is infinitely greater. And if men despise God's
Sabbaths, as it provokes him greatly to cut them off from among his people now,
so without repentance he will cut them off for ever. 2. VERY dreadful have the
punishments of this Sin been, by the immediate Commandment of God, to Rulers,
or by the hand of his Providence.


BY the immediate and direct Command of the High God the first open and
presumptuous breaker of the Sabbath was punished with death. You have the
melancholy and dismal Story, Number. 15. from the 3^, to the 36. verse. And while
the Children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man that gathered
sticks on the Sabbath day: and they bro't him to Moses and unto Aaron, and all
the Congregation: And the Lord said unto Moses, the Man shall be surely put to
death; all the Congregation shall stone him with stones without the Camp: And
he died, as the Lord commanded Moses. God made him an Example, to deter others
for evermore from the like Sin.

BUT then also, God has in his Holy Providence dreadfully judged and punished
for the Sin of Sabbath-breaking. How many he cuts off by untimely deaths for
this sin we know not; but there is reason to fear they may be many. Read the
threatening and warning, Levit, 26.31, 34. I will make your Cities waste and
bring your Sanctuaries into desolation, and scatter you among your Enemies;
then shall the land enjoy her Sabbaths; as long as it lies desolate it shall
rest, because ye did not rest in your Sabbaths when ye dwelt in it. All this
was fulfilled in the doleful seventy years Captivity of the Jews in Babylon.
Then the Holy Land enjoyed a long and sad rest, without a worshipper or place
of worship. See the 2. Cron 36.20, 21. And they burnt the house of God, and
brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and carried away the Remnant to Babylon, to
fulfill the Word of the Lord, until the Land enjoyed her Sabbaths. We read also
how that when the Jews were returned from Babylon, and again fell into this
Sin, Nehemiah told them that the past wrath had been provoked by this, and that
more would still be so: Nehem. 13.17, 18. Did not your fathers thus? and did
not our God bring all this Evil upon us, and upon this City? Yet ye bring more
wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath.

BUT this for the fifth head, That from the beginning God did very dreadfully
threaten and terribly punish the violation of the Sabbath.

VI. THE holy Prophets of the Lord did in their times vehemently insist on the
sanctification of the Lords Sabbaths; they complained of and declared against
the profanation of it, and they made in God's name the most gracious Promises
to the people of God in case of their religious Observation thereof. These
three things, added unto what I have said before, will give you the whole voice
of Scripture through the Old Testament of the sanctification of of the
Sabbath Day.

1. I say, The Holy Prophets of God did in their times vehemently insist on the
keeping God's Sabbaths. I scarce know a stricter precept and fuller direction
in this point through the whole Book of God, than those words of the Prophet
Isaiah, the 58. Chap. and 13. v. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath,
from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the
Holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him; not doing thine own ways,
nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words. Here the Prophet
taught the people of God how to Sabbatize, and required them so to keep the
Sabbath; and his words are written for our admonition and learning.

1. WE must turn away our foot from the Sabbath: from trampling on it, (says a
late pious Expositor) as profane, atheistical people do; from traveling on it,
as many worldly men are ready to do; and from those walks and diversions on it,
which men of pleasure and license are apt to take. 2. WE must not do our own
ways, nor find our own pleasure on God's holy day. We must not follow our
Callings, which is to do our own ways; nor follow our sports and recreations,
which is to find our own pleasures. Especially we must beware of the defiling
and polluting pleasures of sin, which are unlawful on any day. 3. WE must not
speak our own words: Not give our selves that liberty of speech on the Sabbath
day, which we may lawfully take on other days. Our words must be then guarded,
grave, and seasoned with grace. We must speak God's word; speak of Him and of
his Works, out of his Word: not talk of our worldly affairs and business as on
other days. 4. IT must be honorable to us because the holy of the Lord. The
holy duties of it should be pleasant and delightful to us. We must honor it as
the Lord's day; the day which the Lord has made; made for himself, and
sanctified to his honor and service; made sacred to us, and to be spent in
holy duties: We will rejoice and be glad in it. Psalm. 118.24.
AFTER this manner Isaiah prescribes and requires the keeping a Sabbath: how
spiritual and reverend! and thus from one Sabbath to another should all flesh
come and worship before the Lord. Isai. 66.23.

LET us pass on to the Prophecies of Jeremiah, and observe how he also insists
on the Sanctification of the Sabbath. Jer. 17.20, 22. Hear ye the word of the
Lord ye Kings of Judah, and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem that enter in by
these gates; thus says the Lord, Take heed to your selves and bear no burden
on the Sabbath day, nor bring it in by the Gates of Jerusalem; neither do ye
any work, but hallow the Sabbath day as I commanded your Fathers. This
Commandment was to the King and all the people together: The highest and lowest
are equally under this Law and must be obedient. And to the Rulers it belongs
to see to it that the Sabbath be sanctified by their People.

A like Order both to Prince and peasant, for the religious observation of the
Sabbath we have from the pen of the prophet Ezehiel, 46. Chap. 1,2. The Gate of
the inner Court that looks toward the East shall be shut the six working
days; but on the Sabbath it shall be opened, and the Prince shall enter by it,
-- and the Priest shall prepare his burnt-offering, -- and he shall worship at
the threshold of the Gate, -- and it shall not be shut until the Evening. It is
the duty of Princes, and it is the privilege of peasants, to go up to the
Sanctuary of God on his Sabbaths, then and there to worship him with holy
reverence, as unworthy to tread the threshold of his Gates.

IN this frame and spirit we find Nehemiah, and the Princes, Priests and
Levites with him, signing a Covenant to walk in the Laws of God and to keep his
Sabbath. Nehem 10.31. We cannot walk in God's laws and not keep his Sabbaths;
In our Covenanting with God to walk in his laws, we do in a special manner
covenant to keep his Sabbaths. This is a special Article in God's Covenant with
his People.

THUS have the Holy prophets insisted on the Observation of the Sabbath in
their days and times.

2. THEY complained grievously of the profanation of it. For this they had too
often sad occasion. What evil thing is this that ye do? said holy Nehemiah to
the people of his day; -- Ye profane the Sabbath day. It grieved the good
Governor to the heart to see it. He called it a most evil thing. He spoke of
it with a pious anger and indignation, to see God so dishonored; and with a
holy fear of the Consequence of such a provocation. In like manner the
Prophets, Ezekiel and Amos. Ezekiel. 22.8. Thou have despised my holy things, and
have profaned my Sabbaths. 20.13. My Sabbaths they greatly polluted, then I
said I would pour out my fury upon them to consume them. Amos 8.5, 8. Shall not
the Land tremble for this? and every one mourn that dwells therein? and will
not the end thereof be as a bitter day? -- It is a sorrowful and fearful
Symptom, when peeople are sick of their Sabbaths; weary of the sacred rest, and
tired with the holy work. -- But on the contrary, and to add no more,

3. THE Prophets of the Lord have made many great and precious Promises to the
people of God, in case of their religious Observation of the Holy Sabbath. The
God who has blessed the seventh day and put his Name upon it, will bless all
them that keep it holy. Spiritual Blessings are the special and more natural
fruit of Sabbath Sanctification; but the outward blessings of Providence are
also the reward of it. This is the way to ensure the spiritual and temporal
Blessing together. Isai. 56.2. Blessed is the man that does this, that keeps
the Sabbath from polluting it. This brings a blessing on all our employments,
but especially upon our Souls. Here then,

1. THE spiritual Blessing, yea all spiritual blessings in heavenly places, is
the promise to the Person that keeps God's Sabbaths. Isai. 56.4, 5, 6. For thus
says the Lord to them that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the things that please
me, and take hold of my Covenant; even to them will I give in my House and
within my Walls, a place and a name better than of Sons and Daughters; I will
give them an everlasting name that shall not be cut off: -- I will bring them
to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer; their
burnt-offerings and their Sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar.

NOTE here, That these three things go together; the religious Observation of
the Sabbath, the Choosing the things that please God, and the taking hold of
his Covenant. Look where you will and show me one that keeps God's Sabbaths,
and you shall find him one that in all other points likewise chooses the things
that please him; And such may and will and do lay hold of God's Covenant. It is
from a sincere universal desire of pleasing God and glorifying him, that the
pious worshippers of God set themselves to observe and keep his Sabbaths. Such
have (through grace) consented and come up to the Terms of God's Covenant, have
taken him for their God, his Word for their Rule, and given themselves up to
him, in his holy ways and among his people.

AND now how great and precious are the Promises made here to this holy
Sabbatizer? even all the Blessings of the Covenant of Grace are assured to him;
present peace and communion with God and supplies of Grace, and the everlasting
love and mercies of our Heavenly Father. They have a Name among the Children of
God, a Name in the Church on earth, a Name written in Heaven; an everlasting
Name that shall not be cut off. -- Thus the Spiritual Blessing is the Promise
to the person that keeps God's Sabbaths. And then

2. THE Temporal blessing is promised to the People that do this. To prove this
I need only turn you again to the 58. Isai. 13, 14. If thou call the Sabbath a
delight, etc Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause
thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the Heritage
of Jacob thy father; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Here are the
temporal Rewards; even riches, honor, power, safety, prosperity and dignity;
to the place and people, the Country or Nation, that keep God's Sabbaths.

GOD promised his Israel that he would make them high in Name and honor, if
they sought his honor and observed his will; and that their Nei'bours should
see him bless them. He promised them to feed 'em, to defend 'em, and to advance
'em. He promised that if they would zealously and religiously keep his
appointed Feasts, no man should desire their Land when they went up unto 'em.
He also bid them prove him, if he did not open the Heavens over them to pour
down Blessings, if they duly regarded his Worship and Sanctuary. And doubtless
this will always commend a People to his favor and blessing in the course of
his Providence; and he will be their shield and strength, and the lifter up of
their head.

IN a Word, We have the promise and the threatening repeated, the Blessing and
the Curse; Jer. 17.24, 25, 27. And it shall some to pass if ye diligently
hearken to me, says the Lord, to bring in no burden through the gates of this
City on the Sabbath day; but if ye hallow the same; -- then shall there enter
still into it Kings and Princes sitting upon the Throne of David, riding in
Chariots and on horses; and this City shall remain for ever; and
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, meat offerings and Incense of praise, shall
still be in the house of the Lord: -- But if ye will not hearken unto me, to
hallow the Sabbath day, then I will kindle a fire in the Gates of Jerusalem,
which shall devour its palaces, (whereof the Temple was a principal one) and it
shall not he quenched. -- That is to say,

THE religious Sanctification of God's Sabbaths would have been a means of
preserving the Royal House of David, and the Holy City of God; But for the
profanation of the Sabbath both the one and the other were bro't to ruin. The
prophet assured them from God, that in case they would keep his Day, He would
keep the Court, the City, the Country and the Church, and make all to flourish:
But on the contrary, if they went on to profane the Lord's Sabbaths, the Lord
would destroy them all together. And so it was: The Enemy prevailed against
Jerusalem, and kindled a fire in the Gates of the City, which burnt down the
Palace of the King and the Temple of God, and none could quench it.

AND thus I have shown through Moses and the Prophets, how strictly and
vehemently the Holy God has required and inculcated the Sanctification of the
Sabbath day.

WHICH was the thing to be proved, -- Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep. The
Instances given, from the precept to Adam unto and by the last of the Prophets,
are so many plain and affecting proofs, as well as singular Illustrations, of
my Doctrine. The method which I have taken is, I think, the most simple and
natural Exposition of what the Scripture has said upon this head, so far as I
have gone. -- God bless what we have heard for the Increasing in us the
Reverence of his Holy Day, the strict Observation of it, and the fear of
profaning it. Amen.

Sermon Second.
Exodus 31.12, 13. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak thou also unto
the Children of Israel, saying,

Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep; for it is a sign between me and you throughout
your Generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord that does sanctify you.


THE great Law of the Sabbath is here repeated to Moses, and by him unto the
Children of Israel with an awful Preface, in a most commanding Manner, and with
a most powerful Reason annexed. More Authority and Commandment cannot be well
put into fewer words.

THE last time I spoke in this place, I proposed to speak to these two
Doctrines. I. That the Great GOD has most strictly and vehemently required the
Sanctification of the Sabbath day. II. That it is a sign between Him and us
that he is the Lord that does sanctify us.

I could not quite get through the first Doctrine on the last Lecture, namely,

I. D. THAT the Lord our God has most strictly and vehemently required us to
keep his Sabbaths. Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep. -- It was a Law to Man
from the beginning of the World, and the first Law that was given to him, even
in his state of Innocence. It was one of the first things given in Commandment
to Israel upon their leaving Egypt. It was one of the ten Words, the ten
Commandments, given from Sinai, in that august and fearful manner. It was
repeated and inculcated upon the delivery of the Ceremonial and Judicial Law,
and was indeed inserted into the latter. Moreover. God has from the beginning
very dreadfully threatened and terribly punished the violation of this
Commandment. And by the mouth of all his Holy Prophets he has vehemently
insisted on the Sanctification of the Sabbath day, complained of and declared
against the profanation of it; and they have made in God's name the most
gracious promises to the people of God in case of their religious Observation
thereof. -- Thus through the Scriptures of the Old Testament we find abundant
proofs and plain Illustrations of our Doctrine.

I shall continue the proof of this great Truth through the Scriptures of the New
Testament. The religious and strict Observation of the Lord's day is there also
directed to, prescribed and enjoined; but more by the holy practice and example
of our Lord Jesus and his Apostles, than by precepts.

THE Law of a Sabbath was nothing peculiar to the Jewish Church. It was before
them, even a Law from the beginning of the world, and it continues after them,
unto the End of time. There remains the keeping of a Sabbath to the people of
God, and it will do so while the world lasts. The Law is Moral, and of
perpetual Use, universal Obligation. We need the privilege of a Sabbath now,
its use and benefit to our Souls; as much as the People of God did heretofore:
And we owe this homage, honor and service to God as much now as his People of
old did. A weekly Sabbath is a small rent and acknowledgement unto the LORD of
our lives, in whose hand all our time is.

LET us look into the holy Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, the Epistles of
Paul, and the Revelations of John, and read the mind of Christ respecting the
religious Observation of the Sabbathday. And let us bear in mind that the
Practice of Christ and his Apostles is a Law to us in this matter. For (as a
late worthy Writer Mr. Wright on the religious Observation of the Lord's Day.
has it) Actions do certainly make a Law, where they sufficiently publish the
Mind and Will of the Lawgiver, as much as words. If then we can find Actions of
our Lord Jesus, and of his Apostles after him, equivalent to a verbal Precept,
for the Observation of the Christian Shbbath, we must needs account it his
Institution and Commandment to us.

IN the blessed Life of our Savior we read once and again of his going into
the Synagogues, to attend the public Worship of God on the Sabbath days. Luke
4.6. As his Custom was he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day. This he
did to teach and require us to keep the Sabbath as he did. He has given us this
Example that we should follow his steps. So he served and worshipped God,
fulfilling all Righteousness, and so must we. He came not to destroy the Law
and the Prophets, but to fulfill them. Had he put an end to the Sacred weekly
Sabbath, it had destroyed the Law and the Prophets with a witness. But Christ
fulfilled this Law, and kept many a Sabbath to the glory of God in a perfect
manner, so as no mere man, nor all the Holy men of God together, ever did or
can do. He has taught us how to Sabbatise; how to spend our Sabbaths in the
solemn Assemblies, and in works of piety and mercy. Many a high Exercise of
devotion, and many a good work of charity, did he upon the Sabbath Day. He
filled up the Holy time with work, and the work with Spirit. For these very
works of God like goodness he was sometimes reproached as a breaker of the
Sabbath; but it turned to the confusion of his ignorant and superstitious, if
not hypocritical and malicious Accusers. As in Mark 3. Init. He sanctified and
honored the Sabbath by his divine Sermons, and by his miracles of mercy on
that blessed day. He made it a Day of his Blessing to men, both on temporal and
spiritual accounts. Luke 13.10, 17. He kept that blessed Law for his Elect,
which Believers themselves keep so poorly and imperfectly. -- He also taught
his Disciples and followers to observe and keep the Sabbath Day, Indeed some of
the superstitious Pharisees did sometimes tax the Disciples with taking undue
liberties on the Holy Sabbath. But what was it? they plucked an ear of corn and
eat of it as they passed through a field. They were hungry and it was but a
proper and needed taste, and an ordinary hasty bit, for their support and
refreshment in the services of the day. The Women also that followed our Lord
Jesus, and ministered unto him, were strict Sabbatizers: Luke 23. ult. They
rested on the Sabbath day according to the Commandment. Though they were
preparing spices for the dead body of their dear Savior, yet they laid by the
holy care and labor of love till the Sabbath was over. Verily God's Sabbaths
did they keep; even as if the words of my Text were then in their remembrance,
and they considered that as the holy work of the Tabernacle was to give place
to the holy Rest of God's day, so their pious ministering to that sacred Temple
of the Deity, our Lords Body. -- And that was the last Seventh day Sabbath
which the Disciples kept. For early in the morning of the next day, being the
first day of the week these Women came unto the Sepulcher, bringing the Spices
which they had prepared; See Luke 24.1, 13, 34, 36. And John 20.1, 16, 19, 26.
and they found not the Body of Jesus, but had a vision of Angels who told them
of his resurrection from the dead. -- And that same day the Lord himself
appeared several times to one and another of his Followers; to Mary Magdalene,
to the two disciples on their way to Emmaus, to Simon, and to the ten together
in the Evening: when he blessed them, breathed on 'em, and gave them their
Commission. That day seven night, being again the first day of the week, the
Lord appeared again unto them, Thomas being then present, and showed them his
hands and his feet. -- Now by the Resurrection of Christ on the first day of
the week, and by his repeated visits to them on this day, the Inspired Apostles
(under the infallible Conduct of the Holy Ghost) from thenceforth held their
solemn Meetings, their holy Convocations, on this day of the seven, and called
it the Lord's Day. -- On this first day of the week, the Disciples were all
with one accord in one place, Act. 1.1, 2.
assembled as on their holy Sabbath, when suddenly there appeared the cloven
Tongues of fire and sat upon them, and they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost; and spoke in every language the wonderful works of God; the proper
service of the Sabbath day. That this day of Pentecost was the first day of the
week is easily computed and proved. The day after the Passover was the first
day of the feast of unleavened bread; (see Lev. 23.5, 6.) which was as a
Sabbath to the Jews; They were to have an holy Convocation on it, and to do no
servile work thereon. On the next day was the Offering of the first fruits unto
the Lord: And from this day, (the next but one after the Passover) they were
ordered to count fifty days, or seven weeks complete; and then was the feast of
Pentecost, so called from the fiftieth day. Now see how these things were all
fulfilled in the Dying and Resurrection of our Lord Jesus, and in the pouring
out of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost. -- Our blessed Lord Jesus was slain
at the Passover, which fell that year on a friday: Then was the Lamb of God
offered, Christ our Passover sacrificed for us. -- That Evening therefore was
the preparation, as it is called John 19.31. scil. the preparation both for the
weekly Sabbath, and also for the Feast of unleavened bread; which made that
Sabbath a high day. The Jews therefore were earnest with Pilate to have the
Bodies taken down early from the Cross. This whole Sabbath our Lord's Body lay
in the grave. And the next morning early, being the first day of the week, the
next day but one after the Passover, the day of the offering of the
first fruits unto the Lord, he rose from the dead, and became the first fruits
of them that sleep. Now compute just seven weeks from this day of our Lord's
Resurrection, and the first day of the eighth week, even the fiftieth day, was
the day of Pentecost; when the Spirit, (the promise of the Father) was poured
out from the ascended Jesus upon his Apostles, as they were assembled together
for his solemn Worship. Then (as one says) they themselves received the
first fruits of the Spirit, and through the word of truth begat three thousand
souls to Christ; and presented them as the first fruits of the Christian Church
unto God and to the Lamb. Thus did our Lord Jesus honor and hallow the first
day of the week by giving the Sanctifier and the Comforter thereon. So did he
shed Him forth in his miraculous Gifts and in his saving Graces, abundantly on
that day. He poured out the Blessing from on high, and blessed the Day, to be
an holy Sabbath unto Himself; and unto us, the day for our "seeking and
receiving spiritual blessings. Such Actions (says One) do as fully declare and
express the mind and will of Heaven as any words could do -- Especially if we
find (as we do) in the sacred Writings, that the Apostles and primitive
Christians did thenceforth observe the first day of the week for their
religious Assemblies, and for the Administration of the special Ordinances of
Christ thereon. And this we do expressly read, that they did come together on
the first day of the week to break bread, and that Paul preached to them. Act.
20.7. They were wont to come together to hear and to receive the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, on that day. It is spoken of as their usual practice, and
they were "under the infallible Direction of the Holy Ghost in Actions of this
nature and importance. So that their Example and practice herein must amount to
a Law and Institution to the Christian Church; interpreting to us the mind and
giving us the will of Christ in this matter. And to borrow the words of a late
Writer, As Moses was faithful in settling the matters of the Jewish worship and
of the Tabernacle, being authorized by God and guided by him in the doing it;
so the Apostles were to settle the Orders of the Gospel Church, and were
faithful to Him who appointed them -- Moreover you know, how that the Apostle
Paul directed the Church of Corinth, and the Churches of Galatia, to have their
Collections for the Saints on the first day of the week; So (says he) I have
given order, and so do ye: Upon the first day of the week let every one lay by
him in store, as God has prospered him. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. -- Some have observed,
and the remark is of great weight, That the first day of the week is the only
day spoken of through the New Testament, as a day religiously observed; but that
this day is several times over so spoken of. A day sacred in the Apostles times
for Holy fellowship and communion, for breaking of bread and for prayers, and
for works of piety and charity; for the public testimony of their faith in
Christ and love to all his Saints. -- To add no more, They called it the
Lord's Day; and on it the beloved Disciple had his Vision of Christ, one like
the son of man amidst the seven golden Candlesticks. Rev. 1.10. I was in the
Spirit (in a spiritual Ecstasy or Rapture) on the Lord's day. Whose day? Ubi
Johannes dicit se raptum fuisse in Spiritu Die Dominico; non sane Sabbatho
Judaeorum, quod procul dubio nominasset; non aliquo tantum die Septimanae, quia
sic ambiguus esset titulus, ad implicandum potius quam explicandum comparatus,
sed die illo quo Christus resurrexerat, quo convenire solebant Apostoli ad
sacra peragenda, et quo Paulus ordinaverat collectas haben^as, prout moris erat
in primitiva Ecclesia. Cum ergo de illo die tanquam nota et in Ecclesia usitata
loquitur, dubium non est quin ex recepto Ecclesiae usu hoc nomine insignita
sit. Turret. Vol. 2, p. 103.
but the Lord Jesus, whose Revelations he now received. And assign a reason, if
you can, for another day of the week, to be called his, besides the first,
whereon he rose from the dead. As the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ
is called the Lord's Supper, so is the Christian Sabbath the Lord's day. Both
the one and other are instituted, separated and appropriated unto his worship,
and the religious remembrance of Himself. -- The Son of man is Lord of the
Sabbath, Lord of our time and lives. He has power to change the day. And there
is the same reason why it should please the Lord Redeemer to take the first day
of the week for his own day, and make it the weekly Sabbath to the Church, upon
his Resurrection thereon from the dead; as there was why the Lord Creator
pleased to bless the seventh day, and the seventh part of time, because he
rested from his work of Creation after six days. For the work of man's
Redemption is a work of God equally glorious with that of his Creation, and so
equally worthy of a sacred, instituted, perpetual Memorial. And the
resurrection of Christ was really his resting from his work of our redemption,
having completed it in his death. Nor does the change of the day of the week
in the least take away from the Memorial of the Work of Creation every Sabbath
day; for the seventh part of time is yet sacredly observed in Commemoration
thereof. -- Upon all therefore, We have now the same Reasons for our religious
Observation of the first day of the week, that the Church of old had for their
keeping holy the seventh day. The reasons to them were, God's special propriety
in the seventh day, his own Example and resting thereon, and his blessing it.
And for these reasons we keep the first day of the week holy to Christ, because
of his special propriety therein, (his resting on it, and taking it for his
own) his own Example and his blessing it. On every Account it is the Lord's
day, the Christian Sabbath. -- Jesus has given us this Rest, upon his ceasing
from his redeeming work as God did from his of Creation; and upon his entering
into his rest. There remains therefore a Rest to the people of God; a
spiritual rest in Christ, and the keeping of a weekly Sabbath to him.

AND thus I have briefly traced through the Scriptures of the New Testament, some
of the things occurring there, for our keeping holy the Sabbath Day. -- And so
I dismiss the first part of my Text, Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep. -- I
come now to the Reason annexed, which is the other part, For it is a Sign
between me and you throughout your Generations, that I am the Lord that does
sanctify you.

2. D. THAT the Lord's Day, or weekly Sabbath, is a Sign between God and us,
that he is the Lord our Sanctifier.

IT is great Condescension and Grace in God to us, to annex a reason unto any
of his Commandments. His Sovereign will is the highest reason. -- Yet is there
much of Majesty and much Grace in this Reason, It is a Sign between me and you.
And will God in very deed give us such a Sign and Token between Himself and us?
will he in very deed deal so with Man upon the Earth? And give a standing Sign
too, throughout all the Generations of men on earth? O the favor and Grace to
dust and ashes! while He humbles himself to behold the things that are above!

BUT what is the Lord's Sabbaths a Sign of through all the Generations of men?
Why they signify and let us know, 1. That he is the Lord and our Lord: Lord of
the world, and Lord of our time and lives. The great Proprietor and absolute
Disposer of them. 2. That he is the Lord our Sanctifier. This is that Glory
wherein he delights to appear unto his Creatures, and for which to be adored by
them. So the Seraphims worship him above, and cover their faces, crying, Holy,
Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts. And so we worship the Lord in the Beauties of
Holiness on earth; His Sabbaths being unto us the sign, and his Ordinances the
blessed means of holiness and Sanctification.

THE Lord our Sanctifier. It speaks the utmost favor, grace and mercy to us,
and the utmost holiness in the Lord our God. He is the Sanctifier of all whom
he saves. His Elect are chosen unto Salvation through sanctification of the
Spirit. And he has appointed his Holy Sabbath and all the Ordinances of his
worship, under the blessing of his Spirit, to be the season and means of the
Regeneration and Sanctification of souls, and of their growth and increase in
Holiness.

GOD's Sabbaths were from the beginning of the world given for a Sign and a
Memorial. They are a Sign that in six days the Lord made Heaven and earth --
Our Lord's days are now a Sign of the Resurrection of Christ from the dead. And
in short, both the Jewish and Christian Sabbath are a Sign to fallen man, of a
Covenant of Grace and Salvation granted to him through Jesus Christ; the promised
seed of the Woman, but the Only Begotten of the Eternal Father.

TO be sure, The Observation of a weekly Sabbath is a very public and open
thing; a thing of much Solemnity and Significancy. It is a perpetual and
universal Memorial of something very great and important between God and man.
-- Every child is ready to ask, What means this Service? what signifies such
a weekly Solemnity? -- God answers in my Text, It is a sign between Me and you.
Surely then a sign of something very great and good on God's part, and worthy
of his blessed and glorious Name, and of something very good and great,
beneficial and necessary to us! Yes truly: the work and grace is great on God's
part, to be our Sanctifier! the benefit and mercy vast to us, our
Sanctification! -- This, this is signified by the weekly Sabbath. What more
worthy of the Holy God? what more important to polluted, guilty and perishing
Sinners? Of his mercy he thus saves us.

THE Text speaks plainly of two things, 1. Of a Covenant between God and fallen
man: It is a Sign between me and you through out your Generations. 2. Of a
Covenant of holiness, or of our Salvation in a way of Sanctification; that I am
the Lord that sanctifies you. Therefore these two things lie before me, 1. To
show that the Lord's Sabbaths continued to fallen man, are a sign and token of
the Covenant of Grace made with him through Jesus Christ. 2. It is a sign and
token of Christ's saving us in the way of Holiness or Sanctification.



1. THE Lord's Sabbaths continued to fallen man, are a sign and token of the
Covenant of Grace made with him in Jesus Christ. It is a sign between (...) and
you. Here is something mutual between (...) parties, God and man; significant
of great grace and favor to man on the part of God, and of special and holy
bonds and duty to God on the part of man; Now what can this be but a faderal
and Covenant stipulation? and what can it be referred unto, but only the
Covenant of Grace and Salvation by Jesus Christ? Assign something else if you
can.

INDEED the Sabbath was given and instituted to Man in his State of Innocence,
and that even before the Covenant of works was given unto Adam. But Man having
sinned and broken the first Covenant, had forfeited and lost the Privilege and
honor of a Sabbath. There remained no room or place for any Sabbath to him
till it was restored in the Covenant of Grace. -- But as it pleased God,
according to his Eternal Counsel and purpose, immediately to reveal unto fallen
man hss Covenant of Grace and Salvation, through Jesus Christ the promised Seed
of the Woman; So the Law of the Sabbath did naturally and in course revive and
take place again. -- For it is nothing peculiar either to the Covenant of
Grace, or to the Covenant of works, that there should be a Sabbath; but it must
needs be common to either, that there be some appointed time sacred unto the
public and solemn worship of God. -- IF then God pleased to give a new Covenant
to Man after his fall, it must needs bring him a new Right and liberty to
worship God; and consequently must revive the Privilege and Law of a Sabbath
to him. -- And other Foundation can no man lay, for this privilege and liberty
of Worship, than this which is laid, Jesus Christ, and the Covenant of Grace in
and through him. It is truly one of the Benefits of Redemption, and a great and
necessary one. It is the Gift of Grace by Jesus Christ; it is the purchase of
his Death, and the fruit of his Resurrection, that there remains the keeping
of a Sabbath to the Children of fallen Adam. -- This is a Benefit of the New
Covenant, without which there had remained no place for prayer, praise or
worship to fallen man; and consequently no day sacred to these Duties.

HENCE the Sabbath is said to be given for a Covenant, and to be observed as
such; and the ten Commandments are called God's Covenant: Deu. 4.13. He
declared unto you his Covenant; even ten Commandments. But it is the fourth
Commandment which stands peculiarly as the most visible token of the Covenant
of God; according to the 16. v. of our Context, Ye shall observe the Sabbath
for a perpetual Covenant. And Ezekiel. 20.20. It is a sign between me and you,
that I am the Lord your God. -- Every Sabbath day we do publicly and solemnly
confess and avouch the Lord Jehovah to be the true God, and God alone, and that
he is our God and Redeemer, and that we are his people and worshippers, and
will be devoted to him for ever. These two things are therefore put together by
the Holy Ghost, Isa. 56.4, 6. The keeping God's Sabbaths, the taking hold of
his Covenant, and the joining our selves unto the Lord. -- We keep God's
Sabbaths as a sign of our faith in and devotion to the God of Israel, as the
great Creator and High Possessor of heaven and earth. According to what we read
in my Context, v. 17. It is sign between Me and the Children of Israel for
ever, that in six days the Lord made all things, and in the seventh he rested
and was refreshed. -- Again, We covenant with God through Christ, as the Lord our
Redeemer, in our keeping his Sabbaths. It was to the Church of Israel, and is
to the Christian Church, a Memorial of redeeming Grace and Mercy. When God had
redeemed Israel out of Egypt, he then said to them, Deuteronomy. 5.15. Remember that
thou wast a Servant there, and that the Lord thy God bro't thee out thence with
a strong hand and by a stretched out arm; Therefore the Lord thy God commanded
thee to keep the Sabbath day. Here was a super-added and special reason to
Israel for their religious observation of the Sabbath. Some learned men have
argued and insisted on it, that the seventh day from the Overthrow of Pharaoh
at the Red Sea was the Jewish Sabbath. And if it were so yet might it be the
seventh day from the Creation also. But to be sure, in memory of this their
Redemption, as well as of the World's Creation, they were to keep their
Sabbaths. -- Now this seems to me a plain Prefiguration of our Christian
Sabbath, in memory of Christ's finishing the work of our Redemption. For if the
Sabbath was unto the Jews a sign of their Covenant relation and obligations to
God as their Savior and Redeemer; is it not more so unto us under the Gospel,
and from the day of the completion of the Spiritual and Eternal Redemption by
the Son of God? If that deliverance which was but the Type came into a constant
Remembrance, and was a standing reason of the weekly Sabbath till the
Resurrection of Christ; shall not the Eternal Redemption by Him, which is the
Substance, be had in a perpetual Remembrance by us upon the weekly Sabbath; and
be a special reason to us for our Sanctifying the same? -- Wherefore no doubt
but from the fall of Man unto the End of the world, the Sabbath has been
ordained, and by the worshippers of God ought to be observed, in memory of
Man's Redemption as well as of his Creation, and to the honor of God our
Redeemer as well as Creator; and so we keep it, as a redeemed people, bought
with his Blood; and every Lord's Day we covenant anew with our Savior, to
glorify him in our bodies and spirits which are his. -- The Covenant stands for
ever, because the Redeemer lives, therefore the Sabbath abides: The Covenant
of his peace is not removed, and the God of the whole Earth is he called, who
is the Holy One of Israel, the Redeemer. -- God openly and significantly
covenants with his Church and people every Sabbath day. He meets them to bless
'em, as they assemble to worship him. He gives a name and place within his
walls, even an everlasting name. He does this (says the Prophet) Isa. 56.6.
while we join our selves unto him, to serve him and to love his Name. --
Wherefore God owns his people, as well as they him, every Lord's Day. He meets
them in his own appointed time and ways. He seals to his Covenant, and shows it
to them, and his secret is with them while they keep his Sabbath. -- The risen
Savior visits his assembled Disciples from week to week, and is still in the
midst of them, and says, peace be unto you; yea and shows them his hands and
his feet when they come together to break bread. -- Thus the Sabbath is the
abiding and conspicuous Sign of a Church state; and it is for Stipulation and
mutual Covenanting between God and his people. -- It is a sign between Me and
you.

2. It is an evident token, and blessed means, of Man's Salvation in a way of
holiness and sanctification. That I am the Lord that sanctifies you. A
parallel place we have, Ezekiel. 20.12. Moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths to
be a Sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that
does sanctify them. -- This, this is at last the thing signified, the thing
covenanted. God covenants with his people to be their Sanctifier in their
observation of his Sabbaths; they covenant to be holy to him and to seek his
sanctifying grace, and live as his sanctified Ones.

GOD's Sabbaths were to the Jews a sign of his selecting them from other people
and consecrating them unto himself, his worship and service; to be unto him as
a kingdom of priests, a holy nation. If he had not so set 'em apart for
himself, he would not have revealed to them his Sabbaths, to set up his Worship
among them: And they that worship him must be sanctified, must sanctify
themselves hereunto.

MOREOVER, The Observation of the Sabbath ever was, is and will be, a special
means of the Sanctification of God's Elect. He sanctifies them by his Spirit in
his Word and Ordinances, the Means of grace and holiness, wherein his Sabbaths
are sanctified, and wherein his people apply to him as their Sanctifier. If we
keep God's days, they will be the means of our sanctification. It is a sign
that God has sanctified us if we love his Sabbaths; and to keep them is the
grand means of our increase in holiness.

THUS the Holy Sabbaths of God do exhibit him unto us, not only as the Lord our
Creator and Redeemer, but also as the Lord our Sanctifier. Not only is the
Sabbath ordained to serve unto the honor and worship of God the Father
Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth; and of Jesus Christ his only Son our
Savior, but also of the Holy Ghost (proceeding from the Father and the Son)
our Sanctifier.

SANCTIFICATION is the special work of the Holy and Eternal Spirit of God. In
remembrance of his glorious descent from the Ascended Savior we keep our
Lord's days. He is in his Word and Ordinances, the which he has inspired and
instituted, and makes them the effectual means of holiness unto all sincere and
fervent Worshippers.

HE is himself the Holy One, infinitely holy. He would have us holy. He only can
make us so. His Sabbaths and worship are holy, and sanctifying to us. We wait
on him in them for his sanctifying influences and Operations. He blesses his
Sabbaths and Institutions for this end. He sanctifies his Elect through his
Truth, his Word is the Truth. We acknowledge him as the Lord our Sanctifier,
apply to him and glorify him as such, in the way of Sabbath Sanctification. And
they that do so, find him to be their Sanctifier. His Sabbaths are under his
blessing the special means of that little Holiness that is in the world. Not
only is the form of Godliness kept up in the world by the keeping the Sabbath
day, but also that power of Godliness which is, or ever has been, in the Church
of God, is owing hereunto. In this way Sinners must seek after Sanctification,
and in this way they experience and find it. As it is written in the Psalm or
Song for the Sabbath Day; Ps. 92.13. They that be planted in the house of the
Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God; to show that* the Lord is
upright; -- A God faithful to his Covenant and true to his Institutions, to own
and bless them.

AND thus I have offered some hints toward the explaining my Text, How the
Sabbaths of God are a sign between Him and his people, that he is the Lord that
does sanctify them.

NOW the Argument from all is, That verily his Sabbaths we must keep. And you
may easily perceive a variety of Argument, cogent and very weighty, in what has
been said. -- The Lord's day is unto us the primary, perpetual and universal
Memorial of the Covenant of Grace, which God has made with fallen man; and
shall we not thankfully and religiously celebrate the Memorial of this Grace of
God unto us? -- It is the badge and livery of our being the Covenant People of
God; our public and solemn Confession of the Lord Jehovah, Father Son and Holy
Ghost, our glorious Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier. -- It is the great and
solemn Profession of our Faith in, our devotion unto, and our covenanting with,
the most High God, Possessor of heaven and earth. -- It is the instituted Means
to us of Grace here and Glory for ever; of present Communion with God and of
seeing him hereafter; of his having any service and glory from us in this
world, and of our finding blessedness in him in that which is to come.

(...)
