An ESSAY to Silence the Outcry That has been made in some Places against
Regular Singing. IN A SERMON Preached at Framingham,

By the Reverend Mr. Josiah Dwight, Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Woodstock.

BOSTON: Printed for John Eliot, and Sold at his Shop at the South-End of the
Town. 1725.

The Unreasonable Outcrys, against Regular Singing Silenced.
ACTS 17.6. -- These that have turned the World upside down, are come hither
also.

THEY that first set up, as the Spreaders of the Gospel, and to give their
testimony to Christ and his Doctrine, had seen little beside Boats and Men: a
few illiterate Fishermen with a Publican and Tent maker; a strange undertaking,
for such unaccomplished Orators, to try to convert the World to Christ, and to
subject the powerful, learned and wise, to the foot of a crucified Person! but
they forgot not Christ's parting Promise, Mat. 28.20. Go ye therefore and teach
all nations; -- and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.
And failed not to lean on Divine Aids and Assistance; which brought the matter
on to a wonderful Persection, in a little time; though they met with not only
cold entertainment: but damping repulse, and harsh treatment, when they first
preached Christ, to an ignorant, depraved, atheistical and infidel World; as
the Text intimates; which sets forth, the bitter charge laid upon Paul and
Silas, for only Scripture reasoning concerning Christ, and his Resurrection.
The charge laid upon them, by the implacable outrageous Jews, was, as if they
went about only upon a seditious Design, and as State troublers; when they
sought (...) worse thing, than to persuade the Thessalonians, (where the
preaching now was) to turn from dumb idols to serve the living God. The Rabble
counted it very criminal, for Jason their Host to harbor them, and took Bail
belike of him for their appearance, when they should be called for to
Examination.

The Words may be considered as a bitter, causeless Charge. Where observe,

1. The Persons charged; Paul, and Silas his Colleague, that were out upon no
other but the Gospel design.

2.Observe the matter of the Charge; viz. that they (and their followers) had
turned the world upside down. A proverbial say, but high charge! and their
meaning probably was that they stirred up the world to Insurrection and
Sedition, a grievous Charge! -- But the comfort was, (to speak on the Apostles
side) it was utterly false, (like that of Tertullus against Paul, Acts 24 5.
says he, We have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition,
etc. For all the Jews were so ready to confirm his lie, v.9 The Jews also
assented, saying, that those things were so) In a good sense, it were well if
the charge in the Text had been true, for the depraved world wanted then, (and
never more perhaps) to be turned clean out of their idolatrous, vicious
Customs; and to be brought to the Faith and Purity of the Gospel. But these
(the only Tumult and Uproar-makers of that Day;) continue the Charge, v. 7. for
that they brought in Customs contrary to Caesar' s. Whereas, these Servants of
God, tried to advance the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, without the least Injury
to the Roman Empire: that the Jews knew to be so in their Consciences; but cast
the wicked Aspersion on them, to make them odious to the people; and pretended
regard to Caesar' s Decrees, only to ruin Christ's Servants, and hinder the
Gospel: whereas the traduced persons, honored the Emperor, prayed for his
Life, for a prosperous Reign, and valiant Armies; a faithful Senate, discreet
Counsel, a good People, and a quiet World. For this they taught, Tit. 3.1. Put
'em in mind to be subject to principalities, and powers, to obey magistrates,
to be ready to every good work etc. And Yet was the world (at that time all
gone to naught;) set to misrepute them, and the whole Gospel design, viz. to
advance a divine Knowledge and Purity, with Reformation of Life.

3. Observe, a farther Aggravation insisted on, are come hither also. O
Nesandous! It was bad eno' to go to other places, and spread their leaven, but
quite unpardonable to go near the Chargers. Thus they proceed in Accumulation
against the Servants of God, till out of breath: for men will be as violent in
a bad cause sometimes, viz. when mispersuaded, as others are in a good one. All
that I shall observe to you from the words is this. viz.

DOCTRINE.
That the Gospel itself, when first advanced in the World, and the first
Preachers of it, had a formidable Outcry raised upon them. The Malignant world,
did not know how to speak bad eno', and contemptuously eno' hereof they though it.
What scorn and hard frumps had Paul and his Doctrine from the Athenian
Philosophers? v.18. Some said what will this babbler say? other some, He
seems to be a setter Forth of strange gods, etc. The Apostles offered nothing
more harsh to Reason, than convincing proofs, that Christ was the appointed,
and expected Messiah to come and save the world; and irrefragable Confirmations
of the truth of his Resurrection, that mon might be persuaded, they had a
living Savior to trust in; and that they might quit the vices spoken of in
Romans 1.30.1 Cor. 6.10. Tit. 3.3. Gal. 5.21.2 Tim. 3.2. And get washed,
sanctified, justified, etc. And appear with the spirit of love, joy, peace,
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness, temperance and
the like, as a proof that they had closed with the Savior of the world, as
their Head and Savior. And could this hurt any, need it to have disturbed any!
Yet harsh and very unwelcome treatment, had the Gospel and the first Preachers
of it, when Christ any more instance of this thing, it is but turning back to
what the Apostles, at their first setting into the Ministry, met with, Acts
4.18. and 5.40. That was the unpardonable Crime, viz. to preach Christ
crucified; for fear men should get into a new and better way of Salvation, than
that of following their foolish superstitions, the Commandments of men, that
brought more gain to them, than profit to any body else --. Thus Christianity
notwithstanding its brightness and purity, was not only exposed naked in the
day of its Birth, but made odious to the People.

Quest. Whence was it thus?

Ans. 1. The first Preachers of the Gospel, were not such promising, taking,
quaint men. This was the exception against Paul, 1 Cor. 2.4. And my speech, and
my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration
of the Spirit, and of power. Which the Apostle acknowledged, under the
Denomination of infirmity in the flesh, Gal. 4 13. A crucified Christ was the
Rhetoric! The Roman Empire was now at its height, Philosophy and Eloquence in
its flower and vigor, and the Sages of that time pushed against the Disciples
of Christ and their Doctrine with their might, as fine undertakers (to speak
ironically) to new model the World. (Say they) No, the messages of God himself
shall be slighted, if brought by such hands: like as the Emulation showed
itself at the time of the Reformation, under Luther's preaching, when many
Church Dignitarys and Ecclesiastics could not but own, that sundry things
wanted Reformation in the Church, but could not bear it should be lead on by a
sorry Monk.

2. The Gospel in its Doctrine and Design is very contrary to men's Lusts. And
hence might proceed the opposition made unto it. This corrupt nature is very
fond of, and does not know how to away with the hard sayings of the Gospel
about them, to deny themselves, and take up their cross, plucking out a right
eye, leaving mammon, and laying up treasure on Earth, giving liberally to the
poor, and depending upon Heavenly Refundments, loving Christ, etc. which makes
some go away from the hearing with damp, as the young man, who when he heard
that saying, went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions. Mat. 9.22. And
others set up with bold rages, and try to spurn at the Gospel, and run over it.

3. Merely for its newness the Gospel might be excepted against. For our nature
is apt to be fond of things we have had a long Intimacy with, and apt to recoyl
at Innovation, if never so much for the better. So you shall see some fond of
an old house, 8 house implements, clothes, hats etc. and if those that are
never so much better and more useful, be offered in their room, they are
slighted, because those they have had such long acquaintance with, are so dear
to them. So their old Superstitions, corrupt Customs and Idolatries, the
infidel world would not part with, for a sound Gospel --

USE. Hence the best things that God has sent us into the World may be
misconstrued and misrepresented. When God sent Christ into the World, some said
he was a friend of Publicans and Sinners, and held a compact with Beelzebub, to
slur and blaspheme his mighty works. And the Gospel was by some reputed
babbling, and a setting forth of strange gods. And the Apostles, whose feet
should have been beautiful, for bringing the glad and gracious tidings of peace
and reconciliation by Christ, they were counted pestilent fellows and mad men.
But surely this ought not so to be. This was one effect of the misconduct of
Reason depraved, and benighted with the fall, that in some cases it no better
discerned good from evil. Whence I would take occasion, to offer to the
Consciences of some Neighbors and Brethren, that appear not so well satisfied,
about the Essay of Regulation and Amendment, of the defects of our public
Psalmody, and to have too tort and smart Objections, viz. that they may miss
it, and offend against the generation of the just, though they seem to be pretty
sure to themselves; That I am well persuaded, 'ere this Generation pass away,
thousands upon better consideration, will see reason to retract precipitant
Censures, on conscionable endeavors, to (...) the religious Interests of New
English Churches, by to them, lead wrong in an affair of this Nature. But they
have so learned Christ, and so they understand the Gospel, as they have held
forth to you, relating to this Subject. And in relation to something further
that may be added on this head, I would premise,

1. That I cannot see there should be any holiness in a Tune; though there be
holiness in the matter of a sacred Song, to which a Tune is required when it is
sung. Singing I take to be but melodious reading, and who can show an
Institution for the special moding a Service; nor should any mistake from the
propinquity of a Tune, to the matter of a sacred Song, to the mingling and
counting that which is unhallowed, with that which is holy --. The grave Tunes
used in foreign Churches, are no more holy than ours, nor ours, than theirs;
for though the Bible be an holy Book on all considerations, yet the Cover put on
only to preserve, and put honor thereon, none can imagine to be holy. And though
Christ put honor on a certain Tune, (if we knew which of them it was) that he
used to sing an Hymn with, at the head of his family, and at the first
Administration of the second New Testament Sacrament, and last public Service
he was in on Earth, yet I don't conceive that hereby he put holiness thereinto.
And suppose it to be as likely that he used then one of those Tunes, that are
now excepted against by some, as any other; wherefore I would not have any go
too fast in rejecting, or putting a slight upon any particular Tune, that is
used in the Churches, and approved by the skilful, learned and judicious, least
(inverting Luke 16 15. for a seasonable check here) they be found abominating
that which is approved in Heaven, and was used by Christ in his Family on Earth.

2. Singing is partly a natural, and partly an acquired Gift. The To canere, or
posse canendi, is concreated with us; the Ars canendi is an acquisition by
practice, and God's blessing thereon. The posse of singing is in-lay'd with us
by the God of nature, (together with the seeing Eye and hearing Ear, Prove.
10.12.) And which Singers rise to some expertness in using, by the Divine
blessing, on their reading and hearing the Rules of singing, and practicing
thereon, and by minding and conforming to the Voices of them that were Singers
before them. Now some have a natural Genius, Sweetness, and Governableness of
the Organs, and Strength of Voice above others: but there are but few indeed,
than would fall short, of following a Tune in desirable manner, if they would
but give their minds to it, and try for it. But still

3 It is a good Gift from the Father of Lights if any can Sing well. Jam. 1.17
Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the
Father of Lights, etc. And he that set up Solomon to shine with wisdom in
Israel, made David eminently skilful this way, among his people; in which
respect, as in many beside he served his Generation; for the dispensation of
the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, be he Prince or Subject: And
as every one has received the Gift, let him be a Civil or Ecclesiastical
Ruler; so let him minifier the same, that God in all things might be glorified.
By what I can learn from the lively Oracles, David (and no doubt by Heavens
direction) was the first that introduced singing into the Church of God, that
assistant to the devotion of the godly; and I take him to be at the head of the
Regulation of the sacred Music, for Harmony and Concord at that glorious
Solemnity of removing the Ark to the chosen place for it. 1 Chronicles. 15.16, 22.
And other Festivals in Israel. As David was serviceable to the civil Interest
of his people, in guarding the Country, and by encouraging trade and business
among his Subjects, for such was his upright and princely behavior at the
Court, and such his martial Valor and cunning in the field of War, that he
soon grew for midable to his Enemies, and an amiable Allie; and every one ready
to court him or crouch to him: So besides this, was he serviceable in penning
the Psalms, setting the Tunes, and appointing the Singers, and Instruments of
Music, for helping the devotions of the Godly; that it is remembered of him,
together with his last things and lies as part of his Epitaph, viz. that he was
Amanus Psalmis intra Israelitas; and it is reckoned among the honors to which
David was raised, viz. that he was a Psalmist; by which he was as truly great,
as by being the anointed of the God of Jacob, a (...) There is a mathematical
proportion in the ascent, elevation, and falling of the Voice, which they that
ar^ students in the Science can best speak to; and which other would presently
come to the knowledge of by study. The fundamental rules and grounds of all
Music are but few, but Mathematically certain, and are for all Ages, Nations
and Places: though as to the particular Tunes the variation is wonderful. There
is no English Psalm Tune, but may be soon leared by them that have an
Instructor, and give their minds thereto; only let it be remembered, that God
who is the Author of all truth, of Theological, Logical, Physical, and Ethical,
he is so of Mathematical and Musical Truth; whose Name is to be praised, for
the admirable perfection and excellency he has laid into the things of nature
and art. And as the Conditor and Framer of all things he has ordered the
agreement and disagreement of things, [inter se] so that though a man and brute
agree in animation; yet they differ as to reason; and the earth and sea agree
in cold, but differ in respect of dryness; which is for the study and
contemplation of Philosophers: So God has ordered Concord and Discord in
musical elevations, for the students in Music, that he might be admired in
every thing.

4. Yet strenuous driving after a Regulation of defects in Singing, or after
additional Tunes I approve not; especially if some see it not so practicable,
and lothly come into it. For I reckon it to be in this matter, as with the
Church of old, a shifting from Judaism to Christianity, and some not
sufficiently instructed, in that liberty purchased by the Death of Christ,
would have the galling Yoke of Ceremonies longer kept on the neck of Disciples
than was fit. Acts 15.1, 5. And certain men which came down from Judea, taught
the Brethren, and said, except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye
cannot be saved, etc. which hurt the whole Interest of Christianity, and
undervalued the Death of Christ in this point; when yet the result of the
Council was (though they knew it was an error contended for) that there should be
a present forbearance; that by length of time, they might get light, and
conviction of things, that, may be, at present they did not so well see through;
and to preserve their peace. Act 19.22, etc. This (...) the Ceremonies were
antiquated, and abolished things, dead and done with, and belonged to the Grave
of Christ; yet for the sake of some scrupulous Consciences, they would not drag
them out of doors before their eyes; but let them lie by for a while, till they
might be carried out to a decent Funeral. So though we have as much liberty to
change our Tunes as our Clothes, as we may see reason; and to mend the obvious
defects in our Tunes as Clothes: by how much through the long use, of imperfectly
sounded Tunes in our Congregations, they have gained a veneration from some, as
if a sort of sacredness with them, that makes them flinch at the seeming
innovation and real amendment essayed; there should be gentle progress (I
count) and forbearance of going the whole circle and latitude of our right and
claim, least we bear too hard on our Brethren's Spirits, for whom Christ dyed.

But next I would say something by way of Answer to some Queries that seem to
be obtruded, especially some of them on the Singing side.

Quest. Is it equal, that the Elderly, should yield, to be turned out of the
old way of Singing, to gratify the Youngerly, who urge on a Regulation the most.

Ans. It is not to yield to man but to God, to fall in with a more advantageous
way of performing his Worship. In the times that we can look back to, there
were no such helps and advantages, to get skill in Singing as now; if so I
Question not, but our Fathers would have fallen in therewith. And that now God
has stirred up some to improve their (...) this way, I see not but that elder
and younger that would have cases determined by Reason and Religion, ought to
improve it, and praise God for it. The younger Generations have ordinarily, the
clearest and strongest Voices, and so it will be to the end of time; and it is
no wonder if there be something the most heard of them, in such an alteration
and reformation as seems to be now on foot: who yet must be advised to be
soberminded, and to be humble and thankful to the Lord, and full of respect to
Superiors, and farthest from Ostentation and despising others, though grown to
Barzillai's condition and infirmity, (...) and can I discern between good and
evil? -- Can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women?
Wherefore should then thy Servant be yet a burden to my Lord the King? And the
elder among us must be exhorted to comply and fall in with the well approved
and promising reformation, least their sharp contradiction to their surprise be
interpreted at the Supreme Bar, their fighting against God.

Quest. Were our Fathers to blame for Singing God's Praises in that way that is
now censured for it is defects.

Ans. Persons are accepted of God, if with a good and honest heart, they Sing,
Pray or Read God's Word as well as they can. But to do these brokenly, when
they might do them more accurately is a disrespect and dishonor to God, and
therefore censurable. A Person performing a holy Service, with many lamenesses
and defects while he don't know better, may be accepted of God; but when he
knows how to come to amendment hereof and refuses, and sets himself against it,
he will have though it to Answer to God --. And I see not but some Congregations,
and sundry in many more, are to be blamed for their ignorance and heedlessness
about the Tunes, that may be cannot distinguish one Tune from another when Sung,
and slide out of one Tune into another, and do not mind it, or Sing the Lines
of several Tunes for one: when a little care and study indeed would have saved
the Disorder. Therefore I would propose, there might be many Advantages
attending a Practice which I could wish all our Congregations were come into,
viz to name the Tune together with the Psalm, and all the Skilful of the
Congregation be sure to fall in with the first Note and Syllable; nor is this a
bare Proposal without Experiment: for some of us have been some time in proof
hereof, and see its Expediency.

Quest. This new way is not Singing in the Spirit, is it?

Ans. As much as the old way is, and no odds in that! But it is not the outward
sounding of a Song any way, that amounts to that; where this is all with any
Sinners, they are but as sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal, let their
Voices be never so good and Skill (...) with the zeal and integrity of the
Heart, and by the rules of (Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship
him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth. And, Romans 1.9. God is my witness,
whom I serve with my Spirit. etc.) or by the Holy Ghost furnishing us thereto,
and aiding us therein, or both: And so it is too Superior a thing, in the
Practice of Singing to bear a flant.

Quest. Can you desire us to be reconciled to the new way of Singing, when it
brings in so much disturbance with it?

Ans. I must needs ask leave here to plead, that the blame is mislay'd; and the
wrong Horse Sadled. For that which ought to be laid to the weakness or some
men's reason, and to strength of passion in others, is bro't and charged upon
Regular Singing. For consider, if you have an Important Journey to go, and go
forth to procure an Horse, or other requisites thereto, and a Shower come upon
you, or you dash your Foot against a Stone, or by any other Accident you become
Wounded, must your going forth on the Errand be therefore Censured, when it may
be the Occasion is as Rational and Vindicable as can be. We always say, it is
unreasonable to measure Causes by Effects, or Censure or Justify them by their
Consequents. For then if a Son take to ill Courses, his Father, as a Father,
must be blamed, though such Courses of his Son be never so grievous to him, and
he never so copious in disswasives against the same.

Quest. Well if you could show this new way of Singing, were commanded in
Scripture, I should not dare speak a word against it?

Ans. If I did not suppose it there commanded and required, I should not dare
speak a word for it. i. e. though it be not in terms inserted, if by just
Consequence, I could not fairly deduce it therefrom to my satisfaction, I
should not appear to Advocate for it. I think it contained in Psalm. 33.2, 3.
Praise the Lord with Harp, Sing unto him with the Psaltery, and an Instrument
of ten Strings. Sing unto him a new Song, play SKILFULLY with a loud Voice. For
I cannot suppose, the moral part (...) David calls upon the Church of Israel to
unite their (...), and to engage their Skill to offer the most High, the best
Praises they could possibly --. When Instruments of Music, were more Laudable
in the Worship of God, than now under a more Spiritual Dispensation, then the
Sweet Singers Direction was, to observe the Consort between Harp and Voice,
keep time and measure; and manage each their work dexterously. Besides this
plain and direct Precept for it, there are very instructive and convictive
general precepts and hints, in 1 Cor. 14.40.2 Sam. 24.24 Mal. 1.14 and 1 Cor.
12.31. Covet earnestly the best Gifts -- And how many things do we practice in
the Church of God, relating to the Worship of God, deduced from general
Precepts; only such as Building sightly and comfortable Meeting Houses, putting
on our best Apparel on the Sabbath, and if at distance we take our Horses to
ride etc. that are not in Terms commanded us; Besides Electing Men of Learning
and Gifts, apt to teach, for the Work of the Ministry, that may with fittest
Expressions carry our requests to God, in the public Prayers, and that can
choose acceptable words for Sermons; whereas illiterate Persons could with more
ease and less Charge be introduced; which yet you will not hear of or yield to,
to avoid the Construction, and imputation; that we count any thing good enough
for the Service of God; and that the Lame and Maimed of our Flock, will do well
eno', when we know God will have the Male and best of us or nothing.

Quest. Well, but Regular Singing is not the great Cause of Religion, is it?

Ans. No, but it is one of the well equipped hand-maidens waiting upon a
Religious Exercise. If one had gotten a Horse, Hat, or Garb, that gave offense,
or that a Brother were disturbed at, such might by an act of self-denial
consent to put either any or all of them away, to recover their temper; and no
Prejudice, but Credit would be to Religion hereby: but that which is under
Consideration, cannot be let drop, without a plain hurt to a main Exercise of
Religion, although it be not itself a principal Pillar (...) ble Singing, and
Sing after a sort, had we learnt neither the new, nor old way of Singing, but
to do such a Service most miserably, when we might do it, with more accuracy
and Credit; (like them about us that learnt, when we missed our Opportunity,
and that may be purposely) is contrary to Scripture caution, not to expose our
good to be evil spoken of. Besides as there are weightier matters of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy and Truth, so there are under them things weighty, though not
equally so with the other. But I could wish, that instead of growing into a
ferment and controversy hereabout, we could all set our minds to the Apostle's
rule, Ephesians. 4.2, 3. With all lowliness and meekness, with long suffering,
forbearing one another in love; Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit,
in the bond of Peace. And I would have such invectives and flings among
Christians kept back, concluding that many will have to retract them in time to
come, with the tears of Repentance, and wish over and over they had never let
them out of their mouths. I could wish we were more sensible of, and willing to
part with, the brokenness of our former Singing, and in the mean time let not
them that are for Regular Singing, judge the rest, and vice versa; for God
receives both, if they humbly and faithfully come to Him. And let us go and
learn what that means, viz. to Love one another with a pure heart fervently,
1 Pet. 1.22. Finally, To such as profess themselves to be yet in the dark, in
respect of seeing that which is labored for to be a gainful Reformation, I
must needs plead, that to me it promises to befriend and serve the Interest of
Religion. And as long as you plead that you are thus blinded about it, I
entreat you not to let your Passions abroad, nor yet to let your Spirits be
sowred hereat. Though I desire not to hinder your resenting, and faulting
misconduct with some, that have rather too earnestly set themselves to hasten
the matter on. But I would not have any that hope to endure the Trial at the
last Day, under the Righteousness of the GREAT REDEEMER, after an innocent and
unblameable Walk among Men, I would not have them allow themselves to fight and
strike stand not, to the oppugning and discouraging the Interest of Religion
among us, when, I don't mean Religion in the Essentials of it (as when Paul had
to retract his error, and said, Act. 26.9. I verily though it with my self, that I
ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazereth.) but in the
Circumstantials of it, that have their weight; or our Fathers more than Sixty
Years ago and since, were out of the way in the Reformation they stood for: who
could have had Prayers, Sermons, Scriptures, and Sacraments in the Church of
England, but could not away with the imposed and supposed Adulterating
Ceremonies, and were earnest to have them parted from Ordinances; as Now the
flaws and imperfections of our Singing, some of our Brethren seek to have
removed: And our Fathers suffered much rather than anger Conscience in them:
And how desirable was their Practice in their Difficulty for Imitation, in
discovering so much of the true Spirit of Piety, and a Native undisguis'd
Sincerity, in all their conduct; thoughtful, cautious, and humble, in their
Applications to God to direct their way, open to Light and Conviction, willing
to weigh every thing that deserved regard, and fearful of being deceived and
misguided in their Contests: It were unaccountable to think such were left of
God, in matters where the Divine Honor and Credit of Religion was so much
concerned. Would to God we in our more petty Contests could do likewise. And in
the mean time patiently suffer, being most afflicted that Religion suffers,
while some too strenuously plead for, the more broken and imperfect carrying on
its Exercises; but are the more to be forborne, because not sufficiently aware
hereof belike, and so may be said not to know what they do. And we might wind
up with 2 Cor. 13.8. For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth.

But I cannot forbear adding, that I think David was a very accurate Singer, and
that he used many Tunes, and some possibly that some of ours say, they cannot
come into of Conscience, though others say it is of Ignorance and Frowardness;
and that as his mind was much in the exercise (...) so that he had much
Communion with God herein, by which he was the better Christian, and that by
the help and blessing of God he made himself so much more a Warrior and better
Soldier by Singing over and over such Passages as that when he took the Field,
Psa. 144.1, 2. I will bless the Lord who teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight. And that in the midst of the battle, Psalm. 118 9 They
compassed me about like Bees, but in the name of the Lord, I will destroy them.
Beside, Psalm. 18.41, 42. They cried but there was none to save them, even to
the Lord but he answered them not. Then did I beat them small as the dust
before the wind, I did cast them out as dirt in the streets. And that in
quitting the field, Psalm. 144.10. It is he that gives Salvation to Kings, who
delivers David his Servant, from the hurtful Sword. And it seems as if that
were his Storming Song, when in spite of all the Guards his Enemies could set,
he was resolved to Scale the Walls of their Fortresses, Psalm. 18 29. For by
thee have I run through a troop, by my God have I leaped over a wall. And Oh!
that we were of one mind about the mode of Singing his holy Songs; not only for
the sake of making our selves Masters of Strong Cities and Impregnable Castles
if sent against them, and defying Ramparts and Bulwarks, but for the sake of
fighting the good fight of Faith, Scaling Heaven, and taking its Kingdom with
Violence, and inheriting with him, and all the Saved there, Eternal Life. Amen.

FINIS.

