WAYS and MEANS For the Inhabitants of DELAWARE To become RICH: WHEREIN The
several Growths and Products of these COUNTRIES are demonstrated to be a
sufficient Fund for a flourishing TRADE.

Humbly submitted to the Legislative Authority of these Colonies.

Nemo seipsum natus est.

Prnited and sold by S. Keimer, in Philadelphia. MDCCXXV.

THE INTRODUCTION.
AS Trade is a noble Subject very copious, so it deserves a better Genius and
Capacity than I am Master of, to discourse of the several Branches thereof.

But some ingenious and well meaning Persons having employed their Pens that
way, from the generous Motives and Views of promoting the public Good, I
persuade my self it is a good Omen and Presage of the future Happiness of a
Country, especially when it appears in private Persons, who for the most Part
may be presumed to be free from the Bias of sinister Interest; whereas publi^k
Projectors, under the specious Pretenses of public Spiritedness and Promotion
of Trade, secretly carry on their private Interest, without any true Regard to
the Public, and which they too often sacrifice, to the great Damage, if not
Ruin thereof.

But since nothing of what has been wrote on this Subject, has been so public
and common as is necessary to render it of public Service and Advantage; and
considering Trade is of the last Importance to the Good and Prosperity of any
Country, and how much it has languish'd for diverse Years past in the Colonies
lying on Delaware; insomuch that Trade not only sunk, but most of the middling
People, and diverse good Housekeepers, as well as the inferior Rank labored
under inextricable Difficulties, Silver and Gold the only Legal Currency, being
almost totally exhausted, or kept up, that through the Scarcity thereof, the
Farmer to pay a D^bt was forced to sell twice as much as he needed to come at
Silver, and take one part in such Goods as he did not want, till at last scarce
any Money could be come at, to answer his Occasions, much less to pay his
Debts, or discharge the Encumbrance great Numbers of Estates lay under; all
Credit private and public, being ^unk.

And that this is not a groundless Suggestion, or a Misrepresentation of the
State of the Country; but a Truth known to all who saw the late deplorable
Condition of these Colonies compared to what they were some Years past. When
Grain bore a Price, the Farmer could live by his Labor, the Tradesman, the
Artificer and the Merchant increased in Wealth and got Estates, what Colony
then on the Continent of America of better Credit and more punctual in their
Dealing? but since Husbandry the Foundation of our Trade has been so fatally
discouraged by the low Price of Grain, and our Currency, the vital Spirit and
Blood of the Body politic stagnated, instead of (prompt Payment) so much the
Honor of our Country, has been introduced the mean and scandalous Way of
Discount, Tr^ck and Turn-ove^s, which ended at last in re^ding Lawsuits and
barbarous Attachments, the Ban^ of Concord, Peace and Civil Society, and the
Preludes of Poverty.

Hence it was that this melancholy Scene of Affairs being laid to Heart by some
sympathising Persons from a Sense of the languishing Condi^ion of the Country
crying for Relief from their Representatives, who, as honest Men and worthy
Patriots, engaged themselves for their Country's Relief, by providing a Medium
for Commerce and Dealing by a Paper-Credit, which though far short of what the
Nego^^ of these Colonies required, yet it answered our present Exigencies,
revived Trade, rendered Commerce and Dealing more easy and safe.

And it is with much Pleasure I have since met with diverse who have acknowledged
the Advantages they have received thereby, as having no Prospect of being
relieved or freeing their Estates from the Encumbrances and Engagements they
were under but thereby, as the only Expedient that with Honor and Justice
could be found to restore Credit, and put themselves in a Capacity to approve
them just and honest Men.

And now, that a greater Sum is struck this present Year 1724. It may
contribute to enable diverse Inhabitants on both Sides the River to engage in
Foreign Trade which will not only be our present Relief, but a Means to restore
us to our former flourishing Condition by advancing and increasing our foreign
as well as Domestic Trade, which is what only can complete ou^ Happiness and
re-instate us in any Degree of our (...) Tranquillity.

And indeed without this we and our Posterity must inevitably sink and relapse
into our late deplorable Condition, if we do not in some uncommon Way exert our
selves to promote Manufacture, Trade and Navigation.

These Thoughts of late have been the Subject of my serious Deliberation; and
indeed I have been sorrowfully affected when I have considered that this River
which was settled with a sober, religious and industrious People, who were of
no mean Circumstances in their native Country, should be so soon reduced to so
low a Condition as of late we were; which how to retreive in Time is the Design
and Intendment of this Essay, wherein if the Ideas I have formed are not
agreeable to the Nature of the Subject, or may not be judged practicable, it is
to be hoped some other Person of better Notions and brighter Conceptions in
those Affairs may complete what I have from just Views taken in hand, having
sincerely the public Good, and the Interest of these Colonies at Heart,
separate from all other Views whatsoever; for I cannot doubt but every honest
Man finds a secret Joy in contributing any Thing to the Happiness of his
Country either in Respect of Wealth, good Laws or Liberty, as knowing he is not
born for himself.

In Order thereunto, 'twill be necessary to consider what the true Riches of
any Country does consist in, or whence we may be truly denominated rich or
wealthy, that so we may not amuse our selves with Chimerical Notions or
imaginary Riches in a Matter of so great Importance as our present Happiness,
and of that of our Posterity, in which we shall observe some Methods the better
to be understood. And,

1. First then Negatively, I say what it is not, which will nece^sarily lead us
to observe such Ways and Means, in the Pursuit whereof we may really and truly
become rich, as the intended Design and Purport of this Essay.

1. It Is not Extent of Country or Soil. 2. It Is not ^opulacy simply. 3. It Is
not Fertility of Soil. Consequently, 4. It Is not abundance of Country-Produce.
5. Lastly, it is not our Paper-Money.
I conceive we shall prove th^se Positions from the undeniable Evidence of Fact
and Experience, wherein we mu^^ be somewhat historical; for Examples in such
Cases do better ^llustrate than Reasoning and Argumentation.

Spain, which within little more than a Century, was a Monarchy of a large
Extent, consisting of diverse Kingdoms and Islands, (which I need not enumerate,
being done, and may be seen in some of our late Prints) be^ides the Silver and
Gold they have in Old Spain, (perhaps what they have in this new World, exceeds
all That in the Old,) a great Part of their Country fertile and productive of
all that is necessary for the Life of Man, and much for Pleasure; For Extent of
Territory their Historians glory to say, The Sun never sets in their Dominions;
well accommodated for Trade by Situation; with Bays, Harbors and artificial
Moles, and not long since the Terror of Europe for Maritime Power which they
styled Invincible:

Thus a Country where Nature seems to have been prodigally diffusive of all
that Mortals can wish, or that may render a Nation happy, is now fallen from
their pristine Glory, and of late Years reduced to a mean Appearance in the
World, and of small Account in the Affairs of Europe, through Neglect of
Manufactory, Trade and Navigation, sunk and lost their ancient Grandeur, so as
to permit two Foreign Armies in the Bowels of their Country, contending the
Right of providing a King for their Monarchy, who at last split it in Pieces,
whilst they were little other than Spectators.

We could produce other Examples of Nations in Europe, who through the Neglect of
Trade have sunk; as on the other Hand, it is easy to point to a Holland.
Nation little in Extent, scarce capable to feed its Inhabitants, who by their
indefatigable Pains and Industry in promoting Manufacture, Trade, and
Navigation are become Rich and powerful.

From these Examples we presume we have undeniably demonstrated all those
Positions about Matters of Fact, except that of Paper-Money, which we shall
refer to a subsequent Part of this Discourse: But here we shall acknowledge it
to be a known Maxim, that Populacy is the Riches of a Country; but it must be
understood of an industrious and laborious People, such as are the Palatines
and others, and not Convicts or the Scum of Goals, who are a Nuisance to the
Countries whence they came, and will contribute no more to the Advantage of a
Country than the most salvage Indians.

Having thus negatively laid down what is not to be deemed Riches, I shall next
Affirmatively demons^rate what is properly and t^uly the Rich^s of a ^ountry;
whence a Country may be rig^tly denominated rich or wealthy, as also the Way
and Means whereby a Country may attain to that happy Condition which is the
Thing proposed, and which in ^rosecution of this Discourse, we shall clearly
evince.

The Riches then of any Country may be said to consi^^ in an ^ven Balance to
its Favor in all Trade it is engaged in with the sev^ral Countries i^ trades
withal: But if it be so unhappy as not to balance with those Cou^t^^es it
trades with by an Exchange of its Produ^t or Manufacture, it most certainly
loses by such Trade, and mu^t part with its ^^llion to make Good the ^allance,
or with its Credit; and the greater its Trade is, the sooner it becomes
bankrupt. But on the contrary, if any Country is so happy in their Trade with
other Countries as that their Exports to such Countries exce^d the Imports, by
which Means the Balance is in their Favor; instead of paying, they receive of
their Bullion, or what is equivalent their European Goods: And this was
formerly the case in our Trade to the West Indies. When our Exports much
exceeded our Imports, the Balance came back in Bullion; hence it was, we so
much abounded with Silver and Gold; but as Riches is the Mother of Luxury and
Idleness, it may be said, as in another Case, the Daughter devoured the Mother.

But as this River grows more populous, which increases our Demands from
England; and as by the more frequent Use of Rum, the Consumption of the
West India Goods increases on us; hence, from the low Markers and Gluts of our
River-Produce there, it is not probable we are in a Condition to balance with
any Place we trade to at this Time, which gives a very melancholy Prospect, and
which all true Lovers of their Country should seriously lay ^o Heart.

And to possess every sensible Farmer of the Truth and Certainty of this
Assertion, let it be supposed that he is one possessed of a spacious Farm, of a
rich Soil, well stocked with Cattle, and all other Advantages, which may render
a Farm profitable; Nevertheless, if through the low Price of the Produce in
general, and Charge of Husbandry, which is very great, the Produce of his Farm
will not balance with the Shops and Stores, he must inevitable become poor.
Now as no Man can reasonably deny this; so a just Inference may be from the
lesser to the greater; for as every individual Member of the Community must in
a most sensible manner acknowledge this, Reason will enforce the same as
applicable to the Body conjunctively. And the true Cause of our Poverty and
sunk Condition is obvious, namely the low Pric^ of our Country-Produce, which
can never be retrieved but by the Encourage^ment of Manufacture, Trade and
Navigation, which only will enable us to balance with those Countries we are
concerned in Trade withal, by which Mean^ our Lands and Produce, will advance
i^ Value, which is what we may properly call Riches.

I have been the more particular in this Notice to the Farmer, who not
considering the Importance of Trade to the Benefit of a Country, and being
unacquainted therewith, choose Men to represent them who are as much
unacquainted as themselves; that if one Assembly happily pass a good Law, for
the Promotion of Trade, the next being imposed on by wrong Notions, undo what a
former Assembly have done, to the great Injury of Trade and the Country in
general. Of this we have an Instance in the Eastern Division of the Jerseys,
where there have been good Projects advanced: But for Want of Patience to see
the desired Effects, all dropped again, and came to nothing: The same has
happened on the Western Shore of Delaware, where an Impost on that destructive
Liquor Rum, laid by one Assembly, with other good Laws for the Advancement of
Trade, Navigation and Building of Ships, have been taken off by succeeding
Assemblies, only from wrong Notions, not allowing Time for Experience, which is
the infallible Directress of Affairs of this Nature.

Now of what Importance it is to the Prosperity and Wealth of a Country to
preserve the ^allance in Trade, our Mother Country England is well aware of,
being a Nation that very well understands their true Interest, and are as fine
in their Politics as any Nation in Europe. We cannot so low a better Example,
in copying after her (as far as practicable under our Circum^tances of a
dependent Government) whose Prudence and Policy it is to consider the State of
Trade with every Nation they trade withal; as I remember soon after King
Charles the Second's Accession to the Throne, the People following the Example
of the Court, sell in with the Modes and Humor of France, which together with
other Luxuries derived from that Nation, gave a very strange Turn to the
Affairs of England. France increased in Trade, and Naval Force, and England
declining, the Nation seeing their Error, an Address from the Parliament was
presented, petitioning his Majesty that he would be graciously pleased by his
own Example, to encourage the constant wearing of the Manufacturies of his own
Subjects, and discourage those of Strangers; but so devoted was the Court to
French Measures, that it had little Effect. Then followed the Act for burying
in Woollen, the Balance of Trade continuing in Favor of France; next a
Prohibition of French Wines, with other good Acts for the Encouragement of
Trade and Navigation. Of so great Importance is the Balance of Trade to any
Country, as that which can only render a Country opulent.

From these Premises necessarily follows what we first proposed; namely the Way
and Means for the Colonies on Delaware to become rich; or in the Explanation
above, how we may attain to a Condition to balance Trade in our Favor with
all Places we trade to; which in Effect is the same; which we shall descend to
do with as much Brevity as so large a Subject will admit of.

As the principal Design and Intendment of this Discourse is the promoting of
Trade and Traffic, Foreign and Domestic, which as they are of a complicated
Nature, the Ways and Means tending thereunto, are likewise diverse and various.
But

Though we have said the Produce of the Country simply considered cannot make us
rich, (for often it is at so low a Price in these Countries, that the Farmer is
not able to live at the Rates it sells for) yet it must be granted that it is
the Primum, the Foundation and principal Medium and Staple of our Trade both
Foreign and Domestic. And here we are led to consider, that as Manufactory and
Navigation is the Way of improving such Country-Produce, so all possible
Encouragement ought to be given for the manufacturing such Country-Product as
is capable of improving that Way, whether spontaneous or artificial, under
which two General Heads may be concluded all the several Species.

1. WHEAT. To begin with tha^ Specie which is the chief Staple of ou^ Trade.
Wheat, from the Nature of the Soil and Climate, is what we are capable to raise
in vast Quantities, and what we are mostly to depend on, and was the chief
Matter of our Trade in the most flourishing State of these Colonies, which
being manufactured into Bread, Flour, Starch, etc. renders it of twice the
Value as in Grain, consequently will purchase twice the Value of Goods from
those Markets it is sent to, than in Grain, and casts the Balance the more in
our Favor, being sold for so much more than otherwise it would, which makes
the Returns the more valuable for those we sell to pay the Labor and Charge of
manufacturing and Freight. Hence several Tradesmen and Artificers are
immediately employed, by whom again diverse others, as Butchers, Bakers,
Tailors, Shoemakers; and by the Bulkiness of the Commodities Navigation is
promoted, all which is the Foundation of Towns (the Fame and Riches of
Countries) which I conceive to be the most proper Places for Bolting and
Baking; and it would be the Advantage of the Farmer if they declined boulting
their Meal, and sent it to Town, as I could easily demonstrate, and which
Experience has fully evinced. For I justly date the Fall of Flour from the Time
of the Farmer becoming Boulters; but this only by the bye.

But to return. The Manufacturing of all our Wheat is rather to be wished than
expected, for when far greater Quantities of Wheat were exported than of late,
we had sufficient to manufacture and supply all our Plantations in the
West Indies; and those Markets of late have been glutted to that Degree, that
the Merchant and Boulter complain of Loss there as well as the Farmer by the
low Price here, as appears by the Numbers of Estates that were encumbred, though
many but for small Debts from which they could not extricate themselves till
the Expedien^ of a Loan-Office was pitched upon. But tho that has proved a
present Relief, yet it is to be doubted diverse will relapse into the same
Condition, unless some Way is found to augment the Value of the Farmers Labor;
for by the Value of the Produce, Land will rise, and be more valuable, which is
what must make these Provinces really rich, otherwise we are but nominally so,
notwithstanding we might have a Million of Paper-Money.

From these Considerations, proper Methods ought to be thought on to advance
the Price of Wheat, and to enable the Farmer to live; for if he sinks, at long
Run, all sinks. It Is by his Labor as already observed, Trade must be
supported, and Land rendered valuable: The Merchants Interest is inseparable
from the Farmers; and if he cannot make an Advantage by raising of Grain, he will
make the less, and endeavor to cloth himself without much Use of their Stores
or Shops. And if the Chain of mutual Dependence is broken, twill be the
Disadvantage of both: Therefore we offer an Expedient which will be the
Advantage and Encouragement of the Trader and Farmer, whose Interest we shall
impartially regard in Prosecution of this Essay.

We humbly propose to the Honorable the Legislative Authority of the Provinces
on Delaware, that a Bounty of per Bushel be paid for all Wheat which shall be
exported to any Parts of the Continent of Europe; as to France, Spain,
Portugal, and sometimes Italy is a Market for that Species. By this Means
Encouragement will be given to find out new Markets: The Bounty to be raised by
a Land Tax, or a Duty on Rum, or as the Honorable Assemblies may think fit.
Tho it may be objected, that the Country cannot bear a Land Tax, yet it is not
to be doubted but as by this Means there will less Quantities be sent to the
Islands, this will abate the Glut, and consequently what goes, will fetch the
better Price. Hence the Country may easily bear a Land Tax, when most probably
they will be re imburs'd by the Advance of the Price of that Grain to what of
late it has been, or in Reason can be expected, whilst the West Indies is the
only Markets we depend on, where the Markets for our Country-Product of late
has been so low that we cannot balance with them with all our Exports as
already ^emark'd.

This will encourage Navigation, and the Building of Ships, which how far it
will conduce to the Advantage of these Countries, shall be discoursed in a
proper Place. But to proceed,

Having this further to offer to mature Consideration on this Branch; That
whereas all Ships bound hither from Lisbon come empty, or in their Ballast,
this is a dead Weight to the Adventurer, whether Merchant or Owners, and
Discouragement to Navigation; for by this Means unless Wheat sells high, we
have no Encouragement to send, having no Prospect of Advantage by Returns,
which frequently helps a bad Market. Therefore we humbly propose to their
Excellencies the Governors of these Provinces to use their Instances at home,
with his Majesty our Sovereign King George, that he would be graciously pleased
to permit all English Bottoms carrying Wheat to Lisbon, to return back with
Salt into this River; and this we conceive will be no ways detrimental to the
Navigation of Great Britain (to which we shall propose nothing injurious) for
by this Opportunity the British Traders will be on an equal Foot with the
Baltic Traders, who by Loading home Salt, on which they are sure of making a
profitable Voyage, have the Advantage of underselling what Wheat goes from
hence, since otherwise the Profit of the Voyage solely depends on the Exports,
and nothing by Returns.

This we take to be the only Means to advance the Price of Grain which of late
has been so low, that the Farmer has been reduced to the Brink of Ruin, and
which will be his inevitable Fate without some timely Remedy. For we cannot do,
as the Dutch are said to do, after they extorted from England the whole Spice
Trade of the Indies, were careful to send no more home than they knew would
supply Europe, so kept up the Price to a vast Profit of their India-Trade. Or
should we attempt to enhance the Price of Wheat by the Method the Virginians
did to enhance the Price of their Tobacco, the Success would not answer, ^or
the same Reason it had not the desi^ed Effect with them, which was the
re^^ricting the planting of Tobacco to less Quantity, thereby to make it
scarce, and ^f greater Value: For Maryland not con^urring in the Project, it
gave them the Advantage of a better Price to the Cost of Virginia. And this is
the Inconveni^ncy attending contiguous Governments that are distinct, and
independent, where ^f one Government make a Law, though never so much for the
public Utility, the other fru^trates, these good Designs from their private
Views, though it might be to their mutual Benefit to have concurred therein.
Therefore as this Proposal carries a fair Prospect of Advantage to all the
Colonies lying on Delaware, it must be by the united Endeavors of the
Legislature of all the Governments on Delaware that must render all Projects on
Trade successful. This in the present Conjuncture, we have Reason to hope and
expect on the Part of our Governors, from their happy Unanimity and Attachment
to the Interest of the respective Provinces they govern, of which to their
Honor be it spoken, we have had several In^^ances, more particularly their
joint Concurrence in Concert with other worthy Gentlemen of these and those
other Virginia* and New York.
Governments in settling a Peace at Albany with the Five Nations our Friendly
Indians, the good Effects whereof is the Happiness of Peace, Plenty and
Tranquillity, when other Colonies in America are molested and disquieted to the
Ruin of many Families, and Loss of very many Lives.

This Consideration induces us to hope and expect their continued Endeavors to
exert themselves on an Occasion so conducive to the Benefit and Prosperity of
the People they govern, especially, as we just now observed, that the Thing
proposed will be no Disadvantage or Injury to the Trade and Navigation of Great
Britain, to which we know these Gentlemen have a constant due Regard, and are
not known to deviate from the Instructions transmitted to them, relating to
Navigation and Trade. This we think is not an unnecessary Digression.

But to return to this Branch of our Trade: We have this Caution to propose
relating to the Bounty; that it be not given to any New England Vessels trading
here; for we not being so well situate for Trade, lying so far up a River, they
will fetch our Wheat, manufacture it, and send it to the West Indies, continue
the Glut of that Market, and under-sell us, which will frustrate the Good End
hereby intended. The same Caution may be observed with respect to the Madera,
Fyal, and other Western Islands, who impose very much on the English Trade,
though we have less Need of their Commodities than they have of ours; also the
Returns being Wine, the Merchant has the Opportunity of advancing on his
Returns in Case of a low Market for Grain. The proposed Bounty therefore ought
to be for such Grain only as is exported to the Continent of Europe, in Order
as has been said to find out new Markets to prevent cloying the Caribbees. And
that this may not be thought an impertinent Proposal, we have the Example of
England to warrant us in this very Case, whose Example, as has been observed,
we may safely copy after, who by frequent 12 Car. II.14 idem.
Acts of Parliament have encouraged the Transportation of Grain.

BARLEY also is another artificial Product of these Countries, of which we have
three Sorts, namely the common Barley with 4 Rows of Grain, the Winter Barley
which grows much like it, and the English with only two Rows; all fit for
Trade, when Manufactur'd and made into Malt for brewing of Beer, either for
Exportation or Home Use, of which we have very good, if we will go to the
Price, but through the Depravity and Viciousness of our Palates, and the so
frequent Use of Spirits there has not been due Care in the Brewing of Beer, by
which it has lost its Credit at home and abroad. It were to be wished it were
retrieved by brewing of what is very good, though it cost the more; but it is to
be feared that were it never so good, we are so strongly addicted to Rum and
other Spirits, that neither Regard to public Interest or private, Body or
Soul, will divert the Generality of these Parts of the World from the frequent
Use thereof. But not to be wholly without Hopes, let the Brewer do his Part,
and the Legislature their Part by laying an Impost on For^ign Liquors, and
permit the selling of Beer and Cider free of all Charges: This will further the
more frequent Use of the latter, and Disuse of the former, consequently will
cause a greater Consumptino of the Country-Produce, and lo^s of foreign,
whereby we are still in a fairer Way to balance with the West Indies.

OATS another artificial Produce, of which we have two or three Sorts, and are
di^tinguish'd by Black and white; the latter is found to be the best, and would
be better if sown earlier than usually they are by most Farmers; they increase
well, if the ^and and Husbandry is any Thing like. Hence they are prof^table;
though it is the cheapest of Grain, they are capable to be manufactured into Grots
or Oatmeal. And when Freight is low, or by throwing them into the Hold amongst
the Cask, they advance as well as any Thing else, and if frequently sen^ to the
Caribbees, would undoubtedly be more in Use, being more wholesome for Horses
than Indian Grain, and would be one Means also to help to a Balance: But
Indian Corn being of a more general Use and Service, oftentimes sells to great
Advantage, and is a better Merchandise.

TOBACCO has been formerly planted in this Colony* and considerable Quantities
made, but the Price of late Years has been so low, the Planting has been
discontiued to the Loss of the Planter and greater Disadvantage of the
Merchant, by Want of that Commodity to make Returns to Britain. So true it is,
that if the Planter or Farmer sinks, the Merchant or Trader cannot swim, no
more than his Ship when a But-Head is sp^ung.

HEMP is another artificial Product of this River, the raising whereof ought to
be encouraged by a Bounty, whether it be manufactured here or exported, in both
which Respects it will much contribute to the Advantage and Benefit of these
Countries, not only by employing People, by what is manufactured for the River
Use, but as it is proper Merchandise, and fit to make Returns, which will help
very much toward a Balance with England; for, by how much soever is made into
Cordage here, our Demands thence will be the less, and the Surplusage will
supply so far our Wants of other Goods. And the more Species of Growths we have
to employ our Land, the more it will enhance the Value thereof which renders us
the richer: And though here is not much Land proper for raising Hemp without
chargeable man^^^^turing, yet those who have it, by employing it and their
Servants that Way, will raise the less Grain, unless better Markets could be
found for it.

Hence we are induced to urge the Necessity of a Bounty for the Encouragement
of that Product here, lest these Attempts already made for the raising thereof,
prove abortive, and those Countries deprived of so considerable a Matter for
Trade, and Navigation.

And here the mentioning a Bounty it may be worth our serious Consideration to
add what ought to be of Moment to us, That as the Government at Home thought it
the Interest of Brita^n to endeavor the Supplies of Naval Stores from America,
and as Cordages is a prinpal Part, it will become us to exert our selves on
this Occasion with the utmost Diligence: For if once we lay a Foundation for
'em to believe and be assured of a Supply from hence, this will take off the
Nation from a Dependence on the Russians, etc. from whom they may be
disappointed; for should the Czar who appears to be an ambitious Prince, either
by his Arms or Alliance, with either of the Northern Crowns, stop the Trade
into the Baltic Seas, not only Prudence but Necessity of Affairs will oblige
Britain to be supplied from hence for such Naval Stores, especially in that the
Manufactures of England will purchase what^^er we are capable to furnish 'em
with, without parting with any Money, which ^^ll be the undoubted Interest of
Britain; ^hereas a great Part of the Naval Stores ^^om the Baltic is purchased
with Bul^^on, which enriches the Northern Crowns, and may render them the more
formida^le Enemies in case of a Rupture; where^s the other will save the
Treasure of ^reat Britain, and promote Navigation, ^he Foundation of their
Naval Force, the Glory of a Kingdom, and which has ren^er'd her the Arbitress
of Europe.

But notwithstanding the fine Notions of some late Authors here in recommend^ng
Hemp to be so advantageous in Agriculture, if these speculative Farmers would
but once practice what they so ^^rnestly recommend to the Country, ^hey will
most assuredly find themselves mistaken in their Notions, for which we have
very probable Grounds and Reas^ns for our Opinion; for it is to be considered
that England, Holland, and Part of France is supplied with those Commodities
from the East-lands, where all the Produce of the Country is miserably cheap
and low, the Soil being rich, an^ the Laborers Vassals, who live in miserable
Bondage under their Lords. Their Apparel is Sheepskins Coat and Breeches with
the Wool on the Inside in Winter, and the ^ame with the Wool Outside in Summer:
Hist. of Russia, by G. Fl.
They subscribe and name themselves Kolophey, that is, Villains or Bondslaves:
There is not a Servant or Bondslave more awed by his Master, nor kept down in a
more servile Condition than those poor People are, and that universally, not
only by the Emperor, but by their chief Officers and Soldiers.

Hence it is, that all the Produce of the Land is so very cheap; Wheat and Rye
sells sometimes for 5 Alteens, or 2 ^. 1 d. Sterling the Chitford, which makes
almost three English Bushels. But the Prices of Grain rises and falls there,
according to the Circumstances of the Country, with respect to Peace or War;
from whence it may be concluded, that Hemp another Specie of their Country
sells as cheap ^s Corn; for it is not to be doubted they employ themselves on
that which is most beneficial; so that as long as our Wheat will fetch 3 s. per
Bushel, 'twill never be ^he Interest of the Farmer to raise Hemp. We have been
thus far hi^torical in relation to Russia on this Subject, to support what we
have asserted of the Necessity of a Bounty for the Encouragement of ^aising
that Commodity, without which ^ll the Attempts to raise Hemp will prove
unsuccessful, and these Provinces ^epriv^d of the Advantages which we may
reasonably hope will accrue there^y. As it must be acknowledged that ^he more
Species of Growth or Products ^ur Lands are employed in, the more will it raise
the Value of Lands and La^our of our Servants or Slaves, in which ^he Riches of
America chiefly consist, ^y which Means we shall be better ena^led to balance
with England.

FLAX is another Produce fit for manufacturing and making of Linen, etc. For
this we are at greater Certainty than the former, in that it requires not so
rich a Soil, nor so much Labor, and may be raised with l^ss Difficulty. There
is scarce a Plantation but what has Land good for that Use, and is a lighter
Work fit for Women and Children, either Negroes or White, and is a^^ther Way to
convert our Land to Pro^it, and which being manufactured also into Linen, will
be found to the Benefit and Advantage of those* Countries, not only by
employing Labor and Land, but by lessening our Demands from Europe, and in
Lieu thereof, have Returns of such Commodities, of which we shall always have
an absolute Necess^ty from thence; and so the less we need, the better able we
shall be to pay for them, and this in our humble Opinion deserves the
Encouragement of a L^w, of which we have the Example of the Kingdom of Ireland,
whereby the Linen Manufacture has been very much improved to the no small
Advantage of great Part of that Island. And this can be no Detriment to
England, most of the Linens we have being from Germany or Holland; and seeing
^^at the Woollen Fa^tory is the Staple of ^ngland, by which the People are
gene^^lly employed there, if once we make ^ur own Linen, we shall be in a
better Capacity to take off the greater Quanti^ies of fine Woollens as
Broad-Cloths, Drabs, Druggets, etc. as Convenience or Luxury may prompt us to.

Add to this, that as we acquire the Skill of making fine Linens with a Mixture
of Cotton of di^ferent Colors, it may well serve instead of Indian Callicoes:
And this rather will be the Advantage of England than otherwise (we speak of
the Nation and People in general, for pa^ticular People, or even Companies may
gain to the Loss of a Country in general) for the more England vends of India
Goods, the more of their Bullion must be exported to buy it; whereas if these
Parts of America which are proper for raising ^lax fall in with the Use of such
Linens and the Disuse of Callicoes, etc. (as observed above) we are in the
better Condition to take off the Manufacture and Growth of England, whereby our
Christian Brethren there will be employed, and our Silver and Gold which goes
to balance our Trade, will stop in England, amongst the several Tradesmen,
instead of going to the Indies to employ Mahumetans and Pagans: All which duly
considered, proves our Assertion that it will be the Advantage of the Nation in
general, that we make our Linen; and by the Way I shall make this short Notice,
that by making Canvass and Sail-Cloth, we are in the better Condition to
furnish and fi^ out Ships, of which we say more under a particular Head.

PAPER, another Manufacture is what we are fallen into of late Years, and in Time
may be improved equal to Dutch, or French Paper, and is chiefly Labor, which
saves us the Costs to be laid out otherways, as observed in other Cases, and
employs some poor People to find a Living by gathering Rags which would
otherwise be lost.

LINSEED-OYL is what necessarily follows to be taken Notice of, whereof
considerable Quantities may be made, not only for Domestic Uses about our
Houses and Shipping, but is also proper to be sent to the West Indies where
they have the same Use for it, and often sells to Advantage.

DISTILLING is another Art or Mystery we are capable of. It is the Chemical
Extraction of Spirits from Matter of a low Value, whereby it is rendered of
considerable Worth and Use; not only for Consumption at home, but for
Transportation to any of our Neighbor Colonies; but little of the latter is to
be expected, for they are aforehand with us, and supply us, though we have the
same or greater Advantages, which is a culpable Neglect of the Inhabitants on
this River to their very great Damage, suffering our selves to be drained of
our Silver when we had it, and now the best of our Produce for what we can
easily supply our selves for about half the Cost; namely Melasses, besides
other Matter we have to distill, as Cider, Peach-Drink, decayed Wines, as well
as sundry Grains, as Rye, Parley, etc. But though the Art of Distilling is a
Science very useful to Mankind* yet by the great Abuse thereof, nothing is more
injurious and prejudicial to human Nature; for by the two frequent Use thereof
the Natural Heat of the Stomach is impaired in many, and lost in others to that
Degree, that they feel little of Gu^^ in any simple Liquors, to which, no Doubt
is owing the many pining Diseases and ling^ing Deaths of so many People.

But this only as transient, our Design being Traffic, not Physic, and to
provide Remedies and Preventives for the Body Politic, and leave the Natural
to the Gentlemen of that Faculty; we return to show how this Manufacture may be
improved, and conducive to Trade, and whereby we shall be the better enabled to
balance with our Islands, which is the Maxim we build on, and what is of
Weight is the Example of England whose Politics, (as observed,) we may with
the greatest Safety follow, especial^y in Cases where the same Reasons and
Considerations induce us.

It had been often represented to the Parliament how much England fell in Debt
in Balance to France, that Monarchy endeavoring to vie in Trade and Maritime
Power with England, laid exorbitant Burdens on our Merchandise, besides 50 Sols
per* T^n on our Ships, whereby they had the Advantage of trading to our Ports,
being then free; That of two Milions of Goods imported from France, our Exports
was at about one Million. Thus England fell in Debt more than one Million
yearly, which was chiefly by the great Imports of Wine and Brandy; England then
by distilling of Spirits came nearer a Balance: And again since the happy
Revolution, by the Vigilance and Care of a good Ministry, the State of Trade
betwixt the two Nations has been more narrowly inspected than in some former
Reigns, and she has been obliged to part with Louis d' Ors to make good the
Balance.

Now seeing we have the same Advantages to all Places we trade to, our Exports
being more valuable Commodities, and such as the Places we trade with are in
greater Want of than we are of their Liquors, therefore an Impost on Liquors,
and a free Import of Melasses will soon give a Turn to the State of Trade to
our very great Advantage; and as we improve in this Art, a Part of our Grain
may be converted to that Use also, especially if at any Time Melasses falls
short; but at present Melasses must be the Ma^ter depended on, as what we are
to expect as Part of our Returns from the Caribbee Islands, Curranham, Caynam,
etc. which, of how great Advantage to the Farmer and to Trade and Navigation,
is clearly demonstrated in a Manuscript styled The Examination, which, though odd
in some Notions, is clear in this Case, which, not to trouble my Thoughts with
another Turn of Expression, or act the Plagiary, I shall transcribe.

1. First, It is to be observed, that the West Indies is the principal Market
for our Country-Produce, and the chiefest Employment for our Vessels and
Sailors, many of whom are Dwellers in Town.

2. When a Cargo in the West Indies, is disposed of, the Returns for the most
part is Rum or Melasses, unless sometimes Salt. If you buy Rum, it being the
most valuable, consequently the less will be the Balance in your Favor.

3. Whereas if you make Returns in Melasses, as the Cost is far less, so the
more will the Balance be in your Favor, and consequently the more European
Goods, Silver or Gold, will be brought home for Balance, or Bil^s of Exchange
for Europe, which is the same.

4. Melasses being the more bulky, the Vessels are the sooner back, so will be
the readier for another Voyage, which is the Benefit of the Owners and
Shippers, who by these Means will have the more frequent Opportunity of
shipping Goods again; to which it may be added, that it will give us the
Opportunity of other new Markets among the Dutch and French Settlements, from
whom we have Melasses at a very cheap Rate, and will be not one Quarter the
Cost of Rum, which, how far the ^allance may be in our Favor, is obvious to
every intelligent Reader.

RICE is another Specie of Grain, this Country is capable of, which grows and
thrives very well here on new Land, with no other Tillage than what Barley
requires, and is sown after the same Manner which is easier, and with less
tending than in Carolina.

But as Mankind are rational Creatures, and as such are most adapted for
Society, Commerce and Dealing, so Providence seems to have decreed various
Climates for different Productions of Nature for a mutual Intercourse and
Dependence on each other by exchanging the Growth of one Country with another,
which is the Foundation of Traffic and Dealing. But in Case we were to raise
that Grain here, it would in some Measure break that Chain of Intercourse and
Dealing betwixt us and them. Therefore it is rather to be desired, that we should
purchase that Specie of them, if upon an equal Foot, as they do the Produce of
our Province from us: But Carolina is very ungenerous in this Case, for though we
impose nothing on their Rice, Pitch, Tarr, etc. but all comes free into this
River; yet they clogg our Beer and Flour with exorbitant Duties. For these
Reasons it would not be amiss for us to endeavor the making of Rice here,
unless they will permit the Produce of our Province exported among 'em to be
free, as we do their Imports here. And it were to be wished, that as the
Government at home have past Acts for the universal Rates of Silver in America;
so if all the Ports in America were free to all British Subjects, we conceive
it would very much advance Trade and Navigation in general.

THE other Things proposed as Matter for Trade, come under the general
Predicament of spontaneous Productions, of which the Principal is Timber, which
though of little Value as it stands in the Woods, by Labor it may be rendered and
made valuable by the Artist for Domestic Use by the Cooper, Joyner, Turner,
House-Carpenter, etc. and is proper to make Returns for England, either gross,
as large Pines for Masts for Ships, which though cumbersome and bulky the more it
employs Ships and promotes Navigation. ^ut to render it yet of more Value and
fit for Merchandise, is by converting it into Cooper's Timber and Plank of
several Sorts, not only for Domestic Uses as are proper to employ Artificers,
whereby the Value will be augmented by the Labor of diverse of the Inhabitants,
but for Exportation, which will also promote Navigation.

This may be done at all convenient Places by erecting Mills. For this we have
two large Rivers, namely Dell^ware and Schu^^kill, besides several Creeks on
the Eastern Shore, which will furni^h with vast Quantities, being easily sent
down either by Flotes or Rafts at a small Charge; West-Jersey being stored with
Pine for Boards and Ship Timber, and their Clay-bottom Swamps with noble Timber
for Keels and Plank, not inferior to any in America. And their Cedar Swamps in
Time will be a Treasure: Their Pine also is proper for Pitch, Tar, Rozin, as
well as Boards, not to omit the common Products of this River, viz. Beef, Pork,
Butter, Cheese, Bread and Flour which are Staple Merchandise.

Another spontaneous Production of Nature, of which we have a doubtful Prospect
of, is Copper, in the Search whereof much Labor, Time and Cost has been spent,
as also on Metals of a superior Value; for strong is the Power of Imagination,
that every glistering Stone was thought Gold, and every glaring Thing Silver.
But

IRON the most useful of all spontaneous Production comes next under
Consideration. From Experiments made, we have great Plenty, and very good, both
for Ship-Work and Husband^y, and ought to be particularly encouraged from the
certain Assurances it gives of Advantages to the Inhabitants of this River in
diverse Respects.

No one Metal is so universally serviceable and useful to Mankind: For though
Nature has furnished us with Hands, which a great Philosopher has styled The
Instrument of Instruments, how much should we fall short of these excellent
Uses and Services Nature has adapted them to, were we deprived or ignorant of
this excellent Metal, the Natives here are pregnant Instances thereof.

The judicious Lock observes of what Consequence the Discovery of one natural
Body and its Properties may be to humane Life, the whole great Continent of
America is a convincing Instance; whose Ignorance in useful Arts, and Want of
the greatest Part of the Conveniences of Life, in a Country that abounded with
all Sorts of Natural Plenty, I think may be attributed to their Ignorance of
what may be found in a very ordinary despicable Stone, I mean the Mineral of
Iron, and whatever we think of our Parts and Improvement in this Part of the
World, where Knowledge and Plenty seem to vie each with other; yet to any one
that will seriously reflect on it, I suppose, it will appear past Doubt, that
were the Use of Iron lost among us, we should in a few Ages be unavoidably
reduced to the Want and Ignorance of the ancient savage Americans, whose
natural Endowments and Provisions, come no Way short of those of the most
flourishing and polite Nation, so that he who first made known the Use of that
once contemptible Metal, may be truly styled The Father of Arts and the Author
of Plenty.

To which we shall add this further Observation in Praise of the Usefulness and
universal Benefit of it to Mankind, namely its Magnetism, to which undoubtedly
is owing the Discovery of America to the Europeans; for how is it possible a
Course could be directed through the vast Atlantic Ocean without a Compass,
since Navigation was so difficult to the Greeks and Romans in their narrow
Seas? It may not be an idle Speculation to the curious to consider those
admirable Qualities of sympathetical Attraction, and Antipathetical Repulsion
of the Lodestone, which is a Species of Iron. And here we shall conclude with
this Remark, that the Manufactury of Iron will employ such a Number of People
as will be Consumers of Provision and English Goods, as well as Timber, which
at present lies so remote from great Rivers, that in clearing of Land great
Quantities are burnt to waste, which now by being rendered useful on this
Occasion, will become valuable, and consequently will proportionably augment
the Value of Lands.

This will vastly contribute to the Riches of these Countries, we having Plenty
of Oak, at least twelve Sorts, though the best is that which grows in
Clay-Swamps, its Leaf formed much like the Chestnut, but not so large, for the
most Part growing tall, is, (as remarked) fit for Keels and Plank, with crooked
Timber which chiefly grows on Up-Land, (of which White-Oak is the best) being
the principal Matter for building of Ships. In like Manner, if we attain to
Plenty of Iron, we are capable to carry on the Hull without any Foreign
Materials, as also complete the Tackle and Rigging with Canvas for Sails. Of
what immense Advantage this will be to America, is obvious to any one the least
skilled in maritime Affairs. And we flatter our selves, who ever lives to see
half a Century will find a great Part of Europe furnished with Ships from
America; and this we dare predict from very probable Grounds and Reasons.

The Hollanders were the People who formerly found it much to their Account to
build Ships for other Nations. France, Spain, and Venice, and sometimes England
bought of that Republic, though scarce any of the Materials of Building were the
Product of their Country; so that they made that Want a Foundation for Trade,
and a great Employment it was to their Ships into the Baltic Seas to fetch
Timber, Pitch, Tar, Hemp, ^lax, etc. all which they manufactured, and by
building Shiping, Furniture, Stores and Victualling, sold to other Nations.
England indeed out of a just Emulation to the great Advantages accruing to them
thereby, and wisely considering how much it would be to the Advantage of the
Nation to promote Building of Ships and Navigation, did in Effect prohibit
Buying of Ships of Foreign Nations, by rendering all Foreign built incapable to
trade to the Plantations, (unless Plantation-Built) being capable of building
her own Ships, having the same or greater Advantages than the Dutch. But
France, Spain, and Portugal are under the same Necessity still, and build in
Holland, and sometimes in England: And as Timber in most Parts of Europe grows
scarce, France and Spain, etc. not having sufficient for Cask for their Liquor,
it will be soon wasted. Within our Memory, England was furnished with
Ship-Timber and Staves from Ireland, and now so great is the Change, that
Ireland has not for their own Use as appears by the Supplies from this River.
Therefore it is a strong Presumption the Europians must build in some Parts of
America. And since the Southern Parts have not Plenty of Timber for these Uses,
our Northern Parts will be most capable to furnish them with Ships and
Ship-Timber.

Hence, if once we are in a Condition to equip from the Growth and Manufactory
of America, as also with Naval Stores, this will be of huge Advantage to the
British-America.

We have been the more prolix on those two Articles, as Matters which very well
deserve our most serious Thoughts, much tending to a general and public Good,
as well as to the Farmer, the Merchant, the Artificer, the Baker, the Butcher,
the Victualler, with all the nece^sary Trades of which Towns consist; with this
further Remark, that such Numbers of People as must necessarily be employed in
all the several Occupations depending, will be a great Consumption of the
Country-Produce, and by their Labor will render Things of small Value to more
considerable Worth, which will enable us the better to balance with those
Countries we trade to, which ought to be our Rule, according to the Examples we
have brought to that purpose.

LIMESTONE, we have in great Plenty, of which Store of Lime is made, which
gives the Opportunity to the Inhabitants to build good Stone and Brick-Houses
in Town and Country. Here are late Discoveries of Slate fit for covering
Houses, and other Uses, as also Marble, which being polished, proves very fine
and of beautiful Colors, and may deservedly compare with most in Europe, where
it is not improbable it may find Applause; and if once it obtains Opinion, it
may serve for Merchandise, at least for Ballast.

ISING-GLASS we have also, which may serve for Window-Lights, and is much
better for Lanthorns than either Glass or Horn, especially for Ships, it not
being affected with Noise of Guns, nor scorched with Heat, as the latter is.
Here is also Cotton-Stone, of which Handkerchiefs, Gloves or Purses may be
knit, and when soul are cleans'd in the Fire, which like Gold ^t endures it
without any Change.

What we have now to consider is, PAPER-MONEY, which, how far it has been
conducive to restore Credit, relieve the Exigencies of diverse Freeholders and
Inhabitants of this Province, and revive the languishing State of Trade, with
diverse other Advantages, is already intimated. Yet we are not the richer simply
by this Paper-Money, otherwise than as it conduces to those good Ends, it being
only a Part of the real Estates we had before, which lay useless as to Trade,
and is now turned into a trading Currency, to supply the Want of Cash, which
(by remitting what we had in the Country, and the excessive Use of Foreign
Liquors, instead of more useful Commodities) we were so far drained of, as not
to have any Thing like a competent Quantity to maintain Trade and Credit
amongst our selves.

It is then the Produce of our Country, in which our Riches does consist, it
being the Foundation of our Trade, and that wherewith we must pay for all
manner of foreign Commodities which we want. It is that also which has formerly
brought us in Silver and Gold, and may again when we can be so happy as to
retrench the Use of Foreign Liquors, etc.

We know some Persons that profess Skill, will tell us this would be a Clog
upon Trade: But by their Leave the abundant Use of it has been very destructive
to the Welfare of this Province. The Discouragement Foreign Brandy meets with
in Great Britain is a Clog upon Trade too, but the wise and honorable
Legislature there well know it is a Trade that would be no ways advantageous to
the public Interest of the Nation; and if we could have been but so happy as
to copy after them so far as to clog the injurious Parts of Trade in Time, and
had continued so doing, I suppose we should never had Occasion for a
Paper-Currency, (which by former Irregularities) is now made so absolutely
necessary that Trade and Credit together would inevitably sink without it; and
if it be said that we have the Balance of Trade with the West Indies in our
Favor, and that some Cash is still brought from thence, it makes but very
little for us to have an Hundred Pounds in Cash from those Parts where we send
the greatest Part of our Country-Produce, and want a Thousand Pounds elsewhere,
(which we take to be near our Case of late Years) and certainly such Trade must
end in our own Ruin; for if so much of the Country-Produce, as is exported will
not pay for all that is imported, the longer we trade, the poorer we shall be;
we speak of the Public, for though some private Persons may make a present
Advantage out of its Ruins, yet they too in their Turn must needs have a
Feeling of the public Calamity. But due Care ought to be had to preserve the
Value of our Paper-Currency, otherwise it will prove an Injury to the
Creditors, and be an Injustice in the Debtors to pay their Debts in what is not
of the Value it ought. But this Inconvenience will easily be avoided by
continuing the Care already taken in the Security, and also restricting the Sum
in a due Proportion to the Trade of this River; for a great Excess in that
Respect will inevitably debase the Value of it, though a reasonable plenty is
advantageous in increasing Trade and Navigation, which cannot thrive without it.

The very great Abundance of Silver and Gold in any Place lessens the Value of
it, though it may still retain the same Denomination, or be called so much per
Ounce as it was before, yet a greater Quantity of it must be given for all
Vendibles. On the other Hand, the too great Scarcity of it enhances its Value
by debasing the Price of Vendibles to the other Extreme, that even the
Husbandman, etc. cannot live by his Labor, for the Scarcity of Cash makes few
Buyers, and consequently miserable Markets, when otherways they might be
tolerably good.

We are told the Portuguese of late restrain the excessive Quantity of Gold
brought from Brazil to keep up the Value of it, and that this is no ways
impolitick, let us for once make (what may be thought) an extravagant and wild
Hypothesis: Let it be supposed these Countries abounded with Gold Mines, in as
great plenty as we have of Iron Stone, we must necessarily conclude, that Gold
would lose much of the Value it now bears, and much more if it were confined to
this River, as our Paper-Credit is, which is a Consequence no ways strained,
but must be acknowledged by all judicious Persons to be self-evident.

Hence we conceive it will be the Prudence of those Governments to emit no more
Paper-Money than the Trade of these Colonies call for, it being That, which,
together with the good Security given by those Persons who take it out of the
Offices, will undoubtedly keep up its Value. This, with humble Submission to
the Honorable Legislative Bodies in these Colonies is not intended as a
Direction, but is humbly offered to their further Consideration.

The extravagant Exchange that has lately been given for Gold, has been
wrongfully charged on our Paper-Currency, with this Insinuation, that it was
fallen so much below the Value it was given out at, as Gold is advanced,
whereas it is most evident to have been occasioned by the exceeding Scarcity of
Gold, and the great Want of it to make Remittances; for when several Persons at
one and the same Time were busied in buying up what Gold they could hear of,
they advanced the Exchange to four Times as much as it was but a short Time
before, and could not get (...) much as they would have done neither; which is
still a further Proof of the miserable Circumstances we should have been under
without a Paper-Currency, and that very few Payments could have been in Houses,
Lands, Stock, Country-Produce, and the like, which could never have been
adapted to answer all the Necessities of Trade.

HORSES, the most serviceable of all Animals to the Use of Mankind, we have
hitherto omitted. But finding from the Example of some Neighboring Colonies
they are proper for Trade, and that great Numbers to a considerable Value, are
frequently shipped off to the French and Dutch, as well as English Settlements
to the Southward, where they ^ell at great Prices: But then they ought to be of
a Breed better than what is common to this River. Therefore it will be of
Importance to the Husbandman to meliorate the Breed by getting the best
S^allions, and using such other Care and Diligence as may be necessary to that
End; for a low Price J^de will cost as much Provision, Provender and Freight as
a Beast worth five Times as much. Hence it is advisable for such who are well
circumstan^^^ and accommodated with good Pasture, to secure to themselves a
good Breed both of Horses and Mares; and if the Success answers not by shipping
off, yet it will be of Advantage to these Colonies to improve our Breed for our
proper Uses, especially comely and well paced Horses for the Saddle. By this
Means we shall not need to buy of our Neighbors who drain from us yearly
considerable Sums, which by Industry and Care, as above, may be saved: And it is
not improbable but in Time we may acquire such a Breed as may be proper for
Transportation to those Markets where they are vendible. This only as an
Experiment for the Ingenious and thoughtful Farmer to put in Practice; it is
Experience must recommend it for a general Service and Advantage to this River.

Having thus far discoursed of most of the Branches of Trade we are capable of,
there is yet one great Encouragement, to adventure in the Discovery and
Prosecution of new Markets; more safe to the industrious Adventurer; namely an
Insurance-Office in one or more of these Colonies; which is the interesting of
diverse in the Loss or Profit of a Voyage, and is now become so much the
Practice of England, that Insurance may be had in diverse Cases as well against
the Hazards at Land, as Casualties at Sea, which must be acknowledged not only
to be safe, but a great Encouragement to adventure; for it may so happen that a
Person may sometime adventure his ALL, and then in case of a Loss he may be
rendered incapable of a future Trade, to the Disadvantage of the public, and
(it may be) to the Ruin of himself; whereas could he get a part of his Interest
either of Ship or Cargo insured, (though in Case of safe Arrival he parts with a
part of his Profit, yet) in Case of Loss, he is secured of such part as he
insureth, which may be a sufficient Bottom to begin a new Adventure: How far
this may conduce to the Trade of this River, is obvious to any Man of Thought.
Now whereas there has been some Attempts made at Philadelphia, which dropped and
proved abortive, (for what Reasons we never could learn) we humbly propose to
the Legislature that an Office be erected and supported by a Fund arising out
of the Interest of the Loan-Office. This will be a good and safe Bottom, and
cannot be easily over-set by a few Losses; and we conceive will contribute to
keep up the Value of our Paper-Credit by promoting of Trade, Navigation and
Building of Ships, and in Consequence, of great Advantage to this River: Which
we refer to the Consideration of the Merchant.

AND now for a Close to this Essay, from a Consideration of the Causes of the
Decay of Trade and the languishing Condition of the Country; the Ways and Means
of Redress will not be found very difficult, much less impossible, if happily
the Premises be duly observed: For as in Diseases of the Natural Body, the
Knowledge of the Cause is half the Cure, so there needs no other Direction but
a diligent Application to correct those noxious Humors which continue to feed
the Distemper, of which having as fully discussed as the intended Brevity would
admit, we refer back thereunto, though we think this short Summary may not be
altogether improper.

1. That the Balance of Trade is essentially necessary to restore us to our
former flourishing Condition.

2. The Encouragement of Manufactury, Trade and Navigation, and raising the
Value of our Country-Produce.

3. This can be attained only by finding new Markets.

4. As necessary thereunto the Farmer must endeavor the raising all the
various Species of Growths these Countries are capable of, as the necessary
Funds for a flourishing Trade.

AND here we address our selves to the Farmer, that as it is by his Diligence
and Industry that this River must be furnished with a Stock for Trade, whether
of Beef, Pork, Grain, Bread or Flour, as becomes honest Men, who value the
Credit of their Country. Let those several Commodities be well saved, well
packed, sound and merchantable, this will tend to their Honor and Interest:
And to all worthy and generous Merchants, that they would abstract from private
Views, and prosecute such Trade as may be beneficial for the public, as well
as themselves.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 7. line 10. read former. p. 19. l. 15. read we. p. 22. l. ultim. read
low. p. 23. l. 6. read farther Confideration. p. 30. l. 14. read these
Colonies. p. 31. l. 19. read Manuring. p. 42. l. 31. read Surrinam.


