THE CURIOSITIES OF Common Water; OR The ADVANTAGES thereof in Preventing and
Curing many DISTEMPERS.

Gathered from the Writings of several Eminent PHYSICIANS, and also from more
than Forty Years Experience.

By JOHN SMITH, C. M.

To which is added, Some RULES for preserving Health by Diet.

That Is the best Physic which does cure our Ills, Without the Charge of
'Pothecaries Bills.

The Fifth Addition. With Additions communicated by Mr. RALPH THORESBY, F.R.S.
and Others.

LONDON Printed: Reprinted at Boston for Joseph Edwards, at the Corner Shop on
the North-side of the Townhouse. MDCCXXV.

THE CURIOSITIES OF Common Water.
FOR the Benefit of Mankind in general, I have taken Pairs to give the World an
Account of what I have found written in the Works of the most Eminent
Physicians, concerning the Good that Mankind may receive from the use of COMMON
WATER; and of the Informations I have had concerning the Benefits thereof from
others by Word of Mouth; and of what I have discovered by my own Experience,
from frequent Trials during a Time that has intervened from that of Thirty to
Seventy four Years of Age: Which is sufficient to confirm the stupendous
Effects thereof in many Particulars, that shall be mentioned as my own
Discovery with respect to this Excellent Remedy, which will perform Cures with
very little Trouble, and without any Charge, and is also to be had where ever
there are any Habitations, which is what can hardly be said of any other Thing:
So that in some Sense, Water may be truly styled, An Universal Remedy, since
the Diseases it either prevents or cures may have this Remedy applied to all
Persons, and in all Places where Men do inhabit.

Excellency of Water. The first Commendation of Common Water that I shall
mention, is that which is written concerning it by Dr. Manwaring, in his Method
and Means of enjoying Health; wherein he says, That Water is a wholesome
Drink, or rather the most wholesome -- being appointed for Man in his best
State: which does strongly argue that Drink to be the most suitable for Human
Nature -- answering all the Intentions of common Drinks, for it cools,
moistens, and quenches Thirst; it is clear, thin, and fit to convey the
Nourishment through the smallest Vessels of the Body -- and is a Drink that is
a Rule to itself, and requires little Caution in the Use of it, since none will
be tempted to drink of it more than needs: And that in the Primitive Ages of
the World, Water-Drinkers, he says, were the longest Livers by some Hundreds of
Years -- nor so often sick and complaining as we are.

Dr. Keill, when he treats concerning the Stomach, in his Abridgment of the
Anatomy of Human Bodies, says, That Water seems the fittest to promote
Digestion of the Food which we eat; all spiritous Liquors having a Property by
which they hurt, rather than help Digestion; the sad Effects of which they are
sensible of, he says, who by a long Use thereof have lost their Appetites,
hardly ever to be restored without drinking Water, which seldom fails of
procuring a good Appetite and a strong Digestion. With which Dr. Baynard does
agree in that Affirmation, That Water liquifies and concocts our Food better
than any fomented Liquor whatsoever. Hist. of Cold Bathing, p. 440.

Dr. Prat, in his Treatise of Mineral Waters, shows it to be his Judgment, That
if People would accustom themselves to drink Water, they would be more free
from many Diseases; such as Tremblings, Palsies, Apoplexies, Giddiness, Pains
in the Head, Gout, Stone, Dropsy, Rheumatism, Piles, and suchlike: Which
Diseases are most common among them that drink strong Drinks, and which Water
generally would prevent. Moreover, he also says, That Water plentifully drank
strengthens the Stomach, causes an Appetite, preserves the Sight, makes the
Senses lively, and cleanses all the Passages of the Body, especially those of
the Kidneys and Bladder.

It Is also said by Dr. Duncan, in his Treatise of hot Liquors, That when Men
contented themselves with Water, they had more Health and Strength; and that at
this Day those who drink nothing but Water, are more healthy and live longer
than those who drink strong Liquors, which raises the Heat of the Stomach to
Excess, whereas Water keeps it in a due Temper. And he adds in another Part of
the Book, That by hot Liquor the Blood is inflamed; and such whose Blood is
inflamed, live not so long as those who are of a cooler Temper: A hot Blood
being commonly the Cause of Fluxes, Rheums, ill Digestion, Pains in the Limbs,
Headache, Dimness of Sight, and especially of Hysteric Vapors. He also imputes
the Cause of Ulcers to a hot Blood, and declares, That if Men kept their Blood
cool and sweet, by a moderate and cooling Diet, they would never be troubled
with Ulcers, or other Breakings-out. Which Coolness of the Blood will be well
performed by drinking a large Draught of Water in the Morning, which will carry
off the bilious and salt Recrements by Urine. And if Water is drank also after
Dinner, it will cool a hot Stomach, and prevent the rising of those
Fermentations which cause Winds and Belching after Meat. So that if Persons who
are liable to these Disorders, will leave off strong Liquors and a hot Diet,
and drink Water, they will procure better Health to themselves than they had
before.

Sir John Floyer also, in his Treatise of Cold Baths, does affirm, page, 109.
Edit. 5. That Water-Drinkers are temperate in their Actions, prudent, and
ingenious; they live safe from those Diseases which affect the Head; such as
Apoplexies, Palsies, Pain, Blindness, Deafness, Gout, Convulsions, Trembling,
Madness, and the drinking of Water cures the Hiccough, Foetor of the Mouth, and
of the whole Body, it resists Putrefaction, and cools burning Heats and
Thirsts, and after Dinner it helps Digestion. -- And if the Virtues of Cold
Water were seriously considered, all Persons would value it as a Great
Medicine, in preventing the Stone, Asthma, and Hysteric Fits; and to the Use of
this Children ought to be bred up from their Cradles. And in Page 434, he
says, That as Water is in chief the Universal Drink of the World -- so it is
the best, and most salubrious. And in Page 437, That he has known where a
Regular Drinking of Spring Water has done considerable Cures, by Washing off
the acrid, scorbutic Salts from the Blood, and strengthening the Coats and
Fibers of the Stomach and Bowels, and has brought on a good Appetite, and a
strong Digestion.

Having read over an old Book written by one Sir Tho. Elliot, entitled, The
Castle of Health, he there declared from his own Experience, That in the County
of Cornwall, though it was a very cold Quarter, the Poorer Sort, which in his
Time did never, or but very seldom drink any other Drinks but Water, were
strong of Body, and lived to a very great Age: to which Relation that of Sir
Henry Blount is very agreeable, who affirmed in his Book of Travels into the
Levant, (where under the Turkish Government the Use of Wine was forbid, and
where the common Drink is Water) that he then had a better Stomach to his Food,
and digested it more kindly than he ever did before or since.

And in the Treatise of the Vanity of Philosophy, written by Dr. Gideon Harvey,
it is affirmed by him, That it is not Heat that causes a good Digestion, but a
proper Ferment, or Liquor provided by Nature, to dissolve the Food into a
Substance like unto Pap made with fine Flour, which Dissolvent, he says, is
much depraved by hot spiritous Liquors; and therefore he commends Water above
all other Drinks to promote Degestion.

Gout and Hypochondriac Melancholy. Water drinking is also said by Dr. Allen
to be good to prevent Two Deplorable Distemper, the Gout, and the Hypochondriac
Melancholy; For, says he, the Gout is generally caused by the too great
Drinking of fermented Liquors, and is never said to have assaulted any Drinker
of Water; and he sait^ also, That Melancholy Hippochondriac is kept off
longest by drinking Water instead of strong Drink. To which let me add. That I
once knew a gouty Gentleman, who, to avoid his Drinking Companions in London,
retired to New Brentford, where I then lived; in which Town by a very temperate
Diet of one Meal a Day, and drinking only Water, he lived two whole Years free
from Pain: But being visited by one who came that Way, and invited to drink but
one Bottle of Claret between them, he fell next Day into a terrible Fit of the
Gout, which held above a Month after; of which being recovered, he by the same
Course continued well till I left the place, which was about a Year and an half
after.

Gravel. The good Properties of Water are further manifested in preventing the
breeding of Gravel in the Kidneys; for Zechias, in Consul. 17. as he is quoted
by Salmon, affirms, That nothing does so much abate the Heat of the Kidneys,
and free them from those Recrements which cause Pain in the Back, one great
Sign of Gravel, as Water does; but he advises to drink it warm, by the Use of
which, he says, the unnatural Heat in time will be so extinguished, that no
more of that Matter causing Gravel will be produced in the Body. Which
Assertion by Experience I have found to be true; for observing much Gravel to
be voided by me, as also abundance of Matter floating in the Urine like Bran,
with a great Number of Recrements like Cuttings of Hair, some above an Inch
long, which Substances were found in all the Water that I made in above Twelve
Months; for which I could get no Remedy: I was advised to drink Water, which in
about half a Year did entirely free me from those Symptoms, which some out of
Ignorance imputed to Witchcraft, so that from that Time to this present I never
have been troubled with it.

Stone in the Bladder. Water also is commended as efficacious to prevent the
breeding of the Stone in the Bladder, for it has been observed, that in some
who have been cut for the Stone that new Stones have been engendered, so that
some young Persons have been cut several Times. Now to prevent this, the
drinking Water has been advised with Success; for by this that intemperate
Heat in the Body was abated which did occasion the Distemper. Some have advised
to drink it warm, and others cold, and in particular Van Heydon, a Physician of
Ghent in Flanders, in his Book, entitled, Help for the Rich and Poor; which, he
says, in p. 49. is sufficiently insinuated by Piso and Alexander, who do
assure us, That the taking a Draught of cold Water in the Morning, has done so
much Good, that several after the voiding of a Stone never had any more Stones
grow in them.

Which Experiment may give Light to the Discovery of a Way to cure the Stone
without Cutting; for if the growing of new Stones can be prevented by drinking
Water, let it be hot or cold, it may prevent a Stone from growing bigger when
begun; and if the adding Matter to increase a Stone new begun, can be
prevented, Nature in Time may waste that which is begun, especially if some
Drops of sweet Spirit of Nitre be added to all the Water drank, which will
powerfully help to cool, and is known to be an admirable Mover or provoker of
Urine, and will waste a Stone, and make it crumble like Fuller's Earth, if
applied to a Stone taken from the Body. Or the Water may be sweetened with
Honey, which is now much in Use among the Gentry, as I am informed by an
Ingenious Apothecary; who told me that among them at present, Pump-Water and
Honey was in great Repute to give Ease in Gravel; And there is so near an
Affinity between Gravel and the Stone, that what is proper for one, will be
suitable to both, and will prevent the growing of both.

Beneficial in Childbearing. Water is also styled in Sennertu's Works, The
Balsam of Children, the drinking of it by the Mother being one of those Things
whereby Children may be strengthened in the Womb, and will prevent those
Injuries that are done them by drinking strong Liquors; which Sampson's Mother
was not allowed to do, for she was commanded not to drink Wine or strong Drink,
Judge. xiii. 4. But I will not say, If all Women should do this, their Children
shall be as strong as Sampson was; yet this I will say, If they would do this,
they would find their Children more free from Distempers and Frowardness, and
so much more easy to nurse and bring up, and be less liable to an immature
Death; the want of which Abstinence from strong Drinks is the Cause why so may
Rich People find it hard to bring up Children, in Comparison to what is done by
the Poor; For these last are born of Mothers who not only are prevented from
being Gluttons by their want of Dainties, which are deceitful Meat, Prove xxiii.
3. but they seldom taste Wine or strong Drink; whereas the Rich not only seed
high, but they also drink strong Drinks, which in most Constitutions do
over-heat and corrupt the Humors of the Body, and that Blood by which their
Children are nourished during their Pregnancy. Which Injury to unborn Infants
would be prevented, if the Mother would be temperate in Diet, and drink Water;
especially at Meals, by which the Blood of the Mother would be kept cool and
clean; which must needs communicate a healthful Substance to the Child within
her, and prevent all those Distempers, which Infants do bring with them into
the World.

Increases Milk in Women. And here it may be proper to add, what by diverse
Experiments has been found to be true, That the drinking Water by Nurses while
they give suck to Children, will wonderfully increase Milk in those that want
it, as every one will find, who can be persuaded to make Use thereof. I have
advised many to make use of it, who have found that by drinking a large Draught
of Water at Bedtime, they have been supplied with Milk sufficient for that
Night, when before they wanted it, and could not be supplied by any other
Means: And besides, they who have found their Children restless, by reason of
too much Heat in their Milk, do find them much more quiet after their Milk is
cooled by Water-drinking.

Stays Hunger. By drinking Water also, the Want of Food for a Time may be
suffered without Starving; for I have been informed by a credible Friend, who
was an Officer at Sea, That being sent down to Stafford to take Care to see
some Men conveyed on Shipboard, that had been Pressed by Act of Parliament for
the Sea-Service; he found in the Prison where they were kept, a lusty Fellow,
who had declared, he would starve himself rather than go to Sea, and taking
particular Notice thereof, he found upon due Enquiry, that for Twenty Days he
had refused to eat any manner of Food, only he drank each Day about three Pints
or two Quarts of Water, hoping thereby to get himself discharged: But when he
found his Pretensions to be in vain, and that in about two Days they should all
march for London, he condescended to eat some Food, beginning with a little,
and in the March he was observed to travel as well as the best Man. I find also
an Account in Dr. Car's Letters, of a certain crack-brained Man, who, at
Leyden, when the Docter resided in that University, pretended he could fast as
long as Christ did; and it was found that he held out the Time of Forty Days
without eating any Food, only he drank Water, and smoaked Tobacco. And I once
had a sad Complaint from a poor old Woman of the greatness of her Want,
affirming that oftentimes she had not eaten any Food for two or three Days;
upon which I asked her, If she did not then suffer much Uneasiness in her
Stomach? She said, she did; but found a Way at last to assuage her Hunger by
drinking Water, which did satisfy her Appetite.

Strengthens weak Children. Water is also of great Use to strenghen weak
Children, for we are informed by Dr. Joseph Brown, in his Treatise of Cures
performed by Cold Baths, That the Welsh Women do preserve their Children from
the Rickets, by washing them Night and Morning in cold Water, till they are
three Quarters of a Year old, p. 79. And it is said by Sir John Floyer, in his
Treatise of Cold Baths, That a Lady in Scotland, who had lost several Children
through Weakness, did, by the Advice of a Highland Beggar Woman, preserve those
she had afterward, by washing them Daily in cold Water. And I myself did
advise a Neighbor, whose Children began to be Ricketty, to treat the Child in
the same manner; but she, instead of washing, dipped it over Head and Ears
every Morning, it being then in the Summer time: The Event of which was, the
Child became strong, and had a good Countenance, though before it was in the Face
very pale and wan. Which shows how great the Power of Water is, when used
outwardly to invigorate the Spirits and strengthen Nature.

Swellings from Bruises. It is also a known Custom, to prevent the Swellings
that follow Bruises in the Faces of Children, by immediately applying thereunto
a Linen Cloth four or six times double, dipped in cold Water, and now dipping
it as it begins to grow warm; for the Cold repels or prevents the flowing of
Humors to the Part which otherwise would Cause great Swelling, and after turn
blackish: And if upon neglecting to do so, a Swelling should succeed, it may be
discussed by fomenting Night and Morning, for an Hour at a Time, with Water as
hot as can be endured; for that will give Vent to the Humors to transpire
through the Skin, or dissolve them, so as to make them capable of returning
back.

Sickness at the Stomach. Moreover, by means of Water all Sickness at the
Stomach may be cured, which is done thus: Take four Quarts of Water, make it as
hot over the Fire as you can drink it; of which Water let a Quart be taken down
at several Draughts; then wrap a Rag round a small Piece of a Stick, till it is
about the Bigness of a Man's Thumb, tie it fast with some Thread; and with
this, by endeavoring gently to put it a little Way down your Throat, provoke
your self to vomit up again most of the Water, then drink another Quart, and
Vomit up that, and repeat the same the third and fourth Time. You may also
provoke Vomiting by tickling your Throat with your Finger, or the Feather-End
of a Goose-Quill; but the Cloth round a Skuer makes one Vomit with most Ease,
which is done with no Trouble when the Stomach is full. And by this Way of
Vomiting, which will be all performed in an Hour's Time, that viscous and ropy
Phlegm in the Stomach, which causes the Sickness, will be cast up, so that the
Party in that Time will be free from all that inward Disturbance, if you use
the Remedy at first; but if the Sickness has continued for a Time, it will
require the same Course once or twice more, which may be done in three or four
Hours, one after another, without any other Inconvenience, besides that of
being a little sore in the Breast the next Day, which will soon go off by the
Force of Natare. Which Remedy, by Forty Years Experience, I look upon to be
infallible in all Sickness at the Stomach from what Cause soever, and for all
Pains in the Belly which seem to be above the Navel; for these are all in the
Stomach, as by long Experience I have found: Which Pains are generally counted
the Cholick; but it is not so; for true Cholicks are always below the Navel, in
the Gut, Colon. And by this Means I have eased very great Pains caused by
eating Mussels that were poisonous; and it is also a certain Cure for all
Surfeits or Disorders that follow after much eating; so that the Lives of
Multitudes might be saved by this Means, who for Want of expelling what
offends, do often die in Misery: For by thus cleansing the Stomach at the
first, the Root of Diseases proceeding from Surfeiting, or unwholesome Food, or
any viscous Humors from a bad Digestion, are prevented; the Stomach being the
Place in which all Distempers do at first begin. No Man was more subject to
Sickness than myself before Thirty Years of Age; but since I found out the Way
of Vomiting with Water, which is now above Forty Years, I never have been sick
for two Days together: For when I find myself ill to any great Degree, I betake
myself to this Way of Vomiting, which in an Hour's Time rest^^es me to Ease,
and perfectly removes my Illness; and the same Benefit all my Family find in
it, as do others also whom I can persuade to try the Experiment; which is such,
that no Physician whatever can advise a better to the King himself, should be
fall sick. For, in the first Place, it is not a nauseous Remedy, it does not
make the Patient sick, as the best of all other Vomits do; and then it is a
Vomit which is at our own Command, since we can leave off when we please: And
it infallibly works a Cure to all sick Stomachs.

Some Few indeed pretend they are not able to vomit by this Means: Now, if they
cannot vomit, let them take a Pint of Water when they find themselves ill from
eating, and do so every three or four Hours, eating no more till they are
hungry; and they will find the Water digest and carry off what was offensive.
The Ingenious Dr. Cheyne, in his Treatise of the Gout, does affirm, That warm
Water drank freely in a Morning fasting, and at Meals, ( and I say cold Water
is as good) has been a sovereign Remedy for restoring lost Appetites, and
strengthening weak Digestions, when other more pompous Medicines have failed.
And he advises Gouty Persons, after Excess either in Meat or Drink, to swill
down as much fair Water as their Stomach will bear, before they go to Bed,
whereby they will reap these Advantages, either the Contents of the Stomach
will be thrown up, or both meat and Drink will be much diluted, and the Labor
and Expense of Spirits in Digestion much saved. And indeed I have found by long
Experience, that nothing causes so good a Digestion as fair Water: but this
requires Time to free us from the Uneasiness that an ill Digestion causes,
whereas Vomiting is an immediate Remedy, and frees a Man from it upon the Spot.

We are told by Sir John Floyer, in his Treatise of Bath and Mineral Springs
That Vomiting with Water is very useful in the Gout, Sciatica, Wind, Shortness
of Breath, Hypochondriac Melancholy, and Falling Sickness; which Distempers are
generally derived from evil Matter contained in the Stomach, as is likewise
Giddiness in the Head, and Apoplexies, with which myself once seemed to be
threatened; for after eating a plentiful Dinner, I was seized with Giddiness,
and the Sight of my Eyes became so depraved, that Things seemed double, which
was accompanied with a strange Consternation of Spirit; and having read, That
Apoplexies generally seize after Eating, I immediately called for Water, and
not daring to stay till it was warmed I drank it cold, and by the Help of my
Finger provoked Vomiting: Upon which I did immediately overcome the Evils I was
threatened with, the Symptoms before mentioned being the same as did precede the
Fit of an Apoplexy in another Person, as himself afterward told me, who died
of it the third Fit, about a Year after.

Shortness of Breath. As for People who are troubled with Shortness of Breath,
it is certain from Experience, that Vomiting with warm Water three or four times
will afford certain Relief. And the same may be prevented by drinking nothing
but Water afterward, either cold, or warmed with a Toast: For upon doing this,
the Difficulty of Breathing will apparently abate; which Water, if you please,
may be boiled with Honey. And I knew one, who by this Means, as he was advised
by me, lived comfortably in this City two or three Winters, but having
undertaken Business which did occasion drinking strong Drinks, was the next
Winter carried off by the Distemper; Wine, Ale, or Brandy, being as bad as
Poison to People troubled with Shortness of Breath. So that nothing but Water
ought to be drunk in that Distemper.

Vomiting. Some People are taken with violent Vomiting, and the Excess thereof
in some has been so great, as to endanger their Lives, yea, cause Death: In
which Case Water will be very helpful; for if a Pint of it warmed be drank
after every Vomit, it will prevent that violent Straining, wherein lies the
Danger of all Vomiting, because to strain violently, when but little will come
up, does endanger the breaking of some inward Vessel. And besides this, the
offending Matter will be sooner loosened from the internal Part of that Bowel,
the Stomach, and cast out, upon which, the Vomiting will sooner cease: For
after this Manner the Famous Sydenham, a most honest Writer, did overcome the
Cholera Morbus, or Vomiting and Looseness, so common in his Time, and was found
by the Weekly Bill to kill more than now die of Convulsions; for his Way was to
boil a Chicken in Four Gallons of Water, which made a Broth not much differing
from Water, of which he ordered large Draughts to be given, and some of it to
be taken by Clyster, till the whole Quantity was spent, if the Vomiting did not
stop before; which did so take off the Sharpness of the Matter offending, and
wash it out, that the Party in a little Time became well. And the same was the
Practice of Sigismundus Grasius, who commends pure Water in a Vomiting and
Looseness to be drank in large Quantities; for thereby, he says, the currosive
and sharp Humors will be so weakened, that they will no more offend: And, he
says, it may be drank cold, if the Patient be strong, otherwise let it be
warmed.

Fluxes. And in common Fluxes without Vomiting, a Quart or more of warm Water
drank, will so weaken the Sharpness whereby the Distemper is caused, that it
will soon be overcome, and the Gripings eased; and in the Bloody Flux, which is
the most dangerous of all Fluxes, the Ingenious Cornelius Celsus advises a
large drinking of cold Water as the best of Remedies: But then no other
Substance must be taken till the Disease is cured. And another great Physician,
by Name Lusitanus, affirms, Cent. 1. Obser. 46. That he knew one, who, being in
the Summertime afflicted with the Bloody Flux, did drink a large Quantity of
cold Water, and did thereby recover. This large Quantity therefore of Water in
these Fluxes, does so correct the Sharpness of the Humor offending, that it
can have no Power to cause Pain, or corrode the Vessels, and cause bloody
Digestions or Stools.

Consumptions. Water also is a Drink that conduces above all Things to cure
Consumptive People, for the Digestion being weakened, is the Cause of producing
a hot, fretting Nourishment; which is injurious to the tender Substance of the
Lungs, and which constringes and stops up the Lymphatic Vessels through which the
Nourishment is to pass to all the Parts; so that by Degrees the Body for Want
of due Supplies consumes: Which Obstructions, and that Acrimony which cau^eth
them, will be opened and sweetened by the plentiful Use of Water, if taken
before the Lungs become ulcerous. Which Cure of Consumptions by Water is
recommended in the Writings of Dr. Couch, who in his Praxis Catholica tells us,
that he knew a Man cured very soon of a Consumption by drinking pure Water. And
it is said by another, that some have been cured of Consumptions by drinking no
other Drink but Water, avoiding all Malt Liquors and sharp Wines: For Wine or
any other strong Liquor is pernicious in this Distemper, whose Original is
affirmed by Dr. Coward to be always in the Stomach.

Flushes. Some there are who are much troubled with flushing Heat in the Face,
and others with the Heat in the Back; in both which Cases, Water used as common
Drink, is the best Remedy, with a spare cooling Diet: And it is also excellent
for such as have Red Blotches in their Face, which proceeds from a hot fretting
Blood, which by Water-drinking, and a moderate Diet will be kept under: For as
Dr. Duncan, before quoted, does affirm, Those who keep their Blood cool and
clean, are never troubled with Breakings out, like many others, who may be
known to be Drinkers of hot Drinks, and use a hot full Diet, by their Faces
being full of Blotches.

Cholick. Water is also commended by the Learned for the Cholick; thus Riverius
affirms, That in the Cholick large Drinking of Water has been found to be an
excellent Remedy: And it is said by Fortis, that when he Practiced at Venice, he
often gave cold Water in the Cholick with good Success. With whom an English
Physician, Dr. Wainwright, in his Mechanical Account of the Six Non-Naturals,
concurs; for he says, That Water-Drinkers are never troubled with the Cholick,
and that many thereby have been cured when all other Remedies failed.

Smallpox. And in the Smallpox, Water has also been proved to be an
excellent Drink. Salmon, in his Synopsis Medicine, says, That in this
Distemper you may safely give the Sick fair Water, of which, says he, they may
drink liberally to quench Thirst; the Want of which Plenty of Drink has been
the Death of many a Patient. Which Opinion of his was right, as by Experience I
have found in Two of my own Children, when sick of this Distemper; to whom,
after I had given a gentle Vomit of Emetick Tartar, I gave to other Drink but
Water, and they both recovered safely, and were not in the least Lightheaded,
as two others before were in the same Distemper, when treated otherwise: And I
remember that one Dr. Betts being consulted in a Case where the Eruption did
not come out kindly, did order Two Quarts of cold Water to be drank as soon as
could be; upon which they came out according to Expectation, and the Party did
well.

Burning Fevers. It Is also certain, that in what we call Burning Fevers, Water
is found to be a safe and effectual Remedy. It is said by Dr. Primrose, in his
Popular Errors. That many great Physicians have commended the Drinking cold
Water in Diseases, and they attribute to it the chief Place in Fevers, where
the Sick must drink largely; for thus taken, it will quench all Heat, page 374.
And Galen is said by an English Author, to reprove Crosistratus for denying
cold Water in Burning Fevers; and says, That this is a Remedy for any Fever,
provided it be drank in great Abundance. With which Opinion I find Dr. Oliver
to agree, who, in his Essay on Fevers, says, That in Fevers we must drink
oftener than Thirst calls for it, and such Draughts as are plentiful; and the
Drink he prescribes, is either cold Water or Barley-Water. Dr. Wainwright
affirms also, That Water is proper in Fevers and that the Ancients gave as much
of it, as the Patient could drink And by another it is said, That if you give
the Patient nothing but Water for Three Days, that in the third Day the Fever
will be cured generally; but if it is not, give for Food a little Barley Broth,
and the Fever will not exceed the seventh Day. And by another we are informed,
how one in a Fever, that was past Hope, being forbidden to drink Water, which
he greatly desired, did find Means, in the Absence of his Nurse, to get a large
Pot-full, which he drank off, and lay down again, being well cooled; after
which he fell into a Sweat, and so was cured. And I find that Dr. Cook of
Warwick, in his Book of Observations on English Bodies, does prescribe, for the
Cure of Fevers, first a Vomit, and afterward as much cold Water as the Patient
can drink; and he says, That if he sweat upon, it, the Sweat must be continued
as long as can be. And it is said by another, That it is an excellent Remedy in
Fevers, to drink a Quart of hot Water, and sweat upon it, being covered warm.
There is also one Dr. Quinion, who, in his Book of Observations, writes, That
to one in a malignant Fever, whose Pulse was so low it could scarcely be felt,
there was three Quarts of Water given, at several Draughts, to make him Vomit;
but it did not operate that Way, yet the Event was this; That it did refresh
him, much raised his Pulse, brought him into a breathing Sweat, and passed off
by Urine: Which Lowness of the Pulse my own Experience has often found to be
raised by drinking Water plentifully. And I know a Woman, who, though she in a
Fever had the Advice of two Doctors, yet became distracted: I bid the Nurse
give her a Pint of cold Water, which she drank up, and in three or four Minutes
came to her right Senses; and desiring to drink more, she recovered. And I have
observed, that when, in Fevers, the Patient can relish no other Drink, yet
Water is always drank with Pleasure, as it also will always be after the eating
sweet Things, that spoil the Relish of other Drinks; which is one Excellence
peculiar to Water, and shows it to be most agreeable to the Nature of Mankind,
though now so much slighted. And besides this it is a Drink that will not turn
sour in the Stomach as all fermented Drinks will do to the Increase of
Distempers already begun there.

Gout. And as or the Gout, which Dr. Harris says, in his Anti-Empiric, is
gotten either by high feeding, or drinking much Wine, or other strong Drink; it
may be cured, as that Author does affirm, by a very spare Diet, and drinking
Water: According to what is said also by Sir Theodore Mayhern, who, in his
Medicinal Counsels, advises to leave off all strong Drinks in this Disease,
and drink only Water. And Van Heydon says also, in his Treatise of Help for
the Rich and Poor, that there is not any greater Remedy for the Gout than
drinking Water, not only by young, but old Men; many of whom, be says, have
drank cold Water for many Weeks, which has succeeded so well, though they were
far gone in Years, that they found great Ease thereby, without that Offense to
the Stomach, or Hindrance of Digestion, which some did seem to fear. And he
also commends the large drinking of Water in the Sciatica or Hip-Gout, he
having often cured this Distemper, by this Means, in less Time than could
reasonably be expected; and the some my self have found to be effectual in a
Pain in the Shoulder, which had continued very bad for three Months. For, being
taken with a Fever, I drank in one Day about four Quarts of Water; which though
it did not make me Sweat, because I lay not in my Bed, yet it cured me so that
I slept well that Night; and in the Morning when I rose, I did find that the
Pain in my Shoulder was not felt, neither did it ever return. And the same
success I have had in the Pairs of other Parts, whereby I judge, that in all
Pains whatever, the drinking of Water is proper, as well as in the Gout; and
accordingly I find cold Water advised to be drank largely for the Cure of the
Headache from hard Drinking; that Pain proceeding from the same Cause the Gout
does, namely, from Heat, as all Pains do, that are not from Bruises.

Inflammatory Distempers. It is said also by Dr. Wainwright, That in the Itch,
Scurvy, Leprosy, and in all hot Inflammatory Distempers, such as Pleurisies,
Rheumatisms, and St. Anthony's Fire, Water is a proper Remedy; but he advises
to drink it hot in some Cases, as doubtless it ought to be done in Pleurisy.
He also says, That Water is proper in Headaches, Catarrhs, Vapors,
Falling Sickness, Dullness of Sight, Melancholy, Shortness of Breath, Scurvy
in the Mouth, and Windiness in the Stomach: And, for Wind in the Stomach, I, by
long Experience, have found it the best Remedy, who, in the former Part of my
Life through a disorderly Diet, and drinking strong Drink like others, was
never free from windy Belchings, and sometimes very sickish Qualms after Meals;
from which at length I was delivered, by drinking only Water at Meals, so that
for above Forty Years I have been seldom troubled: And if I find myself
troubled, a Pint or more of cold Water, in less than half an Hour, will set me
free, by drinking of it.

Hard Drinking. And that Water is the best Remedy for the Mischiefs that come
by hard Drinking. Experience teaches; there being nothing that so effectually
frees from those nauseating and reaching Qualms the next Morning, as the
drinking a Pint or more of fair Water; which effectually allays the
Inflammation of the Bowels, occasioned by strong or hot Drink, which spoils the
Strength of the Stomach, as it does the Strength of all other Parts; nothing
being a greater Enemy to the Vigor of the Nerves and Sinews since by much
Drinking, Men make themselves (...) to stand or go: Which Effect would never
follow, if Liquors that abound with Spirits, were strengthening; and if they
were strengthening, the Fibers of the Stomach would not be so weakened after
drinking strong (...), as to make Men sick; which Sickness will soon be
recovered by the drinking cold Water, this being also the best Remedy, if taken
largely, for that Heat of Urine which is often occasioned by Hard-drinking.

Colds. In Colds, Water is the best of all Drinks to prevent Floods or Rheum
from the Nose and Mouth, as my long Experience testifies, and the drinking
therefore will prevent Coughs; for a Cough will seldom succeed a Cold, if Water
is used from the first as common Drink: And if, through neglect, a Cough should
become troublesome, the Use of Water, avoiding all Wine and strong Drink, will
contribute much to the Cure. Some order the Water to be drank warm but others
say, That the drinking it cold vastly excells the using it hot in a Cough. It Is
said by Van Heydon, That some may think it strange to advise Water in such
Diseases, which most do account to proceed from Crudity or Indigestion; but he
says, That in any Disease where the Case is dangerous, the Use of Water is the
only friend to Nature; cold Water being a Preventer rather than a Cause of
Crudity, since by all Experience, it is proved to be a Promoter of a good
Digestion: And at this Time I know a Woman, Seventy-eight Years of Age, who for
this Ten Years past has had a great Cough, and spit much tough Phlegm, that
this present Winter 1722, has been persuaded to leave off all strong and small
fermented Liquor, and drink only Water at Meals, and sometimes a dish or two of
Tea; and has found herself much less subject to Cough than before, and scarce
Coughs at all in Bed, though subject before to Cough very much in the Night; she
also Drinks at Bedtime half a Pint of cold Water, and the same Quantity first
in the Morning, and finds herself more comforted by it at so great an Age, than
Wine has at any Time afforded.

Strong-Drinks hurtful to Children. It is generally the Opinion of most
Physicians, That Wine and Strong Drinks are not proper for Children, and that
the smaller and cooler their Drink is, the better it will be with them; and
that nothing conduces more to the Health of Children than drinking Water,
which will prevent the Foundation of those Diseases that are caused in many by
Strong-Drink, and do show themselves in their more advanced Age, wherein many
also do suffer much by the Mother's ill Custom of making them Gluttons, by
constantly cramming their Stomachs with Food, many being thereby destroyed
among the Children of the Rich before they come to Years of Maturity; when the
Children of poor Country People, who fare hard, stand their Ground till full
grown: For fewer Children die in the Country than in great Cities, where Luxury
in Diet does more abound; which is one Reason why so few Housekeepers in London
were born in it, the great Supply of Inhabitants being from the Country,
Children being brought up more hardy there than in London, where great Numbers
are killed by over-pleasing their Palates: Which Mischief would be in a great
Measure prevented by their being accustomed to eat less, and drink Water;
which, by Experience, is found to make young Children free from that
Frowardness which is commonly caused by a sharp, and hot, or feverish Blood,
which engendereth Wind, and causes Pain and Gripes: For there is no Pain but
is the Consequence of Heat, or inward as well as outward Inflammations.

To what has been said, may be added this Consideration, That when the best
Physicians are baffled by some Distempers, they advise their Patients to use
the Water of some Mineral Spring; tacitly acknowledging thereby, that all their
Prescriptions may be excelled by Water. They pretend indeed, to ascribe its
Effects to some Minerals with which the Waters are Tinctured: But Dr. Baynard,
in page 438. of Sir John Floyer's Cold Bathing, tells of a certain Person who
used to frequent Tunbridge, by which he found much Benefit; but being hindered
from going thither one Season did drink the same Quantities of Water taken from
the Pump of a Spring in his own Yard, which did him as much Service: Whereupon
he wrote thus on his Pump: The Steel is a Cheat;
It Is Water does the Feat.


And, indeed, if we consider how many Diseases and Pains proceed from a sizey,
thick Blood, which cannot pass as it ought to do through the finest Pipes that
conveys the Blood to the Parts, pure Water, without Minerals, drank to the
Quantity of a Quart or three Pints in a Morning, will attenuate or thin the
Blood sufficiently: Nothing, as Borchaave affirms, being a greater Diluter of
thick Blood, than warm Water drank in great quantity. Which to thin the Blood
may be best, though to strengthen the Stomach, it is best drank cold; having the
same effect inwardly, in some Cases, as Cold Bathing has outwardly, its Use
outwardly being also great. For,

Burns and Scalds. Water, I have found, by long Experience, to be of excellent
Use in Burns and Scalds; for in all Burns and Scalds that are slight, if the
Part is plunged immediately into cold Water, the colder the better, the Pain
will instantly be taken off; and it will fetch out the Fire, if continued so
long, as will be required to do it by any other Remedy. And if the Burn be so
considerable, that other Remedies must be applied, none of which will take off
the Smart of themselves in less than two or three Hours; yet if you apply cold
Water presently, after other Applications are made to the Part, the Pain will
immediately cease, till the Remedy becomes effectual: So that the Ease Water
will give in such Cases makes it of good Use. Which Remedy, as it has not been
discovered till now, appears to transcend all other Remedies in this Case;
because in a Moment, the great Smart will be eased, if the Water is cold, and
will be felt no more, if the Part afflicted be kept immersed in it till the
Fire is extinguished, either by the Water, or the Medicine applied. Besides, it
is a Remedy every where ready at hand, which cannot be said of any other; which
generally require so much Time to get it ready, that much Pain will be endured,
if Blisters do not arise, which do much increase the Trouble. If the Part burnt
or scalded cannot be dipped in Water, you may apply Water to it, with double
Linen Cloths dipped therein, and new dipped as they grow warm? by which Means
I have cured Burns and Scalds in the Face without Blistering, when applied
immediately before Blisters did arise.

I once knew a large Ulcer in the Foot, made by the running of melted Brass
into the Shoe, that was kept in hand by a Surgeon nine Weeks, without any
Probability of Healing, because of the great Inflammation that attended it; but
the Party being a Lover of Angling, was persuaded to go with some others to
Hackney River: Some of them went bare-legg'd into the Water, to come at a
certain Hole where much Fish was sometimes found. The Sport was so good that
the lame Man, having pulled off his Stockings and Plasters, went in also,
where he staid above two Hours, and coming out again he found the Ulcer, which
appeared very read and angry when he went in, did look pale; he put on his
Dressings, and came home, and in less than a Fortnight his Ulcer healed up;
which doubtless was occasioned by the abating of the Inflammation by the
Coldness of the Water. And I have had an Account also from an Acquaintance,
that was Surgeon to a Merchant Ship, that their Gunner, at a Time when their
Captain treated some Friends on Board, going to charge a Gun that just before
had been fired off, the Cartridge he was ramming down took fire, whereby he was
blown into the Water, and had some of his Fingers blown off, and it was about
an Hour before a Boat could be got to take him up: But they found that the
Coldness of the Water had almost stopped the Bleeding, and the Cure was effected
so speedily, that other Surgeons wondered at it; which he imputed to the Water,
which kept back the Humors, by its Coldness, from flowing to the Part at
first: So that there was no Impediment, from Inflammation, to hinder healing;
for the chief Impediment to healing, is Inflammation in Wounds or Ulcers.

Sprains. And as for Strains and Sprains in the Joints, cold Water affords the
best and most speedy Remedy, as Van Heydon affirms; who says, That by bathing
in cold Water all harm so received may, by this Remedy, be cured more safely
and more speedily than by any other, without Loss of Time, Cost or Trouble; for
no more is to be done, as I have often found, that, as soon as can be, to put
the Part into a Vessel of cold Water for about two Hours, which will prevent
all Swelling and Pain, by repelling or keeping back the Humors that otherwise
would flow to the Part. And if it should be the Shoulder, or any other Part,
which is so hurt, that cannot well be immersed in Water after this mannner,
Water may be applied, by dipping Towels folded up into it, and laying them to
the Part, as is done, in effect, to the wrenched Joints of Horses, about which,
if you wind oftentimes a thick Rope made of Hay, and then cast upon it diverse
times a Pail of cold Water, the Wrench will be cured; which Experiment is now
commonly practiced by those concerned about Horses.

Weakness in the Joints. Bathing in cold Water has also been found to be a
good Remedy to strengthen Weakness in the Joints, as Sir John Floyer, in his
Treatise of Cold Bathing, has showed; and which by Experience I found to be
true in a certain Woman, who complained of great Weakness and Pain in her
Ancles: I advised her to dip the Part in cold Water every Morning for a quarter
of an Hour, and do the same at Night; and in about Twenty Days she became as
strong in that Part as she was in the other. And Sir John tells us of a Boy who
could not stand, his Limbs were so weak, that by Bathing in cold Water,
perfectly recovered his Strength in a little Time.

Pain in the Head. Great Pain in the Head has been also cured by this Means;
for we are told by Van Heydon, That one Sir Toby Matthews had for Twenty Years
been troubled with great Pain in one side of his Head, and a great Defluction
of Rheum from his Nose; but he at last was cured, by applying cold Water to the
Part every Day for about a Quarter of an Hour: Upon reading of which, I tried
the Experiment upon myself, who for a long Time had been troubled with the
running of much clear Water from my Nose, with great spitting of thin Rheum:
For I let a Water-Cock run upon the Mould of my Head every Morning, by which,
in about Six Weeks Time, I was eased of my Trouble. And since that I had a
credible Information of a certain Servant-Maid, who was afflicted greatly with
a Rheumatism and an intolerable Pain in the Head, who being put into St Thomas
's Hospital, her Nurse was ordered by the Doctor to apply to her Head Towels
four Times double, dipped in cold Water, changing them as they became warm,
which she was to continue doing Four or Five Hours; in which Time she was freed
from that Pain in the Head, and was afterward cured of the Rheumatism by other
Means.

Want of Sleep in Fevers. The Want of Sleep in Fevers may be cured likewise by
the Application of cold Water: For to a near Relation in a Fever, who could not
sleep for three Days and three Nights, I ordered a Towel to be several Times
folded up, then to be dipped in Water, and a little wrung-out, and so laid upon
her Forehead, and to be new dipped as it grew hot; which in about two Hours
time so cooled her Head, that she fell into a Sleep, and continued in it five
Hours: And I ordered the same to be done the next Night, with the same Success.
And we find that Dr. Cockburn, in his Treatise of Sea Diseases, did order for
the Want of Sleep in Fevers, to dip a Towel, four times doubled in Oxycrat,
which is six Parts Water, and one Part Vinegar, to be bound about the Head and
Temples; which, he says will cause Sleep with wonderful Success. But cold
Water only will have the same Effect, as I often have proved.

Swoonings. And that the Use of cold Water in Swoonings, is of great Effect,
common Experience teaches: for, if a Dish or Cup of cold Water is thrown
strongly upon the Face, the Person in an Instant will recover though for a Time
he seems dead, and perhaps might not have recovered in some Cases, if cold
Water had not been so applied; such Faintings being sometimes deadly, which
proceed from poisonous Vapors ascending up to the Brain from a foul Stomach;
for such Effects there are, as I have found by Experience, who in my young
Days, did swoon away twice; at both which times I was sensible of a Collection
of Wind in my Stomach, from whence I plainly felt a Fume or Vapor ascend to
the Head, that in an Instand deprived me of all Sense: But being both Times in
the Company of a Person who had seen the Thing tried, he dashed some cold Water
against my Face, which I remember made me start, as if I had been suddenly
awaked. And I am apt to think, that some die in such a Fit, when none are near
to help them; and especially when so taken in their Sleep, which I believe none
need fear who live temperately, or that eat no Suppers; none who have refrained
from Suppers, having been ever found to die in Sleep.

Bleedings at the Nose. Dangerous Bleedings at the Nose have also been cured
with cold Water largely drank, syringing cold Water up their Nostrils, and
applying Towels round their Necks dipped in cold Water, changing them as they
grow warm; for it is said by a good Writer, That this will so cool the Heat of
the Blood, and by the Coldness of the Water syringed up the Nose, so contract
the Mouths of the Veins which bleed, that it will put a stop to the bleedings.
Such Bleedings have also been stopped by dashing cold Water often into the Face,
as a French Writer has affirmed, whose Name was Flamand; and the same also is
affirmed by Cook in his Marrow of Surgery.

Small Cutts. Cold Water is an absolute Cure for all small Cuts in the Fingers,
or other Parts, for if when cut you close the Cut up with the Thumb of your
other Hand, keeping it so closed for a quarter or half an Hour, this will
infallibly stop the Bleeding: after which, if you double up a Linen Rag five
or six times, dip it in cold Water, and apply it to the Part, binding it on.
This, by preventing Inflammation and a Flux of Humors, will give Nature time
soon to heal it without any other Application, as is seen in the common
Practice of Surgeons when they let a Man blood; for all the Application they
make to the Vein so cut, is a Pledget of Linen dipped in cold Water, and bound
on with a Fillet: for all Wounds without loss of Substance will heal of
themselves, if Inflammation be prevented, and the Lips of the Wound are kept
close together.

Bitings of a mad Dog. We also are told by Van Heydon, that in his time some
were of an opinion, that a Person bit by a mad Dog might be preserved from that
Sympton, called, The Fear of Water, which generally follows, and proves so
mortal, by applying cold Water to the Place bitten: And this, he says, they
conceive to be no unlikely thing, if there is any credit to be given to what
Cornelius Celsus writes, who says, that the only Remedy in this case is to
throw the Party who is in this Condition, or has the Fear of Water upon him,
into a Pond or River, and when plunged over Head and Ears, to keep him in the
Water till filled with it, whether he will or no; and by this means both his
Thirst and Dread of Water will be cured. For if this Immersion be of use when
the Party is so far gone, why should it not be of greater force in preserving
from it, if speedily applied and repeated? Now though this is mentioned by him as
a probable Opinion, yet Experience in our days shows, That the plunging the
Patient into the salt Water either of the River of Thames about Gravesend, or
in the salt Springs in Cheshire, is the best means to prevent any Evil
succeeding the Bite of a mad Dog; they must indeed be dipped so often, as to be
almost drowned before the Danger is over: but it is a question whether the
Saltness of the Water contributes any thing to this Cure, since Boerhaave, the
present Professor at Leyden, affirms, That when Men bitten by a mad Dog are
arrived to the Fear of Water, called an Hydrophobia, they may be cured, by
blinding the Patient's Eyes, and throwing of him into a Pond of Water often,
till he seems not to be afraid of it, or but very little, and then force him to
drink large Quantities.

Falling Sickness. And we are told by Dr. Edw. Brown, that a Person troubled
with the Falling Sickness, by happening to fall into a cold Spring ( I suppose
it was in the time of his Fit) was freed from his Distemper all his Life after:
and he says there is no need of preparing the Body for it in this, as in some
other Cases. But the Patient, when plunged into a cold Bath, ought to continue
in the Bath each time about three or four Minutes: for in plunging over head
and ears at his first Entrance into a cold Bath, the Brain will be so sensibly
affected, as to be relieved from the Distemper, which is a kind of Convulsion
proceeding from an Inflammation, or some other Cause; but we want more
Experiments to confirm this Notion: Which Notion may be worth noting, that the
thing may be tried in others, to see whether it will succeed as it did in this
Person. For it is said by the ingenious Dr. Pitcairn, a Scotchman, some time
Professor at Leyden, that there is no such thing as the Art of Curing, but only
the Practice, Remedies were found out by chance, p. 264. of his Works: for when
Remedies thus happen to be discovered, and prove often to be effectual, the
remembering that Remedy, to apply it in a like case Practice, brings Reputation
to the Prescriber; but if it fails, some other Experiment must be tried, which,
were Physic an Art, need not be done, because the Rules of Art art certain,
and Men depend upon them as such.

Madness and Melancholy. It Is also said by the same Dr. Brown, that Madness
and Melancholy, with all their Retinue, may find better Effects from the Use of
bathing in cold Water, than from other violent Methods, with which People so
afflicted are now treated; for says he, that which will make a drunken Man
sober in a minute, will certainly go a great way toward the Cure of a Madman
in a month. Now it is most certain, to my own Knowledge, that if a drunken Man
be plunged over head and ears in cold Water, he will come out of it perfectly
sober: And some I have known, that in such cases have been recovered by barely
washing their Heads in cold Water. Which forementioned Opinion of Dr. Brown
is confirmed by the Practice of Dr. Blair, who, in a Letter to Dr. Baynard,
declares, That he cured a Man raving mad, who being bound in a Cart, stripped of
his Clothes, and blindfolded, that the Surprise might be the greater; he on a
sudden had a great Fall of Water let down upon him from the height of twenty
foot, under which he continued so long as his Strength would permit: and after
his Return home, he fell into a Sleep, and slept twenty-nine Hours, and awaked
in as quiet a State of Mind as ever, and so had continued to the time of
writing that Letter, which was twelve Months. Distractions also in Fevers, of
which there are diverse Instances in the History of Cold Baths, has been cured
by being plunged in cold Water. See page 226.

Which Relation seems to make that a more probable Truth, which was related in
a Letter from Sir John Floyer to Dr. Brown, and printed by that Doctor;
wherein it is said, that in Normandy they immerse Fools, or dip them in cold
Water, to cure them: a hot Brain being the Cause, perhaps, of several Disorders
in the Understanding, and is in great part found to be true, in the ridiculous
Behavior of some drunken Men, which, when their Heads are become cool, abhor
what they before did do or say. Now if such Dipping would cure Fools among us,
great Numbers might be made more happy then they are by being so dipped.

King's Evil. Dr. Brown, in his Discourse of Cold Baths, affirms likewise,
that to bathe in cold Water has been found to be the quickest, safest, and
pleasantest Cure for the King's Evil; and he tells us, in p. 85. of a Yorkshire
Gentleman, who was grievously afflicted with this Distemper, having great
Ulcers in the Glands of his Neck, which were so much enflamed, as to bring him
very low; but being advised by Dr. Baynard to bathe in the Cold Bath, he in a
Month's time was perfectly cured, his Ulcers being healed up, contrary to the
Opinion of the most learned Physicians.

Jaundice. We also find mention, in the Description of the Scottish Islands, of
an odd Remedy commonly made use of there for the Cure of the Jaundice; which is
this: They strip the Party naked, lay him upon the Ground on his Belly, and
pour unawares upon his Back a Pail of cold Water. And also Pains in the Joints,
as Dr. Curtis tells us, will be cured, by holding the Part under the Stream of
a Pump or Cock; and fomenting with cold Water is commended as good to assuage
hot Swellings. And I know a Person who had often been subject to blood shot or
inflamed Eyes, who afterward, upon the beginning of the same Distemper, took,
by Advice, a Ball of Linen Rags, dipped them in cold Water, and applied them to
the Part, cooling them by new dipping as often as they grew hot: which
Application was continued three Hours, in which time the Humor was so
repelled, as to be troublesome no more; for the Party, to my knowledge, has
had no sign of that Distemper since, though the same had been very troublesome
many times before.

Defluctions. It is also advised by Dr. Gideon Harvey, to wash the Eyes well
twice a day in cold Water, as the best Remedy to prevent Defluxions on them,
and preserve the Eye sight, which it greatly comforts. And this I have found
true for many Years, my Eyes being often apt to be dim, and stiff, so that I
could scarce open my Eyelids; which, upon washing for a minute with fair Water,
has been felt no more for a good while after. Besides which Benefit to the
Eyes, Authors say it is also good to preserve the Memory, if the whole Forehead
be washed twice a day; which also is a certain Cure for itching in the Eyes, as
Authors tell us. And indeed washing with Water will free Mankind from a
troublesome Itching in any other Part of the Body, let it be never so private,
as Cook, in his Observations on English Bodies, does expressly declare from
Experience.

Callosity. Some People are troubled with a Callosity, or Hardness of the
Bottoms of their Feet, which is so troublesome, as to be a hindrance to their
easy walking; for which a Cure is prescribed by Dr. Cook, that is, to soak them
well in warm Water, till the Hardness is softened, and then scrape it off with
the Edge of a Knife: and if the Feet burn with any unnatural Heat, the bathing
often in hot Water will cool them, by giving vent to what offends.

Scurvy. And the plentiful drinking of Water is commended in the Scurvy whether
hot or cold, by Dr. Pitcairn, to dissolve the Scorbutic Salts, and carry them
out by Urine, whether they are Acids or Alkalies; and myself having formerly
been extremely troubled with the Scurvy, which often made me faint and weak,
and my Pulse so low as scarcely to be felt, did find at last that the Pulse
would infallibly rise upon drinking a Pint or more of cold Water, and in a
little time I should again become brisk and strong: For I have often observed,
that upon a Disorder of the Stomach, the Strength of the bodily Members soon
would fail, and as easily be recovered when the Disorder of the Stomach was
removed; yea, by long Experience, I have found that nothing conduces so much
to bodily Strength as a Stomach in right Order, which requires Temperance and
cooling Diet to bring it into Order, when distempered.

Asthma. To what has been already said, I will add an Account, taken from a
credible Person, of a Man in the Parish of Shoreditch, who was desperately ill
of an Asthma, or Shortness of Breath, and deep Consumption, for which he had
tried many Remedies to no purpose. At length he was advised by a Physician,
being poor, to drink no other Drink but Water, and eat no other Food but Water
Gruel, without Salt or Sugar; which Course of Diet he continued for three
Months, finding himself at first to be somewhat better, and at the three Months
end he was perfectly cured: but, for Security-sake, he continued in that Diet a
Month longer, and grew strong and fat upon it. But his Diet he had no mind to
till he was thoroughly hungry, and then he eat it with pleasure; in which perhaps
consisted the best part of his Cure, it being an Advantage to Health never to
eat till Hunger calls for Food.

Cough. And I remember a young Woman, a Burnisher of Silver, who had a
desperate Cough, for which she had taken many things of an Apothecary to no
purpose; at length the Journeyman told her, his Master said, he could do no
more: but, said the Fellow, I would advise you every Morning to wash behind
your Ears, and upon your Temples, and on the Mould of your Head with cold
Water; which she told me she did, and was perfectly cured of her Cough by that
Means.

Difficulty in making water. There are diverse other Cases wherein the Use of
Water has done much good. I knew an ancient Practiser in Physic, who told me,
That in many Difficulties of making Water, he advised the Party to put his Yard
into Water as hot as he could endure it, which, in a Minute, did cause him to
make water; and that Women have had the same Benefit by sitting over hot Water.
And he often had advised them who were costive, and went to Stool with great
Difficulty, to sit over a Pot with hot Water in it; which soon was attended
with an easy Dejection, or Stool, the Body drawing up the Vapor, which did
provoke Expulsion of Excrements without much straining.

And it has been observed, that froward Children have been made much more
quiet, by washing their lower Parts every Morning with Water, to wash off the
Salts of their Urine, which usually stick in the Pores of the Skin, and are
fretful and uneasy, and nothing cures their Soreness about those Parts like it.
Nor is there any thing more effectual to cure Men, who are gauled with Riding,
than to wash themselves well, when they go to bed, with cold Water; and washing
the bear Breast every Morning with cold Water, will make those hardy who before
were apt at every turn to take Cold. To which I will add this, that Sir
Theodore Mayhern affirms in his Medicinal Counsels, that in most Diseases of
the Head, there is nothing better than to bathe it with cold Water, which, in a
desperate Pain in the Ears upon taking cold, I have found to be true; for the
Pain seems to Vanish upon applying to it about 30 Minutes, a Towel doubled up
often, and wet in cold Water; and though it returned again some Hours after, yet
Ease was obtained the same way, and the Cure perfected in four times doing:
Which Cure of a Pain gotten with Cold, by a cold Application, will not seem so
strange, when we consider that in the Northern Countries, Mortifications from
Cold are no ways to be cured but by applying cold Snow.

In short, Water when rightly made use of, does appear from the Accounts
beforementioned, very effectual to prevent and Cure many Diseases, but more
especially the inward Use thereof; for to use the Words of the ingenious Dr.
Curtis, in his Essay for the Preservation and Recovery of Health; The habitual
Use of Water for common Drink preserves the native Ferment of the Stomach in
due Order, keeps the Blood temperate, and helps to spin out the Thread of Life
to the longest Extent of Nature, it makes the Rest at Night more quiet and
refreshing, the Reason and Understanding more clear, the Passions less
disorderly; and, in case of eating too much, a large Draught of cold Water
vastly exceeds any other Cordial to cause Digestion: Water being not so cold
and lifeless, he says, as many do imagine. Besides which Commendation of it by
this Doctor, it is certainly a Drink that will not ferment in the Stomach, nor
turn sour, as Wine and strong Malt-Drinks will do, to the hindering of a good
Digestion, which all Acidity in the Stomach certainly does, when it abounds
there; and is best corrected by weakening or making it less sour, by drinking
good Store of Water, as the Experience of above Forty Years Practice has
assured my self and many others. For though Water is accounted a contemptible
Drink, yet by beginning to make use of it at about Thirty Years of Age, before
which I was often out of Order, and continuing the Use of it ever since,
drinking very little Wine or strong Drink, I have attained to the Age of
seventy-four Years; when Thousands in the mean time, who delighted only in
drinking strong Beer, Wine, and Brandy, have not lived half so long: which
makes good that Saying in the Scriptures, That Wine is a Mocker, and strong
Drink is Raging, and he who is deceived thereby is not wise, Prove. xx. 1. since
it no ways contributes to long Life; for it is certain that Thousands in the
World live as long who drink no strong Drink, as any Drinkers of it do. Some
indeed, from an extraordinary Strength of Nature, have been hard Drinkers, and
yet Die old; but for one who does this, perhaps an hundred are destroyed by it
before they come to half the time of Life: and generally we shall find that
very strong and healthy Constitutions, at the long Run are ruined by Riot and
Excess, there being no certain Safety in any way of Living, but that of
Temperance and Moderation. Nature in some may, a long time, withstand the
Abuses offered to it, but at last it will yield to its Enemies; and those who
live the longest in an intemperate Course, might, from the Strength of their
Constitution, have lived much longer, had they eat less, and used themselves to
drink more Water; which Drink, as it is most friendly, and longest will
preserve the Life of a strong Constitution, so it is absolutely necessary for
those that are weak and sickly, and are naturally subject to the Gout, the
Stone, Shortness of Breath, Wind, Ill-Digestion, and such like.

Useful in Vomiting. But the chief Use of Water in preserving of Health, is by
using of it as a Vomit, as before was shown, which is an infallible and the
most speedy Remedy that ever was found out for any Stomach-Sickness, or Pain
there; for to vomit with warm Water will effectually remove it in one Hour, and
be a means to prevent great Fits of Sickness, and preserve the Lives of many
Thousands to old Age, by cleansing the Stomach from that tough, slimy, or
corrupt Matter that offends, and is the Cause of all mortal Diseases;
especially of an Apoplexy, which though counted a Disease of the Head, yet has
its Original from a foul Stomach, which nothing does so effectually cleanse as
Vomits: according to that of Dr. Curtis, who says, That vomiting with warm
Water, or Carduus Tea, is very beneficial to bring up that which fluctuates in
the Stomach, and that tough, ropy Phlegm which sticks fast to the Wrinkles and
Folds of that Bowel, and which Purges do often pass over, and cannot remove.
Which way of Vomiting with warm Water, is ten times more easy and pleasant than
that which is effected by the Use of a nauseous Tea made of Carduus, which
Physicians do sometimes advise; and it is also such as can do no harm by
Violence, as other Vomits made from Antimony sometimes do, for want of drinking
after each Vomit a Pint or more of Water Gruel, or warm Water, since you may
stop when you please, by forbearing to drink more warm Water, when you vomit
with Water.

And here it may not be amiss to relate what I some Years ago discovered, in
order to Men's freeing themselves from Sickness that may happen after eating;
for being invited to dine at a certain Table, where there were several good
Dishes of Meat, I was over-perswaded to eat more than I should do, and in a
little time after Dinner found my self begin to be sick. I went out and in a
private Place attempted to vomit, by tickling my Throat with my Finger, but
could not vomit as I designed to do; only by this means I raised up two or
three mouthfuls of thick tough Phlegm, upon which I found my self better, and
my sick Qualm went off. I took the Hint it gave me, and have done the same
several times since, and find that the getting up the Phelgm, which like Yest
upon Beer, works up to the Mouth of the Stomach a Man may free himself from
some kinds of Sickness after eating. And I remember it is an Advice given by
one Vaughan, in a Book long since printed, entitled, Directions for Health, for
Men who feed high, to put their Finger in their Throat when they rise in the
Morning, to make themselves puke, or avoid the Phlegm which can be raised, as
an excellent way to preserve Health; and it is said also to be an absolute
Preservative from the Gout.

Gripings. I will conclude with this Note, That in such Distempers where
Water-drinking will be available for a Cure, the same must not be drank
sparingly but plentifully, as (for instance) to ease the Gripings in a Looseness
or Flux: for if but a Pint of Water should be drank, Ease would hardly succeed;
but drinking in about an hour's time a Quart or three Pints, the Sharpness and
evil Quality of the Humor offending will be so far diluted or weakened, that
immediate Ease will follow. If the Season be too cold to drink cold water, you
may warm it a little upon the Fire, or put a hot Toast of Bread in every Pint:
and the same is true in Fevers, or in Pains from Gravel or the Cholick: A small
Quantity will not be effectual in these Cases, for in the Cholick a Quart is
necessary, which ought to be carefully noted, and in a Fever a little Water
will rather increase the Burhing, which large Draughts, often drank, will soon
take off. Rest, Fasting, and drinking much Water, after a Vomit or two, is a
Course that never yet has failed to cure Fevers, by clearing the Stomach of
that sordid Filthiness which causes he Distemper; for a happy Issue will
certainly follow such a Course, if the Fever is simple, and not complicated
with sch other Distempers, which will re, sist all Remedies: for in many Cases
nothing can prevent Mortality, as is evident by the Death of the best
Physicians themselves, and by the Death of many, who consulted with them for a
Cure, since many die under the Hands of the most able Doctors, as well as
Quacks.

Grief. I will add to what has been said, one Experiment more, that is very
material, And that is, being very hypochondriacal, and of a melancholy Temper,
I have often strangely dejected in Mind when under Grief for some Misfortunes,
which sometimes have been so great, as to threaten Danger to Life; in which
Fits of Grief I always found the Parts within my Breast very uneasy, and
sometimes continued long: but now I have found a good Remedy, for upon drinking
a Pint or more of cold Water, I find ease in two or three Minutes, so that no
Grief seems to afflict. Which Experience I discover for the sake of others in
the same Circumstances, being verily persuaded that the Stomach sympathizeth
with the Mind, and this becomes the Cause of that uneasy Sensation and Pain
perceived there; for which, cold Water I have found to be the best Remedy in my
self, and I believe others may find the same Benefit, who will make use thereof
upon the like Occasion, and it gives also Relief to People under Frights.

Vapors. There is also another Experiment that I have often seen of good
effect; and that is, that if Persons, subject to what is called Vapors, or
that are afflicted with Fits, commonly called, The Fits of the Mother, will but
drink Water when they find their Fits approach, it will immediately yield
Relief. There is in this case a mealy Julep prescribed by Dr. Bates, which is
to take a Spoonful of fine Wheat Flour, an Ounce of fine Sugar, and a Pint of
Water, brew them together, and drink it off: This is pleasanter than Water
alone; but Water of it self will be as effectual, or rather better, as has
been often proved upon Persons in those Fits.

How to distinguish Water. Some perhaps may desire to know how to distingush
good from bad Water; and the way to do this, is by the Taste and Scent; for if
it have no Taste nor Smell, being purely fresh, not salt, nor sweetish, nor
ill-scented, it is good, provided it be pure and clear; of which kind is the
common Water used in London, when well settled, or in fair Weather. As for
those who are curious, and will be at the Charge, they may procure the best
Water for Drink by Distillation, either in an Alembick, or in a cold Still used
in drawing any cold Water from Herbs; for no earthy or metallic Substance, nor
any kind of Salt will rise in Distillation: so that the Water so distilled will
be pure and admirable to drink when cold, and will keep as long from stinking
as any of the cold distilled Water in the Apothecaries Shops; according to what
Dr. Quincy has affirmed about it in his Dispensatory.

Those who have not the Convenience of Distillation, may boil it a little as
they do for Tea; for then, when kept a while after it is cold, it will become
more fine, by suffering any mixture contained in it to settle to the bottom of
the Vessel wherein it is contained, and that will render it still more pure: in
short, all Water that will make a good Lather with Soap, is wholesome to drink
without boiling, but none else.

Pains in the Stomach. Since the collecting together the forementioned
Accounts, I have met with a Book written by Dr. Boerhaave, the present
Professor of Physic at Leyden, in Holland, who affirms, that drinking Water,
made very warm, is a good Remedy to pacify griping Pains in the Stomach; and
that it is proper to bathe wounds in the Face with it, when they come to be just
healed, so that the Place be kept continually wet, which I conceive is best
done by applying often Linen Cloths wet, and binding them till they begin to
be dry, for this will prevent Scars: And he says, that warm Water is better to
attenuate, or thin the Blood, than cold Water.

Fevers. There is also published lately a Book of Experiments made with Water,
by Dr. Hancock, a Divine, called Febrifugum Magnum; wherein he says, that
drinking a Pint or Quart of cold Water in Bed, will raise a copious Sweat, and
cure all burning Fevers, which at once taking has done the business: it will
raise a Sweat without much more covering than ordinary. And he further affirms,
that the same taken at the beginning of the cold Fit of an Ague, and sweating
upon it, at two or three times taking will cure that Distemper. A large
Quantity of hot Water, I know, has been advised to take off the cold Fit of
Agues, but the Party was not ordered to sweat. Which Discovery of the Reverend
Doctor about Fevers, is confirmed by the following Accounts, which I received
from a Worthy Gentleman. Mr. Ralph Thoresby, F. R. S. Author of Ducatus
Leediensis, or Topography of Leeds, which the learned Bishop of Lincoln, in his
Preface to the new Edition of Camden's Britannia, styles, An Useful and
Accurate Treatise.#
to whom they were transmitted by Mr. Lucas, a pious and learned Gentleman of
Leeds in Yorkshire who says that

One Captain Rosier fell into a violent Fever, which, as soon as he perceived,
he said he must have some cold Water. The Gentlewoman, at whose House he
lodged, not thinking that proper, boiled the Water (unknown to him) and put
some Spirits therein, and sent it up cold; but he smelt it before it came to
his Head, and refused to drink it, saying, he knew what he did, for he had
several times tried it. Afterward some clear Water being brought, he drank it,
sweat profusely, and was well the next Day. Another Captain of a Ship also took
the same Method, when he, or any of his Men, fell into a Fever; which had the
desired success. Mr. Lucas adds, in another Letter to the same Gentleman,

That his own Wife fell very ill of a Fever; she drank Water, sweat very much,
and thereby recovered. All which Instances corroborate the new Way of curing
Fevers, so lately discovered in this City by Dr. Hancock; who also says, he
has had long Experience of curing common Colds with cold Water; and this is
done by drinking a large Draught of Water at going to Bed, another in the
Night, and another in the Morning: which, he says, will soon thicken and
sweeten, and digest that thin sharp Rheum, that provokes Coughing to no
purpose: for the Rheum, when thin, is hard to be brought up; but when
thickened, it will come up easily, and the Cough will soon go off. Which agrees
with what I before affirmed from my own long Experience.

He also affirms from his own Experience, that using sometimes to take a Walk
of eight or ten Miles in a Morning, he found that Water gave twice as good
Breath for that purpose as Wine or Ale; and if it would do this for a Man who
had no Asthma, he doubts not but it would do the same in one troubled with one.
And he also affirms Water to be the best Remedy for a Surfeit, to the truth of
which I can testify by long Experience.

Rheumatism. He also affirms, that drinking cold Water has been found good in
Rheumatisms, and that to one so afflicted he had advised to drink it as he lay
in his Bed, and it took off the Fit; but if hot Water attenuates the Blood
most, as Boerhaave affirms, it is then best to drink of it warm daily to a good
quantity: for, as Pitcairn observes, it is then the best Dissolver of all kinds
of Salts in the Body, which it will carry off in the Urine, it drank
plentifully; for by Urine Salts are evacuated, as is evident by the Taste.

Gout in the Stomach. And it is his Opinion, from the long Experience he has
had of the Effect of Water in keeping the Stomach in order, and making it tite
and strong to perform its Operations, and digest all Humors, that it will cure
the Gout in the Stomach; and perhaps it may do it better than Wine, which I
have known to fail. And I do not wonder that the same Liquor, which is the
principal Cause of the Gout in other Parts, should not be a help in that Part,
but rather kill, as it often is found to do, though the strongest Wine is drank.

I^ short, ^e affirms, and that with great reason, that Sweating in Fevers by
drinking cold Water, is more natural than to do it with hot Sudorificks, which
often do harm in the beginning of Fevers, except good store of cooling
moistening Liquors are drank with them, they being more apt to inflame than
cool and quench Heat in the Body; and for that reason Sweating has not been
often advised by Physicians, because they were ignorant of this way of Sweating
to cure Fevers, by drinking cold Water.

Which Cure, he said, did succeed in one who was his Relation, at the fifth Day
after his falling sick; to whom he gave a Dose of Water after he was in bed,
and he sweated profusely for twenty-four Hours, and thereby was cured. Half a
Pint, he says, is enough for a grown Child^ a Pint to a Man or Woman, though if
they drink a Quart it will be better. And in Scarlet-Fevers, Smallpox, or
Measles, though the Water will not cause Sweat, yet it will so quell and keep
under the Fever, that the Eruptions will come out more kindly; which is a
Confirmation of what before was said about Dr Bett's prescribing two Quarts of
Water, when the Small Pox did not come out kindly; the Water affording Matter
to fill them up, according to what the Author observes of a certain Person, in
The History of Cold Bathing, p. 347. that he could give an hundred Instances
where People of all Ages have been lost, by being denied Drink in the Smallpox
-- for it hinders the filling of the Pustules.

Plague. And Dr. Hancock lets down an Account of the Author of the Free
Thinker, concerning a Woman, who, in the last great Plague, fell ill of that
Distemper, who got her Husband to fetch her a Pitcher of Water from Lamb's
Conduit; she drank plentifully of it, but did not avoid the Cold, and so did
not sweat, however she was cured. And he gives us another Relation of an
Englishman, formerly Resident at Morocco, that fell ill of the Plague at that
Place, and getting Water to drink, fell into a violent Sweat, and recovered:
from whence he concludes, that Water is good in the Plague; agreeable to what
is related in Sir John Floyer's Book of Cold Baths, wherein it is said, That
but two died of the Plague who lived over the Water upon London Bridge, p. 223.
the Coolness of the Air being supposed to contribute to their Health who
inhabited on the Water in that manner, their Blood being cooler than others:
It Is said also, the Watermen escaped better than others.

I will here add to what the Doctor has said before concerning the Cure of
Fevers, that if the Fever be accompanied in the beginning with any great
Illness at the Stomach, nauseating or vomiting, it will be the surest and
safest Practice to clear the Stomach first, by vomiting with warm Water, as
before has been directed; for I cannot believe it possible for the Stomach to
be cleared from foul Humors by sweating: it may do, if no great sense of
Disorder is perceived there, but it will certainly be safest to cleanse the
Stomach first, which is the Place where all Diseases are originally begun; for
then sweating with cold Water afterward may turn to good account. Indeed I
have not made any trial of it since the Doctor's Book was published, but I have
a very good opinion of his Accounts therein given concerning the Benefit of
Water, having had so much Experience thereof in my own Practice for above forty
Years; for so long it is since I first began to collect those Accounts, and
make those Experiments, which are herein made public for the Benefit of all.

And thus, for the common Good of Mankind of all Ranks and Degrees, I have
gathered together all the Accounts I have observed in Physick-Books, relating
to the Use of common Water in preventing and curing Diseases; to which I have
added some Experiments of my own, which by numerous Trials I can warrant as
sure and certain, especially that of curing any Sickness in the Stomach upon
the Spot, by vomiting with warm Water: which is an Experiment, that, if put
into common Practice, would prevent many thousand Fits of Sickness in a Year
among Mankind, and also a great number of untimely Deaths; for it takes away
the Cause of all Stomach-Sickness, which is the Root or first Beginning of most
of the Evils that afflict the Body.

I shall conclude all with this Advertisement, That if this finds a kind
Acceptance, the Author intends to publish a Collection he has made out of the
best Writings relating to Physic, of such Receipts as are most commended in
all Distempers, and made up of the fewest Ingredients, and easiest to be had,
all reduced under their proper Heads; which, I doubt not, will prove very
useful on many accounts, beyond any Collection of that nature. The Collection
was begun above forty Years ago for my own use, without any design originally
to make them public; but I am now persuaded to let others partake of the
Benefit of my Labor, if I can do it with the Prospect of any suitable
Encouragement, from the kind Reception this may meet with among those who
desire Health, which is best attained to by the most uncompounded Remedies.

Some RULES for preserving Health by DIET, collected from Physical Authors.
IN a little Treatise, entitled, Kitchin-Physick, written by Dr. Cook, the
Author declares, he can hardly be told of any Disease which he cannot relieve
or cure by a proper Diet, p. 39. And in the same Book we find his Opinion to be
this, That all tender sickly People, and all aged and decrepid Persons, ought
to eat often, and but a little at a time, because weak and wasted Bodies are to
be restored by little and little; and by moist and liquid Food also, rather
than by solid, because moist and liquid Diet does nourish soonest, and digest
easiest.

Those, he says, that eat much, and get little Strength by eating, show, that
they have used themselves to too full a Diet; and the more you cramb such
Bodies, the less they thrive by it, but rather grow worse and worse: because by
much feeding you do but add to the bad Humors wherewith the Body is already
filled, which should rather be wasted by purging and using a spare Diet.

And a spare Diet he describes to be this, That we never eat at once till the
Appetite is fully satisfied, and never to eat till we have an Appetite; and Men
never have a true Appetite till they can eat any ordinary Food: And he advises
to keep constantly to a plain Diet; for those, he says, enjoy most Health, and
live longest, that avoid Curiosity and Variety of Meats and Drinks, which only
serve to entice to Gluttony, and so work our Ruin.

Another says, that the less Food the sick Person eats, the sooner he will
recover; for it is a true Saying, The more you fill foul Bodies, the more you
hurt them. The Stomach being the Place where Diseases begin, when that Part
therefore is weak, and out of order, and cannot make a good Digestion when much
is eaten, raw or crude Humors then must needs be bred, and bad Humors cannot
produce good Blood.

All Men do find by Experience, that in the Morning before they have eaten,
they are light and pleasantly easy in their Bodies, but after they have
indulged their Appetites with Plenty of Food, they find themselves heavy and
dull, and often sleepy: which sufficiently shows that those full Meals are
prejudicial to the Welfare of the Body; for a moderate Meal would have
continued the Ease and Lightsomness they before found in themselves, and would
have refreshed any Faintness that Emptiness might occasion. And he certainly,
who uses the most simple Meat and Drinks, avoideth the Snare of provoking his
Appetite beyond the Necessities of Nature; whereas Variety enticeth to a fresh
Desire of every Dainty, till at last the Stomach is gorged, and made incapable
of performing a good Digestion; and this produces those Crudities, which are
the Cause of all Diseases, and of so many sudden Deaths.

It Is generally observed, that the most unhealthy are found among those who
feed high upon the most delicious Dainties, and drink nothing but the strongest
and most spirituous Liquors whereas others who want this delicate Fare, are
seldom sick, except they have such unsatiable Appetites as to eat too much;
which a Man may do of the plainest Diet; whose Belly is his God, as an Apostle
expresses it. But though Men may glut themselves with coarse Food, yet coarse
Food and long Life are very Consistent, as appears by John Bill, mentioned in
the History of Cold Baths, p. 408 whose Food was Bread, Cheese and Butter; and
Drink, Whey, Butter-milk or Water; and yet he lived 133 Years, was a strong,
strait, upright Man. And the Food of John Bailes, whose Age amounted to 128,
was for the most part brown Bread and Cheese, and his Drink, Water, or small
Beer and Milk, p. 416. He had buried the whole Town of Northampton twenty times
over, except three or four, and said strong Drink killed them all.

Dr. Pratt advises to Sup sparingly; for to Sup sparingly, he says, is most
healthful, because of the Experience of an infinite Number of Persons who have
received the greatest Benefit from light Suppers. For the Stomach being not
over-burdened, the Sleep is more pleasant; and from sparing Suppers the
breeding of those Humors are prevented, which Cause Defluxions, Rheumatisms,
Gouts, Dropsies, Giddiness, and Corruption in the Mouth from the Scurvy: and
from light Suppers a Freedom from Sickness and Reaching in the Morning is
obtained, and Concoction is made perfect, which prevents Obstructions.

Another says, It is well known, that many Indispositions are cured by
Fasting, or a very spare Diet; for what is taken into the Stomach being no more
than can be well digested, the chylous Juice, so rightly prepared, is conveyed
into the Lacteal Vessels, and from thence into the Blood: so that Nature being
duly supplied with well-concocted Nourishment, the corrupted Blood will free
itself from that Corruption in time, by throwing it out, through the Pores of
the Skin, in Perspiration, and supply itself with the purer Juices; and in this
way, Consumptions and Scurvys, and other Chronical Distempers, will be
overcome: which way of curing Diseases by Fasting, Swine do naturally betake
themselves to, who, when sick, will eat nothing till they recover, as they
always do after they injure themselves by over-eating; in which they are
imitated by all who delight in Gormandizing or Gluttony, though not in using the
same means of Recovery.

That Men in Health may prevent Diseases, 'twas advised, that one Meal should
not be eaten, till the other, which was eaten before, was passed off clean out
of the Stomach; which never is done till the Appetite of Hunger is found to
call for another Supply: by means of which constant Observation, the Food will
be converted into good Chyle, and from good Chyle, which is a milky Substance
good Blood will be bred, and from good Blood generous Spirits will be produced,
out of which a healthy Constitution will ensue; but, on the contrary, too great
a Quantity of Food being taken for pleasure only, which the Stomach cannot well
digest, the Chyle will be raw and corrupt, which will foul the Blood, and
render the Body disorderly and unhealthful.

Others say, that Abstinence and Sobriety free from most Diseases, especially
Catarrhs, Coughs, Wheesings, Giddiness, Pain in the Head and Stomach, sudden
Death, Lethargies, Gout and Sciatica, an ill Digestion being the Cause of all
these; it also prevents Pain in the Spleen, Stone, and Gravel, and a day Itch;
it makes the Body vigorous and nimble, maintains the five Senses in a good
State, preserves the Memory, quickens the Wit, and quenches all undue Lust in
Mankind; and, in short, all Misers, who eat and drink but little, live long.

Two Meals a day is said to be sufficient for all Persons after fifty Years of
Age, and all weak People; and the omitting of Suppers does always conduce much
to the Health of the Weak and Aged: since if no Supper be eaten, the Stomach
will soon free itself from all tough slimy Humors wherewith it is slabbered
over on the Inside, and thereby the Appetite will be renewed, and Digestion
made more strong and vigorous. Moreover, all that are troubled with Sweating in
the Night, any ill Taste in their Mouths, belching, and troublesome Dreams,
must avoid Suppers: for in Sleep the Fibers of the Stomach relax, and are not
able to contract themselves so strongly, as when awake, to embrace the Food,
and by Trituration reduce it into a Pan fit to pass out into the other Bowels,
called the Guts, out of which the Nourishment is sent to other Parts.

'Twas said by Dr. Curtis, that though those who use a spare Diet, cannot well
bear long Labor; yet such People, when their Exercise is suitable to their
Strength, do live longer than those of a robust Constitution, that think large
feeding adds Strength; especially such as being strong, use no Exercise
proportionable to it, to conaume the Superfluities which a full Feeding does
occasion: so that the only way for those to live long, who have much Wealth,
and need not labor for a Livelihood, is to live temperately: and this
Temperance does consist in not letting the common Custom of Meals invite you to
eat, except your Appetite concur with those Times. We must not indulge the
Cravings of a depraved Appetite, as those do who eat to please their Fancy, and
not the Necessities of Nature; and when we do eat, we must not think that the
more plentifully we eat, we shall be more strengthened, for it will not prove
so: a little well digested will make the Body stronger, than the being glutted
with Superfluity, most of which will be turned into a corrupt Juice, and must
be cast out by Physic, or else Sickness will ensue, and the easiest Physic is
that which the Germans call the Hunger Cure, if continued a due time.

It is the Opinion of learned Men, that the early Distemper of the Bodies of
Children, called the Rickets, proceeds from the Fault of their Mothers, in
making them Gluttons from their Cradles, gorging them with Food till they loath
it, out of a mistaken Opinion, that this is the way to make them thrive and
grow strong: which Excess is not only the Cause of this Disease, but of the
immature Death of many; and in others it lays the Foundation of many
Distempers, which afflict those afterward who live to Years of Maturity: and
as they gorge them with Food, so they vainly think to cherish them with strong
Drink, than which nothing can be more pernicious to the Health of Children,
whose Diet should be little and often, and their Drink cooling. As it also
should be when Men arrive at the time of becoming Children again in Old Age;
that is, in an helpless State, which should be prevented as much as can be, by
a cooling moistening Diet, in opposition to the hot and dry, and withered State
of Age; for it is Heat and Dryness that are the Cause of most old Men's Miseries,
especially the wasting of the Substance that fills the Parts with Moisture, and
keeps the Body plump and smooth; they who style Wine the old Man's Milk, being
greatly mistaken, for Milk cools, and Wine heats.

It was the Opinion of Dr. Pit, who was formerly Physician to St.
Bartholomew's Hospital, that Fasting, Rest, and drinking Water would cure most
Diseases; and there seems to be a great deal of Reason in what he asserted.
For Fasting will give time to the Stomach to unload itself of the Cause of
Distempers, the Cause of all Diseases being begun in that Bowel only; to which
cleansing, the drinking of Water plentifully will much contribute, which also
will keep the Action of the Stomach upon the Hinges, by filling of it when
empty, at which time there will be need of Rest, for thereby the Body will be
less fit for Business: though the mere drinking of Water, which affords
Nourishment sufficient for the Growth and Support of all Vegetables, will, in
some measure, supply the want of Food, as has been shown in the Example of
two, who were supported a long time by nothing else. In short, the best way for
a sink Man to recover, is to eat little or no Food till he finds an Appetite,
according to that Saying, Spare Diet will the most Diseases cure,
If a due Time you can the same endure.
And fasting from Food may be continued long enough to be a Remedy for many
Diseases, with the Assistance of common Water; by the drinking of which warm,
in a due Quantity, without a total Fasting, two Persons, I am informed, were
recovered out of Consumptions, with which they were extremely weakened, and
that in about six Weeks time; as was another by drinking Milk and Whey, equal
Parts, made blood-hot without using any other Diet, which is thought to be far
more effectual than Asses Milk, whose Virtue consists in being thinner than
other Milk.

But besides a spare Diet, cool dry Air is also very helpful to preserve Men in
Health, who are not sick, for it mixes with the Blood, and without it the
Motion of the Blood and Spirits can never be preserved, as appears by
Diving-Vessels, in which Men cannot live when the Air therein is made hot by
their own Body and Breath: And is proved also by an Experiment of Dr. Croone's,
who stifled a Chicken, till it seemed quite dead; and yet by blowing cool Air
into the Lungs, with a small Pair of Bellows, it revived. Hence it appears that
the common Custom of managing sick People is very pernicious, and so far from
helping them to recover, that it is sufficient to make a healthy Person sick;
for were a Person, who was not sick, confined for three or four Weeks in a
Room, made hot like a Stove, and kept in his Bed, with the Curtains drawn, and
all the Windows close shut, and the Room made unpleasant with the nauseous
Fumes of Physic, and a close-stool, which will almost make a fresh Man sick
when he just enters into it; we can never think that this is the way to recover
one that really is sick, and wants the fresh Air and reviving Scents to cherish
his Blood; a fresh open sweet Air being one principal means to strengthen the
Body, make a good Appetite and Digestion, and render the Spirits brisk and
lively: which Advantage should be allowed to all but Childbed Women, and those
who are afflicted with the Smallpox; for the fresh Air can be prejudicial to
no other, whose Bodies are clothed warm, either in Bed, or sitting in a Chair
in their Chamber.

Some Years since a Neighbor became very feverish, and his Wife persuaded him
to go to Bed; and hearing of it soon after, I gave him a Visit, where I found
the Windows close shut, the Curtains of the Bed drawn, and the Room very hot,
for it was in July: he was burning hot, and complained for want of Breath. I
drew open the Curtains, covered him warm, and then opened the Windows, and the
Wind blew into the Room; upon which he soon told me his Shortness of Breath had
left him. I persuaded him to drink some Water, which he found did much refresh
him; and after I had taken my Leave of him, he called for more Water: And while
he had the Cup in his hand, an Apothecary came in, whom his Wife had sent for,
who, finding him about to drink the Water, told him, if he did it he was a dead
Man; but instead of forbearing, he drank it up in his Presence: Upon which the
other took his Leave, and told him, he would say no more to him. However,
before Night, the Person got up, went abroad, and was cured of his Fever; which
is one Instance, among many others which might be given, of the Benefit of
fresh Air to a Person who is kept warm in his Bed; for thereby his Body was
cooled inwardly, and his Breathing made more free by the Air which was drawn
into his Lungs to refresh and comfort the Blood as it passed through them.

I shall only add, that by keeping the Blood cool as well as clean, is to be
understood, not only Moderation in Diet, but to feed most on cooling Food made
of Wheat, Barley, Oatmeal, Rice, and ripe Apples, as also on Milk; which,
joined with Oatmeal, is the chief Food of those lusty and strong Men, the
Highlanders of Scotland, who abound in Children, as Dr. Cheyne tells us in his
Treatise of the Gout, p 108. Edit. 4. which demonstrates Milk and Oatmeal to be
a most strengthening Food, and such as keeps the Blood in due Order; so that
therewith Men may subsist, though they abstain from Beef, Pork, and Venison,
and all other Meals hard to digest, and drink Water as the Highlanders do: Of
the Efficacy of which cooling Milk Diet, the (...) Cheyne, gives a notable
Instance in a Doctor (...) at Croydon, p. 103. who had been afflicted with
(...) Evil; for, by slow Observation, he found (...) his Meals were, the
lighter were his Fits. At last (...) cast off all Liquids but Water, and found
his Fits (...) and the Intervals longer; and finding his Disease mend, as its
Fuel was withdrawn, he took to vegetable Food and Water only, which put an
entire Period to his Fits without any Relapse: but finding that Food windy to
him, he took to Milk, of which he eat a Pint for Breakfast, a Quart at Dinner,
and a Pint for Supper, without Fish, Flesh, Bread, or any strong or spirituous
Liquor, or any Drink but Water, with which he lived afterward for fourteen
Years, without the least Interruption in his Health, Strength, or Vigor, but
died afterward of a Pleurisy. Which is a Confirmation of what Dr. Cook did
affirm, of the Possibility of curing Diseases by Diet only that is temperate
and cooling.

In short, Temperance or a spare Diet, void of Dainties, never was injurous to
the strongest Constitution, and without it, such as are weak and sickly cannot
long subsist; for the more such Persons eat and drink, the more weak and
disordered they will still find themselves to be: So that if the strong despise
Temperance, yet the Comfort of weak, sickly, and pining People, does depend
entirely upon their constantly observing it; which, when they are accustomed to
it, will be easy to do: so that they will deny all intemperate Desires with as
great Pleasure, as they before did delight in what is falsely styled good
Eating and Drinking; for nothing of that is good, which is injurious to Health,
it is Custom only that makes Men hanker after Gluttony and Drunkenness, and a
contrary Custom will make Men abhor it as much: And therefore it is a Wonder the
Rich do not strive to attain it; for A fatal Error it is in Men of Wealth,
To feed so high as will destroy their Health.
Temperance being that which will enable them to live most at ease, and enjoy
their Wealth the longest; this, and Water-drinking, being the surest way to
bring Men to Old Age, though it has not power to make the Aged young.

FINIS.

