Mr. Pratt 's Discourse about Quakerism.

The Prey taken from the Strong. OR, AN HISTORICAL Account, of the Recovery of
One from the Dangerous Errors of Quakerism.

By PETER PRATT, the Subject of that Mercy.

To which the Author has Added, An Account of the Principal Articles of the
Quakers Faith, and especially of the New London Quakers the Disciples of John
Rogers.

AS ALSO, A Brief Answer to John Rogers's Boasting of his Sufferings for his
Conscience, etc. With a Word of Advice to all who Adhere to those Doctrines

Psalm. xix. 12. Who can (thro'ly) understand his Errors?

New London, Sold by T. Green, 1725

Advertisement.
THIS Treatise was begun in the Lifetime of John Rogers, and by the best Advice
finished since his Death; though not without much Reluctance in the Author, as
Judging it Less Manly to Write against One whom the Clods of the Valley forbid
to Answer for himself: Upon which Account John Rogers's Character, is used with
as much Tenderness as the Subject will possibly allow of.

P. P.

To the READER.
Courteous READER,
INTENDING not to trouble you with an Apology, or any thing Ceremonious, I
thought fit in this place just to hint to you the Contents of the following
Treatise, and the Motives inducing me to such a Performance; and also a little
to Open and Expose the Doctrines of Quakerism at least to give you such a
General View thereof, as perhaps may considerably facilitate your Understanding
their particular Tenets, as they occur in the Place and Order in which they are
disposed in the Second Chapter, viz.

First of all, I have given you an Honest and True Account of my own Case, and
of that Wonderful and Peculiar Providence of GOD, which was Concerned for me
therein; In which, youd find many things worthy of your Notice, tending to your
Profit, and Strongly engaging your Acknowlegements of the Finger of GOD, which
I hope is Sincerely my chief End in giving you the Narrative thereof.

In the next Place, I have given yon the main Heals of the New London Quakerism
an Heresy Advanced and Maintained there by John Rogers, Late of that Town,
Deceased, and to this Day adhered to by many Persons thereabout.

Together with which I have drawn the principal Lines of the true Portraiture
of proper Quakerism, both Ancient and Modern.

Mr Design herein, is to Remove the mistakes and Consequently the Dangers which
I fear many may be in. Who not imagining what Errors these People hold, or what
Truths in Religion they Deny and Oppose, may have conceived a favorable
Opinion of them and their ways, who nevertheless may by the bare view of those
Heresies, be induced to alter their opinions about them, for they so directly
Contradict both Religion and all Right Reason, as that the very opening and
Exposing, will ordinarily prove an Effectual Confutation of them.

In the third place, I have spoken something in answer to John Rogers's
Boastings of his Suffering In which I have endeavored to show the Criminal
Causes of those Sufferings; by which it is manifest, that his Gloryings were
Extremely Vain, and that he had no cause to boast, except that because his
Punishments were Lighter than his Crimes.

Last of all, I have concluded with a word of Advice to such as are already
taken in that Snare.

Now as to Quakerism in General, I conceive of is to be nothing else but some
of the Heresies of Pelagius (Improved) who lived about Anno, 415 and held
amongst other Error, that Christ Dyed for all men, viz as much for one man as
an other. To support which Error 'twas necessary to advance the doctrine of
Free Will, in opposition to the truth of Election and Free Grace (thence came
all our free wisers) For he that holds the Universality of Christ's Death, can
no way salve the divine Justice in Damning some, but by Supposing a full power
in all to Reject or take Benefit by his Death of themelves.

These Errors of Pelagius have been ever since kept up and believed in whole or
in part, 'till a few Years ago, viz. about or near the middle of the last
Century, that one George Fox, came upon the Stage, who was the first proper
Quaker that the world has seen, he held the Universality of Christ's Death, and
built upon it; he was soon followed by Multitudes, some of whom rather out went
him and became very eminent and Superior Guides of their Sect, who were called
Quakers, because of an horried shaking that would surprise their Bodies,
especially when their Souls were in Ecstasies, which frequently happened.

They held that JESUS the son of Mary, etc' was not the Christ, in any other
sense then every Saint is, that he is not the Savior of Sinners, that he Died
for his Religion, but Merited nothing by it for any but Himself But that Christ
the Son of God and Savior of Sinners is a part of the Divine Essence, which is
shed forth into the Hearts of all both Good and Bad, and is a Light unto all,
but a Guide and Savior to them that will Submit thereto as such.

That Christ's coming in the Flesh is the Entrance of this piece of the Divine
Essence into the flesh of men, that his Manifestation in the flesh signifies
the apparent Exerting his Divine power in men, that His offering Himself a
Sacrifice to God is something done by Him in a man's body for the Pacifying the
Wrath of God.

That His Suffering and Dying on the Cross, the Bruising His Body and Shedding
His Blood, must be taken only in a Spiritual Sense. Now all this they held to
be done for Every Man in his own Body by the aforesaid piece of the proper
Essence of God, which they most frequently styled the Light within. And so they
are to be understood when they say, that the Death of Christ is Universal, or
that He Dyed for all men.

They also held the Doctrine of Free Will; and asserted that Every Man had a
Full Power in himself to follow the Dictates of the Light within, or to Disobey
them, and in case of Disobedience they held that this Universal Light would
after a while give over playing the Savior with a man, and turn to be a Spirit
of Horror and Astonishment in him; and this they called Hell, but to the
Willing and Obedient it would be their God and Savior; it would procure them
pardon of Past Sins and keep them from Committing Future ones, it would
perfectly Illuminate and Sanctify them and make them Equal with God Himself.
(As to this Equality, see Francis Howgills works, Page 232.) Hence the Quakers
Rejected all Revealed Religion, Damned the Bible, etc. and gave themselves up
to walk Entirely by the Light within.

These Tenets being so Extremely Nonsensical and Blasphemous, few men of
knowledge have been taken in the share, yet some there have been, Particularly
one Barclay, a Learned and Ingenuous Scotchman, who preached in the Time of
King Charles the Second, He soon perceived that Quakerism needed Emendation and
Polishing, which he Essayed to do in a Book called Propositions of Divinity, in
which he expresses quite Different sentiments about many things, from what the
Former Quakers had done, but yet Remained a Quaker: for both spoke from the
same Infallible Guide, viz. the Light within, and yet they Differed even about
the very Light it self: For as I said before the former held it to be God; and
as I might have said, they accounted it to be the Soul of Man. Barclay says,
It Is neither of the Two, but a Certain Divine Substance Different from Both; He
says, it is Palpable, etc. and that God is wrapped up in it, and Cannot be
separated from it, he calls it the Vehicle of God, the Spiritual Body of
Christ, the Bread which comes down from Heaven, the Spirit, the Son, the Word,
the Seed, the Life, the Light, the Grace; a minute afterward he makes it an
Eatable substance, and says, That Good men do Eat and Drink its Blood, and that
he calls the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, he says it is he Savior
of Sinners, yet he acknowleges Christ too tho'in a Remote way, for he says that
Christ by his sufferings purchased the Light within, which is Properly and
Immediately the Savior. Barclay also minced the Doctrine of Free Will, for he
held the power of man's Will to be only Negative and that it did not Extend to
the performance of any Positive act of Obedience, but only that man by the
power of his will might forbear to Resist the Motions of the Light and might
yield and submit himsef to the operations of it; and in case a man did so, then
the Light would supply him with strength to do whatsoever it Commanded to be
done by him.

It Remains that I speak of the third step in Quakerism taken by John Rogers,
who Received his first Notions of Spirituality from Banks, and Case, a couple
of Lewd men of that sort called Singing Quakers, whose Noisyness acquired them
that appellation to Distinguish them from other Quakers, from whom they differ
not in Doctrine

These men as they Danced through this Colony, (Attended by an herd of Women
who said of them, that their Lips dropped Myrrh etc.) Lit of John Rogers and
made a Quaker of him: But neither they nor the Spirit could teach him to sing;
God not having given him a Musical ear, nor Tuneable Voice, which was a Torment
to him: However he Remained their Disciple for a while, and then being wiser
than his Teachers made a Transition to the Church of the Seventh Day Baptists;
But the same Spirit not deserting him but setting in with the disposition of
his own Spirit, to a Vehement affectation of Precedence, he Resolved to Reach
it, though it should happen to Lead to Singularity; whereupon after a few
Revelations, he Resolved upon Quakerism again, though under a Modification
somewhat new, I call it Quakerism, not but that he differed from them in many
things, yet holding with them in the main; being Guided by the same Spirit,
acknowleging their Spirit, and they his; he must needs be called a Quaker.

'Twere well if the Consideration of man's Proneness to Err, from the Dreadful
Instances of it in spiritual things, might Effectually Excite every one to
Endeavor Seasonably to have their Hearts Established with Grace.

It may be observed, that there are certain Times which pass over some men, in
which they are in mo re mminent danger of departing from the Faith, giving heed
to Seducing Spirits.

One is the Time of sore Affliction; when a man through the mere Providence of
God, is under very Afflictive Circumstances; then he will be Tempted to
Discontent and Repining at Gods Providence; which if he don't Watch and Pray
against, but suffers it to grow upon him, It Is well if the next step be not to
change his Religion. We know the Jews under Dark and Afflictive Providence
Murmured and Fell to Idolatry.

Another time is when a man has Suffered very unjust Treatment from men, as he
conceives; and having, applied to the Authority for Relief, but not obtaining
it, hell be Tempted to think Uncharitably of, and Rail against them, which if
he allows him elf to do, his next Temptation will be to fall away to some Party
that Opposes them: And this was the case of one Gates in New-London-County.

The Third and Last that I will note is the Time of Spiritual Conviction, when
a sense of Guil has wounded the Soul, the Terrors of the Lord Inviron him on
every side. Satan pursues him with all his Fiery Darts, and Christ is not yet
revealed to him; he ll go from Mountain to Hill, and be in danger to hearken to
the voice of every one that shall say to him, Lo, here is Christ, or Lo, there.
And to be led away by every wind of Doctrine This was my case:

And what could I have done Less than to have displaced Signals of danger over
those Fatal Rocks and Sands, on which I had suffered Shipwreck?

Which that God may make Useful to many, and Especially to all those who are,
or may be overtaken by the like horrible Tempest, Is the Desire and Prayer of
the Friend, and Well-wisher of all men,

Peter Pratt.
Hartford July the 4th 1724.
CHAP. I. Giving an Account of the Authors being Led into, and His Recovery
from Quakerism.
MY near Alliance to John Rogers, (then Junior) who is my Brother, viz. the Son
of my Mother, Proved an Unhappy Snare to me. He being Naturally a Man as Manly,
Wise, Facetious, and Generous, perhaps as one amongst a Thousand; I was
exceedingly Delighted in and with his Conversation: He also Indeared himself to
me very much, by his Repeated Expressions of Complacency in me; by which I was
Induced to be Frequently in his Company, and often at his House, where his
Father would be Entertaining of me with Exhortations to a Religious Life;
Warning me of the Danger of Sin, and Certainty of that Wrath which shall come
on all that Know not GOD, etc.

I would some times for Curiosity be enquiring into his Principles, and other
times for Diversion, be Disputing a Point with him; but I knew not that the
Dead were there, Prove. 7.24 I was not Religious enough to be much concerned
about his Principles, but Pitiful enough to be extremely moved with the Story
of his Sufferings, who had a Faculty to Relate them very Artfully in his own
Favor. Until at length my Mind came to be Insensibly tinged with something of
Prejudice against both Magistrates and Ministers. I had also a Reserve in his
Favor, that 'twas Possible, he might be a Good Man (the strangness of his
Doctrines notwithstanding) especially seeing all his Sufferings were not Able
to shake his Constancy, or Oblige him to Recede from the least part of his
Religion.

At length my Brother became a very Strict and Devout Professor of his Fathers
Religion, and so became less Sociable, till at length our Conversation was
almost wholly Suspended for diverse Years.

When some Years and many Changes had rolled over me, it Pleased GOD in a
Solitary Moment to bring into my thoughts, these Words, Forsake the Foolish and
Live, I wondered at the Words, their sound and savor was like the Word of GOD,
but I remained some Days at a loss about them. However I dwelt upon them, and
they afforded me constant matter of Meditation. I understood them to Suggest
that if I would Live Eternally, I must Forsake my Sins, which the Scripture
calls Folly, and my Vain Companions, which the Scripture calls Fools. Thus they
Engrossed almost all my tho'ts for several Days, till by search I found them In
the Ninth of Proverbs at the Sixth Verse: where the Sense Complete is, Forsake
the Foolish and Live, and go in the way of Understanding. Whereupon I Concluded
there was something of God's more than Common Providence in the bringing those
Words into my Mind, or at least in the Application of them thereto; I took them
as a Reproof of my Vain Course of Life, and a Counsel and Invitation to me to
Walk with the Wise and be Wise. Whereupon I fully Resolved from thence-forth to
Turn from Sin to GOD, which I thought not Extreme Difficult to do, seeing my
Understanding was now fully Persuaded of the Necessity of it, in Order to Life
and Blessedness.

Accordingly I began to set up a Strict and Religious Course of Life, to Reform
the Errors of my Ways, to Pray to GOD in Secret, and to Attend the Means of
Grace, expecting that GOD would soon meet me in his ways, and Answer me with
Strength in my Soul. After some Trial made, I found it far otherwise, I could
Experience no sensible Supplys from God, but seemed to Labor wholly in my own
Strength. I found I could neither Believe, Repent nor Reform to any Good
Effect, nor Persevere in my Good Purposes so Lately and Solemnly Resolved upon
This made me add to my Prayers Fasting, to Renew my Resolutions, and to put
forth more Strength, to Maintain a Stricter Watch over my Heart and Life, but
still all seemed in Vain, I was never the nearer to GOD by all that I could do;
and so perhaps for about Seven Months I was in a strange Perplexity, I knew not
what to do, nor was I Able to do any thing; sometimes I should be very much
Concerned and Resolute, at other times very Dull and Indifferent, and at other
times ready to give over all through Discouragement. At length upon considering
those Words, Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall not always Strive with Man, etc. I was
put into extreme Fear, lest GOD should withold from me those Convictions and
Impressions whereby I had been carried thus far, or that all my Purposes and
endeavors might be Frustrated by a Sudden Death. This put me upon exerting all
the Powers of my Soul, and for ought I know all that a Man without special
Grace can do, I did, but all to no Purpose, or rather to bad purpose, as it
seemed; for the more Earnestly I Desired and Endeavored to Believe, Repent,
etc. the further off I seemed to be from it: Temptations of all Sorts beset me,
and a Congregation of all Hateful Lusts I felt Raging within me; all the
Threatenings in GOD's Word Traversed directly against me; no Strength in my
self, nor any sensible Supplys from GOD, but my Heart as hard as a Stone. And
now I saw my self in a very Doleful Case, a Sinner in Grain, an Enemy to GOD,
and GOD Justly so to me, His Justice Engaged against me, etc. I was Distressed
about the Decrees of GOD, fearing my Non-Election. Sometimes Fearing the Door
of Mercy was shut against me, and sometimes that I had Sinned Vnpardonably.
Sometimes I Questioned the Possibility of my Salvation, if GOD would Vindicate
the Honor of His Justice.

I was now in the Depth of Darkness, and no Door of hope opened to me; Yet the
Immense Riches of the Divine Grace, was so Frequently Hinted to me, in the
Word, that a Spark of Hope was kept alive in my Soul, by which I was kept from
utter Despair, and upheld in Seeking and Striving to enter in at the Strait
Gate.

I Cried to GOD Incessantly for Mercy And Grace; I saw a necessity of Faith, a
New Heart and Life, the Pardon of Sin, and Cleansing my Soul from Guilt, but
all out of my Reach, all above my Power, either to do or understand, I had
heard of Looking to Jesus, (but did not understand what it meant, to go out of
my self to Him for Life,) I Prayed GOD to Lead me to his Son to Undertake for
me, and work in me the Works of His Grace.

Thus it was with me about Three Months, During which space of time, I
continued instant in Prayer, and other Religious Duties.

About the End of the time, I was one day Surprised with an horrid fear of
Diabolical Molestation in secret Prayer, I Resisted the Temptation, and Prayed
against it, yet the fear Increased upon me, and I began to think whither it was
not better to Omit the Duty.

I Propounded the Difficulty to one who was a Strong and Skilful Christian, who
advised me, by no means to Omit the Duty, but rather to change the Place of my
Retirement which was Remote in the Field. I thought to change the Place, though
otherwise very Warrantable, yet upon this Occasion would be a giving way to
Satan, whom I must always Resist. Whereupon about the close of the Day light, I
retired to the usual Place where I soon imagined my self to be Attended with
Innumerable Swarms of the Infernal Spirits, rushing toward me with utmost
Fury, which made me Cry alond to GOD, in these Words, O Almighty GOD and my
Father, who beldest these Spirits in thine Eternal Chains, will thou suffer me,
for whom Christ has Dyed, to be a Prey to them. Indeed I have often feared I
was Guilty of very great Presumption, in Claiming that Relation to the Almighty
and Interest in the Death of His Son, on the best Grounds I could then have
shown; however, it proved of Eminent Service at that time, for I felt upon it a
very sensible Support of my Spirits, and the Imaginary Apparitions Disappeared,
I went through with the Duty, and then Returned as free from Fears of that
Nature, (for ought I know) as I am at this time.

Twice afterward I met With something of that Nature, but without any
Annoyance to me. I have called this an Imaginary Apparition, for I saw nothing
indeed with my Eyes; and whither there were there at that time the Real
Presence of such Spirits, or whether the Soul of Man be Capable of the
Perception of Spirits, or any thing else, otherwise than by the Senses, I leave
to be considered by them that know more of the Powers of Humane Souls, and of
the Natures of Spirits, if they Please.

But this at least is true, that it was so fixed on my Imagination, as that I
Realized it. and so it answered the design of the Tempter in that Respect.

I should not have Mentioned this, but that I could not have been a Faithful
Witness, in Omitting so Material a Passage, in the story of my Troubles.

I had but a little passed this Temptation, but I began to be very Impatient
that GOD had not Revealed Christ to me, and showed me the way of Faith. At
Length I began to Question, whither I had not been seeking the Living among the
Dead; I thought it Unusual for God so long to withold the Knowledge of Himself
and Ways from any so Solicitous to have Known Him; whereupon I feared I had
been in the way of an Erroneous and Heterodox Religion, I Resolved to Examine
it, and did so; but neither Methodically, Impartially, nor Effectually.

Yet therein with all Possible Earnestness, I asked Counsel of the Wonderful
Counselor, and Wisdom of him that gives it Liberally to all, etc. And so I
proceeded after the following Strange and Preposterous manner: And First, I
took a View of the Professors of Religion, amongst whom I found but few that my
Charity could reach.

There is such an one, thought I, that will not Swear, but I have heard, he
will Cheat; and an other indeed will not be Drunk, but such an one Affirms he
will Lie Others I found whose Characters Black Mouths, had not sulfied with
particular gross Imputations, but of them I had understood that must of them
were accounted Hypocrites.

As for those few whom I Judged to be Sincere, I thought it might be as some
had said, that some of every Religion are Saved, and so I thought never the
better of the way for their Sakes.

In the next place, I considered the Ministers, with whom I soon found fault
for their Salaries, I thought they might Labor with their Hands, and Preach
the Word by an extraordinary Assistance, as the Apostles did, if they were the
Ministers of Christ; and thus on a sudden before I was aware, I became deeply
Prejudiced against both Ministers and People before ever I had examined the
Articles of Faith, so Foolish was I and Ignorant even as a Beast before thee,
Psalm 73.22.

When I considered the Articles of Faith, I could not proceed in any Method or
Order therein, for as soon as I thought of a Point, I first scrupled it and
then hated it, and accordingly bent all the force of my Understanding to over
throw it.

Against some Truths I though it I Prevailed, others I could not gainsay, yet even
them I would by no means Grant, and yet could not tell why.

In this Drunken Staggering Condition, I began to be Lead or rather Driven
Headlong a very great pace in the greatest imaginable Confusion, and no less
Perplexity, the whole frame of Religion was Tottering and ready to fall with
me, yet I could not tell why, save that, in the general it looked all wrong,
etc.

And now I perceived my self to be in a worse Case than ever, for as I was
without Christ so I was at the greatest loss in what Form of Religion I ought
to seek him.

The Papists I Abhorred for Idolatry and other things.

The Church of England I thought not to differ in matters of Faith from what I
was just now ready to Renounce.

The Quakers I Hated for Denying Christ and the Authority of the Scriptures and
such like things.

I thought of a Conference with my Brother, but was afraid of his Principles.

In this Distress I poured out my Soul to GOD in Prayer, I Implored the
Guidance of his Word and Spirit. I Confessed my Sinful and Lost Estate, but I
told him of His Word, Hos 13.9. O Israel, thou bast Destroyed thy self, but in
me is thy Help found: I flew to our Saviors Words, that, If a Son Ask Bread,
the Father will not give him a Stone, Luke 11.11. And Pleaded them in this
manner, O thou that Hear Prayers, and have never said to the Seed of Jacob
seek ye me in Vain; who art a Fountain of Light and Truth, and therefore the
Sins of Men Believe thy Word, bebold the Promise of thy Son which I now Humbly
Plead before thee. I Implore the Bread of Life, and the Knowledge of the Truth.
Will thou now send me strong Delusions to Believe Lies, and so let his Words
fall to the Ground! Surely thou will not, for they are selted in Heaven, and
more permanent than the Heavens or the Earth, and I will Believe them and
Adventure my Soul thereupon. These Words of our Savior I never let go, but
they were a ways a present help to me in the Darkest Succeeding Moments; for
although I did not Believe from thence, that the Lord would not lead me through a
very Dark and Slippery way, yet I had constant Hope, in some Degree, that
finally he would bring me forth to the Light, and that my Eyes should see his
Salvation.

There was nothing now worthy of Remark that I Experienced for some Weeks, save
only that I remained in a Confused, Unsettled Posture, Doubtful of everything,
and fixed in nothing but my Resolutions to Pray always, and to Act according to
the best Light I had, which by this time was very gross Darkness; for a Spirit
of Infatuation possessed my Understanding, so that in Spiritual things I was
not able to Act as a Man; I grew so Prejudiced against the Ministers as that I
could scarce bear to hear Mr. Noyes Preach, at length on a Saturday being about
the beginning of January, 1709 10. I Wrote a Letter to my Brother, in imating
something of my Difficulties, and Desiring a Conference with him; I carried it
with me to Meeting, intending to send it or forbear, according as what I might
meet with in the Sermons, but finding nothing that suited me, I sent it, and
the same Week he made me a Visu and brought me Two Books and a Manuscript from
his Father, which when I perused, though I found not such forceable Argument
therein as to sway much my Judgment, yet I fancied a Marvel'ous Spirituality in
them, which soon Captivated my Affections, and I began us hope GOD was
Answering my Prayers.

Now by the way, I would Observe to you, that until I Wrote to my Brother, I
had not hinted a word of my Scruples about matters of Religion to the Dearest
Friend in the World; through a certain Aversation from my very Childhood to
Consult the wisest or best Friend in Cases of Extreme Difficulty, though in
lighter Troubles I could do it freely; which is an Unhappy Disadvantage I
Labor under to this Day.

After this I soon laid aside Family Prayer, could see no Rule for the Praftice
of it.

The Eighth of January, being the Lord's Day, I doubted so much of the Sabbath,
that I dared not go to Meeting.

The Twenty Second of January I thought it my Duty to Labor as on other Days,
and I did so.

Now you may Please to Understand that by this time, there had been perhaps
used with me, all proper means of Conviction, but in Vain; my Prejudices
increased to that pitch, as that I could hardly talk Peaceably with a Minister,
and all but such I Despised as Mean, Ignorant, and Bigoted persons, that held
their Principles (and Consciences too) of their Ministers, excepting a very few
at whom Captain Huntington was one, whom I accounted a Man of Knowledge, and I
allowed he might have Grace, who being sent for on this Occasion, had almost
persuaded me to a Retraction

By this time I had also had much Conference with John Rogers, been at his
Meetings and heard him Preach; and although I could not fall in at present with
his other Disciples, into the belief of all his Doctrines, yet I was persuaded
that GOD was in him of a truth.

The Twenty Sixth of January, refusing to pay a Fine, or to suffer any to do it
for me, I was carried to Prison at New London, for Profanation of the Sabbath
last before.

I conclude the Prosecution against me had not been so sudden, nor so strict
(feeing all men knew I did the Fact in Obedience to my Conscience,) had they
not hoped to have Reclaimed me by Sufferings; for every one was concerned to
have me Recovered, and to that end exerted themselves with a great deal of Zeal
and Fervor, but in very different Methods, according to their various
Capacities or Dispositions; Some by Fervent Prayers, Friendly Conferences, Sage
Counsel, Forceable Arguments with a Sprit of Meekness, whilst others by sharp
Rebukes, etc. Labored my Restoration: Warm Tempers where there was less
Grace, would Rage against me, expressing themselves to this Effect, Ephraim is
joined to his Idols, let him alone; an Heretic after -- Admonition, Reject,
etc. Mild Tempers would endeavor to Allure me, with Prospects of Worldly
Advantages, which I must needs forego if I would persist in that way. Of the
Ruder Herd, some Cursed me in the Streets, wishing me Dead etc. others by
Mockings and other verbal Abuses ministered to me such Provocations, as one
would think nothing but a Stock or Stone would have been Silent under; those
rough Vsages tended exceedingly to increase my Doubts about the Religion of the
Country, and Incensed me still more against the People that Prosessed it.

In the Morning before I went to Prison, I committed all Concerns and Interests
to GOD, by Solemn Prayer with my Family, as I thought on such an Extraordinary
occasion I might do, and then taking a sad Valediction of my Wife, I Addressed
my self to the Journey, taking a Bible with me; but GOD knows that the Anguish
of my Soul was Inexpressible, arising from a Variety of the Solemnest
Considerations, which I will Reduce under two Heads, viz.

First, The loss of all Valuables in this World, which seemed to me more than
Probable; amongst which none lay so near to roy Heart as my Wife justly did,
(being a Beautiful and Gracious young Woman) whom I had enjoyed but less then
Five Months, and was now at the point of Death through extreme Grief on my
account.

Secondly, And what added Amazement and Horror to all was, that I had no sure
Proof, either that my Heart was Right with GOD, or that my ways were directed
according to his Word.

I greatly feared I might be found Fighting against him; yet at present could
do no other wise than to Proceed, for so my Conscience led me, the Dictates
whereof, I dare by no means Disobey.

Under this pressing Burden, I went to New London, about Sixteen Miles from my
own House, lifting up my Heart to GOD by the way, in Thousands of Ejaculations,
with the most Vehement Application of Mind; and surely, I had Fainted unless I
had Believed, from our Saviors Words before mentioned, to see the Goodness of
GOD in the Land of the Living. I tarried in the Goalers House about an Hour
before he Committed me, and then pretty suddenly he said to me, Come, Young
Man, you must go to Cage. It put me a little out of Frame, for I guessed by the
Expression and the Air he used, that he Insulted me; however I followed him
readily, and entered the inner Prison with more Constancy than I expected. But
toward the close of the Day I grew very Pensive, and taking a deliberate
Survey of things; the Prospect of the Sufferings of the Approaching, Night in a
a dark Goal, with out Fire or Lodging, in a very Cold Season, was somewhat
shocking to me: yet I must say that by itself considered, it was the smallest
Article in my Complicated Distress; for greater was the loosing Wife, Friends,
etc with all other Worldly good things at once, as I then expected to do, and
to be exposed to all outward Miserys, Harred, Reproach and Infamy; but greatest
of all were the thoughts of this, that my Spiritual Interest was as yet not at
all Secured; and that whilst I earnestly sought GOD, for Christ, and Pardon,
and Grace, I might Possibly be found taking part with his Enemies, and so
Fighting against my own Salvation. All those Doleful Idea's were Stamped upon
my Soul, in the brightest and deepest mpreshons possible and under these
Agonies my Flesh and my Heart Cried out for GOD, for the Strong and Living GOD
I Supplicated his Mercy for Christ's sake, Confessing my Sin and Misery, I
Blessed him for his Word, and Appealed to his Omnisciency, that I Desired to
keep His Precepts, I Implored His Spirit to Help my Infirmities and to Lead me
into all Truth.

After this, looking into my Bible, I lit upon the Eighth Chapter to the
Romans, and read on to the Thirty Fifth Verse, whereupon I was blown up into an
Extatick Joy, I thought I had now Assurance of my Union to Christ, and that
nothing should Separate me from His Love; this Rapture lasted me that Night,
but the next Day totally Vanished, the Darkness Recurring upon my Soul (if
possible) in a more formidable hue I than ever.

I was in tne Goal Five Days, in which time John Rogers and his Company often
Visited and Treated me with sufficient expressions of the tenderest Regard,
Procuring me a Lodging in the Goalers House the first Night (otherwise it is like
I should have Dyed of the Cold, being a Man of a tender Constitution, and not
Inured to Hardships) and afterward they furnished me with Lodging and other
things for my Comfort during my Imprisonment. I told them of what I met with
the First Night, they said, it was from the Holy Ghost, and that the present
Desertion was but for the Proof of my Faith and Patience. They Counseled me to
Persevere with all Constancy, and assured me that in so doing I should anon
meet with such clear Light as would fully assure me in all Points wherein I
doubted, and yield me a Solid Support under all Sufferings I was willing enough
to Believe them; but told them, that the Work of Faith was not wrought in me,
asI feared, without which there is no Union to Christ, nor possibility of
Pleasing GOD. I gave them two Reason of this, viz.

First, That I could not Perceive the Guilt of Sin Removed from off my
Conscience.

Secondly, That I could not Discern in my Soul such Actings toward and upon
Christ, as I conceived to be the Effects of a Living Faith.

To all which they said, that it was now a Dark Hour with me, but in GOD's time
He would bring me into Mavelous Light, if I Remained Constant and Unshaken in
my Sufferings, and were not ashamed of the Cross of Christ.

The next Remarkable that happened, was upon reading, Romans 10.9, 10. If thou
shall Confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart,
that GOD has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart
man believes unto Righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
Salvation. Hereupon I made some pause upon the Words, and anon took them fully
to Answer my Doubts about a Saving Faith, for most certain it was that I
Believed that GOD Raised Christ from the Dead, and thereupon I v a again
Exalted above Measure, like him described, Hab 2.4 He whose Soul is listed up,
is not upright in him: but the Just shall Live by his Faith. My Sorrows were
now turned into Joy, and my Prayers into Praises of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; and thus I kindled a Fire and Compassed my self about with Sparks; But
GOD did not say to me, as in (...) 50.11. -- Walk in the light of your Fire,
and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of nine hand, ye
shall ly down in sorrow. This Elevation lasted me not long, for I soon called
to mind that its said, The Devils also Believe and Tremble, Jam. 2.9. And now I
began to examine my Faith, whether it differed from that of the Devils? and
though I could not well tell what Faith they had, yet to my Confusion of Face I
could not find that I my self had any other than that I had had, for then above
Twenty Years, even ever since that my Mother taught me that Christ was
Delivered for the Offenses of the Elect and Arose again for their
Justification: a mere Historical Faith, such as any Wicked Man may have. On the
Fifth Day of my Consinement, my Wife against my express Prohibition having Paid
the Fine, and Procured a Mandamus to the Jailer to Discharge me, the Messenger
came in the Morning: This was Surprising and Unwelcome News to me, for that
Morning I had awaked in a Mavelous Calm, every thing was Pleasant and Easy
to me; I could Believe and Conclude any thing in my own Favor without any
Premises at all: and it seemed to me the more Spiritual way, and indeed the
only way of the Spirit, and now I hoped all would be well; amongst other things
I had a Desire to be Baptized by John Rogers; those words in Act. 22.16. ran
much in my mind, And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash
away thy sins, etc. And accordingly was Baptized of him as soon as Released
from Prison, by burying my Body in the Water: after which I went home, it being
Tuesday. The Residue of that Week I walked in Darkness and deep Distress, for
as I was without Light so I was without Comfort. The next Sabbath John Rogers
and his Company, held a meeting at my House, and he Preached and Prayed there.
I was Refreshed to see their Persons, but not at all moved with their
Devotions. All that Spirituality I had some times found in that way, and they
had talked so much of, was now clean Evanished, and an Horror of thick
Darkness rested on me, and so I spent most of the ensuing Week, yet the
Darkness was not unto Despair. I held fast that Promise; that they that seek
shall find, etc. and Cried to GOD Incessantly, but no Answer of Prayer, no Help
from the Word, no Conference with Friends; for my Straight was now too great
for that, my best Friends also had Surceased the Use of Arguments with me, and
all other Means, except what they did in their Closets, or especially what was
done by a Day of Prayer Privately kept on my account by some of the Church that
Week; upon whom its said there was an Extraordinary and Undeniable Spirit of
Prayer poured forth, at length I forced my self to a Consideration of things,
and finally thus Resolved, viz. That in as much as this Newly Embraced Religion
seemed at the present the more Probable way wherein to find Christ and Peace, I
would by no means Decline, seeking after him therein, at least till I had
better Light; yet withal that I would more strictly pry into it, and take
nothing upon trust from Men, and accordingly I Prepared sundry Questions for
John Rogers his Solution at the next Meeting, which happened at his House the
next Sabbath, where I mentioned these Three, Desiring to know what was to be
Believed, in the Premises, and also from what Scripture Grounds;

Quest. 1. Whether the Union between Christ and a Beliver be the same with what
is of the Two Natures of Christ, viz a Personal Union?

Quest. 2. Whether the Sufferings of Christ in His Followers, viz. In the
Bodies of the Saints, be of equal Value and Merit, with those he Suffered in
His Own Person, according to their Kind and Degree.

Quest. 3. Whether an Eternal Decree of GOD had Determined the Salvation of
those we call the Elect?

I soon Perceived the Queries were very unexpected to every one; however there
was a very Profound Silence and Attention in the Assembly, Whilst he with all
possible wilyness, as it were, Confounded the Three Questions together and then
there was no Question in it: So that a proper Answer was both Needless and
impossible: and then he went On quoting a multitude of Scriptures, and heaping
up Words but with utmost Confusion, and of no Pertinency or Significancy to my
purpose, until no Mortal (...) have guessed at his Opinion about the matters,
or have known by his Answer what the Questions were, nor scarcely to what
Science they belonged.

After this, he ended his Discourse with a Flourish to this Effect, viz. Thou
do well to seek Light, etc. but thou our breast to Consider that thou art but
a Babe in Christ, and see Men but as Trees, and may soon Disadvantage thy
self by too Curious an Inquisuiveness into deep Matters of Faith; thou had
better be Content to Believe and Walk by what Light thou art Capable of, till
by Reason of Use thou shall be able to Digest strong Meat: for my own part it
was once with me as it is now with thee, but now its otherwise for these and such
like Wonderful Mysteries, are now all so Plain and Easy to me, as that I do
not Desire a better Knowledge of them than what I have, for I can see. Eye to
Eye and Understand as Perfectly as the Pen Men of the Scriptures did, what they
wrote, and so it will be with thee are long, if thou abide in the Truth, and
remain unmovable and steadfast in thy Sufferings for Christ. I was Confounded at
his Talk, for indeed I think no Man would have looked for such an Answer from a
Minister of Christ; I said not much upon it, but Determined to scan it in time
convenient: And accordingly when I came Home, having Earnestly begged
Assistance of GOD, to make just and reasonable Reflections upon it, I began and
considered First the Questions, and the two first of them I judged to be very
necessary to be well understood, in order to the being of a right Faith: as to
the Third, I judged it a point of great concern, to be understood by every
Christian; and all Three of the Questions to Respect nothing but Revealed Truth.

Secondly, I considered my self, and although I had as low thoughts of my
Ability to Discern Spiritual things in a Spiritual Manner, as any one could
have had of me; yet when I considered the Maturity of my Years, and that from a
Child I had had some Knowledge of the Scriptures, and withal that my
understanding was not Despicable, I judged my self capable of a Doctrinal
Knowledge of any Revealed Truth; and how any such Knowledge should endanger my
Spiritual Interest I could not conceive, for it is Written, that without
Knowledge the mind cannot be good.

In the Last Place I considered the Respondent John Rogers and his Answer, and
thought I, if he be a Minister of Christ, and if he be Guided by GOD's Spirit,
and especially if in an extraordinary and Infallible Manner, as he Professes,
then he has been giving me a reason of the Hope that is in him with Meekness
and Fear, 1 Pet. 3, 15. and has been feeding me with the Bread of Knowledge, For
what Christ says to Peter, Joh. 21.15, 16 Feed my Lambs, is no less Required of
every Minister of Christ. But I could not take his Answer by any means under
such a Construction, without utterly excluding my Reason, according to which it
was plain that he Industriously Concealed from me his own Sentiments, and
Labored with much Craftiness to divert me from further searches after any
Solid Knowledge in the matters proposed.

I Remember as I came home from that meetting, I Rode part of the way with one
of the Company, who said thus to me, viz. why, Thee was it upon some very high
Queries with John.

I Answered him to this Effect, that all matters of Faith were high Things. But
said he, John Answered thee very notably. And I believe that man spoke the mind
of the whole Assembly; for Ignorance in the Understanding, Prejudice in the
Heart, and a false Peace in the Conscience, make up the Threefold Veil with
which the God of this World Blinds the Eyes of that Poor Besotted People.

But to Return, I Dwelt upon these Reflections several Days, and it pleased GOD
to Restrain by Degrees, that Spirit of Prejudice whereby I was Blassed against
the Truth, so that I was able to think more Indifferently and to Argue more
Regularly about Things, which I thought to be my Duty and Interest to Improve,
and accordingly I pressed forward with all possible Endeavors to try all
things.

I was quickly brought to a stand about my Minister; but my affections were so
strongly toward him that I could not easily Conclude against him, also the
further progress I made in Trial of his Doctrines the more I Scrupled them, my
Scruples Increased to Doubts, till I had Little to say for the defense of the
most of them, at Length I was afraid any Longer to Adhere to them, yet at
present far from a good Opinion of the true Religion; but began to be able with
some degree of Calmness, to Confer with others about Principles which laid me
under great Advantage for Conviction, till at Length I came to be pretty well
Satisfied that the Assemblies Catechism, in the General, was Orthodox, yet
still I Doubted of some things in it, particularly the Doctrine of Election; I
could not bear that an Irrevocable Decree of GOD should have Determined that,
whilst it Remained so very Doubtful with me concerning my Self, till I
perceived the main difficulty with me was touching my own Election; and that as
to the Doctrine in general, I was not able to withstand the Truth of it.

I began now to have sad tho'ts of my Late Deviation from the Truth, and at the
end of three Weeks made a Public Recantation, which the Church accepting,
Received Me into their Charity.

And thus it pleased GOD to bring me entirely off from my adherence to that
Faction, and their Errors; and that Principally without the force of arguments
from Ministers or Books, for I could Converse but Little with them, but rather
as the Prophet says, Zec. 4 6 Not by Might nor by Power, but by my Spirit says
the Lord of Hosts. Still after all there Remained Heavy upon me the Guilt of
Sin and great Darkness and Uncertainty about my Spiritual Estate, I Trembled at
the tho'ts of those Miserable Jews who Perished in the Wilderness through the
just Wrath of GOD, after their Deliverance from Egypt, and never saw the Good
Land. I read Mr Guthery about the Trial of a Saving Interest in Christ: And Mr.
Shepard's Sincere Convert, with other Books to the same Effect, and Diverse
times had almost Concluded in my own Favor, but Shepard was so exceedingly
searching, that he showed me from time to time, my deceits of Heart, Mistakes,
Presumptions, etc. and so broke me off from every hold, drove me from every
resting place, and brought me many a time to my Wits end.

In my Darkness I applied to my self, almost in Despair, what God said to
Pharaoh, Exodus 9 16 For this cause have I raised thee up, that I might show my
Wonders in thee. I could now see nothing in the past Providence of my Life,
but a series of Evil from the Hand of GOD, and little Hopes of better things
for the future, which brought on the Fears of my Non-Election, and every thing
seemed to Argue my Reprobation. These deep Discouragements were also
Accompanied with the Blackest Temptations, through the force whereof I was
ready to envy the Salvation of others. This Startled me, as what carried in it
the express Image of Satan I Cried to God for Pardon and Strength; and thus I
passed many Weeks, till Providentially reading the Thirty First Chapter of
Jeremiah and the Third Verse, I have Loved thee with an Everlasting Love:
therefore with Loving Kindness have I drawn thee. At the first view I was ready
to have taken the Words for a full Proof of my Election, but soon called to
mind how I used to be Imposed upon, and that it concerned me to try every thing
and take nothing unreasonably. However the Words brought with them a Sweet
Influence, and were more excellent than to be lightly passed over, I read them
again and again, but was for some time at a loss how to Improve them. By
Everlasting Love, I understood GOD's Eternal Electing Love, and by Drawing, etc
I understood Effectual Calling: Hereupon I Propounded to my self two Questions
from the Words, First, Have I been the Subject of Loving Kindness? And if so,
then Secondly, Have I been drawn thereby? For if I can Affirm these two, I must
thence lnfer my Election.

Then taking a strict Survey of things, I saw to my great Comfort, that I had
Experienced abundance of Favors from the Hand of GOD, whereof diverse had been
Extraordinary great, and especially my late Wonderful Enlargement from the
Chains of Error. Such Reflections made me look again on the words to Pharaoh,
which appeared now with another Aspect: I considered that the most High, had
Wonders of Mercy, as well as of Judgment to show, and 'twas possible his
Designs concerning me were to show the Wonders of Free Grace.

The Second Question also I resolved in the Affirmative, for I found my Heart
to be Sensibly drawn to Love, Fear, Acknowledge and Worship GOD for all his
Benefits: but yet whether I were Savingly and Effectually drawn I was at a
loss, and so Concluded nothing as to the Point of Election; but still the Sweet
Impression of the Words Remained a long time; whereby I was Supported and
Carried on with some Cheerfulness, till by a Sermon of Mr. Noyes, I was cast
down to the Dust; in which Sermon, he showed from those Words, Prove. 23.7. As
he thinks in his Heart, so is he: That a Man's Estate might be known to him by
the settled bent and Inclination of his Heart, etc Which put me upon searching
my Heart; by which I discovered nothing that Evidenced to my Satisfaction any
real Change, I found it very much set upon Earthly things, Corruptions very
strong and Unmortified. And although I Earnestly desired to escape Eternal
Death, yet could not at that time Perceive any real Gracious Actings or
Dispositions of my Soul toward GOD. Hereupon I was very Disconsolate, my
Patience was now almost at an end, and I feared GOD's would be quite, and his
Spirit would cease to strive with me: And thus it was with me some time, till
it Pleased the Lord to Refresh my expiring Hopes, by that good Promise to
Jacob, Genesis 18.15. And behold I am with thee, and will keep thee -- For I will
not leave thee, till I have done that which I have spoken to thee of. This was
Life from the dead to me; and by the strength of this I walked many Days. (O
who can express the solid and substantial Supports of GOD's Promises?) Yet it
did not Convert me; it did not carry me to Christ, nor Reveal Him to me; but I
remained as before, save only the present Support of it.

Quickly after this I entered into a more strict Search of the Mystery of a
Justifying Faith; which the Divines variously Express, sometimes calling it a
man's going out of himself to Christ for Life; and such like Descriptions they
give of it: I knew what the Scripture, and They, said of it, and could speak
about it as I had Learned; but I had no Spiritual or Feeling Sense of it, nor
could I Conceive what it was in Reality so to do: And when I considered the
Necessity of Justification, Adoption and Sanctification, a New Heart and Life,
with Victory over all Spiritual Enemies in order to Life and Blessedness; to be
obtained only by going out of my Self to CHRIST for them, etc. Which thing I
could neither Do, nor possibly Understand what it meant, my Salvation looked
then Impossible. My Hopes were then reduced to the lowest Ebb, and I was about
to quit both Hopes and Endeavors about it. Now things were come to the last
Extremity, which is the fittest season for Omnipotency to Interpose: Isa. 37.3.
The Children are brought to the Birth, and there is not strength to bring
forth. But now CHRIST's Hour was nearer than I knew of; for the next Sabbath,
Mr. Noyes (that Man of God) in his first Prayer of the Forenoon Exercise,
framed a Petition to GOD in these words; viz. That although the Difficulties in
our way to the Heavenly Canaan, might seem Insuperable to us, by reason of the
City being Walled up to Heaven; and of the Mighty Anakims who must be Overcome,
Yet that we might not be Discouraged, nor in our Hearts turn back into Egypt;
but that we might be Taught to Look unto JESUS, who is Entered into the Heavens
as Our Forerunner, and able to Draw us after Him.

I had hereupon such an Interview of CHRIST and of GOD through Him, as I never
had had before any thing the like; but how Great! How Excellent! How Wonderful!
How Glorious! And how Real and Evident! Words cannot at all Express.

I saw the Lord JESUS CHRIST as having Assumed the Humane Nature, and therein
having Done and Suffered in the Place and Behalf of the Elect, to the most
Ample and Complete Acceptance of GOD the Father, and as being now Exalted unto
the Dominion and Government of all Creatures in Heaven and in Earth, I
apprehended Him as Sitting on a Glorious Throne Exercising His Threefold
Office, and sending forth His Spirit to Offer and Apply to the Elect, the
Redemption Purchased by Him, working Grace in them and bringing them at Length
to a Participation of that Glory whereof He is Lord; and particularly offering
this to me, with unspeakable Freedom and Good Will.

I have said I saw these things, and what I mean is, that they were Discovered
to me with more Demonstration and Reality than things which occupy our Senses
are Evident to us when substantially present.

And now, hereupon whether my whole Soul did agreeably make out after Him, so
as to Accept of Him as He is Offered in the Gospel, and was then particularly
Offered to me, were a great Thing for me to say.

Doubtless, You will look for the Evidence of it in my Conversation; and if
there may be any thing found Evidential of the Truth of my Profession, let GOD
have the Praise of it, through whose Grace --

And whatsoever shall appear Otherwise, he that shall be forwardest to Reprove
me for it in Love, shall most indear himself to me; Let the Just smite me it
shall be a Kindness.

And now you have had a True and Punctual Account, of the most material
Passages, both as to my being Led into Error, and gracious Return out of it; it
being one of the wonderful Works of Him who is Perfect in Wisdom.

I shall only add, That for diverse years after, I was frequently Assaulted
with Temptations to call all in Question over again; To Consider whether I had
not Apostatized from CHRIST and His Truth, which has been no small Annoyance
and the occasion of a great deal of Trouble to me; but the Grace of GOD has
been sufficient for me hitherto.

And I will Praise Him who has done great Things for me; For He sent from
above, He took me, He drew me out of many Waters, He delivered me from the
horrible Pit and miry Clay, He brought me out of Darkness into Mavelous
Light, He set my Feet upon a Rock and has put a New Song into my Mouth, Even
Praise to GOD.

[I.]
O Isreal's Holy One,
To whom the Praise belongs,
For thy Salvations Great,
I Will Laud Thy Name with Songs.
[II.]
Thou worthy art of Fear,
Because thy Name Excels,
In all the Earth, and as thy Praise,
Above the Heavens Dwells.
[III.]
So Thine Immensity,
Fills all Created Space,
And still Extends to Heights Above,
Where none thy ways can Trace,
[IV.]
Divine Perfections all,
In Thee I do believe,
Which by an Infinite extent,
Surpass what I conceive.
[V.]
Thou always had in view,
What ere in time should be,
Amongst thy works because thy Will,
Did Every thing Decree.
[VI.]
Thou did the Heavens frame,
With what therein Remain,
The Lower World, and Lowest Hell,
With what they both Contain.
[VII.]
Thy Glory to display,
Which end they answer Well,
Except those Spirits now Impure,
Which once from Glory fell.
[VIII.]
And man who Broke thy Law,
And thereby Violated,
The Terms of Peace and life, which GOD
With men Consederated.
[IX.]
The former thou have Doomed,
To Lasting Condemnation,
The Latter Graciously Reprievd,
A while upon Probation.
[X.]
And Both shall Glory bring
In The end, O GOD to thee,
F^r ^ant with Creatures to Suspend,
The Effect of thy Decree.
ANOTHER.
(I.)
Heaven, Lord, is thy Exalted Throne,
Whence thine Omniscient Eyes Survey
And Supervise the Universe,
Which is Subjected to thy Sway.
(II.)
Thy Manutenency to all,
Created beings does Extend,
Thy Manuduction also Guides,
Each Individual to its End.
(III.)
Thy Works declare thy Deity,
Thine Attributes are not Concealed,
Though nothing speaks thy Name so Plain
As it is by thy Word Revealed.
(IV.)
For thine Flecting Love to Men,
And thy Dear Purchased Saving Grace,
Through Christ I Cannot understand
Unless thy Written Word I trace.
(V.)
What Glorious Rays of Light and Truth,
I View, which from thy Records shine,
Whereby my Eyes have strength to look
With fixed sight on things Divine.
(VI.)
But how Sublime of Godliness,
The Mysteries, O! how Stupend
The Truths which I Believe from thence?
But Angels cannot Comprehend.
(VII.)
What Creature, Lord, shall ever Scan
By search to all Eternity;
That Paradox of THREE in ONE,
Or that of ONE in TRINITY?
(VIII.)
Or how the Glorious SON OF GOD
With Man by Hypostatick tie;
Do but one Person Constitute?
Created thoughts Soar not so high.
(IX.)
But lest thy Wisdom I Offend
In Touching Mysteries concealed,
Or by my Darkness Darken more,
Some Sacred Truths less plain Revealed.
(X.)
I Will be Consigned to things I know
In which thy Praise I Will Celebrate,
I will Rehearse thy Boundless Grace,
To me in my Forlorn Estate.
(XI.)
I will with Thankfulness Record,
Thy Love to me a Sinful wight,
In that thou from the Darkest Depths
Have brought my Soul into the Light.
A SOLILOQUY.
WHen I forsook thy Law
and Precepts did Decline,
Turning aside from Paths of Life
to crooked ways of mine.
My Face was from the Light
a mist before my Eyes,
The way was Dark and Slippery,
I fell, but could not rise;
Till GOD from Heaven sent,
because it was his Will,
Concerning me, my Sinful Soul
to Save and not to spill;
The Night came on apace,
no Light Remained in View,
But Depth of Darkness me enclosed
more Dense than Egypt knew.
Enonious Conscience then
Commanded to fulfill
What GOD forbad, and to refuse
Obedience to his Will.
His Gospel Precepts I
as Men's Inventions slighted,
Nor with his Holy Worship was
my Soul at all Delighted.
His Sabbath I Profaned,
and thought I kept His Law
Better than those who of the Fourth
Commandment stood in awe.
The Daily Sacrifice
I wholly did Restrain;
And what so ere was Wrong seemed Right,
whilst Darkness did remain.
For Lo, his Precepts Light
ceased on my Soul to shine,
And Blackest Smokes of Hells dark Fire,
I took for Rays Divine.
His Sanctuary where
His Glory often is seen,
And where His Blessing from on high
has often Commanded been;
Even Life for ever more,
as all his Children know,
I did forsake, and took my Choice
with Scornful Men to go,
To Satan's Synagogue,
where Sons of error met,
Who being Blind, were lead by one
more Blind into the Net.
His Saints I treated ill,
His Prophets I Despighted,
Their Suasive Arguments and Prayers,
as trivial things I slighted.
The Civil Magistrate
who bore the Sword of GOD,
I did Contemn and so Declined
to Fear Christ's Sovereign Rod.
But thus to be and do,
did not to me Suffice,
There yet remained one step to fall
before my Soul could rise.
That Sacramental Bond
by which my Soul was tied
To Christ in Biptism, I cast off
and basel, Vilifi'd.
I suffered to be washed
(as Satan Instituted)
My Body, so my Soul thereby
became the more Polluted.
This was my lowest fall
the utmost step whereby
My Feet were able to digress
from Paths of Verity.
O GOD my Sin release
in all that I have done,
And mark not the Indignities
I Have offered to thy SON.
Now when the lord my state beheld as on his I hrone of Mercy Seated, His Heart
was with Compassions filled, and thus the Sacred Persons treated.

THE FATHER.
I.
Lo here is a Sinner on the Brink
Of what engulfs Rejected Souls
And will for ever therein sink
Unless my power his course Controuls.
II.
But I am GOD, and all shall know,
TO Save from Hell, belongs to Me,
I Ransom from the Pit below,
And from Destruction I set Free.
III.
I Will Bow the Heavens and go down;
I Will Touch the Hills and they shall Smoke,
In Wrath I Will on his Haters Frown,
And from his Neck I Will break their Yoke.
The Son.
I.
When GOD the Earths Foundations laid
My Joys were with Men's Sons,
Since which the Purchase I have Paid,
Whence their Redemption comes
II.
Whereof he freely shall Partake
With others whom I Save,
O Father, Love him for my sake!
For him thy Love I crave.
III.
I can to the utmost him Redeem
Though his Condition's low,
He shall my Precious Blood esteem
And its Effects shall know.
The SPIRIT.
I.
Truth is my Conquering Sword,
Your Mission also I Sustain,
I Will now Apply the Word,
And of his Soul the Conquest gain.
II.
I Will CHRIST to him Reveal,
And make him understand the way,
None shall from him Conceal
The Truth, nor make Him go astray.
III.
I Will Lead him to the SON,
I Will also him Regenerate,
Though in himself undone,
I Will his Salvation Consummate.
I.
THis was the Blessed Concord above,
My Soul to Ransom and Retrieve,
Then Mercy flew on Wings of Love,
In have to Succor and Relieve.
II.
Lord, I thy Wondrous Grace Adore,
And stand Amazed to see thy Love;
Let me behold for evermore
Thy Face in Light, with Saints above.
III.
For this the Pious ever will
In welcome Hours GOD's Throne Address,
Whose Humble wishes he will fulfill,
And One Day all their Griefs Redress.
CHAP. II. Giving an Account of the Principal Heads of Quakerism.
IN this Chapter, I shall show you the Principal Heads of Quakerism. In the
First, Second and Third Steps of its Progress in the World; yet with this
Limitation, viz. That upon some Heads I shall wholly pass by the Two former,
not having Authorities by me to Prove so Punctually concerning them. Who have
Written so much that it will be expected, that I should be Silent about them,
farther than I am Prepared with Proof: Wherefore upon those Heads, I shall only
show you John Roger's Opinions, yet without any Reference to his Writings; And
that

First, Because I don't need them.

Secondly, Because they Contain but few of his Principles.

Thirdly, For that they are so Perplexed and Ambiguous, that he that will
Attend the Rules of Reason and Speech, can Prove scarcely any thing of the
chief Articles of his Faith by his Books.

Concerning GOD, His Decrees, and Works.
1. THere is a GOD. (Orthodox.) 2. But not Subsisting in Three Persons, See
George whiteheads Answer to Mr. Townsend. page 10. with diverse others. 3. (
Rogers,)Yet in some Respects so to be taken, for as He was before all, etc. He
is a Father. As he Created, Redeems, etc. He is Styled a Son. And as he
Sanctifies, Comforts, Enlightens, etc. He is called the Holy Ghost. 4. He has
not Foreordained what so ever comes to pass, yet he has Ordained many
things.( Rogers.) 5. He Created all Things (Orthodox) 6. He Governs, etc. yet
those things which come to pass without His Decree; do so also without His
Providence.( Rogers.)
Concerning Man.
l.GOD Made him of the Dust, etc. (Orthodox.) 2. But not with an Immortal Soul,
for the Rational Faculties belong to the Body and Die with it; Yet there is a
spirit in the Saints, besides the Natural Life, which Returns to GOD that gave
it, but that Spirit is GOD Himself.( Rogers.)
The Opinions of the other Quakers in this Point, follow under another Head.

3. Man was made a mere Carnal Creature, without any Spiritual Knowledge or
Disposition.( Rogers.)
Note, The other Quakers have been very sparing to Speak on this Third
Particular Head.

4 That Man was Subjected to one Precept only, and stood in a state of
Vice-gerency to Obey or Rebel for his Posterity, as well as for himfelf.(
Rogers.) 5. That Man fell, Forfeited his Earthly Paradise; himself and
Posterity were driven into a Servile state: And finally Exposed to Temporal
Death, which is the utmost Vengeance GOD can take for Original Sin.( Rogers.)
6. That as the Serpent Promised, so it came to pass, that Man was Wiser after,
than before the Fall; for GOD instantly thereupon, gave him the Knowledge of the
Moral Law, as a Covenant of Works to save himself by, if he could.( Rogers.) 7
But GOD foreseeing that he would not fulfill it, gave him also the Promise of a
Savior, viz. the Seed of the Woman. ( Rogers.)
But other Quakers say, gave him a Savior, viz. the Light within; George Fox,
Great Mystery. page 47.

Of the Holy Scriptures.
1. THey are not Infallible nor Divine, but, Humane. G. F. Great Mystery, page
202 2. Yet they are a good Book, whereunto Wicked Men may do well to take heed,
but unto those in whose Hearts the Day Star is arisen, they are of less use,
except for the Answering of gainsayers.( Rogers.)
Of the New Testament.
ITs not the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, but it is the Doctrine of
Christianity, Written in the Heart with the Finger of GOD.( Rogers.)

Of CHRIST the Savior.
1. HE is not that Outward and Visible person with Flesh and Bones that
Suffered. See William Penn's, Serious Apology, page 146. and Stephen Crisps
Collection, page 160. and William Bayleys Works, page 600. those Sufferings
were of no more Value than the Blood of a Chicken. Ecclestone in a Letter to
Porter. Christ's coming in the Flesh is but a Figure. Faith in Christ without
Men is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, G. W. Truth Defending Quakers, page
22, 65. 2. The Light within (that is Christ) Ofsereth up himself a Living
Sacrifice to GOD for us, whereby the Wrath of GOD is Appeased to us, William
Penn's Light and Life, page 44.
But Robert Barclay in his Propositions of Divinity, talks otherwise, for in
his Demonstration of his fifth and sixth Propositions, he says, the Light
within is not GOD, nor is it Man's Soul, but an Heavenly and Divine Principle,
which Excites and Disposes Men to that which is good; a little while after, he
makes it a Substance, yea a palpable Substance, and says, that GOD is wrapped up
in it, and cannot be Separated from it, he calls it the Vehicle of GOD:
Sometimes the Spiritual Body of Christ, the Flesh and Blood of Christ which
came down from Heaven: A Minute after this, he makes it an Eatable Substance,
and says, that Good Men do Eat it and Drink the Blood of it, and so are
Nourished unto Eternal Life, and this he calls the Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ. Moreover, he says, that this Light is Properly and Immediately
the Savior, yet he Acknowleges Jesus Christ too, and his Sufferings: He holds
his Sufferings and Death to be Universal, that is, for all Men, and
Meritorious, that is, to the Purchasing the Light within to be Imparted to
every Man, which Light will Procure him Pardon of Sin, and Peace with GOD, and
Work a Complete Salvation for him, if he be willing, and thus he makes the
Light within to be the Savior, and Jesus Christ to be the Purchaser of that
Savior, and so he makes, as it were, two Saviors, one more Remote, and the
other more Immediate: the Remoter by his Merits purchasing the more Immediate
Savior, and he by his Merits Purchasing Grace, Pardon, and Eternal Life.
Moreover, He says that this Light is at first but as a Seed in the Heart (and
he uses Similitude of Humane Seed in the Womb) where he says, it receives
Geniture and Growth by the Obedience, which the Righteous Render to its motion,
until it comes to be a Complete and Mature Body, and that he understands by
CHRlST's being formed in a Believer. Further he says, that by this Light the
Saints can discern the Spiritual Estates of others, etc.

And in short, That it Teaches them all things, and would fully Reveal to them
the Mystery of Salvation, and all needful Principles, although they were
destitute of the BIBLE altogether; But on the other hand, if it be not Obeyed,
it will dwindle and Pine away, and Prove like an untimely Birth, and then the
SON of GOD is said to be Crucified, Slain, etc.

In the last place, to speak of John Rogers, he held that Christ is the Eternal
GOD, that in time he became Man, was Born of a Virgin, Suffered, Dyed, Arose,
Ascended, etc and that in the same manner he comes into the Flesh of every
Believer, and is united thereto by a Personal Union, and not merely by a
Covenant Transaction, so that the Body of a Saint is the Body of Christ, in the
same sense that the Body of Jesus was, yet he differs from the Saints, in that
the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him, but to the Saints GOD gives a Measure
of his Spirit to Profit withal, and also, in that He is the King, They the
Subjects, He the Head, They the Members.

Of a Dead Faith.
IT is a Belief Grounded upon the Scriptures, or other Humane Testimony. (
Rogers)

Of Repentance.
IT is a Turning from Sin with a Godly Sorrow for it, and Earnest Prayer to GOD
for Pardon.

2. It is the Effect of a Dead Faith in them that have it, though not Produced
in all that have a Dead Faith. 3. The Place of it is between a Dead and a
Living Faith, for when once a Living Faith begins to Operate, Repentance is at
an end; Insomuch that he that does Savingly Believe, is Incapable of the least
Impressions of Sorrow for the Wrongs done to GOD by the Transgressions of his
part Life, have they been Whoredoms, Sodomies, Beastialities, or what ever: Nor
can he look back on them with Blushing, but speak of them freely, and with an
Air of Satisfaction. ( Rogers.)
Of a Living Faith.
IT is the certain Knowledge of the Pardon of Sin, and of Peace with GOD,
grounded upon the immediate Testimony of GOD, speaking in and unto the Soul. (
Rogers.)

Of Justification.
THe Saints are Justified not by the Imputation of CHRIST's Righteousness to
them, but by a Righteousness Actually wrought in them. William Penn, Serious
Apol. page 148. and so says Barclay in diverse places, of his Book aforesaid.
But John Rogers had an inexpressible notion of mixing both together.

Of Sanctification, Mortification and Perfection.
1. SAnctification is a Perfect cleansing from Sin. 2. The place of it is
before Justification. 3. But then there remains the Mortifying the Lusts of the
Heart, which is a Gradual Work, and being Finished, it Lands a Man in a State
of Perfection, and may be Perfected in this Life, if Men will.( Rogers.)
Of Election and Reprobation.
ELection is GOD's choosing a Man, etc. which is, when Man has first chosen GOD,
and Reprobation is the contrary, and never is till the Man has Rejected GOD,
yet these may successively happen to a Man diverse times in his Life, yea in a
Week, for a Man may fall away from Saving Grace, and may or may not be Renewed
by Repentance, as it Pleases GOD, yet from a State of Perfection a Man cannot
fall.( Rogers.)

And here observe a necessary distinction, for I have said, if it Please GOD,
and else where, I say that Rogers held the Doctrine of Free Will; wherefore
please to understand, by Rogers's Opinion, That every Man has a Power to Will
his own Salvation or Damnation, and accordingly to be Saved or Damned; yet this
Power is but Temporary in some Men, for when GOD has once wrought in a Man
Effectual Saving Grace, and a Man is fallen from it, then in that case it is not
if Men Will, but if GOD Will, that such are Renewed by Repentance and Saved,
for the Election is changed, and it happens that the most High has the Power of
Giving his Grace only to whom he Pleases, which Power he had not before, but
was under the strictest Ties of Giving or Withholding of it according to Man's
will.

Of Ordinances.
THere are none of Religious Observation in the Church, but are Cain's
Sacrifices. G. F. News out of the North, page 14. The Sacrament as its called,
is Carnal, the Communion Bread and Wine, the Table of Devils, and Cup of Devils.

The Title of the Book out of which this is taken, is News out of the North
written from the mouth of the Lord, from one who is naked, and stands Naked
before the Lord, Clothed with Righteousness whose Name is not known in the
World, Risen up out of the North, which was prophesied of, but now is
fulfilled, called George Fox.

But Rogers held Three Ordinances of Religious Use, viz. Baptism, the Lord's
Supper, and Imposition of Hands.

Of Worship in General,
ALL Worship is in the Heart only, and there are no External Forms in which,
etc. (Rogers,)

Of the Moral Law.
AS it Ceases to be a Covenant of Life, to the Saints, so neither is it a Rule
of Life to them, any more than it is to Christ. Truth Defending Quakers, page 1
8. So said Rogers also.

Of the Sabbath
THe Christian Sabbath is not any Particular Day, but all that time in which a
Man Lives without Sin. ( Rogers.)

Of Asking GOD's Blessing upon our Food and Returning Thanks,
THose who so Practice are the same whom the Prophet says Peep and Mutter. (
Rogers.)

Of Gospel Ministers.
1. THey must be immediately Called, Qualified, Authorized, and sent forth by
GOD Himself. 2. They must Receive no pecuniary Reward. 3. They must Labor with
their hands for the Support of themselves and others. 4. They have the Counsel
of GOD, or New Testament written in their Hearts. 5. Hereby the Church knows
them to be the Ministers of Christ, namely by Comparing notes, for what the
Minister preaches agrees perfectly with what is written in the heart of every
Saint. 6. The World does or may know them by their Faith, Charity, Boldness,
etc. And by the Success of their Ministry, ( Rogers.)
Of Heaven and Hell.
A Local Heaven and Hell is Denied, for they are only within men. Fox Great
Mystery, page 214. (also Rogers)

Of the Resurrection, and Day of Judgment.
THey are Denied utterly. W. P. Reason against Railing, page 138. But Rogers
held both; yet doubted whither the Body to be Raised would be the same that
fell, yet owned It would have the same Consciousness, He Denied also, the
Resurrection of infants

Of the Soul of Men.
THe first sort of Quakers were extremely at a Loss about the Soul of man, and
seldom spoke plainly of it, though they agreed in this, That man as Man was not
Constituted of Soul and Body. Considering the Soul according to the Opinions of
Philosophers and Divines; yet the Scriptures so plainly and plentifully
yielding us such an Idea of it, they were loath but to grant that the Scriptures
intended something, when they spoke of the Soul, and therefore they used the
Term themselves also; yet at the same time some of them not knowing what they
themselves meant by it, others meaning only the Intellectual Faculties, whilst
others meant the Breath of God, otherwise called the Light within or Christ
Incarnate. This I speak by my own Knowledge, gained by Personal Conferences with
diverse of them about the Point And agreeable hereto Mr. Hicks, an Honest and
Judicious Baptist tells US, that they said, Christ came to save the Soul, but
not the Body; and that else where they said, That by the Soul they intended the
Light withm: whereupon he aptly observes, that according to Quakerism, Christ
came to Save Himself. And Dr. Cotton Mather, in his Book called Quakerism
Displayed, Quotes a Passage out of one of their Chiefs, in these words, viz. Is
not the Soul a part of God? etc. As for Barclay, he wrote so little and so
Cautiously about it, that I cannot affirm what he held.

But John Rogers Rejected the Opinions of all and held downright, that man had
noSoul at all; yet he used the Term, but intended by it, Either the Natural
Life, or else the Rational Faculties, which he attributed to the Body; and held
that they Died with it, even as it is with a Dog, etc.

Of the Civil Magistrates.
THe Civil Powers are the Rulers of the Darkness of this Present World; They
are the Beast that gives Power to the False Prophets; They wield the Sword of
the Devils Spirit, and are those Spiritual Wickednesses in High Places, against
whom Christians must incessantly Wrestle: Yet so as that if their Precepts In
join nothing but what is purely Civil, as the Building Bridges, Repairing High
Ways, etc. and intermeddle not with Matters neither Military nor
Ecclesiastical, Christians must Obey them for the Lord's sake. ( Rogers)

It remains that I give you some Insight into that Depth of Satan, which Rogers
called, A mixture of Spirits; by which he meant, a. Conjunction of the Holy
Ghost and Satan in a man's Heart, each striving for Predominancy, but moving
different ways, according to their different Natures and Interests. A little
like to what our Astrological physicians tell us, of the tussings ot the
Planets, for the Regency of Humane Bodies; when it thus happens, its a case of
extreme Difficulty with a man, it being of very dangerous Consequence to Obey
the Infortune, and yet next to impossible to distinguish his Influence from
that of the Good Spirit; for the poor Man has by that time learned to believe
every Spirit that testifies that Christ is come in the Flesh, that is, into the
man's own Flesh; for so they understand the Apostle John, in his First Epistle,
Fourth Chapter and Second Verse. And hence they make not GOD's Word a
Touchstone for the Trying of the Spirits.

I shall mention an Instance or two wherein this Mixture of Spirits has
happened.

And

First, A certain Disciple of John Rogers's, upon a Time was moved to go forth
in the Name of the Lord, and Anoint a Couple of Men of the Neighborhood to be
Prophets, and it was so, that the shortest way to the Remotest of the
Candidates, was to cross a considerable Pond; Now it chanced to be an
Unfortunate Hour, for Satan was housed in the Heart of the Missionary in the
same Degree with the Good Spirit, and put the man upon treading the Water,
which he intended to have done; but coming to it, whether he suspected a
Mixture of Spirits, or calling to mind that he was no Swimmer, I cannot tell;
but in fine, he headed the Pond.

Secondly, A certain Stranger who had been in a deep Concern about his Eternal
Estate, and at length was somewhat inclining to Quakerism: Rogers happening
into his Company upon a Journey, Preached to him; upon which he soon became a
Believer, and went on Rejoicing, as the Eunuch did; his Joys increasing with
his Wonder at so mavelous a Change and so sudden; at length be fancied that
he should be put upon some eminent Service in the Ministry, all which Rogers
strictly observed, and fearing whereto it might grow (for he hated the breaking
forth of another Sun) began to Caution him of a Mixture of Spirits, assuring
him that GOD did not call men to the Ministry, until they had been foundly
Whipped, Imprisoned, etc. and so were madeHumble and Patient; left otherwife
being puffed up with Pride, they might fall into the Condemnation of the Devils.

CHAP. 3 Giving an Account of the Unreasonableness of John Rogers's Beasting of
his Sufferings And Offering some Advice to such as hold his Principles of
Religion.
I Purpose in this Last Chapter, to make a few Remarks upon some of John
Rogers's Sufferings and the Causes of them: To the end it may be known that his
Sufferings were not Persecutions, nor for his Religion and Conscience, as he
vainly and falsely Boasted, and as some ('it is like) have Believed; but that
Really he was himself a Persecutor, and that his Sufferings were the Demerits
of his horrid Immoralities and Impieties,

The first Thing that he mentioned on the account of his Sufferings, was the
Divorcing his Wife from him

To which I Answer; That the Cause of it was his Adultery, Beastiality, etc. in
which he had Lived for Diverse years, as he Boasted and Endeavored partly to
justify.

If any in his behalf object that the Proof was lnsufficient, I Answer that
neither they nor I are Competent to Judge of that. And farther, that upon his
Trial, he never denied a tittle of the Charge, and out of Court always Owned
it, and in particular to Mr. Edwards, who was his Council, but athereupon
deserted him and gave an Evidence against him; and for the Proof of this, I
Refer the Reader to the Records and Files, in the Secretary's Office, at
Hartford.

The Second Suffering he Boasted of, was the taking, his Children from him, and
Delivering them to their Mother, after the Divorce.

To which I Answer, (Pretermitting what might be said, as to the Equity of that
Law of this Colony, Directing and Enabling Overseers of the Poor, with the
Advice of the Authority, to take into their Care such Children as are in danger
greatly to suffer, as well for want of Competent Education, as for want of
Suitable Subsistence) that the Mother had by Nature and Law as good Right to
them as he had. Moreover, The condition of the Children (being very Young)
Required the Care of a Mother at the present; besides his Condition at that
time forbade their abode with him, who through the force of Enthusiasm, went
about Raging and Raving to that Degree, as that no Sober Man could have though it
him to be Compos mentis, or fit to have been a minute out of Bedlam,

After some Years his Son was returned to him by Authority (which I Am sure
would be as hard a thing for me to Defend as the Contrary) but his Daughter
having through GOD's Grace, so Effectually Imbibed, not only the Principles of
true Religion, but the Real Beginnings and Seeds of saving Grace (as since has
been more Evident) Nothing but force could have obliged her to abide with him,
wherefore none was used, for these two things he has unspeakably Railed upon
and Vilifi'd the Authority of the Government, Charging them with Adultery in
the former, and Persecution in both.

Nor was She, who had been Divorced from him able whilst Living to escape the
Expressions of his Rage; he loaded her with all manner of Reproaches and Lies,
at an execrable Rate (at the same time pretending the greatest Love) Concerning
whom the Rules of truth would Justify me in speaking as much of her Exem plary
Piety, Charity, Goodness, etc in Life and of her Faith at Death, as of most
Good Women that have breathed; but its besides my purpose, nor is my Testimony
in Favor of my Mother so Authentic as others; wherefore in this Respect I
choose rather to Appeal (as I do with all Freedom) to the Reverend Pious and
Judicious Elder, and to the Whole Church and Neighborhood at Lyme, whereof she
Lived a Beloved and Died a Lamented Member.

Another Suffering that he Gloried in, was his Whippings and Imprisonments; of
which to speak particularly and to show the Criminal Causes of them, would tire
my self and you.

Wherefore let it suffice to Affirm, that great Part of his lmprisonment at
Hartford, was upon strong Suspicion of his being Accessory to the Burning
New London Meeting House, his Whippings there were for most Audacious Contempt
of Authority, his sitting on the Gallows was for Blasphemous Words; and in
short, he never Suffered the Loss of One Hair of his Head, by the Authority,
for any Article of his Religion, nor for the Exercise of it; unless when he has
Purposely and Contemptuously put himself under the unavoidable Notice of Grand
Jurors, or the like, in Laboring on the Sabbath, Baptising, or some such Fact,
which the Laws forbid.

No verily, it was not for his Religion; unless this were his Religion, viz. to
Traduce and Oppose the Sdbbath, Ordinances, Worship, Ministers and People of
God; yea, and the Government, Courts and Ministers of Justice, in their Civil
Administrations, in a sort, like as if his Salvation had depended upon his
being an Inveterate and Constant Plague to Mankind: For it was for such things
that he suffered Imprisonments and other Corporal Punishments. It was his
manner to Rush into the Assembly on the Lord's Day, in the time of God's
Worship, in a very Boisterous Way, and to Charge the Minister with Lies and
False Doctrine; and to Scream, Shout, Stamp, etc. by which he offered
insufferable Molestations to the Worship and People of God: And this was his
manner in the Court also, when he pleased or had a mind to make himself Sport,
and he would Laugh at it when he had done, till his Sides shook.

I saw him once brought to Court for such a Disturbance Committed on the
Sabbath; he had contrived the matter so as to be Just without the Door when he
was called to answer, upon which he Rushed into Court with a prodigious Noise,
his Features and Gestures expressed more Fury than I ever saw in a Distracted
Person of any sort; and I soberly think, that if a Legion of Devils had pushed
him in headlong, his Entrance had not been more Horrid and Ghastly, nor have
seemed more Praeternatural.

When he came to the Bar, he demanded of the Court, what their Business was
with him? The Indictment was ordered to be Read. To which he Pleaded, Not
Guilty, after a new Mode; for as the Clerk Read, sometimes at the End of a
Sentence, and sometimes at the Beginning, he would Cry out, That Is a Cursed Lie;
and anon, That Is a Devilish Lie! till at length a number of his Followers, of
both Sexes, tuned their Pipes, and Scream'd, Roared, Shouted and Stamped, to
that Degree of Noise, that it was Impossible to hear the Clerk Read. (But how
contrary to the Meekness and Mansuetude of Christ's Sheep?) For which the Court
put a Fine upon him, and so added an Article to the sum of his Sufferings.

I am prone to think, he may have been sometimes, Over done, by Officers, in
their Collecting Rates and Fines of him; which if it were so, the Authority
could not have Redressed it, for want of his Application to them in that
Respect.

But before I Conclude, Let me Mention some other of his Sufferings; which though
he Fretted at at Home, yet never Complained of Publicly, I mean what happened to
him about his Maid Mary Ransford; whom he first Bought, then took tohis Bed (at
least when he wanted her) till she proved with Child, and in the Fifth or Sixth
Month of her Pregnancy, as I remember, he Solemnly Betrothed her to him; then
afterward Dwelling with her several Years, and having had Two Children by her,
upon some Disgust, put her away, and all by his own Authority Agreeable to that
Rule in the Law (atleast in one respect) Modo quo Oritur pactio, Eodem modo
Dissolvetur, That in the same way that a Contract is made, it may be made Void.

After which he was Lawfully Married to a Woman of Oyster Bay, of Good Report,
save only, that by her Religion, she was one of those Quakers, who for their
Noisyness,,are called Singing Quakers.

I am not at all at a loss, how John Rogers and this Quaker Woman, over looked
the small Disparity in Religion, that was between them, so as to Match
together; but by what Sophistry he levelled that horrible Jogg in his
Conversation, Respecting Mary, aforesaid, I cannot imagine.

To me, I Remember, he accounted for it after this sort; Said he, I have
Experienced Wonderful Operations of GOD 's Hand upon my Body, as well as upon
my Soul; and so Proceeding, Signified to me, that upon his entering into a state
of Sufferings, he felt such a mavelous Mortification of his Members which
were upon the Earth, as that his Venereal Propenfuy in particular, seemed to be
totally Extinguished; but however after he had Incountred the sharpest of his
Trials, it flamed forth again, even beyond the Limits of Nature, whereby it was
manifest that God's Hand was in an Eminent way in it; Whereupon, etc. And I
never could get him an Inch further than this; yet he would not make a full
Stop neither; but signified to me that in a more Convenient Time he would let
me into that Mystery, and fully Convince me that he did it by a Divine Impulse,
from First to Last I guess he told Capt Witherell, who was then Judge of the
Court, something of this Story, by the Judge's Answer to him in Court.

You shall hear the Rounds of the Matter, which you will think strange(if true) of
a Minister, yea, more than a Minister, an Apostle, who had been then Perfectly
Free from sin above Twenty Years; it was thus, At a County Court at NewLondon
(my self a Spectator, with a multitude of others being present) came John
Rogers into Court, leading in his Hand Mary, aforesaid; and Applying himself to
the Judges, said thus, viz. I desire you all to take Notice, that I take this
my Servant-maid to be my Wife; I bought her with my Money, and I take her to be
my Wife. Replied the Judge, How, how? What do you mean, John? why are you not
Published and Married in an Orderly Way? Continued he, I do not Regard your
Laws in that Respect, nor will I he Married by your Authority. Then Applying
himself directlv to the Judge, said, Capt. Witherell, Thou know something of
the Occasion of this, for I hinted it to thee at such a time. Replied the
Judge, why, thou filthy B -- t, I know nothing that thou toldest me, but of a
base Pang of Lust that befell thee; Go, for shame; be gone, the Court will not
be hindered.

In about Three or Four Months, as I remember, Mary brought him a Child, he
owned it and got her with Child again, having suffered Persecution for the
First according to Law; (...) seeing the Second Persecution, he Charged Mary,
not to lay the Child to him, if Examined by Authority, she promised him she
would not, but failed of her Word; which occasioned him further Sufferings for
his Conscience; which so Roiled him, that he put her away, and dwelt no more
with her.

And now to Conclude, I am very sensib1e, that although GOD has said, That the
Name of the Wicked shall Rot; and often in His Providence fulfils that
Threatening, yet that by its felt-Considered, is no sufficient Warrant to us, to
sulley the Characters of the Dead, because of their Impiety Yet, Methinks, when
we are engaged in the Cause of Truth against Error, for as much as in the eyes
of most men, nothing tends more to Detract from the Credit of any Religion,
than to show the Preachers and especially the Original Founders of it, to have
been exceedingly Corrupt in their Morals; it may be very Warrantable, yea,
Necessary, and more especially where the Case is Peculiar, as this is, that a
Man Boasting of Perfection, of Immediate Communion with God, and the Constant
and Infallible Guidance of His Spirit, should Deliberately Practice Whoredom,
and Live in it Diverse Years, and then to save himself from the just Censures of
men, father his Debaucheries Upon the Holy Ghost, as he did, I hope it will be
granted that the dark Curtains of Death and the Grave, ought not to screen him
(in this Respect) from the notice of the Living, in the World in all Succeeding
Generations: and Conseqently, that no Indifferent Person will be Prejudiced at
my Animadversions thereupon.

AND now, I will in a few words, Apply my self to those who are Less
Indifferent, and so Conclude, I mean, those who are already fallen into the
suare of that Fowler.

GOD forbid, that being Restored my self, I should be like Pharash's Butler not
to Commiserate those whom I have left Behind and who Remain in the Dungeon
still. No verily, I will speak of you and for you to the King, whilst I have
breath to do it; and to you I would not be wanting, I would choose acceptable
Words, I would fill my mouth with Arguments, Laboring your Conviction, but
that I know the Disadvantage you are under, and of how little Force Right words
will be with you, till GOD abate those warm Prejudices of your Minds, which you
take to be Pious Zeal, and therefore Indulge; Wherefore I will say the Less,
yet suffer me a word or two.

And

First, Be persuaded, That its possible, you may have been mistaken in what
ever Comforts, Illuminations, or the like, you seem to have had: Consider what
the Scriptures say, that There is few that find the way of Life; That there is
a way which seems Right to a man, but the End thereof are the ways of Death.
That if it were possible the very Elect should be Deceived, through the
Activity of Error; That there is a Spirit of Error, as wll as a Spirit of
Truth; And that by that Spirit of Error, men are Liable to be missed, not only
in Spiritual Things, but also in a Spiritual Way, and therefore that it
concerns you to Try the Spirits, whither they be of God.

And suffer me to tell you how; and that is according to Gods Institution and
the Practice of his People always.

1. Negatively, Do not try the Spirit by the Spirit, for that is no trial at
all: for you know a false Spirit will give a false Testimony in his own Favor,
wherefore seek some Rule for the trying of the Spirits. I Will tell you what the
Rule has been and what it is. 2. Affirmatively; Before the Finishing and
Completing of the Scriptures, GOD's SPIRIT in all the Prophets, and also in
CHRIST and his Apostles Evinced his Divinity and Godhead by Miracles: and
although that be not the General Rule now for the trying of the Spirits, yet
Miracles when shown must be Granted to be good Proof at all times: So that if
one comes to me, Commanding me in the name of the LORD, to take a Voyage into
Turkey, Preach the Gospel, or do something (...) out of my particular Calling;
now if he will Verify his Mission, by Raising the Dead, or the like Miraculous
Action, I must then Believe and Obey; otherwise I Will try him by the general
Rule, which in Gospel Times, is this;
To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to these, it is
because there is no Light in them. Wherefore be entreated to try the Spirits,
that is, try your Principles, and try those Extraordinary Motions and
Influences which sometimes you feel, by the Rules of Gods Word.

I Will mention none of your Principles in particular, and but one of your
Practices, Left I be troublelsome to you; and that is this, when you are moved
to Disturb others in their Worshipping of God according to their Consciences,
then try that motion before you execute it. If I demand of you how you know God
moved you thereunto? I know your Answer will be,

First, That you had a good End in it, and therefore you know it was from the
LORD; for Satan never makes God's Glory his End:

Answer, The End and Design does not of it self warrant the Action, Balaam had
a Good End in going to Curse Israel; it was to Enrich himfelf, which is Lawful
for a man to do, provided it be, in a right Way and by due Methods. Moreover
Saul had a Good end in sparing the best of the Cattle, etc. of the Amalekites;
it was to Sacrifice to the Lord, a pious End, but the Action no the less
abominable to GOD; and so had the same man, doubtless, a good End in Offering
Sacrifice.

Secondly, You Will say, That at the time when you felt that Impulse, you were in
a very Spiritual Frame, and had very great Assurance that you were a Child of
GOD; and that although Satan be permitted by Transforming himself into an Angel
of Light, to Impose upon Hypocrites, yet be cannot so Impose upon GOD's
Children. This I know is your Principle.

To which I Answer,

First That it Remains to be proved that you are a Child of GOD; for you may be
Extremely Mistaken in that point, and especially Seeing (as I full well know)
that you pretend to no other Proof of it, than the witness of that Spirit,
which I am now advising you to try; and that thus the case is with you in this
Respect, viz.

1. You know you are a Child of GOD, because the Spirit of GOD dwells in you,
and you are led by it. 2. You know that the Spirit of GOD dwells in and leads
you, because you are a Child of God.
Sirs, This is a way of Arguing far below what GOD expects of rational Beings.
What is there to be spoken of, that cannot be proved in this Way? May not the
Angels of God, prove themselves Apostates, and the Devils prove themselves
(...) by this circular Way of arguing, if Sound? Secondly, In Answer to that
Principle, that Satan cannot so Impose on Gods Children; I say it Contradicts
another of your Principles, and that is the Doctrine of a mixture of Spirits,
wherein you hold that the Good and the Bad Spirit may personally Possess and
Influence a man at the same time; as it has often happened, as you suppose to
Diverse of you; Particularly to him that went to Anoint the two Prophets.

Again, Be persuaded to take a view of John Rogers, and try him in some
respects; I do not mean to try whether he be Saved or Lost (that is not our
business, nor may we pry into it) but try whether he were a Minister of CHRIST
or not; for if he were not, you may well suspect your selves to have been
misled by him.

In trying of his Authority to Preach and Baptize, I think you may safely
conclude that the Office of a Gospel Minister is like that of a Priest, in this
Respect, viz. That No man takes the honor of it upon himself, but he that it
called of GOD, as Aaron was, Heb 5.4. Wherefore the Apostle says plainly, in
Romans 10.25. How can they Preach except they be sent?

2. That the Call Of GOD Thereto, is either,

Frist, Extraordinary, as GOD called diverse of the Prophets of old, and as
CHRIST called the Apostles, who always proved their Authority by Miracles;
insomuch that Moses despaired of being believed when GOD sent him to the
Israelites in Bondage, without the Gift of Miracles; which therefore GOD gave
him, that thereby he might prove his Mission to be Divine.

Or,

Secondly, lt is Ordinary, viz. by Ordination and Laying on of the Hands of the
Persbytery; whereby that Power which CHRIST at first vested in the Apostles, is
Delegated and Derived unto them; and this is the usual way in Gospel Times,
being first practiced by the Apostles themselves, and ever since followed in
the Church in all Ages; and every man pretending to that Office has always been
able to prove his Authority in the one or other of these ways, excepting a few
such as George Fox and John Rogers.

I know he used to say when pinched in this Point, that his Converts and the
Success of his Ministry, were the Evidence of his Apostleship; but if that
Argument will do, then was Mahomet a Prophet of the LORD, and Sabbatai Sevi the
Eternal Son of GOD; for they had more Disciples than he.

Once more, Be persuaded to make a few short, but Reasonable Reflections on
some part of his Life, and see if you can therein Discover the Characters and
Signs of a Minister of CHRIST; Particularly the matter about Mary R^^^ford. And
methinks Reason should Guide you thus in your tho'ts about it, viz.

1. That she was either his Lawful Wife, or not; if not, then his [W -- e,]
with whom (...) ^ived in Fornication diverse Years; which cannot possibly stand
with the Perfection he pretended to, and Infallible Guidance of GOD's SPIRIT.

Or,

2 If she were his Lawful Wife, then his putting her away was without
Sufficient Grounds, not being any where Warranted by Laws neither Divine nor
Humane, nay Condemned by his own Writing, and Consequently he broke Wedlock,
and committed Adultery in so doing. If you Reply, that David and Peter did as
bad; I Will Grant it: but I observe that they both Repented of, Confessed and
Forsook their Sins; but he always Justified his and Lived in it to the day of
his Death, that is his Adultery. If she were his Wife, as I think you will
Judge she was, let that land where it will rather than to make him a
Fornicator. Now I am persuaded that if you do but use your Understandings in
the case, you cannot Reconcile these things and his pretensions of Holiness and
Purity together; and if not, then what follows, but that he was an horrible
Liar and Impostor! and that all his Doctrines are to be Suspected and
Immediately scanned and sifted to the Bran. Which if GOD Enable you to, I am
sure you will soon perceive that you have not been in the way that Leads to
Life, though it has seemed Right to you.

Cry to GOD for Understanding; its He that Leads the Blind by a way which they
knew not.

Finally, Pray and Strive against this one Evil in special, which otherwise
will greatly (...) your Progress from Darkness to Light, and that is the
slavish Fear of being made the Scorn of Fools and Song of the Drunkards, who
witi probably at every tarn upbraid you of Unconstancy, twit you and yours of
your Quakerism, and the like; this sort of Suffering is an evil Disease its
what David earnestly Deprecated after his fall, and there is no Promise of GOD
to secure you from it. Yet there are well grounded Confiderations which ought
to Support you under it. As

1. That there is GOD's permitting Hand in it, from whom yon have deserved the
Extremest Sufferings. 2. That GOD does not willingly Grieve His Children; but
only if need be, and for their profit. 3. That you need it to put you in mind
of what you were, and how much you are Indebted to Divine Grace, that you are
now otherwise. 4. That there is no Justice on the side of them who thus Traduce
you, albeit they speak what is! true, for who has Right to lay any thing to the
Charge of GOD's Elect, whom he has Justified? 5. Finally, Consider, That if you
bear these Asfronts wifh a Spirit of Meekness and Fortitude, CHRIST will Resent
them, as Injuries Done to Himfelf, and will find a place for them in; the
Catalogue of those Sufferings of yours, which He will Own and abundantly Reward
with Grace and Favors here, and Glory at the Resurrection of the Just.
FINISH.
ADVERTISEMENT.
JUST ready to Publish, a Book, Entitled, Poetical Meditations, being the
Improvement of some Vacant Hours, by ROGER WOLCOTT, Esquire With a Preface by the
Rd. Mr. John Bulkley. Wherein the Right Of the Aborigines of this Country, to
Lands in it, is largely Discoursed, etc.

Also a Sermon from those Words, 2 Timothy 2.19 last clause, By the Rd. Mr. John
Graham.

As also, A Discourse, Entitled, The Duty, and a Mark of Zions Children, from
Psalm. 137.1. By the Rd Mr. Morgan

Sold by T. Green, at N. London


