A DIALOGUE SHOWING, What Is therein to be found.

A Motto being Modish, For Want of good Latin, are put English Quotations.

While Public Good was urged for private Ends,
And those thought Patriots who disturb it most,
Dryden. Experience it is by whose true Eyes though slow,
We find, at last, what often too late we know.
D'Avenant. Printed in the Year MDCCXXV.

ERRATA.
Page. Page 5. l. 9. read. After That! add, Tim. Pleasure in that! Page. 7. l.
20 read. and Property. Page. 11. l. 17 read. of his with the Tenants, Page. 12.
l. 25 read. Medium Page. 14. l. 10 read. dele late^ Page. 16. l. 24 read.
doubled it. Page. 17. l. 8 read. after And add if Page. 20. l. 10 read. where
there Page. 21. l. 2 read. Excitement Page. 22. l. 10 read. according dele ly
l. 12. read. surroundings l. 18. read. his Care. l. 26. read. taking Page. 26.
l. 5 read. for and read of l. 11. read. dele that Page. 30. l. 3 read. for from
read of l. 4. read. for Companions, read Champions. l. 26. read. Abuse dele s
Page. 38. l. 11 read. after would add not Page. 40. l. 12 read. rousing.


A DIALOGUE SHOWING, What Is therein to be found.
Simon. WHAT News at Town, Neighbor? Does the Assembly go into any new Matter
this Sitting?


Timothy. It Is said, Not: But they intend to break up this Day. If so, they
will fail in the Charity, and other Services which seem to have been expected
from them. Here Is the Mercury of Yesterday which has the Speech, and I have
bought a new Book for Eight-Pence. -- Read it.


Simon [Reads.] Ways and Means, Hum, hum, hum, -- Money well laid out, if it
answers the Title.


Tim. Title! -- Why it is all Title, Man.


Sim. We'll lay this aside for reading at Leisure. Let us at present have some
Consabulation, and take Care what thou say Tim, I shall write it down, and
perhaps publish it; for I have a mighty Mind to be an Author. Methinks we are
advancing in it. Is there nothing of it mentioned in this new Piece, as a
necessary Improvement in this new Country?


Tim. Nothing mentioned! It Is nothing else Man! Every Line, almost every Word,
the whole Book has it in View. But for all that, don't pretend to it Simon; thou
can never commence Author with thy shallow Politics: There are many
Qualifications (they say) necessary, which thou know nothing of.


Sim. Let me but try: Do, help me, for I must have thy Assistance, and we'll
make it Dialogue. -- I love Dialogue. I Have heard it commended of old.


Tim. I help! no sure. At that Rate I shall commence Half-Author at least. No,
no, farewell.


Sim. Prithee stay; think of the Pleasure of being an Author, especially an an
an -- What Is the hard Word? -- I mean, we'll put it out without a Name. Oh
there is a deal of Pleasure in That! Ha! ha! -- hum -- (Excuse me) Now I have
it, -- Virtue is her own Reward. -- We are to do Good secretly, we are to have
no mercenary, no selfish Ends, no Party-Designs; and therefore want, nor expect
no Honor, nor Applause from our Performance; confess how unequal we are to the
noble Task, and hope it will be taken off our Hands by Persons of better
Notions and brighter Conceptions.


Sim. No, no, That Is not it: Most Authors pretend to some or all of those: But
we'll be more honest, and profess to aim at our own Satisfaction in the
pleasing Titillation which Authors (secret and therefore modest Authors) enjoy.
First, let us think of somebody that cannot write, (at least to our Pitch) and
find Means to insinuate it is his; then the Wit, the delicate Style, the ^mooth
Periods, and fine Turn of Expression, and especially the larding our Work with
some Particularities which will fit nobody else. All will turn upon us.


Tim. Ay; but we can never reach any thing like that.


Sim. Very true, if we view our Performances with any other than an Author's
own Eye. -- We shall have this Satisfaction however; if we make Blunders, if
our Arguments are not cogent, if we fail in matters of Fact; if we fall into
Inconsistences, we stand aloof, the Shot of the Readers fly over, or beside us.
-- O it is clever to have, or fancy we have Gyges's Ring.


Tim. But will not that be some Mortification, though?


Sim. Not at all, or at least, 'twill be over-ballanc'd by the Pleasure on
the other Side; for the good Opinion Men generally have of themselves, is a
well-wrought Corslet; and Censure, Conviction, or Remorse, rarely touches them;
but if any body applauds our Work, (as it is much but some will, for that seldom
fails, where there are Parties, or different Interests) this we receive and hug
as if directed to us by Name.


Tim. But still methinks --


Sim. What do think! Am not I as well qualified as most Authors nowadays.
Projectors indeed under the Pretenses of public Spiritedness and Promotion of
Trade secretly carry on their private Interest, and too often sacrifice the
Public to great Damage, if not Ruin. But for me, who can be more
disinterested? I defy even the worthy Writers I have heard of, who laid out
themselves most learnedly in a Garret, for the Preservation of the
Constitution, and of Liberty and Property, or even De Foe himself when he wrote
the Mercator to be more so. -- They had a Standish to secure, and the Invasion
of a Bailiff, perhaps, to guard against. -- I have only this Log-House to be
anxious for: And if the Proprietor of the Land should ever gain Power enough to
turn me off, I can soon with the Help of my Neighbors the Freemen (whose
Numbers we have a good Prospect of increasing) whip up another on the next
Vacancy.


Tim. Hah! Prithee, how did get chosen two or three Years ago? Was it to get
some Office, Annuity, or Stipend? Art' one of the Four, or the the other Four, or
either of the single, disinterested Patriots who got more than either Set?


Sim. No: I had a Mind to see the Town once more, and to be secure from
impertinent People, not only for the Time being, but for the future by
excellent Laws. -- But do not lead me thus into Digressions: Let Us talk to some
Purpose.


Tim. Talk, -- What would have me talk? I know not any Thing worth while, or
to any Purpose as Matters go, somebody or other will be disgusted; and few Care
to be informed in any other Mode, but what sooths or confirms their own strong
Opinion.


Sim. Let Us to Dinner then, and take an Hour after to read the New Piece;
perhaps that may furnish with Matter, or supply all the good Purposes we can
pretend to in relation to the Public.


Post Meridiem. Tim. Now thou have read it, and I have heard it a second Time,
what is thy Opinion of it?


Sim. There are many pretty Things in it; several right Notions and true
Positions, which are not the less useful for being generally known. One would
think the Author to be well skilled in Trade, and the Advantages which redound
to a Country by it, to be temperate, a good Oeconomist, and to keep true
Accounts, as the Dutch phrase it.


Tim. Can add to it, or contradict any thing there? If not, lay aside the Whim
of turning Author.


Sim. Hey day! Why, is there nothing besides Trade and Riches worth thinking or
talking on? Sure there are other Topics; Prudence, Justice and Honesty are
Qualities altogether as comely in a Government, and as necessary to its
Reputation and Continuance.


Tim. Nay, then we shall have it: What! in this House! in the Circumstances
just now confessed, prate of Justice, Ha! ha! ha!


Sim. Prithee don't grin so. Parsons tell the People, They must adhere to what
they say, and not what they act. Some will inform us (a great Truth) That Rum
and other Spirits impair the Heat of the Stomach, produce pining Diseases and
lingering Deaths; -- Complain, That the Generality of People are so addicted to
them, that neither Regard to public Interest or private, Body or Soul, will
divert them from the frequent Use of it: And yet these very Dictators miss very
few Days in the Week wherein they do not begin in the Morning with that ruinous
new Invention of White Bitter; and complete the Evening, which they would seem
to design for cheerful and improving Conversation, in full Loads of the
pernicious and intoxicating Compound.

I knew a Steward once who depended so much on the Maxim, as thereby to spoil
all his fine Accounts; for whilst he was hugging himself, and vainly
endeavoring to deceive others, by proper Colorings on particular Occasions;
it came to that pass at last, that his Lord wanted no other than his own
Letters, and the comparing them and his Actions, to be satisfied concerning the
Gentleman.

He, at a certain Time, to gain a Point with the Tenants, harangued them upon
the prosperous and flourishing Condition they were in: And not long after,
having Occasion to allude to that very Time, in Vindication of some
Combinations of his Tenants, mainly for his own Interest, he declares, that
Laying to Heart the melancholy Scene of Affairs; and the low Condition they
were at that Time reduced to, made those Concessions of Necessity. Further,
after he had made some Rules concerning the Estate, directly contrary to
positive Orders from his Lord, he so far forgot himself as to assert, that he
had a constant due Regard to, and was never known to deviate from his
Instructions. Many such Finenesses as these he had.


Tim. Do mention this with Approbation?


Sim. What a Question there is? -- Are such Proverbs as these of no Use in
Life? -- At Rome, do as Rome does, As good be out of the World, as out of the
Fashion. -- But Jesting a part, come then Neighbor, we'll preserve Characters.
And since it seems, my Sincerity or Integrity may be questioned, thou shall be
on that Side. I Will take to'ther. Thy Industry, Sobriety, Probity, and Modesty
gives a just Right to aim at Reformation in others. Prithee take the Hint, and
go on.


Tim. I told thee in the Morning I had nothing to purpose. What a modish Lover
of Chat art thou?


Sim. What ado is here? Like persuading a noted Singer. -- Why put together a
Parcel of clever Words; talk of Mediums, of Commerce, Balance of Trade,
Pullick Good, Funds, Loans, Striking, Sinking, and such like. No Matter whether
understood, or not, by our selves or others, or whether we reason well and
clearly, so as we make a fine Gingle. The common People will believe strongly
what they are told is for their Interest, and for the few that may see the
Trick, never mind em; they may be halloo'd off?


Tim. What a strange Creature art? To strain up a Character just now too
valuable for me, and then put me upon so opposite a Part? No; But had I a Mind
to say any Thing, or reason upon the present Posture of Affairs, I am too much
confused, and at a Loss in what I hear and see. Some things may be dangerous,
or inconvenient to meddle with; and in those, as well as the more common
Themes, People are of different Opinions. To instance first, the
Paper-Currency; some say it has been advantageous, Relieved the Necessitous,
and quickened Trade at home and abroad; and many of these are for more (for can
we have too much of a good Thing?) Others conceive, that the Relief given to
one, was by oppressing, if not defrauding another; That as to Trade, they allow
it to have at first View such an Appearance; but is a Flash and Deception. They
doubt it will have such an Effect as the Virginia Plant upon humane Bodies,
create a false Joy, a Levalto in the Brain, but end in Sickness, Pain, and
perhaps Death. These urge, That the (...) Building of Vessels and other late
Pushes in Trade are owing to the Apprehensions Men were under, who must receive
i^ their Dues in such a Specie as in Time would sink in Value, (according to
Presidents) and were willing to lay it out in Vessels and Goods, while the
Project was young, and before the Value or Prices altered; and conclude, That
all will subside again, and for the future be governed by Proportion, and the
Encouragement or Discouragement which may arise from Freights and Markets, etc.
That as Foreign Goods rise in Disproportion to our Produce, as may reasonably
be expected, and is in Part already seen, the Burden which at first seemed to
be thrown on others will fall upon the Planter and Tradesman.

Besides, I cannot but observe the many Inconsistencies in the Opinions not
only of diverse, but the same Persons. At first some were positive the Value of
the Currency would not fall; now they see it, it is the Trick of Traders, and
the Paper don't fall, but the Silver and Gold rises because it is scarce:
Strange Position! By what do these People measure it? or by what Scale, I
wonder, do they pretend to talk, or judge of the Benefits or Profits by Trade
or Ballancing with other Countries? Is our imaginary Stuff the Criterion? The
same Person will tell us in one Place it was far short, in another, that Excess
of it will inevitably debase the Value; That the Expedient had relieved from
Engagements with Honor and Justice. Again, That its Value ought to be kept up,
otherwise it will prove an Injury to the Creditors, and be an Injustice in the
Debtors to pay what is not the Value it ought. Was not, and is not this already
done with a Witness? Further, an Impost is proposed on Foreign Liquors: And a
few Pages after, it is wished the Government at home, would make all free.


Sim. These, I think, may not all be Inconsistencies; to say Enough is
necessary, and of Utility, and too much, hurtful and ruinous, seems not
inconsistent.


Tim. True, as to that Part: But this may be designing; for unless the Quantum
sufficit be fixed and agreed, there may be room to couch the worst Consequence
under a Visor, until the Point is gained and too late to be undone, as seems to
be very much the Case already, taking it in the whole; and thus well intending
honest Men may be led Step by Step hoodwinked to a Precipice.


Sim. Fix the Sum! That appears difficult to do: However the Legislators are
the best Judges, or ought to be. They began with one Sum, and finding that not
enough, doubled, and so perhaps will go on from Time to Time as Necessity and
Experience shall induce them.


Tim. How! In a Progressive Geometrical Proportion! That indeed will in Time be
enough for the Purpose of even the most zealous Promoters. And by the Way, many
will be Pushers and Complainers until a NOTHING can pay a SOMETHING. And these,
or such as stand in some Degree toward them should unhappily be the greatest
Number -- I -- But I would choose to say no more on this Head; Only add, that
ascertaining a Sum really necessary for common Circulation (if that must be the
Case) I do not conceive to be so very difficult: Have not Political Estimations
of much larger Extent, been made and accounted, nay almost demonstrated to be
very nearly exact. The Bulk of our Trade and Home-Commerce (for it is of no Use
in our Foreign) which may demand a present Deposit, is not hard to be come at:
Therefore, these Projectors or Leaders, since from the Nature of the Thing they
own, that too great a Quantity will be ruinous, ought to be so honest as to say
at once, how much, and why no less is necessary, not arbitrarily, but
demonstratively upon just Calculations; and these should be published some Time
before they execute their Projects, that there may be Time and Room for
Observation upon them; for sure Justice and Prudence require the utmost Caution
where a whole Country and every body it trades with abroad, is so deeply
concerned. I would not be understood to be forwarding the Magical Contrivance.
No, far from it, I am only cautioning such as may be mistaken, misled, or
decoyed.


Sim. Even now thou could find nothing to say. How came by all this? and
perhaps more; for there seems to be Reserves.


Tim. I get it, as honest plain Men should do, by conversing with such as
reason clearly to my Apprehension and Judgment; not vilifying others with
scandalous Insinuations and Falsehoods; imposing nothing; but modestly leaving
what they advance, to the Discussion of my own Reason; Men of real Interest in
the Country, and who, I Am well satisfied, do, as well from Principle, as tied
by that Interest, wish well to it; have served it without mercenary Ends, and
are capable of it still. I will not make Comparisons.


Sim. Ha! ha! Tim, art thereabouts? I doubt these are the very Men figured to
be so dangerous to the Country's Good, (that is Paper-Money) and rendered so
unfashionable two or three Years ago. Some of them had got Money (a most
obnoxious Case at that Time, however justly and honorably they came by it) and
trusted others with a Part of it, and expected the poor Debtors should pay them
again, when Money was gone, so very scarce; was not that Oppression?


Tim. To enter into any Debate on that Head, is unhappily out of Time, and
useless; and would therefore now be ridiculous. I shall only say, Whosoever of
the Debtors had Country-Produce, or any Thing else to buy Money with, (if that
be a proper Expression) might procure it. And as to those whom it was one Part
of the Scheme at that Time, to render obnoxious, in Order to cast a Mist on the
manifest Injustice intended them, it is well known how forbearing and easy
most of them were, and how few Lawsuits: Nay, none but where was apparent
Danger of suffering, were commenced by them. And how ready and willing, nay
desirous they were to take the Country-Produce; for those I am acquainted with,
affirm they never refused it. But enough of this; I shall remark, that it is no
new Thing for artful designing Men to traduce the best Patriots and most
beneficial Members of a Commonwealth. History is full of it: Nay, what
flagrant Instances thereof in our Mother Country, not many Years ago, can our
own Memory recollect. Such here, as were so used, I must confess I have the
greater Opinion of, and have sought their Conversation the more, in that I
perceived there did not want Emulation, Malice, and Excitement^ enough to have
charged them severely had there been a Cause. These, though they preserve their
Judgment free, yet sit quiet and aim at Contentment and Peace. In Hope that the
Ferment will work off, they are, I am well assured by what I gather from
conversing with them, pleased to see that Providence has not quite forsaken us;
that there are a Number of well intending Men in some Degree of Power still as
a Balance, and rejoice at any Thing which tends to the Country's Benefit (when
they see it) from what Hand soever it comes.


Sim. Ah Tim, do think to slide in an Opinion of these Men? Do think to
bring any of them into Play again? The Country will hardly trust them in these
Times. -- They are better informed. -- Care is taken of them.


Tim. The Art and Cunning of some People is indeed notorious; and we are drove
to that pass that there seems little Enquirie^ into the Abilities or Probity of
Men; but the single Question is, Whether he be for or against Paper-Currency,
and that is the Standard and Rule: Not considering, as I assuredly know, That
true Patriots will not, must not be so swayed by their private Opinion in any
one Point, as to run the Public into Confusion or Ruin. No, a good Pilot will
steer and work the Ship, accordingly as the Wind and Weather, and surrounding
of Rocks, Sands, or Shores, will admit him; and if he cannot get clear with
Safety on a strait Course, he must make the best on it by plying, or else anchor
awhile till the Tide or Wind turn. Preservation, and a steady Pursuit of the
Voyage is all His Care.

But to return to what I was a while since saying of Inconsistencies; would it
not give the Spleen, or rather make one wonder and smile at the Assurance of
some People in the Contrivance and Conduct of their Schemes. Men are cried out
against for taeking lawful Interest, though as low as in any, and lower than in
most of the Plantations. Advertisements were published to brand them with
Usury, to incense the People, and prevent their being elected, and immediately
(nay, 'twas even then concerted) the whole Power of Government set up the
Trade; for what Ends and private Purposes, there may come a Time when it will
be no Crime to show. But sure none can think such the less Sinners by
Proportion as Six is to Eight; for Casuists will hardly allow, that to abate in
Degree, absolves the Sin.


Sim. I have indeed my self thought further of That than I care to mention: But
I know how the Law would construct it, if I should sweeten another into an
Obligation without a valuable Consideration, or Demand Use or Interest upon an
Imaginary Principal, or what really cost me nothing, and by which I should in
Fact lose nothing, were it all destroyed.


Tim. H -- s -- st, That Is the wrong Side.


Sim. A little unwary indeed. It is to be hoped however, we shall be set right
in what regards General Benefit both in Trade and Government, since ingenious
and well-meaning Persons are employing their Pens in Examinations, Ways and
Means, etc. as the last mentioned Piece informs and shows us.


Tim. I heartily wish it, and there may be good Notions and Hints exhibited:
But it is in Civil Affairs much the same as in religious, Every one to mend one,
will do more than the best Precepts in the one Case, or best Laws in the other
(though both are necessary, and by all Means to be used) for I presume it a great
Truth, that whatsoever God has been pleased to make our Duty in the one, is the
best, if not the only Means for our Happiness in the other. Without Justice,
Temperance, and Industry in lawful Callings, we can neither thrive laudibly in
this Life, nor answer what is required of us toward Bliss in the next. I could
enlarge and exemplify on this Head. Many Instances occur; but I would shorten,
for he that thinks, will have them.


Sim. I have heard it said, that by the same Method or Rule whereby one Man, or
a single Family thrives, or gets and keeps out of Debt, a Country may do it.
And for a particular Instance, I have not observed a better than my Friend Tim;
pray give the Rule.


Tim. Do not put me to the Blush. There Is little Difficulty, nor any Thing
extraordinary in it. Nay, I think the Sot, the Rambler, the Spendthrift, and
Slip-Season have the most unpleasant Life for the Time being, as well as the
most afflicting Prospect of what in the End must befall themselves and
Families. However, hoping it may be of Service to the not yet abandoned, I
shall take a short Way, and give a few Negatives.


Sim. Negatives! Did not observe my Cousin there in the Corner, as he was
Reading, to smile and cry out, These Negatives indeed! I have heard, said he,
the Scholards talk, that two Negatives make an Affirmative: But here are Four
of 'em, and the Fifth is well thrown out.


Tim. I am well enough pleased to be diverted; for I was going on with my
Egotisms, as I think they call talking of one's self, which is not very
pleasant to a modest Man. But I confess, I could not but take Notice of the
Formality of the Argument, and fancy the Author had read some of the
fashionable Sermons of the middle of the last Century. I would not doubt
however, but it is well understood by the Wise and Learned, or those who know
the proper Method of writing these kind of popular Things. But for me, I
confess I was so simple as to imagine it intended that I should believe that
laborious, industrious People (such as Palatines,) are to make us rich without
Extent of Land or its Fertility, or a great deal of its Produce; and even
without People ( simply) and that without all these, Wheat, Hemp, and all the
enumerated, are to be raised and produced.


Sim. No, no, thou do not understand Logical Tracts, I see. But I am indeed
somewhat offended, that Palatines should be so put in the Front, and all the
natural born Subjects (the industrious English and Welsh) only tagg'd to them,
as an Appurtenance. True, some of them came with their Girdles lined, are
industrious, and seem honest: But I think not in so great a Proportion as to
monopolize a Character. Many of them are far from it. They have Impudence
enough to imagine the Merit of coming over, has given them a Right to the
Properties and Labors of the prior Inhabitants, from Lands down to the very
Apples.


Tim. Pay for thy Land, Simon, and then talk.


Sim. I intend it, and am resolved on it, notwithstanding that merry Expression
of mine in the Morning. I was led into that Circumstance Inadvertently But
prithee let not That, nor my Interruption put thee by.


Tim. Well, since thou will have it, I Will go on with my Negatives, without
further Ceremony. But perhaps 'twill not be readily found how my silly Tale may
affect a Country's Thriving. Politicians and Projectors will laugh at it,
unless it may slide in by Way of Episode before we have done.

I began with a little, and after my Time was out, I did not presently get a
fine Horse, and ride about spunging on one honest Housekeeper or another,
idling half the Year, unless I could get such Wages as the industrious Farmer
could not afford, which I knew however, he must give, in Corn and Hay-Harvest:
But hired my self to my old Master at moderate Yearly Wages, until I had paid
for the first Hundred of my Land. Then set to Work, clearing some of it in the
Winter, and wrought at Wages in Summer; by which Means I had enough to support
me, and provide Necessaries till I got a House and a Crop. I soon got out of
some small Debts, which this necessitated, and managed so, as to be no more any
thing considerably involved.

I never went to Markets, Fairs, or the Town, but when my Business called me,
and was such as would compensate the Time and Charge. When there, I never sat
tippling the Day out, and then ride home in the Night to destroy my Health, and
unfit me for Business the next Day. My Wife (for I married the second Year of
settling) was loving and industrious; She spun so much Linen and Woollen as to
be pretty well stocked before Increase of young Children took her off. And by
that Time, through the Blessing of God on my Industry, I had got enough aforehand
to afford her a Maid, and soon after, my self a Man. Our Children grew, and
helped us on bravely, so that I added to my Land a Piece to settle one Son, and
began it, and have agreed for another, having wherewithal to pay for it.

I never gadded about, chaffering with, or for Horses. I observed the Time
spent, and Charge of keeping them fine and high for Sale, did not answer even
to the Jockeys. I kept no more than were necessary. But what I raised and could
spare from Plantation-Use, I disposed of, as any Neighbor wanted, at moderate
common Rates.

I never, or very rarely slipped the proper Seasons for the respective Parts of
my Business, unless put off by Weather or Sickness, or some Interposition of
Providence, under which I always made my self submissive and cheerful; and by
Precaution and Diligence, beginning early, and losing no Opportunity by
Pocrastination, or any body telling me, 'twas Time enough. I seldom suffered,
but when the Disappointment was general. I observed and copied after the most
industrious and improving of my Neighbors, took all Opportunities of being
inquisitive concerning their Mode of Management, and their Experience, and was
as free in communicating mine.

I never burdened my Neighbors with rambling or trining Visits, tho I loved to
be sociable, and we saw one another often, but contrived it so, as not to be
injurious to either of our Affairs by Loss of Time. Nor did I ever delight
(however it comes to pass, that I am prevailed on to dip into it now) to turn
Politician or Statesman. And whenever Public Affairs would fall in, I never
joined in, but opposed censuring Men and Things I knew little of, at least
nothing but well; for I observed That, generally arose from the Charterings and
Vanity of (...) our Fireside Companions, such as are generally (I have been
well-informed) insignificant, or mere Tools elsewhere, who over a Dram or a
Mugg without Doors, make all the Laws, and do all the Business. And because
they may have been genteelly bowed to, taken by the Hand, or perhaps hugged and
kissed, become inflated, and imagine themselves of the greatest Importance.

Keeping clear of Debt I never did Cabal, or suffered my self to be Cajoled
upon the Choice of a Sheriff, which now ridiculously seems to be made the main
Business of the Country. I always thought any Honest Capable Man, who would do
his Duty without Injuring or Fearing any Body, more fit than such as make their
Court to, and stand in awe of the Crowd, from whence, as it is said, arises,
abundance of Non-ests.

I go to Elections, because I think it my Duty, but confess my self almost
tired of it. -- To see the vile Abuses of our Rights and Liberties, and how
easily the better and more modest of the People give into it. Many of them seem
to think and act as if a Set of busy Fellows were appointed by Law to make the
Tickets, and the People had only a Right to choose which they liked best: The
worthiest Men those People know to be the most Modest and Decent in their
Behavior, and make Advantage of it, by timely Provision, Clamor, Noise and
Impudence. I must confess, I stood amazed at the Tanned Impudence of a Fellow
two Years ago, who stood upon the Stairs with Heaps of prepared Tickets; asked
to see mine as I was going up; I was not forward to show it, but being between
my Thumb and Fingers, he took it, looked on it, and then told me it was not the
right, would have kept it; and offered me another, as it seems he had managed
several. With some Trouble I got mine again, but so provoking was the Looby's
Conduct, that our Neighbor Evan (his Blood being up) asked me, why I did not
spit in his Face.

I never could join with those who were caballing against the Town, and
contriving Mischief, and Discouragement to it, because I plainly saw it
generally arose from Envy, Malice, and Ignorance of the Country's true
Interest; and that in the Prosecution of their Projects, Passion and Folly lead
them; and their Notions were mostly Chimerical, aimed (erroniously) to support
their own Idleness, or indulge their Spleen: For I always judged the Opulency
of Towns to be the Advantage of every industrious and frugal Countryman. And
here I cannot but lament and wonder at the prevailing Politics of late to cry
out against Merchants and rich Men, (alas we have too few) and at the same Time
talk and bluster of promoting Trade and Navigation. Every Body that knows any
Thing of the Matter, knows that these can never be carried on to general
Benefit, without Men of good Stocks, with Skill and Ability for the Purpose:
And therefore where we have one such, I could wish we had twenty, or at least a
Number proportionate to the Exports and Imports which the Country requires. It
is not every Farmer, or any other uncertain Nibblers at it, with half a Tun or
a Tun now and then of Flour (though all are, and should be free) will promote
Trade, of draw a general Balance; it must be done by such as are able to bear
a Loss or Disappointment without giving off, but continue on with Endeavors to
retrieve them; that are provided with Vessels, some or other of them, at all
Times, even when they appear most discouraging, and are thereby obliged to push
for and try various and new Markets; such as obtain continual fresh Advices;
that know the proper Seasons and usual Consumptions abroad. Those are in the
Sense I am speaking, Agents or Servants of a Country; if they thrive and reside
in it, the Country has the Gain, and it will disperse.

I would not be understood to be against any Adventurers, though their Stocks be
small, but heartily wish Prudence and Success to all, as having, I imagine, a
Share in it, but would show that if we envy and endeavor to discourage the
Able among us, or such as may be growing to it, we are utterly in the Wrong,
and shall lay our selves at the Mercy of Foreign Traders, which, upon
Experience, would be found very disadvantageous, when they should be checked
and balanced, by having Merchants of our own. Both indeed do best together;
the one a Country should look upon and cherish as Children, the other as hired
Servants.


Sim. I must beg a Repitition of this by-and-by, and confess my Failure of due
Attention, being diverted by listening to my pretending Cousin there. See, he
has got the Book, and has been endeavoring to impose upon poor Jenny. The
Mimick has been laying forth in Method and Form, That it is not large Fields,
nor good Grass in them, nor a great deal of Butter and Cheese made, nor her
simple Hands that will get her a Portion, but she must balance Trade with
every individual Person she deals with. She sat staring and gaping, while he
has been haranguing and running over all her Advantages; the Turkeys, the Hens,
the Geese, -- the Eggs, the Wool, the Flax, -- the Apples, the Butter, the
Cheese, -- the Honey and the Wax, -- and because he would be regular, and make
up an Even Dozen, he added the Straw for making warm Nests. He just mentioned
the Pye-Crust too for Home-Use, if she would but do her Part; but the Wag would
not vex her, I perceived by telling how black, and tough, and thick she made
it, lest she should refuse to get his Dinner, or make his Bed. Jenny at length
bid him have done with his Ribble-Rabble; for he had not told her any Thing
(that was intelligible) which she did not understand better than he, how to
manage and improve; for he had informed her nothing, unless it should be in
what he said of Sympathetical Attraction, and Antipathetical Repulsion; there
might be something indeed in That; for a finical Sweetheart of hers once talked
like it. Then as to ballancing with every individual Body she dealt with, she
could say little; only (...) was sure she had nothing but Shoes from the
Shoemaker, and they wore out, and yet she must deal with him, or go barefoot.
All my Care is, adds, she, that I raise and make enough for my Use, and to pay
for a little Muslin and Kenting, and such Things which I cannot make, and yet
must of Necessity have, and at the Years End see that I gain and lay up
something upon the whole in Money, toward a Portion, which I have done more or
less for several Years; and if our wise Folk had done so, they needed never (as
they confess) have made this tattered wretched Stuff, they call Money. Nay, (as
the Book says.) Unless they will henceforward resolve carefully and diligently
to do it, they will be worse and worse, for the Paper-Projects will never
retrieve them. I have got some in my Trunk (adds she,) but am afraid the Worms
will eat it, or the Mice make Nests with it, before -- Eh -- [sighing] my
Wedding Day comes. And the Tears came in her Eyes, when she told him, that
putting a Piece of Gingerbread in her Trunk, the Vermin gnawed a Hole, got in,
and had devoured and spoiled she knew not how much of her Money.


Tim. Shrewd Jenny. -- I think I may draw to a Conclusion, for I have a mind to
close with something general, if I can but express what has sometimes taken
large Room in my serious Thoughts, in Words few enough to be heard patiently.

I have indeed been sunk in my Spirits, and ready to weep at the melancholy
Prospect before us. The Honesty, Sobriety, Industry, religious Concern of Mind,
and Openness of Heart one toward another, which so apparently and beautifully
accompanied, and were the Characteristicks of most of our first Settlers, seem
(too much of it) to be gone down to the Grave with them. At Fairs, Markets,
Country-Vendues, and almost all Times of Concourse, (and O that I could say
those intended as religious Services, and Visitations of Charity and Love were
wholly free!) How does Levity, Rudeness, and the deplorable Custom of Excess in
spirituous and intoxicating Liquors prevail, and especially that of Dram, Dram,
-- Dram upon Dram! When Things are at the worst, it is said Proverbially,
they will mend. May there yet be Room to hope it. I almost despair of many of
those advanced in Years, who have long indulged themselves therein, and seem by
Habit and the Loss of Religion and Reason, to be abandoned to it. But O that
the young and the yet innocent, may, from the Sight and Abhorrence of this
Abomination, this Debasement of humane Nature, with the many Evils which are
the inseparable Consequences thereof, resolve and guard against it. I would not
call it Brutishness. Beasts are free from such an Abuse of themselves. Instinct
is appointed to them, Reason and Religion to us. They act steadily. Mankind
deviate grossly. The Good-Fellows, as they call themselves in one of their
Songs, (the pretended Wit apart) own this, when they say, He that drinks least,
Drinks most like a Beast.


Would (I say) but the Rising Generation steer clear of this fatal Rock, while
the Disuse is easy, and the Use uncouth to them, and rather a Violence upon
their Nature, we might yet hope for he Continuance of Blessings, and a thriving
and flourishing Country.

Since the baneful Practice is become so general, I perceive it is proposed the
Government should take it in Hand. I could heartily with it in their Power: And
that preventative or discouraging Measures might or could be taken to Effect.
Rum being the most common Spirit, an Impost, it seems, is offered as the Means.
If such a La^^ could prohibit the Personal Excess, it might do something; but
the making it dearer, is only to increase the Public Revenue, at the Cost of
these unhappy People who are so tied to it, that they would rather go naked,
than be without it. And to propose the encouraging of Distillations in its
Stead, is to turn off the poor Creatures the sooner; for Rum (though the Excess
of it is very injurious) is accounted (I presume not unjustly) more wholesome
than any of our usual Spirits; and it may be demonstrated is generally
purchased with our own Produce cheaper and more advantageously, by employing
our Vessels, and all that depend on them, than Distillations from any Corn (as
has been proposed) if not any other Materials, all things considered. Besides,
it is worth Consideration, whether to encourage Distilling, unless we had a Vent
abroad for it, would increase the pernicious Custom of Dram-drinking. We see
what Methods are taken by most of these already in the Occupation, to promote
and tempt to the Use. I say then, since it would be impracticable or ridiculous
to make a Law, that none should drink a Dram, or to direct how many of them, or
how much of Spirit mixed, any one Body shall take; and that an Impost will not
prevent the Abuse, what else the Government may prudently fall upon, must be
waited for. Mean Time, it must, I think, be left to every-body's Care for
themselves, by the Reason and Judgment God has given them. When I spoke even
now of a thriving and flourishing Country, I would not be understood that I
imagine we are stated for acquiring such large and unweilde Estates, as many in
other Colonies and Plantations obtain. What may in Time be the Effects of new
Products and Discoveries, I shall leave. The present Time and Care is ours;
succeeding Generations will have theirs. But Happiness, if we think rightly,
consists in the Golden Mean, to be free from Straits and Penury, on the one
Hand, and the Temptations to Luxury and its Crony-Vices on the other. This was
a celebrated Prayer of old: And as we really exceed all the West India
Colonies, and most of the other Plantations in all the wholesome necessary and
(in a judicious Sense) delicate Provision for Life, Health and manly
Satisfactions; Prudence and good Judgment will account us happily situated: But
if we do not think and find it so, the Fault is our own.

Let us take a View; let us not be blind to the great Blessings we enjoy; a
healthful Climate, and productive Country; neither Soldier, nor mercinary Bands
of any other Denomination, burden or injure us. The Natives, whom our
Predecessors found in Possession, we have always lived peaceably with, and they
love us. We have none of those opulent powerful Men, which are in some Parts of
the World to oppress or enslave us. If any here arrive to a Figure above their
Neighbors, it must be, as it is directed, or commanded in another Case, by
becoming as Servants to them. And I presume it will not be denied by any body,
who by traveling, or reading, knows any Thing generally of the World, but that
the Rank among us who are in other Places called the common People, may
challenge the whole Globe to compare for Ease, Freedom, Sufficiency of
Necessaries, and a general Equality. In a Word, LIBERTY is ours; may it never
be called LICENTIOUSNESS! What remains then, but that we lay aside Wantonness,
Prejudice and Folly; love one another, and study Peace.


Sim. Well, my Friend, I have heard thy few Words patiently; and find my
pressing and rousing has produced pretty long Discourses, wound up at last
almost to Preaching. But I had a Mind (though that might be too tedious now) to
lead into Information and Direction respecting Trade and our general Economy.
This would be generous and becoming, after the Endeavors made to show, there
may yet be room, notwithstanding all that has been published, said, or done.


Tim. Were that to be pursued, I conceive we have been clearing, and in some
Part pointing out the Way. My good Wishes for the general Good, would strongly
persuade to it, were I capable of it; or was there a Temper to receive or use
it, or at least to judge heartily of such an Essay, then perhaps I should visit
some of my Friends, and would not spare my Part of the Pains to collect what
might appear useful and beneficial: But as the Case stands at present, Farewell.


FINIS.

