THE OBSERVATORS TRIP to America.
Roger. O Master! My dear Master! Can I believe my Old Eyes? Speak, say, Whence
come thou? And by what Magic or supernatural Power do we see one another in
this strange new Place? for all the World knows you have been Dead and Rotten
in your Grave this Twenty years, and the Unsavory Relish of that Esteminate
Reign which stopped your Breath, has left me without Sense or Memory. Bless me,
Sirs! Where am I?


Observator. Honest Roger, My very Heart leaps for Joy to see thee again, once
more happy and fortunate Event; not less Welcome to me than the Resurrection
will be to a Righteous Spirit.


Roger. Resurrection Spirit! Mercy on me! What Is all this? I cannot for my
blood call to mind when I dyed, or the time when these old Bones were crammed
into a wooden Coffin. I have often heard, indeed, our Curate tell mighty fine
stories of a Resurrection, do you call it, and a very pretty New World flowing
with Milk and Honey, where he, poor good natured Man, undertook to introduce
all the Parish; and who knows but this same Curate of ours, who (I Will say for
him) in a Cann of Old October made his way as good as he looked, may (as he
then promised) have given me a lift into this same New World of his; would to
God I could but see his bright face here to solve all my Doubts, as he used to
do; for he was a clever man in his way, and was always telling such pleasant
Stories, it did ones heart good to hear to him.


Observe. Roger! Roger! I see its thy own self indeed, for thou wast always a
Wag, and can not give over thy old Itch of perverting the true Sense and
Meaning of thy Friend's plain Words. But upon this surprising Rencounter, let
us post-pone all Wit, for a little, until we first understand where we are, and
what has brought us unto this New World, as you call it.


Roger. Nay, faith, Master, as for my part, I pretend to no Wit, and as little
Judgment at these years; but I have a wounded mind to know how (the Devil) you
are come to Life again, and whether We are both risen from the Dead, as our
Curate used to tell us, or not.


Observe. Roger, Thy impertinent Curiosity was always invincible, and therefore
to ease thee of thy Pain, as well as to put an end to thy Jargon, You must
know, I am not Dead, as thou would seem to believe; but for certain Political
Reasons, it was only given out, that I actually dyed about the same time you
heard it in the Country; and after Nineteen years close Retirement, and
Application to the study of human Nature, I was charmed with some Accounts of
that Ease and Freedom both in Religion and Government, which People here enjoy;
and so putting a small Purse of Gold, which I had penuriously saved into my
Pocket, I went on board the first Ship that presented for this Place, in order
to pass the little Remainder of my Days in greater Peace, and in doing more
good than I could propose to my Self at home.


Rog. Ods Budkins, My dear Master, You Revive my old heart, and I perfectly
feel my strength Return, at the sight of you: I came over here merely to humor
a young Booby of a Son of mine, called Humphry, who like a Changeling, as he
is, could not be content with my little Cottage in Gloucestershire, where it is
well known his poor Mother Joan and I earned our Bread honestly by hard Labor,
and lived lovingly together above Forty years; but, alas! she is dead and gone,
and I am, for want of strength, or any thing else, left to help my Self,
Reduced to the Necessity of gadding abroad, the Lord knows where, after a young
Fellow in his pursuit of foolish Projects; for, Master, you are a Man of
Experience, and very well know, that although the young Folk take Us to be Fools,
yet We certainly know Them to be such; and it is an old and true saying, Fools
are fond of Changes.


Observe. My Friend Roger, you seem to be too hard upon the young Man, for I
have formerly heard you say, he was a hopeful Boy, and very inclineable to be
industrous, and to follow your Example in every thing. Now you must know,
Roger, that though these Countries are scarce known to the People of England,
when you was a Youth, yet by the Inginuity and Labor of English Men, they are
of late years brought to such Perfection as to be Serviceable to their Mother
Country in many Things, for which Reason the People and Parliament of England
have admitted them to enjoy the same Liberties and Privileges with themselves,
whereby they are in fact Free Subjects of England, the very same as you and I
can pretend to be, at this Day. Now your Son Humphry inheriting, as I suppose,
the same Sense of Interest which you had at his Age, and being well informed
that his Labor here is worth three Times as much as it is in England, he very
judiciously proposes to Support both himself and you Three times better than he
could have done at home.


Roger. That may be all very true, Master, for ought I know, and I wish it may
prove so; But I have been now here in this Town two Weeks, and although I have
not wanted for Meat, Drink nor Lodging, yet, methinks, the Peoples Manners and
way of Dealing is quite different from the Old English Fashion of plain
downright Honest.


Observe. I have not been, as yet, on shore two hours, and pleased at this Lucky
Opportunity of meeting such a trusty Friend, before I could deliver any of my
Recommendatory Letters, prethy, therefore, My dear Roger, in thy wonted free
manner go on and tell me the Adventures you have met with since you landed, and
what you think of the Place.


Roger. Why then, faith, Master, to be free with you, for what I have seen, it
does not answer the Character I had of it; for instead of a Plain Sincere
Well-meaning People, free of all Pride and Luxury, I do not see but they
Pamper, Strut, Back-bite and Sharp upon one another, even far beyond the
Londoners themselves.


Observe. If it be so Roger, Things have been strangely Represented to me; for I
was told, that the late William Penn, or Sir William Penn, as some call him,
who was known to be a very Wise and Generous Hearted Man, had so Projected and
Contrived the Foundation and Government of this Colony, that every thing, both
with respect to Public and Private Busness, did gradually and equally move in
the Moderate Prudent Way of the Quaker Economy, and that, you know, in
England, has been always agreeable to our ancient Whig Principles, which (I am
sorry to say it) are but little minded nowadays.


Roger. I tell you, Master, William Penn, or Sir William Penn, let him be what
you please, he has been hugiously Mistaken in his Notion of Government; for
although I agree with you, that our English Quakers, in a general way, are a very
plain, honest good People in all their Dealings, and have ever showed a strict
Regard to the Settlement of the Crown in the Protestant Line, which God long
preserve, yet they are Folks, as our Curate used to say, are Well Skilled in
the Wisdom of this World, and know How to Use the Mammon of Unrighteousness,
under a Great and Wise Government that keeps a tight Reign; but here, where
some of them think they have got into the Saddle, Nature seems to work, and
they forget from whence they came, or to whom they belong.


Observe. If I am not altogether misinformed, Roger, there are men of Sobriety,
good Learning and Sense amongst the Quakers here, and I am Surprised, that such
men as these do not take Due Care of the Manners of their People, or at least
that public Affairs be Decently managed, and a good Decorum kept.


Roger. Wounds, Master, why there is the thing now! for according to the best of
my Information, since I have been here, it is these very same men of Learning,
but not of Right English Sense, that has bred lately a deal of Mischief amongst
the People of this Place.


Observe. How can that be, Roger? for it must be Universally acknowledged, That
good Learning is the truest Foundation of all Improvements whatsoever; nor
indeed can any be made to Purpose without a Competent share of Letters.


Roger. Why, in truth, so I have often heard our Curate say. But then, how do
you make this agree with the old Proverb, That too much Learning makes a Man
Mad?


Observe. That, perhaps, is not so very difficult as you may Imagine; for if we
say, that such a One is a man of great Sense and Learning, it is meant, that he
has acquired a sufficient Knowledge in Letters, to make the most of that share
of good Natural Understanding God has given him, and such Men generally are
fittest to exercise the first Offices in Society and Government, because their
minds are commonly bent rather upon a Necessary and Useful Knowledge in Life,
than upon that which is merely Speculative and Scientifical. But when we say,
such a One is a very studious Man, and a great Scholar; That he is a great
Mathematician or Philosopher, and a Complete Master of Crit^scism in all the
Languages, then we Conceive the Idea of One fit to be at the head of a
University, but by no means Qualified to govern Mankind in a Civil Society; for
if ever such a One as this was to be put on a Throne, or attempt to Officiate
in the Post of Secretary of State, or the Governor of a Colony, he would
Instantly be for Acting the part of a Roman Emperor or a Tacitus, and would so
much despise Constitution of Laws made by Men les^ Learned than himself, that
the generality of my People now, would most certainly conclude, he was Mad. And
it is from Excesses of this kind, that the Proverb you mention has ^ully taken
place.


Roger, Why then Master, as sure as you are Alive, that must be the very Case
here; for an honest Tradesman told me over a Tankard of good Punch, the other
Day, that there was a Certain Quaker in this place, who had a huge Reputation
for being a mighty Schollard; But withal, had an Unruly Itch to be a
continually Dabling in Politics, and meddling with other Folks Affairs; Nay, he
Assured me, that the same learned Politician, had l^^^ly published a Manifesto,
declaring, That the Governor of this Place had no right to Speak to the
Assembly, which Represents the People here, just as our House of Commons does
in England, nor to pass any Bills sent up to the Governor from that House,
into Laws, without his Consent; for, that as he had, without all Doubt, more
Learning then any body Else, he was therefore the most Proper Person to make
Speeches, Frame Laws, and to Interpret them after they were made. And further,
as my Friend told me, he Claimed by the said Manifesto an Indefeazible Right to
be Hereditary keeper of the Seal of this Government, and treated a worthy
honest Gentleman, the present Governor, with most Scurrilous Language, because
he would not deliver up the Seal into his hands, and go Blindfold into
whatsoever he Proposed. who can Imagine then, but as you say, Master, The
honest well meaning People must think such an Extravagant Fellow to be
horn-mad; for my part I never heard of the like, except at Bedlam Hospital many
Years ago, where Oliver's Porter used to Rant upon Kings and Government.


Observe. Roger, You tell me strange things indeed; but surely that Tradesman
or Friend of yours, be he who he will, must have had some Personal Pique or
Partial Disgust to the Person you mean; for I can guess who you mean, by the
Character I received of him in London; and, if I am not mistaken, I have a
Letter in my Pocket directed to him.


Roger. Faith, Master, I neither know, nor care to know who he is; for I have
been bred a poor Laboring Man all my Days, and have no fancy to be acquainted
with great Folks, or to keep Company above the pitch of a plain Country
understanding; but if my Friend spoke any thing out of a grudge, then your
great Schollard has disobliged many more than him in this Town; for I think I
have been almost every Night, since I came here, in a different Company, that
at no time consisted of less than Seven, and for the most part of double that
Number; but I never yet heard one good word spoke of that same Great Man; on
the other hand, they all agree, that he carries about him, in his very Gate and
Phiz, such a a wounded Conceit of his Own Person, that he cannot condescend to
be commonly Civil to his Betters or Equals, and disdains to be at the trouble
of showing the least Humanity to those below him: In short, if I be rightly
informed, he seems to think that Mankind in all stations of Life cannot be
employed to so good Purpose, any other way, as in executing the Projects of his
Brain.


Observe. Heyda, Roger! Where art going? To describe a Complete Tyrant over
Human Nature? I thought there had been none such in these parts of the World,
else we might have better staid at Home, than come hither in quest of Liberty.
But knowing thee to be a very honest Man, and an entire Lover of the Country's
Freedom, I must take time to enquire a little concerning this odd Account of
Matters which you have related to me. Besides, it draws near to Bedtime, and I
am not a little Fatigued with having been above eight Weeks cooped up in a
small Cabin on Shipboard; but if thou will favor me with thy Company to
Morrow Night, at the usual time of meeting over a Pot of good Liquor, I shall
have delivered all my Letters, and, perhaps, may be better prepared to proceed
further in our Inquiries.


Roger. With all my heart, good Master, so be it, and I wish you a good kindly
Repose.


Second Dialogue.
Roger. WEll, Master, you are a Punctual Man, for I had but just lighted my
Pipe as you came to the Door, and my very Guts yarn'd to tell you a piece of
News which I have just heard, and for which every Soul I met with in the
Streets seemed to be heartily sorry.


Observator. Surely it must be somewhat of Moment, that gives such a general
Concern. Pray, what is it?


Roger. Why, Master, it is certainly true, that there is either a New Governor
for this Place actually arrived at New York, or, which is the same thing, he
will be here in the next Ship from London.


Observa. I cannot tell how to believe it, for its but 24 hours since I arrived
here directly from London, and there was no such Report there when I came away,
nor any grounds for it, I remember, indeed, to have heard one or two little
Fellows, who had lately com^ over from these Parts, Prate in the Co^^^^-House
as if they did not like the present Governor, and hoping he would soon be
Removed; but they talked after such a silly manner that no body minded them;
and I am sure of it, that amongst People of the best Judgment, the Governor's
whole Conduct here, and especially his Extraordinary good Mannagement with the
Indians, and his great Regard to Liberty of Conscience, as well as to every
part of Natural Justice and Equity, was much Commended; and I really took a
great deal of Pleasure to hear some particular Conversation on that head,
although I was altogether a stranger to the Gentleman's Person and Character
before.


Roger. You know, Master, it does not fall into my way to be acquainted with
such Things in England, but this I know, that if, as you say, the present
Governor had such a good Name at Home, he has a much greater, and more general
One here; for I have not met with either Man, Woman or Child, that does not
speak Affectionately of him, as if he was a Father to the whole Country, and,
Methinks, it is pity that such a Man should be Removed without very good Cause.


Observa. These things will frequently happen, Roger, so long as there is such
a Trade of ^ishing for Public Posts of Trust and Profit, which are generally
obtained nowadays with ^ntent to save Money to some, and to get it for
others; but I cannot help being sorry when any honest Gentleman, much more a
whole Country happens to suffer by such means. It is a bad Omen, Roger, and
portends no good to the State, when a less skillful Cook comes to have the
mannagement of the Kitchen.


Roger. That is all true, Master; but if I be rightly informed, this same
Government here is not an Office of that Nature which you speak of, being the
Nomination of the Governor is in the hands of a Subject, and his Profits or
Sallary entirely depends upon the People themselves, from year to year,
according to his Behavior; so that what can a Courtier get by putting any
Creature into this Office, who will not do their Duty to the Peoples
Satisfaction, as, undoubtedly, he ought to do.


Observe. Why truly. Roger, I must own I did not know so much of this
Constitution before, as you now tell me; and I think it very happy for the
People, if it be so, because it inseperably unites the Interest of every
Governor unto that of the Country, as in all free States it truly ought to be;
however, such is the Vicissitude of human Affairs, and the force of Ambition,
or something else, that men are not always distingiush'd according to their
Personal Worth and Merit, but oftener as (...) Tools to be made Use of, in order
to serve certain Ends; And it may, from many Examples, be observed, that
Appointments of that kind, in Affairs of Civil Government amongst a free
People, seldom or never Succeed.


Roger. Well, but Master, Let us suppose then, that one of those same Tools you
mention was to come over Governor here, in the room of a Gentleman who is
generally beloved, and to whom even his Enemies, for what I hear, can assign no
Fault which they dare own to his Conduct, what would be the Consequence, do you
think?


Observe. Why, if the Constitution really is such as you have told me, the
Consequence, in all Probability, would be, that in a Short time the Tool, as
you call him, would find himself under some Necessity of Returning Home as
great a Fool as he came out; and let High-flyers talk as they please, it is a
certain Truth, That there can be no better Test of a good King or a good
Governor, than to possess the Hearts and Affections of the People they Rule
over; for that can proceed only from a natural and grateful Sense of the
Benefits which from his Impartial Conduct has been equally shared amongst them.
And you may depend upon it, Roger, that all Men of any Sense and Knowledge, who
Despise or Ridicule this very plain Maxim, let them pretend Conscience,
Religion, or what else they please, to gull and cheat the Ignorant and Weaker
sort of People, it is only a Mask to cover some secret Vice, or to introduce
one or more particular Favorites, who cannot be supported but by an Arbitrary
and Partial Power in the Government.


Roger. Master, you know it was always my Mind that Kings and Rulers were
appointed for the good of the People; and can any Man tell me who is or can be
a better Judge of the Peoples good, than they are themselves? As for your
Learned Schollards, though perhaps they will not allow Us poor Country Folks to
put Our Thinking Faculty in the Balance with theirs, on many Subjects, which,
in truth, We do not pretend to, yet surely they must own, We are made of the
same Flesh and Bones, and after the same manner with themselves, to that our
Sense and Feeling of Happiness and Misery, Justice and Injustice, good Fortune
and ill Fortune, are much the same in Us all. And I appeal to you, Master, if a
quiet Enjoyment of, and an equal Support under these opposite States in Life,
respectively, be not the chief End, if not the whole Business of all Civil
Government?


Observe. Thou art, Roger, entirely in the Right, and I do not think that the
Case can be more fairly stated, or a better Judgment given upon it, than what
you have done in a very few Words; Wherefore, I think, at present, we will
leave that Subject as it stands, and after a good nights Rest, think of some
New Entertainment for to Morrow.


Roger. Master, I agree, and hope, that by that Time the growth of your
Acquaintance in Town will help to enlarge the Conversation, as you in some
measure promised last Night at parting.


Third Dialogue.
Roger. GOod Morrow, Master; I came to enquire how you slept, and if you are
perfectly recovered of your Fatigue on Shipboard; for methought, you was
walking upon Society Hill this morning, as if you was much Cast down and
Pensive.


Observe. I am pretty well in health, Roger, thank God, but having been to
deliver my Letters of Recommendation, I did not very much like the Reception I
met with in some places, And therefore took a walk to the Hill, ruminating upon
what part I should Act with some folks.


Roger. Good now, dear Master, Oblige me with some account of your Visits, and
how you was received; for, to my fancy, they are a mighty Generous, Kind,
Hospitable People in this place, and entertain their Friends heartily. I do
Assure you, Master, I have not been suffered to draw my Purse-strings but once
since I Landed, and that was only to treat a poor honest Labourer, my fellow
Passenger, with a four penny Mug of Beer.


Observe. As to Victuals and Drink, perhaps it may be as you say; for that is
often lavished away, more out of Vanity than good will; but I met with so much
haughty stiff and awkard Pride in those from whom I could least expect it, that
I am at a loss what to think of it.


Roger. What to think of it, do you say! why, never vex your self for the
matter, Man, for, God be praised, we are in a free English Country, with Money
in our Pockets, and those who don't like us, may let us alone. Come* here, my
Service to you, in a Mug of Mother Badcock's double Beer, as they call it;
Never fear, Master, take Courage, and let us hear what these same Proud Folk
have done or said, to put such a wondrous good Natured civil Man as you, thus
out of Humor.


Observe. Why then, Roger, since you must have it, you must know, that in the
first place I went this Morning, about seven a Clock, to deliver a small
Packet, that I had charge of, to the Governor, and not intending to wait upon
so great a Man at that early hour, nor to give him any manner of Trouble, I
only delivered the Packet to a Jolly Ruddy (...) well looked Servant at the
Door, without leaving my Name, or any Message whatsoever; but the Servant at
once desired me to walk into the Hall and sit down, told me his Master had been
up in his Study above an hour, and would wait upon me presently; and
accordingly, in less than three Minutes the Governor came down in his Night
Gown, took me by the hand, and sat down close by me; after a few general
Questions, of what Passage we had? and if I had heard about what time the King
might be expected home from Hannover? he called for a Dram of very fine
Cordial, and drank my Welcome to the Place: Then he asked me, If I intended to
make any stay in Town? To which I answered, That I was come over with design to
reside here for some considerable time, if the Air agreed with my Health. He
said, he believed I needed not doubt but that it would, and assured me, That if
it lay in his way to do me any Service, or to encourage my stay in the Place,
he would do it with all his heart. I returned his Honor my very humble Thanks
for his Civilities, and went off much pleased with the Gentleman's unexpected,
but great Humanity.


Roger. Do you see now, Master, Was not I in the right of it, about the
Governors Character? for this is exactly the manner wherein I was told he
generally receives all strangers, that wait upon him.


Observe. A Just share of Affability and Complaisance in a great Man, is a sure
sign of a Noble Spirit; and it not only gives lusture to his other good
Qualities, but attones for and often decently covers many small Failings. But
to proceed, from hence I went in course to wait upon the next Greatest Man of
the place, Unto whom, I know, that I was very particularly and warmly
Recommended by Letters from Persons of some Figure and great Substance in the
City of London, and being Charged to deliver them with my own hand, I desired
the servant Maid to acquaint her Master, that a Gentleman come over from
London, in the last Ship, waited to speak with him, and had some Letters for
him; but the Maid was employed in celaning the Parlour, and very briskly
replied, That it was not yet the hour of her Masters coming down from his
Study, and that if I wanted to speak with him, I might wait in the Porch until
he came down; I said, I would, and so sat down upon the Bench at the Door,
pleasing my self with Observing the Air and Dress of the People, as they went
along. When I had waited about an hour, a Poor Shabby-like fellow called to
speak with the Gentleman of the house, but the Maid in a rude Tone bid him be
gone, for a sorry follow, as he was, did let think that her Master must be
disturbed at this time of Day for such a one as him: The Country Man being thus
provoked, made a good dear of Noise in the street, and Complained much of the
Injustice and Hardship that in many particulars had been put upon him. This
disturbance, however, brought the Gentleman down from his study, in his
Disabila, being wrapped in an old rusty dark colored Calaminco Nightgown,
which forced my Imagination to represent to my thoughts One of our London
Conjurers or Fortune Tellers, only he did not carry so much Temper and Gravity
about him, as they usually do; for he immediately fell open Mouthed upon the
Poor Fellow in the street, and bid him instantly be gone, or he would send him
to the Correction-house to beat Hemp, until he should learn more Manners; at
which the Countryman scratched his Head, and walked off. Then the Senator
turning himself very Solemnly about toward me, said, Friend, have thee any
business with me this Morning? Very little, Sir, said I, only a few Letters
here from London, which I was Charged to deliver with my own hand. He took the
Letters, told me, it was very well, and so walked up Stairs to his study again,
without saying One word more or less. Now, Roger, What do you think of this
Entertainment from One, who, I do assure you, amongst some of the best People
in the City of London, has the Reputation of a man of good Sense, and every
body allows him to be Master of a great share of Learning.


Roger. Wounds, Master! I Will be Content to be hanged, if this be not that very
Learned Pragmatical Schollard, that is become a Plague to the whole People
here, as I told you at our first meeting.


Observe. I believe, Roger, you are not mistaken; it certainly is the same Man,
you meant; and if we may suppose he treats his Neighbors and Acquaintance with
an exact Mathematical Proportion of the Civility and Manners which it seems he
allows to strangers, I do not much wonder he has obtained such a Character as
you then gave of him.


Roger. A Pox take those learned Schollards, say I, who have so little
Knowledge of Themselves, as to pretend to things which their very studies, and
the pievishness of their own Nature renders them Incapable of. Is it not a fine
thing now, that such a Flourishing Country, and a Quiet Industrious People, as
this seems to be, should be put all in Confusion for the sake of a Looby, who
really can act no part in Life, with any Discretion, except it be to dictate
unto and Instruct Boys in Greek and Latin out of a Pulpit, with such a
singular habit, as a Long sleev'd Gownd and four Cornered Cap.


Observe. Why indeed, Roger, I am fully persuaded the Gentleman is well
Qualified to perform that part, you very Justly have assigned him; and in
America, where a tolerable Education for Youth, is so hard to be got, it is
great pity but that the public should provide a very handsome Encouragement
for Employing men of his Genius in their Proper way.


Roger. If it please God that you live, and do well in this place, Master, I do
not doubt but the Continuance of your agreeable Conversation and knowledge of
the World, will help to Rectify Peoples Thoughts in many things, and do
abundance of Good.


Observe. You know, Roger, it is One of my first Principles to be as Careful as
I can, not to hurt any Body, but to do as much good to all, as lies in my
Power. Let us, however, rest a little now, and go to Dinner, expecting the next
favorable Opportunity of a further Chat.


Fourth Dialogue.
Roger. Master! Master! I have been in Quest of you. these two hours; I am
quite out of breath; here is Wit for you; American sublime Wit, I Vow!


Observe. What have got there, Roger? A Pamphlet?


Roger. Ay, Sir, a Pamphlet, a whole Six penny Book, just came from the
Printers They call it, Let me see, they call it; Pray, Master, read the Title
page, for it is so very Witty, I protest, I have forgot it already.


Observe. Reads. A Dialogue showing what is therein to be found.


Roger. Ay, Ay, showing what is therein to be found; That Is it; And is it not a
very pretty thing? I Vow, it is; Ha ha ha; for who can help Itching to know
what this fellow would be at, and what his Book Contains?


Observe. Why truly, Roger, I must own it is a sort of a Bite; for although I
have read it, I can find nothing in it, but a dull Recipe for a Poor Devil just
got out of Servitude, how to keep himself out of Debt, and a scurrilous
senseless Pun upon the present Mayor of this City, as they say, who, being of
the Tanners Company, it seems, Disobliged the Author two years ago, by not
giving him his Vote to be an Assembly man. If there be any thing more meant, it
is so wrapped up in the private history and Politics of the Place, that it is
altogether Unintelligable to me; besides, it is plain, the Author cannot write
English; and since he owns, he does not understand Latin, I wonder his Friends
do not advise him to take up another Trade more suitable to his Capacity.


Roger. If that be all, what, the Devil, does People make such a Pother with
it, about the Town, as if it was Judiciously Composed by the most Ingenious,
most Sober, most Prudent and most Industrious Man in the whole Government, who
Eats, Drinks and Sleeps as he does every thing else, that he can do by Square
and Compass.


Observe. I am doubtful, Roger, that Wit in these new settled Countries will
prove a Commodity of too much Weight for an English Carriage; wherefore, let
those that will, content themselves with the Burden, some other Diet will
better suit our homely Stomachs.


Roger. Come then, Master, good now do proceed with your Visits, and the
Delivery of your other Letters; for, methinks, I want hugely to know a little
more of these same great Folks, as they call them, in this Place.


Observe. You must know then, that the next person I waited upon immediately
after Dinner, was a Senator of the first Rank, of a Grave and comely
Deportment; without attending, I was presently Introduced, and he made me sit
down while he read his Letter; after which, he wellcom'd me to the Place, in a
very friendly manner, called for a Glass of Wine, and Invited me to Dine with
him the next Day, where I was, indeed, very heartily Entertained, and
particularly by the good Lady of the house, who though she was a Woman pretty
well advanced in Years, yet had something so mild and sweet about her, as gave
an exceeding Grace to every thing she did or said.


Roger. Now that is something-like, Master, and it pleases the very Cockles of
my heart; Were the substantial Housekeepers here all such, there would not be
a Whit Difference, as I see, betwixt this Country and Old England.


Observe. That Is True, Roger, but we may expect, in vain, to see it; for our
Heads will be laid long enough before that happens; Nevertheless, we must
remember, it is Our Wisdom, as well as our Duty, to be Thankful for the Good,
and to bear with Patience the Evil, of our present Lot.


Roger. With all my heart, Master, I approve your Counsel, which, though I say
it, is as good Doctrine as ever was preached out of a Pulpit. But, now I think
on it, Master, and to divert us from dull and melancholy Reflections, I met
with a Skipper this Morning upon the Wharff, Tearing, and Running about like a
Madman, because the C -- or had seized his Sloop for the Value of half a piece
of course Holland that was found in one of the Men's Chests, which the poor
Devil had brought home to make his Wife some Aprons. The Mob gathering about
the Man, they hearkened attentively to his story, and at last their Spleen got
vent, by ripping up the C -- r's Character, at such a Rate, you would have been
amazed to hear it; for there was so many particular downright Villainies, with
the Times, Places and Circumstances mentioned, that one could not help
believing it all to be True. And, methinks, its strange that the Crown should
have been so deceived, and the Subject Oppressed for Twenty years together, in
such a Port as this.


Observe. Why, Roger, if it be so that the Crown is Deceived, I know none but
the Ministry at home that can help it; and therefore, if you please, to them
we'll leave it, since it is a plain case, every Master will be served in his
own way, and by such as he thinks fit to make use of.


Roger. But, Master Observat^r, allowing all that to be Right, as you say, is
it not, for all, Hard upon the poor Subject to be Oppressed by Villians, under
the pretense of Authority?


Observe. Roger, You must understand, that the Laws of the Land are the only
Rule whereby to judge of Oppression, and what is Right or Wrong between Man and
Man; now these are, or ought to be, Open unto all alike; and when any Case
happens which the Common Law does not fully reach, then Equity and a good
Conscience will provide a suitable Remedy.


Roger. Methinks I understand all that very well, Master; but what shall a Poor
Man do, that has not where-withal to go either to Law or Equity? for you know
there is no doing of any Business nowadays without the ready Penny.


Observe. Why, the very best Provision for the Necessity of such Poor Men' is a
set of good wholesome Laws well executed, without ^avour or any Partiality
whatsoever; for in that Case, no Affluence of Money or other thing will have
the least Effect upon the Equal Distribution of Justice; and that is all that
an Honest Man, in any Condition of Life, can demand; and which, at this time,
renders the Common Law and Constitution of England so vastly Preferable to all
others in the known World.


Roger. To be sure it is a Choice Rare Thing, Master, to be born with the
Liberties and Privileges of an English Man; and yet, for all, if I remember
right, I have heard our Curate say, That in Old Times the Common People in
England were all born Slaves to the Clergy, Barons, and Great Men of those
Times. Now, how could that be, Master?


Observe. You must know, Roger, that before Christianity had taken any deep root
in England, the Errors of Idolatry, Superstition and Craft, had so crept into
the Government of the Christian Church, That all Civil Authority, Nay, even
Morality it self was entirely Swallowed up by it, insomuch that the Clergy not
only got Possession, and a formal Title to half of all the Lands in England,
but also contrived to give the Barons, or great Men of that time, the like
Title to the other half, by which means they kept what they had taken to
themselves securely, and Governed the whole with an absolute Incomptroulable
Sway. So, that as your Curate rightly Observed, the Common People were then
born in Vassalage or Slavery, which is much the same thing, without any manner
of pretense to a Freehold.


Roger, O! Bless me Master! those surely were Dismal Times, and (...) must have
become of you or me, do you think, if we had lived in such Days?


Observe. If such had been the Will of God, Roger, we must have patiently
submitted to his Providence, as many good men, doubtless, then did; but as it
is, we Ought to be thankful, and make such use of the History of those Times,
and the knowledge woe may learn therefrom, as never to act or consent unto any
thing which may in the least contribute to bring the whole, or any part, of
such Misery upon our selves or Our Posterity after Us. But I see a Gentleman
yonder, whom I very much want to speak with, and therefore must for the
present, honest Roger, bid you farewell.


Fifth Dialogue.
Observator. HOw now, Roger! What Is the matter? for methinks you look as if you
had not sleep well last Night.


Roger. Why truly, no more I have, Master, for as you left me, I smok't a
solitary Pipe, and my head so Run upon the Melancholy Thoughts of those
Unhappy Times we had been discoursing of, when the Good People of England were
born Vassals or Slaves to the great Folk, that I could not, all Night, sleep
One Wink for my Blood, and to mend the matter, my Landlord told me something
this Morning, at Breakfast, that does not please me at all.


Observe. Come then, Roger, let us have it, Perhaps, I may find a Cure that may
suit, for you know, I am an old Quack for Pains of the Mind.


Roger. Ay, that is true indeed, Master, you have Cheered me many a time, when
my Heart was in my Hose; but if what my Landlord told me be true, we are got on
the wrong side of the Hedge, and I am afraid this Climate will soon become too
hot for such free-heart^d Body's as you and I.


Observe. As for the heat of the Climate, Roger, never fear; they say, its
helpful to Old Age; besides, we have a whole Winter and Spring before us, to
season and prepare our Bodies for the Summers Heat.


Roger. Alack-a-day, Master! That is not what I mean, it is that same Vassalage
or Slavery that sticks in my Gizzard; for my Landlord assures me, that a great
and a Wise Man, not far from this Town, has been Plodding above these three
years upon a Scheme to Introduce the Old English Vassalage, you was speaking
of, into this New Country, which he Affirms, cannot thrive until that be done;
and, for my part, I had as lief be a Slave in Algiers, as to submit to such a
form of Government.


Observe. That would be hard indeed, Roger, if it was so; yet surely None but a
Madman, or a Vagabond, would dare to broach such a thought in a free Country;
besides, the thing it self is such a Contradiction to Law, Nature and Common
Sense, that it is altogether Impracticable, and the very Proposal a mere Jest.


Roger. Why so I said, Master, but my Landlord, who is a very honest Civil Man,
assured me, that he heard the Gentleman speak of it himself, and he talked so
big as if he was sure to bring it about speedily; for, they say, he is a very
Rich Cunning Man, and sees a great way off, so that he seldom or never misses
to accomplish One way or other, whatsoever he Projects.


Observe. A Gentleman, do you say? and a Rich Man? Surely your Landlord must be
mistaken, or otherwise, this same Projector of his must be out of Conceit with
the World, and wants to be Revenged of Mankind, on account of some
Disappointments that, perhaps, have Checked an Ungovernable Ambition, which is
certainly one of the worst species of downright Madness, and is seldom Cured,
because it wears the Vizard of Wisdom and Power, that leads the party
blindfold to his own Destruction.


Roger. Very true, Master, it is to be hoped that such a mad Attempt will
Probably terminate in the Overthrow of the Contrivers; but in the the mean
time, both public and private Interest must suffer considerably, while such
mischievous Designs are hatched and flyly carrie'd On by Men of any Credit;
wherefore, methinks, it is pity but such Hellish Schemes should be exposed as
soon as they can be discovered, and entirely blown Up.


Observe. I am of your Opinion, honest Roger, and I do not doubt but the general
Assembly, or Legislature of this Providence, which, it is said, is to meet very
soon, will, for their own sakes, take effectual Care tb discourage all
Oppression, and to preserve entire the Just Rights and Liberties of a Freeborn
People, for such, I perceive, they call themselves, in one of their last years
Addresses to the Governor, and if we had not Understood them to be so, before
we left Old England, it is more than probable, my good Friend Roger, that
neither of us would have been here to Day. What do you say, Man?


Roger. Say Master, Faith, I can freely swear it; for albeit my Son Humphry is
a cleaver industrious Lad, though I say it my self, he might have gone to the
Devil for me before I would have followed him one Inch beyond the Bounds of Old
English Liberty and Property: I Will be none of their Vassals, not I, as Old and
Poor as I am; and if these same Wise Cunning Men, or call them what you will,
can find out ways to Gull the Poor Ignorant People here, out of their Birth
Right and Freedom, Good by to them, say I, if I shoul'd be Obliged to work out
my Passage home again by boiling Pease Porrage and Baken before the Mast.


Observe. I perceive thou art no Changeling, and retainest thy Old True Honest
English Spirit, which justly calls for the Love and Esteem of all thy Country
Men; but the path of Liberty is yet Open before Us; why should not we hope for
better things, and leave off teazing our selves with frightful Imaginary
Prospects and Incredible Apprehensions? Come, let us hear what thou thinks of
this odd sort of Money that passes here for good Coin?


Roger. Why faith, Master, now you puzzle me indeed, for I am truly at a loss
what to make of it; and as I can neither Spell nor Read, it was in my thoughts
to ask you that same Question you now put to me; for I know by Experience, that
you are a good Natured Man, and always ready to help a Poor honest well meaning
Ignorant Country Fellow at a dead Lift.


Observe. You may, Roger, freely Command any thing that is in my Power to Oblige
or serve you; but before we can come to a Right Understanding of this matter,
you must answer me plainly to another Question, viz. What is the Necessary Use
of Money? or what is it that you do with it, when, perhaps, you have got your
Purse full of King Georges Guineas?


Roger. Do with it, say you, Master! why there is no living without it; I buy
Bread, Beef, Clothing, and now and then a Cann of good Beer or a Noggen of
right Nants, to Cheer up my Spirits after a hard Days work; for it is a clear
Case with Old Roger, he never could make two wants of One in all his born Days.


Observe. And if this Paper Money here will purchase you the same Necessaries
and Conveniences, where is the difference then, betwixt that and Guineas, Roger?


Roger. Nay, for my part, Master, as to that point I know of none; for I
changed a Guinea the other day, and Instead of Twenty One Shillings in English
Silver Coin, the good man of the house gave me Thirty five Shillings in Paper
Money, Out of which I bought me a pair of good Buck-Skin winter Breeches, as
Cheap as I could have done in London for sterling Money; and for what I could
Observe at the Club, Meat and Drink of the same kind and goodness may be had
for less Value here in Paper Money, than can be got for Silver Milled Coin in
England, and if so, let the World wag, I say, and every Man Praise that Bridge
over which he Passes Securely.


Observe. I must own your Observations are very good so far; but those who have
a public Care upon them, must look a little farther, and see that there be no
fallacy at the bottom in matters of that kind; for you may remember not long
ago, when South Sea Stock was sold for Ten Times its Value in ready Cash,
although the Nation and Government of Britain was at the same time within an ace
of being ruined by that Bubble.


Roger. Ah, Master, well do I remember it, and we Poor Folk then thought we
were all directly going to be made Lord Mayors and Aldermen; but, say I, a Pox
take the State Contrivers of that Gin to catch Woodcocks, and Thanks be to the
honest Parliament that plucked our feet out of that Snare, else, as you say,
Master, we had been Ruined as sure as a Gun.


Observe. If so, then Roger, Why should not we enquire a little into the Nature
and Credit of this same Paper Money here? for, although, as you Observe, it very
well serves for present use, yet there may be a Snake in the Grass, and it is
the part of every Wise Man to Examine well the Ground he walks over.


Roger. Such a part, Master, will very well become a Man of your Learning and
Skill, and if there be any thing Wrong in that, or any other Project here, It
will be generous, and like your self, to set People right in their Notions of
the Public good; but for us, Poor silly Country Bodies, we can make no hand of
such Enquiries, Our Representatives in the Legislature must speak and act for
Us; it is enough if we Cry out when we are pinched.


Observe. Roger, you speak like an honest quiet Fellow, and a good Subject, as
you have always been; I, for my part, have not yet had time to be sufficiently
Perpraed for such a Work as you now assign to me; But at more leisure I do
intend to bestow a few serious Hours upon it, and shall not be wanting in any
thing within the small Compass of my Capacity to do the Country real and good
Service.


Sixth Dialogue.
Roger. MAster Observator, I want very much to speak with you; pray step into
this next House, and let us drink one Mug together this Morning; for I have a
grievous Complaint to make concerning my poor Boy Humphry, who, I think, has
been very ill used by some of your great Leading Men here, and their
Under-strappers.


Observe. What Is the matter, Roger? I am sorry to hear that poor Humphry should
meet with any Discouragement; I thought he had got his Ax on his shoulder and
been at work in the Woods; for I know he is a sober Lad, and eats no idle Bread.


Roger. Why truly, so he is, Master, and I thought I had done very well for
him, upon our arrival, the very first week here, when I Purchased three Hundred
Acres of good Rich Land, from an honest Countryman in Bucks County, about
Twenty Miles from Town; I am sure it cost me Fifty good Guineas in Gold,
besides two to the Scrivener for drawing the Deeds, and a good Supper at the
close of the Bargain; and yet, for all, we are like to be Tricked out of it,
for what I can see, by an Old half hanged ill looking Dog, who keeps the Books
of what they call a Land-Office in their Town. Now, Master, you know, in England
every Freeholder keeps his Writings or Deeds for his Land himself, in a good
Iron Box or strong Chest; but this Gallimafry will have it, that our Deeds are
good for nothing because the Return of the Survey was not in due time (as he
says) Recorded in his Office upon the Books; and the Old Rogue pretends it is
too late now, because, forsooth, (the Land being very good) he has taken care
to have it Resurveyed, and a Return duly entered upon his Books, in another Man's
Name. And now, Master, is not this, do you think, a very hand Case upon the
poor Boy Humphry, who has almost Cried his very Eyes out of his Head about it.


Observe. It seems to me to be a very hard Case indeed, Roger, and according to
my slight Notions of such Things, I cannot see how the superficial Neglect of a
Surveyor for not Returning the Performance of his Duty into a certain Office,
at a certain time, should invalidate a Prior and give a legal Preference to a
Posterior Right to Lands, which in England we hold to be the most Sacred and
Valuable of all Property whatsoever.


Roger. Ay, Master, in England, you say Right, no such thing could be suffered
or born with; for it is to be seen very lately, how our just and good
Parliament at Home can Trounce even a Lord High Chancellor for Defrauding the
Subject, and Invading their Rights. But, Alas! Master, if I be rightly
informed, it is not so here, where we are told, the Soil originally belongs to
a Proprietary, and this same Proprietary keeps an Agent or Secretary, as some
call him, to Sell these Lands for ready Money; and this same Secretary keeps
Two Under-strappers at one Table in his Office, the one to make out and Return
Surveys, while the other is striking or Recording of Patents, or Original
Deeds, all which you may see them Toss from one to another, as if they were
shuffling a Pack of Cards at Put; so that an honest Countryman has but a poor
Chance for his Money amongst such a parcel of Rooks, who are Absolute in their
Mannagement, without any manner of Check or Control.


Observe. Thou give a very odd Account of this Land-Office, Roger; surely the
Proprietor must have a careful Audit upon these Officers Accounts, if he puts
any Value upon his Property here.


Roger. Why, Master, the Proprietor, they say, is a very Worthy Honest young
Gentleman, of Spirit enough, but having a good Estate at home, he likes Old
England, and does not much Trouble himself about the state of his Private
Affairs here, which this same Cuning Agent has Artfully involved, by raising a
Claim upon it from some younger Branches of the Family, who are at Law with the
Heir, which is a fair opportunity for certain Folks to make something, not as
the Old Saying is, While the Sun shines, but rather While he is under a Cloud.


Observe. I heard, indeed, before I left London, That there was a Powerful Tribe
of Land-Jobbers, who had erected themselves into a sort of a Company here, in
order to Demolish Paper Money, which by the Prodigious Encouragement it gave to
all manner of Trade and Commerce, did greatly Obstruct their Design of
Engrossing the Lands, and making themselves a kind of second hand Proprietors
of the whole Country.


Roger. We had a great deal of Talk, Master, of that same Company, at our Club
the other Night, where it was said, That Two of them had been in England this Ten
Months purchasing all the Old Rights, Claims or Titles, of any sort, they could
possibly meet with or trump up; for they value no Opposition whatsoever, being
furnished with a Powerful Commissioner, an Obstinate Senator, a very Eloquent
Lawyer, and the most finished Merchant, all exactly fitted for their Purpose.


Observe. Well, but Roger, it is strange to conceive how these Men can Propose
to carry on Projects and Monopolies over the Belly of Laws, Constitutions and
just Rights, which they will most certainly find are very hard to be Overcome
after that manner.


Roger. Lord, Master! is it a plain Case, if they can once get in to be
Proprietors of the Lands, they will soon be the Lawmakers themselves; for you
must know, that the Assembly or Legislature here, is chiefly composed of a
Landed Interest, as indeed it is with Us in the House of Commons in England;
but God be praised, our Rights are better secured There; and until something be
done to render Property more certain Here, I cannot but pity the poor People
whose Children, in all Probability must depend on this same Land-Jobbing
Company for a Confirmation of Rights to their Possessions.


Observe. Come, honest Roger, I see thee art Piqu'd at the Case of thy Son
Humphry; but I shall have frequent Opportunities to know more of this Matter,
in a short time; and till then let Us Adjourn this Subject, and every other
Thing that relates to Public Business.


FINIS

