Strength in Weakness Manifest in the LIFE, TRIALS and Christian Testimony Of
that Faithful Servant and Handmaid of the LORD, Elizabeth Stirredge, Who
departed this Life, at her House at Hempsted in Hertford-shire, in the 72 d
Year of her Age.

Written by her own Hand.

^e^ving her Pious Care and Counsel to her Children, and according to their
Desire, made Public: Also for the Instruction and Benefit of many other
Parents and Children concerned.

^rov. xxxi. 13. Who can find a Virtuous Woman? (...). Ver. 30. A Woman that
fears the (...) shall be praised. Printed at London, and Reprinted by SAMU^^
KEIMER in Philadephia, MDCCXXV^

A PREFACE Concerning the Author, and following Book.
AS the Memory of the Just is blessed, so there is a Justice due to their
Memories, who walked in the Path of the Just, (which is as a shining Light) and
are the blessed who die in the Lord, who rest from their Labors, and their
Works follow them, to their everlasting Reward in the Kingdom of Heaven: Or for
the Example and Admonition of them they leave behind. And that is either by
Publishing their own Memoirs of th^^^ Lives (when they leave any) which is
Instructing, or often not the least. ^^difying; or else by supplying that where
wanting, in Commemorating them otherwise, according to the Example of Holy
Scripture, eve^ (...) Women as well as Men; the first (...) which is done in
the following Relation written by an early Disciple of Christ in this
Gospel-Day of her Labors in it, and Suffering for it, and so the less need of
the latter, viz. to say much of the Author; her own Book being a sufficient
Memorial of her, and what she was in her Day; only as a necessary Introduction
to her own Account, I have this in short to premise concerning her.

I knew her, and was acquainted with her many Years, being my Country-Woman;
and I have this Testimony lives in my Heart concerning her, That she was a
Religious Exercised Woman, always seeking the best things, and through the
Goodness of God, found him whom her Soul loved. An Honest Sincere Tender
Hearted Zealous Woman for God, and underwent many deep Exercises inwardly, and
also outwardly, by reason of contrary Spirits, who opposed the Work of the
Lord, and Testimony of Truth in his Servants and Handmaids, with whom she was
often concerned, and bore a Faithful Testimony as the Lord laid it upon her,
and made Way for her, being a serious, weighty concerned Woman in her Spirit, a
true Mourner in Sion, for the Abominations of the Times, and she had a solid
savoury Testimony for the Truth, which she received Early, and was Faithful and
Diligent in it according to her Gift, and was well received and esteemed for
her Service by the Honest-Hearted in and about Bristol, and Chew-magna in the
County of Somerset, where, and in the Countries ad^acent her Service mostly
lay, till she, and her Husband and Family removed to Hempsted, in
Hertfordshire, in the Year, 1688. where she was well received, as by the
following Testimonies appear. And she used to come to my House at London, when
she came to the Yearly Meeting, and I was often Comforted in her Savory
Testimony, and to find that the Lord's Presence was so fresh with her, in her
latter Days; and after several Years Abode at Hempstead, and Labor and Service
there, and there away, she died in the Lord, and laid down her Head in Peace in
a good Old Age, in the Year, 1706. and of her Age, 72. and is undoubtedly
entered into Rest.

And as for the following Papers written with her own Hand, in Relation to her
Life, Labors, Travels, Exercises; Trials, Service and Sufferings, with Desire
they should be published after her Decease, for the Benefit of her Children,
and others; they were some time since put into my Hand to peruse, as falling
mostly within the Compass of my Knowledge; especially that Bart in Relation to
her Sufferings and Imprisonment at Ivelchester, ( I being then a Prisoner there
for the Testimony of Truth) in the Time of the Great Imprisonment for Meetings,
etc. in the Year, 1683. She being taken at a Meeting at Chew-magna, with near
Thirty more, and sent to Prison, by that wicked Persecutor (and Under Sheriff
of the County) John Helliar of Bristol, at the Instigation of the Priest of the
Parish; both which, were soon after cut off by Death. The said Priest Cross
immediately thereupon, in a very remarkable Manner, as is herein related, and
the said Helliar not long after being smitten with great Terror and Horror of
Mind for the Violence he had committed on the People of God in that City, etc.
keeping Men to watch with him Night and Day, for Fear the Devil would fetch him
away, as I have been credibly informed he expressed; as another Great
Persecutor there [R. Oliffe] who had made much Spoil on the said People, as I
heard, crying out he was Damned, and that they should make Restitution, i. e.
to them he had wronged, which he was never able to do; and so both died
miserable, and several others. Such a thrifty Trade (says one) is Persecution,
that it leaves Men never a Friend in Heaven, or on Earth. Oh that other's would
take Warning in time by such Examples of Divine Vengeance, to avoid such
things, and do no more so wickedly. For as the Memory of the Just is blessed,
and the Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance, so the Name of the
Wicked shall rot; and wherever Helliar's Name is mentioned, it stinks, as all
Persecutors do.

And according to Desire, I have for the Truth's Sake, and the Respect I had to
her, and owe to her Memory, carefully perused and put in Order the following
Relation; which I have been comforted in Reading of, being very Solid, Serious,
Weighty Matter of Experience, Warning, Exhortation and Counsel, written in a
good Sense and Understanding of the things of God, and Mysteries of his
Kingdom, and very Sound and Sav^^ry in the Expression of it. To whi^^ (...)
added a short Supplement of the last Fourteen Years of her Life; collected
chiefly from her Son's Account; with an Epistle to Frie^^^ and a Warning to
others, formerly Printed; all which, I doubt not, will have an Answer in every
Conscience of such as Read it in the Fear of God; and hope it may be of Service
to her Posterity, and Benefit of others; and that it will tend to the Glory of
God and the Comfort and Edification of his People; to whose Perusal, in much
Love, and Sincerity, (...) Recommend it, and all to the Grace o^ God, which is
able to build them up and give them an Inheritance among them that are
Sanctified; which is the sincere Desire of, Reader, Thy Re^^ Friend,

JOHN WHITIN^
London, the 21st of the 2d Month, 1711.
A TESTIMONY from several Friends belonging to the Meeting at Hemel, Hemsted,
and the Parts adjacent, in the County of Hartford, ^ncerning E. Stirredge, the
8th of the 3d Month, 1711.
OUR Dear Friends James and Elizabeth St^^^edge, came here to Inhabit, about
the Year, 1688. whose coming into these Parts was seasonable, and we believe
ordered by the good Providence of God; for it had a good Tendency to the
Strength and Edification of Friends; for about that Time, some were busy to
weaken Love among Brethren, under specious Pretenses of Liberty, etc. But the
said Elizabeth being Gifted for the Ministry, and acquainted with the Wiles and
subtle Devices of the Enemy, was made a serviceable Instrument in our Defense
and Preservation; being attended with Power, Wisdom and true Zeal for the
Prosperity of the Truth, and People of God. She was sound and savoury in her
Doctrine and public Minstry, and tender and affectinate in Christian Advice
and Counsel, to the Comfort of the Afflicted and Exercised in Spirit,
declaring, that the Way to the Kingdom of God is through Tribulation; agreeable
to the Ancient Account we read of in Holy Scripture. And she did frequently
press Friends to Sincerity and Uprightness of Heart. And although the Lord had
given her a large Gift, and a good Utterance, she was not forward to appear in
her public Service; but as an immediate Concern came upon her: She was a good
Example in her frequenting Meetings, both on the First and Weekdays; and was
there often made Instrumental to the stirring up of the pure Minds of many, by
way of Remembrance, to our mutual Comfort, by her fresh and Living Testimony.

Her Husband also (who departed this Life ^^me Time since her Decease) was an
Honest Zealous Friend, and her fellow-Helper in the Work of the Lord (in his
proper Gift) and our true Friend and Brother; and they were both ^^ery near and
acceptable to Friends, here, and here-aways. But what shall we say? (the Lord
having called them to his Rest in a good Old Age) but earnestly desire (as they
frequently did) that the young Generation might come up in Faithfulness, and
fill up the rooms of all such (being thereunto Spirited by the Lord) that his
Name may be more and more known and glorified to all succeeding Generations,
World without End, Amen.

Our said Friend Elizabeth Stirredge, departed this Life at Hempsted aforesaid,
on the 7th of the 9th Month, 1^06. and was Buried in Friends Burying-Ground at
Wood-End, in the said Parish.

John Edmunds, Moses West Edmond Neale, Michael Tirpin, Michael Tirpin jun.
James Stirredge.


JOHN THORNTON's Account of his Neighbor Elizabeth Stirredge.
I Having Opportunity, by dwelling in Hempsted several Years before she
departed this Life, had an intimate Acquaintance with her; and as the Lord had
given her a Measure of his holy Spirit, to guide, lead and direct her in the
Way of Peace, He also gave her a large Talent in a public Testimony, in which
she was very serviceable in our Meetings; being attended with Power, Wisdom,
and true Zeal; so that her Testimony was sound and savoury, to the comforting
of the Upright hearted; she being many Times drawn forth to encourage the
exercised and afflicted in Spirit, and led to declare that the Way to the
Kingdom of God is through Tribulations. And also would frequently press Friends
to Upright-heartedness, Sincerity and Integrity; she being also a good Example
in her Conversation. And although the Lord had given her a large Gift in a Verbal
Testimony, you she was backward to appear therein, except she found it was
immediately required of her. She was zealously concerned against that Spirit
that le^^ into Separation and Division, and also against all manner of Deceit
and Hypocrisy. She commonly had a sharp and piercing Testimony against such
that the great Enemy had so misled. She was a diligent Frequenter of Meetings,
both on First and Weekdays. Her Husband also being an honest and zealous
Friend, and since her, departed this Life; they being both serviceable to TRUTH
and FRIENDS, are missed. But what shall I say? the Will of God be done; for
fully satisfied am I, that they are gone to Rest, and entered into Joy and
Happiness, where all Sorrows cease, and Tears are wiped away.

John Thornton.

JOHN NEALE's Testimony concerning Elizabeth Stirredge.
IT is in my Mind to write something as a Testimony concerning my dear and
well-beloved Friend Elizabeth Stirredge, deceased.

She was one who received the Truth in the Love of it in her young Years, as I
have heard from her own Mouth, and as in her following Book is more fully
related: Wherefore I need say no more of that, but descend to write something
concerning her, during the Time of my Acquaintance with her, which was about
Fifteen Years.

She lived for that Time about Seven Miles from us, and sometimes would come to
visit our Meeting at Watford, whom I and many more were glad to see, she being
one whom the Lord was pleased to bestow a Talent and Gift of the Ministry upon
(which he is pleased to give unto both Male and Female, they being all one in
Christ Jesus) that she might tell unto others, what God had done for her Soul;
for those, (and those only are they) whose Mouths the Lord opens, that do and
shall show forth h^s Praise. And indeed her Testimony was reaching and
affecting; my Heart has been well affected many Times in Meetings with her
Testimony; for she spoke as one having Authority, almost to Admiration,
considering the Weakness of Body wherewithal she was pretty much afflicted* but
the Lord was with her, who gives Strength to the Weak, and his Power was her
Support.

It was her Lot, many Times, when she came to our Meeting, to lodge at my
House, (my dear Mother Hannah Neale and she being very intimate Friends, and
heartily loving each others Company) and indeed her Company I also loved, for
it was pleasant and delightful to the honest-hearted; and I may say, her
Discourse was edifying to me.

And I have been affected to hear her give an Account of the Sufferings, deep
Trial and Exercises of Friends, which she, and many others went through in early
Days; how when they were going to a Meeting, they went as it were, in Peril of
their Lives, by reason of wicked and ungodly People throwing Stones, Clods, and
other Things at them. And although many were they that rose up against them, yet
how wonderfully did the Lord preserve his People in that Day, through many
Tribulations! many of which various Exercises and Trials that diverse of our
worthy Ancients passed through, blessed be the Lord, we in this our Day, are
freed romans

Much might be said concerning this our Friend; but in short, she was a valiant
Woman for Truth on Earth, a Mother in Israel, and a worthy faithful Elder in
the Church of Christ in her Time.

And now my Desire is, that we who are of a younger Generation, and are ^et
left behind, may in our measure be fo^^ ^^eading in the Steps of this, and many
others of our Ancients, who have served the Lord faithfully in their
Generation, and are removed from us.

Though our Loss of such Worthies be great, yet their Gain is far greater; for
doubtless they are entered into those Mansions of eternal Bliss, where Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory is their Portion, and that for evermore.

John Neale.

Concerning her Husband James Stirredge, by the same Hand.
HE was a Man with whom I was well acquainted for many Years; and I may say of
him, he was an honest upright-hearted Man, one that feared God, and eschewed
Evil; zealous for the Honor of God, and for the Promotion of his Truth on
Earth; a hearty Lover of faithful Friends, and in his Conversation amongst Men,
I think I may say blameless.

A zealous Man for Monthly and Quarterly Meetings of Church Government; his
Desire was, that (...) in such Meetings, might so (...) upon the Lord to
receive Council from him, as that they might act in the Wisdom of God, that
every thing that is contrary to the Principle of Truth might be kept out of
them, and that nothing but Truth might have the Pre-eminence.

In fine, he was a meek-spirited and lowly-minded Man, more in Substance than
in Show.

I went to visit him in his last Ilness, when he was very weak in Body, so
weak, that he spoke very low, but very sensible, and was in a good Frame of
Mind and Spirit; so that I was refreshed in my Visit, and he was pleased to see
me.

He was very patient under his Affliction, and I believe was fully resigned to
the Will of God.

He departed this Life in the 10th Month, 1708 at Hempsted in Hertfordshire,
and was buried at Friends Burying-Ground at Wood-End, in the same County*

John Neale.

Strength in Weakness, etc.
SEeing the Lord has been pleased to count me worthy to travel in Sion's Way;
and seeing I have found the Way so strait, and so narrow, and so many that have
been called; and some, that have entered into it, have gone into bypath, and
crooked ways again; and I have found the blessed effect of keeping in the right
way; therefore I have a great Concern upon my Spirit, for my Children, that are
coming up after me, that they may not be forgetful of keeping in the right way,
whenever the Lord shall be pleased to take me from them.

Therefore it is in my Heart, as my Heavenly Father will be pleased to assist
me, to leave a short Testimony behind me, for my Children, of the (...) of my
Life, ever since I had a Remembrance; and the Goodness of the Lord to me all my
Life lon^ unto this very Day, which is (...) for ever to be had in remembrance,
above all that ever my Eyes beheld, and in reverence to the worthy Name and
Power of the Lord is it spoken, and he shall have the Praise of his own Work
for ever.

In the first Place I was born at Thornbury in Gloucestershire, 1634.
of honest Parents; my Father's Name was William Ta^^er; my Father and Mother
were People fearing God, and very zealous in their Day; and my Father (being
one of those called Puritans) prophesied of Friends many Years before they
came; he said, There was a Day coming, wherein Truth will gloriously break
forth, more glorious than ever since the Apostles Days; but said, I shall not
live to see it; but died in the Faith of it Seven Years before they came; whose
honest and chaste Life is often in my Remembrance, and his fervent and zealous
Prayers amongst his Family, are not forgotten by me. My Parents brought me up
after a very strict Manner, so that I can truly say, I was much a Stranger unto
the World, and its Ways. In my tender Years I was one of a sad Heart, and much
concerned and surprised with inward Fear what would become of me when I should
die: And when my Lot was to be near any that would talk rudely, or swear, or be
overcome with strong Drink, I dreaded to pass by them; and when I did hear it
thunder, O the Dread and Terror that would fall upon me; and I would get the
privatest Place that I could to mourn in secret, thinking the Lord would render
Vengeance upon the Heads of the wicked. When I saw the Flashes of Lightning,
Oh! think I, whither shall I go to hide my self from the Wrath of the dreadful
and terrible God? Thus was I possessed with my Soul's Concern, before I was ten
Years of Age; I was so filled with Fears and Doubts, that I could take no
Delight in any thing of this World. And when I grew up to riper Years, I went
to hear those accounted the best Men, that lived up to what was made known unto
them, and I delighted to hear them, and be in Company with them that talked of
good Things, and discoursed of Scripture, and of God and Christ, and of
Heaven's Glory, Oh! how delightsom was it unto me; but still I was unsatisfied,
because I found I was not a Living Witness of these States and Conditions that
the People of God were in, in former Days; and how to attain unto it, I did not
know. Then did I mourn unto my self, and say in my Heart, Oh that I had been
born in the Days when the Lord spoke unto Moses, and unto the Children of
Israel, and with a high and wonderful Power brought forth his People out of
Egypt, and through the Red Sea, that I might have known how to have walked in the
right Way, and to have done what the Lord would have required of me, and been
in Acquaintance and Familiarity with my Maker; that I might have known when I
had pleased or displeased the Lord, whom my Soul loved, but knew not how to
come acquainted with him. Oh! what would I have partted with for the Enjoyment
of the Lord, and Assurance of Salvation? Surely if it were possible for me to
have enjoyed all the World, I could freely have parted with it, for Peace,
Comfort and Satisfaction for my poor distressed Soul, that mourned as without
Hope; and many a time, and many Hours have I been alone, ^eading and mourning,
when no Eye saw me, nor Ear heard me, neither could I find comfort in Reading,
because it was a Book sealed unto me. Then did I mourn, and say, Oh! that I had
been born in the Days when our blessed Savior Jesus Christ was upon the Earth;
how would I have followed him, and ^ate at his Feet, as Mary did; how freely
could I have left my Father's House, and all my Relations, for true Peace and
Assurance of Life Eternal for my Immortal Soul.

And under this exercise I grew very sad, insomuch that my Mother feared I was
going into a Consumption, and greatly feared my Death; and would say to me,
Can thou take Delight in nothing? I would have thee walk forth into the
F^elds with the young People, for Recreation, and delight thy self in
something. And to please her, I have sometimes, when we were out of our
Employment, gone forth with sober young People, but I found no Comfort in that.
Then I fell into a Custom of reading the Scriptures, and to be alone in
private, reading, and crying, because I knew not that Heavenly Power and Spirit
to have Dominion in me, that was in them that gave forth the Scriptures; and
nothing else but the Substance would give me true Satisfaction, therefore the
Scripture was but a Book sealed unto me.

Then did I fall down upon my Knees, to pray unto the Lord, with my Heart full
of Sorrow, and the Tears running down my Face, and could not utter one Word;
which seemed very strange unto me, and set me a thinking, that there was none
like unto me. But it was the Enemy's Work to persuade me, there was none like
unto me: And because I could not pray in Words, as others could, and likewise
under Afflictions, therefore the Lord had no Regard unto me. But the Enemy is a
Liar, as ever, for the Lord was near me in every Exercise, and broke my Heart,
and melted my Spirit, or else it would not have been so with me. Oh! my Soul
can now behold his Goodness, for he was near me, although I was not aware of it;
for I thought none was so miserable as I, the Enemy endeavoring to cast me
down to make me despair. And truly it was the great Mercy of the Lord in
preserving me from it, for my Affliction was great, and my Distresses very
many, and the Enemy following me with his Temptations, and for Want of right
Information where my Strength was to be found; which was to have stood still,
and have waited upon the living God for Strength to overcome my Soul'^ Enemy.
And instead of so doing, the Enemy so disturbed me, and so followed me with his
subtle Allurements, sometimes to draw my Mind into the Vanities of this World,
and to delight my self in bedecking my self in fine Clothes, that I might
appear comely in the Eyes of the World; for (said the Enemy) as for this Way of
Sadness and Trouble that thou art under, it will redound to no Advantage,
Benefit, nor Comfort; thou will not be in any Esteem amongst thy Neighbors,
therefore take thy Pleasure, and be at rest. A Liar he is, and ever was from
the Beginning; and my dear Children, believe him not, if it be your Lots to be
under Temptations or Exercise of any kind; or what Way soever the Lord may be
pleased to lead you in, for the Trial of your Faith and Patience in any! kind;
either now, or any Time of your Pilgrimage in this Life. I say, the Enemy will
befool as many as he can; therefore look unto the Lord, and keep him in your
Remembrance, and pray unto him in the inward of your Minds. Although you cannot
utter one Word, know it assuredly, that he is near to help his afflicted
Children at all Times, as they stand in Need or him. Oh! that I had known this
in the Days of my Ignorance, and in my young and tender Years, when the Lord
was near me, and at Work in my Heart, and I knew it not: For Want of an
Understanding, the Enemy befooled me, and led me aside in those Things
abovenamed and by harkening unto him, and the young People that was my
Neighbors, in persuading me, that it would be of great Benefit to me, for I
was young, and knew not what I might come to and I was left of my tender
Father, and hardly any Friend was left me. And in my Distress and Afflictions,
willing to have a little Rest and Comfort, I lent out an Ear to the Enemy of my
Soul, and let my Mind go forth after fine Clothes; but when it was drawn out,
it went without Limit; and when ^bedecked my self as fine and as choice ^s I
could, it would hardly give me Content; for when I had one new thing, when I
saw another, or the third, I was as desirous as for the former; so ever
unsatisfied. Oh! the lying Enemy, who promised me Rest and Peace, but could not
give it me; a Liar he is, and ever was; my Soul hates him, and is at Enmity
with him; the Lord preserve me out of his Snares, and my House also for ever.

But though he had drawn out my Mind, the Lord did not leave me; for I should
many Times have a Concern upon my Mind what would become of me; and if at any
Time I was drawn out into any Mirth or Laughter, I should feel something smite
my Heart, and bring great Heaviness over my Spirit; but I knew not what it was,
and I little thought it was the Lord, who was ever good and gracious, kind,
merciful, and slow to Anger, and not willing People should run into
Destruction, nor perish.

I little thought he looked so narrowly to my Ways; but since the Lord has
been pleased to open my Eyes, I can look back and admire his Goodness, and
blessed be his worthy Name, and the right Arm of his Strength, who has early
been my Guide, and kept me in great Part from running into the Evil of the
World, which greatly attends young People. But blessed be the Name of the Lord,
he took me by the Hand, and led me when I knew not of it, in the Days of my
tender Years; and if I had not hearkened unto the Enemy, my Condition had been
well. But as soon as he had drawn my Mind into Pride, and to take Delight in
fine Clothes, it soon became my Burden; for in a little Time after, the Lord in
the Riches of his Love, was pleased to fit and furnish his Faithful Servants,
and painful Laborers, whose Industriousness the Lord greatly prospered, two
Men of worthy Memory, dear John Audland, and John Camm, in 1654. But when I
heard the Report of them, it struck a Dread over my Heart, ^^earing of their
Plainness. I began to think, how shall I demean my self to go to hear them. In
a little Time after, there was a Meeting appointed by them; where my Lot was to
be, and dear John Audland was declaring; but as soon as I heard his Voice, it
pierced me; and when I came into the Meeting, and heard his Testimony, and
beheld his solid Countenance, Oh! how my Heart was troubled within me, insomuch
that I knew not what would become of me.

After Meeting was over, I separated my self from my Company, and traveled
alone two Miles, because no Ear should hear me making my Moan unto the Lord;
and out of the Bitterness of my Spirit did I say, Lord, what shall I do to be
saved? I would do any thing for Assurance of everlasting Life; and if the Lord
will be pleased to accept of me upon any Terms, I matter not what become of
this outward Body, if I could find out a Cave of the Earth that I might get
into, where I might mourn out my Days in Sorrow, and see Man no more.

I thought I could have been contented; but it pleased the Lord to open the
Eyes of my Understanding, and to lead me by a Way that I knew not, and to begin
the first Day's Work in my Heart, which ^as the Spirit of the Lord to move upon
the Waters, and to divide the Light from the Darkness; and when the Separation
was made, then could I see my Way in the Light, which was the Light unto
David's Feet, and was a Lanthorn unto his Paths; and it will order every one's
Goings aright, if they take Heed unto it.

It would be too tedious to go through every particular State; but my earnest
Cries were unto the Lord, to lead me the right Way, and to create in me a new
Heart, and renew a right Spirit within me. Oh! let me be unto thee, O Lord,
what I am, and not unto Man; and I do not take Care for this outward Body, do
but redeem my Soul from Death, and out of this horrible ^it, wherein I am held
as in Chains of Darkness, and shall perish for ever, if thou do not, out of
thy Infinite Mercy, have Compassion on me, and bow thy Ears to my Cries, for I
can do nothing else; for I can truly say, My Heart was filled with Sorrow, my
Sighing came before I eat, and Tears were as my sorrowful Meat; when I lay
down, it was in Sorrow, and watered my Pillow with my Tears, before I could
take my Rest; and when I awaked, it was with the Dread of the Lord over my
Heart.

Oh! my Soul can do no less than magnify the Living God, who is worthy of
Praise, Honor and Renown, Thanksgiving and Obedience for evermore. And why so?
because he has condescended unto the lowest Estate of his Handmaid, and bowed
his Ear unto my Prayers, and had a Regard unto my Cries, and has answered my
Request, and given me my Heart's Desire, which was to be led the right Way. And
Sion's poor Travelers know very well this is a Beginning or a Step in the Way;
for I can truly say, that I never coveted Heaven's Glory, nor to be made a
Partaker of the Riches, Glory, and everlasting Well-being for ever, more than I
desired to walk in the Way that leads thereunto. And I did as truly believe
that the Lord would redeem a People out of the World, and its Ways, and
Customs, Language, Marriage and Burying, and all the World's Hypocrisy; I
looked for this Change, before I saw any Appearance of it; but all my Fear was,
I should not live to see it; the Enemy always following of me with his
Temptations, to work me into Unbelief, and to cast me down into Desparation. Oh
my Soul cannot but give the Lord God the Glory, the Honor and the Renown, for
he is worthy of it for ever, and evermore.

And now, my dear Children, this is for you to remember, and keep by you, that
ye may always know the Way to Heaven's Glory, and to enjoy true Peace and
Satisfaction: It is a strait and narrow Way; whoever thinks it is not, they are
mistaken* Therefore, my dear Children, keep unto the daily Cross all the Days
of your Lives; and to Truth's Language. And more especially, keep your Heart
with all Diligence; for out of it are the Issues of Life; then will you be
brought nearer and nearer unto the Lord, and grow into Acquaintance with him;
which was That my Soul mourned for in the Days of my tender Years; which I
cannot forget, nor I hope ever shall; for I find the good Effects of it from
Day, unto Day, it bows my Spirit, and humbles my Heart, and keeps me in a
living Remembrance of what the Lord has done for me; though the Lord has been
pleased to give me the Waters of a bitter Cup to drink, and to feed me with
Bread of Affliction, and suffer Temptation upon Temptation to come near me; and
the Enemy, the subtle Serpent, the old Dragon, who was more subtle than all the
Beasts of the Field, following me with his ^yes, to persuade me, that the Lord
had no Regard to me; if he had, he would not take Delight to afflict me; for
there is none like thee, said the wicked one, thou ma^^^ look abroad, and see
where thou can find one whose sorrow is like unto thine.

Then would I wander alone in some remote Place, where no Eye could see me, nor
Ear hear me, to make my moan unto the Lord, who has sweetly comforted me, and
refreshed my Spirit many a time, and has kept my Head above the Waters,
blessed be the worthy Name of the Lord my God, and the right Arm of his
strength, that has wrought wonderfully for my Deliverance; and cursed is the
old Dragon, who ever envied Man's Prosperity, and to destroy the blessed work
of the Lord, as much as in him li^th. For after the Lord had done much for me,
and in a good measure had redeemed my Soul from Death, and by a high Hand and
stre^hed out Arm, had brought me out of Egypt's Darkness, and through the
Red Sea, where my Soul had true cause to Sing Praises unto the most High God,
who lives for ever, and ^or evermore. Oh! let me never forget so great and
wonderful Deliverance, but for ever keep in that, that will bow my Heart from
Day unto Day, and humble my Spirit before the Lord, who has been pleased to do
more for me than my Tongue is able to declare. And although I can say, mine Eyes
have seen Afflictions, and no Affliction seems joyous, but grievous for the
present, yet afterward it brings forth the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness.

And now, my dear Children, my very Aim and End is to make you a little
acquainted with the work of the Lord in my Heart, and also with the subtle
Devices and Contrivances of the Enemy of your Immortal Souls; his way is to set
his Baits according unto People's Nature, for therein he is most likely to
prevail. And because I was of a sad Heart, and very subject to be cast down;
therefore did he with all his might endeavor to cast me down into Despair, and
Unbelief; persuading of me I should never hold out unto the End. Then should I
mourn to the Lord, to preserve me to the End, for my Affliction was very great,
both inward and outward, and many things he cast before me, that seemed too
hard for me to go through; when my Mind was filled with Sorrow, the Enemy got
Ground upon me, and filled my Heart with Thoughts and Imaginations, until my
Heart grew hard before I was aware of it, and I had lost that sweet Enjoyment
and Heavenly Fellowship that I was comforted with in the Night Season, and in
the Morning Light. I had great Cause to Magnify the worthy Name of the Lord,
who was pleased to comfort my afflicted Soul; but when the Enemy had gotten a
little Ground upon me, he set his Baits so agreeable unto my Nature, which was
apt to be cast down. And when I had any thing struggling in me in remembrance
of my State and Condition I was in a little before, and now for a little time I
had lost it; I had great cause to mourn unto the Lord, who was able to deliver
me, as he had done many a time, blessed be his Holy Name, and the Right Arm of
his Strength, that lives for ever. Yet though he was able to do it, yet the Enemy
prevailed upon me a little further: For when I was in my mournful Estate,
making my Moan unto the Lord, saying in my Heart, There Is no Sorrow like mine;
and why none like thine? Because I had lost my Beloved, and my Loss was great;
he that had redeemed my Soul from Death, and had done well for me. Oh! I could
do no le^s but mourn for him. And in this time of mourning, which was a State
very suitable unto my Condition, had I been wary o^ that subtle Serpent, who
was too hardfor me, in persuading me I was discontented, a Murmurer, and a
Complainer, and I made the Lord weary with my crying, and should be shut out of
his Kingdom, for 'twas the Murmurers and Complainers that perished in the
Wilderness.

Oh! how soon was I caught by his Subtilty; for he infused in me, and persuaded
me it was in vain to strive any longer, for I should never Inherit the Kingdom
of Heaven. But a Liar he was, and ever will be, my Soul is at Enmity with him;
the Lord whom I trust, preserve me, and my House for ever, as it pleased my
Heavenly Father (who had a regard unto me) to make way for me to escape. For in
a little time after, it was my lot to be at a Meeting, where a Faithful Servant
of the Lord was, by Name William Dewsbery, whose Testimony was mostly unto the
distressed and afflicted, tossed with Tempest, and not comforted; 1655.
which State many were in, in that Day. A true Messenger he was unto many. I
was 21 Years of Age when I was in this Condition; but after Meeting was ended,
I dreaded to go unto him, for I thought that he was one of a great discerning,
and he would be sensible the Hardness of my Heart; and if he should Judge me, I
should not be able to bear it; but yet I could not go away in Peace, until I
had been with him: Who seeing me coming so heavily on, held up his Hand; and
with a raised Voice, said unto me, Dear Lamb, Judge all thoughts and believe,
for Blessed are they that believe and see not. And with a raised Voice, again
said, They were Blessed that saw and Believed, but more Blessed are they that
Believed and saw not.

Oh! he was one that had good Tidings for me in that Day, and great Power was
with his Testimony at that very Time; for the Hardness was taken away, and my
Heart was opened by that Ancient Power that opened the Heart of Lydia;
everlasting Praises be given unto him that sits upon the Throne for ever, who
has preserved me out of the Snares and subtle Contrivances of the Adversary.

And now, my dear Children, you have been brought up in the way of Truth; it is
made known unto you; and my Soul cannot but Bless and Praise the Lord my God,
who has preserved me out of the Evil of the World; therefore trust in his
Name, and believe, he will keep you unto the End; which he will assuredly do if
you depart not from him; which I hope you will not whilst you have a Day to
live; and my Prayers are both Night and Day for you.

I can truly say, that when any of our Family have gone out of our Habitation
(though upon outward Occasions) my Prayers have ascended unto the Lord for their
Preservation; and unto this Day the Lord has heard, blessed be his Name that
lives for ever. For you may well remember the many Dangers you have been
preserved out of, that have been likely to hazard your Lives, but the Lord of
his infinite Goodness has hitherto preserved you all, that you may serve him.
Therefore, dear Children, forget not your Duty unto the Lord, and the Counsel
that Jesus Christ gave unto his Disciples, which was, to watch and pray, that
you may be preserved out of all Dangers both inward and outward, which you may
be liable to fall into, if you do not keep unto the Guide of your Youth: But if
you keep unto him^^^, will never depart from you; and keep in remembrance your
Creator in the Days of your Youth, then will he keep you in the Hour of
Temptation, and he will take Care for you; if you seek first the Kingdom of
God, and his Righteousness, all other Things shall be added unto (...). He has
spo^en, that cannot lie, therefore put your Trust in him for ever. Then will my
Heavenly Father do for you as he has done for me, in the Days of my tender
Years; he took me by the Hand, and led me by a Way I knew not, and made
Darkness Light before me; and has preserved me unto this very Day in Covenant
with himself; everlasting Praises and Honor be given unto his holy Name for
ever, faith my Soul.

Now, my dear Children, you may remember since you have had an Understanding,
the many Straits and Difficulties the Lord has enabled me to go through for
these many Years, tho* but weak, and greatly afflicted with S^exness, and very
near the Grave many a Time, and the Lord renewed my Strength again, to bear
many a faithful (...) for the Lord, and his blessed Truth; many various Straits
and Hardships has the Lord my Redeemer brought me through; which, when I look
back and consider, I am filled with Admiration, in Consideration how my Soul
has escaped to this very Day. But this Saving of Christ Jesus often comes
before me, That greater is ^e that is in you, than he that is in the World; and
said to his Disciples, Be of (...)* Cheer, I have overcome the World. This has
been a Comfort to me many a Time, and I often remember a Saying of a faithful
Servant and Minister of Jesus Christ, whose Name was Miles Halhead, when I was
21 Years of Age, and under great Exercise, he (...) looking upon me, said, Dear
Child, if thou continue in Truth, thou wi^t make an Honorable Wom^n for the
Lord; for the Lord God will honor thee with his blessed Testimony. And ten
Years after, in 1665. he came to my Habitation, and said unto me, My Love and
Life is with thee, and that for that blessed Work's Sake that is at Work in
thee; the Lord God keep thee Faithful, for he will require hard Things of thee,
that thou art not aware of; the Lord give thee Strength to perform it, and keep
thee faithful to his blessed Testimony; my Prayers shall be for thee, as often
as I remember thee. And soon after that, a great Exercise fell upon us; we were
exposed to great Suffering, and the Lord had opened my Mouth in a Testimony but
a little before; yet have been concerned, for Fear my Friends should suffer for
me; not for my self, for I could truly say, My Heart was given up to serve the
Lord, come what would come. But this was the least of our Sorrow; Loss of
Goods, Beating and Hurling to and fro, and dragging out of our Meeting House,
and many other Abuses, which the Lord made us able to go thto', and sanctified
unto us; and my Soul blesses the Lord, for that he accounted us worthy to
suffer for his Name's Sake.

For in the Time of Suffering did a selfish separating Spirit begin to break
forth amongst us; which added to our Affliction and Sorrow, more than all our
Persecutors could do; though we went in great Hazard of our Lives to our
Meetings, the Informers were so wicked and inhumane, and filled with Envy and
Madness, that they swore, It was no more Sin to kill us, than it was to kill a
Louse; and that they would bathe their Swords in our Blood. But blessed be the
Lord our God that lives for ever, we were in no wise affrighted at these
Things, nor concerned at it, for we knew him in whom we had believed, was able
to deliver his chosen ones that put their Trust in him.

And now, my dear Children, some of these Things you know, your Eyes have seen
this when you were young and tender in the Beginning of your Days; and though but
young and tender, yet the Lord kept you from the Fear of Men. And in this Time
of great Exercise, there fell upon me a^ another greater Exercise and Travail
of Spirit, which seemed so strange and so wonderful, that I could not believe
that ever the Lord would require such a Service of me that was so weak and
contemptible, so unfit and unlikely, my Understanding but shallow, and my
Capacity but mean, and very low and dejected in my own E^es; and looking so
much at my Insufficiency, made me to strive so much against it; crying
oftentimes within my self, Surely this is something to ensnare me, for the Lord
does not require such Things of me; seeing there are so many wise and good Men
that are more honorable, and fitter for such Service than I. O Lord remove it
far from me, and require any thing else of me, that, I can better perform.

Thus did I reason and strive against it, till my Sorrow was so great* th^^ I
knew not whether ever the Lord would accept of me again. Then did I cry unto
the Lord again, and again; Lord, if thou have found me worthy, make m^ Way
plain before me, and I will follow thee; for Lord, thou know that I would
not willingly offend thee. But for Fear thou (...) require me to go to the
Great Men of the Earth. I knowing my self to be of such a weak Capacity, I did
not think that the Lord would make Choice of such a contemptible Instrument as
I, to leave my Habitation, and tender Children, that were young and tender, to
go to King Charles, which was an Hundred Miles from my Habitation, and with
such a plain Testimony as the Lord did require of me; which made me go bowed
down many Months under the Exercise of it; and oftentimes strove against it;
but I could get no Rest, but in giving up to obey the Lord in all things that
he required of me; and though it seemed hard and strange unto me, yet the Lord
made hard Things easy according to his Promise unto me, when I was going from
my tender Children, and knew not but that my Life might have been required for
my Testimony, it was so plain; and when I looked upon my Children, my Bowels
yerned toward them. The Word that ran through me, was, If thou can believe,
thou shall see all Things accomplished, and thou shall return in Peace, and thy
Reward shall be with thee. And for ever blessed be the Name and Power of the
Lord, that sustained me in my Journey, and gave me Strength to do his Will, and
afforded me his living Presence to accompany me, which is the greatest Comfort
that ever can be enjoyed; and this was my Testimony to King Charles the IId, in
the 11th Month, of the Year, 1670.

This is unto thee, O King, hear what the Lord has committed unto my Charge
concerning thee. As thou have been the Cause of making many desolate, so will
the Lord lay thee desolate; and as many as have been the Cause of the
persecuting, and the shedding of the Blood of my dear Children, in the Day when
I call all to an account, I will plead with them, says the Lord, therefore
hear and fear the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, for of his righteous Judgments
all shall be made Partakers; from the King that sits upon the Throne, to the
Beggar upon the Dunghill.

This Testimony I delivered into his Hands, with these words in my mouth, Hear
O King, and fear the Lord God of Heaven and Earth. And I can truly say, that
the Dread of the Most High God was upon me, that made me to tremble, and great
Agony was over my Spirit; insomuch that Paleness came in his Face, and with a
Mournful Voice he said, I thank you good Woman. My Soul honors and magnified
the Name and Power of the Lord my God, for keeping me faithful to his blessed
Testimony, and giving me Strength to do his Will, and made good his Promise,
which was, If I could believe, I should return in Peace, and my Reward should
be with me. So the Lord blessed my going forth, and his Presence was with me in
my Journey, and preserved my Family well, and my coming Home was with Joy and
Peace in my Bosom; everlasting Praises, Glory and Honor be given unto him that
sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever, and for evermore.

And now, my dear Children, this is for you to remember the Goodness of the
Lord to his Children, that faithfully follow and obey him with their whole
Hearts, though they may be attended with many Weaknesses, and are many times
crying unto the Lord, Oh my weakness! I am not able to go through this great
Work, neither indeed (...) I worthy; there are many Honorable Wise Men that
thou have fitted for thy Service, that are fitter than I am; and there seems
so many Mountains in my way, and so many Difficulties appear in my view; that
it appears t^o wonderful for me to go through. And so it was indeed, whilst I
gave way to the Reasoner, which I have done many a time, till my Sorrow has
been so great, that I have not known which way to turn for it has dimn'd my
Sight, and hurt my Life, and plunged my Soul into Sorrow, whilst I gave way to
the reasoning Part. But it pleased the Lord to appear in a needful hour, and
turned back the Enemy of my Soul's Peace, and showed unto me that he would
choose the weak and the dejected, and them that were nothing in their own Eyes,
and that could do nothing, no not so much as to utter a word but what the Lord
gives into their Mouths, I mean in Testimony for the living God, that the
Scripture of Truth may be fulfilled in this our Day, as fully as it was in
Times past and gone, that no Flesh should glory in his Presence. Then did I
freely give up to obey the Requirings of the Lord with Peace and Comfort, and
received the blessed Reward in my Bosom, as I have already said; but our
Exercise continued by our Persecutors. But blessed be the Name and Power of the
^^rd for his infinite Mercies; for according to the Day, so was our Strength.

A little time after the Officers came ^^d demanded Money for the King for our
Meeting together. My Husband answered them, If I owed the King any, I would
surely pay him; but seeing I owe him no Money, surely I will pay him none. They
asked him leave to Strain his Goods, he said, If you will take my Goods, I
cannot hinder you, but I will not give you leave to take them; neither will I
be accessory to your taking of them. Then the Officers seeing our Innocence
(for we were in our Shop at our lawful Calling, with our Hands to our Labor,
and our Children with us) the Constable leaning his Head down upon his Hand,
and with a heavy Heart said, It is against my Conscience to take their Goods
from them. Then I said, John, have a care of wronging thy Conscience; for what
could the Lord do more for thee than to place his good Spirit in thy Heart, to
teach thee what thou should do, and what thou should leave undone. He
said, I know not whar to do in this Matter; if paying the Money once would do,
I would do it, but it will not end so; but it will be thus, whilst you keep
going to Meeting; for the Rulers have made such Laws, that never was the like
in any Age. I said, John, When thou have wronged thy Conscience, and brought a
Burden upon thy Spirit, it is not the Rulers can remove it from thee. If thou
should go to the Rulers, and say, I have done that which was against my
Conscience to do; they may-say as the Rulers did to Judas, What is that to us?
see thou to that.

But the Officer that were with him, came and pulled down our Goods; but the
Power of the Lord smote them, insomuch that Paleness was in their Faces; and
their Lips quivered, and their Hands did so shake, that they could not hold it
long. Then they would force a Poor Man to take them, but he refused, until they
forced him, and laid them upon his Arms and Shoulders; but he looking much like
a dead Man, replied, You force me to do that, which you cannot do your selves,
neither can I; for he trembled very much, though we had not ought farther to say
unto them, after they came in, but could rejoice that the Lord had found us
worthy to Suffer for his blessed Truth and Testimony.

A little time after they had a Meeting to Prize the Goods they took from us,
and other Friends; where there met together Seven Men called Justices, and the
Officers and Sheriffs, and many more of their Confederates, a great Room full
of them; and I was at Work in our Shop; and seeing the Constable carrying along
some of the Goods to be Prized, it immediately came into my Heart to go after
them; not knowing one word that I should have to say; which made me a little
consider for what I should go; but it more and more rested with me to go; and
when I came within the Door, I sat down like one that was a Fool, and had not
one word to say for a time; as near as I can count the time, half or three
Parts of an hour. But when I came in they were greatly disquieted in their
Minds, and hurried in their Business, that they said many a time, that they
could do nothing whilst I was with them; the Justices calling one another to
cause me to be taken away many times; saying, We shall not do any Business this
Day, but spend our time in vain, if this Woman sit here. And they many times
tempted me to speak what I had to say, and be gone; but could not prevail with
me. Then calling to the Man of the House to take me away, solemnly protesting
never to come to his House again, if if he would not take me away. But the Man
had not Power to touch me, but full of trouble, said, Sir, I cannot lay Hands
on her, for she is my honest Neighbor: And turning toward me, said, pray
Neighbor Stirredge, if you have any thing to say, speak, that you may be gone.
Then one of the Justices in great Rage and Fury Solemnly protested he would
never sit with them any more, if they did not take me away; oftentimes
wondering at their Folly for letting of me alone. Then he opened a Back Door,
and went out as though he would be gone but in a little time came in again,
saying, What is she here yet? I wonder at your Folly. Then the Power of the
Lord fell upon me, and filled my Heart with a very dreadful Warning amongst
them; telling them, That it was in vain for them to be found striving against
the Lord, and his People; their Work would not prosper; for the great God of
Heaven and Earth would be too strong for them. Therefore I warned them to
Repent, and amend their Lives before it be too late; for the Lord will smite
you in a Day at unawares, and in an Hour not expected by you, therefore
remember that the Lord has afforded you a Day of Warning, before Destruction
comes upon you. This, and much more ran through me at that time; and the Lord was
pleased in a very short time to fulfill that Testimony on them. For in a few
Weeks, as they were making merry at a Feast, Two of them died on a sudden,
after Dinner, and the rest very hardly escaped, about the Year, 1674.

Now, my dear Children, I write not this, to rejoice at the Fall of our
Enemies; but for you to consider of the Goodness, and Mercies, and Dealing of
the Lord with his People in all Ages; and to keep in Remembrance his loving
Kindness and Forbearance to the very wicked, that are always provoking him to
pour down his Vengeance upon their Heads. Yet so great is his Mercies, that he
always warns the Wicked, and gives them Time to repent, and Space to amend
their Lives, that the Lord may be clear in the Day of Account; which Day will
surely come upon all that draws Breath in the Air.

Therefore, my dear Children, remember your latter End, and the Day of Account,
and keep a Bridle to your Tongues; for he that knows not a Bridle to his
Tongue, his Religion is vain. And keep to the daily Cross, which is the Power
of God to Salvation. And if you will be Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven and
Crown Immortal, you must take up the daily Cross, for no Cross, no Crown; for
the Cross will keep your Minds in Subjection to the Living God, and being in
Subjection, and standing in Awe that you sin not, this will keep you near unto
the Lord, in a living Acquaintance with him; then he will take Delight to bless
you more and more, to instruct you, and to counsel you in his Way; which is
pure and holy, and will not admit of any Unholiness, no^ any Uncleanness.

Therefore, my dear Children, keep clear in your Spirits in the Sight of God,
and beware of the World, and the People thereof; be not in too much Familiarity
with them, nor let in their Spirit to mix with yours; that has been the Hurt
of many that have been going right on their Way, and have made a good
Beginning; yet for Want of Watchfulness, and keeping to the Guide of their
Youth, the Light of Christ Jesus, which is the Way to Salvation; and whoever
comes in any other Way, is a Thief and a Robber. The Way you know, you have
been trained up in it; and the Concern of my Spirit is, that you may keep in
it, and be concerned for your Children, as your Father and I have been for you;
and train them up in the Way of Truth, and keep them out of the beggarly
Rudiments of this World, that they may grow up in Plainness, and keep to the
plain Language, both you and they; which is become a very indifferent Thing
amongst many of the Professors of Truth. But in the Beginning we went through
great Exercise for that very Word, as Thee or Thou to one particular Person.
And for my Part, I had a Concern upon my Spirit, because I shifted many a Time
from that one Word; I would have said any Word rather than Thee or Thou, that
would have answered the Matter that I was concerned in, but still I was
condemned, Guilt following of me* I was not clear in the Sight of God* my Way
was hedged up with Thorns* I could go no further, until I had yielded Obedience
unto the little Things; then I walked alone (as my Manner was, and frequently
used so to do, when Things came as a Weight or Concern upon me) where I might
be private from all Concern, except my Soul's Concern. Oh! that desolate Place
where I used to retire alone, how many Times has my Soul met with my Beloved
there, that has sweetly comforted me, when my Soul has been sick of Love; and
full of Doubts for Fear my Beloved had left me, and forsaken me. But blessed be
his Name, that lives for ever, he still appeared in a needful Time, when my
Soul was distressed for him, and then was the Time I truly prized him. And this
is the Way of the Lord's dealing with his Children, that he may teach them to
be humble, and train them up as Children, that they may learn Obedience in all
Things to do his Will. And this is his End in chastizing of his Children, to
make them fit for his Service.

But I little thought in that Day, the Lord would have spared me so many Years,
to bear a faithful Testimony to his blessed Truth and Powerful Appearance in
the Morning of the blessed Day of the breaking forth of his glorious Light and
Life unto many thousands that sat in Darkness, whose State was miserable and
distressed, and many times past Hope of ever seeing a good Day, and at their
Wit's End; Horror, Dread and Anguish was in the Hearts of many. Oh! these were
they that could receive and prize the blessed Proffers of God's everlasting
Love and Appearance, though it was in the Way of his Judgments. For I can truly
say, that my Heart and Soul delighted in Judgment, though one Woe was poured o^^
after another; yet blessed be the Day in which the everlasting Truth was first
sounded in my Ears; which was in the Nineteenth Year of my Age. O let it never
be forgotten by me, is my Soul's Desire: But more blessed be the Name of the
Lord our God, and the right Arm of his Power, that has been made hare from Day
to Day, and from Year to Year, for the carrying on of his blessed Work, and the
Preservation of his Children unto this very Day alive in his blessed Testimony.

But the greatest Exercise that ever I met withal, was conerning this
separating Spirit that is gone forth from us, that first began to appear in
these Parts, in John Story, and John Wilkinson, about the Year, 1670. which I
find a Concern upon my Spirit to leave a short Relation of my great Travail and
Exercises in this Work and Service for the Lord, his blessed Truth and
Testimony, that he in the Riches of his Love had made my Heart and Soul a
living Partaker of, Praises be given to his Holy Name for ever.

In the Year 70. which was a Time of great Suffering amongst Friends, and from
that Time forward, as it is well known amongst Friends and others, we went to
our Meetings in the Peril of our Lives, and our Goods they took for a Prey. And
in this Time of great Exercise did this dividing Spirit begin to appear, and in
a very crafty Manner did ensnare (...) Hearts of diverse of the Simple. And
indeed there was too too many that the Lord had reached unto in the Days of the
breaking forth of his wonderful Power, whom the Lord had enriched both inward,
and outward, that had forgotten the Days of their Distress, and where the Lord
first found them out, and had caused the Offense of the Cross to cease, and had
gotten into Ease and Liberty. Oh! how did such fall in with them, to the Grief
of the Souls of the Faithful.

And in that Day of great Trouble, greater was our Sorrow for the Lost of our
Brethren, than for all our Persecutions, or Loss of Goods, or all other Abuses
of what kind soever* for indeed, great was our Sorrow on every Hand, and my
Soul was mostly concerned for the Lord, and his blessed Truth and Testimony.
Oh! how did my Heart pant after the Lord, and my Soul traveled Night and Day
before him, for Strength to stand a faithful Witness for the living God, whom I
had made a Covenant with in the Days of my bitter Bewailings, when my Soul lay
in Distress and Horror; where the Lord first met with me, when I was bewailing
my self in bitter Lamentation, saying in my Heart, O that I could find out a
Cave in the Earth, wherein I might go and mourn out my Days in Sorrow, and see
Man no more; or that the Lord would be pleased to accept of me upon any Terms;
or if my Life would be accepted of for a Ransom for my Soul, I would be very
willing to part with it. The Cry many a time ran through my Heart, O Lord, what
shall I do to be saved?

Oh! the Appearance of the Lord in that State was very precious to me, I very
gladly entered into Covenant with him, to serve him for ever, if he would redeem
my Soul from Death, and from under the Power of him that was too strong for me.
And seeing the Lord in his Infinite Mercy was so good and gracious unto me, as
to give me my Hearts Desire, how could I forget it? No, rather let my right
Hand forget her Cunning, and my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, before I
should forget to pay my Vows and Promises to the Lord, in the Days of my
Distress.

And now to come to the Matter concerning this Libertine Spirit. -- In the
aforesaid Year 70. when they began their Work, the Priest's Son of our Town was
one of the Informers, and his Curate was another. The Priest's Son bought him a
new Sword, and swore, he would bathe it in our Blood; and said, It was no more
Sin to kill a Quaker, than it was to kill a Louse. Thus they began their
dreadful Work, which is too tedious to run through the Particulars: But they
first Nailed up our Meeting-House-Doors, and set a Guard before it; and it
being on a Day that the Petty-Sessions was kept in that Town of K^^^sham, four
Miles from Bristol, there being several Justices there, they sent the Bailiff
and other Officers attended with a great Company of Rabble, who came in great
Rage with Clubs, and other Weapons, but the Lord was good and gracious unto us,
and gave us Strength according to the Day, and opened my Mouth in a Testimony
for the Encouragement of Friends, and in Praise to God, for counting us worthy
to suffer for his Name and Truth's Sake. And after me, another Woman, to the
encouraging of Friends; and the Power of the Lord was so livingly felt amongst
us, that our Enemies fell, that they could hardly speak to ask us our Names.
But at length we were Fined 20 l. apiece, but when Meeting ended, we came away
rejoicing. And indeed there was great Cause for it; for the Power of God was
over all, to o^^ great Comfort.

But for all this, the Clouds gathered Blackness, and Storms raised higher and
higher, and dismal Days appeared; and many set their Wits at Work, and
consulted together how to meet in private, and out of the Enemies Sight. And it
was but a little Time that our Meeting held together; for one that had been a
Great Preacher of our Meeting, was soon weary with standing in the Street, at
our Meeting-House-Door, and was greatly offended with us, for not leaving our
Meeting House, and come and meet with him in private in his Dwelling House. And
there was a little Remnant that could not conform to the Will of Man, but
feared the Lord, and dreaded to deny him before Men.

Then R. W. who was John Story's great Associate, whilst the said J. S. abode
in our Parts, sends a Messenger to tell us, that If we would come and meet with
him, and some others in private, where (say they) we may sit together in
Quietness and Stilness, and wait upon the Lord, and enjoy the Benefit of our
Meeting; which will be better than standing here in the Street, to be hurried
and thronged together, and hardly any Time of Stilness to wait upon God. A very
plausible Bait the Enemy had cast in their View, and indeed too many were taken
in the Snare. But when I heard this Message delivered from the Wise Preacher
afore-nam'd, Oh! the Concern that fell upon me, in Consideration of them that
had been Preachers amongst us many Years, that should have been a Strength to
the Weak, and Encouragers of the People; and Legs to the Lame, and Eyes to the
Blind; that such Men should have no more Courage, nor Zeal, nor Love to the
Lord and his blessed Truth. Oh! it became my great Grief, and I sorrowed Night
and Day; Lord strengthen thy weak ones, and make the little ones as strong as
David; give us Courage and Boldness to stand as faithful Witnesses for thy
blessed Truth. And blessed for ever be the Lord our God, he answered my
Request, and according to the Day, was our Strength renewed; blessed be that
Hand that never failed us, nor any that put their Trust in him.

So they parted from us, and left us as it were in the open Field, to encounter
with our Enemies; who the more triumphed, and made a Byword of them and us;
and cried out, Here be the Fools, the wise Men are gone. Aye, say they, they
have more Wit than to meet so near the Justices House to aggravate him, and
ruin themselves; they be wise Men to save themselves, and that they have; but
these are the Fools, they will ruin themselves do what we can; a poor Company
of ignorant Fools, that know not their right Hand from their Left? Do you think
to stand against all the Powers of the Earth? a Company of silly Fools!

Thus they pleased themselves with such Discourses, thus to lose Ground, which
was a grievous Exercise to us, to hear any of our Brethren, which should have
been as Valiants in Israel, and have gone before the little ones, like valiant
Champions to have born the Brunt of the Battle; that our Enemies might have
s^^^ their Courage and Valor for the Lord of Hosts; that the Lord through his
Instruments might have been glorified, and his blessed Name and Truth honored
and exalted over all; who alone is worthy of all Honor and Praise for evermore.

But if any should say, Was this a Discouragement to you little ones? No, our
Fear and Zeal toward God was increased; and I can say, to the Praise and
Honor of his everlasting Name, my Cries and Supplications did ascend Night and
Day unto the Lord, for Strength to stand in my Lot and Testimony, and that I
might be made able to hold out to the End. And for ever blessed be the Lord, he
strengthened my Weakness, and made the Weak as strong as David, and afforded
his living Presence amongst us, to our great Comfort. But still my Exercise
increased, which drove me to a narrow Search, and a deep and pondrous
Consideration what should be the Cause of my great Exercise; crying to the
Lord, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Will thou be pleased to make known
thy Will concerning me? Is there any Thing lodges in my Heart that offends
thee? O purge it out I beseech thee, search my Heart, and try my Reins, for I
love to be searched and tried. Lord, will thou be better pleased with us, to go
and meet with our Friends that are gone from us? Is there Service there, that
we know not of? or am I too forward, or over zealous for (...) Truth? To this
Enquiry, the Answer so suited my enquiring Heart; Keep your Meeting Time, and
Place, be valiant for my Truth upon Earth, and I will crown you with Honor.
Oh! blessed be his eternal Name; no greater Honor does my Soul desire, than to
be preserved in his Fear.

And another Time in great Exercise it often sounded in my Heart, I will gather
from far, from the East, West, North and South, and they shall come and sit
down in the Kingdom, with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the Children of the
Kingdom shall be c^st out. Oh the Concern that fell upon me, and the Cry to the
Lord, Save the Children of the Kingdom: O gather from far, and bring near them
that are afar off, but save the Children of the Kingdom. This Thing was my
daily and hourly Exercise; many times saying within my self, O Lord, save the
Children of the Kingdom, or take me to thy self, whilst thy Mercy is continued
unto me; let me not live to be cast out of thy Kingdom.

Thus the Lord gently led me in these Things, tending toward this Service and
Testimony that he was pleased to lay upon me to bear; which was the very
greatest that ever I met withal. For still my Exercise increased, my inward
Pains grew stronger and stronger, my Heart was troubled within me, my Eyes were
as a Fountain of Tears, and I cried out, Woe is me, that ever I was born. Oh;
what is the Matter that all my Bowels seem to be displaced. Then the Word ran
through my Heart, My Indignation is kindled, and my Anger is waxen hot against
this People, and my Controversy shall be with them; and the Time is coming,
that they will bring more Dishonor to my Name and Truth, than is brought by
open Profaneness, and thou shall be an Instrument to proclaim it in their Ears.
Which made me to tremble before the Lord, crying, O Lord, (...) by will thou
require such hard Things of me? Lord, look upon my Afflictions, and lay no more
upon me than I am able to bear. They will not hear me that am a contemptible
Instrument. And seeing they despise the Service of Women so much, O Lord, make
Use of them that are more worthy. And I oftentimes cried to the Lord to remove
it from me, still crying out of my Unworthiness. Oh! how unfit am I for such
Service. The Answer I received was, They shall be made worthy that dwell low in
my Fear. So we continued under our great Suffering; a poor little Remnant, as
one may term it, was in the open Field, to encounter with our Enemies. But for
ever magnified be the Name and Power of our God, his Presence was our Life and
Strength, and according to the Day, was Strength given* Whereof we had great
Cause to say, Good is the Lord, and his Mercies endure for ever. And we had
Cause to praise his Name, for that he had made us worthy to suffer for his Name
and Truth's Sake; and keeping of us faithful to stand for our God, and confess
him before Men. For I can say to his Praise, I was more encouraged in all times
of Persecution, wherein I might bear my Testimony for the Lord, that had
redeemed my Soul from Death, and raised me out of the Pit of Misery, that I
rejoiced to do the Will of the Lord; for it was more to me, than all that ever
my Eyes beheld, and to stand a faithful Witness for him.

I was constrained in the Fear and Dread of the Lord, to warn them of the
dreadful Day of the Lord, and to call them to Repentance for their
Unfaithfulness. Thus we went on in our continual Exercise, and in the Strength
of the Lord, and by the Assistance of his Holy Power, were born up in it.

But now to come to what is most before me, that all may understand how the
Enemy works in a Mystery, and under a fair Pretense to betray the precious
Life, and from the Simplicity of the Gospel, which is Foolishness to the Wisdom
of the World.

In this troublesome Time, it came in my Heart to visit Friends in Wiltshire,
where I heard much of J. S. his Goings on. He had much reflected upon several
Women for bearing their Testimony against that Spirit; and I met with two good
Women that had been upon the Service of Truth, and had a good Testimony. He
grieved them, bidding them go Home about their Business, and wash their Dishes,
and not go about to preach. And said, that Paul did absolutely forbid Women to
preach; and sent them crying home. And furthermore, he counse^led Friends to
use Christian Prudence, and remember what is said in Scripture, If you are
persecuted in one City, flee to another. So he would have them to alter the Day
and Time of their usual Meeting. And there was a little Meeting in a Dwelling
House, and he importuned them to remove it, or alter the Time; and the Woman
Friend of the House was soon gained, not being so zealous for the Truth as she
should have been. Her Husband being more faithful, would not be caught in that
Snare. She fell at Difference with him, and said, Do thou think God does not
reveal his Secrets to such as J. S. more than we? Yes surely, and if the Lord
is pleased to save us, and what we have, and make him an Instrument, why shall
not we receive his Counsel? A very subtle Bait to catch the poor ignorant
People in. Oh, this was a great Grief to the sincere-hearted! it caused many to
know Days and Nights of Sorrow. But still this Testimony always lived in my
Heart, that God's Anger was kindled against that Spirit that had turned their
Backs on Truth's Testimony; and was not only fallen into that Snare themselves,
but endeavored to ensnare many more. The Concern of it began to come over me,
insomuch that I dreaded to go to a Meeting, for Fear that Testimony would be
required of me; but the Time was not yet come.

But there came a faithful Servant of the Lord to our Meeting, whose Name was
Miles Halhead, who was wonderfully endowed with the Power of the Lord, and
great Discerning; he came to see me, and said, My Love runs unto thee, and that
for the Work's (...) is (...) for God will require hard Things of thee; thou
little think what is at Work in thy Heart; the Lord God of my Life keep thee
faithful; my Prayers shall be for thee, as often as I have thee in Remembrance;
thou art as my own Life, and sealed in my Bosom, I cannot forget thee. So dear
Child, fare thee well; the Lord my God has sent me forth once more, and when I
return home, he will ^ut the Thread of m^ Life in two. And so it was. But O the
Goodness of the Lord, with that Salutation overflowed my whole Heart, and
melted my Bowels into Tenderness, and my Eyes as a Fountain of Tears, saying
within my self. What am I but a poor helpless Creature, and am not worthy of
the least of these great Favors and Mercies that the dear Servant of the Lord
is speaking of: And surely, if the Lord be with me, why is it thus with me? I
am under great Exercises daily, and Straits many. Sometimes it seemed to me, as
if the Lord had withdrawn himself from me, which caused great Sorrow of Heart.
(...) little I (...) after our Lots being cast at Bristol, where John Story was
most of his Time; the Height of Persecution being a little over, then he could
preach one Hour after another, whilst one Word would hang to another, to the
Hindrance of several traveling Souls, that have been in Travail, and pained at
the very Heart, for a little Time to ease their Spirits, and discharge their
Duty, that all might have been comforted together. But in the room of that, a
Cloud of Darkness has come over, which has made many to groan under it. But
Oh! the dreadful Agony which I have been in to come forth with that Testimony
that had lived with me, that I had been so long confirmed in. Many Nights and
Days, and Weeks, and Months, have I gone on in Sorrow and Pain, and have eaten
no pleasant Bread. And many a time have I lain down in Sorrow, and watered my
Pillow with my Tears, crying out, O Lord what will become of me, and what shall
I do? And the Lord said, A Testimony I do require of thee. Then I said, O Lord,
if thou will open my Heart to declare of thy Goodness, and what thou have done
for thy People, and to tell of thy Noble Acts, and thy manifold Mercies, how
ready should I be to do it; but these are hard Things, who can bear them?

Thus I did reason with the Lord, till my Burden became too heavy for me to
bear. And when I have gone forth in my Lawful Concerns, and have seen any of
them, Pains did take hold of me, and Distress of Mind, and Anguish of Spirit
did seize upon me; insomuch that I sought out private Places to mourn in;
saying, What shall I do? Send me to a Nation of a strange Language, whose Face
I never knew, and make Use of a better Instrument for this great Work; they
will not hear me, who am a contemptible Instrument, neither do I kn^w whether
any of them will receive my Testimony.

For there was not one that knew for what I went through such great Exercises;
for many Friends have said, That I had something that lay weightily upon me;
insomuch that I could hardly go on my Feet; and they wondered that I did not
give up unto it, and said that I hurt my self, and the Meeting too.

Oh! I cannot but greatly admire the infinite Mercies and Loving Kindness of
the Lord, and his long Forbearance with me, in that he did not ^ut me off in my
Disobedience to him, when I knew what he required of me, as well as I knew my
right Hand from my Left, and would not obey him. But still I reasoned, and
cried out, What shall I do? And I thought that if any one had born a Testimony
in public before me, I could the better have born it; but I to be one of the
first, such a contemptible one as I, I thought I could not do it. But what
Mercy did not do, Judgment did; for the Lord was pleased to lay his Hand heavy
upon me, and with his Correcting Rod chastized me; and I did feel more of the
Displeasure of the Lord for my Backwardness to his Requirings, than ever I did
for my former Transgression. For I may say, as true as ever Jonah was plunged
into the Deep, and his Head wrapped about with Weeds, so was my Soul plunged
into a Gulf of Misery; insomuch that all Hope of ever finding Favor with God
again, was hid from me, and I left in Sorrow to lament, as one without Hope.

Oh! how did my Heart lament, and my Soul languish Night and Day; and I said, O
that the Lord would be pleased to show Mercy once more, and to raise up my Life
again, and redeem my Soul out of this horrible Pit wherein I am held as with
Chains, and bring me to my former State again, and require what thou please,
and I will obey thy Voice, though I should be hated of all Men upon the Face of
the Earth.

And before I could take any Rest, I made a deep Engagement unto the Lord, to
do whatsoever he required of me, if he would give me Strength, and be with me.
So when First Day Morning came, I had a great Concern upon me; and when I sat
down to wait upon the Lord, the Power of the Lord seized on me, which made me
to tremble; insomuch that my Bones were shaken, and my Teeth chattered, and I
was in a great Agony; and standing up, with a dreadful Testimony, and
proclaiming God's Controversy with the Exalted and High amongst the Professors
of Truth, and such as had departed from the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with such God's Anger was waxen hot, and his Indignation burned, and I warned
them to repent while they had a Day, and more to that Effect, but as short as I
could. Then a Friend stood up with a great Concern upon him, saying, A living
Testimony is the God of Heaven and Earth raising up amongst the poor and
contemptible ones, that shall stand over your Heads for evermore. So he went on
in great Power and Authority, and the Power of the Lord was greatly manifested
amongst us that Day. O Glory be to his Everlasting Name for evermore, says my
Soul, for his blessed Appearance to us that Day, and all other of his Mercies
at all Times, who returned me an hundredfold in my Bosom, after all my
unworthy consulting against the Motions of the Spirit of so merciful and
compassionate a Father, who after he had corrected me, received me into Favor
again: O Glory to him for evermore. For when I had cleared my Conscience, O the
Peace and Comfort and Consolation that I received from the Lord, was more to me
than all the World, or the Friendship of it.

So some time after, John Story and Three of his Party came to my House to
rebuke me, and was very high, and spoke great swelling Words, thinking thereby
to discourage me. John Story asked me, What I had to lay to his Charge, and
what I had against him, I told him, (...) ha^ I had against him, I never
received from Man, nor by any Information from any one; but what I have against
thee, is from the Evidence of God in my own Conscience. The Evidence of God in
thy Conscience (said he in a deriding Manner) that is not sufficient for thee.
I said, It was sufficient for me; by what else should I try Spirits with, but
by the Evidence of God in my own Conscience. So he said again, That was not
sufficient for me. My Husband said, Jo^n, to what will thou bring us now? Have
not thou and all other Friends directed us to God's Witness in our own
Conscience, and now thou say it is not sufficient. And he said again It is
not sufficient, unless thou could bring Witness that I had done some Evil
Action, and what could I accuse him of; or else what signifies it to have ought
against him?

I could have laid enough to his Charge, of his Manner of going on in Time of
Persecution; but being willing to be short with him, I said I have this to say
to thee, that thy Ways and Manner in public Meetings, is much d^ffering from
the Apostle, who said, If any thing be revealed to him that sits by, the
first is to be silent: And thou will take up the whole Time of the Meeting,
although there has been many that have been concerned before thy Face, and that
greatly; so what thou do, is not ignorantly, but wilfully. He answered me
very angrily, and said, If I do do so, what can thou make of that? I did say,
Thou art out of the Order of the Gospel; for it is said, the Church may
exercise one by one; and thou do not as thou would be done by. And
further I told him, that this was not his Place to abide here a Preaching, and
(...) burthening the Souls of the Innocent; but thy P^ace is to return Home
into the North, and be reconciled to thy Brethren, before thou go to offer thy
Gift. So many great Swelling Words proceeded from him, and his Three Friends
which were with him; and so went away sorely displeased.

And their Rage increased toward me, and many Faithful Friends. Many were
concerned that had ^itten under their dead Ministry, but mostly against me, for
discharging my Duty, in Obedience to what the Lord required of me, and
committed to my Charge, concerning that Spirit, which did for some Time
endeavor to Lord over God's Heritage; which made many sensible ones go bowed
down many a Time, my Soul is a living Witness; with many more, of what I have
here declared; which is but little of their Persecution toward me, in
Consideration of what follows after. For the Lord was pleased to continue my
Exercise in that City, where John Story abode much of his Time. And several
more of that Spirit oftentimes frequented thither in that Time of Exercise with
that Spirit. And the Lord was pleased to make me so sensible of them, that in
the Night Season I had many a sore and hard Travail upon my Spirit, when I knew
not of any of them by any Information from any one. Then did I make my Moan
unto the Lord, crying in secret; O what shall I do to go through such hard
Things? O that I may be excused this Day, or that thou will be pleased to keep
me in Silence this Day; then should I be very willing to go to Meeting to wait
upon thee, and to sit under the Shadow of thy Wing with great Delight, where
thy Fruit will be pleasant to my Taste. Then it would come up before me* the
Covenant that I made with the Lord in the Days of my Distress, when all the
World, and the Friend, ship of it, would not yield me one Dram of Comfort to my
poor distressed Soul. Then did I promise the Lord in that Day, which was twenty
Years before That, that if he would redeem my Soul from Death, and give me
Assurance of Life, I would serve him all my Days, if he would give me Strength,
and be with me; for I mattered not what I went through for his Name's Sake. And
it would often come up before me, that they that followed the Lord, and loved
him most, did whatsoever he commanded them. Oh! I cannot but admire the long
Forbearance and Loving Kindness of the Lord, that he had not cut me off in my
Gainsaying, and Unfaithfulness; for I never wanted the Assistance of his Holy
Spirit, in giving up to his Requirings, blessed by the Holy Name of our Lord
God, and the right Arm of his Strength for evermore, who alone has been our
Keeper and Preserver to this very Day, Glory be to his Great Name for evermore.

Now I shall give a little Account of one Meeting in Bristol, which was one of
the greatest Exercises that ever I met with, or ever went through since I had a
Remembrance. When I was going to the Meeting, I had a great Exercise upon my
Spirit, and knew not for what; but after some Time of waiting upon the Lord, I
saw my Service, for J. Story was there, who came into Bristol the Night before;
and several Friends had warned him not to come and offer his Gift, till he was
reconciled unto his Brethren; for if he did, they did believe that the Lord
would concern one or another to bear Testimony openly against him, But I knew
not of it till afterward; for if I had, I believe my Service would not have
been so hard and strange unto me. But whilst he was a declaring a great Cloud
came over the Meeting, and I was greatly exercised in my Spirit; insomuch that
the Lord constrained me to cry, Woe to that Spirit that dimned the Glory of the
Lord, and woe to that Pot that the Scum remains in it, for in it is the Broth
of abominable Things, such as the Lord's Soul lo^^^th, and the Souls of (...).
Oh how it ran through me again and again, and I was pressed in my Spirit to
declare it, whilst he was a speaking: But I was sensible what a Disturbance it
would be in the Meeting. I would fain have for^orn till he had done, but I
durst not; for I was afraid to speak, and afraid to keep silent. For if I had
been silent, I kn^^ that I should have withstood the Spirit of the Lord in my
own Conscience. But I strove against it, by Reasoning, and saying, O that the
Lord would be pleased to excuse me this Day, and that I might not lose his
Favor, then I should have accounted my self happy. But all this Reasoning
would not do that Service that God had for me to do that Day. But when I found
no way to pass it by, I stood up to clear my Conscience and discharge my Duty
in the Sight of God. And when I considered the low Estate and weak Condition
that I had been in that Day; O the Lord's Strength sustained me, for according
to the Day was Strength given me, Glory to his everlasting Name for evermore,
says my Soul, for his blessed Reward was returned into my Bosom, and he
renewed my Strength, and raised up my Life in Dominion over all their
Opposition I then met with.

And thus, Reader, I have given this short Account of the going forth and Work
of that Spirit; since which, I have seen a withering and Decay come upon it,
near Twenty Years having since passed over my Head.

O the many unchristian-like Treatments that have been brought forth by that
Spirit; and how have some of them writ and printed against Truth and its good
Order, and how have they turned their Backs in the Day of Battle, and have left
their Brethren in the Hands of their Enemies? O how grievous have their Actions
been since the Year 70. Now let all consider whether that Testimony that God
raised in my Heart in that Time of my great Distress, and great Bowings down,
and bitter Bewailings, when the Lord answered me, for what my great Exercise
came upon me, was not true; for I can truly say, I went under the Exercise of
their Backsliding many a time. And the Lord was pleased to exercise me, and to
cause me to go through a Vail of Tears, and a Land of Drougth, in Order to humble
me, and that I might bow to his Will, and obey him in all Things; for Obedience
is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken to the Voice of the Lord, is better
than the Fat of Rams. And there is no hearing of his gracious Voice, but by
humbling under his mighty Power, and subjecting the Mind unto his Will; then
does he make known his Mind and Will, and then blessed are they that hear his
Word, and obey it; and blessed are they that know his Will, and do it. O
blessed be his eternal Name for ever, and for evermore, says my Soul, for all
his Mercies, and Favors, and Blessings, and good Gifts, and Tokens of his
gracious Love that he has bestowed upon me, ever since I have had a
Remembrance. First, in keeping me out of the Evil of the World in my young and
tender Years, and preserved me from falling into many, and various and great
Temptations, of which I had a great Share in the Days of my tender Years; and
then for taking me by the Hand, and leading me in his Way, and also opened my
Spiritual Eye, that I might see the Way that led toward his glorious Kingdom;
and for his preserving of me to this very Day alive in his blessed and glorious
Testimony; and all these his manifold Mercies, which are all in my View at this
Time. And in the Remembrance of them my Heart is truly bowed, and with hearty
Thank^ giving do return unto my Heavenly Father all Glory, and Honor and
Praise, and everlasting Renown be given unto my God, and our dear Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus, who is sitting upon his Throne, Judging in Righteousness,
and swaying ^his Scepter in Holiness; who is worthy for ever to be feared,
honored, and obeyed, faith my Soul, at this Time, and for evermore, Amen.

And now, my dear Children, it further lives in my Heart, to leave some of the
Testimonies that the Lord was pleased to lay upon me in that Time of great
Suffering in Bristol, and near unto it.

In the Year, 16^0. I was greatly concerned to go to the Mayor of Bristol with
this Testimony, on their Sessions-Day in the Morning; waiting at his Door for
his rising from his Bed, I met with him going through one of his Rooms, before he
was fully ready, and said unto him, The God of Heaven and Earth has
constrained me this Night and Morning to come unto thee with this Testimony:
therefore don't lay it by thee, as a Thing not worth thy minding, but read it
and well weigh and consider what is written therein; for could I have been
(...) in the Sight of God in not coming, I had not been here this Day.

Which Testimony was as follows,

THIS is to the Mayor, Alderdermen, and Officers of all sorts, and all that
have a Hand in persecuting of the Righteous Saints and Servants of the most
High God, called Quakers, who are near and dear unto the Lord, as the Apple of
his Eye; and the Lord has said in the Scriptures of Truth, Touch not min^
Anointed, and do my Prophets no Harm. Now consider you People of all Sorts, who
have the Scriptures of Truth so frequently amongst you. O do you make such ill
Use of them, as not to take Notice what is written therein? surely they were
given forth for a better Purpose; for the Lord our God, who is full of
Compassion, and Bowels of Love toward the Work of his own Hands, has in the
Riches of his Love provided a Way wherein People might escape his Wrath and
^erce Vengeance; I say the Lord has placed a Measure of his good Spirit in
your Hearts, that never consented to Sin; the which, if you would give up to be
guided by it, it would make you happy for ever; it would teach you to do unto
all Men, as you would all Men should do unto you; this is a good Lesson for you
to learn, this would make you honorable in the Sight of the Nations, and
beautify you in the Sight of the People; then no rending, tearing, nor
devouring, neither making Havoc, nor spoiling of our Goods, no imprisoning of
the Servants of the most High God, for the Answer of a good Conscience; no
beating and throwing of the ancient and feeble, because they cannot so hastily
go out of the Way, as your hasty Wills would have them. O the God of Heaven
will plead for these Things; and a Day of Reckoning will the Great terrible and
mighty Jehovah, who is the God of the whole Earth, call for; and dreadful and
terrible will he be in his Pleading. Oh who will be able to stand before him,
who is like a devouring Fire, and all the Wicked, and all that forget God,
shall be as Stubble before him, says the Scriptures of Truth.

Now, O ye Rulers and People of all Sorts, read the Scriptures, and see what
became of the Persecutors in Days past, for they were written and left upon
Record for the Comfort of them that live the Life of them, and for warning of
the Wicked and Ungodly. Now consider Dives in the Days of his Health, how he
fared sumptuously every Day, and consider not poor Lazarus, that begged at his
Gate. O how hard-hearted was he; but what became of him? and what a dreadful
Place of Torment is prepared for the Wicked and for the Ungodly, wherein they
are made to cry out when it is too late, for one Drop of Water to cool their
Tongues? and it shall not be granted them. Therefore for the Lord's Sake, and
for your own Soul's Sake, Repent, left you per^st to all Eternity, if you
repent not. Wherefore the Call of the Lord is once more sounded in thee, O City
of Bristol, and to the Inhabitants thereof. O repent, repent before it be too
late, and break off thy Sins by true Repentance, and thy Transgression by
showing Mercy; plead the Cause of the Innocent, and let the Oppressed go free;
and be not worse than them of old, who cried, Help, O Men of Israel, etc. But
now there is a Company of rude Boys, and Rabble of the basest Sort, with the
Officers, thronging in amongst us, pressing of us together without Mercy, and
the Officers themselves taking of us by the Arms, and throwing us along, until
we can hardly recover our selves; and pulling off the Men's Hats, and throwing
them from them in great Fury, and hale to Prison many in a Day. Oh be ye
ashamed, ye Rulers, and all that have a Hand in this Work. O dread and tremble
before the Great and Terrible God that made you, and gave you Breath and Being;
for he is able to dash you in Pieces like a Potter's Vessel, and to take away
your Breath, and to lay you as dead Men before him. Therefore consider it
before it be too late, and before the Days of your Calamity come upon you, and
the Arrows of the Almighty slick fast in your Livers, and there will be none to
help you, nor to deliver out of his Hands; for the Lord will assuredly visit
this Nation, and that for the Treachery and cursed Oaths, Pride and Oppression
of many therein, whose Sins have reached unto Heaven. And it is the
Determination of the great God of Heaven and of Earth to send his destroying
Angel amongst them, and shall thin them. Great will be your Sorrow, Pain, and
Perplexity, Terror and Amazement, Horror and Vexation of Spirit; alas, for the
Day will be great, who shall be able to stand in it, but the pure in Heart, and
them that have made the Lord Jehovah their Choice, and love him above all
things, as well in Times of Peace, as Times of Distress, such shall dwell with
the Lord for ever.

And now, O you Magistrates, consider what you are a doing: And you that are
Fathers of Children, O dishonor not your gray Hairs so much, as that you
should be found nourishing of such ungodly Actions. Oh! consider your Places
and wherefore the Lord created you; it was to serve him, and not to serve Sin,
nor Uncleanness. And wherefore did the Lord our God, who is rich in his
Mercies, ordain Means or a Way whereby Men might escape the Snare, but that he
would have all to do well, and live in his Favor for ever. Oh! be you all
awakened this Day, and be you rouzed up, and sleep not in Security; for
Destruction is near if you do not speedily repent. Oh consider the Sodomites of
Old, how they were toiling, and nothing would satisfy them but the Servants of
the Most High God, that he had sent to warn them; and instead of being warned
by them, they the more provoked the Just and Holy God, who wills not the
Death of Sinners, but had rather they would return and live; and therefore has
he sent his Servants early and late to warn the People; that by taking warning
the might escape the Wrath of the most High God, that all are liable to fall
into, that are adding Sin unto Sin. And truly I know nothing more likely to
draw down the Vengeance of the dreadful and terrible God, than to cruelly use
his Children, and to make them to groan under their Oppression, as Pharaoh did
in his Day; until their Groans pierced the Ears of the Lord, and he said I have
heard the Groanings of my People, and I am come down to deliver them. And truly
our God is the same, as great in Power, and as mighty to deliver at this Day,
as he was in that Day. And truly if you do thus go on, as you have already
done, your Days will be shortened, and you shall not prosper. Therefore
consider it in Time, I entreat you; as you tender the Good of your own Souls,
and your Childrens, be not Patterns of Cruelty to succeeding Generations; leave
not your Names upon Record for such ungodly Actions, and unchristian-like
Dealings, as persecuting your honest Neighbors for keeping their Consciences
void Offense toward God, and all Men; for it is because we fear the great God
of Heaven and Earth that made us, and gave us our Breath and Being, and durst
not betray our Lord and Master, as Judas did in his Day: But mark what became
of him. I say, because we durst not deny the Lord, nor wrong our own Souls,
therefore are we Sufferers this Day under your Cruelty. And as I have already
said, that the Just and righteous God of Heaven and Earth, who will one Day
plead with all People, and not one shall escape from his Tribunal-Seat without
a just Recompense of Reward for their Deeds done in their Lifetime; I say
again, He is no Respecter of Persons; he regards not the Rich no more than
the Poor; he is just in all his Judgments, and equal in his Ways, ever blessed
and honored be his worthy Name and his Honorable Truth, says my Soul, for
ever, and for evermore, Amen.

These Things have been weightily upon my Spirit, and for the clearing of my
Conscience have I wrote them, desiring your Moderation may appear, and that
Noble Spirit may arise in you, that was in them of old, who tried all Things,
and held fast that which was good. However it be, whether you will hear or
forbear, clear shall I be in the Sight of my God, who said to his Servant in
the Days of old, If thou warn the Wicked, and they turn not from their
Wickedness, yet thou have delivered thy Soul, but his Blood shall be upon his
own Head.

Elizabeth Stirredge.

And it further lives with me to leave a Relation of our Sufferings, Trials,
and Imprisonment in the Year, 1983.

That if it may fall to any of your Lots to suffer for Truth's Testimony, or
for the Answer of a good Conscience in any Case whatever, I mean in Things
relating to the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, which you may be
assured to meet withal during the Time of your Pilgrimage here; Well, I have
this to say, and this Testimony to bear for the living God, and his everlasting
Mercies, that amongst the many Blessings; and Favors, and Deliverances, that
we are made Partakers of from Year to Year, for these Seven and Thirty Years;
which blessed be the Name and Power of our God, he has made me a living
Witness, and an Enjoyer of his blessed Truth: And amongst all the blessed
Seasons of his Love, this was the greatest of Mercies unto me; for the God of
Heaven and Earth was with us at our down-lying, and up-rising; and whilst we
slept, he kept us, and when we awaked, he was present with us; the right Hand
of his Power upheld us, and his good Spirit sustained us, and made hard Things
easy unto us, and bitter things sweet. When we awaked in the Night Season,
Spiritual Groans ascended unto him, and in the Morning-Light, living
Thanksgiving and high Praises was returned unto him that lives for evermore;
who was the God and Father of all our Mercies and Blessings, and gave us
Strength, Courage and Boldness to stand faithful unto our Testimony, to the
Praise of the Lord. The Terror of Evil Times did not affright us, though our
Enemies determined our Ruin and Destruction, and pleased themselves in
afflicting of us.

The Way and Manner of our going to Prison, and by whom we were persecuted.
ONE Robert Cross, Priest of the Parish of Chew-magna, in the County of
Somerset (whither we removed some Time before, and where we then dwelt) who was
a Great Persecutor Twenty Years before, but had left it for some Years, until
he began afresh with us; his Rage being again renewed against Friends, for
their Faithfulness to the Lord, and his blessed Truth. He was greatly offended,
but against me in particular was he enraged greatly; to that Degree, that he
said, If he could but live to see me ruined, and my Husband for my Sake, he
cared not if he died next Day. And that which enraged him against me, was, I
being with a Neighbor that lay very weak, and on her Deathbed, there being
several of the said Priest's Congregation, I had a Testimony amongst them,
declaring a Day of Mortality to them, which accordingly fell out to Three or
Four, in Two Weeks Time, which was taken Notice of; and the Priest being told
of it, was enraged as aforesaid, and contrived and made Use of several
Instruments for the carrying on of his cursed Work. He sent to the Neighboring
Justice, and threatened him. That it should cost him an Hundred Pounds, if he
did not put the King's Laws in Execution against the Quakers, as the Justice
told me himself, upon a Time when they took me from a Burial, and had me before
them; the Manner of which, comes up before me at this Time.

It being my Lot to be at the Burial of a Daughter of one professing Truth,
where I had a Testimony to the People, many being there of the Priest's
Company, which greatly offended him. The next Week after, the Father of this
young Woman dying also; the Day of his Burial happening on the very Day that
several Justices were met at their Petty-Sessions, near the Burying-Place of
Friends, they sent a Warrant, with some Officers, into our Burying-Yard, to
bring away Preacher and Hearers (if any one there was, that did take upon them
to preach) there being a great Concourse of People, many coming in with the
Officers, to see what they would do unto us; and a very great Company with the
Corpse. And no sooner were we come into the Yard* and the Multitude, but the
Power of the Lord seized upon me, and made me to tremble, that I could hardly
stand on my Feet; but by taking hold on a Friend that was near me, I said,
There is a Day coming, in the which, the God of Heaven and Earth will be too
strong for the stout-hearted amongst you; therefore repent, and amend your
Lives, while you have a Day, and a Time; for as the Tree falls, so it lies,
and as Death leaves, Judgment finds, for there is no Repentance in the Grave;
therefore hasten, hasten to Repentance, and Amendment of Life, for the Great
God of Heaven and Earth will thin this Nation, for the People are too many that
are sinning against the Lord. This, and much more ran through me; for my Heart
was opened, and my Spirit greatly enlarged by the mighty Power of the Lord, and
drawn forth in Bowels of Love toward the People; for I saw the Tears running
down many Faces, and many said, they would never be again as they had been. And
the Officer standing by me with a Warrant in his Pocket, he exceedingly
trembled, and could hardly open the Warrant, without rending it, crying, Oh!
that I had been twenty Miles from my Habitation, that I had not had a Hand in
this Work this Day; pray don't you take it ill of me, for I am forced to it;
you must go with me before the Justices, but I wish I had been farther off,
then I had had no Hand in troubling of you, pray don't you be angry with me. I
said, Don't be troubled so much, I am not offended. I will go with thee.

So when we came before them (the Justices) one of them was greatly enraged
against me; he said, You are an old Prophetess, I know you of old; ((...) might
well say so, for he was one of them that I bore a dreadful Testimony amongst,
Ten Years before.) He greatly threatened me, and said, I should go to Prison,
and he would ruin my Husband; but where is be? He cares little for you, I will
warrant you, else he would have come with you, and not have suffered you to be
sent to Priso^^ly your self; you are a troublesome Woman; Parson Cross
complains of you, you scatter his Flock, and have done him more Injury than all
the Quakers ever did; you made an Oration at the Daughter's Grave last Week,
and now at the Fathers also; you shall cerly go to Prison, that shall be the
least I will do unto you. Thus he went on in an outrageous Manner, and I stood
before him, looking steadfastly upon him, and did not answer one Word in all
this Time; but he continued, and said, You are a subtle Woman, your Tongue is
at Liberty when you are with your Conventicle; but you are dumb, now you are
come before us, I will send you to Prison. I said, I am not so much affrighted
at a Prison, as thou think I am; but if thou send me to Prison, and shorten
my Days, because of my Weakness, thou will but bring innocent Blood upon thy
Head, and that will cry aloud for Vengeance.

He said unto me, Why do you break the King's Laws then? and why don't you go
to Church? you are running headlong into P^^ery. I deny the Pope, said I, and
his Actions. Do you love the King? said he, Yes, said I, Why do you not obey
his Law then, said he? I have broken no Law this Day, said I. I was at a
Burial, and it is no Breach of Law to bury our Dead. Well, said he, you say you
have broken no Law, will you keep the King's Law for the Time to come, and
leave off holding Conventicles, and Preaching? So far as the King's Laws do not
wrong my Conscience, (said I,) I will keep them, but I will not wrong my
Conscience for the King, nor no Man else; and I do not know whether ever the
Lord may open my Mouth again; but if he do, and unloose my Tongue to speak, I
shall not keep silent. So, you can talk now, when you please; but (said he to
them that sat by him) she will be dumb again by and by. I will ask her one
Question that shall make her dumb again. Well, you say, you have not broken the
King's Laws, you were but at a Burial; but I will warrant you held a
Conventicle amongst the People at John Hall's House, before you brought him
forth? What say you to that? I did not presently answer him, until he said
again, Why* don't you answer? I knew she would be dumb. Then I answered, I am
no Informer; Judas was an Informer, when he betrayed his Master. Then he looked
on them that were by him, and said, I tell you these Quakers are the subtilest
People that ever we have to (...) withal, there is no dealing with them; one
while they will not speak at all, and another while such cross Answers as this;
I protest I will send her ^o Prison. Then he called the Clerk to make my
Mittimus, and the Officer was called for; then he raged at him, and said. You
silly Fellow, you have let all the Men go, and have brought a troublesome Woman
here to trouble us; you should have brought two or three rich Men to have paid
for the Conventicle. Sir, I did not know them, (said he.) No, I will make you
swear you did not know them; give him the Book, make him kiss the Book. The
poor Man was so scared at it, that he cried, Pray Sir, don't you do it, I
cannot swear. Then I looked on the Justices, ^and said, My Soul is grieved to
see ho^ you oppress Men's Spirits, in forcing of them to wrong their
Consciences. Do you not think that the Just and Righteous God will not visit
for these Things? Yes verily, a Day of Reckoning will the great God of Heaven
and Earth call for, and dreadful and terrible will it be to all the Workers of
Iniquity. Then the Vother Justice that sat by, and had forborne meddling all
this Time, being a moderate Man, who was not forward in persecuting his
Neighbors; he seeing the other so furious, said, Come, let us come to the
Matter in Hand; this Woman was at a Burial, and there are many Religions in the
World, and all have their Way to bury their Dead, and we cannot hinder them.
But come Officer, let us know the Truth of the Matter; was this a Conventicle,
or no? If it was, there must be a Place prepared for her to stand up over the
People to preach; was it so? -- No, Sir, said the Officer. What then stood she
on? Nothing But the Earth of the Grave. And what said she? I never heard the
like in all my Life, said he. She said, There was a Day coming, in which the
God of Heaven and Earth would be too strong for the stout-hearted amongst us;
and proclaimed a Day of Mortality amongst us, and warned us to repent, and
amend our Lives; surely it made my Heart to tremble. How! What a Woman make
your Heart to tremble? Yes, Sir, and I had no Power to touch her, until she had
said all ^e had in her Heart to say. How, (said the angry Justice,) You silly
Fellow, you an Officer, and had a severe Warrant in your Pocket, to bring
Preacher and Hearers, and you let her say all she had to say; you are not fit
to be the King's Officer; send him away to Prison. Then he that was the
moderate Justice, went forth out of the Room, and sent one to me, to desire me
to go forth; I not being forward to go, for that honest Confession of the poor
Man, did me more Good, as I thought, than my Release at that Time. The Justice
returning in again said, Pray Neighbor Stirredge go home about your Business.
So I returned to my Habitation again, and had the Peace of the Lord in my
Bosom; everlasting Praises be given to the Lord our God for ever.

But this wicked Priest after this Burial, went from House to House, and
threatened the People, That it^ should cost them Five Pound a-piece for going to
hear the Quakers. And some being affrighted at his Threatening, asked him
Forgiveness; others said, they would go again. But still he continued his Rage,
for nothing would content him but our Ruin. For after he had sent the Officers
to our Meeting, which dealt roughly with us, by pulling and throwing, and
threatening; all which did not content him. But a little after, as he was
preaching in his Pulpit, he fell down dead, whilst the Words were in his Mouth;
as many of the Hearers being th^n and there present, declared unto me, that
they thought he would never have drawn Breath again. But after a great a do,
and all Means used, that they could make Use of, he a little recovered again.
But, said the People, we hope it will be a Warning to him for to leave off
persecuting his Neighbors. But it was not, for he was heard to say, That if he
could but live to accomplish that Work that he had began, he did not care if he
died presently. So he seeing his Neighbors not forward in answering his Will
to the full, he sends to Bristol for John Hellier, with more of his
Confederates, who was the great Persecutor at Bristol, whom he thought did his
Work to the full; for they came in with many Officers, into our Meeting at
Chew-magna, Five Miles from Bristol, where we were solemnly met together to
wait upon the Great God of Heaven and Earth; they rushed in amongst us, and
arrested us all in the King's Name, and left a Guard upon us, and went to the
Priest's House to Din^^r, and s^a^d near two Hours; in which Time we had our
solemn Meeting peaceable, wherein we enjoyed the Presence of the Lord, to our
Soul's Comfort; who never failed his Children in a needful Hour, but always
gave them Strength suitable to the Day. Everlasting Honor be given to his holy
Name for ever.

So after they had fed to the full, and drank in Abundance, they brought with
them Faggots of Wood from the Priests, with a Hatchet, and great, Ax, and
commanded the People to aid and assist them. So they mustered up their Force as
they came along And the People seeing what Posture^ they were in, cried out,
What! are you a going to do? Blow up the House, and burn the Quakers (said
they) then down they threw Wood at the Meeting House Door, and cried out, Set
Fire on them; blow up the House. Then the People cried out, It will burn o^^
Houses that are near, and you will not be so wicked to burn the People, will you?
Then they came in, in a violent Manner, and laid Hands on the Children,
threatening them to burn them; bringing some of them out, they said, We will
make them a Warning to all others, and make them repent that ever they were
Quakers Bastards.

Then they laid Hands on us, haling and dragging us along, beating some with a
Cane, and hewing off the Legs of the Forms, and taking other Forms by the two
Ends, and so threw the Friends backwards that sat thereon; often calling to
our Neighbors to aid and assist them. Some of them replied, We cannot work on
the Sabbath Day. So they continued the Work, until they had wearied themselves;
then bringing us all out into the Street amongst many People, I said unto them,
Where is your Teacher? What is that to you, some replied, you shall be sure to
suffer, if the rest do not. But where is your Teacher? I said again, let him
come and see the Fruit of his Labor; this is his Flock, and this is your
Sabbath Days Work; let him come and behold the Fruits of his Labor, and ^ee if
he will not be ashamed of it. Then they forced us in again, and John Hellier
caused his Man to make our Mittimus, and himself committed us to Ivil-Chester
Goal, where we were so cruelly used, as is after related.

John Hellier being the Head Man in this Work, our Headborough asked him, What
he should do with us? he replied, Have them away to Prison presently. The Day
being (...) spent, and the Journey long, it being Twenty and two Miles to the
County Goal, he asked J. Hellier how we should go? for there are many Women
that cannot travel on ^oot. He answered, I will press some Carts to haul them
along. I said, We are not ashamed to be Carted for the Testimony of our Lord
and Master Jesus Christ. -- But you shall be carted, said John Hellier, as the
Whom are in Bristol.

So they returned to their Master the Priest, and told him they had done his
Work effectually, for we were all committed to Prison. He put off his Hat, and
thanked them, and said, It would add Years to his Life, now he should live in
Peace. But take Notice how short his Days were. The Headborough on the Morrow
Morning, went and told him, he must provide Horses to carry the Quakers to
Prison on. He answered, The Devil should have them first. He asked what he
should do to get us thither? Drive them along like Hogs, said the Priest. The
Officer was our Neighbor, a moderate Man, and what he did, was sore against
his Will; he came from the Priest's House to ours, and told us what the Priest
said. So before we were carried to Prison, he, the Priest, was walking in the
Steeple-House-Yard, where he had a great deal of foolish Discourse with some
Boys that were there at Play, too tedious to mention. But the last Words was,
He bid one of the Boys take a Halter and hang himself: And then lie fell down
dead. His Family being called, brought forth a Chair, and other Things
necessary, and lifted him therein, and used all Means they could, there being
many People about him: Some crying out, Don't you disturb the Old Man; but let
him go quietly. Aye, said others, Let him depart in Peace, and don't you
disturb him, that his Neighbors (the Quakers) may abide at Home, and not go to
Prison. Some of the Neighbors came into our Shop with Joy, and said, Now you
may abide at Home, for Mr. Cross is fallen down dead in the Churchyard. And he
was going mad before, said the Mother of one of the Boys; for, said she, He bid
my Boy take a Halter and hang himself. Lord have Mercy upon me! what wicked
Counsel was that of a Minister, said she; we were in good Hopes that his
falling down in the Pulpit would have been a Warning to him, but we see it is
not; but after an Hour and halfs Time, he had so much Life, as that he called
them that were about him, Rogues. So they carried him in his Chair, to his Bed,
where he remained some Days, and died; but never sensible, as I was informed by
several. But we were carried to Prison before he died, where we had such
Entertainment, and hard Usage, as follows.

Our Keeper Giles Bale, and his Wife, put us in the Common-Goal, with Three
Felons, that were condemned to be hanged, and would not afford us Straw to lie
upon, though we would have paid for it; they locked us up, and carried away the
Key with them (they living some Distance from the Prison) thereby to prevent
the Under-Keeper from showing us any Favor: And the Head-Keeper's Wife said,
There let them be like a Company of Rogues and Whores together. If I had a
worse Place, I would put them therein.

Note, This Keeper and his Wife son after died and their Family came to Ruin.
And truly that was a most dismal Place, where we had neither Stock nor Stone
to sit upon; nor any Resting Place to lean against, but the black Stone-Wall,
covered over with Soot, and the damp cold Ground to lie upon. But before we lay
down. Three of our Friends that were Prisoners in the Room adjoining to that we
were in, put through the Grates in unto us Four Dust (or Ch^^t) Pillows, and Two
Blankets, and a little Straw, whereon we lay down, like a Flock of Sheep in a
Penn, in that very cold Winter, that we never had the like since I had a
Remembrance; where most of us took our Rest very sweetly. But when I lay down
in that dismal Place, it came into my Heart a Consideration of these Things;
saying in my Heart, Lord, thou know for what we are exposed to this
Hardship, it is because we cannot betray our Testimony, nor wrong our
Conscience, nor deal treacherously with our own Souls. And seeing it is so,
Lord, be thou our Comfort in this needful Time; for it is thy Presence, that
makes hard Things easy, and bitter Things sweet, and thou have sweetened the
Waters of a bitter Cup. O thou Physician of Value, that can strengthen both
Soul and Body I Be with us this Night, and all the Nights and Days that we have
to live in this World. Then the Lord was pleased to open my Heart unto him, and
to fill it with his living Mercy, and comfortable Presence, insomuch that it
overflowed my whole Heart, that I could have sung aloud of the Goodness of the
Lord, and of his Mercies and Blessings bestowed upon us. But I looking over my
Fellow Prisoners, and seeing them so sound asleep, I did forbear to open my
Mouth; but in the Morning there came many People to the Prison-Door, to see how
many of us were dead with our hard Fare; some of them was sure (as they said)
that I was dead, for I looked as if I would not live until the Morning. But
then finding us all alive and well, they confessed and said, Surely we were the
People of God, if there were any. That being the first Day, we had a Meeting in
the Prison, and many Friends came there, where we had a very good Meeting, and
the good Presence of the Lord was with us, and filled our Hearts with Joy and
Gladness; insomuch that I was constrained to praise the Name of the Lord, and
magnify his Power, and to testify in the hearing of many People, that we were
so far from repenting our coming there, that we had great Cause to give Glory,
Honor and Praises to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth; for that he had found
us worthy to suffer for his Name and Truth; for this powerful Presence was with
us, and sanctified our Afflictions, and made the Prison like a Palace unto us;
and we would not change our State, for all the Glory of the World, if it were
prostered unto us.

This and much more ran through me, which I shall omit for Brevity-Sake: But in a
Word great was the Goodness and Mercy of the Lord toward us, from Day to Day,
that I have sometimes said, Surely the Lord is honoring his People; he is
weaning of them from this World. It seemed to me, as if I had no Habitation,
but the Prison; then was the Time for the Lord to reveal his Secrets unto his
Children, that he had tried and proved in such Things; for it was Faithfulness
that rendered the faithful Servant acceptable in his Master's Sight, and caused
him to say, Well done thou good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful
in a little, be thou Ruler over much; for I cannot believe, that him that is
not true to a little, will ever be made Ruler over much. No, no, therefore keep
to Truth in all Things, and to the plain Language, and teach your Children so
to do, and as I have said, In that Time of great Afflictions, and Sufferings,
and parting of many, Wife from Husband, and Husband from Wife, and both from
tender Children; then was the Lord pleased to reveal his Secrets unto his
Children. And seeing the Goodness of the Lord from Day to Day, and being made
sensible of his gathering Arm from Day to Day, a great Concern came upon me for
many careless ones, that had deprived themselves of that blessed Benefit that
our Souls enjoyed with the Lord. Oh! in Consideration of them, and their
deplorable State, my Soul has often been poured forth before the Lord, crying,
O Lord, that they may come and partake with us of thy great Mercies, as we do
from Day to Day. Then it would oftentimes come up before me, the great
Dishonor they had brought upon the Lord, and his blessed Truth, by their
Unfaithfulness, and Unbelief. Yea, great Dishonor indeed, they could not trust
the Lord, as if he had no Power or Strength to preserve them. Then I cried, O
Lord, many are weak and feeble, and the Cruelty of Men has been great,
terrible, and desperately wicked; and thou have suffered them to be very cruel,
to the Astonishment of many; insomuch that many a poor Soul has been tossed as
with a Tem^^st; and for Want of keeping to that blessed Guide and Rock, Christ
Jesus, who alone was able to give them Boldness and Courage to go through the
Work of this Day of Affliction; many a poor one has fallen, not knowing they
should be deprived of so great a Reward that we have, and do enjoy; blessed be
thy Holy Name for ever. And Lord, thou know that my Heart is pained within
me; my Soul is in Travail, and my Bowels is rolling toward the Poor and the
Distressed, the tossed with Tempest, and not comforted; the Enemy of their
Souls is busy to cast them down, and to fill their Minds with Trouble and
Unbelief, always casting before them their Unfaithfulness, and would fain keep
them in Bondage, and from returning unto thee by true Repentance, that thou
may heal their Backslidings, and teach them to be more faithful for Time to
come. O Lord, what shall I do for them? They are often in my Remembrance. Lord,
open my Heart in Prayer more and more and bow thy Ear to the Supplication of
thy Servant, as thou have done many a Time; and accept of the Prayer of thy
Servant, for them who cannot pray for themselves. O Lord, if it may stand with
thy blessed Will, once more to afford them a Day of Visitation, and try them
again. O Lord, deal not with them according to their Deserts; but Lord, I pray
thee, have Compassion on the Works of thy Hands, and remember poor Mortals this
Day; for surely many of them are greatly distressed, and compassed about with
many Temptations, and my Heart is pained for them. And in this mournful State,
the Lord was pleased to speak comfortably unto me in the Secret of my Heart, in
a living Spring of Life, and said, The Time of the Deliverance of my People
draws near, and nearer than many are aware of Though I have suffered their
Enemies for a Time to triumph over them, yet too many have grown high and
lofty, and forgotten the Days of their Distress and Calamity, and what State
they were in when I first found them out, as it were without Hope: Then did I
send forth my Light and my Truth, which many received with Thankfulness of
Heart, and with a ready Mind, and bowed thereunto, and yielded Obedience for a
Time. But after I had confounded their Enemies, and appeared for their
Deliverance, and enriched them greatly, then they forgot the Days of their
Distress and Poverty, and the many Promises that they made unto me in the Day
when they were sorely beset with many Enemies, within, and without. But since I
have appeared for them, and confounded their Foes, and have done more for them;
than they looked for, or expected at my Hands, how have they forgotten to pay
their Vows unto me, that many of them made unto me in the Days of their
Distress? And how far are they gone into old Israel's Sins? Nay, have not some
so much lost their Senses, as to put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for
Light? But blessed are all they who continue truly humble, for my Covenant is
firm, for ever established, and never to be altered with my Remnant that have
been faithful, that have parted with all that I have called for, for my Name
and Truth's Sake; and who have had no Helper in the Earth but me, nor none to
lean upon, nor to confide in, but the Arm of my Power; who could not turn to
the right Hand, nor to the le^t, unless I go before them. O these are mine, and
my Secrets shall be with them; they shall be found worthy to stand in the Gap,
and to interceed for the People; notwithstanding their Poverty, and the
Nothingness of themselves, yet they shall be as Instruments in my Hand, to
proclaim my dreadful Day, and the Day of my Vengeance amongst the People, What
many may hear, and fear, and turn unto me by true Repentance, that I may heal
their Backslidings, and receiving them freely. And in Order there^^^^ I will
bring a Day of Deliverance for my People, and many of them shall praise my
Name, and tell of my wondrous Works, and what I have done for them that others
may be encouraged to be faithful the Residue of their Days; for I have seen
many bemoaning themselves in Desolation and sorely bewailing their lost
Condition; for many have been made desolate, by reason of the Cruelty of the
wicked one, and they being desolate, have mourned unto me, and I have seen the
Bemoaning of my People; and I have seen the Travails of the Faithful for the
Unfaithful; and for the Cries of the Poor, and the Sighings of the Needy, will
I arise, and I will work a Way for the Deliverance of my People; for the Time
is near, that the Prison shall not enclose them, but they shall come forth, and
declare and publish my wondrous Works; for I will work, and none shall be able
to hinder; and many shall proclaim my dreadful Day, and the Day of my
Vengeance; that many may hear, and fear, and return unto the Lord by true
Repentance.

Oh this was the glad Tidings that livingly lived with me Night and Day in the
Time of my Confinement. O it was great Satisfaction to my traveling Soul; it
answered the very Petition that many a Time I had put up in the Night Season
unto the living God, everlasting Honor, Glory and Renown be given unto him
that lives for evermore, says my Soul. For surely I cannot but admire the
wonderful Loving Kindness, and Mercies and Favors of the Lord our God. The
High and Holy One that inhabits Eternity, is condescending to the Poor, and to
the Low, and the Little; he has revealed his Secrets to many who have not
thought themselves worthy to be made Partaken of so great a Benefit; but their
greatest Concern has been, for the Redemption of their Souls from under
Satan's Power; and when that was done, now Lord preserve me in thy Fear for
ever, and keep me from Sinning against thee, that my Soul may not go into
Captivity again.

This was the chiefest Concern of my Spirit, in the Time of my great
Afflictions, in the Passage out of Egypt's Land, and through the Wilderness,
where I met with many Straits, and great Hardships, and many Enemies; and many
crooked Ways, and By*Paths that the Enemy of my Soul had cast up to catch my
Feet in (...) but the Lord in his infinite Goodness, who never failed his
Children that sought him, above all Things, he provided me a Way for me to
escape his Snares, as he did his Israel in former Days, Glory be given unto his
Holy Name for ever. This was Part of the Exercise during the Time of my
Confinement with my Husband, and many more of the Servants of the most High
God, in Ivelchester-Goal. And when the Time drew near of our Deliverance, when
I came out of the Prison to go to the Sessions held at Brewton, I assuredly
believed that the Time was near (that lived in my Heart) that the Prison should
not enclose us any longer, though it was altogether unlikely; for our Persecutors
were exceeding wicked against us, although our grand Persecutor the Priest, was
at that Time taken off in a very remarkable Manner, as before mentioned;
notwithstanding, many remained, that were very cruel, and acted cruelly and
unjustly against us; and put by the Jury that were chosen of our Neighbors,
and called another Jury presently in the Court, such as they thought most fit
for their Turns. Then the Clerk began, and read an Indictment, viz. That we
were found, or taken at an unlawful Assembly, in Force of Arms, in Contempt of
the King, and his Laws, Crown and Dignity, to the Terror of the People, etc.
And he said to the Jury, Gentlemen, you have heard their Indictment, if you
find them guilty, you find for the King. And a Bishop that safe upon the Bench
with the Judge, stood up and said, That the first Quaker that ever was in
England, was banged for being one concerned in the Popish Plot. I answered,
That the first that was ^^^led a Quaker, was now alive. He fall again, He could
prove by sufficient Witness that he was banged for being one in the Popish
Plot. Then the Bishop being enraged, by reason he was contradicted, held up his
Hand toward us, and bid us have a Care what we said, for them that had Estates
amongst us, it should cost them their Estates, and them that had not, should
lie in Prison whilst they perished. Such was their great Rage and Wickedness
against us, that it was very grievous to hear them; but there was a secret Cry
many Times ran through my Heart unto the Lord, Lord, work for thy Name Sake, and
confound their Wisdom and Rage, and bring down their proud and wicked Spirits,
and bring to naught their mischievous Contrivance, that they have been
contriving against thy Innocent People, as they have been making themselves,
merry, and drinking Wine to the full, and feeding themselves with the Fatness
of the Earth (as Drives did) and have what their Hearts lust after, and yet
none of all these Things will give them Content nor Satisfaction; no, no, but
the Destruction of a poor despised People. O Lord, make thy Power known this
Day, and that that will make most for thy Honor, and the Prosperity of thy
blessed Truth, do thou bring to pass this Day, that it may be known that there
is a God in Heaven, that can rule the Hearts of the Children of Men; and make
them to know that there is a God, whom all Men ought to fear, honor and obey.

And surely the Lord was pleased to hear the Prayers of his Children, and to
answer the Request of them in the Days of their Afflictions; for this Jury whom
they chose, as they thought most fit for the Work, was long absent; but when
they came with their Verdict, the Foreman could not readily speak, but looked
(...) like a dead Man. Then the Bishop in a Rage, asked him, Whether (...) were
guilty, or not guilty? He answered, Guilty of not going to Church, (...) not of
a Riot. Of not going to Church, said the Bishop, that is not the Matter in
Hand, Guilty of a Riot, (...) mean. Then the rest of the Jury said, No, my
Lord, Guilty of not going to Church, but not of a Riot. You mean of an unlawful
Assembly then. Yes, said the Foreman; Why, that is a Riot in Law, said the
Bishop. Then I answered, We are no Rioters: Then (...) Crier of the Court
shaked his White Rod over my Head, and said, Be silent. I said, No, we may not
be silent, we are a sober People, and live a good Life and Conversation; we do
unto all Men, as we would be done by; I never wronged Man, Woman, nor Child;
nor I know none that have ought against us, unless for the Answer of a good
Conscience. Here are of our Neighbors that can testify for us. The Crier
continued shaking his white Rod over my Head, crying, Hush, and be silent. Then
one of the Justices, a sober ancient Man, said, Let the Woman alone to speak
for her self, she speaks Truth, and Reason, let more of them speak; you are
many against them, and if they may not be suffered to speak for themselves, it
is very hard. That a little stopped the Rage of the Bishop, and Judge; then they
called to ou^ Keeper to take us away, and to bring us when they called for us
again; so they went to their Dinner and we with our Keeper. But no sooner were
they gone, but a great Concern fell upon me to follow them; I could neither eat
nor drink, but was pressed in my Spirit to go after them; and when I came, they
were sitting down to their Dinner, with a Noise of Music playing at the going
up of their Dishes, which were very many of the choicest Things. I went in
amongst them whilst they were at Dinner, but I did not see a fit Opportunity,
but waited till they had dined; and as they were rising, I came in with a great
Dread and Awe over my Spirit. One of the Great Men came to me, and said, Good
Woman, who would you speak withal? I said, the Judge of the Sessions; he said,
I am the Judge, if you have any thing to say, I am ready to hear you. But he
not being the Man that sat upon the Bench that Day, I said, Thou art not the
Man that I am going unto. Then he turned toward the Judge that sat that Day,
and said, This Woman has something to say to you. Then one of the Justices
laid his Hand upon my Shoulder, and said, Let this good Woman have what she
will to say, we will hear her. But I getting near to the Judge, and Bishop,
that sat at the upper End of the Table, said, Forasmuch as you are all here,
that sat in Judgment against us this Day, I have a Concern upon my Spirit in
Vindication of our Innocence; we are well known amongst our Neighbors to be a
sober and an honest People, that live a good Life and Conversation; we do no
Wrong to none, we can do Good to them that hate us, and pray for them that
despitefully use us. I know no^^ that has ought against us, but concerning the
Law of our God; notwithstanding all this, we are numbered amongst Transgressors,
and have been turned into the common Goal amongst Felons, our Trades and
Families lie liable to be ruined, and all these Things shall not befall us, but
you shall understand thereof, for I am here this Day to testify the Truth of
it; for which, the Just and righteous God will one Day plead; and as sure as
the Day gives its Light, and the Covenant of the Day and Night cannot be
broken, there is not a Man here, nor any that draws Breath in the open Air,
that shall escape the Tribunal Seat of God's Divine Justice, till a Sentence of
a just Recompense of Reward every one shall receive for their Deeds done in
their Lifetime, whether they be good or evil.

And I can truly say, the Dread of the Lord was upon me, insomuch that they
were smitten, and Paleness appeared in their Faces, (...) had not a Word to
say. But wh^^ I was going forth, some Hectoring young Man said, I thought it
would be so, when this Woman came i^, I thought she would preach when the
Spirit moved her; but why would you suffer her (said he to the Man of the
House) to disturb your Guest? Then he said, Get you down Stairs, or I will
throw you down. I turned in again, and said, What Wrong have I done unto any
one here, if I could have kept my Conscience clear in staying away, I had not
been here this Day. But whether you will hear, or forbear, I shall be clear in
the Day of Account, of all your Blood. So I left them, and returned to my
Place, and had great Peace with the Lord; but we were not called into Court no
more that Day: but the Morrow Morning early, we were called to come into Court,
in Order to finishing our Trial; but the Bishop came no more into the Court,
that we saw, or knew of; (...) the Judge was very moderate that Day; a great
Change indeed! he only called to the Keeper to bring up the Quakers, and called
some of us by Name, and said, You that stand here indicted the Court Fines you
(...) a-piece, and never spoke a Word of the Payment of the Money, but broke up
the Court (their Business being done) and went their Way, and our Keeper also
lest us, to our great Admiration: Above Fourscore Prisoners that were before
them that Day, were freed.

After Dinner, the Crier came in amongst us where we were, and said,
Neighbors, and Friends, I am glad^ for your Release. You are the People of
God. Men would ruin you; but God will not suffer them so to do. And said, Where
is the Woman? I said, Here am I. He said, The Lord bless you, I pr^^^ you
forgive me; for I intended no H^^ (...) would not do any Thing again, (...)
you; though I shook my Rod over your (...), (...) I did it in no Evil toward
yo^^, so I hope my honest Neighbors and I friends, you will forgive me. We
answered, Yes, freely; and was very loving to him, and desired his Well-being
(...) over.

He went his Way in much Love, praying God to bless us, and we returned to our
Habitations, with the Peace of the Lord in our Bosoms; everlasting Praises be
given unto the Lord our God for evermore.

Now, my Children, the End and Aim of my leaving this to you, and all upon
Record, is, that ^^uture Ages may know that the great God of Heaven and Earth,
that brought up the Children of Israel out of Egypt's Bondage, that made the
Waters stand on Heaps, and brought his Children through on dry Land, and
over-turned Pharaoh and all his Host, he it is that is our God; in whom we have
believed, and his Power is not lessened, that he cannot save, nor his Arm
shortened, that it cannot deliver, this Day, as in former Days, Praises to his
Name for ever.

This, my dear, Children, you known (...) certainly true; but for you and all
others to keep in Remembrance these and all other Mercies that the Lord our God
has bestowed upon us, ever since he gathered us to be a People, which is Eight
and Thirty Years ago; for I was in the Nineteenth Year of my Age, when J. Camm
and John Andland came first to Bristol, in the Dread and Power of the Great God
of Heaven and Earth; and I am a living Witness that his powerful presence was
with them, and made their Ministry so dreadful, that it pierced the Hearts of
Thousands. O the Dread and Terror that seized upon my Heart, at the Sound of
John Audland's Voice, and the Sight of him, before I rightly understood what he
said. But before the Meeting was over, the Spirit of the Lord moved in my
Heart, and in the Light I came to see my woeful and deplorable State, which made
me to cry to God for Mercy; a Day never to be forgotten by me. And now I have
arrived to the Seven and Fiftieth Year of my Age. Oh! the many Deliverances,
both inward and outward, have I been made a living Witness of. The many Decrees
that have been Sealed against us, the many Threatenings of Ruin and Destruction
have been sounded in our Ears, how have we been as killed all the Day long? and
counted as Sheep for the Slaughter, and yet behold we are a live to this Day to
praise the Lord. How have the Enemies roared both inwardly and outwardly, and
have come with open Mouth to devour at once? And how has our God helped us!
The Great God of Heaven and Earth is he that has been our Strength in a
needful Time; and has sustained his People by the Strength of his Arm, and
has born up our Heads above the Waters, that they have not drowned nor
overturned us to this very Day, everlasting Honor be given unto the Lord for
ever. But our Enemies has he overturned, and broken their Bands in sunder, and
have made them to bow under his dreadful Power, and has taken many off in his
Displeasure. Oh! what shall I say in the Behalf of all these his wondrous
Works, that mine Eyes have seen? but more especially the inward Work of
Regeneration. Oh! my Tongue is not able to demonstrate the Tenth Part of it,
that the Lord has been pleased to bring me through. Oh! what shall I say at the
Remembrance of them, all which at this Time is livingly come up before me; but
bow before the Lord, and prize his Mercies for evermore.

And now, my dear Children, keep faithful to the Lord, and his blessed Truth,
that you have been trained up in, and your Eyes shall see for your selves, as
mine Eyes have for my self; be faithful to the Motion of the Spirit of Christ
Jesus in your own Bosoms, and don't you overlook the little Things, for they
that be not faithful in a little, shall never be made Ruler over much.
Therefore, don't you exercise your selves in any Matter too high for you, but
mind the Motion of the Spirit in your own Hearts, and hearken diligently to the
Voice of the Lord, that your Souls may live; and keep the Lord always in your
Remembrance, that you sin not against him. And remember to keep to the daily
Cross, which will crucify all the Motions of the Flesh, and keep you alive to
God, and near unto him; and in so doing, you will know his Council; and seek
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof, above all Things in this
World, and other Things shall be added unto you. For I will assure you, this is
the Way that my Soul has traveled in, and have found Favor with God. And one
Thing more that I have experienced, which has been of Moment unto me, that in
all my Afflictions, and Pain, and Sorrow of Body or Mind, I have not had an Eye
to confide in Man, but have applied my Heart to the Lord, and have poured forth
my Soul unto him. O thou Physician of Value, that can cure both Soul and Body;
thou that knows better how to administer to my Necessity, than I can ask of
thee; from thee alone do I look for Comfort, for there is none besides thee,
that can administer true Comfort to me. And the Lord in his due Time, has
appeared to my Comfort and Satisfaction, and has established my Goings, and
has kept my Feet from falling, and my Heart from going astray, unto this very
Day; everlasting Honor be given unto his Name for evermore, Amen.

And since I have seen the good Effects of my Labor and Travail, I earnestly
beg of the Lord Night and Day, to do for you, as he has done for me. Oh! how
has my Prayers ascended unto the Lord, in Public, and in private, and in my
Concerns, when my Hand has been at my Labor, and on the Highway Side. O my
Children, let it not be in vain, for I can truly say, that you have been the
Children for whom many Prayers have been offered.

Therefore consider it, when I am gone from you, and can no longer watch over
you; for my Time is much over. I have no long Time here on this Side the Grave;
but I shall be gone, and see you no more in this World, nor take more Care for
you, nor give more Counsel; therefore have I written this little Account of
Part of my Travails out of Egypt's Bondage, toward the Land of Rest and Peace;
which have been through great Difficulties, and through many a sore Combat with
the Enemy of my Soul's Peace; many a fiery Trial, and through a Vale of Tears;
but don't you be discouraged at it, for you know how wonderfully the great God
of Heaven and Earth has been my Support in Time of Need, and has born up my
Spirit, and given me more Strength than I could have believed, if it had been
declared unto me. And now I seeing so many Professors of Truth at this Day,
going on at such an easy Rate, and so careless, and so indifferent, so
slighting the Cross, and so little regarding the Travail of their Souls, and so
little concerned for their Soul's Good, and so slighting the Testimonies of
Truth, and spending their precious Time and Season that God has put into their
Hands; as if Heaven's Glory and a State of Eternity were not worth the looking
after; and as if there was no God to punish for these Things, nor any Day of
Account.

Oh! the Consideration of these Things has been weightily upon my Spirit for
many Months, and Morning and Evening has my Heart been afflicted, saying
within my self, Lord, what will become of such? I fear the Visitation of many
of them is almost over. Oh! how does my Soul lament for them; and has the
greater Concern upon my Spirit, to interceed with the Lord to preserve me and
mine for ever. O Lord, my Soul is concerned, and my Heart is bowed at this Time
in the Sense and Feeling of thy everlasting Love, and Mercies and Blessings
that thou have bestowed upon me a poor distressed Object, till thou took Pity
on me, and looked on me in the Days of my Distress, and spread (...) Skirt over
me. And now in Consideration of this thy great Love that thou shewedst unto me
when I was bemoaning my self like a silly Dove with out a Mate, or like a
Mournful Widow, or like a Sparrow upon the Housetop, that is sitting alone.
Oh! when it comes up before me, Lord, how is my Heart broken? and how is my
Spirit melted, and how does my Soul-love the Lord, and desires for ever more to
obey his Voice, and to ^ow to his Scepter, and keep Covenant with him, and
dwell and abide with him for ever; that I may be kept fruitful all my Days.

And now, O Lord my God, seeing thou have been pleased thus to deal with me,
and to have a Regard to the low Estate of thy Handmaid, and have heard my
Prayers, and answered many a Time; O Lord, if I have found Favor in thy Sight,
this once more hear my Petition this Evening, and grant me my Request; and
Lord, thou that have kept me all my Life long, to this very Day, bless my
Children, by preserving of them in thy Fear. Cause them to remember thy
Mercies, and thy Blessings from Year to Year, and from Day to Day; and cause
them to remember what thou have done for them, and their Father and Mother, in
the Days of their great Affliction, when Destriction and Ruin were determined
against us; and when we were almost past Hope, how have thou appeared, and
confounded our Enemies before our Eyes? Lord, let these Things never be
forgotten by me, nor them, whilst we have a Day to (...) upon the Earth. But, O
Lord, I pray thee bless and sanctify all these thy Blessings and Mercies
bestowed upon us, and give us a thankful Heart, and humble Mind, and more and
more unite us unto thee, and cause us to wa^k worthy of the same. Oh that my
Heart was but worthy enough; for methinks my Heart is not able to set forth thy
Praises enough: No, surely it is impossible for Tongue to declare thy infinite
Goodness, and thy Noble Acts. But, Lord, we that have made our Choice of thee,
and have believed in thy Son Christ Jesus, have known him to be sufficient
Strength in Time of Need; and we that have known thy holy Arm to be made bare,
for the Deliverance of us out of Thraldom and Captivity, have known it
sufficient to preserve us to this very Day. Therefore, O Lord, strengthen my
Faith, Hope, and Confidence, that I may steadfastly believe that thou will
preserve my Children, when I am gone to my Resting Place. Lord keep my Family,
and thy People; let not one of them be lost, or a Prey to the Wicked one. O
Lord, if thou should yet add more Days to my Life, let me not cease to pray
for them, and their Offspring, that I may do my Endeavor for their Entrance
into thy blessed Kingdom; so shall I go to my Grave in Peace. And now, O Lord,
I do wholly resign them into thy Hands, as knowing right well thou art able to
keep them through Faith, and preserve them all their Days, and to do more for
them than I am able to ask of thee. O Lord, whatever Exercise they meet withal,
Lord strengthen them, and bear up their Spirits, that they may not be overcome
with the Temptations of the Wicked one: For, Lord, thy Power has been
sufficient to redeem my Soul. So Lord, once more do I commit the keeping of my
Spirit, with my Children, and all thy Flock and Family upon the Face of the
whole Earth, with whom my Soul is at Peace, and in Unity; and do feel the
Renewings of thy Love at this Time, which is the greatest Comfort that can be
here enjoyed; therefore does my Heart, Soul and Spirit, and all that is within
me, return unto thee, O Lord, all Praises, Glory and Honor, with hearty
Thanksgiving, and pure Obedience for evermore. Lord, accept of it this Evening,
as an Evening Sacrifice from a broken Heart, and a contrite Spirit, which thou
never rejected; for surely, O Lord, thou art worthy of it, from this Time
forth, for ever, and for evermore, Amen.

This was finished the 13th Day of the 2 d Month, 1692. By me, Elizabeth
Stirredge, Sen.

The last Fourteen Years of her Life after this, she lived at Hempsted in
Hertfordshire, whither her Husband removed, with her and Family, from
Chew-Magna, in the Coun^y of Somerset, in the Year 1688. and did not travel
much abroad in her latter Days; except once or twice to Bristol, etc. and
usually to the Yearly Meeting at London, once a Year; but labored mostly about
home, as she grew aged and weakly; but often as the Lord afforded her Strength,
visited the Neighboring Meetings in the same County; and her Service therein
tended to the edifying and comforting of God's Heritage, as many faithful
Friends in those Parts can bear her Witness. And great was her Concern for the
Meeting she belonged to, which she frequented so long as she was able; many
Times going to it through great Weakness; and many living and powerful
Testimonies (especially toward her latter End) did she bear in it, exhorting
Friends to Faithfulness; frequently declaring and setting forth the wonderful
Power that attended Friends in the Beginning (of which still does all the
Faithful) of which she often spoke, and bore Testimony to, in the Beginning of
her last Ilness, amongst her own Family. And so departed this Life, and laid
down her Head in Peace with the Lord, at Hempsted aforesaid, on the 7th Day of
the 9th Month, 1706. in the 72d Year of her Age.

A Salutation of my endeared Love in God's Holy Fear and Dread, and for the
clearing of my Conscience, once more unto you of that City of Bristol, amongst
whom my Soul has some Years travailed under many a dreadful Exercise, which
has made my Bones to shake, and my Heart to tremble before the Great God of
Heaven and Earth, who will yet further bring his notable Day, wherein all Flesh
shall tremble before him.
AND now in the Sense of the great Love of God that has been extended unto you
of that City continually, first, in sending of the Servants amongst you, and
endued them with Power from on High, that it wrought effectually upon many,
whereby many are brought out of Egypt's Darkness, and through the Red Sea
Spiritually, and could sing (...) the Lord, as Moses and the Children of Israel
did, when the Lord had wrought wonderfully for their Deliverance and by a high
Hand and a wonderful Power brought them forth: And blessed be the Lord God
Almighty, and honored be his worthy Name, and the right Arm of his Strength,
there are many living Witnesses of these Things in this our Day. Oh! dear
Friends! forget it not, but dwell low in the Sense of your deplorable States
that you were in, when first the Lord reached unto you, and opened that Eye in
you, that let you see you were undone for ever, if the Lord did not arise for
your Deliverance, when many cried out, for a Savior, or else I perish for
ever. O Friends! what was too dear for us to part with in that Day for the
Lord? Truly can my Soul say, That all that ever my Eyes beheld, was nothing to
me in Comparison to my Soul's Redemption. Oh! it was precious in my Eye, and to
this very Day the living Remembrance of it dwells fresh upon my Spirit at this
Time* and my Heart and Soul loves the Lord, and blesses his worthy Name for
ever, and for evermore. And now the Lord is remembering the Covenant that many
made with him in the Days of their Distress. O remember, remember to pay your
Vows to the Lord; and look into your Hearts this Day, and with the Light of the
Lord search and see, whether you are in Covenant this Day with the Lord or no?
If you are, surely you are not this Day to serve your selves, but the living
God, that made you for a Purpose of his own Glory, and redeemed you with his
precious Blood.

And now consider, you that are at Ease in your Sion, and eating and drinking,
and wearing what seems desirable in your own Eyes, notwithstanding the Honor
of the Lord lies engaged, and your Souls in great Danger, and the Servants of
the Lord distressed in your Behalf: O for the Lord's Sake, and for your own
soul's Sake that will perish, if you do not speedily repent, and arise and
strip your selves, and shake your selves from these Things and come away, while
the Call of the Lord lasts. O ^inger not, for the Day of the Lord hasteneth
mightily, let nothing hinder you; make no Excuses any longer, lest you be
excluded out of God's Kingdom, and the Door be shut against you. O think upon
it, before the Midnight Cry come, wherein not one Day more will be afforded to
work for the Lord. O then, Wife nor Children, Lands nor Livings, Husband nor
Trade, Gold nor Silver will redeem one Soul; then that doleful Sentence will be
^ounded against the Rebellious, Depart, ye Cursed Workers of Iniquity, into
everlasting Torment, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Oh the Sense of
these Things lie very heavy upon my Spirit, and truly bows my Heart in
Reverence before the Lord, and Morning and Evening is my Heart afflicted,
insomuch that I can say, as the Prophet said, Oh that my Head were as Water,
and mine Eyes as a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep Day and Night, for the
Unfaithful, that my Spirit might be eased: For truly, Friends, though I am the
least amongst many Thousands of the Lord's People, and a weak Instrument, yet
my Soul is concerned this Day, and my Prayers to the great God of Heaven and
Earth are, That he would be pleased again to arise, and utter his Voice, and
thunder his Alarm from his Holy Habitation, and make the Hearts of People to
tremble before his wonderful Power, and that he will yet afford a Day, and try
them again, and that his Trumpet may once more (...) an Alarm, to the awakening
of their Consciences out of that Spiritual Slumber, wherein many are sleeping,
and dreaming it is well with them, and that they are rich, and f^i, and full,
and need nothing; when their State is miserable, and wretched, ^aked and bare,
and undone for ever, if they do not speedily repent, and return with their
whole Hearts, and cry to God for Mercy, and that he will pardon their
Iniquities, and heal their Backslidings. O backsliding Israel! return, return,
before it be too late, for the Lord has long born with thee, O thou City of
Bristol! As the Testimony livingly sprung in my Heart a little before thy
Distress came upon thee, I was constrained to say, O thou City of Bristol! a
City of the Mercies of the living God, he has highly favored thee; thou have
had a Day and a Time, wherein thou might have enriched thy self with the
Treasures of God's Kingdom, and might have grown strong in the Lord, and in
the Power of his Might, whereby thou might have stood in a living Testimony
for the Lord, with one Consent, as one Man: But now behold, the Days of thy
Distress are at hand, and thy Calamity like an armed Man; and now who can
bemoan thee, or who can interceed the Lord for thee? Or who can say to the
Lord, Why have thou suffered these Things to come to pass? Because it is in his
Justice he has done it. And blessed be his Name for ever, he is fulfilling the
(...) of his Servants, whom (...) sent early and late to (...) is dreadful Day
in that City, (...) after Year, and Month after Month, has the Mind and Will
of the Lord been declared, and Messenger after Messenger, insomuch that many a
full Stomach lothed the Honeycomb, and all that seemed to receive it, made not
a right Use of it; for the Lord's End, in sending his Servants in Days past,
was, that his People might be fitted and prepared, that a Judgment, or a
Destruction should not come upon his Children at unawares, but that they should
believe the Testimonies of his Truth, and take Warning by it, and amend their
Lives, and be bowed in Spirit, and humbled under the great God of Heaven and
Earth, that your Prayers in this State might ascend unto the long provoked God,
whose Anger is waxen hot, and nothing will appease his Anger, but true
Repentance, and that with Speed, and true Brokenness of Heart. Oh! Is this your
State? Or are you this Day trampling upon the Testimonies of Truth, and upon
the Sufferings of your dear Brethren and Sisters, that are Sufferers this Day
for the Testimony of Jesus, and are cruelly used? Oh! can you forget these
Things? Come, put your Hands to the Work, and your Shoulders to the Burden, and
cry mightily unto the Lord to spare a little, and give a little Time to renew
your Strength in him, that you may do something for the Lord, though but at the
last Hour; for surely Friends, the last Hour to many is very near; and the long
invited, if they miss of this Hour, they will never have another Hour to work
for the living God; and therefore is my Soul concerned, and my Heart pained
within me, and Shortness of Time is much before me, and therefore I beg it of
you, that you will lay it to Heart, before it be too late, and consider how
soon the Lord can call for your Breath; for our Lives here are likened to the
Flower of the Field, as the Lord said to his Prophet, when he said, What shall
I cry? Cry, All Flesh is Grass, and the Glory thereof as the Flower of the
Field? And I pray, how soon is that withered, and the Beauty of it comes to
naught? And seeing it is so, why will People run the Hazard of their poor
Souls, for that which will augment to their perpetual Misery, World without End.

Oh! the Lord grant me my Request, and bow his Ear to my Prayer; for I am very
earnest with the Lord, and my Heart is pained within me on your Behalf. Oh! it
is you, it is you that should have been as Pillars in the House of the Lord,
that the weakest might have leaned upon you, that your Courage and Valor might
have appeared in the Sight of the Weak, that they might have been encouraged by
it, that the Strong and the Weak might have gone up together to the Mountain of
the House of the Lord, where the Lord would have taught you of his Ways, and
you might have walked in his Paths, and he would have fortified you with Might,
Courage, Strength and Valor, and your Bow would have abode in his Strength, so
that you would have grown strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might,
which he would have given unto you in a bountiful manner, had you wholly given
up your selves, and all that God Almighty had given you, and gave Way to that
Noble Spirit that was in Joshua and Caleb, who were resolved to follow the
Lord, they and their Families. Oh Friends! I can hardly write what arises in
my Heart, as touching this Matter; but in the Fear of the Lord, I have this to
say, Your Eyes should have seen the Wonders of the Lord in a miraculous Manner,
as they did that thus leaned upon the Lord, and trusted in his Strength, and
believed in him, and then all Things were possible; and by obeying of the
Command of the Lord, the Walls of Jericho fell: But if they had reasoned with
Flesh and Blood, or thought the Instruments too mean, or consulted with
Reasoning, they had never seen the Power of the Lord to do his Work; neither
shall any now this Day, that reason with Flesh and Blood: No, no, first learn
Obedience, give up to obey the Lord, and then your Eyes shall see the blessed
Work of the Lord to be fulfilled in its due Time; for he is God Almighty, and
all-sufficient, therefore let every Heart confide in his Power.

So, dear Friends, keep your Hearts with all Diligence; for out of it are the
Issues of Life; for we all well know, that the People that live most chaste,
keep nearest to the Lord, and they that are nearest, hear most of his Counsel:
And truly Friends, the Time is at Hand, when all shall be distressed for the
Lord, and the most Faithful will not spare of the Heavenly Oil; then it will be
too late for any to go to buy. Oh! it often rises in my Heart, that yet a
little Time, and Time unto many will be no more, for which my Soul is more
concerned, than for any outward Suffering; for, surely Friends, it is in my
Heart to believe, that the great God of Heaven and Earth, who has been long
provoked, and tried many Ways, and shaken his Rod over this Nation many a Time;
and nothing will prevail, therefore will ^e arise in his Strength, and go through
this Nation, and will afflict the Inhabitants thereof. He will bring Terror and
Amazement upon them, that none shall be able to deliver out of his Hand; for he
has long called, and they have not regarded; he has long held out his Hand,
and they have not laid it to Heart, and therefore will their Calamity come at a
Day unawares; and because they have not regarded the Call of the Lord, when
they cry aloud to him, he will not regard them. O then blessed eternally, and
happy for evermore will all them be, that have obeyed the Lord in their Day,
and have not their Portion with the Wicked.

So with my endeared Love unto you, and that beyond Utterance, desiring and
praying for your Soul's Prosperity, I remain your loving Friend; Elizabeth
Stirredge.

A Faithful Warning to the Inhabitants of England and elsewhere. With an
Invitation of Love unto all People, to call them to Repentance, and Amendment
of Life; for by so doing, many have escaped the Judgments that have been to be
poured down upon their Heads.
O England! England! the Sense of thy Wickedness has been very heavy upon my
Spirit a long Time, even many Months, and Years, and sometimes has my Mouth
been opened in the Fear of the Lord to testify against the Proceedings of the
Inhabitants of this Land: Many have been my Prayers and Tears unto the Lord in
secret for this Land of my Nativity: And since it has pleased the Lord of his
infinite Goodness, that he has been pleased to renew his Mercies and Favors
once more unto this Land, O prize it while you have Time, and walk worthy of
it, le^t by your Unworthiness you may provoke the Lord to Anger: Therefore
hasten to Repentance, O you Inhabitants of England, and take up a Lamentation,
and weep bitterly, and let it be for a Lamentation indeed; and bewail your
former State, and mispending your Time that is so far gone over your Heads; for
your Sins have reached unto Heaven, as truly as ever the Sins of Sodom did,
which the Lord destroyed, and repented not. And truly if there had not been a
Remnant in this Land, that the Lord in his infinite Mercy and Loving Kindness
has redeemed out of the World, and the Wickedness thereof; and not only so, but
they retain their Integrity, Zeal and Faithfulness unto the Lord unto this Day,
whose Souls have mourned in secret Night and Day unto the great God of Heaven
and Earth, that he would be pleased to bow his Ear unto the Request of his
Servants, whose Mournful State is well known to the Lord, or else I believe
that this Nation had been more miserable than it is. And truly I can say, that
my Heart is, and has been for a long Time pained within me, and I have been
concerned because of the Abominations of the Times, crying, How long, Lord,
will it be e^e thou will arise, and ease thy oppressed Seed, that (...) Night
and Day under the Sense of the great Wickedness that lodges in this Nation,
which has grieved the Souls of the righteous from Day to Day, as just Lot's was
in Sodom: And these have groaned under it with great Agony of Spirit, and
sometimes very earnest with the Lord concerning this poor Nation; and indeed I
have been dissatisfied, when I saw how Things appeared in this Land of late
Years. Oh! out of the Bitterness of my Spirit have I said again and again,
Lord, be in^reated for this poor Land, I beseech thee, and take Pity upon the
innocent Ones therein; for, Lord, if thy tender Mercies would have spared Sodom
for Fifties, or Tens Sake, surely, O Lord! thou will spare this poor Nation for
thy People's Sake, for thou art God, and changes not; therefore am I
encouraged to cry unto thee, hoping that thou will be entreated by thy
Servants. And truly can I say, that I had Satisfaction, and the Lord was
pleased for to show me* That that has come to pass in this Land, some Time
before it came to pass.

And now in the Fear of the Lord, I have this to say to Professor and Profane,
hasten, hasten to Repentance and Amendment of Life, O Inhabitants of England,
for the Lord has long strove with thee; he has shaken his Rod over thee many a
Time, and he has sent forth his Servants early and late, and has endued them
with Power from on high for to proclaim his dreadful Day, and the Day of his
Vengeance; and the everlasting Gospel has been preached throughout this Land;
and he has showed his Signs and his Wonders in the Earth, (...) he did over
Jerusalem of old. What could the Lord have done ^^ore for thee than he has done
to ^ain thee to Repentance? and thou art not fitted for thy latter End: No, no,
thy Account is very large that thou have to give unto the Lord, for thou have
required the Lord Evil for Good; and for all his ender Mercies and loving
Kindness, and his Forbearance and tender Compassions; notwithstanding all this,
thou art in thy Sins and Abominations, and going on in the broad Way which
leads unto Misery and Destruction, and the End thereof will be everlasting
Torment, World without End. Therefore remember it whilst you have a little Time
lent to you, and how little none knows; therefore consider it, and lay it to
Heart, and remember that there is a God in Heaven that ought to be feared, for
he is a just and righteous God* that will do righteously with all People. He is
no Respector of Persons; he regards the Rich no more than the Poor, but every
one that serves him, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him, whether
poor or rich: And this is That will be required of you (...) true Repentance,
and that with (...) and Amendment of Life; true Brokenness of Heart, and
Humility of Mind, and that in the Sense of his abounding Goodness. O do but
look back a little, and consider, and see whether you can count the Mercies of
the Lord that he has bestowed upon this Land, both Spiritual and Temporal; no,
no, they are past numbering: Well then, do you not think that the just and
righteous God does look for something at your Hands? yes surely, O Inhabitants
of England, a Sacrifice of a broken Heart, and a contrite Spirit, and a
trembling at his Word, will be that which will engage the Lord for to continue
his Mercies to this Land. O wash and make you clean, put away the Evil of your
Doings, cease to do Evil, and learn to do well. Cleanse your Hands you Sinners,
and purify your Hearts you double-minded ones. For this know, that the Day of
the Lord draws near, wherein he will be a swift Witness against the Wicked; and
the Ungodly must be turned into Hell, where there is weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of Teeth for ever; therefore look to it, I entreat you, before it be
too late; and fear the Lord, and dread his glorious Majesty, for he will be a
swift Witness against the Wicked.

And thou, O City of London! What shall I say to thy Inhabitants, that my
Spirit may be eased: O fear, dread and tremble before the great and terrible
God, who can dash you in Pieces, and lay you as dead Men and Women before him;
he will pull down your Crown of Pride, and lay your Honor in the Dust:
Therefore hasten to Repentance before it be too late, for the Lord has long
strove with you, therefore look to it before it be too late, I entreat you, and
before the Lord pour forth his Vials of Wrath upon this Land, and his long
Forbearance comes to an End, and his Decree be sealed and the Angel of God
swear by him that lives for ever and ever, that there shall be Time no longer.
O then it will be too late, and then it may be possible that you may cry and
call to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon you, for to ^ids you from the
Wrath of the Lamb, his Fury will be so great; and therefore whilst there is a
little Time afforded unto you, prize it; and prize the everlasting Mercies of
so great and gracious a God, that has blessed this Nation with so many Spiritual
and temporal Blessings as he has done: O let not your Unworthiness draw down
his Vengeance upon your Heads, after all this his infinite Mercies and Favors
bestowed upon us; my hearty Desire is, that you may receive and embrace the
Love of God whilst it is proffered unto you, that by it your Hearts may be
seasoned and made fit to receive his Blessings.

And this I have more to say to many of thy Inhabitants, O England, be
true-hearted one to (...) other, and seek the Good one of another, and (...)
down to Sobriety. Let your Moderation appear unto all People* and in as much as
in you lies, endeavor (you who have Power in your Hands) to suppress
Wickedness, that Fruits of Christianity may appear, that this Nation of England
has made a large Profession of ever since I have had a Remembrance and
Understanding of it, and I believe long before. O come now, let Fruits of
Christianity appear, which will be better than many Years talking of it; the
Lord has put a Day into your Hands again, wherein you may do good. O make a
good Use of it, whilst you have it, lest you provoke the Lord to take it out of
your Hands again, and leave you in Sorrow to lament. Then will your latter End
be worse than your Beginning, and your Account greater than ever, and your
Measure more filled up than ever, and by so doing will be made fit for
Destruction. Oh! my Soul's Desire it, that wherever this may come, that it
may take Place upon the Hearts of People; for surely it is high Time for People
to be awakened to Amendment of Life, seeing their Time is so far gone, that
many have spent in Vanity and Pleasure, which will add to their Sorrow upon
their dying-Beds, when not one Day more will be left them for to repent.

From one who wishes well to all people.

Elizabeth Stirredge.


