A Just Rebuke TO A DIALOGUE BETWIXT Simon and Timothy, SHOWING What Is therein
to be found.

Namely Levity, Perversion, and Detraction. All which are detected in this
short Examen.

And that short Treatise, entitled Ways and Means, etc. rescued from the
Dialogist^s unjust Charge of Inconsistences and Contradictions.

Ad decus and libertatem nati sumus. Philadelphia: Printed by S. Keimer, in
Market-street, MDCCXXVI.

A Just Rebuke, etc.
IT is an approved Maxim, That every wise Man proposes an End in all his
Designs and Actions. Hence it follows, That from the Design and End of such
Actions they may be denominated Good or Ill.

It was given out here at Philadelphia, that there was a Piece in the Press,
intended as an Answer to Ways and Means, etc. [a little Book which had been the
Subject of Conversation some Time before.] At last it came out under the Title
of A Dialogue showing what is therein to be found. I confess I was at first at a
Loss to find a Meaning to it; and after further Perusal, could find nothing to
the Purpose; nor any Thing like Argument to disprove any Thing contained in
Ways and Means; That being a Probationary Essay upon Trade, not dogmatically
determining, but modestly submitted to the Judicious for Amendment, Probation,
or Confutation, as better Judgments might see Cause. But this Performance,
without showing any reasonable Cause, makes the said Book, which was the
Author's sincere Endeavors for a public Good, to be only a Subject of
Drollery, Derision and Contumely, and that in a very ungenteel Manner, all
which I shall wipe off by the ensuing Lines.

But first I shall here remark the Occasion of my first setting Pen to Paper,
viz. Some Years since, some ingenious Persons and Well-wishers to their
Country's Happiness, when they saw the Province near the Brink of Ruin,
occasioned by the encouraging instead of clogging the injurious Parts of Trade,
(Foreign Liquors especially) and disregarding our own Product and Manufactures,
as Iron, Homp, Malt, etc. the chief Dependence of the Country being on the
West India Market, which was glutted with such great Quantities of Bread and
Flour that often sold cheaper there than they were bought here; and the Price
here so low, that the Husbandman could scarce live by his Labor, much less
extricate himself from the Encumbrances which many lay under; Silver and Gold,
(the Cash we had in the Country) continually drained by our Wine-Trade (and
sometimes for Rum when it would purchase that Commodity better than Bread and
Flour,) and making Remittances till the little we had left, was still
decreasing, and served rather to debase the Price of our Vendibles than help
Trade.

Then it was that those Well-wishers to their Country, exerted themselves to
make some Essays for its Relief, and to open the Eyes of the People. The first
was, Some Remedies, then a Dialogue betwixt R. Rich and R. Plowman, and other
Manuscripts, which were such clear Displays of the languishing State of the
Country, that the People generally sensible thereof, and of the Exigencies and
Straits they labored under, did by their Representations and Petitions to
their Representatives in Assembly, obtain from the Legislature (according to
the Practice of our Neighboring Colonies of New England and New York) a
Paper-Credit or Currency: How far it has answered the Ends proposed, is obvious
to all judging Men, who do not wilfully shut their Eyes.

The Manner of Emission being by a public Loan-Office, where every Man that
had an Estate in Fee, free of Encumbrance, might by mortgaging the same to the
said Office, be admitted to take out half the Value of such Estate, not
exceeding the Sum restricted so long, as any Bills remained in the Office,
without Preference to one above another.

Thus Numbers of Inhabitants whose Estates had lain dead, were furnished with
Stock for Trade, or to lend to others whose Inclinations led them thereunto,
which gave the quickest Push to Trade that has been known for (...) before.

But the Consideration of our West-India-Market, being over stockt with Bread
and Flour, and for that Reason grown very low, as is before noted, put me on
Thoughts of contributing to that Good, those benevolent Persons had so happily
begun, and from like good Will to my Country, set Pen to Paper at some
Spare-Hours.

This I did by an Essay styled Ways and Means, etc. Humbly submitted to the
Legislative Authority of the Governments on Delaware, wherein I demonstrated it
to be the undoubted Interest of all those Colonies to preserve a good
Understanding betwixt themselves in Matters of Trade, as most conducive to
their mutual Benefit, hoping it might excite their Concurrence. And I have
understood, than many are fully convinced from the Arguments these advanced,
how much it will be their Interest to come into those Measures.

It was put out without a Name, and the Printer under an Obligation of Secresy:
The Reason of such Injunction was, That as we are unhappily in Parties, the
Prejudices too often arising from thence, might not frustrate the good Design
and End thereof; which was not that minute Thing, the Name of an Author, as the
Dialogist is so little and vain to suggest. Whence he takes his Measures, I
know not, unless from himself. And as I have elsewhere said, so I now again
sincerely aver, to have no other View but the public Good and Interest of
those Colonies in these Undertakings; maugre the Suggestion of Simon, or any
other malevolent Person whatsoever. For what thinking Man can judge other-ways,
but that it must be the Effect of Ill Will thus to jest, scoff and deride
(instead of confute) the honest Intention of the Essayer, which, though it should
not have effectually done the Good intended, or had not represented the State
of those Colonies so exactly, or had not proposed so effectual Remedies for our
Calamities, as some abler Hand might have done; yet might have excited such an
one to do it better: Nor could it possibly be of ill Consequence to any,
carrying with it no Manner of Reflection on the Conduct of any Man, either in a
public or private Capacity, keeping my self so within the Bounds of Modesty
and Indifference, as might free me from the Bias of Party-Heat, and render
what I did, least obnoxious to Cavil.

But notwithstanding all my Precaution, and without any Provocation or Reason
that I know of, out comes the comical Dialogue, on purpose, no Doubt, to
prevent its intended Service. Dialogue is a Way of writing most liable to
Exceptions of any, especially in Controversy; for unless the Writer is a Man of
great Integrity and Justice, he may make his Antagonist speak Nonsense, and put
a Sense on his Words which he never meant; represent him inconsistent,
contradictory, contemptible, or what else he pleases, as to Fact, or Opinion;
and by that Art, form such monstrous Ideas of his Adversary, in the Minds of
People, as may beget invincible Prejudice to the best of Persons and Things;
represent his Adversary by a Man of Straw of his own making, and then fight
with it.

How far the Dialogist is culpable in those or other Respects, is what I have
to show in these Examinations of his Performance, and shall accordingly
denominate his Character as a Justice to my self, and my honest Intentions in
that Essay.

In the Person of Simon, he says, He loves Dialogue, and makes that his Option
which every one has a Right to do as well as to choose the Subject. And if he
had kept to the just Rule of Dialogue, I should not fault him for That -- He
tells us next, It Is commended of old. To this I accede, for it is as ancient as
Aristophanes the Comedian, who by his ludicrous Wit, rendered Socrates
contemptible to the People, of whom he deserved much better Treatment, being
esteemed one of the wisest and best of Men in that Age of the World. And though I
have no Reason to think the Eight-penny B^ok will be less esteemed by any sober
and judicious Reader for those repeated Scorfs and Reproaches from this merry
Performance, any more than Socrates was for the Shower cast on him by Xantippe:
Yet lest any should take Railery for Reasoning, and Jeer for Argument, I shall
as briefly as may be, remark on the Vanity of the Dialogist. What I have thus
far in general said, may serve for Remark on the Dialogue to Page 10, for I
suppose no intelligent Person will judge it deserves a particular Discussion,
being a continued Scene of Drollery, which may be cast on the most solemn
Discourse, and is as much a Satyr on the best of Mankind, as on Ways and Means;
"Virtue is her own Reward; with much more before and after; but this only as a
Specimen of a great Part of the Work, which, I doubt not, but all sober Readers
will censure; therefore shall say no more to that Part. But finding it
difficult to trace the Dialogue under particular Heads, the same Thing being
transperss^d in diverse Parts of the Book without any Coherence; therefore I
shall remark on several Pages together, unless the Case otherways requires.

Page 10. The Dialogist has a Passage, which being in a different Character, I
take to be a Citation out of Ways and Means, which runs thus, That the
Generality of People are so addicted to them (Rum and other Spirits) that
neither Regard to public Interest or private, Body or Soul, will divert them
from the frequent Use of it. To which he subjoins, And yet those very Dictators
miss very few Days in the Week, wherein they do not begin in the Morning with
that ruinous new Invention of White Bitter, and complete the Evening, etc.

The sole Dictator of that Passage in Ways and Means, is the same Person and
Reason that now dictates my Pen, and I disclaim and reject this Insinuation as
a gross Calumny, and so far is it from Truth, That in a Series of above nine
Septinaries of my Age, (nigh Forty Years whereof I have spent in this Country)
I was never guilty thereof one Day; and I doubt not, but most Readers who know
me, will be my Witnesses, so far as they have Knowledge of my Conduct.

Page 11. the Dialogist entertains his Reader with a Fable of a Steward,
without giving the Moral, which he continues, to near the End of the 12th Page,
where, in an Ironical Manner, he says, Why put together a Parcel of clever
Words, talk of Mediums, of Commerce, Balance of Trade, Public Good, Funds,
Loans, Striking, Sinking, and such like, no Matter whether understood or not by
our selves or others, or whether we reason well and clearly, so as we make a
fine Gingle. He would do well to let us know whence he makes this Inference.

That these Terms are proper to the Subject then discoursed of, no Man of a
common Understanding will deny: And if they had been unapplicable to the
Occasion, impertinent or improperly applied to the Subject, it would very well
become his Sagacity to detect its erroneous Application. But it is presumed,
That was too difficult a Task. And therefore passes it off with a Scoff, No
Matter.

We have the like Quirks of Wit in other Places; for from the abundance of
Science or Conceit, he will allow the rest of his Neighbors so small a
Pittance of Understanding, as if, to use his own Words in another Case, he had
monopolis'd a Character, etc.

The 14 th Page is spent in Supposition, Conjecture, Imagination and Phantoms,
concerning Paper-Money; no otherways intelligible (to that Scantling of
Understanding he even now allowed me) than a Scarecrow to frighten the Farmer
and Tradesmen; for, says he, on those the Burden, which at first seemed to be
thrown on others, will fall, meaning the Farmer, etc. But he may see, if hell
please to open his Eyes, than Paper-Money will at this Time build Vessels,
purchase Goods, and serve the other Uses of Money, as well as while the Project
was young (as he terms it,) and the Planter and Tradesman in a concording
Harmony will tell him, that Paper-Money revived Trade, and freed them from
great Difficulties. And I think I may place his Prediction of its Downfall
amongst some others, that have not yet come to pass, and in all Probability
never will.

Page 15. The Dialogist proceeds, I cannot but observe the many Inconsistences
in the Opinions, not only of diverse, but the same Persons. At first some were
positive the Value of the Currency would not fall; Now they see it, etc. I am
not accountable for the Opinion of those diverse Persons: But where he says,
the same Person will tell us in one Place it was far short, in another, that
Excess of it will inevitably debase the Value, to an ordinary Capacity will
appear no Inconsistency; and to avoid dwelling the Discourse, I shall refer the
Reader to Page 6, and 58 of Ways and Means, whence those Citations seem to be
taken, and will sufficiently attest their Consistency with all Men, who will
not be impos^d on with empty Sounds. His Words, At first some were positive,
etc. is sufficiently answered in the foregoing Paragraph. But does he think,
that crying out, Strange Position! etc. is sufficient to disprove so known a
Truth; and that People will be halloo'd off, as he expresses it in Page 13. Was
he not told in Ways and Means, Page 60. That the Exchange given for Gold,
advanced on a certain Occasion to four times as much as was given a small Time
before: I might have said, more than five Times, that is from 9 d. to 4 s. per
Pound: And can he be ignorant that a short Time after it fell again to 2 s. 6
d. per Pound. This was manifestly the rising and falling of Gold, as People's
Occasions were more or less pressing to purchase it to make Remittances. And it
is as evident, that if Gold was imported faster than it is wanted to be
exported, it would bear but little, if any Advance at all.

Page 16, 17, 18, 19. are spent all in Resentment and Anger at that Imaginary
Stuff, as he calls it, Paper-Money. Not only the Thing, but Persons cannot
escape his Passion, under the Epithets of Designing, Visor, etc. and leading
well-intending honest Men Step by Step hoodwink^d to a Precipice, till a
Nothing pays a Something; than starts back into Political Estimates of the Sum
necessary; then back again, and retracts, I would not be understood to forward
that Magical Contrivance. No, far from it; I am only cautioning su^^ (...) be
mistaken, misled or decoyed. To wha^ (...) then, is so much Paper blotted,
(...) spent? What Reason has he to think, (...) his Prejudice to so known a
Benefit as our Paper-Currency is, should render his Cautions of any Force? Does
he think that scandalous Insinuations with which the Dialogue is replete, can
be convincing Arguments? It must certainly be Destitution of better Argument
that puts him on such mean Ways of trifling: The Query, Is not this already
done with a Witness? is answered in the Negative, and the contrary proved
hereafter. In the 16th Page he allows, That what he had noted in the 15th Page,
to be Inconsistences in Ways and Means. May not all be Inconsistences? But this
may be designing; for unless the quantum sufficit be fixed, and agreed, there
MAY be room to couch the worst Consequences under a VISOR, etc.

These are mere Insinuations, abusively to scandalize the Legislature, who have
taken all the Care and Circumspection imaginable, both in its Security, and to
avoid striking more than was necessary. In his next Paragraph he says, They
began with one Sum, and finding that not enough, doubled; and so PERHAPS will
go on, etc.

Here he gives himself a brave Opportutunity to break out into an Admiration;
How! In a Progressive Geometrical Proportion! etc. until a Nothing can pay a
Something!

This is a very unjust Insinuation; for can any Man in his Senses, call that a
Nothing, which a good Security has made valuable, and is at this very Time
acknowledged to be in good Credit, by some who were great Opposers of it, and
now own, that it will purchase even European Goods as well as Silver and Gold
did, when we had it, to purchase Goods withal?

Page 20. is a continued Praise of the Dialogist, and of his Moderation to
Debtors; to which I shall not be Negative; not knowing who he, or those others
are. But to what Purpose is all this, unless to cast a Mist on his Reader? For
here are three Things suggested,

1. That whosoever had Country-Produce, or any Thing else to buy Money with,
might have it.

2. It is well known how forbearing and easy they were, and how few Lawsuits:
And 3 dly, how ready to take the Country-Produce.

I have before remarked, that I have been at a Loss to understand the
Dialogist; and here I can only guess what to understand by it; which may be
supposed to be those Things, viz. the Non-necessity of Paper-Money; and a
Contradiction to Ways and Means, Page 4, 5, 6. where the languishing State of
the Country is shown in many pregnant Instances; Trade and Credit sunk, private
and public, and Lawsuits continually growing on us. All which being urged to
show the Necessity of a Paper-Currency, it had become a fair Antagonist to have
shown the Falsehood thereof, and have derected by clear Reasoning, and not by
Drollery: And now by artful Insinuations, of what might, or might not be the
Practice of a few to infer generally; for to say, Whoever of the Debtors had
Country-Produce or any Thing else to buy Money, (meaning I suppose) Silver and
Gold, it may perhaps be true of his Debtors, yet as generally understood, I
deny to be true. He continues, How few Lawsuits? Nay, none but where there was
apparent Danger, commenced by them. And what is that to the Purpose? Does that
necessarily infer that few were commenc^d by others? So little of understanding
as he will allow me, as not to understand Words of common Use; yet I shall
adventure to tell him, it is very false Reasoning to make general Conclusions
from particular Cases. And the contrary was notorious from the Numbers of
Lawsuits commenced and increased Quarterly; besides the Number of Prisoners,
it is said beyond what was ever known in America, in any of the English
Colonies. And Lastly, How ready and willing they were to take the
Country-Produce. This may be a Truth of a great Number. For such was the
Scarcity of Gold and Silver, that the Farmer not able to purchase it with his
Crop, forced the Shops to take it, and they again imposed the same on the
Merchant till it became pretty current in Trade; but at so low a Price, the
Farmer could not live by it. The Silver had been bought up for Merchandise, so
that none passed in common Payments, and Gold so far exhausted, that little but
Cut Pieces, and some Scraps passed, and That melting up for Remittances, before
Paper-Money came out; and nothing else being a Legal Tender or Discharge to a
Bond, the Lawsuits increased, and when an Attempt was made to pass a Bill for
making some Species of Country-Produce a Legal Tender, it was rejected, which
made a Paper-Currency of absolute Necessity.

Page 22 begins with a Strain of Politics, and may be allowed to be
instructive, had those Quondam Patriots, when in Power, exemplified by
Practice, what is so pathetically talked of. For Practice is more demonstrative
than a Sound of Words barely, to use his own Words, in his Title Page,
Experience it is by whose true Eyes, though slow.
We find, at last, what often too late we know.


But it is our Happiness to see that Providence had not forsaken us, and that
there were a Number of well-intending Men in some Degree of Power still as a
Balance, who not only rejoiced, but exerted themselves, preferring the public
Good to all Fear and Apprehension of private Damage, who having given
sufficient Proof of their Ability and Probity, and as true and honest Patriots,
in Spite of Floods of Obloquy and Contempt, have been and still are steady in
their Pursuit for the public Tranquillity as far as human Prudence can give a
Prospect, and I hope will continue so to be

Next he returns from his grave Politics to charge Inconsistences with Spleen,
Wonder and Smile, that Men are cried out against for taking Lawful Interest.
The Book says nothing of it; nor do I know of any chargeable with it, except
two honest (though I think in that erring) Men now in their Graves. And to what
End this is brought here, I know not, unless to banter on the Government and
criticize upon an imaginary Creature, a Phantom called a Casuist.

In the next Paragraph he renews his Efforts against our Paper-Credit, saying,
I know how the Law would construct it, if I should sweeten another into an
Obligation without a valuable Consideration, or demand Use or Interest upon an
Imaginary Principal, or what really cost me nothing, etc. The Vanity whereof
will be shown by a few Interrogatorie^.

Is it an imaginary Principal which so many Freeholders have supported by
engaging their Estates? and whereby others have freed theirs?

Is it an imaginary Principal which is generally accepted for Discharge of
Bonds, and all Manner of Debts, and will again purchase Lands, Cargoes, and all
manner of Vendibles, build Houses, Ships, etc. and answer all the necessary
Uses of Money in Way of Trade, except to send out of the Country for
Merchandise? Our Silver and Gold did serve that Purpose so long as there was
any to be gotten: But when that was gone, and no Prospect, or indeed
Possibility (as our Trade was then managed) of bringing more in, not so much as
any Thing near to answer the Demand for carrying away, our Trade and Credit
together had inevitably been racked, had we not been made sensible of our
Danger, and had good Pilots at hand to bring us off from the Danger that was so
near us, that we had in a great Degree suffered for Want of a Currency, which
now being happily supplied, the Want of Gold for Remittances, is in a great
Measure supplied also by building Ships, and encouraging Trade, which we have
still a fair Prospect of improving, by the Exportation of Timber to Great
Britain, and perhaps Hemp in Time, which will be a great Help to pay for
European Goods; and if we can but discourage the extravagant Use of Foreign
Liquors, by encouraging our own Product, we may in all Probability, have Silver
and Gold in Returns for our Flour, as formerly we had. But why so angry at its
being let out on Interest to defray the necessary Charges of the Office, etc?
The Dialogist differs widely from all other Oppose^s of our Currency that I
ever heard of, if he would have it let out without Interest; for the Charges of
the Office, etc. then must be paid by a public Tax. The Hint that there may
come a Time when it will be no Crime to show for what Ends and private Purposes
Interest is taken, is a mere Insinuation of a pretended Something; for he who
takes the Liberty to bespatter the who^e Power of Government with groundless
Surmises might certainly use the Freedom of speaking what he knows is true.

Page 24. He begins with an Irony on an Expression in the Introduction to Ways
and Means, viz. Well meaning Persons are employing their Pens, etc. For what
Reason he goes so far back, I know not, unless for a repeated Scoff on the
Writer of that Book; for I cannot find any Coherence it has to any thing
immediately preceding or following. Then like Saul amongst the Prophets, he
falls into a religious Fit of pathetical Expressions, which simply consider^d,
might be instructive, had he concluded there, or continued his Preaching to the
End of his Performance. But instead of that, in the following Page he resumes
his wonted Levity, so that I doubt his Preaching will be of little Benefit, for
he falls to Drolling on the Word Negative, with which he is well pleased and
diverted; and so perhaps may be the Sot, the Rambler, the Spendthrift and the
Slip-Season, which he elsewhere inveighs against, but now is making Sport for
them: But a Man of Sobriety will hardly thinks it deserves a Smile, as Comical
as himself may imagine it to be.

Page 26. He casts his Javelin at Ways and Means; but only strikes a Man of
Straw of his own making, thus; I was so simple as to imagine it intended that I
should believe that laborious, industrious People (such as Palatines) are to
make us rich without Extent of Land or its Fertility, or a great deal of its
Produce; and even without People (simply) and that without all these, Wheat,
Hemp, and all the enumerated, are to be raised and produced.

This I conceive is his Logical Inference on the Negatives, to which he adds an
Irony on the Word ( smith) which Word was happily added; for without it, he
might have had some Ground for Cavil; for my plain Meaning was, That a great
Number of idle and profligate Persons, of Convicts, and the Scum of Goals, etc.
were not the Riches of a Country, and no judicious Person can suppose they are.
But he continues from the same Logical Forge, I am offended that Palatines
should be put in the Front, etc. If his Prejudice to Palatines had not sowred
his Temper, he could never have made such Deductions from my Words in Ways and
Means, page 11. as put in the Front, monopolize a Character; for it is plain to
any unprejudiced Man, That industrious and laborious People, Palatines, and
others, are there opposed to Convicts, or Scum of Goals, of which many have
come of late, and in all Probability may do no more Good here, than in the
Places from whence they came, But industrious, honest People are beneficial to
the Public, increase Trade and Manufacture, etc. though here is nothing of
Preference given to Palatines, above prior Inhabitants; nor are they so much as
brought in Competition with the first Settlers and Improvers of the Province.
And if any of them are so impudent as (he says they are) to imagine they have a
Right to the Properties and Labors of the prior Inhabitants, it is easy to
convince them of the contrary.

I shall further observe on the Dialogist a Quibbles on the Word Negative,
which are so often repeated with Banter and Ridicule, the only Weapons of a
Sort or Men to laugh those out of Countenance whom they cannot refute. But I
appeal to the Discussion of Reason for the Authority of those Examples I
brought to support my Position, and add in Defense of the Formality of my
Argument, in Ways and Means, That as every Man has Liberty to write in what
Method he thinks may be most intelligible, I shall just fie that manner of
Argument by Examples from sacred Writ, of much elder Date than the Dialogist's
fashionable Sermons of the middle of the last Century. I shall begin with our
Saviour^s Discourse with the Woman of Samaria, whose Question concerning the
Place of Worship was answered by two Negatives, viz. Neither in this Mountain,
nor yet at Jerusalem, etc. and then affirmatively in Spirit and in Truth, in
Opposition to the Superstition of the one, and Formality of the other. The next
Example I cite is the first Psalm, which, by some is thought to be designed by
the Penman, as a Preface to that Book, where the Beatitudes there mentioned are
predicated by three Negatives, Walks not in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor
stands in the Way of Sinners; nor sits in the Seat of the Scornful. Then
it is added in Contradistinction: But his Delight is in the Law of the Lord: And
if the Dialogist had not sat in the Seat of the Scornful; but had delighted in
that Law, whether Internal or External, I persuade my self he would not have
found such Pleasure in his Performance; all the Examples of this Kind in the
sacred Writings are too numerous to insert here.

But to recur to secular Matters, in relation to the Word Negative. Suppose one
should ask me, which is the best Form of Government, I would answer negatively
thus;

It Is not a Tyranny.

It Is not an Oligarchy.

It Is not an Olocracy.

These being Names we borrow from the Greeks, who wrote of Politics, I would
next proceed to a Definition thus: A Tyranny is, when a single Person governs
by an absolute Power, for his own private Good, as in France. But where a
single Person governs for the public Good, that is called a Monarchy, as in
Great Britain.

An Oligarchy is, where a Number govern for their own private Good, as at
Athens, under the thirty two Tyrants; and at Rome, First under the Decemviri,
and next under the' two Triumvirates successively, which made Way for enslaving
the freest People in the World, and such at this present are the Lords of
Poland, where the Subjects are Vassals.

But where a Number govern for the Good of the whole, that is called an
Aristocracy, as in Holland.

An Olocracy is the Mis-rule of a Multitude, or a Rabble, as at Naples, under
Massanello. But where the Multitude rule well, and for a common Good, this is
called a Democracy; but these are generally on the Brink of Confusion, and
seldom of long Continuance.

Having thus displayed, Negatively and Positively, the Vices and Virtues of the
several Forms of Government from as good Authors as any amongst us, who set up
for Politics, I conclude a Government happily constituted, as the Monarchy of
Great Britain, consisting of a limited Monarchy, a noble Aristocracy, and a
just and prudent Democracy, This, in Answer to the Question, I pronounce (with
Ancestral Zeal,) the best Form of Government, where it is practicable.

From Page 27, to 33. is a long Digression on Economy, which I like very well,
for the most Part; and if it were generally put in Practice, it would very much
contribute to the Design of Ways and M^ans; for the more diligent we are in
raising of Country-Produce, and retrenching our Luxury, the better Condition we
shall be in to BALANCE in TRADE, if I ^ay without Offense, pretend to
understand these Words.

Page 23. I cannot omit to observe how ready he is to turn from his most
serious Discourses to Jesting, as if Satyr was become habitual to him, he makes
his Chimerical Jenny's Improvidences and Neglect (the Subject thereof,) to try
his Skill, in undervaluing the wretched tattered Stuff called Money. But I
suppose he will acknowledge, 'twas an untoward Blunder to make Jenny say, "If
our wise Folk had done so, (that is, saved some Cash Yearly out of what she
raised, besides balancing with every body) "they needed never have made
Paper-Money. This Stroke does not fall, as I suppose, it was intended, on the
Makers of Paper-Money, (when there was no other Way to support Trade and
Credit;) but on our Quondam Patriots, who did not find it consist with their
private Interest to clog the injurious Parts of Trade: But so much of our
Produce was annually confounded on Foreign Liquors, that the Remainder would
not balance our other Trade. And instead of adding something Yearly to the
Cash we had, we were still drawing out, as long as any was to be had. But not
to dwell longer on his Trifling, I pass on to his melancholy Conclusion, which
is but a few Lines after his Waggery with Jenny's Gingerbread. So mutable are
his Passions!

Page 35. I have indeed been sunk in my Spirits, and ready to weep at the
melancholy Prospect before us. There is certainly Cause of Complaint of Levity,
Rudeness and Excess at many Times of Concourse, as at Fairs, etc. and too often
in private Companies: But I would hope better of those others there mentioned.
But the Dialogist seems to despair of a Reformation, leaving Things too
indefinitely at the worst for mending. I acknowledge evil Customs and Manners
grow worse for Indulgence, and with Care had been taken to prevent their Growth
to what they now are, long ago, which might have more easily been done then,
than now. However, I am not without Hopes of a Reformation in some Degree in
our Morals, as we have happily seen in our Politics; and that, as we persist
in so laudable Undertakings, the one may be conducive to promote the other: A
good Step was made toward it last November Fair, where a very corrupt Practice
of Youth, was totally suppressed at that Time by the present Mayor. One End of
Government is the Reformation of Manners. This the Dialogist says, he could
heartily wish it in their Power; and that Preventative or discouraging
Measures, might or could be taken to Effect. But I perceive he likes not the
Means which he apprehends is offered, that is, an Impost on Rum. I think an
Impost on Rum and Wine is a Discouragement to the Importation, and every
Discouragement on those Foreign Liquors is an Encouragement of our own Product,
and nothing can deserve more to be taxed for the public Revenue, than so
public a Mischief, which not only devours a great Part of our Produce, that
the West-India-Markets will, or can take of us; but also hinders the
Consumption of abundance of Barley, etc. which might otherwise be raised for
Malt, which would be in a Manner clear Gain; for so much less Flour might often
sell for as much in the West Indies as the whole Quantity now sent, which often
gluts the Markets, to the great Loss of the Adventurers; two Casks of Bread or
Flour not yielding at such a Time what one would do, when there is a reasonable
Demand for it. What he says of making a Law, that none should drink a Dram, or
to direct how many, etc. would be impracticable; I think none will deny; for I
never heard of any one so wild as to propose such Absurdities; but it does not
necessarily follow, that Dram-drinking may not be discouraged, and Beer and
Cider, etc. brought more into Use. In Hopes of which we ought to wait and see
what else the Government may prudently fall upon, and every Well-wisher to the
public Good, will lend a Hand to promote it.

I thought to have concluded here; but on a Review of those last recited Pages
of the Dialogist, I find him so much in Love with Rum (tho in Charity I believe
not, for personal Excess, as private Interest) that he is averse to an Impost
on it, as an Encouragement to our own Distillers, whom he represents as a Sort
of Manslayers, by turning off the poor Creatures the sooner (meaning the
Drinkers of their Spirits) and undertakes phisically to determine Rum the more
wholesome, which is a Controversy remote from my Design, in writing Ways and
Means, where I left the Decision of this Point to the Gentlemen of that
Faculty. But why Rum distilled from Melasses here, may not be as wholesome as
Rum distilled from Melasses in the West Indies, is what he should have shown
while his Hand was in, and not have turned us off with his Ipse dixit. For in
Ways and Means, page 39, etc. I endeavored to show the great Detriment it was
to the public Interest of this Province, to lay out so great a Part of our
Product on Rum, in the West Indies, when far less might purchase Melasses
enough there to make the same Quantity of Rum here. And the Remainder of what
was usually laid out for Rum would return in Money, or European Goods, and
encourage Manufactory, Trade, and Navigation, as most conducive to a public
Good. But these are Thoughts foreign to some Part of Mankind.

He says, Page 38. Besides, it is worth Consideration, whether to encourage
Distilling would not increase the pernicious Custom of Dram-Drinking. We see
what Methods are taken by most of those already in the Occupation, to promote
and tempt to the Use. To which I answer, that the Method of Rum-selle^s has
been, when a Person called for Beer, to answer, There was very good Rum, and if
he or they had a Mind to Punch, there were the other Ingredients at Hand. But
the Beer was not good. Now if the Distillers have any Methods more prevalent to
promote and tempt to the Use, he should let the World know it, to prevent the
Temptation.

He says, And it (meaning Rum) may be demonstrated is generally purchased with
our own Produce cheaper and more advantagiously, by employing our Vessels, etc.
The Word Demonstration, I confess, makes a fine Sound, and it is not uncommon to
find some Men carried away with Sounds; but as every thinking Man will be
willing to know where to find it; I have endeavored by a narrow Scrutiny, and
cannot find any Thing like Demonstration to the End of the Performance.

But it had become a fair Disputant, before he had asserted the Advantages to
Naviga^ion, by the Importation of Rum, to have duly considered and refuted what
is said in Ways and Means to the contrary, and particularly the Citation out of
the Examination, page 43. But this he overlooks, and gives us only his own
Magisterial Say-so.

FINIS.

