Mr. Fiske's SERMON ON The Good Subject's Wish.

Delivered at the ELECTION, May 12, 1726.

At a General Assembly Held at Hartford May 12th. 1726.
Ordered by this Assembly,
THAT Hezekiah Brainerd, Esquire; and Capt. James Brainerd, Return the Thanks of
this Assembly, to the Reverend Mr. Phineas Fiske of Haddam, for his SERMON
Preached before this Assembly on the Twelfth of May Instant* and Desire that he
give a Copy thereof that it may be Printed.

Hez. Wyllys, Secr.

THE Good Subject's WISH OR, The DESIRABLENESS OF THE DIVINE PRESENCE WITH
Civil Rulers.

Opened and Applied in a SERMON Preached before the General Assembly of the
Colony of Connecticut, at Hartford, May 12 th 1726.

The Day for Electing the Honorable the GOVERNOR, the Deputy Governor, and
the Worshipful ASSISTANTS there.

By Phineas Fiske, M. A.

Pastor of a Church in Haddam.

Published by Order of Authority.

N LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, Printer to the GOV. and COMPANY. 1726.

The Good Subject's Wish. Or, The Desirableness of the Divine Presence with
Civil Rulers.
JOSHUA I. 17. -- Only the LORD thy GOD be with thee, as He was with Moses.
THIS Book contains the history of Joshua's Reign and Government, whom, after
the Death of Moses, God made Chief Captain of Israel, to conduct them into the
Land of Canaan, at once to fulfill the many Promises made to Abraham to Isaac
and to Jacob, that their Seed should inherit the Land of the Canaanites, and to
Execute the Curse on Canaan, which Noah by a Prophetic Spirit uttered against
him, on occasion of Ham's imprudence, irreverence and impudence, in discovering
his Father's Nakedness: Genesis 9 26. Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and Canaan
shall be his Servant.

And in this Chapter we shall Observe,

1. That Joshua is Divinely called to the Government. Moses the Servant of the
Lord was dead, and God appoints Joshua to stand up in his stead, and Lead His
People over Jordan; and encourages him with gracious Promises of Assistance and
Success, from the 1 st. to the 10 th. Verse. It is God's work to give Rulers to
a People. This Promotion comes neither from the East nor from the West, nor
from the South; but God is the Judge, and He sets up whomsoever He will,
Psalm. 75. 6, 7.

2. Joshua accepts the Government, and addresses himself to the Business of it,
giving the needful Orders to all the Officers, from the 10 th. to the 16 th.
Verse. Whatever humble apprehensions Joshua (though a very worthy man) might have
of the Disparity between himself and Moses, his so great a Predecessor, and of
the Difficulty he might meet with in Managing so rough a People, as he knew
they had been, yet GOD's Call must silence all Objections; and the Promise of
the Divine Presence was enough to animate him with Courage cheerfully to enter
upon the great Work.

3. The People agree to it: Joshua shall be their Chief and Head; and virtually
at least take an Oath of Fidelity to him. And whom should they Serve, but him
whom the LORD had Chosen to go before them? And they answered Joshua, saying,
All that thou command us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us we
will go: According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken
unto thee; Only the Lord thy God be with thee, as He was with Moses. This
Answer was made to Joshua, not only by the Reubenites and Gadites and
half-Tribe of Manasseh, to whom Moses had last of all directed his Speech, but
all the Rulers of the People to whom he first gave Commandment, V. 10. In their
own behalf and in behalf of all the People,

(1) Promise him Obedience, both as Subjects and Soldiers. All that thou
command us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us we will go. And
lest Joshua should fear that his Interest in their Affections was too small and
that their Subjection to him would be but cool and indifferent, to remove this
Suspicion they amplify their Promise and tell him, That as they hearkened in
all things unto Moses, so they would likewise hearken unto him. They had no
great cause to glory in the goodness of their Behavior under and toward Moses.
They had sufficiently made known their Rebellious Spirit and Stiff-neck to him,
Deuteronomy. 31. 27. But although, the Generation that were brought up in Egypt and fell
in the Wilderness, were stubborn and froward, yet their Children that were
brought up in the Wilderness under Moses, and now made the Promise to Joshua
might have been better Behaved Vid. Henry in Loc.
. A good Government has a mighty influence into the Manners and Behavior of
men: And it is a great advantage to be Educated under able and pious Guides.
These Israelites, that were brought up under Moses, carried themselves well,
both under him and under Joshua.

(2) They assist Joshua with their good Wishes in his great Undertaking. Only
the Lord thy God be with thee as He was with Moses. They don't make it a
condition of their Obedience; nor say, They will be no longer Subject to him
than he shall be Prosperous. They knew Joshua well and don't seem to have
labored under a fear of his Provoking God to forsake him, or of God's failing
to make good His Promise to Joshua. Ver. 5. As I was with Moses, so I will be
with thee, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. They only pray it might be
unto Joshua according to God's Word; and tacitly Exhort him to keep himself in
a capacity of God's continual Assistance.

[1.] They gratefully acknowledge the Blessing they had in Moses: That he was a
man that had much of the Presence of God with him in his Public
Administrations; and therefore their Obedience unto him was not Unmerited. They
express their Piety to GOD, and their Regards to Moses. They ascribe the Glory
of all the great things done for them by the hand of Moses, unto GOD. It was
His Presence with Moses which was the chief Cause of all the many worthy Deeds
that had been done for them, by him; And they remember Moses as a Man greatly
owned of GOD in his Place and favored much with the Divine Presence in his
Conduct.

[2] They put Respect upon Joshua, wishing the blessing of his Predecessor
might come upon him: As they purposed to pay the like Obedience to him which
they gave to Moses. They had changed their Ruler, but were concerned that they
might not lose that which had been the beauty and the strength of their
Government, viz the Presence of GOD with their Ruler: and therefore pray that
the Spirit of Moses might rest in a double portion upon Joshua, and that the
same GOD that had helped Moses all his Days, would carry Joshua well through
all his Work.

Note, As Gratitude to the Father of Lights from whom comes every good and
perfect gift, obliges us not to be wanting, in paying all due Regards to the
memory of the Dead, that have been eminently Useful and Services able among us
in Public Capacities, so neither should we forget to Honor the Living that
succeed them in their Characters and Labors. The Israelites make honorable
Mention of deceased Moses, and pay a due Deference unto succeeding Joshua.

But our Present work is to Clear and Improve the following

DOCTRINE. It is much to be desired that Civil Rulers may have much of the
Presence of GOD with them.

This was it upon which the Israelites so highly Valued Moses; and it seems to
have been a prospect of this that made them so cheerful and full in their
Promises unto Joshua.

1. That they may be well fitted for the Business of Government; which calls
for no small Accomplishments to reach the Ends thereof* Which as they are of
grand Importance unto the Children of men, so they are not easily attained. The
flourishing of Piety and Religion; the flowing and free course of
Righteousness; the Peace and Tranquillity of Civil Societies and the Public
Good in all these, are the things to be atcheived by Civil Government and
should be the fixed Aims, and steady Views of all in Authority 1 Timothy 2. 2.
. And the Bonds whereby Societies are held together, the Cases whereby they are
weakened in any of these great Interests, and the Remedies whereby they are
restored, are things that lie out of the sight and reach of Ordinary Abilities.
It must be the Presence of GOD in an Uncommon measure that must make men meet
for such Undertakings. We should all be Pares Negotiis, a Match for our Work.
And therefore when God did more immediately call any to serve Himself and their
Generations in such a way, either they were men whom He had before prepared by
suitable Endowments for such Work, as He did Moses and Joshua, or He did then
more immediately Gift them to His Service; as in Readiness case, to whom, after he
was anointed by Samuel to be Captain over God's Inheritance, GOD gave another
heart, 1 Samuel 10 9 Not a new heart, but a Princely spirit and Endowments for
Government* And when God gives leave to us to choose Rulers for our selves, He
limits our Choice to such as He has already Gifted and Prepared. Agreeable
therefore to the Divine Will, was the Counsel of Jethro to Moses, Exodus 18. 21.
That he should provide out of all the People, able men, such as feared God,
acted truly and hated Covetousness, and set them over the People. And when God,
pursuant to this Counsel by Jethro, gave Moses the Sanhedrim for his
Assistance, He ordered Moses, (Numb. 11. 16.) to gather unto him Seventy men of
the Elders of Israel, whom he knew to be the Elders of the People: To select
out of the Elders of Israel Seventy of the most approved Abilities, to help him
bear his Burden. And because the Circumstances of Israel were Extraordinary in
the Wilderness, therefore a peculiar Presence of God is granted to them, Ver.
18 I will take of the spirit that is upon Thee, and put it upon them. God would
show the spirit of Moses with them, as he did His work: Not that the Gift of
the Spirit was at all diminished in Moses; but a like Prophetic Spirit and
Infallible Conduct afforded unto the Seventy, which had been before peculiar
unto Moses Vid. D^od* in Loc.
. What these Abilities are which are the Gifts of the God of all Grace, for the
Benefit of a People, in them that bear Rule, has been shown by others on these
Occasions, to which I refer you.

2. That they may be well spirited to their Work. And indeed this is of main
Consideration in this affair, that such as are concerned in the Government of a
People, should have a kindly disposition to the Duties of it. It is the
Apostle's Command, Romans 12. 11. That we be not slothful in Business, but
fervent in spirit serving the Lord. And our Zeal should bear a proportion to
the Service we have to do for GOD. Civil Rulers then should be men warmly
affected to the Public Good, and in good earnest to approve themselves
Benefactors to mankind. It is for this end Government is ordained. Romans 13. 4.
He is the minister of God to thee for good. And the Ruler, whose heart is right
with God, will set himself to devise liberal things for the good of a People;
and spare no Pains, nor leave any Stone unturned to advance the Public
Interest. He will labor to draw others into the Paths of Virtue and
Righteousness, by going before them in a bright Example; and will be very
careful that there be nothing in his Conversation that may be a Stumbling Block
to others, or an occasion of Sin. If he have Power thereunto, he will gladly
help forward the Enacting of good Laws, however he will do what in him lies, to
keep up the Credit of such good Laws as are Enacted for the Banishing
Wickedness out of the Land, and the Advancing Righteousness and Religion, that
they may not Sink into Contempt and become Enervated. He will Faithfully
Execute Judgment on Transgressors, and in his Zeal will say with upright David,
Psalm. 101. 8. I will Early destroy all the Wicked of the Land: that I may cut
off all Wicked doers from the City of the Lord. His Influences on others will
be not a little conducive to their good Behavior. Much Good will be done by
him through his Countenancing, and Bestowing marks of his Favor, on them that
are found in the ways of well doing. And his frowns will weaken the hands of
the Wicked, that they may turn from their Evil way. He will not only Endeavor
to do Good himself, but will help forward and encourage others in being
Publicly Serviceable. So did Hezekiah who spoke Comfortably to the Levites
that taught the good Knowledge of the LORD. 2 Chronicles. 30. 22.

But without this Zeal of how little Benefit are they like to be to the World,
whatever be their Ability's or Authority. Of what worth is a Talent that is
wrapped up in a Napkin. Such will be in Effect but mere Titular Rulers, but
Idol-gods, that have Eyes but see not the faults of Men, Ears but hear not the
cry of the Poor, Mouths but speak not for the relief of the Oppressed in the
gate, and Hands but revenge not the wrongs done by Transgressors. Indeed the
greatest defect of Men in every Station and of every Degree lies here, That
they have more Ability than Heart to their Duty. What through the Power of Lusts
within, and the many Temptations that are without, there is much of that Good
neglected and goes undone that we are both fitted for and called to do.

3. To Support them under the burden of Government. Which is not a matter of
mere Honor, Pleasure and Profit, (as some seem vainly to Dream; and therefore
Ignorantly envy others their preferments,) but an Employment full of Labor and
Travel, Care and Solicitude, Expense and Charge, Hazard and Danger, and
therefore calls for much of the Divine Presence Assistance and Support under
the presence of it. David compares the managing of Government to the bearing up
the Pillars of the Earth. Psalm. 75. 3. And surely he had need to have his
Shoulders well strengthened, that must stand under such a Weight. Moses
although a Mighty Man and beyond Compare, yet Groaned under this burden. Number.
11. 14, 15. I am not able to bear all this People alone, because it is too
Heavy for me. And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand,
if I have found Favor in thy Sight; and let me not see my Wretchedness. It is
said that Domesthenes, after a long Government in the Common Wealth, confessed
to his Friends, that if in the beginning, the choice had been given him of the
Government, or of his Grave, if he could have foreseen the Evils, the Terrors,
the Calumnies, the Envies, the Contentions, the Dangers that Men in such
Capacity's usually meet with, he would, with much Alacrity have Posted on to
his Sepulcher rather than to his Greatness Vid. Humane Prudence.
. And surely none ever well applied themselves to the work but they felt the
weight. Besides the difficulties that attend their work through the cunning
Craft and unmanageable Spirit of some offenders* And their Sufferings often
times in their personal Interest while they attend the Public affairs, they
frequently meet with Injuries, Indignity's and Various abuses that are no small
Trials to them. There are usually Envious Persons that look with an Evil Eye at
their Greatness: And with the Sons of Belial that despised Saul, will say, How
shall these men save us? There will be such as despise Dominion, and speak evil
of Dignities: There will be Murmurers and Complainers, that will spread and
take up false Reports, and fill the world with Lies, Misrepresentations and
Slanders: There will be Ambitious men of aspiring spirits, that will flatter
the people, and traduce the Government of them that Rule, as Absalom did his
Fathers, 2 Samuel 15. 3, 4. -- There is no man deputed of the King to hear thee,
-- Oh! That I were made Judge in the Land, that every man which has any Suit
or Cause, might come unto me, and I would do him Justice And as Korah did
Moses's, Numb. 16. 3. Ye [Moses and Aaron] take too much upon you, seeing all
the Congregation are holy every one of them: And you ought not therefore thus
to usurp Domination over them: And had doubtless made greater Confusion in
Israel, had not the Glorious GOD seasonably interposed his own Authority for
the protection of Moses and the safety of the People. And in times of
Degeneracy and Distress, the Clamours of the People are wont to be thrown
against the Rulers, as if they were the Authors of all their Calamities and
Sufferings. Nor is it to be expected that the Earthly Gods should meet with
better Treatment from impatient Men, than the Great GOD of Heaven; whom they
are wont at such a time, more directly or more indirectly, by Thoughts or Words
or Actions, or all of them to Reproach and Blaspheme. Isa. 8. 21. And they
shall Pass through it [the Land] hardly bestead and hungry: and it shall come
to pass that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and Curse
their King and their God and look upward. How great a Favor is it to a People,
when GOD gives them Rulers, like Moses, that with a Generous Patience and
Compassionate Meekness, bear with their frowardness and carry them in their
Arms.

4. To Prosper their Endeavors for the Public good. It is not the Wisdom of
the Wise, nor the Counsel of the Prudent, nor the Politics of Statesmen can
raise a Common Wealth or make one Flourish. The Builders of Babel (probably
Nimrod and his Accomplices) are a pregnant Instance of this. They Projected with
themselves to lay the Foundation of an Universal Empire, whose head should be
Babylon, which they would build with a very high Tower to command and defend
it; Their Scheme was well laid, they were Unanimous in their design, and all
things concurred to the accomplishing their Purpose. In so much that God said,
Genesis 11. 6. -- Now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have
imagined to do. Only GOD was not with them to Succeed their Endeavors; but
frowned upon their Enterprise, and so it fell to the ground. Edom thought to
have Built his desolate Places when he was impoverished, but he reckoned
without his host; for what faith the Lord of Hosts? They shall build, but I
will throw down, Mal. 1 4.

If the designs be never so Pious, and they that form them be very Zealous too,
yet without this, their Labor will be all spent for naught and in vain A work
of Reformation will stick in the Birth, if God give not strength to bring
forth. The high Places, where the People worshipped contrary to the Divine
Commandment, were not taken away in the Days of Jehoshaphat that Reforming
Prince; because the Lord had not prepared the hearts of the People (for the
Preparation of the heart is from the Lord) to the God of their Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 20. 33. Though this came to pass through the fault of the People: God
denying them His Grace because of their Neglects and Transgressions; and
therefore it is justly charged upon them as their Crime, That they had not
prepared their Hearts to return to GOD.

Without this, they can be no Safety nor Protection to a People, nor prevent
impending Calamities from breaking in upon them. Psalm. 127. 1 Except the LORD
keep the City, the Watchmen waketh but in vain. Moses was so sensible of the
Necessity of the Divine Presence, in order unto any good Fruit of his care and
pains for Israel, that he dare not move one step without it: Exodus 33. 15. If
thy Presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.

It remains now that we Apply this Truth, and it shall be by way of
EXHORTATION, and that both to Rulers and Ruled.

1. To Rulers, even to all that are in Authority. And the Exhortation,
Honorable, Worshipful and Highly Esteemed, that we bring you this day, is,
That you use your best Endeavors to engage the Presence of GOD with you to all
the aforementioned Purposes. This will be no less Conducive to your Honor,
Interest and Comfort, than to the Weal of this People. It is this must make you
truly Valuable and Useful; while such as are without it, are only Ciphers set
in a Figures place. It is by GOD Kings Reign well and Princes Decree Justice,
even all the Nobles of the Earth. This will be your Strength and make you
irresistible No Man should be able to stand before Joshua, because GOD would be
with him David Peaceably Possessed the Kingdom of Israel maugre all the Spite
of his Enemies, because GOD was with him and Subdued the People under him Psalm.
18. 47.
Nothing can be too hard for you upon these Terms. David by his God had ran
through a Troop; and by his God had leaped over a Wall. Psalm. 18 29. This will
make all Difficulties vanish away. Who art thou, O Great Mountain? before
Zerubbabel thou shall become a Plain. Zec. 4. 7.

Suffer me to put you in Mind

1. That it is a Great Honor done you by the LORD GOD of Israel that he has
set you over, not an Heathen People, but a Tribe of his Inheritance. That He
has Advanced you to such a Care of a People that He has bought with His own
Blood. It is a great Confidence God Reposes in you. The Welfare of a People
Dear unto Himself, and for whom He has done great things in Planting,
Preserving and Increasing them; and whom He has Indulged with many Precious
and Pleasant things, both of a Civil and Sacred Nature, is entrusted in your
hand. And He expects that with a Fatherly Care and Goodness you Nurse them, and
Lead them with Watchfulness and Tenderness as a Flock* It is for a Covenant
People He would have great and good things done by you His own Honor too is
much concerned in their good Behavior, and that depends not a little on your
Prudent and Faithful Administrations. Oh! what Grace, what Assistance, how much
of the Presence of GOD every way is needful to the becoming Discharge of so
great a Trust.

2. It is a great Work, and much Good you have to do for this People. It is for
their sakes God has raised you to your Posts of Honor. And there is much
Business He has for you to do in the midst of us. Our Restraint and
Reformation, our Protection and Preservation, our Prosperity on one account and
another, must under GOD be very much the Fruit of your Paternal care. There are
with us Iniquities against the LORD our GOD, Manifold and Mighty Sins, that
have brought down the Judgments of GOD upon us from Year to Year: There is
Profaneness and Sabbath breaking, there is Pride and Idleness, there is Luxury
and Intemperance, there is much Uncleaness and Unrighteousness, there are
Disorders and Contentions (not to mention the Numerous other Evils that the
Sword of Civil Justice cannot Punish) because of which the Land mourns. And our
Eyes are upon you, to make up the Hedge, and to stand in the Gap, before GOD,
for the Land that he should not Destroy it. Your sense of our Guilt,
Affectedness, with our Sufferings, earnest Solicitations at the Throne of Grace
for us, and Faithful Punishing the Offenders, is the way to heal our breaches
and prevent our Ruin. Moses was Israel's Bulwark in the day of their
Provocation, when the Fierce Anger of the LORD was Kindled against them, so
that he Threatened to Consume them in a Moment, and obtained Mercy for them, and
that by his Fervent Intercession for them with GOD, and Severe Execution of
Justice on the Idolaters. Psalm. 106. 23. And when Israel had greatly Defiled
themselves, by Committing both Spiritual and Corporal Whoredom until the Plague
break in upon them. Phineas by executing Judgment in his Zeal upon Zimri and
Co^bi, Prevailed to the staying of the Plague. Ver. 29, 30. But Oh! how much of
the Divine Presence is necessary to strengthen you with Courage and Zeal to
stem the current of prevailing Iniquity in our Declining Times.

But this is not all, it is not enough that you see to it, Ne Res publica
aliquid Detrimenti Capiat, that the Public do not Suffer in its Interest; that
you retrieve the Government from Present Evils, and Guard against approaching
Dangers: but both the Secular and Sacred Good thereof must be furthered and
advanced by you. Even Saul helped forward the Worldly Interests of Israel: For
David in his Lamentation over him, (2 Samuel 1. 24) makes honorable mention of
this good fruit of his Government. that he furnished the Daughters of Israel
with Beautiful Apparel and Delights. Either through his Victories enriching the
Nation with the spoils of his Enemies, or by the Prudence of his Reign causing
the Land to abound with Wealth and Pleasant things. It is part of Mordecai's
good Character, Est. 10. 3. That he sought the Wealth of his People. And it is
reckoned as one of the Glories of Solomon's Reign, that he made Silver as Stones
in Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 9 27. But more Especially you should have at Heart the
thriving of Religion among us. Good Kings have always made it their Chief care
to Advance this among their People. And have looked upon it as their greatest
Honor to have been able to Contribute any thing to the Promotion of Christ's
Kingdom. The good Emperor Theodosius was wont to Style himself, Ultimus Dei
Servus, The Lowest Servant of GOD, and thought it his highest Title. Indeed you
are by Office Nursing Fathers to these Churches. And what a vast Field is here
for the Improvement of all your Abilities in the Service of your Great LORD.
May the Good hand of GOD be with you, as it was with Governor Nehemiah, in all
the good you have to do for this People.

3. It may be but a very little while that GOD will Honor you, with the
Opportunity, of doing so much good for his People. Your Breath is in your
Nostrils, and when that goes forth, we must cease to expect any further help
from you. We see, with Grief that Wise and Great Men Dye as well as others, yea
that they go to their Graves in their full Strength. What a Pity is it that any
part of a short and uncertain Time should fail of being filled with doing Good.
And how Happy are they that find Mercy with GOD, to be so Faithful in their
Exalted Stations as to be able in the end of their Time, to Appeal to GOD, with
our Blessed Savior, John 17. 4. Father -- I have Glorified thee on the Earth:
I have Finished the Work thou gave me to do. Besides, your Election is Annual
which calls for the closer Application to your Work: And an Heart to do, what
your hand finds to do, for the Public Good, with all your might would be a
great Blessing from Heaven, for this Work cannot be done by Men in a Private
Capacity.

And now I must lay before you some of those Methods that lead to the Enjoyment
of this so Blessed a Privilege*

(1) Such as would enjoy the Presence of GOD in Civil Public Capacity's, must
be Preferred by GOD, and not be self Promoters. It may Reasonably be Expected
that GOD will own and Bless Men in that Service for himself, which he Calls
them to. This is our Encouragement against all our Pears arising from a sense
either of our own Weakness, or the greatness of Public Work, that GOD who
calls and improveth us, is able to Supply us with all needed Strength, and to
carry on his own Purposes by his own Instruments. This was Joshua's case. The
GOD of Israel made him Captain over his Inheritance, and he never forsook him
but Accomplished the Settlement of Israel in the Land of Canaan by his Hand.
But if Men seek their own Advancement, and lay Plots for their own Promotion,
and have a great hand in their own Preferments, what can be Expected but that
GOD should leave them to themselves. Self Promotion is very Displeasing to GOD,
who never wants Instruments for his own Work, and would have no Man rush into
his Service or run of his Errand before he is sent When our LORD JESUS saw the
Pharisee^ choosing for themselves the Chief rooms at a Feast, he reproved them.
Luke 14. 7, etc. And on that occasion gave Documents of Modesty and Humility,
Teaching both them and us that the way to be Owned and Honored both by GOD and
Man, is to carry it with Lowliness of Mind, Esteeming and Preferring others
before our selves and leaving our own Promotion to other Men. For whosoever
Exalts himself, shall be Abased; and he that Humbles himself, shall be
Exalted Ver. 11 The aspiring Spirit of the two Sons of Zebedee, that did so
much itch to be the two chief Ministers of State, in Christ's supposed Temporal
Kingdom, was very Offensive to CHRIST as well as to their Brethren. And when
the Disciples had reasoned among themselves who should be the greatest, CHRIST
set a little Child before them as a Pattern of Humility; and showed them that
they ought to study to be as far, as that little Child, from Ambitious de^^es
and contrivances of Empire and Government; lest they should be Excluded the
Kingdom of Heaven. Compare Mat. 18. 1, 2, 3 with Mark. 9* 33, 34. It is plain
then, a course so irregular is not the way to obtain the Divine Favor. Seldom
are ambitious Spirits the best Qualified to Rule. The Vine does not thirst
after Promotion over the Trees of the Wood. The good Emperor Theodosius, when
he had done all that could make him worthy to Rule, would do nothing at all
that he might Rule: Qui pollet virtutibus debet invitus accidere; They who are
fittest to Govern, should not accept of Rule, unless they be drawn; says
Jenkins from Peralaus.

(2) They must carry it with Humility and Meekness in their Posts. These are
Virtues not calculated merely for the Poor and Low; but are eminent Ornaments
of the Great and High. Our LORD JESUS CHRIST, the Glorious King of Israel, was
Meek and Lowly: With what Condescension and Goodness, with what Gentleness and
Compassion, did He treat his People in the days of his Flesh, and does he still
treat them. And He would have these Virtues Learned by his Example. This will
make room for you in the Hearts of your People, and render the Exercise of your
Authority easy. The King over GOD's People might not li^^ himself up above his
Brethren Deu^. 17. 20. The Dignity of Authority is not to be Maintained by
Pride and Passion CHRIST has taught us, That he that would be Greatest Mat.
23. 11.
must be Servant of all Re^o^oam for want of this, lost Ten Tribes of his
Kingdom. And the haughtiness of Nebuchadnezzer's heart cost him dear: Dan. 5.
20. When his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in Pride, he was
deposed from his Kingly Throne, and they took his Glory from him. It is noted
of Moses that he was very Meek above all the men that were upon the face of the
earth, Numb. 12. 3.
and he was blessed with a distinguishing degree of the Divine Presence. Psalm.
25. 9. The Meek he will Guide in Judgment

(3) They must Labor to be well Skilled and Knowing in the Duties of their
Office. I know such Skill is Chargeable, and will cost Books, Time and Pains,
to make any considerable Acquisitions therein. And if the Public Allowance
will not bear you out therein* yet your Still will be its own Reward. This will
strengthen your hands in your Proceedings, and make others stand in awe of your
Authority. This made King Solomon great in the sight of all Israel. 1 King 3.
28. And all Israel heard of the Judgment which the King had Judged, and they
Feared the King: for they saw that the Wisdom of GOD was in him, to do
Judgment. Wisdom will make a Man's Face to shine, ( Eccl. 8. 1) and cause others
to pay him a Deference.

But if your Domestic Affairs, and Care of your own and those of your own
Houses, will not allow you Liesure to search after much of that Knowledge that
is to be desired in you, and by you; yet be not by any means diverted from the
Study of your own Duty, and of those things that may Accomplish you to the
Discharge of your particular Trust. The King must read in the Book of the Law
all the Days of his Life, Deuteronomy. 17 19 The Wisdom of the Prudent is to
understand his way On this Condition the Divine Presence was Promised to
Joshua; Josh. 1. 8. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy Mouth, but
thou shall Meditate therein Day and Night, that thou may observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shall make thy way
Prosperous, and then thou shall have good Success. Or (as the Margin reads it)
shall do Wisely.

(4) They must be very through in the Discharge of their Particular Trusts, and
not do the Work of the LORD negligently. It is GOD's Law, That he that Rules
should rule with Diligence, Romans 12. 8. Let the Command of Jehoshaphat to his
Judges, be always upon your minds as the Charge of GOD to you, 2 Chronicles 19. 6, 7
Take heed what you do: for you Judge not for Man, but for the LORD, who is with
you in the Judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the LORD be upon you, take
heed and do it. This Work must be done by You, or left undone; Others have no
Call to it.

Fidelity is the way to Promotion: He that is Faithful over a few things, shall
be made Ruler over much, Mat. 25 21 Habenti dabitur. A defect here lost Saul
both the Presence of GOD and his Kingdom. GOD was with him, until he proved
Unfaithful in the matter of Amaleck, but then the LORD departed from him, and
rent the Kingdom out of his hand, Whatsoever be the Work assigned you,
Endeavor to accomplish it, and let not the Kings business [ the King of Kings
business] Suffer in your hands. If you arise to do the Business that belongs to
you, it is to be expected that the LORD will be with you; while Slackness is a
Provocation to Him. The Slothful Servant incurred the severe Displeasure of his
Lord and lost his Talent, while the Faithful was Rewarded. All men expect
Public Service from Public Persons When Adrian the Emperor neglected his
Work, it was well said to him by an old Woman, Then renounce thy Place as thou
have done thy Duty.

(5) They must be strictly Pious. For the Rock of Israel has said, that he
that Rules over Men must Rule in the fear of GOD, 2 Samuel 23. 3. It is an
Article in Jethro's Counsel, That Rulers should be men that have the Fear of
GOD before their Eyes. And surely by how much the more closely they walk with
GOD by so much the more they ^ay expect the Divine Presence will be with (...).
For what said the Prophet that we^^ out to meet Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. -- Hear ye
me, Asa and all Judah and Benjamin, the LORD is with you, while ye be with Him;
-- But if you forsake him, he will forsake you. GOD was wonderfully with
Solomon while he kept the way of the LORD and was steadfast in his Covenant,
insomuch that there was neither Adversary nor evil Occurrent in all his
Kingdom, but when he forsook GOD and turned to Idolatry, GOD withdrew his more
Favorable Presence from him, and raised him up one Adversary after another.

Piety will add a Brightness to all your accomplishments and make your
Authority more Awful. Herod himself feared John, knowing he was a Good Man and
a Just. It was Paul's Religion, as well as Reasoning before Felix, made him
Tremble. And how well does Goodness become them that Judge for GOD, and
Represent Him on the Earth.

(6) They must be Strong and of a Good Courage. The Scripture styles you God's,
be not afraid of the face of Man. Vice is impudent, and many offenders have
necks with Iron sinews and brows of Brass. Be Valiant therefore for the Cause
of GOD upon the Earth. Much Moderation will be your Honor in your own Cause
but Zeal becomes the Cause of GOD. Moses was very mild and meek when Aaron and
Miriam spoke against him; but his anger waxed hot when the Idolaters had made
and worshipped the Golden Calf.

Let not Sinners be hardened in their evil Ways through your Timidity; but Execute
wrath fiercely on Offenders, and never punish them with a timorous Excuse, That
you could not help it; The Law, your Office and Oath obliged you to it; They
must not be troubled with you -- For what is this but to Counter-work Justice
in the very design of it? To justify the Delinquent in his Crime, and accuse
the Law, your Office and Oath, of Injustice; as if they obliged you to do him
an Injury. Rather make them sensible of their own Perverseness, and your
Resentments, that Iniquity may be born down before you. Josh. 1. 7. Only be
thou Strong and very Courageous, that thou may observe to do according to
all the Law, which Moses my Servant Commanded thee: Turn not from it to the
right hand or to the left, that thou may Prosper whithersoever thou go.

(7) By Instant Prayer seek the Presence of GOD with you, and his Blessing upon
all your Administrations. The LORD is a GOD hearing Prayer: and has promised
his Spirit to them that seek it, and that not only as a Spirit of Grace, but of
Gifts Compare Luke 11. 13. with Mat. 7. 11.
, Wisdom for Government, as well as for other Affairs, is to be sought of the
Father of Lights. How very successful as well as pleasing to GOD, was Solomon's
Petition? 1 King 3. 9. Give therefore thy Servant an understanding heart to
judge thy People, that I may discern between good and bad.

And now I must turn my self more particularly to the Honorable the GOVERNOR,
the Deputy Governor, and the Worshipful ASSISTANTS of this Colony. And the
Address we make to you this day, Honorable and Worshipful, is what Israel made
to Joshua in our Text; We will hearken unto you in all things, as we did unto
your Predecessors: Only the LORD your GOD be with You as He was with Them.

This Government has been blessed with very Valuable Privileges and a
Succession of Men, to administer their Public Affairs, of great Worth; who
having served their Generations Faithfully, are fallen asleep. But the Hand of
GOD has been heavy upon us of late in the early Removal of many of those who
were Pillars among us, Men of approved Ability's and Integrity, whom we Loved
and Honored, but called off from their Work, while in their full Strength, and
in the height of their Improvement. The Wisdom Righteousness and Sovereignty
of an Holy GOD is Adorable, and to be Submitted to with all Prostration, in
these Dispensations of his Providence, but more especially in the Death of the
late Governor (which I hope it is not altogether unseasonable to mention,
although he Deceased not in the Year past) The Jews long Lamented the Death of
good Josiah, and made honorable mention of him in all their Public Mournings
for many Years; and Jeremiah the Prophet made it an Ordinance that they should
do so, 2 Chronicles 35. 25. I have no Talent at giving Characters; and GOVERNORS
ALTONST All Is has been already well given, both in the Funeral Sermons By Dr.
MATHER and Mr. ADAMS.
for him and in the Public Prints. Nevertheless I cannot forbear, on this
occasion, to assist you in Paying a Tear to his Memory. He was then a Man of
the brightest Accomplishments, whom GOD had Adorned with so many Gifts and
Endowments and in so Eminent a Degree, as rendered him like Saul taller than his
Brethren by the Head and Shoulders, and made him Famous in both Englands. These
Excellencies that in others exist separate, in him were conjoined. Readiness of
Though It and Solidity of Judgment; Strength of Reason and Elegancy of Style:
Warmth and Activity of Temper and yet a great Command of his own Spirit. His
Wisdom and Prudence, his Piety and Probity, his Fidelity and Constancy, rendered
him our Safety abroad and Strength at home. He was indeed, Et Praesidium and
dulce decus nostrum, Our Chariots and our Horsemen.

His Concern for the House of GOD, in bringing about the Establishment of our
Churches by a Law; and so taking them into his own Arms and placing them under
the Paternal Care and Protection of the Government. His Love to our School of
the Prophets and promoting the Welfare thereof with heart and hand; and eminent
Appearing in a difficult Day for the help both of It and our Churches, ought
never to be forgotten; Nor his constant and growing Zeal for the Gospellizing
the Poor Heathen, to whom we have been so long Neighbors, but too regardless
of their Souls.

He was taken from us as Moses from Israel when his Eye was not dim, nor his
Natural force abated, and left us to Sigh out our Sorrows in the words of the
Lamenting Prophet, Lam 5. 16. The Crown is fallen from our Head: We unto us
that we have Sinned.

Nevertheless we Bless GOD, that although this strong Rod be broken, yet we are
not reduced to the Prophets Complaint, that there are no Strong Rods for a
Scepter to rule. May the GOD of the Spirits of all Flesh, that has set you
over this His Congregation, take of His Spirit and put it, in still more
Plentiful measures, upon you. And as the Israelites carried it better under
Joshua, than under Moses. So may you always find us less querulous and
murmuring, more Tractable and Dutiful than we have been heretofore.

Second Branch of the Exhortation.

II. And now let me offer a word of Advice to the BODY OF THIS PEOPLE; Do what
in you lies that you may always have such to Rule over you, as GOD will delight
to be with and Bless in their great and Good Service for you. Upon this depends
all the Good Fruit of Government. Rulers will be unto you what GOD shall be
Pleased to make them. If they be under a Wise and Good Conduct, and Succeeded
in their way, we shall reap the Benefit; but if their Wisdom perish and their
Counsel and Endeavors for us come to naught, we shall be the Sufferers. How
much does it Concern us then to Labor in this matter? It is this must make us
an Happy People, and our State Prosperous. The Common Wealth, the Public Good
cannot flourish but under a Wise and good Administration. If any think this not
material, and through weakness or wickedness, despise and hate Knowledge and
Wisdom in them that bear Rule, the Queen of the South shall rise up in Judgment
against them and shall Condemn them; for she pronounced Israel Blessed, when
she saw how GOD was with Solomon, and with what measures of Wisdom his Affairs
were ordered, and consequently his Kingdom administered: 2 Chronicles. 9. 7, 8. Happy
are thy Men, and happy are these thy Servants, which stand continually before
thee, and hear thy Wisdom. Blessed be the LORD thy GOD, which delighted in thee
to set thee on his Throne, to be King for the LORD thy GOD: because thy GOD
loved Israel, to Establish them for ever, therefore made He thee King over
them, to do Judgment and Justice.

And although GOD be Sovereign of His Favors, and dispense them unto whom and
when He will; Nevertheless there are Courses for us to take, that lead to our
good herein, and we may contribute much to this matter. And there are ways
which if we take, will cut off all reasonable Expectations of it.

1. Let all that are concerned to Elect Persons to Places of Trust and
Government, aim at this in their Choice. And be not Governed by any Sinister
Views. Be under the influence of this and not of any hurtful Lusts in giving in
your Suffrages. The case of man is deplorable, in his fallen State, that he can
hardly see his own Interest, and Difficultly pursue it. He is full of Evil
Lusts that Blind his mind and Alienate his heart from the way of his own Good.
And Exceedingly so in this as well as in other matters. Consider your own
Weakness, and watch and strive against Temptations. Covetousness will Disaffect
you to such as would carry on the Public Good to the best Advantage, lest they
should put you to some Charge to maintain good Designs. The Love of the World
is always Enmity against GOD, and those Persons and Designs that most of all
Honor Him. Pride Envy and a Levelling Spirit, are very hu^^ful in this affair.
The Scripture styles Rulers, Dignities; and that is but an ill spirit that is
disaffected to the Dignity of Rulers. They that with Korah, would reduce Rulers
and Ruled to a Level do, in effect, destroy Government and render it useless. A
Licentious Spirit, that hates to be Controuled, will be for such to Rule, as
are least Able, or may be likely to be least Faithful to restrain them in their
ill Practices. But let your Eyes be on the Able and the Faithful of the Land;
and look out men of Renown, known in your Tribes, whom GOD has Exalted by His
Gifts, and Promote them by your Election. You must not dictate to the Most
High, and say He shall be Present with, and Bless these and those whom you make
Choice of out of Humor, Faction, Carnal Interest, or to gratify some other
Lust. But let us follow the guidance of Providence in improving those in His
Service He has best fitted for His Work. If we neglect His Conduct, He will in
anger say of us as of Israel, Hos. 8. 4. They have set up Kings, but not by me:
they have made Princes, but I knew it not: That is did not approve of it.

2. Let us take heed left we Provoke GOD to withold from us this so Great a
Blessing of his Presence with our Rulers. GOD is wont to suit His dealings to
the Behavior of a Covenant People; Psalm. 18. 26. With the Pure thou will show
thy self Pure, and with the Froward thou will show thy self Froward. He will be
unto them in His Providence, as they are to Him in their Behavior* While they
do Justly and love Mercy, and walk Humbly with, their GOD; while they live in
some good measure up to their Profession, Obligations and Privileges, they may
reasonably Expect, that the LORD will Rejoice over them, to do them good; and
will make their Judges as at the first, and their Counselors as at the
beginning: But when they forget their Engagements to GOD, and break His
Covenant, and walk Contrary unto Him, what may they look for, but that GOD will
also walk contrary unto them, and punish them for their Iniquities; and as in
various other ways, so sometimes in their Rulers. Hos. 13. 11. I gave thee a
King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath. The Transgressions of Israel
Provoked GOD to Anger, and caused him to forsake David, and leave him to the
Power of Satan's Temptation, that, in the Pride of his Heart, he should number
Israel, and so occasion was given for the bringing the Pestilence at that Time,
on a guilty Land. 2 Samuel 24. 1. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against
Israel, and he moved David against them to say, Go number Israel and Judah. It
was for the wickedness of Judah and Jerusalem, that GOD took from them their
brave Men, and gave them Children to be their Oppressors and Women to Rule over
them, Isa. 3. 12. Men through weakness and wickedness are altogether insufficient
for, and unworthy of the Government.

TO CONCLUDE.

3. Let us carry it with Gratitude, toward both GOD and our Rulers. Let us show
our selves sensible of, and duly affected with our Privileges; and not be
weary of, and quarrel with our own Happiness. Let us bless GOD for a good and
gentle Government enjoyed by us; and that our Rulers are of our Selves, and our
Governor proceeds from the midst of us, Which GOD promised as a great Favor
to the Jews, Jer. 30. 21. Let us Thankfully accept their Endeavors for our
Good: and every way Strengthen their hands, and assist them in their Work. And
not Clamor against them, for Humane Imperfections: much less for a Faithful
Punishing Evil Doers; nor side with Profane and Wicked Men, in their Contempt
of Authority, and of the Laws of GOD and Man. Let us not add to their Burden by
Stiffness or Frowardness: But remember the Command of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.
13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the LORD's Sake. Let us
get a sense of the Greatness of their Work, and the Necessity of it, for our
Good. And let our Prayers be with much Importunity, to the GOD of all Grace,
for them, that they may have always a Sufficiency of the Divine Presence, to
every Purpose of Government; that we may lead a Quiet and Peaceable Life, in
all Godliness and Honesty. But above all, Let us Hearken in all things to the
KING Eternal, Immortal, Invisible; the Only Wise GOD: Let us be Steadfast and
Unmovable, always Abounding in His Work, that He may Delight to Lead us, as He
did Israel of Old, by the Hand of Moses and Aaron as a Flock.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THERE is now in the Press, and will speedily be Published, A Discourse on Romans
12. 2. Entitled, True Christianity Explained and Enforced. Wherein are some
Objections respecting Conversion Proposed and Answered.

Lately Published, A Discourse, Entitled, Ministers must take heed to their
Ministry, to Fu^ill it. Delivered at Windham, Aug. 3. ^726 When Mr. Thomas
Clap, was Ordained Pastor of the Church there; with the CHARGE then given to
him.

Sold by T. Green at N. London.


