Mr. Barnard's SERMONS TO YOUNG PEOPLE, And on the Earthquake.

TWO DISCOURSES Addressed to Young Persons; To which is added, A SERMON
Occasioned by the EARTHQVAKE, Which was October 29. 1727.

By John Barnard, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Marblehead.

Luke X.41. Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things:
but one thing is needful.

Amos IV.12. Therefore, thus will I do unto thee, O Israel, and because I will
do thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

BOSTON, in N. E. Printed for S. Gerrish, at the lower end of Cornhill.
MDCCXXVII.

Deum timere est nulla Mala facere, et nulla Bona, quae facienda sunt,
praeterire; -- Ubi vero Timor non est, ibi Perditio est Animae; ibi Dissolutio
Vitae est; ibi est abundantia Peccatorum.

Bern. ad Sororem.

THE DEDICATION. To the Young People in Marblehead, especially those under my
more immediate Care.
Dearly Beloved, and longed for,
I Hope, I can truly say, That my Hearts Desire and Prayer for you all i^, That
you may be saved. To this End were the two Discourses to the Youth Calculated,
and as is most suitable, in a plain and natural Method, and the most easy and
familiar Style. It Is at your Desire that they ar^ now made public: and if the
Preaching, and publishing of them, may be influential upon you, to stir you up*
to make Religion your Business, my End will be answered, and I shall be little
concerned at the Exceptions, which from the manner of my handling the Subjects,
or the near Relation of the one to the other, may be made by such as read only
to find Fault.

SURE I am, that the Subject is of the nearest Con^ernment unto you all, that
you lift your selves in the Service of God, and that you do it Immediately,
without Delay; and no warmth of Spirit can be too great in pressing so
Important a Duty upon you.

THE awful Providence of GOD, in the Terrible Earthquake, and astonishing
Noise, which so soon followed upon the Preaching of these Sermons, has,
doubtless, given an Edge to the Convictions of many of you, what Need there is
that you be in Earnest, and make all imaginable Haste, to secure your Eternal
Welfare, by getting into the Ark of Safety. This, doubtless, has awakened you
to flock more earnestly to the House, and Ordinances of God, that you may be
instructed in the Path of Life, and be in the way of the Blessing. This also
has produced your Desire of printing the Discourse, which I gave the crowded
Assembly, upon the Lecture after that dismal Night, and while as yet the
Rumblings of the Earthquake were daily heard among us.

SUCH astonishing Praelibations of the great and terrible Day of the Lord, has
made you Thoughtful, what you shall do to be saved. O, suffer not the
Convictions of the Necessity of your being found in Peace with your Judge, and
your Beginning Preparations for that awful Day of the Lord, to dye away in the
Birth.

GOD is yet holding the Rod over us, and keeping your Fears awake, by the
Repetition of the Noise of the Earthquake almost daily, and particularly the
last Lord's Day Evening, at 20 min. after Nine, the One and Twentieth Day since
it first began, you were again surprised with the Roaring Noise. But if there
were no such Cause for your Fears, yet Remember* that the terrible Commination
in the Word of God, are a much stronger Ground of fearing to fall into the
Hands of the Living God, than any Noise or Shakes of the Earth can be. Let then
your fearful Apprehensions lead you to lay hold on the Horns of the Altar; and
while your Fears drive you to JESUS, the SAVIOR, let Love constrain you to
abide faithful to Him. See the wide Field of Divine Grace and Love opening
before you, in the Wonders of Redemption, in providing such a Savior for you,
and in His Readiness to accept of you; and the Riches of Divine Mercy in
sparing of you, when your Flesh and Heart trembled, for fear of the Righteous
Judgments of God; and let the Prospect fil^ you with an inextinguishable Flame
of Love to God, and Christ; that the Love of God, reigning in your Hearts, may
effectually prevail over every other Love, to the ^radicating of Sin and Lust
out of your Souls, and filling you with the Principles of the Divine Life, that
you may never more relapse into any way of Wickedness, but may walk unblameably
before Him, in all the Duties of Holy Obedience.

THERE are especially Two things I would Commend to you, as very requisite to
the Life of real Piety, and to promote your Growth in Grace; namely, a high
Veneration for the Word of God, and a sacred Regard to the Day of the Lord.

IF the Word of God be duly valued by you, as it ought to be, then will you
improve it, as the Man of your Counsel, and direct your Walk according to it.
This will render the Doctrines of the Christian Religion certain to you, its
Duties easy and pleasant, and its Hope comfortable. Whereas a light Esteem for
the Divine Oracles will necessarily slacken your Regard to the practical Duties
of Christianity, and deprive you of the Ioys of its promised Mercy.

AND a due Sanctification of the Lord's Day will render the Word more
profitable to you, your Spirits more devout and Heavenly, and will have a great
Influence into your Practice all the ensuing Week. Whereas, a slighting and
Profaning of that Holy Time by unnecessary Business, by Sports and Diversions,
will rob you of the Benefit of Divine Instructions, and sink your Minds into a
careless Regardlesness of God* Religion, and your own Souls, and will leave you
an easy Prey to all Temptations to Profanity, and Immorality.

I beseech you therefore, as you value your Souls, let these Two have a kind
Entertainment with you; and let the Voice of God in His Providence, put you
upon hearkening more diligently to the Voice of His Word, and make you more
careful to afford on holy Rest to the Day of the Lord, that you may have a well
grounded Hope of partaking of that Rest which remains for the People of God,
where no Terror or Amazement shall ever surprise you.

MAY the Blessing of God go along with these Labors, and make you greatly to
increase in Divine Knowledge, and abound in Faith and Love* in Righteousness
and Charity, in Temperance and Sobriety, and in your Earnest Cries to Heaven
for the best of Blessings upon you* and for me also, that I may find Mercy to
be faithful, and accepted.

AND now, Brethren, I Commend you to God, and the Word of His Grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them that are
Sanctified.

Marblehead, Nov. 21. 1727. John Barnard.

YOUNG PERSONS Excited to Seek the LORD in their Youth. A SERMON Preached at
Marblehead, October 8 th. 1727.
II. CHRON. XXXIV.3. In the Eighth Year of his Reign, while he was yet Young,
he began to seek after the God of David his Father.


THE Beloved Apostle John, writing to Gaius, in his Third Epistle, ver. 4.
says, I have no greater joy, than to hear that my Children walk in the Truth.
And truly, what greater ground of Joy and Comfort can there be to a Minister of
the Gospel, who has his Heart set for the Conversion of Souls to God, than to
see the Children of his People earnestly seeking and serving the Lord,
according to the Truths of the Gospel? The Lambs in the Flock are a great Part
of our Charge, and the Hopes of the Flock; and that they may be kept from
wandering out of the path of Life, or when they have gone astray may be
r^^overed and brought into the Fold of Christ, is a very great part of the Work
of the Evangelical Ministry. Hence the Apostle directs Titus, to exhort Young
Men to be sober-minded, Tit. II 6. And hence, you find the Word of God so often
addressed unto Young People, that they would remember their Creator in the days
of their Youth; and so often setting Examples before them of those that in
their Youth turned unto God, and sought Him with their whole Heart; and so
often the Commend given unto the Young Disciples, as the Beloved Disciples; all
of it to encourage and persuade our Young People to become virtuous, sober, and
Religious betimes.

To this purpose serve the Words of my Text. For whatsoever Things were written
aforetime are written for our Instruction.

IN This, and the following Chapter, we have an account of good Iosiah's Reign,
succeeding the Reigns of a wicked Manasseh and Amon; and it is recorded of him,
That he did that which was Right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the
ways of David his Father, and declined neither to the right hand, nor to the
left; For in the Eighth Year of his Reign, etc. Josiah was but Eight Years old
when he began to reign, as we see in ver. 1. and he began to seek after God in
the Eighth Year of his Reign, as the text tells us, so that while he was yet
but a very Young Man, in the Sixteenth Year of his Age, so soon as he came to
Years of Discretion and Understanding, we find him beginning to seek the Lord.
This is recorded of him to his Commendation, and was that which laid the
Foundation of his great Serviceableness, in his more advanced Years. Herein he
did but what was his Duty, what he owed to God, and his own Soul; and he reaped
the Advantage of it afterward, for his Reign was more peaceful and prosperous,
than that of the wicked Kings that went before him, or any that came after him,
and he lived not to see the Evil which God bro't upon Jerusalem. From the Words
we may raise this DOCTRINE, viz.

DOCTRINE. THAT it is the Duty and Interest of Young Persons to seek the Lord,
while they are yet Young.

In speaking to which I will

1. BRIEFLY show what is employed in seeking the Lord. And then,

2. WHY Young Persons should seek the Lord, while they are yet Young.

I. WHAT is implied in seeking the Lord. Though sometimes seeking the Lord is to
be understood in a limited and restrained sense, and so it means Prayer, and
calling upon God; yet here it is evidently to be understood in a large and more
extensive meaning; for it is mentioned as the Characteristick of Iosiah's
Religious Temper and Disposition, and therefore includes in it the whole of
Religion, even all that Duty which we owe to God, and our own Souls.

And accordingly,

1. SEEKING after God implies in it, a devout and reverent Respect to the
Divine Being and Perfections. That which we seek after we have a respect and
value for: we look upon it as certain, and worth our having. Now our respect
and value for God turns upon the serious, decent, and awful Apprehensions which
we entertain in our Minds, of His Being, and adorable Perfections; that is to
say, that our Hearts are ever kept under the strong and powerful Impressions of
a fixed Belief, and Acknowledgment, that as He has manifested Himself, so He
is Infinite, Eternal and Unchangeable, in His Being, Wisdom, Power, Holiness,
Justice, Goodness, and Truth. This is to be laid in the Foundation of our
Seeking after God. And thus should Young Persons maintain upon their Minds the
awful Apprehensions of it, that verily there is a God; a God that made the
Heavens, the Earth and the Sea, and all things that therein are; and therefore
a God that made them, that has given Life and Breath to them, that upholds them
in Life, and Preserves and Defends them, and Feeds and Clothes them, and in
whom it is that they live, and move, and have their Being. And because the Name
of this God is Holy and Reverend, therefore they should be exceeding careful
that they do not Injure, and Profane, and Blaspheme, and take His Holy Name in
vain; but should always think, and speak reverently of God, and maintain an
holy Aw of God, His Name, Titles, Attributes, Worship, Word, and Works, upon
their Hearts.

2 SEEKING after God implies in it, a sincere and hearty choice of the Lord for
our God. That which we seek after, we make Choice of; our Affections are set
upon it, and our Will embraces it, and determines for it. Thus Young Persons
should seek after God, by a sincere and unfeigned Choice of the Lord for their
God, dedicating themselves to Him, and resolving to be for the Lord, and for no
other. Their Wills should close with Him, by a serious Choice of the Everliving
Jehovah, God Father, Son and Holy Spirit, for their God and Father, their
Redeemer, and Sanctifier. Their Affections should close with this God, by
loving Him with all their Heart, with all their Soul, with all their Mind, and
with all their Strength; and the earnest Desire of their Souls should be after
God in Christ, that they may enjoy His Favor, which is better than Life; and
that the Divine Image may be stamped upon them in Righteousness and true
Holiness, the Dignity and Glory of their Nature. They should say with the
Psalmist, Psalm. lxiii.1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my
Soul thirsts for Thee; my Flesh longs for Thee. They should choose an
Interest in Christ, as the one thing needful, and prefer it above all the
Enjoyments of this World. They should make Choice of that Good part which
cannot be taken away from them, even a Portion in Heaven, which will be equal
to the Nature and Duration, of their Immortal Souls; that when they come to
Dye, and leave this World, they may go to the House not made with Hands,
Eternal in the Heavens.

3. To seek after God implies in it, a diligent use of all proper Methods to
obtain Him. That which we seek for, we are wont to search after it, to take
pains to find it, and use all likely Methods to obtain it. And thus should
Young Persons seek after God, in the diligent use of all appointed Means, and
in improving all the proper Methods, by which God may become their God, and
Portion for ever. And what are the proper Methods herefor? But the Exercise of
those various Duties of Religion, Sobriety, the Fear of God, and Obedience to
His Commands, which God Himself has directed us to. Thus then they should seek
after God, in a diligent Attendance upon all the Duties of Religion; by the
Performance of the Duties of Natural Religion, in their earnest Prayers to God,
public and private, in their Families, and in their Closets, and in Praising
of Him; and in all the Acts of Instituted Religion, remembering to keep Holy the
Sabbath Day, seriously attending upon the Word and Ordinances of God in His
House, coming under the Baptism of the Lord, and carefully living up to their
Baptismal Engagements, and by preparing themselves for, and approaching to the
Holy Table of the Lord, that they may receive the Childrens Bread. Thus we find
it recorded of good Josiah, that he took care of the Service of the House of
God, and kept the Passover.

THUS Young Persons should seek the Lord, by an universal Obedience to His holy
Commandments, Psalm. CXIX.9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way, by
taking heed thereto according to thy Word. They should diligently read, and
hear the Word of God, and meditate upon it, and endeavor to govern their
Practice according to it. They should observe what that Word says, and take
heed to obey and do it. They should improve it as a Lamp to their Feet, and a
Light to their Path; make it the Rule of their walk, and according to the
Directions thereof, live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World,
that they may not injure any in Word, or in Deed, but may be meek and humble,
beneficent and kind, and full of all Goodness and Charity to all about them.
Thus Josiah, when he had found the Book of the Law read therein, and formed his
Practice according to it.

4. SEEKING after God implies in it, unfeigned Repentance of all Sin. When we
are seeking after any thing, we endeavor to remove every thing out of the way
that would hinder our finding it. Now Sin is the only thing that would hinder
our obtaining the Favor of God; and therefore this must be put away, by
unfeigned Repentance. Thus therefore Young Persons should seek after the Lord,
by Repenting of all their Sins, and turning from them, with all their Heart and
Soul. It Is a Direction given to Young Persons, Prove. I.23. Turn you at my
Reproof. They should therefore look upon their past Sins with Abhorrence and
Detestation, and loath themselves in their own Eyes, and mourn and lament
before the Lord because of them, and judge and condemn themselves, as unworthy
of the least Mercy from God, and deserving of His highest Displeasure, for
their manifold and aggravated Transgressions: they should resolve for the Time
to come, to have nothing more to do with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, and
be ever upon their Watch and Guard against Sin, and strenuously resist all
Temptations thereto: they should make it their great Care to flee Youthful
Lusts, to keep themselves pure and unspotted from the World, and approve
themselves blameless and unrebukable, as the Children of God, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation. These things are implied in seeking after God. I
pass,

II. TO show why Young Persons should thus seek the Lord, while they are yet
Young.

And here,

1. GOD Himself requires of Young People, and Commands them thus to seek after
Him. Hence is that, Eccl. XII.1. Remember thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth.
q d. While thou art yet Young, remember there is a God, who made thee to serve
and glorify Him; and remember to make it the main Business of thy Life to
answer the End of thy Creation, to love this God, to devote thy self to Him, to
obey His Commands, and shun all that would be offensive to Him. Thus it is a
Rule and Injunction given to Young Persons, 2 Timothy II.22. Flee Youthful Lusts:
be very careful to guard against all the Vices that Youth is most inclined and
addicted to. This sufficiently shows that God requires it of Young People to
seek after Him. And has God commanded Thee, and will thou dare to disobey Him!
Has He not all imaginable Right to require this of Thee? and art thou not under
the most strong and powerful Obligations to do what He requires? Is He not thy
God; the God that has made thee? thy Father that has bought thee, and
established thee? And ought thou not to live in Obedience to Him from whom
thou receivest thy very Being? Is He not the God that preserves thee, that
daily takes care of thee, and supplies thy Wants, and redeemeth thy Life from
Destruction? And should thou not in gratitude to Him for all his Benefits to
thee, be ready to yield Obedience to whatsoever He enjoins thee? Is not all thy
Hope of Eternal Life and Happiness founded upon His Infinite Grace and Mercy to
thee? Can thou expect to be saved without the Strength of His Arm, and the
Wonders of His Grace appearing for thee? And will thou not then remember to
hearken to His Voice, and diligently enquire after Him? Yea, cannot He punish
thee, and make thee miserable in the place of Torment forever, if thou should
be disobedient to His Command? And knowing the Terrors of the Lord, will thou
not be persuaded to become a willing and obedient Subject to Him? O that our
Young People would be prevailed withal to consider the manifold Obligations
lying upon them to obey the Heavenly Voice, and yield a ready Compliance with
what the Lord their God requires of them.

2. THERE is the Example of many others who have sought after God while they
were yet Young. The Sacred Scripture gives you many Instances of such as began
betimes to seek after God. David did so, who could say, Psalm. LXXI 9. Thou art
my Hope, O God, thou art my Trust from my Youth. It was a Young Joseph, who
could say, when tempted to Uncleanness, Genesis XXXIX.9. How can I do this great
Wickedness, and Sin against God. Moses had made his Choice of God while he was
yet Young, of whom it is said, Heb* XI.24, -- When he was come to years (of
Discretion,) he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's Daughter, choosing
rather to suffer afflictions with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasure
of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater Riches, than the
Treasures of Egypt, for he had respect unto the recompense of Reward. Obadiah
could say, as 1 Kin. XVIII.12. I thy Servant fear the Lord from my Youth. Of
Josiah it is here recorded that (in the Sixteenth Year of his Age) while he was
yet Young he began to seek after the Lord. And we are told of Timothy, 2 Timothy
III.15. That from a Child thou have known the Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise to Salvation. Thus we have several Examples, upon sacred Record,
and through the Mercy of the most High are not without some in our Days, of Young
Persons seeking after the Lord: And what is the end of these Examples being set
before you, but to show you your Duty, and encourage you to it. O that a
Principle of laudable Ambition might fire the Breasts of our Young People, that
they may be excited to go and do likewise.

3. IT will be every way unspeakably to the Advantage of Young People to seek
after the Lord.

Here,

1. THIS will be of all things most profitable to Thee. Persons in their Youth
are striving to make to themselves an Interest in this World; they are plotting
and contriving, they labor and toil, that they may get something of this
Worlds Good, and if possible lay up for a rainy Day* But alas! what are all the
Gains of this World, compared with the Gains of serious Religion and Godliness?
If thou will seek God, and serve Him, and Live a Sober and Religious Life, this
will bring in the greatest Revenue to thee. This will secure a Sufficiency of
the Good things of this Life in the Covenant promise of God: for Godliness has
the promise of the Life that now is. 1 Timothy IV.8. And our Blessed Savior has
assured thee, if thou will seek first the Kingdom of God, and His
Righteousness, that all these things shall be added unto you. Mat. VI.33. So
that in this way of Seeking and serving God, you will most of all promote your
Temporal Interest and Advantage; having these Things secured in the promise to
thee, which is more than any Wicked Man has.

BUT besides all of this, by your thus Seeking the Lord in your Youth, you will
bring in the greater Spiritual profit and Gain to you. You have precious and
immortal Souls in you, and the more their Interest is advanced, the greater
will be the profit you will reap thereby to yourselves. Now by your seeking
after God in your Youth, by being Religious betimes you will gain the inward
Peace and Satisfaction of your own Minds, the Rejoicing and Testimony of your
Consciences for you, which alone will be better unto you than all this World,
without it. Thus the Keeping the Commandments is its own Reward, Psalm. XIX.11.
In keeping them there is great Reward. This also will be a means to possess you
with the Grace of God, the Merchandise whereof is better than Silver, and the
Gain thereof than fine Gold; and the sooner you begin to seek after God, the
more you may expect ^o have your Graces increased; and by a due improvement of
them, lay in a greater St^ck against a Time of Need. And over and above, this
will secure to you the Everlasting Happiness of your Souls, and increase your
Weight of Glory, by your early dedicating yourselves to the Service of God, and
longer Continuance therein. And say now, what is all the Profit and Gain of
this World compared with this? especially if for the sake of this World, you
should neglect God, and loose your own Souls. Mat. XVI 26. What is a Man
profited, if ^e shall gain the whole World, and loose his own Soul? or what
shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?

2. IF thou will Seek after God while thou art yet Young, this will greatly
tend to thy Honor. Young Persons are apt eno' to think of making a Figure in
the World; and they ought to be concerned for their Good Name, and be careful
to gain a Reputation; a laudable Ambition should put them upon striving to
excel; for we are told Prove. XXII.1. A Good Name is rather to be chosen than
great Riches; and loving Favor rather than Silver and Gold. But, alas! how
very much are young Persons prone to mistake the way to establish their
Reputation? It Is not to gratify their Lusts, to follow their carnal Appetites,
to allow themselves in fashionable vices; this is not the way to Excellency and
Dignity; but this will tend to bring a Blot upon thy Name, to Brand thee with
the mark of Infamy. How natural is it to observe upon the Conduct of Young
Persons, and to say of a vicious Young Man, "there goes a profligate debauched
Young Fellow; and his Name becomes a Stench in the Nostrils of all sober,
virtuous, and thinking People. But the true Way to get a Reputation, and gain
Applause is to do those things that are Virtuous and praise worthy. Hence we
are told, Prove. XII.26. The Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor.
This, O Young Man, will be the way to make thy Name as precious Ointment, the
Perfume of it will be grateful wherever it comes. The better Part of Mankind
will value, esteem, and honor thee; Good People will rejoice to see thee, and
say of thee, that is an Excellent Young Man; and even the Vain and Profligate,
who hate the Practice of Virtue, and will openly laugh and sc^ff at thy
Preciseness, will yet have an inward Esteem and Veneration for the truly
Religious Young Man. So that thy Virtue and Religion will be the most likely
way, literally to bring thee to Honor, by promoting thee to Places of Eminency
and Dignity among Men. Hence the Wise Man says of that Wisdom which is the Fear
of the Lord, Prove. IV.8. Exalt her and she shall promote thee; she shall bring
thee to Honor when thou do embrace her.

BESIDES this will put the truest Mark of Honor upon thee, as it will bring
thee into a near Conformity to the Divine Likeness. This will raise thee above
the Level of the Brute, and render thee one of the precious Sons of Sion, and
thou shall be Honorable in the Eyes of thy God. And what greater Advancement
can thou Desire? than to be one of the Children of the most High, to have the
Eternal Son of God Himself encircle thy Brows with a radiant Crown, and seat
thee with Himself on a Throne of unfading Glory. Yet so shall they be Honored
who thus devote themselves to the Service of God. John XII.26. If any Man serve
me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall my Servant be; if any Man
serve me, him will my Father Honor.

3. THUS to seek the Lord, while thou art yet Young, will afford you the truest
Joy and Pleasure. This seems to be a very enticing Bait with Young Persons, who
have their Hearts so much set upon their Pleasures; and therefore the great
Adversary of Souls fails not to improve it to the best Advantage, on his side,
to draw away the Minds of Young People from their Duty to God and their own
Souls. They are ready to think that this and the other carnal Joy and sensual
Pleasure must be gratified: and they are prone vainly to imagine that if they
should become sober, and virtuous, they should be tied up to such strait Rules,
as never more to know what Pleasure means. But stay, O Young Man, and think
seriously a little; and then say which is the Way to have Pleasure. What are
all the Pleasures thou art prone to be so fond of? At the best they are but of
the lowest Kind, such as tend only to the gratifying of thy Body, and the lower
Appetites. And wherein, after thy fullest Career in those low dreggy Pleasures,
art thou better than the Beast, who is capable of them all, it may be in a
higher degree of Sensation? What are all these to the Joy and Pleasure of the
Soul, which is to be found in the Ways of Wisdom? Her Ways are Ways of
Pleasantness and all her Paths are Peace. Prove III.17. When thou have tried all
the Pleasures thou can think of, in the Ways of Sin, thou will find none of
them to be equal with the rational Satisfaction, arising from an Orderly walk:
and yet these are greatly below the true refined Spiritual Pleasures, resulting
from a Life of true Religion and Godliness, the assurance of Gods Love, Peace
of Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost.

BESIDES; all the Pleasures of Sin are followed sooner or later with the Lashes
and Stings of an awakened and enraged Conscience. Thy guilty Conscience will
one Day stare thee in the Face, and the dismal and ghastly Wounds, it will then
give unto thy Soul, will abundantly overbalance all the pretended Pleasures
thou have enjoyed, Prove. XXIII.32. At last it biteth like a Serpent, and
stingeth like an Adder. Whereas the Pleasures of a Godly Life have no such
horrid self-Reflections, are attended with no such remorse and horror; but
afford a new Joy in the review of them.

NAY further all the Pleasures of Sin are but for a Season; as it is said of the
Laughter of fools, Eccl. VII.6. It Is like the crackling of thorns under a pot:
It may make a noise, but it is not lasting; and when it ends, will end either
in a bitter Repentance, or in the amazing Horrors of of Eternal Fire. It Is said
of him that indulges himself in sensual Pleasures, Prove. VII.22, 23. He goes
after her as an ox to the slaughter, as a fool to the correction of the stocks;
till a dart strike through his liver, as a bird hasteneth to the snare, and
knows not that it is for it is life. But the Pleasures of a life of serious
Godliness are solid, substantial, and durable; they are true Pleasures, and
lasting Joys. Though they may admit of an Interruption, as to the actual
Experience of them, at times; yet they will never leave thee, as long as thou
art in the World; and when thou shall be here no more, they will follow thee
into the Eternal World, where thou shall be swallowed up iwith endless and
uninterrupted Joys; while the Wicked shall lie down in pure and endless Sorrow,
Psalm. XVI.11. Thou will show me the path of life; in thy presence there is
fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

But,

4. To seek the Lord while thou art yet Young, is the way to save thy Immortal
Soul forever. And what can be of greater Importance and Concern-to thee, than
the Salvation of thy own Soul? What, I beseech thee, is needful for thee, if
this is not? Do thou think it needful to take care of thy Body, and provide
for the comfortable Support of it? And is it not infinitely more needful that
thy Soul be provided for? Is it needful for thee to comply with the inclination
of thy Friends, and gratify thy Companions? And is it not infinitely more
necessary to please thy Maker, and best Friend, that thou may be happy in his
Favor? Whenever thou art tempted to do any thing contrary to the Law of God,
upon the pretense of necessity, for thy Body, or thy Friend; think seriously
with thy self, That but one thing is needful, and that is, that thou should
save thy precious Immortal Soul. Does not thy Soul lie wounded, bleeding,
perishing* under the Power of Sin, the Energy of the Devil, and the tremendous
Wrath of an Angry and Almighty God? And will not you do all that you can to
rescue it from this Misery, and preserve it from Eternal Perdition? Is it not
absolutely necessary, and thy highest wisdom, that you should do so? Why, this
is the Way to save thy Immortal Soul from all this Misery, and to render it
completely Happy, to seek after GOD, to live Religiously, and walk in Obedience
to the Divine Commandments, while thou art yet in thy Youth. For how can thou
hope to enjoy God, unless thou art faithful in His Service? or to see Him, if
thou art not like Him? Without Holiness, no Man shall see the Lord. Heb.
XII.14. How can you think of entering into the Kingdom of God, unless thou art
new born? Has not our Savior plainly said, Joh. III.3. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Thou
may call thy self a Christian, and say thou have Faith, but without this all
thy pretentions are vain; thy Faith is but a lifeless thing, while destitute of
the works of Obedience to the Law of God. So that unless thou do truly seek
after, and serve God, repent of thy Sin, and lead a holy Life, thou will be
miserable for ever. We are told, Romans VIII.13. If ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die. If ye live in the service of Sin, fulfilling the desires of the
Flesh and of the Mind, walking according to the course of the World, in
gratifying your fleshly and carnal Appetites, ye shall die, and your Souls will
be damned for ever, and it will be beyond the power of Heaven and Earth to save
thee, if thou should dye in thy Sins. For God will judge thee, and condemn
thee for all thy evil ways; and who is he that shall shall deliver thee? Eccl.
XI.9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee, in
the days of thy youth; and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes; but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into
judgment. And what will thou do when God rises up? what will thou answer Him
when He visits, and calls thee to an Account for all thy sinful and ungodly
Courses? Verily, the Eternal Salvation or Damnation of thy Soul turns upon thy
seeking and serving God; and therefore thou ought to begin this now, in the
days of thy Youth.

BUT I pass to make Improvement of this DOCTRINE.

USE. I. HENCE then, it must needs highly concern those that are far advanced
in Years, to make speed and haste in their Seeking after God. If it be the Duty
and Interest of Young People to seek the Lord, while they are yet Young; surely
it must be your Duty and Interest, who have gray Hairs scattered here and there
upon you. Alas; It is to be feared that there are many that have passed their
Youth, that are got into advanced Age; yea, are there not some that have
arrived even at Old Age? and yet unto this very Day, they have never truly,
sincerely, heartily sought after God; but remain utter strangers to God, and
Christ, and a Life of serious Religion, and Godliness: their Hearts are still
in love with their Lust, their Language is profane, and impure, and their
Actions are directly contrary to the holy Laws of God. And think thou, O old
Sinner, that thou shall find favor with God, and be accepted to Mercy with
Him, while thou art going on in thy Evil ways? O what will become of thee, when
thou dyest? What a dreadful End will Death make of thee, if thou do not truly
seek the Lord, before thou lie down in the Grave? Has not thy Life been
hitherto spent to the dishonor of God? Have thou not been daily adding to the
load of thy Guilt? that well may thou say, my Crimes are more than can be
reckoned up. Can thou answer for one of thy innumerable Sins, when thou
come to stand before the Bar of God? And, what a poor inch of Time have thou
now left, to correct the Errors of thy past Life, to make thy Peace with God,
and prepare for a dying Hour in? If God should say to thee, set thy House in
Order, this Night thou shall Dye; what would become of thee? Art thou ready to
entertain such a Summons? Or, art thou sure of any more than the present Time,
to provide for it? At best; How few are the residue of thy Days, when thou
have, as it were, one foot already in the Grave? And does it not then highly
concern thee, O old Sinner, to be up and doing, to use all Diligence to redeem
the few remaining Minutes that may be left thee, that if possible thou may
dispatch this great work, ever Death overtakes thee? O set thy self hereunto in
good earnest. If thou will be in good earnest in thy seeking after God, Old,
and full of Sins as thou art, I may assure thee that there is room for thee to
find Favor with God, and He will yet have Mercy on thee, ( Matthew. XX.6.) But
then, because the greatest part of thy Time has been consumed in the service of
Sin, thou need to be so much the more fervent and importunate, in thy
Prayers and Cries to God; so much the more deep, humble, broken and thorough in
thy Repentance; so much the more diligent in thy Watchfulness, Labors, and
Activity in the Service of God, lest you should not have time eno' left to you,
to do what the Lord thy God requires of you, that thou may be saved in the
Day of the Lord. O that those of you that are advanced in Years, would
seriously consider these things, and immediately set your selves to seek the
Lord.

II. HENCE, Parents should be exceeding careful to instruct their Children in
seeking after the Lord. If Young Persons should seek after the Lord, while they
are yet Young, then they ought to be taught and instructed in their Youth, how,
in what way, and by what means, they may become Religious and Virtuous. For
they are not born with natural Dispositions to the Service of God, but the
contrary; and they need to have their natural Temper and Inclination altered,
and meliorated by a good Education. And whom does this so nearly concern, as
their Parents? whom the bonds of Nature oblige to be thoughtful of the welfare
of their Children. This then teaches us, that it is the important Duty
incumbent upon Parents, to take all prudent Care and use all proper Methods,
that their Children may become an instructed Seed. It Is not eno' that they are
put to School to learn to read, and to furnish them with such Knowledge as may
be of use to them in the Affairs of this World; but they should instruct them
in such Knowledge as may have a happy influence to purify their Minds, and
reform their Manners; that their Spiritual, and Eternal Interest may be
promoted thereby. To this end, they should acquaint them with the Doctrines,
and Duties of the Gospel, and set before them the Counsels, and Directions, and
Warnings of the Word of God, and add their own Counsels and Charges upon them.
Thus Solomon says, Prove. IV.3. I was my Fathers son, and he taught me. If
Children be left to themselves, and no prudent care is taken to give them a
virtuous Education, it is not to be wondered at, if they bring their Parents to
shame.

BUT then how exceeding Careful should Parents be, to set their Children a good
Example, as well as instruct and Charge them. Examples will ordinarily have a
more prevailing Influence upon them than Precept. If therefore you would have
your Children seek and serve God; let them see you going before them in all the
Duties of a Religious Life. If you would have them to live soberly, and
righteously; let them see you setting them an Example of Sobriety in your
Behavior, and Righteousness and Mercy in all your Dealings. This will be the
way for them to learn, from you, those things that are virtuous and
praiseworthy; and having the principles of virtue rivited in them, by Precept
and Example, when they are Young, they will be likely to act upon those
Principles all their days after. Hence, Prove. XXII.6. Train up a Child in the
way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. It Is said of
Josiah, in my Text, he began to seek after the God of David his Father. The
Example of David, though at a great remove from an immediate Father, seems to
have had a great Influence upon him, and he resolves the God of David, should
be his God, and that he would walk in the ways of David; and so David becomes a
Father to him. In a word, If you that are Parents, neglect to bring up your
Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, what a dreadful Account
will you have to give to God another Day, when the Souls of your Children,
perishing under the Wrath of God, shall cry against thee, and accuse your
Neglect of them, as one great Reason, of their going down to the Place of
Torment.

Lastly. O let our Young People be persuaded to seek the Lord, while they are
yet in their Youth. It is a matter of unspeakable Grief to us, to see them
walking in the vanity of their Minds, gratifying a Carnal corrupt Heart, and
complying with the Suggestions of the grand Adversary, liable to the amazing
Wrath and Curse of God both in this World, and in that which is to come; and
therefore we earnestly call upon you to turn from your Evil ways to the living
God. O that you would be prevailed upon seriously to be think yourselves, ever
it is too late, and early enquire after God.

Therefore,

1. LET the Conviction of your undone Estate by Nature, put you upon seeking
after God in your Youth. Look into your own Heart, and ways, and see what an
impure and filthy thing thou art; how loathsome and abominable thy Sins have
rendered thee to an infinitely Holy God. Call to mind the Wrath of God, which He
has denounced, and will manifest in flaming Fire, upon all Unrighteousness and
Ungodliness of Men. Think how often you have broken, the holy and righteous
Commandments of God, Young as you are; and that because of these things the
Wrath of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience: and if you are found in
your Sins you will be undone for ever. And let the Conviction of this your
wretched, undone, miserable Estate, put you upon resolving to continue no
longer in your Unregeneracy, at a distance from God, and a stranger to all true
Happiness; but immediately set upon the great Work of Repentance; go, and
humble and abase your selves before God, lament and bewail your Sin and Folly,
and say, wherein I have done Iniquity, I will do so no more. Now lay apart all
Filthiness and surperfluity of naughtiness, cleanse your selves from all
filthiness both of Flesh and of Spirit, and perfect Holiness in the fear of
God. Let a sense of your misery drive you to God, and put you upon the most
earnest, and importunate Cries to Heaven, that God would be merciful to all
your Unrighteousness and forgive all your Sins. Let not a day pass you, without
your secret Devotions before the Lord, in which you wrestle with Him for the
Blessing; and accept of, and plead the Infinite Merits of the Son of God, that
you may be washed and purified, pardoned and justified, and that your Souls may
be saved in the Day of the Lord.

2. TAKE the Word of God for the Rule of your Walk. This gives you the fullest,
and clearest Directions in your seeking after God. It Is a sure Word, and will
enlighten your Eyes, and show you the way in which you should go; it is a
perfect Word, and there is no error in it, and you cannot miss your way while
you heedfully attend to it; it is a sure Word and steadfast for ever, and will
make you wise to Salvation. Receive then with meekness the ingrafted Word, that
is able to save your Souls. Diligently attend to the Word Preached, which is
the Power of God to the Salvation of them that believe; and neglect no
Opportunity of sitting under the Instructions of Wisdom. Daily, and seriously
read the Word of God, and make it the man of your Counsel. Be much in
Meditation on the Word of God, hide it in your Hearts, that you may not offend
against Him. Call to mind the precious Promises of it, and be encouraged to
Holiness; think on the terrible Comminations contained in it, and dread falling
into the Hands of the living God. And let it be your constant care to live up
to what that Holy Word requires of you; in all Places, when you are abroad, as
well as at home* at all Times, upon Week Days, as well as upon the Lord's Day;
and in whatever you do; and as well when no Eye sees you, as well as when the
Eye of your Parents and Friends are upon you. Thus take the Word of God for the
Rule of your walk, and having begun well, let not your goodness be, as the
Morning Cloud, and the Early Dew, which soon passes away; but hold out to the
End, that you may be Saved.

3. GUARD against Evil Company. Company is pleasant; and our Social Nature
renders it delightful to us to Converse together; and because there is a
peculiar Charm in agreeable Society and Conversation, therefore we are very apt
to learn the Ways, and contract the Manners of those we converse with. Hence it
is an old Observation, that "A Man is known by his Company." This makes it
exceeding Dangerous to Associate with the Wicked; and there is scarce any thing
more fatal and destructive to Young Persons, than bad Company: so that you had
need to be upon your Guard against this snare. Hence is the Direction of the
Wise Man, Prove. XXII.24, 25. Make no Friendship with an angry man, and with a
furious man thou shall not go; lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy
Soul. How often have we seen many a hopeful Young person, that under the
advantages of a Religious Education, has begun to seek the Lord, and walk in
the paths of Virtue; who has had all his Principles of Virtue overthrown, and
his blooming Hopes niped in the Bud, by falling into the hands of bad Company?
Their Evil Example, their Inticements and Solicitation, and their Flouts and
Scoffs at all that is Serious and Religious, has Poisoned him, and proved
Pernicious to him. Wherefore guard yourselves strongly against the Infection;
have no more Fellowship with the Workers of Iniquity, than the necessary
Occasions and Business of Life obliges you to; take no Delight in their
Friendship and Communion, walk not in the way of the Ungodly, stand not in the
Path of Sinners, nor sit in the seat of the Scornful. And when at any Time you
are obliged to be with them, keep thy Heart with all Diligence, watch over the
Door of thy Lips, and make a Covenant with thy Eyes and Ears, and Hands, that
they shall not learn by them to transgress. Think of the Words of Solomon,
Prove. XIII.20. He that walks with the wise shall be wise, but a Companion of
Fools shall be destroyed. Remember you would not be willing to be Companions
with them in their Misery, as well as in their Sins; and therefore be a
Companion of all them that Fear God.

4. BEGIN to seek the Lord now immediately. Think, O Young Man, that Eternity,
the Eternity of thy Happiness, or Misery, greatly depends upon thy Improvement
of the present Time: And will you then Delay in a matter of such infinite
Concernment to you? O do what is to be done for thy Soul, and thy Eternal
Welfare, now, now, while the Spirit of God is striving with thee; now, while
the Offers of Grace and Mercy are made to thee; now, while God is waiting upon
you, and affording you Life, and Health, and many precious Opportunities to
make your Calling and Election sure. It was said to David, 1 Samuel XIX.11 If
thou save not thy life to night, tomorrow thou shall be slain: And thou know
not, but if thou should neglect to take care of the life of thy Soul, this
very Night, before to morrow thou may be irrecoverably lost among the fallen,
and slain. O then set about this Work, this very Night, before thou sleep;
Behold, now is the Accepted Time, now is the Day of Salvation.

THAT I may press you to be in good earnest about this great and important
Affair, suffer me a little particularly to Reason the Case with you.

Is it not most Fitting and Reasonable, that you should begin to seek the Lord
while you are yet Young? Is not this the proper Opportunity, the peculiar
season for it? And should you not be ambitious to do every thing in its season?
Is it not Reasonable that you should do so. If you will not seek after the Lord
in your Youth* when will you? All other Seasons are very unfit compared with
this; as will be seen, if you consider the Disadvantages of Infancy and Old Age.

ON the One Hand, Infancy is no such proper season to seek the Lord in. The
poor Infant is a helpless and thoughtless thing, he has as yet but an imperfect
Beginning. The Organs of the Body are not as yet sufficiently Maturated for the
Soul to manifest it self by, and exert its strength and vigor. Though the Young
Thing, for some of the first Years of its Life, may have a working Fancy, and
abundance of Notions, and imperfect Ideas, floating in the Brain; yet it is not
able to make a right Judgment of things, for want of a stock of Knowledge,
Experience, and Improvement. And hence it is not capable of knowing God, or it
self a right. The Service of God is a Reasonable Service, and the Result of
Choice; and hence, because the Infant state is as yet Ignorant of God, and for
want of riper Years, is incapable of Distinguishing between Good and Evil, and
determining the Choice of the will for God, and Religion; therefore none will
suppose this to be a fit and proper season to seek the Lord in. Infancy is too
Young, and wants Judgment to make a right Choice.

ON the other Hand; Old Age. is got into its declining state; the vigor of the
Mind is greatly impaired, through the decays of the Body; and there is but a
little time to accomplish any manner of Business in; which makes it an improper
season to begin any thing of Importance, when the strength is abated, and the
Glass almost run out. It requires a great deal of Labor and Pains to seek
after the Lord, in the Exercise of Repentance and New Obedience; it requires a
due Application of the Mind, a diligent watchfulness to Duty, and against all
Sin; a vigorous Resisting and Subduing of Corrupt Inclinations, and Passions,
and a gradual reducing of our Natural Man under the Power and Dominion of the
Spiritual. Now, he that has lived to Old Age in the Service of Sin and Lust,
not only has done nothing at all about this great Work, but is an utter
stranger to it, and is grown Old in Aversion against it. And how improper a
season then is it, to say no more, for such an one to begin so hard and
difficult a Work, which is wholly new and strange to him, and when his strength
is exhausted, and his Days expiring. However it may be possible for an Old
Sinner to be Converted, yet sure it is no proper season, not such as a wise Man
would choose, to begin a Work, which he is unacquainted with, and has so little
Time for.

SINCE therefore neither Infancy, nor Old Age are proper Seasons, but have
their peculiar Disadvantages attending of them, this plainly shows you that the
time of Youth is the most fitting Opportunity to begin to seek after the Lord.

2. WILL it not be much more Hard and Difficult for you to seek after the Lord,
if you shall slip the Season of Youth. When thy Youth is spen^ and gone, will
it not require greater Labor and Pains, and cost thee so much the more Sorrow
and Anguish, to work out thy own Salvation, that if thou had began it while
thou art yet Young* For do but consider; The longer thou walk in the ways of
Sin, the stronger hold, and the surer possession does it get of thee. The
repeated Acts of Sin strengthen the Habits; and so it will be more natural and
easy to thee to hold on in thy wonted Course, and thy Lust will become the more
uncontrollable, and its Power over thee more unconquerable. Hence, of
Consequence, it must needs cost thee greater Labor and Pains to subdue those
Lusts, and overcome those radicated Habits and Customs. It might be easy in
Youth, while as yet the Soul has not contracted so strong an Aversion to the
Will of God, and is not brought under the Power of any Evil Custom; it might be
then more easy to seek and serve the Lord; but when thou have for a long while
indulged thy Natural Appetite, slighted the Word of God, and accustomed thy
self in the ways of Sin; then thou will find it so hard and difficult to alter
the Temper of thy Mind, and give over thy corrupt Pract^ces, that it will be
next to Impossible for thee. Hence we are told, Jer. XIII.23. Can the Ethiopian
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye that have been
accustomed to do Evil, learn to do well. Let him that is grown Old in Sin, say,
if he does not find it the most hard and difficult thing to alter his old
Practices, and change the bent of his Inclination, which has so long been
devoted to the service of Sin. Besides, by such a long continuance in the ways
of Sin, the Soul, which is Assimilated to them, contracts a liking to them, and
takes so much the more Delight and Pleasure in them: and then how exceeding
Difficult must it needs be, to eradicate out of the Soul, what it has so long
been accustomed to, and what is so delightful and pleasing to its vitiated
Appetites. Now then, if, after thou should have spent the greater part of
thy Days in the service of thy Lusts, thou should begin to bethink thy self,
and have some serious Purposes to al^er the course and tenor of thy life, to
devote thy self to the Service of God, and take some care about the Salvation
of thy Soul; think you, that it will not cost thee, more bitter Repenting
tears, more distressing fears, and Anguish of Soul; lest thou should not be
sincere, lest it should be all too late for thee, and thou should miss of
the Salvation of thy Soul; than if thou had seriously engaged thy self in the
Service of God, and thy Soul, while thou wast yet in thy Youth? Verily, you may
reasonably expect it will. For thou will have more Sins to Repent of, greater
Aggravations will then attend thy Crimes; and therefore they may well stare
thee in the Face with the more ghastly Countenance, and strike thee with the
greater Horror, and so render the Pangs of the New Birth so much the more
terrible and agonising to thee O then by no means suffer thy self to be
prevailed upon, to put off thy seeking after the Lord till thou have got beyond
the Days of thy Youth, les^ you bring upon yourself the greater Difficulty, and
the more increased Sorrows.

3. AND will there not be infinite Hazard lest you never seek after the Lord,
so as to find Mercy with Him, if you do it not in your Youth? Thy Neglect of
the season of Youth will not only render thy Indisposition to the Work of
Religion, the stronger, but it will render it extreme hazardous, lest you
should go on irreclaimably in your Evil Courses, till it is all too late for
thee to think of the Service of God, and the Welfare of thy Soul. For if the
proper season and opportunity for this Work be neglected, the Danger is very
great, lest thou should never have an other. It was the extreme folly of
Felix, that when Paul reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to
come, he said, Act. XXIV.25. Go thy way, for this Time; when I have a
convenient season, I will send for thee. He received Conviction of the
Irregularity of his ways, his Conscience smote him, and he feared the Judgment
to come; and had he hearkened to those Convictions* and complied with them, it
had been well for him; but he put them off for an other convenient season,
which we don't know that ever he had, and so Perished in his Sin and Folly.
Thus does it prove with many a Young person; while they are in their Youth,
their Hearts are tender, Convictions are more easily excited and stirred up,
and they are more apt to ^eceive the Impressions of the Word and Spirit of God;
they are often told, and they see something of the Necessity of their forsaking
their Evil Courses, and turning unto God; and they sometimes, it (...) be
often, come to some Purposes with themselves to amend their Ways and Doings;
but they let slip the time and season of Youth, before they put their Purposes
in execution, hoping for another, and more convenient season, and so run the
hazard of never having another Opportunity of making their Peace with God, and
securing their own Salvation. And truly the Danger of this is extremely great.

FOR, to hint at two things,

1. Is it not exceeding hazardous, lest God give you up to penal Blindness of
Mind, and Hardness of Heart? This is a most terrible Judgment of God; and what
more likely to pull down this Judgment upon you, than to neglect to seek the
Lord while you are yet Young? For they that go on in Sin, pass the time of
their Youth, under the Gospel; they Sin against the clearest Light, against the
loudest Calls, and Invitations of Mercy; they resist the most strong and
forcible Convictions, Arguments, and Persuasions; they act counter to many
Purposes and Resolutions for a Sober and a Godly Life; they slight and reject
the present Offer of Mercy, upon the Presumption, that when they have spent the
chief of their Days and Strength in the service of Sin and Satan, it will then
be time eno' for them to think of serving God. And now, what can be more
provoking to the Lord than this is? Does not this make it to be exceeding
hazardous, lest God in His Wrath utterly cast them off* lest the Holy Spirit of
God wholly withdraw from them? and then Woe unto them, when I depart from them,
says the Lord. Awful are the Words, Isa. VI.9, 10. Hear ye indeed, and
understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not; make the Heart of this
people fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes; lest they see with
their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Heart, and
Convert, and be healed. Say now, if God should thus in Judgment, Seal any of
you up under this Judicial Obduracy, how will it be possible for you then to be
Saved? And yet this Hazard you run, if you do not seek the Lord, while in your
Youth.

2. Is it not also exceeding hazardous, Lest Death overtake you, ever you begin
to seek the Lord, if you do it not in your Youth? Is not your time of Life very
short at the most, and uncertain at the best? And is there not great danger
then, lest by neglecting the present Opportunity of your Youth, you should
never have another season, to provide for your Eternal Happiness by a holy and
a righteous Life? At the longest, the Life of Man is but short; and this makes
it hazardous lest if you do not begin betimes, while you are yet Young to seek
the Lord and walk in the ways of Religion and Virtue, that all the remainder of
your Life will not be sufficient for the well and thorough Accomplishment of so
great and difficult a Work, as that of a real and unfeigned Repentance, and a
Course of holy Obedience. But then, the Danger rises higher, when you consider,
that you hold your Lives at a very uncertain tenor, and may be cut off by
innumerable, unseen Accidents and Causualties, ever you are aware; and so you
may have none of that Time left unto you, to improve for your Eternal Interest,
which you hope and presume will remain unto you, beyond the Days of Youth. When
once Death has seized upon you, it will then be all too late, to think of
altering your Course, and leading a New Life. The perishing Soul will then go
down to Hell, while it was dallying, and putting off it is Repentance, and
turning to God, and have an Eternity to reflect upon it self, with utmost
horror and anguish, for its folly and madness, in procrastinating and putting
off this great Concern; and then roar out, with inexpressible Agony, O all is
too late! all is too late! there is now no more space left me for Repentance!

So that the Infinite Danger lest thou should never secure an Interest in the
Divine Favor, if thou neglectest to improve the Time of Youth for it, should
be instead of all Arguments to thee, to prevail upon thee, now to seek the
Lord. This is the force of our Savior's reasoning, Joh. IX.4. I must work the
Work of Him that sent me, while it is Day, the Night comes when no man can
work. When the Night of Death is come, and thou know not how soon it may
come, then thou can do nothing at all about working out your own Salvation.
Thus also our Savior said to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Joh. XII.35. Yet a
little while is the Light with you, walk while ye have the Light, lest Darkness
come upon you. Yet a little while, it will not be long, ever Darkness and Death
overtakes you; well then, walk while ye have the Light, now, while the Day
light of Life and Mercy, lasts with you, and therefore now, while you are yet
in your Youth, lest Darkness come suddenly upon you, and you stumble, and fall,
and perish for ever.

4. To have done; Will not God be highly pleased with your Seeking after Him,
while you are yet in your Youth? As God ever delights in His own Glory, so He
cannot but be highly pleased with those that are forward to advance it. What
Father is not wondrously gratified with the ready Obedience of his Young Son?
Or Master, with the attentive Eye, and diligent Hand, of his young Servant? And
who more pleasing to the great Lord of all, than he that early lists in his
Service? or more welcome to Him, than those that from their Youth up, own,
submit to, and obey Him? Hence we read, Prove. VIII.17. I love them that love
me* and they that seek me early shall find me. Those that truly seek the Lord
in their advanced Age, shall find Mercy with Him; but He has a more endeared
Affection for them that do so in their early Days; they shall be sure to find
Him, whatever others do; and he says of them, with pleasure, as Jer. II.2. I
remember the Kindness of thy Youth. Who more dear to our Lord, and more highly
beloved of Him, than the Apostle John, who is supposed to be the youngest of
His Disciples, and is described by this Character, the Disciple whom Jesus
loved. If thou will set thy self to seek the Lord while thou art yet Young,
this will render thee amiable and delightful in the eyes of all Good People; it
will be the Joy and Satisfaction of your Ministers, who long after your
Conversion; yea, it will make Joy among the Holy Angels of God: and more than
so, God Himself will rejoice over you, as over a returning Prodigal; most
readily receive, and kindly welcome you, and say of you, as Jer. XXXI.20. Is
Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant Child? Since I spoke against Him, I do
earnestly remember him still, therefore my Bowels are moved toward him; I will
surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

YOUNG PERSONS Should Arise quickly When CHRIST calls them. A SERMON Preached
at Marblehead, October 15 th. 1727.
JOHN XI.28, 29. And when she had so said, she went her way, and called Mary
her sister secretly: saying, The Master is come and calls for thee. As Soon as
she heard that, she arose quickly, and came unto him.


THIS Chapter contains a very remarkable piece of History; even that of our
Blessed Lord raising Dead Lazarus to Life again; by which He gave an
incontestable Proof of His Mission and Doctrine. Lazarus was taken Sick, while
our Lord was beyond Jordan, whither the two Sisters of Lazarus sent Messengers
to Him, to acquaint Him with the sorrowful Tidings, of his Dying Condition, in
Hopes that He would come and heal him. For Jesus loved Lazarus, and his two
Sisters. But our Lord on purpose, delayed His going to Bethany, the Village
where they dwelt, that He might have an opportunity to make a further display
of His Divine Power, and give a convincing Proof to the Jews, that He was the
true Messiah, by His raising of the Dead. After He had therefore spent two
Days, in the Place where he was when the Messengers came to Him, He then set
His Face to go into Judea; nor could all the Opposition which His Disciples
made against it, who reminded Him, that the Jews at Jerusalem, (which was with
in two Miles of Bethany,) were bitter Enemies to Him, and sought His Life,
hinder Him from taking that Journey, which He knew would be for the Glory of
God. As Soon as Martha heard that the Lord drew near, she went out to meet Him,
and acquaints Him that her Brother Lazarus was Dead, and tacitly Complains of
His delaying His coming, and expresses her Faith in His Ability to have healed
him, saying, Lord if Thou had been hear, my Brother had not Died. Jesus tells
her, that her Brother shall Live again. Upon which she declares her Faith of
the General Resurrection of the Dead, supposing that our Lord had spoken, of
his rising again at the last Day. Jesus intimates to her His Power to Raise the
Dead. To which she yields her Assent, saying, Yea, Lord, I believe that Thou
art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the World. After this
Conference between Jesus and Martha, she goes, according to our Lord's
Direction, to her Sister Mary, and tells her Secretly, whispering in her Ear,
for fear of the Jews that were present at the House, That the Master was come,
and called for her; as soon as Mary heard that, she arose quickly and came unto
Him. After some other Transactions had passed between them, at length our Lord
came unto the Grave of Lazarus, and though he had lain in the Grave four Days,
yet He cried with a loud Voice, Lazarus come forth; and he that was Dead came
forth, bound Hand and Foot with Grave clothes; upon which many of the Jews
believed on Him.

IN the Words which I have read for my Text, I would observe two or three
things; as (1.) The Persons here spoken of, namely, Martha, and Mary, the two
Sisters of Lazarus. They were both of them Young Women, as is generally
supposed; they dwelt with their Brother Lazarus, keeping House together, and we
find them entertaining our Lord, at a Feast provided for Him, Luke X. lat. This
Mary particularly had been a very vicious Young Woman, being the same Mary
Magdalene, out of whom it is said, Christ cast seven Devils; Mark XVI.9. But by
the Grace of God, was brought to a Saving Conversion. (2.) We have the call of
Christ given to Mary. This was handed to her by her Sister Martha, who came and
said to her, the Master, (which was the style by which Jesus Christ was known
among them,) is come, and calls for thee. (3.) We have Mary's deportment upon
this Call of the Master; as soon as she heard that, she arose quickly, and came
unto Him. She instantly obeyed the call, and made no delay to come to Him.
Since it was the Master that called for her, she had no Hesitancy in her Mind
whether she had best to comply with His call, for indeed she had an earnest
desire to be with Him, and therefore lost no time, but arose quickly and came
to Him.

FROM whence we may collect this General DOCTRINE.

DOCT. THAT when Jesus Christ calls upon Young Persons, they should Arise
quickly and come to Him.

UNDER this Doctrine, I shall endeavor to show you,

I. THAT there are several Things which Jesus Christ in His Word calls upon
Young Persons for.

II. THAT when He so calls them, they should Arise quickly and come to Him.

I. THERE are several Things which Jesus Christ in His Word calls upon Young
Persons for. It is remarkable, that the most of the Twelve Disciples of our
Lord, fell under the Character of Young Men, when He called them to be His
Disciples. They were in the Prime and Strength and Vigor of their Days. And as
Christ Personally called those Young Men while He was on Earth, to follow Him,
so he now calls upon Young Persons, in His Holy Word, that they would come and
list themselves in His Service, and be the followers of Him: He says therein,
Unto you, O Men, I call, and my voice is unto the Sons of Men. His Call is
particularly uttered to the Young among the People; He sends His Word, and
His Messengers, rising early, and sending them, even from their most early
Days, earnestly calling upon them, to hearken to His Instruction, and turn at
His Reproof. And there are several Things which He calls upon them for.

As now,

1. JESUS CHRIST earnestly calls upon Young Persons, to Repent of, and Forsake
all their Sins. When Christ called His Young Disciples, Peter and Andrew, James
and John, He Preached Repentance to them; and let them know this was one great
thing He required of them. Mat. IV.17, 18. Every Sinner needs Repentance; and
the Youngest here, that has lived long eno' to distinguish between Good and
Evil, has been a very great Sinner. You were all Born Sinners, conceived in
Sin, and shapen in Iniquity; and alas, how many have been the Youthful Vanities
and Follies of every one of you; you have all gone astray from the Womb, and
have been fulfilling the sinful Desires of the Flesh and of the Mind, and
walking according to the course of this World, and under the Influence of the
Prince of the power of this Air, the spirit that works in the Children of
Disobedience. Now Jesus Christ calls upon every one of you to forsake this evil
course, and truly repent of all your Sins. He sees that you need to be turned
from your evil Ways, that you may live and not dye; and therefore in great
Compassion and Tenderness to you, he calls upon you, saying, O do not this
abominable thing that I hate. This was one great end of His coming into the
World, to Call Sinners to Repentance, Mat. IX.13. His whole Gospel is
calculated to this end and purpose; and when he discerns among the Youth, a
Young Man void of understanding, He says, as Prove. VII.24, 25. Hearken unto me
now, O ye Children, and attend to the words of my mouth; let not thy Heart
decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths. Where ever the Gospel is
Preached, it commands all Men, and therefore Young Persons, every where to
Repent. And He not only commands you to repent, but He uses many Arguments with
Young Persons, and sets before them strong and powerful Motives, to prevail
upon them to repent of all their Sins, and turn to God.

HE lets them know, that if they will not forsake their Sins, they will
unavoidably end in their Eternal Ruin and Destruction. He tells them, Except ye
Repent, ye perish, Luke XIII.3. that God will render tribulation and anguish to
every soul of man that does Evil, Romans II.9. that the wicked shall go away into
Everlasting Punishment, Matthew. XXV.46. So He would fain awaken the Fears of
Young Persons, while as yet they are not hardened in their Sins, that by the
dread of Wrath and Judgment to come, they might be prevailed upon unfeignedly
to Repent of all their Sins, and forsake them, lest they prove the Destruction
of their Immortal Souls forever. And what more forceable to work upon the Minds
of Young Persons, that are capable of the fearful Apprehensions of Misery, than
to assure them that they will be mise^^ble for ever, if they Repent not?

AND Jesus Christ assures them also, that if they will repent and forsake their
Sins, they shall be happy forever. Act. III.19. Repent ye, that your Sins may
be blotted out, when the Times of Refreshing shall come from the Presence of
the Lord. If Young People will truly repent, then all their Sins shall be
forgiven them, and the Time will come when they shall partake of the
Everlasting Refreshments that flow from the presence of the Lord* and be happy
with Him forever. And how strong is the motive fetched from Everlasting
Happiness, to prevail upon such as are yet in their Youth, and are seeking
after Happiness, to repent of their Sins. So that this is evidently one thing
which Jesus Christ calls upon Young Persons for, namely to forsake all their
Sins, to hate and abhor them, and shun the Path way thereof.

2. JESUS CHRIST earnestly calls upon Young Persons to come to Him, and Believe
in Him. Thus He called Mary to come to Him, and she did so; and that not only
by coming Bodily into His Presence, (which was a Privilege she had, beyond what
any of us can have now,) but she came to Him also, in the Outgoings of her Soul
after Him, and her steady Faith and Trust in Him, believing Him to be Christ
the Lord, and grounding her Hopes of Comfort and Happiness upon Him. And thus
Christ Jesus now calls upon Young Persons to come to Him, and put their Trust
in Him, and believe in Him to the Salvation of their Souls. We find our Lord
saying, Matthew. XXIII.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, -- how often would I have
gathered thy Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
wings, and ye would not. So He says to Young Persons now, come, repair under
the shadow of my Wings; repose your Trust and Confidence in me; I will be your
Defense and Safety. He says, Look unto me, and be ye saved, Isa. XLV.22. He
says, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and ye shall find
rest to your Souls, Matthew. XI.28. He says, Him that comes unto me, I will in
no wise cast out, Joh. VII.37. And are you not, Young as you are, heavy laden
with the Burden of the Guilt of Sin upon you? Do you not want Rest for your
Souls? Do you not need Salvation? Why Christ calls you to come to Him, that in
Him you may be eased of your Burdens, and find Rest. This was the great Design
of His Coming into the World, that the World through Him might believe, and that
believing on Him, they might ^ot perish, but have Everlasting Life. Christ
offers Himself as a Savior to the Youngest of you; and if you will come to
Him, and believe on Him, you shall be saved. Was it not needful that there
should be a Mediator, to appease the Divine Anger, and reconcile an offended
God to guilty Sinners? And is it not as needful that you should believe in this
Mediator, and trust to Him, in order to the free Gift of God, even
Justification to Life, coming upon you? Why, Jesus Christ is this Mediator, who
has laid down His Life for His Sheep; and He calls upon every one of you, now
to come to Him, to believe and Trust in Him alone for Salvation. When the Young
Disciples of our Lord came to Him, they owned Him for their LORD, and in the
Faith thereof put themselves under His Instruction and Government. Thus Christ
calls upon Young Persons now, to receive Him, as a Teacher sent from God, and
embrace His Doctrines, as indeed they are the Words of God, and not of Man. He
calls upon you to Believe in Him as the great Head of His Church, and comply
with all His holy Commands and Institutions. He calls upon you to Come to Him,
and rely upon the Sacrifice of Atonement, which as your great high Priest He
has offered to His Eternal Father, the Virtue whereof He ever lives to plead
on your behalf; and He assures you if you do so you shall live through Him,
Joh. XI.26. Whosoever lives, and Believes in Me, shall never dye. In short,
this is the great Gospel Command, That we should believe on the Name of His Son
Jesus Christ, 1 John III.23. So that this is evidently what Jesus Christ calls
upon Young Persons for.

3. JESUS CHRIST earnestly calls upon Young Persons to become His Disciples.
What is it to be a Disciple of Jesus Christ, But to take His Mark and Livery
upon us, and to Follow Him? Thus He called the Two Young Brethren James and
John to follow Me, Mark I.19. And He now calls upon every Young Person, under
the Gospel, be ye Followers of Him. He calls upon you to take His Mark and
Livery upon you, and appear visibly among His Disciples, that by wearing the
distinguishing Badge of your Discipleship, it may be known, at least visibly,
that you belong unto Him. He calls upon you to list in His Service while you
are yet in your Youth, and be careful to yield a ready and constant Obedience
to all His Commands. For it is not eno' that you call Him Lord and Master, but
you must do the Things which He commands; for his Servants ye are, to whom
you yield yourselves Servants to obey. Many call Him Lord and Master, who take
no care to Obey Him; and such He will not own for His another Day, ( Mat.
VII.21.) To be a Disciple of Christ, is to hear His Voice, and do His Will.
Thus He directs the Young Man in the Gospel, Mat. XIX 17. If thou will enter
into Life, keep the Commandments. To be a Disciple of Jesus Christ, is to
follow His Example, to tread in His steps, and walk as He walked. Hence Christ
said, of His Sheep, Joh. X.4. He goes before them, and they follow Him, for
they know His voice. You are therefore to be Followers of Jesus, in the Duties
of Holiness, Piety, Meekness, Charity, and all those amiable Virtues and
Graces, which were conspicuous in His Life. He calls upon you, Mat. XI.29.
Learn of Me; He tells you, He has given you an Example, that you should do as
He has done; and it is your Duty, and your Honor to Imitate Him. Jesus Christ
came into the World, not only to lay down His Life for Sinners, but to give the
World an Example of pure and undefiled Religion, in true Devotion toward God,
and Justice and Charity to Man: He came that He might Obey the Law of God, and
show us, by His Example, that the Duties of Religion were practicable; and thus
He gives light to the World. And as the Captain of our Salvation, He commands
us to follow Him, as ever we would partake of His great Salvation. He has left
His Example upon Record, in the Sacred History of His Life, that so we might
have it ever before us, and might be drawn, by the view thereof, to go and do
likewise. This He requires of Young Persons, as well as other; and if you are
careful to Live like Him, to walk as Christ walked in this World, then will He
bring you at last to be with Him, where you shall see Him as He is, and be more
like Him, being changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory.

I now come to say,

II. THAT when Christ so calls upon Young Persons, they should arise quickly
and come to Him. Thus it is said of Mary here, that as soon as she heard that,
she arose quickly, and came to Him.

HERE it will be needful,

1. To say, What is employed in Young Persons arising quickly to come to Christ.

2. AND then, To prove that Young Persons should do so.

1. WHAT is employed in Young Persons arising quickly to come to Christ at His
Call?

1. IT implies that Young Persons should diligently hearken to the Voice of
Christ, and attend to His Call. He cannot be supposed to arise quickly at his
Masters Call, who is unattentive to his Voice. He that turns a deaf Ear to his
Masters Call, and will not hear him, is far from bestiring himself, and
yielding a quick and ready compliance with what his Master requires. Thus
indeed, it is with many Young Persons; Christ Jesus has been calling upon them
again, and again, but they hear Him not; they are like the deaf Adder, that
stops her Ear against the voice of the Charmer, and hear it not though he
charm never so wisely. Whereas to arise quickly at the Call of Christ, is to
hear Him, while He is yet speaking; to hearken dilligently to the least sound
of His Voice. Christ says, Joh. X.3. The sheep hear His voice, and ver 4. They
know His voice: Which denotes their Attention, that they readily distinguish
His Voice from another; they hear the least whispers of it, in His Word, and
by His Messengers. When Martha did but say secretly to Mary, whispering her in
the Ear, the Master calls, how readily does she hear? Thus Young Persons
should have their Ears open to receive the Instructions of Wisdom; they should
listen diligently to the Voice of Christ, waiting daily at the posts of Wisdoms
Gates. They should be very attentive to hear what the Word of Christ says to
them; and therefore dilligently read that holy Word, and hear it, and meditate
upon it, that they may know what it is that Christ requires of them* If you
neglect to Read, and to Hear the Word of Christ, you are not likely to be
dilligent to attend to His Call: and if you do not attend (...) His Call, you
will not (...) quickly and come to Him, and do what He ^^quires of you.

2. IT implies that Young Persons should Set themselves about the Work which
Christ calls them to. You are to hear attentively, and then put in practice
what you hear; this is to arise quickly at His Call. For it is not eno' to hear
what Christ says, but you must do what Christ Commands. He that hears not,
when Christ speaks to him, is a wicked slothful Servant; but he that hears,
and will not do, is a rebellious one, and shall be beaten with many stripes.
Hence is the Exhortation, Jam. I.22. Be ye Doers of the Word, and not hearers
only, deceiving your own selves. It will prove a dreadful Delusion to him that
thinks it eno' for him to hear the Call of Christ, and is not careful to do it.
To arise quickly at the Call of Christ is to yield a ready Obedience to the
Call. When Mary hears, the Master calls her, she arose quickly, she
immediately came at the Call. When Christ called James and John, it is said,
Mat. IV.22. Immediately they left the Ship, and their Father, and followed Him.
They immediately left all Company, though never so delightful to them, to comply
with the Call of Christ. Thus when Christ calls upon Young Persons to repent of
their Sins, they should arise quickly, and forsake all their former Lusts, and
vain Imaginations, and immediately resolve against all Sin for the time to
come. As soon as the Word of Christ affords you Conviction, that this or the
other course is Sinful, you should from that very time carefully avoid that
evil thing. And so when Christ calls upon Young Persons to Believe in Him, they
should arise quickly, and credit the Reports of His Holy Word, and give up
themselves to Him, in a Covenant never to be forgotten. Whatsoever they find
recorded in the Word of God, as an Article of their Faith, they should
immediately embrace it, and resign their reason up to to the belief and conduct
of it. Thus when Jesus Christ calls upon Young Persons to become His Disciples,
they should arise quickly, and enter themselves into His Service, yield a ready
and willing Obedience to all His Commandments, and from this time forth, set
Him before them as the Copy they are determined to write after.

3. IT implies that Young Persons Should not make any Delay in their Obedience
to the Call of Christ. They should set themselves instantly, about the Work
Christ calls them to; and not stand dallying, and debating the Case, whether
they had best or no. Mary was at no loss whether she had best come at the Call
of Christ; she did not stand, shall I, shall I; she neither dispu^ed His
Authority, nor pretended she had something else to do first; but she readily
owns Him for her Lord, and leaves every thing else to come to Him; so she arose
quickly, without the least delay and came. And thus should Young Persons now
arise quickly, and come at His Call. They should hear Him now, come to Him now,
obey Him now, immediately, without any Delay. They must not pretend vain Idle
excuses against a present compliance with Him; but arise now, while the Master
is calling to them; now, this present moment, without putting it off to another
Time. He that delays, to set about what his Master requires of him, is a
slothful Servant, and injures his Master. Prove. XXVI.6. He that sends a
message by the hand of a fool, cutteth off the feet, and drinks damage. He is
the good Servant, who when his Master says go, goes; when his Master says come,
he comes; when his Master says do this, he does it, immediately without delay.
Thus should Young Persons answer the call of Christ, quickly, without delay,
and putting it off till an hereafter. Christ says to them, turn ye now at my
reproof; to Day, if you will hear His voice, harden not your Hearts; he
requires you to do, what you do about your Soul Concerns, with all imaginable
speed; and you should arise quickly, and not delay; lest your delaying prove of
fatal consequence to you.

BUT,

2. I am to show, Why Young Persons should arise quickly, and come at the Call
of Christ. And I shall mention but two Reasons, which will sufficiently prove
that they ought to do so; Namely, It is the Master that calls thee; And, It
will be thy own Advantage to arise quickly and comply with the Call.

1. IT is the Master that calls thee; And therefore, O Young Man, thou
ought quickly, without delay, to hearken to and Obey His Call. So it is said
here, the Master calls thee. The style of Master, infers Obedience; and
Obedience becomes due from the first Moment of the Knowledge of the Command.
Now Jesus Christ is this Master, who has an undoubted Right to thy Obedience;
For He is thy Maker. Without Him was not any thing made, that is made* Joh.
I.3. He is thy Master by Redeeming Love and Grace, and by thy Profession, and
Covenant Dedication to Him in Baptism, which the most of you have been brought
under the Bonds of* Act. II.36. Let all the House of Israel know a^ssuredly,
that God has made the same Jesus, -- both Lord and Christ. And since He is thy
Lord and Master; therefore thou ought immediately to Obey His Call.

FOR,

1. HE is a Master that has Authority to Command. His rightful Authority is
absolute, indisputable, and uncontrollable. For as the great Mediator, God and
Man, He is constituted Head over all things: (Ephesians. I.22.) And consequently His
Will is a Law, and the highest Reason of all things; and therefore ought to be
immediately, and forever Obeyed. He is thy Lord, worship thou Him. Psalm.
XLV.11^ This is the Worship due to Him, to hearken to His Voice, and comply
with it, without delay. He is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and where the
Word of a King is, there is Power and Authority to Command; and this is a
strong Reason why you should yield a speedy Obedience to Him. Earthly Monarchs
expect a ready Submission to all their lawful Commands; and how much more then
ought Jesus Christ to be obeyed immediately. Shall His Subjucts, Worms of the
Dust, dispute His Authority? or is there any Room to Question your Duty, when
He, who has an absolute Lordship over you, says, do this? No surely; when He
calls upon Young Persons to come and give up themselves to Him, and walk in His
ways, He adds, have not I commanded thee? and should not the consideration of
the supreme Authority and Lordship of Christ over you, excite you to the most
ready Obedience to Him?

2. HE is a Master that requires nothing but what is Just and Right. When He
calls upon Young Persons to put their Trust in Him, to believe His Word, and to
obey His Precepts, there is no fear of any unlawfulness in the Command: so that
there is no room to hessitate whether you ought to comply with it or no. For He
is the faithful and true Witness, and speaks the Truth in all things. The
Herodians said to Him, and they spoke truly, Mat. XXII.16. Master, we know that
thou art true, and teach the Way of God in Truth. All that He requires of
thee is the result of Infinite Wisdom and Verity; He has made known all that
He has received of the Father, and has not spoken in His own Name, but what
the Father has given Him in Commandment, that He has spoken. And what the
Apostles of our Lord have declared to us, they also have not spoken of
themselves, but holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. So
that all that He requires you to Believe, is undoubtedly Certain and True,
(though you may not be able to understand it,) because it is the Word of a God
that cannot Lie* and all that He requires you to Practice, is indisputably Just
and Equitable, because it is the Will of God that you should do it. For
faithful and true is He that has spoken it. And because there is the most
undoubted Certainty of the Truth, and Equity, of what He has revealed, and
required of you, therefore when Jesus Christ calls upon you to Believe this and
the other Revelation of the Gospel, you ought immediately to give Credit to it;
and when He calls upon you to set upon the Practice of these and those Duties
of Holiness, Righteousness, and Charity, you ought immediately to obey Him. For
seeing that it is indisputable that you ought to Obey God, who cannot impose an
Untruth, nor an unjust Command upon you; and it is certain that what Jesus
Christ calls you to, is what God Himself requires of you, therefore there is no
room left to dispute the point, upon presumption of the Call's being unlawful,
whether you ought to obey it or no; but you ought to arise quickly, and do His
Commandment.

3. JESUS CHRIST is a Powerful ^^ster, and therefore Young Persons ought
immediately to hearken to His Call. He has all Power in His Hands; Joh. XVII.2.
Thou have given Him Power over all Flesh. He is styled the Mighty God, Isa.
IX.6. Hence He is a Master that is able to enforce His Laws, to annex the
Sanction, and see it executed. He is able, by His mighty Power, to destroy any
Creature the next Moment, that shall dare to dispute any of His Commands, or
deny Obedience to them. Yea, He can destroy Soul and Body in Hell; He says,
Rev. I.18. I have the Keys of Hell and of Death. He can strike Dead, and Damn,
the Rebel Creature, that refuses to come at His Call. Who can Disobey Him, and
hope to go Unpunished? Who can deliver out of His Hands? When therefore Jesus
Christ calls upon Young Persons to come to Him, He ought immediately to be
obeyed, because He is a Master that is able severely to Punish all
Disobedience, And think, O Young Man, will it not be sufficiently provoking to
Him, if you refuse to Answer Him, when He calls? When He calls upon you to
forsake your Sins* will you dare to incense His Wrath by going on still in your
Trespasses? Are you stronger than He is? Can He not the next Moment, inflict
the Deserved Punishment upon you, if you contemn His Authority, and will not be
Obedient to His Voice? O how ought you to arise quickly and comply with his
Call? When the Three Young Men of the Jewish Captivity refused to obey the
Command of Nebuchadnezzar, it is said, Dan. III.13. -- Then Nebuchadnezzar in
his Rage and Fury, commanded them to be brought before him, and said to them,
Is it true? Do ye not serve my gods? -- If ye worship not, ye shall be cast the
same hour into the midst of a burning fiery Furnace; and who is that God that
shall deliver you out of my Hands? And does not Jesus Christ, the Master, say
to the same purpose, in His holy Word, If you will not Obey my Voice, I will
cast you into Hell, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched; and
who can deliver you out of My Hands. O then, let Young Persons be persuaded to
Hearken to the Voice of the Master, and Obey His Call immediately, since He is
able to destroy them without Remedy, if they do it not.

4. JESUS CHRIST is the Best Master, and therefore should you most readily
hearken to and obey Him. He is full of tender Compassions, Condescension and
Goodness, in appearing a Savior for Sinners, and laying down His Life for
them; and this He has done for the Youngest that will come to Him. And how
should this endear Him to thee, and make thee ready to arise quickly and come
to Him? I beseech you, by the Mercies of God, that you present yourselves to
Him, a living, a reasonable, a holy, and an acceptable Sacrifice. He is most
Compassionate to thee under all the Services He calls thee to: He can have
Compassion on the Ignorant, and them that are out of the way, Heb. V.2. He will
bear with thy weaknesses, overlook thy failings, forgive thy Sins, pass by thy
Offenses; and in whatsoever Service He calls thee to, will afford Help and
Assistance to thee to perform it; that though of thy self thou can do
nothing, yet through Him strengthening of thee, thou may do all things. And
what glorious Rewards has He in store for all that come to Him? There is Joy,
and Peace, Pleasure and Satisfaction, Quietness and Assurance, Grace and every
Good thing, as a full Provision for thee, in the Time of thy Service; and
Glory, Honor, Immortality, and Eternal Life, laid up at the end of thy Service
to Him in this World. And now, what Master is their so Compassionate and
Bountiful? Who can thou serve Better? And therefore how should the
consideration hereof make thee willing to come at His Call, and immediately,
without any Delay, devote thy self to Him, and bind thy self over in thy Youth
to be the Lords Covenant Servant forever? Thus the consideration of Jesus
Christ, as the Master should be a strong Argument with Young People to arise
quickly, and come at His Call. And,

2. IT will be the unspeakable Advantage of Young Persons, thus to arise
quickly, and come to Christ. The Master Calls thee; and what does He Call
thee for? Will it not be thy own Advantage to yield an immediate Compliance
with the Call? Verily it will: as will sufficiently appear from these two hints.

1. THE Sin which Christ calls thee to forsake will prove destructive to thee
if thou do not hearken to the Call. Jesus Christ calls upon Young Persons to
forsake their Sins; and what is this but to call thee from Ruin and Misery? Who
ever got a^y Good in the ways of Sin? though it promise never so fair, it is all
vanity, and lies, and things wherein there is no profit. And what will the End
thereof be, but Death? Romans VI.21. So also, we are told of Sinners, Romans
III.16. Destruction and Misery are in their ways. This is the way thou art
walking in, O Young Man, while thou art in the way of Sin: and this is the way
that Jesus Christ calls thee to turn from. Will it not be thy unspeakable
Advantage then to turn out of this destructive Path? And ought thou not then
immediately to Hearken to the Voice of Christ, seeing thy own Safety is so much
concerned in it? If thou wast traveling in the Dark, till you arrived at the
very Brink of a Precipice, and a Friend called to thee to tell thee of thy
Danger* and directed thee to a safe way, would thou not immediately and
thankfully hearken to him. Thou art going down to Eternal Destruction, while in
thy Sin; thou art upon the Brink of the Pit, and know not, but if you take
one Step more, if you continue one Day longer in thy sinful ways, thou may
tumble down into Hell, and perish for ever: Jesus Christ is compassionately
calling upon thee to turn, and escape the Danger; and will you not immediately
hearken to Him? Surely you owe this, not only to Christ, as He is your Master,
but to your own Souls, to arise quickly, to make no delay, but set thy self
unto the work of unfeigned Repentance immediately.

2. IF Young Persons will immediately come at the Call of Christ, they will be
Happy for ever. Jesus Christ calls thee to come to Him, to Believe in Him, and
Obey Him. And what is it to comply with the Call of Christ, but to secure thy
own Happiness? The way He calls thee to walk in, is the way that leads to
everlasting Rest, and Joy; for he that Believes shall be s^ved, Mar. XVI.16.
No Man can be saved without Faith in Christ, and Obedience to Him: By Grace ye
are saved, through Faith -- it is the Gift of God, -- who has created us in
Christ Jesus to Good Works* which God has before ordained that we should walk
in them, Ephesians. II.1, 10. While you are without Christ, you are without God, and
without any good Hope of arriving at Salvation in an other World. But by Faith
in Jesus Christ we have access with Boldness to the Throne of Grace here, and
of Glory hereafter; and Jesus Christ is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all
them that obey Him, Heb. V.9. So that if Young Persons do now immediately
hearken to the Call of Christ, their Everlasting Happiness is secure. And is
not this a strong Reason why you should arise quickly, without any Delay, and
hear His Voice, and put in practice all that He requires of you? O our Young
People, Do not you need Happiness? Have you no Thirst of Soul after it? Is it
not worth your striving and laboring for? And ought you not then immediately
to accept of it, when it is freely offered to you? Would you spend any long
time in Hesi^ancy and Delay* if any one should make the Offers of a large
Estate to you? Would you not count it worth a ready Acceptance? And is it not
as Reasonable, and infinitely more so, that you should readily embrace the
Offer of Jesus Christ, who calls you to come unto Him, that your Souls may
live? Is not His ^endered Heaven and Happiness infinitely more valuable than
all this World? Well then, since it is so much to your own Advantage to come at
the Call of Christ; since you will thereby escape all Misery and Destruction,
and secure all that will render you Happy for ever, O, do not delay, do not put
it off, but now the Master calls thee, arise quickly, and come unto Him.

I proceed to make some Improvement of these Things.

USE. I. HENCE they are greatly to be Reproved, who do not arise quickly, and
come at the Call of Christ. Would a Master bear it, that his Servant should
refuse to come at his Call? or stand Idle, when he sets him about a Business
that requires dispatch? And yet alas; so many a Young Person serve Jesus Christ
the great Lord and Master! Though He calls them to come unto Him, to forsake
their Sins, and lead ^ew Lives, ^et they turn a deaf Ear to His Call, they pu^
Him off from Day to Day, and refuse to comply with His Command. He says, if I
am a Master, where is my Fear? Will you not fear to provoke His Wrath? Is not
His Anger to be dreaded? O our Young People; Is not Jesus Christ calling upon
you, one Sabbath after an other, how long ye simple ones, will ye love
Simplicity, turn ye, at my Reproof? Have you not had Sermon after Sermon, Call
after Call, to come to Him, and take Him for your Lord, and live in Obedience
to Him as your Master? Have you not been often warned of the infinite Danger
there is in your going on in your Sins? And yet alas; How few have believed the
Reports of the Gospel? Do we not see that many of our Young people, (it is to
be feared the greatest Part of them,) yet hug their Lusts, and will not let
them go? Do we not see them to this Day, walking in the way of the foolish,
neglecting their Duty to God, and their own Souls, and bringing Mischief and
Ruin upon themselves? O that you would be at length prevailed upon to hearken
to the Call of Christ; that you would now immediately set upon the Practice of
the Duties of Religion, and delay no longer, lest your Delays prove your
undoing. There is many a Young Person, that sometimes has many Purposes to
hearken to the Call of Christ; they have some sense of their Need of Him, and
think to alter their Lives before they Die; but they put it off to an other
Time; after they have first served themselves in their Worldly Interest, or
have a little longer enjoyed the Gratifications of this or that carnal
Appetite, then they will come to Christ, and serve Him, and secure their
Eternal Interest. But think ser^ously with thy self, O Young Man; Is it
reasonable that you should first serve Sin, and the World, and give the
Remainder of your Time and Strength to God and Christ? Is it reasonable that
the Interest of your Souls and Eternity, should be postponed to the little, and
comparatively ^^^fling, co^cerns of the Body? Art thou not then g^eatly to be
reproved for thy Sin and Folly herein? Does not thy own Conscience condemn thee
for an egregious Fool? Besides, has not Jesus Christ exercised a great deal of
Patience toward thee already? He says, Rev. III.20. Behold, I stand at the
Door, and knock. Has He not been so waiting upon thee Year after Year? And is
it reasonable that you should abuse His Patience, and put Him off yet longer?
Will not this greatly hazard His Patience being turned into Fury? May you not
justly fear, if you delay any longer, that He will wholly withdraw from you?
And then what will become of you? O, it is a dreadful and amazing Sight, to see
our Young People acting so foolish and mad a Part! And how will thou Answer it
at last, that thou choosest to live in Rioting and Drunkenness, in Chambering
and Wantonness, making Provision for the Flesh to fulfill it in the Lusts
thereof? Ah, foolish People, and unwise! Know it, that however you may Flatter
your selves, the Time will come, (and you know not how soon,) unless you
Repent, when God will set thy Sin in order before thee; and then, because thou
hate Instruction, and cast the Word of God behind thy back, He will tear thee
to Pieces, and there shall be none to deliver thee.

II. O then, Let our Young People be persuaded, now quickly to comply wit^ the
(...) of Christ. What I say unto you, I say unto all; yet more especially unto
you, our Young People, The Master is come, and calls for you; o^ persuaded
then to arise quickly, and (...) a^ His Call. Be at length prevailed upon to
^^ve as Christ requires of you, Set upon the Duty of Prayer; be much in Reading
and Hearing the Word of God; and live S^berly, Righteously, and Godly in this
present World. To exci^e and move you hereto, I will leave with you a few
considerations:

As,

1. THAT Jesus Christ is now Calling of you. Jesus Christ now Calls upon you in
His Word and Ordinances, as He did Personally upon His Disciples of old. Through
the Favor of the Most High, the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel is founding in
Your Ears; you have the Joyful Tidings published to you, that to you there is
born a Savior. And how earnestly is Jesus Christ calling upon you in His Word,
Hear and your Souls shall Live? how pathetically does He address you, O that
thou would know in this the Day thereof the Things that belong unto thy
Peace, ever they are hidden from thine Eyes? How forcibly does He woo and
entreat you to become reconciled unto God? And is He not, herewithal, moving
upon your Hearts with His Holy Spirit, exciting and stirring up the Convictions
of your own Mind? Have you not often felt something of His powerful Operation
within you, convincing you of Sin and Misery, and the Necessity of abandoning
your former sinful Courses, of the Necessity of your Faith in Christ, and your
leading Holy Lives? Yea, have you not now, felt something of the Power of the
Word of God upon your Hearts, by which you are awak^ed to some Sense of your
miserable Condition out of Christ? And have you not been again and again,
assured that you will be welcome to Christ, that He will not reject the
greatest and vilest Sinner of you all, if at length you will come to Him? Thus
have you been, and thus (...) you still, called upon to come to Christ; and
therefore it is as yet a Day of Grace and Mercy with You, a Time of Love, and ^
Season wherein you may find Life. And ought not this Season ^o be w^sely
improved by You?

2. CONSIDER, You cannot reasonably expect that God and Christ should ^ear you
when you call, if you will not now speedily hearken to Him. If you will not
arise quickly and come at the Call of Christ, how can you rea^onably expect
that Christ should hear you speedily? When you are in Distress by Sick^^ss and
Pain, then it may be you are ready to Call upon God to appear for your Help,
and beg as the Psalmist, Psalm. LXXIX.8. Let thy Tender Mercies speedily prevent
me; and Psalm. XIII.3. Consider and hear me, O Lord my God, lighten mine Eyes,
lest I Sleep the Sleep of Death. But how can you reasonably expect that God
should appear right early for your Help, and be nigh at Hand to heal you, when
you are so backward to hearken to the Call of His Son? Why should you be
speedily heard calling for Mercy, when you will not quickly hear your Call to
Duty? Or when you are in Danger at Sea, by Storm and Tempest, how Natural is it
for you to Cry out, as Psalm. XL 13, 17. ^e pleased, O Lord, to deliver me; O
Lord, make haste to help me; make no tarrying, O my God? And if you would have
God to make no Delay to deliver you when you are in Danger, ought you not then
to make no Delay in your Obedience to His Commands? Might He not Justly reward
unto you according to your Ways, and deal with you as you do by Him? And would
it be pleasing to you, for God and Christ to neglect to hear you, and Delay to
Help you in the Time of your Straits? Why then will you Delay to hearken to His
Voice, when He so earnestly calls upon you? Is this Reasonable? Well then,
delay no longer, but hearken to the Call of Christ immediately, l^st He say, as
Prove. I.24. Because I called, an^ ye refused, I will laugh at your Calamity,
and mock when your Fe^r comes.

3. CONSIDER, If you will quickly hearken to the Call of Christ, thy Salvation
is secured. If thou do now immediately arise, and come to Christ as thy Lord,
and give up thy self to Him, then thou will certainly find Mercy: all thy Sins
shall be forgiven, and thy Soul saved; the covenant Promise is thine, and th^^
needst to fear no Evil. But, O Young Man, if thou do not now, quickly,
immediately, obey this Call, you can have no Certainty of an other; for th^^
can not boast thy self of a to morrow. Prove. XXVII.1. By to morrow, thou
may be out of the reach of Mercy; and then in vain will be all thy Wishes, O
that I had hearkened to the Call of Christ while I had the Opportunity thereof!
We are told, 2 Cor. VI.2. Behold, now, is the Accepted Time, now, is the Day of
Salvation. If you embrace the present Opportunity, I can assure you, Christ
will accept of you, the Peace will be made between God and You, He will freely
forgive you all your Sins, though they have been many and great, not one of them
all shall be remembered against you; But there is no Man can assure you of this
Blessed Privilege, if you defer till to Morrow; You cannot tell but you may be
in the Grave with the Dead, yea, in Hell with the Damned; and then though you
seek the Blessing carefully, and with Tears, there will be no room for
Repentance.

4. CONSIDER; The sooner you hearken to the Call of Christ, the more Service
you will do, while in the World. If you arise quickly at the Call of Christ,
now while you are Young, you will have the more Opportunity to do Service for
God, and His People. He that neglects to comply with the Call of Christ, till
his Life is almost spent; if he should be in good Earnest then in his coming to
Him, he has but a little Time left, for him to do any thing for the Name of
God, and the Benefit of His People. Whereas if you that are Young, will now,
immediately list in the Service of Christ, you will have all the Remainder of
your Lives, (and if they should be lengthned out to the common Da^e, it will be
a considerable Time,) to be employed for the Serving God, and your Ge^eration
according to the Will of God: and so all about you, will fare the better for
you As for those that remain in an unconverted Estate, they are generally a
Burden to the Earth, hurtful in their Example, and expose the World to the
Righteous Judgments of God; they bring no Glory to the Name of God, but
Dishonor it; they are unprofitable to themselves, and ordinarily are the pests
of Humane Society. But the Holy, Good Man, serves his God, and his Generation;
is obliging and kind, beneficent and charitable, is an encourager of all that
is Good, and endeavors to promote the welfare of the Place and Neighborhood
where he lives; and he is a Blessing to the World, by his Examples, Counsels,
and Prayers. Now the sooner you begin to hearken to the Call of Christ, and
comply with the Terms, and perform the Duties of the Gospel, so much the more
Glory will you be likely to bring to the Name of God, and so much the more Good
will you do in the World. Thus by an immediate harkening to the Call of Christ,
will you become the greater Blessings to all about you. And what an Excitement
should this be to you, to engage, without Delay, in the Service of God, and
Religion, that by it you will become truly serviceable in the World, and every
wise Man will call you Blessed.

5. CONSIDER, IF thou, O Young Man, wilt immediately hearken to the Call of
Christ, thy own Glory will be s^ much the Greater. There are different Degrees
of Glory and Happiness in Heaven: Though every true Christian shall be Happy, and
completely so; yet there are some that shall have higher Degrees of Happiness
assigned to them than others; as some Vessels will hold more than others, though
they are alike full. So the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. XV.41, 42. There is one
Glory of the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon, and an other Glory of the
Stars; and one Star differs from an other Star in Glory: So also is the
Resurrection of the Dead. In the Resurrection World, though all the Servants of
Christ shall have their full Rewards bestowed upon them, yet those Rewards will
differ as to degrees; he that has gained Ten Pounds, shall be made a Ruler
over Ten Cities, while he that has gained but Five, shall be made Ruler over
but Five Cities. Men's Rewards in Heaven will be proportioned to their
Serviceableness: the more Service they do, the greater will be their Glory. Now
who are most likely to do most Service for Christ, but they that begin betimes:
They that spend the Day Idly till the Eleventh Hour, it cannot be expected that
they should do as much as those that entered in the Vineyard in the Morning, and
labored in it all the Day. This then should encourage you now, immediately to
hearken to the Call of Christ; that you may loose no more of your Time, but
spend the whole Remainder of it as a wise and faithful Steward, that your
Rewards may be the greater in Heaven.

6. IF you do not arise quickly at the Call of Christ, He may never Call you
more. The Master is now calling of you, and He expects a ready Compli^nce with
His Call, and will highly resent it if you put Him off with frivolous excuses
and unreasonable delays. Possibly, He may be so provoked, as wholly to
withdraw, and never give you an Invitation more to come to Him. When the Spouse
made excuses and delays, and did not readily arise, and open, to let Him in,
her Lord withdrew Himself, and into what an Amaze was she plunged; Cant. V.6.
My Soul failed, says she; I sought Him, but could not find Him, I called Him,
but He gave me no Answer -- I charge you if you find Him, tell Him, I am Sick
of Love. What reason then have they that put Jesus Christ off from Time to
Time, and have never once yet hearkened to His Call, after a long waiting upon
them, to fear, that if they do not now, immediately, without any more sinful
Delay, arise and open the Doors of their Souls, and give a due Entertainment to
Him, that He will be provoked wholly to withdraw, and leave them, and give them
up to the ways of their own Choosing, till they perish in an everlasting
separation from Him. While Jesus Christ is calling upon you, to come to Him,
there is yet Hope concerning you, there is a possibility that you may obtain
the Pardon of all your Sin, though they have been innumerably many, and exceeding
great. There is room to Hope that you may yet escape the Wrath to come, and
have a Title to the Blessedness of the Heavenly World as your Portion. But if
you should not now hearken to His Call, how know thou but the Door of Grace,
and Hope, and Life, may be forever shut upon thee? and then what a miserable
Condition will you be in to all Eternity. Think, O Young Man, of those awful
words, Luke XIII.25. -- When once the Master of the House is risen up, and has
shut to the Door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the Door,
saying, Lord! Lord! Open to us! He shall answer and say unto you, I know you
not whence you are, -- depart from me, all ye workers of Iniquity. The Door of
Mercy now stands open, and Jesus Christ at it, is earnestly calling upon thee
to come in, and receive Mercy; but if thou will not arise quickly and come at
His Call, it may be He will be so provoked as to shut the Door upon thee, and
in vain will it be for thee then to cry, Lord, Lord, open to me; thou will be
utterly rejected of Him. And O! what wailing and gnashing of Teeth will then be
thy Portion forever? Has not Christ been Calling upon thee, Sabbath after
Sabbath? But it may be thou have not many more Sabbaths to enjoy; wherefore now
immediately hearken to his Call, come to Him, and secure the Blessing, lest it
be too late.

O that our Young People might be awakened by these Considerations, to arise
now, while the Master calls them, and quickly, immediately apply themselves
to the great Duties of Religion, humbly repent of all their Sins, and forsake
them, earnestly call upon God, in the Name of Christ for Pardon and Grace, and
give themselves up to God in Christ to be His Servants devoted to His Fear. I
conclude, with the Words of the Apostle, Heb. IV. 7, -- 11. He limiteth a
certain Day, saying -- to Day, after so long a Time, -- to Day, if ye will hear
His Voice, harden not your Hearts. -- Labor therefore to enter into that Rest,
lest any Man fall after the same example of Unbelief.

EARTHQUAKES UNDER THE Divine Government. A SERMON Preached November 2. 1727.
at the Lecture in Marblehead after the terrible EARTHQUAKE.
ISAIAH. XXIX.6. Thou shall be visited of the LORD of Hosts with Thunder, and
with Earthquake, and great Noise, with Storm and Tempest, and the Flame of
devouring Fire.


THOUGH the Prophet Isaiah be justly styled, an Evangelical Prophet, for his
many, and clear Discourses of the Gospel State, and Times; which he Prophecies
of, to encourage the People of God, and support their Minds, under the many
Calamities they should meet withal, and to excite them to look with the more of
Earnestness, and with the greater Preparedness for the Coming of the promised
Messiah; Yet we find him often denouncing the heavy Judgments of God against
the Jewish Nation, for the many provoking Sins that were to be found among
them: and particularly in this, with the Two foregoing Chapters, he gives them
Warning from God, what would be the sad Fruit of their Evil Ways, if they would
not timely repent of their Wickedness, and turn unto the Lord.

IN the Beginning of this Chapter he foretells, the Babylonish Captivity that
was hastening upon Jerusalem, whom he here styles Ariel, as Ezekiel does the
Altar of Burnt Offering, ( Ezekiel. XLIII.15.) as denoting, that their nearest
visible Relation to God* and their greatest Confidence in Him, should be no
Security to them against the threatened Judgment, without a thorough Repentance,
and Reformation.

BESIDES the Captivity that was approaching upon them, he ^ets them know from
God, that there were other desolating Judgments which God would inflict upon
them, for their Incorrigibleness in their Evil Ways; as in my Text, Thou shall
be visited of the Lord of Hosts, with Thunder, and with Earthquake, and a great
Noise, with Storm and Tempest, and the Flame of a devouring Fire.

HERE are Four terrible Judgments of God denounced against them, among which I
shall select that of the Earthquake, for the Subject of my present Discourse;
it being what we are all of us under the frightful Impressions of, from the
Trembling of our Earth, and the great Noise that has accompanied it, in the
Days that are past.

POSSIBLY the Earthquake, here spoken of, may be that which happened in the
Days of Uzziah, King of Judah, of which the Prophet Amos speaks, Amos I.1. and
the Prophet Zechariah speaking of the taking Jerusalem, by the Chaldeans, says,
Zech. X^V.5. Ye shall flee, like as ye fled from before the Earthquake in the
Days of Uzziah King of Judah.

ISAIAH prophesied in the Reign of this Uzziah, as we may see in the Beginning
of his prophecy; and it is recorded of Uzziah, that after he had greatly
fortified and strengthened Jerusalem, his Heart was lifted up within him, and he
would needs assume the Priests Office, and go himself into the Temple to burn
Incense, upon the Altar of Incense, which it was not lawful for any but the
Priest to do. Azariah, and Fourscore of the Priests withstood him, though a King;
and when he attempted to force his Way to the Altar, in Opposition to the
Priests, God smote him with Leprosy, and then they thrust him out, yea, he
himself, convinced by the Judgment of God upon him of his Error, hasted to go
out, as an unclean Person. The History whereof we have in, II. Chron. Chapter XXVI.
At the same Time, as is supposed by some, the Earthquake happened that is here
spoken of: and accordingly I^sephus the famous Jewish Historian tells us that
when Uzziah grew Wroth, and in his Passion threatened to kill the Priests that
withstood him, the Earth fell a Trembling, and the temple cleft in Twain, and
the half of a Mountain, that stood to the Eastward, before the City, break and
fell, and removed for the Space of four Furlongs, or half a Mile by which the
Public Ways were stopped up and Choked, and the Kings Gardens of Pleasure
were wholly ruined.

THUS the Lord visited them with an Earthquake and a great Noise; it was not a
thing that happened by mere Chance and Accident, but it was from God, who sent
it, as a Judgment upon them; the Direction thereof was from the Lord of Hosts.

FROM the Words I shall raise this Doctrinal Truth; viz.

DOCT. THAT when an Earthquake happens to any Place, it is the Lord of Hosts
that visits the Place therewith.

IN speaking to this Doctrine, I shall

I. DISCOURSE a little upon the Nature of Earthquakes, their Causes, and
Effects. And then

II. SHOW that when Earthquakes happen, it is the Lord of Hosts that visits a
Place therewith.

I. I am to Discourse a little upon the Nature of Earthquakes, their Causes,
and Effects.

HERE we may consider Earthquakes as Metaphorical, or Literal.

1. THERE are Metaphorical Earthquakes often spoken of in the sacred Scripture.
This means those shaking Dispensations of Divine Providence, which God brings
upon Nations, and Kingdoms, and Churches, by which their Political, or
Ecclesiastical State is made to Totter, and sometimes is dissolved in the Frame
of it, and they are turned upside down, all things being thrown into Confusion
among them. This the Psalmist seems to intend, when he says, Psalm. XLVI.2, 3.
Therefore will not we fear, th^' the Mountains be carried into the midst of the
Sea; though the Waters thereof roar, and be troubled; though the mountains shake
with the swelling thereof. By the Mountains, are meant the Princes, and great
Men of a State; and by the Sea, is meant the Populace: though the Sea roars, though
the People are in a Tumult, and the Noise of Divisions, Confusions, Seditions,
Rebellions are to be heard among them; though the Mountains, the Princes and
great Men are shaken out of their Places, and thrown down, by the prevailing
Tumults of the People, yet will not we fear; God is our Refuge, etc. Thus the
Prophet Isaiah says, Chap. II. ver. 13 -- The Day of the Lord of Hosts shall be
upon the Cedars of Lebanon that are high, and upon all the Hills that are
lifted up, that is the Chief Men of the Nation -- and the loftiness of Man
shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of Men shall be made low, -- and they
shall go into the holes of the Rocks, -- for fear of the Lord, and for the
glory of His Majesty, when He arises to shake terribly the Earth. This does
not intend a literal Earthquake, but such Judgments as God in His Providence
would bring upon them, whereby their State should be greatly shaken and
dissolved. Thus again, the same Prophet foretells the Desolations which God
would bring upon the Jews, and the Nations round about them, in these strains,
Isa. XXIV.18. -- The Foundations of the Earth d^ shake, the Earth is ut^erly
broken down, the Earth is clean dissolved* the Earth is moved exceedingly the
Earth shall reel to and fro, like a Drunkard, and shall be removed like a
Cottage. And the Prophet Haggai prophesying of the same Times, and Changes,
says, Hag. II.6, 7. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, yet once, it is a little
while, and I will s^ake the Heavens and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry
Land; and I will shake all Nations, and the Desire of all Nations shall come.
Both of these Texts seem to be prophetic of one and the same thing, viz. the
great Changes and Revolutions that should befall, not only the Jewish Nation,
but all the Nations around them, before the coming of the promised Messiah,
here styled the desire of all Nations, and they were most sadly accompl^shed in
the Concussions, and Desolations, brought upon the World, by Alexander, the
Grecian, his Four Captains and their Successors, and then by the Romans making
new Revolutions, and Changes, and Desolations in the Earth. Thus also our
Blessed Savior seems to intend Metophorical Earthquakes, when He mentions them
as signs of His Coming, Mar. XIII.8. Nation shall rise up against Nation, and
Kingdom against Kingdom, and there shall be Earthquakes in diverse places. There
shall be great Concussions of Nations and Kingdoms, by the Judgments of God
upon them in their Wars and Tumults, and the like, before the Second Coming of
our Lord, and as a Sign of the near approach of it. And thus to name no more,
we are told that when the Spirit of Life should enter into the slain Witnesses,
and they should ascend up to Heaven, as in a Cloud, that the same H^ur was
there a great Earthquake, and the Tenth part of the City ^ell, Rev. XI.13.
Which seems only to be a Prediction of those mighty Concussions which should be
given to the Antichristian Powers, at the time of the Resurrection of the slain
Witnesses, whereby a Tenth part of the City, or possibly one of the Ten Kings
that had given their Power to the Beast, shall utterly fall off from her, and
renounce her Supremacy, and abhor her Tyranny and Persecutions. And possibly
wherever we read of Earthquakes, in the Revelations, they intend Revolutions,
and Changes, in the State, or in the Church.

2. THERE are Literal and real Earthquakes; when the Earth itself is truly
moved and shaken. Such I suppose to be spoken of in my Text, and such I intend
in my Doctrine, and of these I mean more particularly to speak. And here by
Earthquakes, is not to be understood the general and constant motion of the
Earth, by which, as is supposed, it performed it is daily round, upon its own
Axis, or its yearly one in its assigned Orbit; but I mean particular Shocks
given to some Part or other of the Earth, by which the Surface of it, here, or
there, is put into an unusual and violent Motion; and that, either of
Trembling, as a Person in a fit of the Ague; or a sort of progressive Motion,
which is carried forward on the Surface of the Earth in an Undulating Manner,
like the rolling Waves of the Sea; and sometimes, it may be, by a more direct
motion from the Center, by which the Earth heaves up, till it burst, and
swallows what is near it, in the gaping Chasm. Of such literal Earthquakes I
shall briefly hint at the Causes and Effects.

1. O^ the Causes of an Earthquake; and these may be considered either as
Natural or Supernatural. The Supernatural Cause is the immediate Hand of God,
of which I shall speak under the Second General Head. The Natural Causes, or
Secondary Means that bring about an Earthquake is what I shall take notice of
under this Head. And I shall not enlarge, but only say; That it is very
rational to suppose that there are Caverns and Hollownesses, some very large
and extended, others of more contracted Dimensions, in the Body of our Earth,
containing Wind, or Water, or both in them. Lesser ones we find in our Digging
of Wells, from whence we are supplied with Water. And hence we read, of the
Fountains of the great Deep being broke up, Genesis VII.11. And Prove. VIII.28. He
strengthened the Fountains of the Deep. And Job 28.4. The Flood breaks out
from the Inhabitant All of which are understood of the Waters in Subterraneous
Caverns; and that place in Job should rather be r^ndred, breaks out against
the Inhabitant: as Mer. in Locum.
.

IT is also undoubted, That there are Subterraneous Fires in the Bowels of the
Earth, since we have many Instances of their Eruption in diverse Parts of the
World.

Now these Subterraneous Fires approaching near to those Caverns, filled with
Wind or Water, must necessarily give a vehement Agitation to them; as the fired
Gunpowder does to the Wind in the Gun, and as the Fire under a Pot sets the
Water a Boiling in it: and because the Wind and Water thus rarifyed and put
into violent Motion, by the approaching Heat, naturally seeks a Vent, or Room
to expand themselves, therefore that Part of the Earth, which lies nearest to
the Cavern, in which they are closely pent, is naturally and necessarily put
into a strong and violent Motion to make Room for their Expansion; and because
of the Continuity of the Parts of the Earth, from the Surface to those Caverns,
therefore the Surface of the Earth also is necessarily thrown into Motion*
according to the Direction of the Stroke, or first Shock that is given to the
Concave of the Vault below; and is either made to tremble, as the force of the
Motion of the pent Wind, or Water is less violent, or Cleaves and Rends asunder
its Parts, as the Motion is more strong and vehement. In some such Method we
may rationally suppose Earthquakes are generated of Natural Causes.

2. I shall hint at the Effects of Earthquakes; and they are so numerous that I
may not enlarge upon them. Sometimes we find Houses greatly shaken by the force
thereof, and ^eel too and fro, or tremble like a Leaf shaken with the wind:
while at the same Time, the Vessels upon the Waters feel the Shock as though they
were running upon a gravelly Bottom, and their sides quiver, as if some
floating Rafts had s^ddenly rushed against them. And how often does History
give us an account, of Houses being overthrown from their Foundations, and the
Inhabitants of whole Towns buried in the Ruins. A m^st sudden, surprising and
awful Death! Sometimes we are told of Mountains and Hills that have been put
into motion, by an Earthquake, and carried at a great Distance from the place
where they formerly stood. History acquaints us also, That the Channels of
Water, the Rivers, have been diverted from their usual Course thereby, and a
new path has been marked out for them. At other Times the Earth has opened her
Mouth, and whole Towns, and their Inhabitants have su^k down in the mighty
Chasm, which has quickly closed upon them, and buried them in o^e ^ommon Grave.
Sometimes a mighty Roaring Noise has accompanied an Earthquake, and an amazing
rumbling sound has been heard passi^g through a Land. And some have thought, that
an Earthquake gives vent to certain venomous subterraneous Fumes, which have
infected the Air, and produced pestilential Diseases, as the Natural Effects
thereof.

AND how great are the Effects of an Earthquake, both upon the Bodies, and
Minds of Persons? Their Bodies are put into a fit of Trembling, a cold chilness
seizes upon them, Faintness enters into their Bowels, the Joints of their Loins
are loosed, and their Knees are ready to smi^e one against another: and what
Fear and Consternation suddenly rushes into their Minds? Astonishment takes
hold of them, they are even at their Wits End, and know not what to do, nor
where to go; the apprehensions of a Sudden, U^usual Death, in their full
Strength, and in so Terrible a manner, fills them with Amazement, and they c^y
out, with the Psalmist, O Lord, our Flesh tremb^es for fe^r of The^, and we are
afraid (...) Judgments. Thus it is said of them, in the T^me of an Earthquake.
1 Samuel XIV.15. There (...) trembling in the Host, in the Field, and among all
the People; the Garrison, and the Spoilers, they also trembled, and the Earth
quaked, so it was a very great Trembling. Thus much may suffice to have spoken
to the Nature of Earthquakes, their Causes, and Effects. I pass to say.

II. THAT when Earthquakes happen, it is the Lord of Hosts that visits a
Place therewith. They come not of themselves, nor by mere Chance and Accident,
nor purely by the Force of second Causes; but they are sent by the Lord of
Hosts, who has the sole Direction and Government thereof. And this is Evident.

1. IN that sometimes God visits a place with an Earthquake from the more
immediate Influenc^ of His own Almighty Power. Though there may be sometimes
Natural Causes of an Earthquake, yet there are some Earthquakes, that we may
well say of them, that they have no Natural Cause, but God Himself, by His own
immediate Hand, shakes the Earth, and it trembles, and is greatly moved. We
have several Instances hereof upon Sacred Record.

THUS when Israel passed over the Red Sea, or the River Jordan, there seems to
have been an Earthquake produced by the immediate Hand of God, which the
Psalmist commemorates, Psalm. CXIV. When Israel went out of Egypt, -- the Sea
saw it, and fled, Jordan was driven back; the Mountains skipped like Rams, the
little Hills like Lambs. What ailed thee, O thou Sea, that thou fledest? thou
Jordan, that thou wast driven back? ye Mountains, that ye skipped like Rams? ye
little Hills like Lambs? Tremble thou Earth, at the Presence of the Lord, at
the Presence of the God of Jacob. To which Moses also may possibly allude, when
he says, Exodus XV.12. Thou stretchedst out thy Right Hand, the Earth swallowed
them. A very remarkable Insta^ce we have of this, in the Earthquake that
swallowed up Corah, and his Companions. Number. XVI 30. -- 33. If the Lord make a
new thing, and the Earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, with all that
appertains unto them, and they go down quick into the pit, then ye shall
understand that these men have provoked the Lord. And it came to pass as he had
made an end of speaking all these words, that the Ground clave asunder that was
under them, and the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their
Houses, and all the Men that appertained unto Corah* and all their Goods; and
they, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the Pit, and the
Earth closed upon them, and they perished from among the Congregation.

THUS when God gave the Law, upon Mount Sinai, it is said, Exodus XIX.18. Mount
Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in Fire, --
and the whole Mount quaked greatly. This shaking of Sinai was from the more
immediate Power of God, as the Psalmist observes, Psalm. LXVIII*7. O God, when
thou wentest before thy People, the Earth shook -- Sinai itself was moved at
the presence of the God of Israel.

THUS the Earthquake that happened at the Crucifixion of our Lord, recorded,
Mat. XXVII.51. and That at His Resurrection, mentioned, Mat. XXVIII.2. were
evidently from the immediate Power of God, and not from the natural Operation
of Second Causes.

AND to add no more; when Paul and Silas sang the Praises of God in Prison, at
Mid^^gh^, we read, Act. XVI 26. Suddenly there was a great Earthquake. All of
which shows, that sometimes God by His own immediate Almighty Power, in a
Supernatural way, visits a Place with an Earthquake. But,

2. WHATEVER be the Second Causes producing an Earthquake, still it is the Lord
of Hosts that visits a Place therewith. And this is evident,

1. IN that the Lord of Hosts has the absolute Government of all Second Causes.
This is but agreeable to the Style, The Lord of Hosts; He is Lord of all the
Hosts of Heaven and Earth; He has the Supremacy and Government of all things,
whether Rational, or Irrational, Animate, or Inanimate; He is the Lord of them
all, for He has made them all; and He does what He pleases, in Heaven, Earth,
and Sea, and all Deep Places Psalm. CXXXV 6.
. His Dominion extends to the Bowels, as well as to the Surface of the Earth.
The Deepest Caverns, and whatsoever of Wind, or Water, or Fire may be lodged in
those dark Receptacles, they are all at His Command. So that supposing there
are Second Causes that are productive of Earthquakes, yet it is the Lord of
Hosts that visits a Place therewith, because He has the absolute Government of
those Second Causes. He endows them with their Power of Motion and Action, and
He can increase and suspend Dan. III.2^.
their Power as He pleases. He supports them in the Exercise of their Power,
and Attention to the Laws of Motion; and without the Concurrence of His
Providence, Rule, and Government, they cannot exert themselves, but immediately
loose all their Virtue, and Efficacy. So that as He holds the Winds in our
Atmosphere in His Fist, so He does those in the deepest and most retired
Caverns; as He stilleth the Raging of the visible Ocean, and sets Bounds
thereto, so He does to the hidden Waters under the Earth; as He kindles or
suspends the Influences of the Fire upon the Earth, so He does those in the
Vaults below. Whence it is, that no Second Causes, which by their natural
Virtue, and Operation may be adapted as fit Means to bring on an Earthquake,
can produce such an Effect, without His Almighty Arm, to set those Causes on
work, to uphold them in their Operations, to give Efficacy to them, and
accomplish the Affect by them. So that because God has the absolute Government
of Second Causes, therefore whenever an Earthquake befalls any Place; it is the
Lord of Hosts that visits them therewith.

2. THE Lord of Hosts limits and sets Bounds to every Earthquake. This plainly
follows upon the former Head; for because He has the absolute Government of
Second Causes, therefore He limits and sets Bounds to their Operations, and
Effects. And this He does to every Earthquake. He limits it as to the Time of
it; that a People shall be visited therewith at such a Time, and no other, even
as He gives the Snow, and the Rain from Heaven when He pleases. He limits
them as their Ex^ep^, that they shall shake this Town, or that City, or shall
roam more extensively throughout a whole Country, and He says to them, as He does
to the proud Waves of the Sea, hitherto shall ye come, and no further Job
XXXVIII.11.
. He limits them as to their Duration, that they shall continue so many
Minutes, or Seconds, or so many Hours, or Days; that they shall give just so
many Shocks to a Place, and return upon them so often, and no more. He limits
them also as to their Measure and Degree, and sets Bounds to their Effects, and
they are either stronger, or weaker, more or less hurtful and destructive, as
seems good unto Him. In all these things God acts as a Sovereign, establishes
His own Counsel, and fulfilleth His own Pleasure, and it is out of the reach of
Second Causes to disappoint, or control Him Isa. XLVI.^0.
.

3. THE Lord of Hosts accomplisheth His own Ends and Designs by Earthquakes.
Though the natural Causes of an Earthquake are Inconscious, and know not their
End* yet the Lord of Hosts overrules and Governs them to accomplish those Ends
and Designs which He aims at by them. Hence Job said, Job. IX.4. -- He is wise
in Heart, -- which removes Mountains and they know not, which overturneth them
in His Anger; which shakes the Earth out of her place, and the Pillars thereof
tremble. Sometimes God aims at the Manifestation of the Glory of His Majesty by
them, and convince all the World that His Name al^ne is Jehovah; as by the
Earthquake which was at the giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai. S^metimes God
may send an Earthquake to give Confirmation to His Truths; as by those at the
Crucifixion, and Resurrection of our Lord. Sometimes He may aim at the
manifesting of His gracious and favorable Presence with His People; as when
Peter and John, were assembled together with the Disciples in Prayer; it is
said, Act. IV.31. When they had prayed the place was shaken where they were
assembled together, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. And sometimes
God has caused an Earthquake in Mercy unto His Servants, that by it He might
work wondrously for their Deliverance; as when Paul and Silas were Imprisoned,
and fastened in the Stocks there, that there might be no way left for their
Escape, we are told, Act. XVI.26. Suddenly there was a great Earthquake, so
that the Foundations of the Prison were shaken, and immediately all the Doors
were opened, and every ones Bands were loosed. Thus was Deliverance wrought for
His Servants.

BUT most usually Earthquakes are sent in Judgment, and as a Punishment upon a
Nation or People. Thus it is threatened as a Judgment upon Jerusalem in my Text.
Hence also we find God threatening them, (which whether it be understood of a
Literal or Metaphorical Earthquake it amounts to the same thing,) Ezekiel.
XXXVIII.19, 20. In my Iealousy, and in the Fire of my wrath have I spoken,
surely in that Day there shall be a great Shaking in the land of Israel, so
that -- all the Men that are upon the face of the Earth shall shake at my
Presence* and the Mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall
fall, and every Wall shall fall to the Ground. Thus also we are told Psalm.
XVIII.7. The Earth sh^ok and trembled, the Foundations of the Hills also moved
and were shaken, because He was wroth. The Lord of Hosts visits a Place with an
Earthquake to manifest His Displeasure at the Inhabitants thereof, and to let
them see, and know that He is Angry; and by this He accomplishes His Designs of
Judgment upon them. And who is there of us, that knows any thing of an
Earthquake, and has felt the Earth trembling under us, or our Houses rocked and
tottering over our Heads, that does not with Fear and Trembling, look upon it
as a sore and terrible Judgment of God.

BUT these things may suffice to Illustrate and Confirm the Doctrine, I pass
now to make some Improvement of what has been said.

USE. I. DOES the Lord of Hosts sometimes visit a Place with Earthquakes, See
then and adore the Mighty Power of our God. Who is a God like unto Him, or who
has an Arm like God? Is any Man in Strength so great, or can the united Force
of all Mankind, produce such an amazing Effect, as the Shaking the Pillars of
the Earth, and making them to Tremble? Alas! How weak and feeble is all their
Strength? But the Lord of Hosts is able to shake the Earth out of its Place
when He pleases. He need but touch the Mountains, and they smoke, and the
Hills, and they are moved at His Presence. He that by a Words speaking gave
Being to the Earth, and put it into its natural Motion, can easily by an other
Word of Command, give an unusual and Extraordinary Motion to it.

How should the Consideration hereof raise in our Minds, the most High, and
adoring Thoughts of the Almighty Power of God?

How should this Thought fill us with an holy Fear and Reverence of Him? Fear
before Him all the Earth. He can shake all the Earth; and shall not the Heart
of Man tremble at His mighty Power? What Sinner so great and mighty as to stand
before this All-powerful God? Who ever hardened themselves against Him, and
prospered? Will thou then provoke the Lord to Jealousy? Are you Stronger than
He? Can He not in a Moment, when you least think of it, and are sleeping
securely in your Beds, shake your Houses down over your Heads, and crush you to
pieces? Or can He not cause the Earth to open her Mouth, and swallow you up,
that you should go down quick into the Pit? And will you not then Fear to Sin
against Him, and provoke Him to Anger? O, let the Dread of the most High fall
upon you, and His Excellency make you afraid.

ON the other hand; What a Foundation is here for our Hope, and Trust in the
Lord of Host, who is able to do more for us than we can ask or think? He has
all the Hosts of Heaven and Earth at Command, and can accomplish what Mercy He
pleases for them that put their Trust in Him. He can work Salvation as well as
Destruction, without the help of Second Causes, by the Strength of His own Arm;
and can save by Many or by Few, or without any. How should the Thought of the
Almighty Power of God displayed in an Earthquake, lead us to the most steady
Trust and Dependence on Him, who is able to Wound, or to Heal, to save alive,
or to Destroy; and who can, in wondrous, and unexpected ways, fulfill all the
Mercy, He has promised to them that Love and Serve Him? Thus the Earthquake
which we have felt, should teach us to adore the Almighty Power of our God, to
ascribe Greatness unto Him who is known, by His Name JA^, and by His wonderful
Works among the Children of Men.

2. THIS should teach us, to admire the Goodness and Mercy of God to us, in
Sparing of us in the Time of an Earthquake. If it is the Lord of Hosts that
Rules and Governs the Earthquake, and sets Bounds and Limits thereto, then unto
Him do we owe the Glory of all the Preservations, of our selves, and our
Habitations, when the Earth has been shaking under us. For it were easy with
Him to have enlarged His Commission, and to have destroyed us, and our
Dwellings together. Had the Earthquake, that so lately has passed under us,
been but a little Stronger, or of longer continuance, who can say, how soon it
might have levelled our Houses with the Ground, and have buried us alive in the
mighty ruins? But through the tender Mercy of our God we are spared: and not
unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto Thy Name alone be all the Glory. How
distinguishingly good, has our God been to us herein? That when He has bro't
such Desolation upon so many parts of the World by terrible Earthquakes, as in
Italy, and Sicily, and nearer hand in Iamaica upon the 7 th of June, 1692, yet
He has been graciously pleased to spare Thee, O New England. Think not, that it
was because we did not deserve to be destroyed thereby, as well as other
places; for there are crying Abominations to be found among us. As our Blessed
Savior said, Luke XIII.4. Those Eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell,
and slew, think ye that they were Sinners above all the Men in Jerusalem, I
tell you nay; but except ye repent ye shall all likewise* Perish. Let then the
sense of this distinguishing Goodness of God abide upon our Hearts, and
influence us to make suitable Returns to the Lord our Preserver, and lead us to
Repentance.

And therefore,

Lastly; OH! Let every Soul now be persuaded to hearken to the Voice of God, in
the awful Providence, that He has been passing before us in. There is a Voice
of God in all His Providence; but there is a peculiar loud Voice in such awful
Providence, as that of being visited with an Earthquake, God has been visiting
us with this tremendous Judgment this Week. How terrible and surprising was the
first sudden shock thereof, the Last Lords-Day-Night, a little before Eleven,
when the most of us were in our Beds, and were awaked with a most hideous
Roaring, and terrified with the rocking of our Houses, the rattling of our
Windows and Doors, and the Earth shaking under us? Into what a Maze and Fright
were we thrown? How did our Flesh quiver, and our Joints tremble, and our
Hearts melt within us, because thereof? and how often has the shock been
repeated, ever since, both Day and Night, though in lesser Rumblings? every one
of which seemed a new to startle and confound us. And this has happened, not to
a particular Town or Place, but so far as we can learn, to the whole Land,
which has more or less felt the Trembling. And what is the Language of this
sore Judgment? but that of the Prophet of old, Amos IV.12. Prepare to meet thy
God, O Israel.

Wherefore,

1. LET us all set upon unfeined Repentance, and Reformation of all that is
amiss among us. What is the procuring Cause of the Divine Judgments? but Sin;
which provokes the Lord to Anger. And what is the special Voice of this
Judgment? but, Repent, Repent, O every one of you* Therefore the Prophet
Isaiah, when he is denouncing this, and other Judgments, from God upon the
Jews; says, Isai. XXVII.9. By this shall the Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and
the Fruit thereof is to take away Sin. This is what God expects, when He is
coming so near unto us in Judgment, that every One should set himself to the
Amending of One, that Iniquity may not prove our Ruin. O let us all then, do
what we can to reform our Lives, and amend our Evil Ways. Think how your Sins
stared you in the Face, when the tremendous Judgment of God surrounded you; and
now unfeignedly put away those Evils from you, that they may not pull down the
Divine Vengeance upon your Heads. Here suffer me plainly to mention some Sins,
which I look upon very much to be the crying Sins of the Land, and of this Town
in particular*

First; Is not the Cry of Injustice exceeding great among us? Is it not too
apparent, that a Worldly Spirit possesses the most of Men, and even of the high
professors of Religion? Insomuch that generally Men will stick at nothing,
which the Civil Law cannot take hold of them ^or, to grasp, and gripe, and
oppress, and defraud, and Cousen, and impose upon one another, that they may
enrich themselves. False Weights! false Measures! false Wares! O how common,
almost every where, are they to be found among us? Thus every one seeks his
own, and not his Neighbors Profit and Advantage; few, or none walking by the
Golden Rule, of doing as he would be done by. O let the cry hereof be no more
heard among us; but let every Man thoroughly reform One.

Again; Is there not a Flood of Drunkenness prevailing among us; This was one
of the Sins for which God denounced his sore Judgments, in my Text, and
Context, as we may see, Isai. XXVIII.1, 7. Woe to the Drunkards of Ephraim: --
they have Erred through Wine, and through st^^ng Drink are they out of the Way; --
all Tables are full of Vomit and Filthiness, so that there is no place clean.
And alas! it is in vain to attempt to hide it; Drunkenness, and Error through
strong Drink is become o^e of the crying Sins of this Land, and of this Town in
a special manner. The multiplying of T^pling Houses, the amazing Con^^mp^ion of
strong Drink, the Reeling and Stagge^ing of many Persons, the Stammering of
their Tongues, and the violence of the Passions of many more, are too plain
Evidences against us. Well may God make our Earth to reel and stagger under us,
when we are so given to reel and stagger upon it. I beseech you, as you love
you^ Lives, as you love your Souls, let there be a ^peedy Reformation.

Again; ARE there not abominable Uncleanness among us? This seems to be
pointed at in my Context, when it is said, Isai. XXIX.15. Their Works are in the
Dark, and they say, who sees us? who knows us? Their Secret Uncleanness
were among their Works of Darkness. And is it not so among our selves? How many
Instances of it multiply upon us? Have there not been incestuous Marriages
among us? as well as adulterous ones? And how common is it for young Persons to
have known one another before their Marriage together? These Things are
Pollutions to the Town, and Land, and greatly Provoke the H^ly God, that He
might well spew us out of His Mouth. O that the loud Call of Providence might
be hearkened to, and that such things might be no more found among us.

Finally; How barefaced, and open is the Profa^ity of this People? This also
was a prevailing Evil^ Judah, and therefore, it is here said, ver. 23. They shall
Sanctify my Name, and Sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of
Israel: Implying that they had not Sanctified (...) His N^m^. And alas! What
(...) Profanations of the Name of God are to (...) among us, in the hideous,
Cursing, and Swearing, that is become almost the common Language of too many
among us? And how openly do we see Persons Profaning the Sabbath of the Lord,
in their Sports, and Diversions, especially on the Lord's Day Evening? Do we
not see them walking in droves to serve the Devil, after they have been
pretending to serve God? I am credibly informed, That the last Lord's Day
Evening was very remarkable for the Profanity of it; and that many of our
People were caught, both abroad, and in their Houses, in the very Act of their
Sinning, when the terrible Judgment of God came and shook the Earth under them,
and their Houses over them. Verily the Profanation of the Lord's Day is a
crying Abomination; and because you will not let the Sabbath of the Lord enjoy
its Rest, therefore God is so disresting you, and upon that very Day, as He has
remarkably done the Summer past. I earnestly entreat you, That these Evils may
be reformed; and that those, whose Business it is to help forward a Reformation,
would in good Earnest apply themselves hereunto.

AND to our external Reformation, be exceeding careful to add a hearty and
unfeigned Repentance, in a Godly Sorrow for your past Sins, and in subduing
Iniquity in your Hearts, as well as in your Lives. Does not your Heart within
you tremble at the Earthquake? and will you then dare to hug any thing there,
that shall expose you to the Divine Anger?

2. NOW earnestly set your selves to seek the Lord. This is the Language of the
awful Providence of God, seek ye the Lord, while He may be found; call ye upon
Him, while He is near, Isai. LV 6. Seek the Lord, in a constant Observation of
all His holy Commandments; by a diligent Attendance upon His Worship and
Ordinances. Seek the Lord, by living and walking in the Fear of the Lord all
the Day long; maintaining a holy Awe and Reverence of Him upon your Hearts
continually. Seek the Lord, in the Exercise of all the Social Virtues, of
Righteousness, Mercy, Love, Gentleness, Patience, Long-suffering, Meekness, and
Charity. And seek the Lord, by your earnest Prayers, calling upon the Name of
the Lord your God, that He would appear for your Help, and grant you His
Salvation. When Ionah's Mariners were in a Storm, they said to him, Jon. I.6.
What meanest thou, O Sleeper, arise and call upon thy God, if so be that God
will think upon us, that we perish not. And will you be so sleepy and stupid,
when God is sending an Earthquake among you, as not to arise and call upon Him,
that you may not perish? O let there not be one Prayerless Person, not one
Prayerless Family, from this Time forward to be found among us; but let your
Fears drive you upon your Knees, and make you serious, earnest, importunate in
your Supplications, Night and Day, unto the Lord of Hosts, that you perish not.

To have done,

3. NOW be exceeding careful what Bottom you stand upon. You see the common
Earth, on which you tread, is but an uncertain Foundation, it totters under
you, and may open its mouth to devour you, and all your Substance. And will you
then be so unwise, as to found all your Hopes and Expectations upon the Things
of this World, which may all be consumed in a Moment? O be persuaded now to
make sure of that Good Part, which cannot be taken away from you, that those
things which cannot be shaken may remain with you.

AND see to the Foundations of your Hope for Eternity. If you had perished in
the late Earthquake, O what would have become of the greatest Part of you,
throughout Eternal Ages? Had you any comfortable Grounds to Hope, that your Sins
were Pardoned, and that your Souls would have been saved? Or, did not your Sins
fly in your Face, and your Consciences terrify you, and tell you plainly that
God was Angry with you? What would you then have given, for an Interest in the
Sin-pardoning Blood of Jesus Christ? What would you then have given, to have
had the comfortable Hopes of going to Heaven? O let this loud Call and Alarm of
Providence, mind you of the approaching Judgment, and quicken you, to give all
Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure, by working out your own
Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Let it drive you to Christ, the Rock of
Ages, the Everlasting Strength, that abides sure, and steadfast; and whosover
is built upon Him shall not be ashamed, nor confounded, World without End. Our
Blessed Savior has assured us, Mat. VII.24. Whosoever hears my sayings, and
does them, I will liken him unto a wise man, that built his House upon a Rock;
and the Rain descended, and the Floods came, and the Winds blew, and beat upon
that House, and it fell not, for it was founded upon a Rock. That Rock is
Christ. If you are in Him, you are safe from all Storms, and Tempests, and
Earthquakes; none of them all shall be able to overthrow your Hope of Eternal
Life; because He will preserve all that are founded upon Him, through all the
Revolutions of Time, and through the Horrors of Death itself, to His Kingdom and
Glory If you are built upon Him, and have a Title ^o Heaven, through the Merits
of His Blood, (...) need (...) not Fear, though the Mountains be (...) the midst
of the Sea, though the Earth ^ake, ^^d the Pillars thereof Tremble; b^^ you may
safely, and comfortably leave it with God, to take His own Time, and Way, to
f^^ch you out of this, to that Be^ter World, whe^^ is your Hope* and your
Treasure* Well the^ make sure of this, as the one thing needful, that Christ be
in you the Hope of Glory. This will be the best Preservative against the Fear
of Death, because a suitable Preparation for it; and then the Dissolution of
the Earthly House of this Tabernacle, though attended with the Terrors of the
Earth dissolving under you, will be but the fetching of you away to the
Building of God, the House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

O Let the loud call of Divine Providence be unto you a strong Motive, and
Excitement to all of this. And now seriously consider the manner of God's
Dealings with us, and the many Terrors He has been passing before us in, the
Summer past. He has visited us with the roaring Thunder, and the flashing
Lightning, in an unusual and awful manner; and come very near to us, in the
Effects of the Explosion, particularly on the second of July last. He has
visited us also with the Storm and the Tempest, with such an Hurricane of Wind,
as our Fathers have hardly known before us, and we felt some of the sad Effects
of it to our Cost, the Sixteenth of September last in the Evening. And now He
has been visiting of us with the Earthquake, and a great Noise, upon the Twenty
ninth of October, and several Days following After the first great Shock, the
Rumbling Noise of the Earthquake was heard, for about 30 Times, to the Seventh
of November, about a quarter after Eleven, A. M. which is the last certain
account I have of it.
. O let the Twenty ninth of October be a Night much remembered by us, and never
be forgotten. Those things have all of them happened upon, or near to the
Sabbath, The Thunder, which did some Damage, July 2. about 5. h. p. m.
Lord's Day; The Tempest on 16 of September was on Saturday Evening, the Effects
whereof were heavy ^^on us the next Lord's Day* and the Earthquake began on
Lord's Day Night, between 10. and 11. h.
to mind us of our Sabbath Sins, and excite us to Sabbath Duties. And if we
will not be reformed by these things, who knows what a Flame of devouring Fire
the Lord may next kindle among us; or what other sore, and desolating Judgments
He has reserved in store for us. Remember the awful Words, Lev. XXVI.27, 28.
If ye will not for all this Hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me; then I
will walk contrary unto you also, in Fury; and I, even I, will chastise you
seven times for your Sins.

[Since the Writing of this, the Noise of the Earthquake has been heard often,
as, Nov. 9. at 20 m. after 10. The 11th. it was h^ard twice last Night, about
11. and just about Day. The Twelfth again. The 14th. last Night. The 19th. at 9
h. 20 m. A. M. The 20th it was heard strong. The 27th. about 9 h. 20. m. A M.
Dec. 6th. heard last Night. The 7th. heard again last Night. The 8th. between
10 and 11. to Day It was considerably loud. The 12th it was heard about 50 m.
after 8 this Evening.

It is said that it has been heard every Day more or less, upon some part or
other of Merrimack-River: But these are the Times of it is being heard among us.
Nor do I know of it is being heard since the 12 Instant.]

Marblehead, Dec. 23.
FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for, and Sold by Samuel Gerrish, at the lower end of
Cornhill, Boston.
SERMONS and Discourses on Several Occasions. By the Rev. and Learned Ebenezer
Pemberton, A. M. late Pastor of the South Church in Boston, etc. To which is
added A Sermon after his Funeral, By the Rev. Mr. Colman, containing some
Account of Mr. Pemberton's Life and Character. Now first Collected into One
Volume, with the Author's Effigies.

Indian Converts; Or, Some Account of the Lives and Dying Speeches of a
Considerable Number of the Christianised INDIANS of Martha's Vinyard, in
New England, By the Rev. Experience Mayhew, A. M. Preacher of the Gospel to the
Indians of that Island. To which is added, Some Account of those English
Ministers who have Successively Presided over the Indian Work in that and the
Adjacen^ Islands. By the Rev. Mr. Prince.

Sermons on several Subjects; Viz. A Confirmation of the Truth of the Christian
Religion; upon Heb. II.3. in One Sermon. Compel them to come in; upon Luke
XIV.23. in One Sermon. The Christian Hero; Or the Saints Victory and Rewards;
upon Rev. III 21. in Six Sermons. By the Rev. John Barnard, A. M. Pastor of a
Church in Marblehead.

Ashon's Memorial* Or, An Authentic Account of the Strange Adventures and
Signal Deliverances of Mr. Philip Ashton, of Marblehead in N. E. Who, after he
had made his Escape from the Pirates, lived alone on a Desolate Island for
about Sixteen Months. With a short Account of Mr. Nicholas Merritt who was
taken at the same time. To which is added, A Sermon from Dan. III.17. On
OcOccasion of Mr. Ashton's return home. By the Rev. Mr. Barnard.

Ratio Disciplinae Fratrum Nov. Anglorum. A Faithful Account of the Discipline
Professed and Practiced in the C^urches of New England.

The Palm-bearers. A Brief Relation of Patient and Joyful Sufferings; In the
History of the Persecutions which the Church of Scotland suffered from the Year
1660. to the Year 1688.

A Monitor for the Children of the Covenant. Or Instructions to those who are
Seeking Baptism for themselves or theirs, How in an Acceptable Manner to lay
hold on the Covenant of God.

Two Sermons, Preached upon Recovery from Sickness.

A Brief Essay On, A Soul passing from Death to Life. These Five by the Rev.
Cotton Mather, D. D.

Practical Discourses on the Holiness of Heaven. By the Rev. Mr. Nehemiah
Walter.

Parents and Children at the Table of CHRIST. A Sacramental Discourse, from
Luke II.41, 42. By the Rev. Mr. Benjamin Coleman.

A Summary Account of the Life and Death of Joseph Quasson, Indian; By the Rev.
Mr. Samuel Moodey.

The History of the Wars of New England, with the Eastern Indians, from the
Year 1703, to 1726. By Samuel Penhallow, Esquire

A Short Narrative of the Life and Death of Elisabeth Butcher, Just Eight Years
and Eleven Months old. With a Preface by the Rev. Mr. Joseph Sewall. The Third
Edition

Ministers of the Gospel are CHRIST'S Ambassadors. A Sermon Preached at
Woodstock, May 24th. 1727. By the Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Thayer. At the Ordination
of the Rev. Mr. Amos Throop.

An Introduction to the Singing of Psalm Tunes in a plain and easy Method. With
a Collection of Tunes in Three Parts. By the Rev. Mr. John Tufts. The Sixth
Edition Printed from Copper Plates neatly Engraven.

The World Alarmed. A Surprising Relation of a BURNING-ISLAND lately risen out
of the Sea, near T^r^era; with a Geographical and Theological Improvement of so
Astonishing an Occurrence. And a brief History of the other Ignivomous
Mountains at this Day fl^ming in the World. In a Letter to an Honorable Fellow
of the Royal Society in London; From a Member of the same Society in Boston.

Sermons Preached on the Occasion of the Death of King GEORGE I. and Accession
of King GEORGE II. to the British Throne. By several Ministers of Boston, N. E.

Sermons Occasioned by the Death of the Rev. Mr. William Waldron, late Pastor
of a Church in Boston. By several Ministers of Boston.

A Seasonable Warning against Bad Company-keeping* From Prove. XIII.20. By the
Rev. Mr. John Webb. The Second Edition.

Two Sermons, I. From Luke X.41, 42. II. From Ephesians V.14. By the Rev. John Cotton
M. A. Pastor of the Church in Newtown.

The Holy Fear of God, and his Judgments, exhorted to. In a Sermon Preached at
Newtown, Nov. 3* 1727. From Psalm. CXIX.120. On a day of Fasting and Prayer
Occasioned by the late terrible EARTHQUAKE, With an Appendix, Containing a
Remarkable Account of the Extraordinary Impressions m^de on the Inhabitants of
Haverhill, etc. By the Rev. Mr. I. Cotton.

The Voice of the Lord, from the Deep Places of the Earth. A Sermon (upon Psalm.
XCV.^* 7 and 8.) Preached on the Thursday Lecture in Boston, in the Audience of
the GENERAL COURT, at the Opening of the Session, Nov. 23. 1727. Three Weeks
after the EARTHQUAKE. (Published by Order of the House of Representatives.)
With Ma^ginal Notes, containing Remarkable Accounts of many dreadful Effects of
Earthquakes in other Parts of the World. By the Rev. Mr. Foxcroft.


