Mr. Baxter's Election-SERMON May 31st. 1727.

In the House of Representatives, June 1st. 1727.
Ordered, THAT Major Thomas Tilestone and Josiah Cotton Esquire wait on the
Reverend Mr. Joseph Baxter, with the Thanks of the House for his SERMON
Preached Yesterday before the Great and General Court, and to desire a Copy
thereof for the Press.

Wm. Dudley, Speaker.

The DUTY OF A PEOPLE TO Pray to, and Bless GOD FOR THEIR RULERS: WHO ARE To
Promote Peace and Godliness, and Honesty among them.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable the Lieutenant GOVERNOR, the COUNCIL,
and Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England,
May 31. 1727.

Being the Day for the ELECTION of His Majesty's COUNCIL.

By Joseph Baxter, M. A. Pastor of the Church in Medfield.

BOSTON in N E. Printed by B. Green. Sold by Samuel Gerrish, at the lower End
of Cornhill. 1727.

AN Election-SERMON
I. TIMOTHY II. 1, 2. I exhort therefore that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men:

For kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet, and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.


AS it is a sigular favor and distinguishing privilege to be betrusted with
the divine Oracles, according to that in Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word
unto Jacob, his statutes, and his judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so
with any nation. And that, in Romans 3.1, 2. What advantage has the Jew? -- Much
every way, chiefly, because that unto them were committed the oracles of God.
So to hearken unto, and obey the voice of GOD in his word, is, the most sure
and certain way for a person or people to become truly and really happy. And
hence, it is to be looked upon as a good Omen, a token for good, that those who
are set in the highest and most exalted Places and Stations among this People,
do not only permit and allow, but call the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, the
Dispensers of his holy Word, to be their Remembrancers, to put them in mind of
the will of GOD, and their Duty, who do Annually introduce the weighty business
and affairs of this Day, not only by solemn Prayer and Supplication, to the
Prayer-hearing GOD; but also by giving attention unto the Word, which is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, and for Instruction in
Righteousness. And the Tribes do come up, the Tribes of the Lord, to the
Testimony of Israel. Persons of all Ranks, Orders and Degrees come up to the
Sanctuary of the Lord, and present themselves before the most High GOD,
practically saying with them, in Luke 3.14. And what shall we do? Well, the
words which have been now read do lay before all sorts of Persons their Duty,
and show them what they are to do in their several Places and Capacities, to
promote the best Interest of the People amongst whom they dwell.

These words are contained in an Epistle that was written by the great Apostle
and Doctor of the Gentiles, unto his Son Timothy. That admirable Person who
after he had been a violent Persecutor of Christ, became a zealous Preacher of
him, did labor abundantly to advance his cause; and had the interest of
Religion, continually lying very much upon his heart.

After he had planted a Church at Ephesus, he having occasion to depart from
thence, and go into Macedonia, to promote the work of the Lord there, besought
Timothy to abide still in Ephesus, for the better ordering, instructing and
establishing of the Church there; and when he was absent from him, he wrote
this Epistle to him to encourage and instruct him in his work, and show him how
to behave himself in the House of GOD.

And having directed him in the first Chapter, how to maintain the Truth of the
Gospel, and defend it against the Teachers of the Law, and showed him how to
state the true use and end of the Law, which being rightly understood and used
is not contrary, but consonant unto the Gospel; He does in this second Chapter,
teach and instruct him with respect unto divine Worship.

In the words of our Text, with which the Chapter begins, we have a very
serious and pathetical Exhortation. And here we may observe,

1. The Person Exhorting, viz. The holy and inspired Apostle. I exhort (says
he) or desire, as it is in the Margin.

2. The Duty exhorted to; or what it was the Apostle showed his concern to have
done, and that was, That supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks should be made. Supplications and Prayers for the supply of wants:
Intercessions for others* And giving of Thanks for good things bestowed.

3. Whom this Duty does concern; or who are to be employed herein. And the
Apostle does not only call upon Timothy, to perform this duty, and attend this
part of worship. Nor does he only call upon him to put others upon it: but he
exhorts That prayers be made, etc. intimating, that Timothy should not only do
it himself; but also put others upon doing of it. Ministers must not only give
themselves to Prayer; but also put all others upon this duty, and stir them up
to it, as they have opportunity.

4. The weight and stress that the Apostle lays upon it. I exhort that first of
all, or principally: intimating, that it is a necessary duty that must not be
neglected.

5. For whom they are to do this. And this is to be done, 1. In general: For
all Men, i. e. for all sorts and orders of Men: but this is to be understood
with an exception of those for whom we are forbidden to pray, in 1 John 5.16.
2. More particularly, and in a special and peculiar manner, for those who are
set to rule over others. And, 1. For Kings. Those who are in the chief and
supreme Place, or seat of Government. 2. For all who are in Authority under
them; or in eminent Place: as the Greek word may be rendered.



6. To what end, or for what reason, we should pray for those who are in
Authority, expressed in those words, That we may lead a quiet and peaceable
life, in all godliness and honesty. Which words do plainly intimate, that it is
highly necessary and of great concernment that particular Persons, and a whole
People should lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And
how much Civil Rulers may promote their leading of such a life. And how needful
our Prayers for them are in order to their being instrumental hereof. And what
obligations we are under to be Thankful to GOD, when they are so.

From these words, thus considered, many Observations might be raised: But I
would take Notice only of those things in the words which may more particularly
suit the occasion of the Day. And so insist only on the following Doctrines or
Propositions, viz.

I. That the Greatest and Best thing that can be desired, or wished for with
respect unto a Professing People, is, That they may lead a quiet and peaceable
life, in the due exercise and practice of all true Godliness and Honesty. II.
That Civil Rulers, or those who are in Authority over a People, are to do much
to promote and further their leading a quiet and peaceable life, in all
Godliness and Honesty. III. That all those who would show themselves concerned
for the good, and welfare of the People among whom they dwell, should Pray much
for their Civil Rulers; or those who are in Authority over them. IV. That when
Civil Rulers; or those who are in Authority over a People, do promote Peace,
Godliness, and Honesty amongst their People, They should give Thanks unto GOD,
for the great good and benefit which they receive by them.
DOCT. I. That the Greatest and the Best thing that can be desired or wished
for, with respect to a Professing People, is, That they may lead a Quiet and a
Peaceable Life, in the due exercise and practice of all true Godliness and
Honesty.

This is the Best and the Greatest thing that they can desire for themselves,
or that their best Friends can wish unto them: And this is what they should be
always most Sollicitously concerned about.

But what is it to lead a Quiet and a Peaceable Life? What to live in the
practice of true godliness? What to live Honestly? And why should all sorts of
Persons among a People be Sollicitously concerned that they may lead a Quiet
and Peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty? Or, How does it appear, that
this is the greatest and the best thing that can be desired for a Professing
People? These things may come under our consideration.

I. What is it for a People to lead a Quiet and a Peaceable Life? And

1. To lead a Quiet and a Peaceable Life, is, to be freed from War, and all
Molestation from Enemies. When a People hear the sound of the Trumphet, and the
Alarm of War; when the Enemy is at the gate; when they are beset and assaulty
by their Adversaries, so that there is no safety for him that comes in, or for
him that goes out; when they are often hearing of Garments rolled in blood; or
if they only hear the rumors of War, they do not live quietly and peaceably*
But when they have no Enemies to molest them; when there is no breaking in, nor
going out; when they sit every one under his vine and figtree, and there is
none to make them afraid: they lead a quiet and a peaceable life. And although
this may not be what is immediately intended in our Text; yet, Happy is the
People that is in such a case.

2. To lead a quiet and a peaceable life, is, To be secured and protected in
the peaceable and quiet enjoyment of their Rights, Liberties and Privileges. As
there are Enemies without, who do often draw the Sword against them, and
molest, and disquiet a People: so there are many within them, and among
themselves, or elsewhere, who would dispossess them of their Estates, or
deprive them of their Liberties and Privileges: but when they are protected and
defended in the quiet and peaceable possession of their own Rights, and have
their invaluable Liberties and Privileges secured unto them, and they enjoy
them quietly, they may be said to lead quiet and peaceable lives.

3. To lead quiet and peaceable lives, is, to Live quietly and peaceably
together. When they are at Peace among themselves, and live quietly together;
when Families live Peaceably and quietly; when there is peace and quietness in
Towns and Churches; and in all Societies among a People, they may be said to
lead quiet and peaceable lives. And this is what they are required and
commanded to do. 1 These. 4.11. Study to be quiet. And in Heb. 12.14. Follow
peace with all men. Romans 12.18. If it be possible as much as in you lies, live
peaceably with all men.

II. What is it to live in the due exercise and practice of true Godliness?

1. It implies, their being like unto GOD. To be godly is to be like GOD, and
the more like unto GOD any are, the more godly are they. Although Men have lost
the Image of GOD, yet that glorious One has of his rich Grace so ordered
things, that they may be renewed in his Image. Col. 3.10. And have put on the
new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created
him. They have those divine Qualities and Dispositions infused into them, and
implanted in them which render ^^em like unto GOD, and so they are made
Partakers of the divine Nature; as it is expressed, 2 Pet. 1.4. Now when they
have the Image of GOD renewed in them, those Graces implanted in them, which
are the fruits of the Spirit of GOD, and live in the exercise of these Graces,
so as to show forth the virtues and praises of him who has called them out of
darkness into his mavelous light, imitating him in all his imitable
excellencies and perfections, treading in his steps, and following his example:
This is to live in the exercise and practice of godliness. And this is what is
required and commanded, Math. 5.48. Be ye perfect as your Father which is in
Heaven is perfect. And in 1 Pet. 1.16. Be ye Holy for I am Holy.

2. To be godly, or to live in the exercise of godliness, is, to study and
endeavor to please GOD in all that they do. And this implies, their shunning
and avoiding what is displeasing to GOD, and so their departing from Iniquity,
and forsaking every way of Sinning; for Sin is that abominable thing which the
Soul of the Lord hates, Jer. 44.4. And their studying and endeavoring to know
what GOD would have them to do in every state and condition, and under whatever
circumstances they are; and when they know what GOD would have them to do,
apply themselves to the performance of it; and so endeavor to do always the
things that please GOD, and in such a manner as will be acceptable to him: and
so devote themselves entirely to him. This is to live in the exercise of
godliness.

3. It is to live and walk with GOD. To live godlily is to think and meditate
much on GOD, to thirst for GOD, even for the living GOD, and follow after him
from Duty to Duty, and from Ordinance to Ordinance, and so walk in all his
Ordinances, drawing near to him in all the ways of his appointment, never being
satisfied and contented before they find him, and sit under his shadow with
great delight, and find his fruit to be very sweet and pleasant unto them. This
is to live in the exercise and practice of true godliness.

III. What is it to live Honestly?

Ans. This has reference to our carriage and behavior toward Men. And so Men
live honestly, when they are sincere and plain-hearted in all their dealings
with one another; not only their trading and commerce, but also in the
discharge of every duty that they ought to perform toward one another: when
every one looks at the good of others, as well as his own; according to that in
Phil. 2.4. Look not every man on his own things; but every man also on the
things of others. And when they have their conversations toward one another in
simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom; but by the Grace of
GOD, 2 Cor. 1.12.

IV. We may consider, How it appears that this is the best thing than can be
desired and wished for, with respect unto a Professing People? And so that this
is what all sorts of Persons among them should be sollicitously concerned
about, that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty. Now this will appear if we consider,

1. When a People do lead such a life, and live in the due exercise and
practice of godliness and honesty, The Name of GOD is greatly honored and
glorified. There is nothing to be thought of that is of so great Importance and
Concernment, as that whereby GOD is honored and glorified: for he is
Infinitely worthy of it, who is the chief and supreme good, the first Cause and
the last End of all things; a Being full of all possible Perfection, and has
made all things for the advancement of his own glory, and laid all Men, and
especially his own People under infinite Obligations to honor and glorify
him. They are a People whom he has formed for himself, that they might show
forth his praise, Isai. 43.21. And they have peculiar advantages to honor and
glorify GOD. And hence, it is not a matter of indifference whether GOD be
honored by them or no; but it is of absolute necessity.

Now the more quiet and peaceable a People are, and the more there is of true
godliness and honestly among them, the more is GOD honored and glorified by
them. When the commandments of GOD are obeyed by them, and they manifest their
care to please GOD, then he accounts himself honored and glorified by them;
their hearts are set upon honoring and glorifying of GOD, and they do advance
his declarative glory. Whereas on the other hand, GOD is greatly dishonored by
a People, when they live in strife and contention, and when impiety and
dishonesty prevails among them.

2. A Peoples leading a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty,
will tend very much to their own great Benefit and Advantage. They cannot
possibly do any thing that will tend so much unto their own good as this will,
1 Timothy 4.8. And that whether they are considered personally, and particularly:
Or, as a People. As for particular Persons amongst a People, there is nothing
will promote their Interest and Happiness so much as their living in the
practice of true godliness and honesty: for herein they will find that
Pleasure, Sweetness and Satisfaction, which will sufficiently reward them for
all the care and pains they take to live holily and godlily. And for a few
years Service here, they will be recompensed with an Eternity of bliss and
happiness in the coming world. And then the more there is of godliness and
peace, and honesty among a People, the better it will fare with them in all
respects, and upon all accounts, as they are a People.

For,

1. If a People would live in the exercise of godliness and honesty, They would
hereby be secured from amazing Judgments and Calamities. It is accounted a
terrible thing to smart under awful Judgments and Calamities. A People are very
apt to grown under them; and they account it an happy thing to be freed
therefrom. And as Sin does procure them all. Jer. 4.18. Thy way, and thy doings
have procured these things unto you: so if a People would live in peace and in
the practice of godliness and honesty, they would be safe and out of danger of
Judgments or Calamities. When there was a destroying Judgment coming upon the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, it was declared to Abraham, that if there could
have been found Ten godly Persons among them, the whole city should be spared
for the sake of those righteous Ones, Genesis 18.32. whereby it is intimated unto
us, what blessings godly Ones are to the Places where they dwell, and how much
they do to secure such Places from Judgments and Calamities. And therefore if a
People were generally Peaceable, and Godly, and Honest, they would be secure
from, and out of danger of Judgments and Calamities.

2. This would exceedingly promote their Prosperity. Deuteronomy. 29.9. Keep therefore
the words of this Covenant and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do.
Piety and Honesty is the best Friend to outward Prosperity; and hereby the
Prosperity of their Souls also would be exceedingly promoted; their Souls would
prosper and flourish; they would prosper in every thing that they set their
hearts, or their hands unto.

3. It would be very much to their Honor and Credit, to live peaceably in the
exercise of true godliness and honesty, Prove. 14.34. As Sin brings a People
low, brings shame and reproach, and contempt upon them: so holiness and
godliness lifts a Nation high, makes them honorable in the eyes of GOD, and of
other Nations, Deuteronomy. 28.13. They shall have honor among their Neighbors.

4. This would engage and secure the gracious Presence of GOD with them. As it
is a very dreadful and ruining thing unto a People to lose the presence of GOD,
to have that glorious One depart from them, Hos. 9.12. So the Enjoyment of the
gracious and favorable presence of GOD will render a Person or People truly
happy. If GOD be with them, and for them, they need not care who is against
them, Romans 8.31. Their having their Garners filled, affording them all manner
of store; their Sheep bringing forth thousands, and ten thousands in their
Streets, and their Oxen strong to labor, etc. will not render them so happy as
their having GOD in the midst of them, Psalm. 144. latter end. And if they live
in peace, the GOD of love and peace shall be with them, 2 Cor. 13.11. And if
they live and walk with GOD in the due exercise and practice of all true
godliness and honesty; the Lord will certainly be with them, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The
Lord is with you, while ye be with him. And so there is nothing that can more
promote a Peoples interest, and be more profitable and gainful to them, than
their living in peace, and in the exercise and practice of true godliness and
honesty.

3. If a Professing People do not live quietly and peaceably in the practice of
godliness and honesty, they give the Lie to their profession. A professing
People are in Covenant with GOD: they are under Baptismal Vows; and they are
often lifting up their hands to the living GOD, and swearing Allegiance unto
him: And what do they vow and promise and engage to do, but to serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of their lives And therefore if they do
not live in the Practice of Godliness and Honesty, they flatter GOD with their
Mouths, and lie unto him with their Tongues: they are not sound in his
Statutes, nor steadfast in his Covenant; but break through the solemn Bonds which
they have laid themselves under; and are lying Children.

DOCT. II. Civil Rulers, or those who are in Authority over a People, are to do
much to promote and further their leading a quiet and peaceable Life, in all
godliness and honesty.

They may do much to promote this; and they ought to do it: They have great
opportunities and advantages to do it; and they are under the greatest and
strongest obligations imaginable here-unto.

I. They may do much to promote and further a Peoples leading a quiet and
peaceable Life, in all godliness and honesty. It is remarked concerning the
People of Israel, in Judges 2.7. That they served the Lord all the days of
Joshua: to show the good influence which good Magistrates have upon a People,
and how much they may do to promote their serving of GOD.

And there are many ways wherein they may very much promote their Peoples
leading of such a life, and promote godliness and honesty among them, viz.

1. By making of good and suitable Laws. As it is one branch of the Power of
Civil Rulers to make Laws; so it has always been found very necessary to have
such Laws enacted as will tend to restrain Persons from Impiety and Dishonesty,
and to constrain them to do justly, and live honestly, and in the exercise of
Piety. And Civil Rulers may do much to promote that which is so desirable among
a People, by taking care to have good and wholesome Laws that are every way
suited and adapted to the circumstances of their People. And such as will be
likely to have the greatest Influence upon them.

2. By taking care that good and wholesome Laws be duly and seasonably
executed. That so Bold and Daring Transgressors of the Laws may be brought to
due and condign punishment, that not only, they may be afraid to go on in ways
of Impiety and Dishonesty, but others also, hearing what they have brought upon
themselves by doing evil, may be deterred from doing as they have done. Deuteronomy.
13.10, 11. And thou shall stone him with stones, etc. And all Israel shall ^ear
and fear and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you. The
punishment of sins committed is in terrorem, for the prevention of the like.
Smite the Scorner that sins presumptuously, and the simple that is in danger of
Sinning carelessly will beware: as Mr. Henry observes. Magistrates have a Sword
put into their hands to make Men afraid to do wickedly and dishonestly, and
they should punish sin without either fear or favor

3. ^y countenancing and encouraging the Virtuous and Godly In this way, they
may not only strengthen the hands of the godly, and encourage them to promote
godliness in others also; but this will tend to encourage others to become like
those who are thus countenanced by the Rulers. And hence, we see what was the
resolution of King David, in Psalm. 101.6. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful
of the land, that they may dwell with me: He that walks in a perfect way
shall serve me.

4. By their good Examples. Examples are very leading and prevailing, and in a
special manner the Examples of Great Men, and those that have Authority over
others. The Examples of such Men do powerfully incline others whether to Good
or Bad: To Sin or Holiness. If such Men are Unchaste, Unjust or Intemperate,
etc. their Examples are awfully Influential. How often is there that Bra^d set
upon King Jeroboam; He sinned, and made Israel to sin. When he indulged himself
in sin, this encouraged Multitudes of others to do wickedly. And it is
observed, in Isai. 9.16 That their Leaders made them to err. There is a kind of
sovereignty in great Ones over Men's Lives and Actions. And hence, Lanctantius
notes, That Men account it, Obsequii quoddam genus Regis vit^a imitari; and
therefore cast off all Piety, Ne Regis scelus Exprobrare viderantur; lest their
contrary virtues might seem to upbraid their Rulers Vices. The Egyptians (it is
said) accounted it graceful and their duty to halt on that Leg on which their
King limped. And the wise Man says, in Prove. 29.12. If a Ruler hearken to lies,
all his servants are wicked. But if Magistrates go before others in a holy
Life, and set them bright Examples of honesty, Sobriety, Temperance and Piety,
this will provoke Piety in others. When Religion shines with the Rays of
Greatness and Majesty, this makes it glorious and lovely in the eyes of others,
(as one expresses it.)

5. By taking care that the Gospel be duly Preached unto their People. The
Gospel is called the Gospel of Peace, Ephesians. 6.15. As it is a means to promote
and make up a Peace between GOD and sinful Men, and settle Peace in the Souls
of Men, and promotes love and peace among Men. And this is that whereby vital
Piety is promoted: for it is a means of turning and changing the Hearts of
Sinners. Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth. And of
building them up in faith and holiness. Act. 20.32. I commend you to God and
the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified. And the word of GOD where it
converts not, it often civilizeth, and lays a restraint and curb upon Men's
Spirits. It takes cognizance of, and censures and reproves those inward lurking
sins, which the Civil Sword cannot reach. And therefore Civil Rulers may do
much to promote Peace and Godliness, and Honesty, by taking care that suitable
Persons be employed in Preaching the Gospel, in all Places under their
Government, who will diligently and faithfully lay out themselves to promote
Peace, and Godliness and Honesty in their several Places. And by taking care
that they be encouraged in their work, and supported, that they may not be
necessitated to leave that which is their proper Work, to provide for
themselves and families, and so to do their work negligently. Famem Ministorum
sequitur fames verbi, was a Prophecy of Luther long ago. That famishing of the
Ministers would usher in a famine of the word. And hence, although a Persecuting
Ahab, accounted Elijah the Troubler of Israel, 1 King. 18.17. And ungodly
Princes cast Jeremiah into a Dungeon, Jer. 37.15. yet good King Jehoshaphat
sent Princes to teach in the Cities of Judah, as it is expressed in 2 Chronicles.
17.9. i. e. to provide for and countenance the Levites, who were sent to teach.
And good Hezekiah showed his remarkable zeal, that the People might not want
the Service of GOD, 2 Chronicles. 31.2 and in v. 4. He orders the Maintenance of the
Priests and Levites, that they might neither want Subsistence, nor
Encouragement. It was that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord, i.
e. in the study of it, and in doing their duty, according to it. He would have
them be not only maintained but encouraged, that they might do their work with
cheerfulness: He was not for having them maintained in Idleness and Luxury; but
in the Law of the Lord: In their observing of it themselves, and teaching
others the good knowledge of it. A good Pattern for good Magistrates, who
desire to promote the worship and service of GOD.

II. Civil Rulers, or those who are in Authority over a People, ought to do
much to promote Peace and Godliness, and Honesty, among their People. They are
under very great and strong Obligations to improve all the Opportunities and
Advantages which they have to do it. Necessity is laid upon them, and they
cannot with honor and safety neglect to do it. For

1. They are appointed, and set up to this very End. This is an order of Men of
divine Appointment: And the wise GOD must needs have some great and good End in
appointing such an order of Men, and they ought as much as in them lies to
answer the End of their appointment. Now they are set up and appointed to
promote the best good of the People over whom they are set. The People are not
made for them: but they for the good of the People; and therefore they should
say, with him, Non mihi, sed Populo, and act with a greater concern to promote
the Public good of their People, than to promote their own private Interest:
And particularly, They are ordained to promote the good of their People in this
way, even by suppressing of Vice and Wickedness, and promoting Peace and
Godliness, and Honesty among them. Romans 13.4. He is the Minister of God to thee
for good -- A Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. 1 Pet. 2.14.
Governors are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well And therefore if Rulers neglect to do this, or do not, to
the uttermost of their power promote Piety and Honesty among their People, they
do frustrate the End for which they are made; not only as they are Men; but
also frustrate the great and holy End, and design of GOD in setting them up in
the Places which they are set in.

2. The Honor which GOD has advanced them unto, brings them under very great
Obligations to advance the Honor and Glory of GOD, as much as they can. They
are very honorable Places that Rulers are set in, and it is GOD that has
advanced them unto them. Psalm. 75.6, 7. -- Promotion comes neither from the
east, nor from the west, nor from the south. But God is the Judge, He puts
down one, and sets up another. And as He has advanced them to honor, so He
requires and obliges Men to respect and reverence, and honor them. 1 Pet.
2.17. -- Honor the King. Romans 13.7. Render to all their dues; tribute to whom
tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom
honor. And as GOD will honor those that honor him, (1 Samuel 2.30.) so all
those who are honored by GOD, are under special and peculiar obligations to
improve all that they have in honoring of GOD. And seeing GOD is greatly
honored when Peace and Piety and Honesty are promoted among a People; and
Rulers have great Opportunities and Advantages to promote these, they ought to
do it. It greatly concer^s them to lay out themselves in all proper and
suitable ways, for the promoting (...) them.

3. The more there is of Peace and Godliness, and Honesty among a People, the
more happy and comfortable will their Reign and Government be, who are set to
Rule over them. As this is what will make a happy People: So happy are those
Rulers who do Rule over a People among whom Peace and Godliness, and Honesty,
do prevail. For (as an excellent Divine observes) There is nothing more certain
than this, That the most serious, godly Christians, are the best Subjects upon
earth. It is therefore the Interest of Rulers to do all that possibly they can
to promote Peace, and Godliness, and Honesty among their People.

4. The Great and Glorious GOD is always Present with them; his eye is upon
them; and he marks and observes how they manage and behave themselves, in
those High Stations, which they are set in. He who has set them in those
Places to promote Peace and Godliness, and Honesty, among his People,
critically observes, What they do, How they manage and behave themselves,
Whether they answer his just and righteous Expectations concerning them. This
King David endeavored to awe his Soul with the consideration of; Psalm. 139.1,
2, 3. O Lord, Thou have searched me, and known me, Thou know my down
sitting, and mine up rising. Thou understandest my thought a far off, Thou
compassest my path, and my lying down; and art acquainted with all my way. For
there is not a word in my tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether.
And he would have other Rulers walk under the influence of such a
consideration, who says, in Psalm. 82.1. God stands in the congregation of the
mighty, he judges among the Gods. He stands as a Judge diligently to observe
all that is done there. And this was what King Jehoshaphat made use of to
excite the Judges which he appointed in course of Justice, to faithfulness in
their work, to lay out themselves to promote Justice and Equity, and the Fear
of the Lord: 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Ye judge not for man; but for the Lord, who is with
you in the judgment. When Judges are sitting in Courts of Judicature, GOD is
with them to observe, and take notice, Whether they impartially do Justice to
every one, according to the best understanding that they can have of things.
And when Rulers do meet together in a more general Assembly to transact and
manage the Public Affairs, GOD stands in that Congregation of the Mighty, He
Judges among them. He observes and takes notice of every One, and sees what
Principles and Motives they act from, as well as what they do, and what they
design and aim at. Whether their governing End in all they do, be to promote
Peace and Godliness, and Honesty among their People; and to secure and defend
them in the quiet and peaceable possession and enjoyment of their Rights,
Liberties and Privileges: Or, whether it be only to serve their own Interest,
and the Interest of some particular Friends of theirs.

5. Civil Rulers must quickly be accountable to their glorious Judge, who will
reward them according to what they have done, and their behavior of themselves
here has been, in the High and Honorable Stations they have been set in.
Although they are called Gods to show People how they are to respect and honor
them, and to show whose Deputies and Vicegerents they are, and for whom they
are to act, yet they must die like Men, Psalm. 82.6, 7. And after they have been
sitting to Judge others, must themselves stand before the Judgment Seat of him
whose Servants they are, and give a strict account to him, and pass into an
eternal state, as other Men do, where there will be a just Distribution of
Rewards and Punishments: and therefore if they do live in Intemperance, and
Uncleanness here; if they are Unjust and Unrighteous etc. this will stick their
Deathbeds full of Briars and Thorns, and make them uneasy to them. And how
terrible and amazing will the Day of Judgment be unto them? If the thoughts of
that Day, at a distance, made Felix to quake and tremble, Act. 24.25. How will
they tremble, when they see it is come in good earnest! When they shall hear
the last Trumpet sounding, see the Graves opening, and the Dead arising, and
the World on a light fire, and the SON of Man descending in the Pomp and
Equipage of an Incarnate GOD, and sit down on a fiery Throne, calling them to
his Bar! How will they then call and cry to the Rocks and Mountains to fall on
them, and hide them from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb, for the great Day of his wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand! Rev 6.15, 16, 17. And how dreadful will it be to be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the LORD, and the glory of
his Power!

But on the other hand, If they are bright Examples of Sobriety, Temperance and
Piety; If they have shaken their hands from holding of bribes, and impartially
done Justice to all; and been faithful in improving all their Opportunities and
Advantages, to promote Peace, Godliness and Honesty among their People; with
what Peace and Serenity of mind may they look death in the face, when they come
to encounter the King of Terrors. You see how it was with good King Hezekiah,
what he was under, on apprehension that he should die presently: 2 King. 20.1,
2, 3. In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death, and the Prophet Isaiah the
son of Amos came unto him, and said to him; thus says the Lord, Set thine
house in order; for thou shall die, and not live. Then he turned his face to
the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, saying, I beseech thee, O Lord, Remember
now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight. And Oh, how reviving and refreshing will
the Great Day of the LORD be unto them, when it will be said, Come ye blessed
of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you! Then they will be advanced
to infinitely greater honor, and sit on a more honorable Seat than ever they
have sat on here: for they shall sit down with CHRIST on his Throne, even as he
over-came, and sat down with the Father on his Throne, Rev. 3.21.

DOCT. III. All who would show themselves concerned for the good of the People,
among whom they dwell, should pray much for their Rulers, for those wh^ are in
Authority over them.

The People of GOD should be a Praying People; they should be much in prayer to
GOD; and pray without ceasing. And they should not only join together in
public ^ssemblies to pray unto GOD; but pray every Family apart, and every
Soul apart. And they should pray not only for themselves, but for others also:
And in a more especial and peculiar manner, for all that are in Authority. It
is a very great and weighty work that they have lying upon them; it is what
concerns the glory of GOD, and the good of their People. And how wise soever
they are, and well qualified, they can do nothing without GOD. Their whole
dependence is upon Him, as well as the Dependence of the meanest and weakest of
their people. And therefore all that are under their Authority should be much
in Prayer to GOD for them continually, that GOD would qualify them more and
more for their work, be with them in it, and carry them through it: inspire
them more and more with a spirit of courage and Resolution; and make them
instrumental of promoting Peace and Godliness, and Honesty very much among
their People. David foretold this, as part of the glory of Solomon's
Government, that Prayer should continually be made for him, Psalm. 72.15.

DOCT. IV. When Rulers are made Instrumental of promoting Peace and Godliness,
and Honesty amongst their People, they should be very Thankful to GOD for the
great Benefit which they receive by them.

Here it might be showed,

That when Civil Rulers are Instrumental to promote Peace and Godliness, and
Honesty amongst a People, such a People are greatly benefitted by them. Very
great is the good and advantage which a People receive by such Rulers; and well
may they be called Pillars and Shields, and strong Foundations, and the Breath
of their Nostrils, as they sometimes are. But then,

It is GOD that makes them to be what they are. As He sets them in those Places
wherein they are so serviceable and beneficial to their People: so all their
Gifts and Qualifications are from GOD: It is He that has qualified them for
these Places, and spirited them to improve their Gifts and Parts, their
Opportunities and Advantages for the good and benefit of their People.

And therefore although such Rulers are to be respected and honored, and so
acknowledged as instrumental of great good in the hands of GOD; yet, GOD is in
a peculiar manner to be acknowledged herein; unto Him are we to give the praise
and glory hereof. We are hereby brought under very great obligations to
gratitude and thankfulness unto him.

This is all the return we can make unto him for so great and undeserved a
favor, to give Thanks unto his holy Name, with affected and enlarged hearts,
and to walk in some measure agreeable there-unto.

But I shall now proceed to the Improvement, and apply what has been said.

USE 1 Hence we see what cause of Humiliation, and deep and bitter Lamentation
there is, That there is so much Impiety and Dishonesty prevailing in this Land.
We are fallen into great Apostacies and sore Declensions, have lost much of the
Life and Power of Godliness; and the Form of it seems to be going too; and though
GOD has been calling aloud to us by his Judgments to Repent, and Reform, yet
we go on still in our Trespasses, and after all that GOD has done to reclaim
us, What sinful and scandalous Contentions have there been, which make way for
Confusion, and every evil Work: And how notorious does Pride and Idleness,
Oppression, Sabbath breaking, profane Cursing and Swearing, Drunkenness and
Uncleanness, and many more Abominations abound and prevail amongst us! And how
are we ripening apace hereby for more terrible and amazing Judgments and
Calamities! This is for a Lamentation, and should be for a Lamentation.

USE 2. Hence see what ground and occasion there is of Joy and Rejoicing that
there are any among us, who have a zealous concern to promote Peace and
Godliness, and Honesty among this People. Although we are grown very Degenerate
and Corrupt, and Iniquity does abound exceedingly amongst us; yet it must be
acknowledged to the glory of divine Grace and Mercy, that there is a Number of
serious godly, praying Ones among us, who weep and mourn Day and Night for the
Iniquities and Abominations, that are in the midst of us; and are zealously
concerned for the revival of the work of the LORD, and the promoting of Peace,
and Godliness, and Honesty. These are the Chariots of our Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof.

And it is to be looked upon as a Token for good, that so many are spirited to
lay out part of their Estates, to give their hopeful Sons a liberal Education;
and that so many of those who are so Educated, are Spirited to give up
themselves to the work of the Ministry, when the Ministry is under such dark
and discouraging circumstances, that they cannot have any prospect of advancing
their worldly Interest by engaging in that work. It looks as if they were acted
by a more noble and generous principle; that it is a desire to be instrumental
of promoting Religion and Godliness, that carries them out to undertake so good
a work; May the GOD of all Grace be with them, and fill them more abundantly
with his Spirit and Grace, that when the Aged Servants of the Lord, and those
who are in our declining Years shall be called off from our work, we may leave
it with a joyful prospect of this, that our Places are like to be filled up
with those who will do more to promote true Godliness, than ever we have done.

USE 3. Hence we may learn, That Rulers should be Men of Prayer. They should
Pray much and often to GOD, if their work be of such weight and concernment;
that their People ought to Pray much for them. Certainly they ought to Pray
much for themselves, and for their People too. And those of them who are
sensible of the weight and Difficulty of their work, will be much in Prayer.
King David was a Man of Prayer: He resolved that Evening and Morning and at
Noon he would pray, and cry aloud unto GOD, Psalm. 55 17. And how earnest did
Solomon pray for Wisdom, to know how to go in and out before his People? And
Moses did not only pray much for himself, but was also a powerful Intercessor
for his People. It is reported of one King, that he was so frequent in his
devotions that his Courtiers were went to say, Gerard. p. 786.
Quod saepius cum Deo quam hominibus lequeretur. That he conversed more with
GOD than with Men.

USE 4. What has been said may be improved for the Direction of those
concerned in the Elections of this Day. You have often heard what a great Trust
is reposed in you by GOD and Men, who are to make choice of many of those who
are to be Rulers over this People, and certainly you ought to be true to your
Trust, and do what you may be able to give a good account of to your glorious
Judge. And not act herein merely to serve your own private I^terest or to serve
any party; but sincerely to make choice of such as will be most likely to
promote the best Interest of this People. And so to choose such as are not only
able Men, Men that are able to choose out our way; but also that have the
Interest of Religion lying much upon their hearts, and will improve all their
Opportunities and Advantages to promote Peace and Godliness, and Honesty among
this People.

USE 5. Let us hence be excited to Pray much for our Rulers, for all that are,
or may be set up in Authority over us. We hear that this is our Duty, Let not
any be negligent in it; but let all of us pray without ceasing for them, and
that with the greatest earnestness and importunity, under an affecting sense of
the weightiness and difficulty of their work. Let us be often striving together
in our prayers for them, as well as pray for them alone by our selves. This
would better become us than to be too forward to complain of them, and murmur
against them. And if we would pray more for them, it may be we should not have
so much occasion to complain of them. If they at any time do what they should
not do, or neglect to do what they should do; it may be we are to blame. If we
had prayed for them as we should have done, perhaps it would have been
otherwise.

USE 6. Let us be excited by what we have heard, to Gratitude and Thankfulness
to GOD. Let us bless and praise GOD who has given us a KING who has been so
zealous to secure and promote the Protestant Religion, and to suppress
Irreligion and Profaneness, etc. And let us bless GOD that our Zion has so
many of her Sons at this Day to take her by the hand, who we hope are zealously
concerned to promote Peace and Piety, and Honesty among this People. But this
is what was insisted on in the last Discourse you were entertained with on this
occasion: And therefore I shall not any further enlarge upon it.

USE 7. Let us all be excited by what we have heard, to labor, and do our
utmost, in our several Places to promote Peace and Piety, and Honesty among
this People. Seeing this will be so much for the Glory of GOD, and the Good and
Benefit of this People. Let us all do what in us lies to promote it

And here let what has been said be improved,

1. In an humble Address to his HONOR, our Commander in Chief, The Honorable
Council, and the Honored Gentlemen of the House of Representatives.

Much Honored and Highly Esteemed, We accept always with great Thankfulness
the worthy Deeds you have done for this People. We would Thankfully acknowledge
all that you have done to promote Peace and Godliness and Honesty among us: But
is there not something yet to be done? Is it not evident that Religion runs
low, that there is an awful decay of vital Piety? Does not Drunkenness and
Oppression, and Dishonesty abound among us? Is not the Name of GOD dreadfully
profaned? How are the Sabbaths of the LORD profaned? And what scandalous
Contentions are there in many Places, which make way for every evil work? And
is there nothing to be done to put a stop to these Vices, and revive Religion
and Go^l^ness? This is a Question worthy for your Minds to be employed about,
when you are together, and when you are alone by your selves.

And here,

Let it be seriously considered, Whether the Multiplying of Houses that are
Licensed to Sell Strong Drink be not the occasion of a great deal of Sin. And
is there no remedying of tha^? Is there nothing more to be done to keep
Town-Dwellers from Sotting away their Time at Taverns? And cannot there be
something done that will be more effectual to prevent the making of In^ians
Drunk?

May not something be done to prevent u^nec^ssary Journeying on the Lord^s-Day?
Is it not grown too common a thing for Persons to Travel from Town to Town on
that Day, and it may be they will perform as good a Days work, i. e. Travel as
far on that Day as on any other; and if they do but call at one place and
another, and attend on the Public Worship of GOD, they think all is well. And
if Persons of Note and Distinction, either in respect of their Profession or of
the Places they are in, will allow themselves in it, Others will be encouraged
to do so; and it may be what is a great deal worse.

And what Obligations are the Rulers of this People under, to see to it, that
the Worship of GOD and the Ordinances of CHRIST be attended upon, and improved
according to Divine Prescription, without the Addition of Humane Inventions:
Especially considering with what Hazard and Expenses our Fathers transported
themselves and their Families over the vast Ocean into this Wilderness and what
Difficulties they waded through, that they might enjoy pure Ordinances
themselves, and tra^smit a pure Scriptural Worship and Discipline, as the best
Treasure, unto their Children.

2 What has been said may be improved to excite and s^ir up the Ministers of
the Gospel, to lay out themselves with a burning Zeal and Indefatigable Pains,
to promote Peace, Godliness and Honesty among their People. And here, Will my
Reverend Fathers, and Dear Brethren allow me, the least and unworthiest of
their number, to stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance, of that which
you are sensible is our great and chief Work. This is the work which we are
separated and set apart unto, and very awfully and dreadfully Charged to do,
viz to promote Peace and Godliness, and Honesty among our People; and seeing it
is so desirable a thing for a People to lead such lives, and will conduce so
much to the Glory of GOD, and the good of his People, how should we labor and
spend ourselves to promote them not only by Praying for our Civil Rulers, and
encouraging them to go on steddily and zealously with their work; but also by
applying our selves to that which is our proper work. That if possible in this
Day of Degeneracy the work of the Lord may be revived, and many may have their
eyes opened, and be turned from darkness to light, and from the Power of Sin
and Satan unto GOD; that Bold and daring Sinners may turn their Feet into the
way of GOD's Testimonies, and the Professors of Religion may be sound in GOD's
Statutes, and steadfast in his Covenant, and adorn the Doctrine of GOD their
Savior in all things; and the things which are ready to die may be
strengthened. And to that End, labor in the most lively and affecting manner to
set forth unto them their Misery by Nature, the vileness of Sin, the Vanity of
the Creature, and the Excellency of CHRIST. And with the greatest Importunity
cry to the GOD of all Grace, for the plentiful effusion of his Spirit and
Grace, that it may be a Day of his Power wherein very many may be made willing
to come over to CHRIST, and walk in his ways, and uphold Religion in the Life
and Power of it. And diligently and faithfully attend upon every part of our
work, depending upon GOD for Assistance therein, and Success.

Indeed, many are laboring under such difficulties that they cannot give
themselves to this work, as they should do, and would do. Although they are
wronged and injured; yet, People who are quick sighted in other Cases will not
see it, and therefore they are not relieved; yet let all, as far as possibly
they can, improve their Time, and all their Talents to promote Peace and
Godliness, depending upon GOD, not only for Assistance and Success; but for a
Maintenance, who is able to open the Eyes and Hearts of People. It is a Good
GOD that we serve, and he will not fail any that Trust in him. He has a
glorious Reward for all that will serve him faithfully.

3. These Truths may be improved in a loud Call to the Body of this People. You
hear how much our living in Peace, and in the Practice of Godliness and Honesty
would tend to the Glory of GOD. And how much it would be for our own Honor and
Safety. O, that you would all do what you possibly can for the promoting of it,
and that not only by praying for, and honoring and supporting our Rulers, and
by informing and testifying against Bold Transgressors, and by encouraging the
hearts, and strengthening the hands of your Ministers: but also by laboring to
uphold and maintain the life and power of Godliness in your own Souls, and
promoting it as much as you can in your Families.

And so all Heads of Families are to be called upon, to endeavor the Revival
of Family Religion and Family Government. There is nothing more necessary than
this at this Day. For, as one well observes, If a People have the best
Magistrates, and they Enact the best Laws, and back them with the strictest
Execution; yet Societies will be naught, if Heads of Families neglect their
Duty. They have the Care of Persons in their young and tender Years, when they
may be bowed; but if they neglect them till they grow up, they are like to be
unmanageable; and so to be plagues to the Places where they dwell. It is very
probable that at this Door, that Apostasy and Degeneracy came in which has
awfully crept upon this People, and has been testified against, by so many
amazing Judgments and Calamities. And if ever this People become a truly
reformed People there must be a Revival of Family Religion, Family Instruction
and Family Government. I shall therefore Conclude with a Call to all Heads of
Families, to walk within their Houses with a perfect Heart. Set up and maintain
the Worship of GOD in your Families constantly. Take pains in teaching and
instructing all that are under your Care, and Govern your Families well.

And if All sorts of Persons would unite their active and zealous Endeavors,
with Prudence and Fidelity, to suppress Sin and Wickedness and promote the
contrary, we should soon come to live in Peace, and in the due Exercise and
Practice of all true Godliness and Honesty. And then should we prosper in all
our Undertakings, and see Good according to the Years wherein we have seen
Evil; Glory also would dwell in our Land. And we should have occasion to raise
that note of Triumph, The Lord of HOST is with us, The GOD of Jacob is our
Refuge, Selah.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6. line 28. read assaulted. page 10. l. 7. for than ^. that, page 12. l.
6. ^ groan. page 24. l 14 for on 1. an.


