The Vial poured out upon the SEA. A Remarkable RELATION Of certain PIRATES
Brought unto a Tragical and Untimely END. Some CONFERENCES with them, after
their Condemnation. Their BEHAVIOR at their Execution. AND A SERMON Preached
on that Occasion.

Job XX.29. This is the Portion of a wicked Man from GOD, and the Heritage
appointed unto him by GOD.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for N. Belknap, and sold at his Shop near
Scarlet's Wharf. 1726.

Job XXIV.19. He is swift as the Waters; their Portion is cursed in the Earth;
he beholds not the way of the Vineyards.


Thus Paraphrased by the Incomparable Sir Richard Blackmore.
TO this vile Crew you may the PIRATE add
Who puts to Sea the Merchant to invade,
And reaps the Profit of another's Trade.
He sculks behind some Rock, or swiftly flies
From Creek to Creek, rich Vessels to surprise.
By this ungodly Course the Robber gains,
And lays up so much Wealth, that he disdains
And mocks the poor, unprofitable Toil,
Of those, who plant the Vine, or till the Soil.
A Remarkable RELATION OF A Cockatrice crushed in the Egg.
A Vessel of that sort which they call, a Snoe, belonging to certain Merchants
in Bristol, and commanded by John Green, of that City, sailed from Jamaica,
some time in April, 1726. bound for Guinea. The Boatswain, William Fly, having
before concerted with some aboard, (in a way of Revenge, they said, for Bad
Usage) the Destruction of the Master and the Mate, and the proper Consequences,
on May 27. about One a Clock in the Morning, he, with one Alexander Mitchel,
went into the Cabin, and siezing on the Master, held his Hands, while Mitchel
wounded him. Then they hawled him up; who perceiving their Intention to throw
him overboard, begged, For the Lord's sake, don't throw me overboard; For if you
do, you throw me into Hell immediately. But Fly bid him say, Lord, Have Mercy
on my Soul! And when he siezed the Mainsheets with his Hand, to prolong his
Time, the merciless Monsters, with a Cooper's Broad-axe, cut off his Hand, and
threw him overboard. While this was a doing, one Samuel Cole, presently
assisted with Mitchel and one Winthrop, secured the Mate, whose Name was Thomas
Jenkins, and brought him upon Deck, telling him, that he should go after the
Master. Accordingly, having first cut him down the Shoulder with a Broad-axe,
they threw him over, just before the Main Shrouds. After he was thrown over, he
cried out unto the Doctor, For the Lord's sake, to fling him a Rope. But Fly
soon secured the Doctor, and put him in Irons; and confined the Gunner also and
the Carpenter, who were not for their Turn.

Two Days after this, they met one of the Ships, that came out in Company with
Green, and hailing them, asked, How Captain Green did. They answered, Very
well! At your Service! But upon consulting, whether they had best attack that
Ship, they left her, in Consideration, That they had not Hands enough to Man
her. So, they bore away for North Carolina; Where, off Cape Hattaras Bar, on
June 3. there lay a Sloop at Anchor, whereof the Commander was one whose Name
is Fulker. Some of the Sloop's Hands went aboard Fly, who was now become the
Captain of the Snoe, supposing them to want a Pilot. Fly commanded Fulker
aboard, and informed him, They were Gentlemen of Fortune; and let him know,
that they must have the Sloop, if it sailed better than the Snoe. The contrary
Winds rendering the Sloop unable to be brought off, our New Captain fell into a
great Passion, and swore he would burn her, and bringing Fulker to the Geers,
(who it seems, unadvisedly provoked them) inflicted a severe Scourging upon
him. The Boats Crew, could not bring the Sloop any further than the Bar, but
there she bilg'd and sank: and the Pirates endeavored then to set her on Fire,
but could not make the Fire to take. Fulker and his Men, and his Passengers,
were detained Prisoners by Fly; But on June 5. they sailed from thence; and on
the Day following they saw a Ship commanded by one whose Name is Gale, bound
from Barbados to Virginia. They could not come up with Gale till the next
Morning; when they hoisted their Black Flag, and fired several Guns at the
Ship; and there being little Wind* Gale struck; and Fly made the Men his
Prisoners; but robbed the Ship only of several Sails, and some Clothes and
small Arms; and after a Captivity of Two Days released them; at the same time
giving Fulker, and one of his Passengers, and a Servant, and Green's Doctor,
their Liberty. However they forceably detained one William Atkinson, who had
been Commander of a Brigantine, but left her for a Passage home in Fulker,
bound then for Boston: And who had often declared, That if the Pirates ever
took him, he would humor them, till he could see his first Opportunity to rise
upon them. They wanted him to be their Pilot, for the Coast of New England;
which they told him* he should be, or, They would blow his Brains out. It
seems, they forgot, how bad a Coast New England has been for Pirates to come
upon! Off of Delaware Bay, they met a Sloop commanded by one Harris bound from
New York to Pensilvania, having about Fifty Scotch-Irish Passengers aboard;
which upon their hoisting of their Black Flag Surrendered unto them. After they
had a little ransacked the Vessel, and kept her twenty four Hours, they forced
a Lusty Blade, one James Benbrook, from her, and so dismissed her. Fly bore
away for Martha's Vineyard, pretending to Water there, and so away for Guinea;
But the Pilot purposely missed the port, (whereat Fly was very angry,) and on
June 23. bearing Eastward, they met with a Fishing Schooner, on Browns Bank;
from which upon Fly's hoisting his Black Flag, and threatening to sink her, the
Master came aboard them, and Fly told him, he must have the Schooner, unless he
could inform him, where to get a better Sailor. About Noon, they saw some other
Schooners; and Fly sent that Schooner with seven hands after them. Fly (who had
now entirely sold himself to the God of Ekron,) and Three other Pirates,
whereof one ( Samuel Cole aforesaid, was in Irons upon Suspicion of Mutiny,
remained aboard the Snoe; and fifteen others that had been taken by him;
namely, Fulkers Mate, a couple of his Boys, Green's Gunner and Carpenter, five
of Gale's Men, Benbrook, Three Fishermen belonging to the Schooner, and our
Atkinson. While the Pirates were gone upon their chase, there appeared in Sight
several other Fishing-Vessels; and Atkinson by telling Fly what he saw, drew
him forward, from his two Laden Guns, and Sword, which he had with him; and
while Fly satt on the Windlace with his Prospective-Glass, Benbrook and Walker,
(who had been Fulker's Mate) upon the Direction from Atkinson, secured Fly, and
put him in Irons; and Atkinson struck another of the Pirates; and with the Help
of the Carpenter, soon confined the other Two. Thus they made themselves
Masters of the Snoe; the rest of the Prisoners all the while standing unactive,
not being made acquainted with the Design, which was now managing for their
Deliverance.

On June 28. the Happy Captors brought in their New Captives; having taken them
Captives, whose Captives they were. So, The Triumphing of the wicked, was but
for a moment.

And, the Special Court of Admiralty which the Act of Parliament has ordered
for the Trial of Pirates, [Whereof the chief Judge, was the Honorable WILLIAM
DUMMER Esqr. the Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in Chief, of the
Massachuset-Province,] quickly tried these Four Pirates, and after plain and
full Conviction, on July 3. passed the just Sentence of Death upon them;
namely, upon William Fly, the upstart Captain, who was a Young man, about Seven
and twenty years of old; Henry Greenville, a married Man about foriy seven
years of Age; Samuel Cole, about Thirty seven years of Age, having a Wife and
seven Children; And, George Condick, a Youth of Twenty, or thereabouts.

They were now cast into a place, Where, besides the prayers, which abundance
of Godly Christians made for them, That in the Destruction of the Flesh their
Spirit might be Saved, great pains were taken, by the Ministers of City, to
dispose them for a Return unto God.

Because, it may be Edifying to the Survivers, whatever it might be unto the
Criminals, [Whereof one, appeared all along a very Hardened Wretch, and a
Fearful Instance of Divine Dereliction,) here shall be inserted a Relation of
Two Conferences with them.

A Conference, with the Pirates. July 6. M. stands for Minister. P. P. for
Pirates.
M. UNhappy Men! -- Yet not hopeless of Eternal Happiness! -- A Mavelous
Providence of GOD has put a Quick stop to a swift Carriere you were taking in
the paths of the Destroyer. But had you been at once cut off in your
Wickedness, what had become of you? A merciful GOD has not only given you a
space to Repent, but has ordered your being brought into a place were such
means of Instruction will be Employed upon you, and such pains will be taken
for the Salvation of your Souls, as are not commonly Elsewere to be met withal,
May this Goodness of GOD lead you to Repentance! -- Among other and greater
proofs of This, you will accept the Visit, which I now intend you. --


P. P. We thank you, Sir.


M. The poor men, whom you murdered, You hurried out of the world; You allowed
them no space to Repent. They begged at least for a little Time if you would
not be dissuaded from Killing them; -- that you would not immediately bring on
them the Death, which with a prodigious Anguish, they told you, they were
unprepared for. A Gracious GOD has not so hurried you out of the world, but
given you some Time, to prepare for your Death. And verily, you must not think
now to brave it out so sottishly and hardily, as I am told, some of you have
made some Essay to do. You have now to do with an Infinite and an Almighty GOD.
You must not think to Mock at the Thunder of an Omnipotent GOD, or laugh at a
Damnation which now slumbers not. A most Holy GOD, whom you have provoked by
horrid Crimes, and Offenses that cannot be numbered, has evidently begun to
Execute his Vengeance upon you. You yett see but the beginnings of Sorrows, if
you don't seasonably seek a Deliverance from the wrath to come. Something
within you, tells you, That the great GOD is Angry with you; And, who knows the
power of His Anger! You are going to appear before a Glorious GOD, with whom
there is a Terrible Majesty. You are within a very few Days, to be thrown into
those Hands, which if you die in Ill Terms with Heaven, you will find it a
fearful thing to fall into. Now, it is only in the Way of REPENTANCE, and in the
Flight of a Repenting Soul, to a REDEEMER, that you can be saved from the
inconceivably Miseries in the Future State and World which you are now
presently to pass into. In these awful Circumstances, you are willing to be
advised!


P. P. Yes, Sir! --


M. Your case is very Bad: Wretched, Forlorn beyond Expression. But, you must
not look on it as Desperate. You must not say, Our Hope is lost. There is yet
Hope in Israel for you. It Is true, There Is no Hope of your Living any longer in
this World. Nor indeed have you ever yet Lived. You are no longer capable of
having that Mercy shown you that shall prolong your Life* Your Life here is
forfeited! Humane Society has been so wronged by you, that you may not be
suffered any longer to continue in it. But there is yet room for you to Hope,
and look for the Mercy of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, in an Everlasting Life, And
will not the Thought of This, wonderfully melt and break your Hearts within
you! Though you have been so wicked overmuch, that the Sword of Justice can do no
other, than Cause you to Die before your Time, yet there is Mercy with GOD for
you, if you Return to Him; yea, He will Abundantly Pardon you; and you may
after Death be received into the Rest and Peace and Joy of an Heavenly
Paradise: And the great REDEEMER, will Remember you, [as He will a Penitent
Thief!] when he comes in His Kingdom, and in the Resurrection of the Dead
Remember you with the Favor which He bears unto His People. Will you then with
awakened Souls, attend unto what I am going to set before you; and will you set
your Hearts unto it?


P. P. We hope, we shall.


M. You have something within you, that will compel you to confess, That the
Things which you have done, are most Unreasonable and Abominable. The Robberies
and Piracies, you have committed, you can say nothing to Justify them.


P. P. No, Sir, Not a word!


M. It is a most hideous Article in the Heap of Guilt lying on you, that an
Horrible Murder is charged upon you; There is a cry of Blood going up to Heaven
against you.


P. P. [Under all the marks of Confusion.] Fly said, I cannot charge my self
with Murder. I did not strike and wound the Master or Mate! It was Mitchel did
it! --

The rest said, There was a Murder; and whatever Mitchel and this Man did, we
were aiding and assisting to it. And it is the dreadfullest of all the Things
we have to think of.


M. Fly, I am astonished at your stupidity. I cannot understand you. I am sure,
you don't understand yourself. I shall be better able, another time to reason
with you.

Fly said, It is very strange another should know more of me, than I do of
myself. There are False Oaths ta-against me.


M. You cannot wonder at it, if Mankind agrees to treat you as the Common
Enemies of Mankind. You cannot complain of it, if the Government pass a Sentence
of Death upon you.


P. P. No, Sir, we cannot. --


M. Certainly, The GOD of Heaven has been greatly Offended at you, for some
Things in your former Conversation. Certainly you sinned Grievously, before you
were left unto the Crimes, which have now brought such a Tragical End upon you.
Certainly, you have by some Extraordinary Gratifications of the Devil, procured
his having such an Advantage on you, and such a possession of you, as appeared
in your being thus Led Captive by him to do his will. What is it in your former
Life, that lies now most heavy upon you? Say, Fly.


P. My horrid Swearing and Cursing.


M. Say, Cole.


P. My Swearing and Cursing, and my Drunkenness.


M. Say, Greenville.


P. I must say the like, my Swearing and Cursing, and my Drunkenness.


M. Say, Condick.


P. Fly, Sir, He is a poor Creature, He knows nothing! -- If he ever Learnt any
Catechism, he has forgott it all.


M. Alas, what shall I do? -- I will talk more Separately with him, another
time. In the mean time, Do you, Condick, Mind as well as you can, what I say to
these. I will speak so plainly to them, if it be possible, that you may
understand it.

You are all Sensible, That there lies upon you a Necessity to Turn and Live
unto GOD.


P. P. Yes, Sir.


M. Do you feel, that you cannot of yourselves, (or if He don't help you,) Turn
and Live unto him?


P. P. Yes, Sir.


M. Do you own, that you are not worthy of his Help; no, that He may justly
withhold from you, the Influences of His Grace, which you have despised!


P. P. Yes, Sir.


M. This Humiliation must be laid in the Foundation, of your Conversion to GOD.
And now, you acknowledge, That you have broken all the Commandments of the
Glorious GOD.


P. P. Yes, Sir.


M. You will, by'nd by take the Catechism, and see what is Forbidden and what
is Required in the Ten Commandments, and examine what your Miscariages have
been, in each of the points referred unto. -- But know, That in all your Sins,
you have Denied the GOD that is above; trampled on your SAVIOR; Vexed His Holy
SPIRIT; pleased the Devil; and brought Mischiefs and Ruins on yourselves. In
every Sin, you have done, An Horrible Thing! And, you have done very foolishly.
You think so.


P. P. We do so.


M. But now, you must go back, and go down, to the Root of all your Wickedness.
The sin of your First Parents in eating the Forbidden Fruit, was a very Vile
Rebellion against the Glorious GOD. You were in that Rebellion. From hence
there is derived unto you a Corruption that is the very Image of Satan, whom
you in your First Parents did hearken to. All the Faculties of your Souls are
depraved and enfeebled in this Corruption. You have in you an Heart that is
desperately wicked; an Heart fully set in you to do evil. If you have been
Restrained from any actual Enormities, it is not because you have not had an
Heart inclined that way, but because GOD has witheld you from sinning against
Him. You have in you a Disposition to, All manner of sin! You are aware of This.


P. P. We believe it.


M. By these things, you Deserve all the Sad Things, which have ever yet
befallen you, from the Hand of an Offended GOD. Yea, you deserve all the
strange Punishment reserved for the workers of Iniquity, in that Hell which the
word of GOD has called, The place of Torment.


P. P. We do.


M. Now, How shall you escape the Damnation of Hell? Hear with Astonishment,
the good and glad Tidings which I am to bring you; The Gospel which is to be
preached unto Every Creature! -- The Eternal SON of GOD, the second of the
Three Persons in the eternal Godhead, has taken the Man JESUS into one Person
with Himself* This GOD-MAN, has placed Himself in the Room of His people. The
Law of GOD is armed with a Penalty. The Penalty is the Destruction of the
Sinner. It must be Executed; There can be no dispensing with it. But our good
GOD has allowed of it, that His JESUS undergo the Penalty of the Violated Law
for us. He has undergone it. He Dyed in our stead. He became a Sacrifice for
us. There fell upon Him the Punishment that was due to us for our Sin. When we
come to plead This, as we ought to do, GOD will Release us from the Punishment.
Now mind Exceedingly! -- You must cast yourselves in the Dust before the Lord,
and weep to Him with unspeakable Agony, and plead at this rate before Him; -- O
Great GOD; Let me escape the Death due to me for my Sin, because my SAVIOUL has
Dyed for me. Let the Blood which my SAVIOR shed for His People, procure my
Salvation from what my Sin has exposed me to. -- You will try to plead thus,
and so Hope for Mercy, with a GOD Ready to Pardon.


P. P. We hope, we shall.


M. You must now Remember, That the Gates of the Holy City, will stand open for
none but the Righteous Nation. The Law of GOD will shut those Gates upon all
that cannot show a Righteousness, which will fully come up to all the Demands of
it. You must be owners of a Righteousness, which has no Imperfection in it, or
the Law of GOD which is the Everlasting and Unalterable Rule of it, will never
admit you into Blessedness. What will you do in this awful case?


P. P. Repentance will do for us, instead of it.


M. No, It will not. -- But, mind the only Refuge, you must fly to. Oh! Fly to the
City of Refuge, that is now to be set open for you. Even Wilful Murderers, may
enter there. -- Our SAVIOR is become our Surety. He had a most Holy Heart; He
led a most Holy Life; He yielded a most perfect obedience to the Law of GOD. No
Fault could ever be found in Him. This was to produce a Righteousness, for His
People, Renouncing all Dependence on their own, to plead for their Acceptance
with GOD. It was He that made the Law. It was for our sake that He put Himself
under it. You never can make yourselves a Righteousness. You, of all Men
Living, are Spoilt for That! But now, O what an Amazing Thing! You, as wretched
as you are, have this Righteousness provided for you. You have now a Tender of
it, as a Cord thrown out unto a drowning Man. You! -- that were far from
throwing out a Cord unto the poor Men, whom you cast into the Ocean to perish
there! -- Oh! Lay hold on this precious Cord; and thus pour out your Tears
before the Lord.

O Holy GOD, Though I am the most unrighteous Wretch that ever appeared before
thee, yet I desire JESUS CHRIST the Righteous, to be my Advocate in the
Heavens. That Righteous One has been and has done all that thy Law calls for.
For the sake of that Righteousness, Oh! Let the Blessedness of the Righteous,
be what this Loathsome Sinner shall arrive unto! Will you Consider what I say,
and beg of the Lord, that He would give the understanding of it.


P. P. We hope we shall.


M. Well; But if the Offering of your SAVIOR, do avail for you, there will be
produced a New Heart in you; Your Heart will now close with GOD; and you will
make the Service of GOD, the the Chief End and Main Work of your Life. And GOD
will be to you, what you have heretofore vainly sought in Creatures. The Love
of GOD will be Rooted in your Souls; and all the Branches of PIETY will be
found growing upon it. You will say, What have I any more to do with Idols? You
will not Sin, to please the Flesh, or the World, or the Devil. You will have
Respect unto all the Commandments of GOD. This Wisdom you lack; Alas, Destitute
have you been of it, all your Days! But, the Direction is, If any Man lack
Wisdom, let him ask it of GOD! Send up then, Oh! send up a Cry that shall
pierce the Heavens; Lord, Bestow a New Heart upon me! You must always remember,
Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord. You cannot be Received into the
Heavenly World, if you have not first an Heavenly Heart. Heaven could not bear
you to be in it; Nay, which is a dreadful word, You could not bear to be in
Heaven, if you have not another Biass prevailing on your Heart, than what you
have had, while you have been Wandering from the Way of understanding, and going
astray from GOD in the Greatness of your Folly. You must therefore most
Earnestly Beseech your SAVIOR, to Unite you unto Himself, and by His Good
SPIRIT Quicken you for Living unto GOD: and fulfill in you all the good pleasure
of His Goodness.

Thus, I have in a few words given you the Sum of the Matter; which I hope, you
will Think over, when I am departed from you. For one Conference, thus much may
be Enough, if you will try when I am withdrawn, to go over the Way of Life that
has been set before you.

I will at this Time add only this One Remark. If you come to the Repentance
that is unto Salvation, it will appear, in Dispositions, that will be the
Reverse of Those, which have pushed you on, to the Sins Repented of. I Will
Illustrate it, with Two Instances.

First, That which pushed you on to Robberies and Piracies, was an Immoderate,
Inordinate, Irregular Desire of Worldly Possessions. Now, if you Repent, you
will have a Disposition patiently to bear any Wants and Straits, that GOD may
order for you; and rather suffer any Poverty and all sorts of Difficulties,
than Sin, or do any Unlawful Thing, to gain the World. In this point how do you
find yourselves disposed?


P. Fly, -- Be sure, I have nothing more to Expect from the World.


Co. and, Gr: We hope, we should never do as we have done.


M. Secondly, That which has pushed you on to Murders, as well as Robberies and
Piracies, was an Hatred of your Brother, It Is what you have carried on to the
last Extremity, A most Finished Hatred; Now if you Repent, you will have a
Disposition full of Benignity; Good will toward Men, will sweeten your Minds;
You will have an Hearty Love to your Neighbor. You will Wish well to every
one, whose Welfare, is Consistent with the public Safety.

Now, shall I Enquire after this point also; How you find yourselves disposed
in it? Say -- Fly particularly, Do you say; Are there any in the world, which
you don't wish well to.


P. Fly. Yes; There is one Man, that I don't, and I cannot wish well to! It is a
Vain Thing to ly, If I should say, that I forgive that Man, and that I wish him
well, I should ly against my Conscience, and add Sin to Sin.


M. Alas, Man, Thou do add Sin to Sin. To bear Malice against your Neighbor,
or be unable wish him well, though it be not a Lie, yet it is as great a Sin as a
Lie. But you must part with all Sin, if you would find the Mercy and have the
Comfort of a Penitent. The Great GOD has over and over again required you to
put away all Malice, and lay aside all Malice. Yea, the SON of GOD, the True
witness, who delivers Souls, has expressly told you, That if you do not
Forgive, you shall not be forgiven. I hope, the Lords-Prayer is not forgotten
with you. Our Lord has taught us to pray, Forgive us as we forgive. I hope, you
pray according to that Prayer.


P. Fly. Yes, I do! -- But for all that, I cannot Forgive that Man. GOD
Almighty Revenge me on him! -- It Is a Vain thing -- I will not die with a Lie in my
mouth,


M. Thou talkest like a Madman! -- I hope that you will take pains with your
own Heart, and cry to God for the Help of His Grace, that you may be disposed,
as you know you should be; and that I shall find you in a Better Frame, when I
come again to Visit you.

I hope, I now find the rest of you so.


P. P. Co. and Gr. We heartily forgive all the World; and wish well to every
Man.


M. I have Supplied you with several Books of PIETY, to assist you in your
Preparation for the Death before you. I hope, you allow some Time to a Serious
Perusal of them. One of them, is Entitled, The Converted Sinner; and was
occasioned, by the last Predecessors you had in the state and place you are now
brought into.


P. Fly. I read that Book before ever I was brought hither!


M. -- And yet, come hither! An Aggravation of the Crimes that have brought you
hither!

-- But, above all; You have the Holy BIBLE in your Hands. It Is the Word of
Life. Oh! Read it, and Learn from it how to call upon the GOD, that speaks unto
you in it. Particularly, Meditate on the Fifty first Psalm, and let that Psalm
teach you how to pray under your Blood-guiltiness. But whatever Form of Prayer
may be commended unto you, see that it be always the Prayer of the Soul, which
you address to the Glorious GOD: The Prayer of a Soul, full of Agony, Mourning
for your Sin, -- Woe is unto me that I have Sinned, and Groaning to your
SAVIOR, O Wretched one that I am, Will thou Deliver me!

We will now pray with you and for you. --


A Second Conference. July. 9.
M. ACcording to your Desire, which I am always ready unto the best of my power
to Gratify, I have used my humble Intercessions, with His Honor the Lieu.
Governor, to grant you a Reprieve of Two or Three Days, that you may have Time
to make more Thorough Work, in the Process of Repentance which is, The one
Thing that is Needful for you. He is a Person every where known to be of an
Excellent Spirit, and as he is one of unspotted Equity, so he is one of
uncommon Clemency. It afflicts him, that he cannot grant you such a Small
Releef, but, as the Special Court by which the Time and Place of your Death,
were Agreed, Voted, and accordingly Registered, is now dissolved, he apprehends
it improper for him now, to alter any thing about it.

But in this very Thing, you may now see the Hand of an Holy and a Righteous
GOD, obliging you in some Degree to say, As I have done so GOD has Requited me!
The Men whom you Murdered, they begged, they pleaded, they with the Groans of a
Deadly wounded Man importuned you, that you would Allow them a Little Time, and
not hurry them out of the World. But, Unmerciful Creatures, You were
Inexorable. -- And now, you Petition for a Little Time; and so has the Glorious
GOD ordered it, that it cannot be granted you. May this very Thing help to
awaken the Sentiments of Repentance in you. Especially since the Long-suffering
of GOD, has allowed more than a Fortnights Time of Recollection, to you that
would not allow a Moments Time, to them whose Blood is crying to Him against
you.

And now, Fly; I hope, you are come to a Better Frame, than what I lately left
you in.


F. I am where I was.


M. I am sorry for it. What? Is not your Heart yet prevailed withal, to let the
Leaven of Malice be purged out of it? Cannot you die, wishing well to every one?


F. It Is a Vain Thing to dissemble. No; I cannot. There are those, that I cannot
Forgive.


M. But you must; and you must Resign your Heart up to your SAVIOR, that by
the Influences and Assistences of His Grace, you may.


F. But I cannot. -- And I will not go out of the World, with a ly in my mouth.


M. What Criminal and prodigious Nonsense are you guilty of! -- And yet you will
go out of the World, with what is as Bad in your Heart; Even with Murder there,
You will go out of the World, in a plain Rebellion against a Command of GOD our
SAVIOR, the Glorious One, who is the Judge of the World; whose Judgment Seat
you must appear before.

Has not the Great GOD our SAVIOR, Expressly commanded you, To forgive, even
the greatest of Enemies and of Injuries; and set before you an admirable and
most Imitable Example of doing so? Dare you to Die, persisting in a plain and a
known Disobedience to Him? Can you imagine, that He will be the Author of an
Eternal Salvation for you, if you flatly refuse to Obey Him? O Vain
Imagination! O Vile Imagination!

And I pray what, have you to say of the Government?


F. GOD Reward them according to their Deserts.


M. You must not go on in this Impiety.


F. I cannot help it!


M. But, you must get Help for it. Certainly, you pretend some Hope to be
Forgiven by GOD. Have not you wronged the Great GOD of Heaven infinitely more,
than it is possible for any Man and Worm upon Earth, to Wrong you?


F. Be sure!


M. Will you then hope to have Ten Thousand Talents frankly forgiven to you,
and not forgive the Farthing, which is the most of the wrong that can be done
to you? Nay, The Man that you say, has done you the greatest Wrong, has in
Reality done you, what would prove the greatest Kindness and Service that could
be done you, if you would wisely make a due Improvement of it. He has put a
stop to a Course of Wickedness, in which you were apace running on Headlong to
Hell. He has brought you into the way of Repentance and Salvation. You may
Bless GOD forever, for what you call the Wrong that has been done you; and, if
you be not a Madman, you will do so.


F. I must be where I am. It Is in vain to say any more.


M. I will say thus much more; and the Blood of your Soul would ly upon me, if
I should not say it. If you go away in this obstinacy, you cannot look for any
other, but that He who made you will not have Mercy on you, and He who formed
you will show you no Favor.

I will pass from This, to another Matter, wherein I hope to see some
Relentings begun upon you. Your Murders, your Cruel and Bloody Murders! --


F. I cannot Charge myself, -- I shall not own myself Guilty of any Murder, -- Our
Captain and his Mate used us Barbarously. We poor Men cannot have Justice done
us. There is nothing said to our Commanders, let them never so much abuse us,
and use us like Dogs. But the poor Sailors --


M. What Is this, to clearing you of the horrid Murders you stand convicted of?


F. I never Struck, either of the Persons!


M. You held the Captains Hands down, while Mitchel struck him:


F. No, 'Twas to Save him from the strokes.


M. And hawle him out of the Cabin, and throw him overboard!

But who plotted the Revolution aboard the Ship? a Day or Two before! What was
your Intention about the Captain and the Mate, when you should sieze them? Why
did you carry Mitchel, with his Broad-Axe into the Cabin? Who threw the Captain
and the Mate overboard?

If Mitchel was the only Murderer, why did you not sieze him, and reserve him
for Justice? Were the Murders, any other than one Article, in the Complicated
Plot of Piracy, which you were now upon? Every step that any one of you all,
took in the Piracy you have been prosecuting, involved you all in the Murders,
which the Piracy begun withal?

And, who was it that gave the Ghostly Advice to the Captain, how to make
Sufficient Preparation for the Eternal World? I hope, you now think, a more
preparation to be Necessary.


F. I shall not own my self Guilty. False Oaths are taken against me!

-- Cole now said, I desire to be removed out of the Room; I cannot bear to stay
and hear, my Guilty Companion, so stand upon his Innocence. He and we are all
verily Guilty. And there is the Blood of the Captain yet in the Cabin, crying
against us.

-- Greenville Concurred unto what he said.


M. Miserable Man, You know the Word of GOD, That no Murderer has Eternal Life.
And Murders cannot be pardoned, if they be not Confessed, Bewailed, and
Repented of.

We can do no more, but with Tears [which, alas, you have not for yourself!]
Lament the unaccountable and unparalled Obduration that you are given up
unto; and Beseech you to Consider your ways; and send up our Cries unto the GOD
of all Grace, to bestow a New, and a Right, and a Soft Heart upon you.

I have done with you, any further than to ask your Attention unto the brief
Instructions, which your Three Brethren here are now expecting of me.

Poor Sons of Death; Be attentive to the Words of Life; and Hearken as for
Eternity.

You are in most affecting Circumstances. If you Die two or three Days hence, in
ill Terms with Heaven, you will be doomed and thrown into Miseries,
inconceivably more grievous, than any things which you ever have in this World
been vexed withal. Your Spirits will be continually tortured with the furious
and rending Scourges of a Guilty Conscience. An Infinite GOD will arm your
Conscience to make direful Reflections on your past Misbehaviours. You will
fall into the Hands of Devils; you may guess a little, how they will handle
you, by your way of handling one another. Your Filthy Bodies will after a long
period be Raised, that in them you may receive according to what you have done
in Them. How tremendous pains, will be then inflicted on you! Yea, The Lord GOD
Omnipotent will not only Banish you from all comfortable Enjoyments, but with
more immediate Impressions of His Wrath, make you the Everlasting Triumphs of
His Vengeance, and shoot intolerable Coruscations of it into your Enlarged
Minds, and keep all the Anguish of a Tormenting Fire upon them. Verily, He will
Punish like a GOD; And you will find a Strange Punishment reserved for the
workers of Iniquity. Can you hear this, and not cry out; O Lord, My Flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments!

But then, if before you Die, you do in the Methods of a Repenting Faith get
your Pardon Sealed, and your Souls taken into the Saving and Healing Hands of
that Good One, whose Call now unto you, is, Look unto me, and be Saved: Your
Expired Spirits, will be taken into the Paradise of GOD. And the REDEEMER will
anon Raise you from the Dead, and make you partakers of the Spiritual Blessings
in the Heavenly places. Though you have been the Companions of Robbers, you shall
then be the Companions of Angels; yea, you shall Inherit all things, and be
Filled with all the Fullness of GOD. The Things to be done for you, are beyond
what the Heart of Man can conceive.

You are not strangers to what we read of a Menasseh, in his Chains, returning
to GOD. Oh! may you do and fare like him!

One, who had been a very wicked Man, dying in this Country, after the
standers-by took him to be Dead, revived so far, as to start up in his Bed, and
cry out, O! All Heaven rings with it; A Great and (...) Old Sinner, coming to
Heaven! As wicked as you have been, [ wicked overmuch, and now to Die before
your Time for being so!] yet before Tuesday night, Heaven, Heaven, will be
filled with the High-praises of GOD, and there will be Joy among the Angels for
your Arrival there!

And now,

First, Cole, Do you answer me distinctly; answer me to such Tings as these.

[ The Answers, being mostly but words of Compliance, there will be no need of
Reciting them, and Repeting them.]

It Is by coming into the Covenant of GOD and of Grace, that you are to Lay hold
on Eternal Life. Behold, the meaning of that Covenant, and the manner of coming
into it.

You must apprehend, That the Eternal SON of GOD, has in a Covenant with His
Eternal FATHER, engaged, That He will bring His People to Blessedness; -- bring
them to all the Good, which a GOD of Infinite Goodness, has purposed for them.
You are apprehensive of This. --

One Thing Engaged by our Lord-REDEEMER, is, To offer up a Sacrifice unto
Divine Justice to make Atonement for them; and undergo the sad Things which are
due to them for their Sins, that so they may be delivered from them. And
therewithal, To Obey the Law of GOD, and so work out, and bring in a
Righteousness, that shall be Reckoned Their's; for them to be dealt withal
according to it. This is already done; Is it not?

Now, Do you Consent, unto This; To be Forgiven of GOD, on the account of the
Sacrifice your SAVIOR has presented for you?

Do you Consent unto This; To be Accepted with GOD, on the account of the
Righteousness with which your SAVIOR does furnish you? And, You have no other
Hope! -- no other Plea!

Well; But another Thing Engaged by our Lord-REDEEMER is, To make suitable
Impressions on the Souls of His Chosen; To fill them with the Love of GOD and
their Neighbor; To Heal all that is amiss in them; To Quicken them for Living
to GOD; And work in them what is well pleasing in the sight of GOD; and Conform
them to His Will in every thing; and render all Sin Odious to them; and incline
them to every thing that is Holy and Just and Good; and fit them for, and bring
them to, the Heavenly world.

For you, This remains to be done. Do you consent, That He Will do all this for
you, and in you? --

Do you Resign yourself up to His Holy SPIRIT, that He may do so? --

Instead of saying, I will Fear GOD and Serve Him, do you say, O my SAVIOR, I
desire, that by Thee Living in me, I may Fear GOD, and Serve Him!

So, you are willing, that your SAVIOR fulfill in you and for you, all the Good
pleasure of His Goodness!

If your Heart be in This, then you are in the Covenant of GOD!

Now, Greenville, Do you distinctly answer me to such things as these. There
are Two Adams. The First Adam, who has been our unhappy Father; and Second Adam
who is our Almighty SAVIOR.

The Conversion to GOD, without which, you Perish Wonderfully and Eternally,
lies in your Translation from the First Adam, to the Second Adam.

You are sensible, That the First Adam, whom the Great GOD constituted the Head
of His offspring, Sinned against his GOD, in eating the Forbidden Fruit. --

An horrible Sin it was!

It is your Sin; You had your part in it. GOD justly reckons it yours! --

Your First Father ceasing to be what he should be, there is derived from him
to you, a Base Nature. Your Nature is depraved. All your Faculties are
enfeebled, and corrupted. You have now an evil Disposition in you. -- prone to
all Evil. -- Full of Enmity to GOD. -- poisoned by the Devil. -- In his Image.

You feel This. --

Under the Efficacy of this Evil Principle, you have trespassed against the
Laws of GOD, in Actual Sins, -- Many, -- Heinous, -- All of them inexcusable.
--

They render you worthy of all the Sorrows you have met withal! -- yea, worthy
of all the great Plagues and of long Continuance, in another world.

All this while, you have been a Slave to Satan, -- Serving diverse Lusts? --
In Hourly Danger of being thrown where the Smoke of the Torment ascends forever
and ever?

You feel this, -- own it, -- Count your condition very miserable.

You dare not continue in it. You tremble at the Thoughts of lying under the
Curse of GOD.

Then, Be astonished; And, Oh! Receive not the Grace of GOD in Vain.

The Blessed JESUS is the Second Adam. And since He is GOD as well as Man, He
is more Able to Relieve you, than the First Adam could be to Ruin you.

You hear Him inviting of you, to come under the shadow of His wings.

You are made willing to do so; -- And be Found in Him: -- And be Drawn by Him.
-- You cannot come if He don't help you.

You are willing, That as the Sin of your First Father is imputed unto you, so
that what your SAVIOR has done and born for His People, should be yours: --
Availeable for you! -- And you be saved from the Curse, because He has been
made a Curse for you.

You are also willing, That your SAVIOR should make a New Creature of you; --
Stamp His Image upon you, and make you to Hate what He hates, and Love what He
loves, and bring you to be all that He would have you to be?

You commit your self into His Precious Hands, that it may be so?

-- I leave you in those Hands; and ask you accompany the Prayers that we shall
now proceed unto. --


WISDOM In the Latter End.
A SERMON occasioned by the Condition of the Condemned Pirates, July 10. 1726.
Job IV.21. They Die even without Wisdom.


THe Greatest Unhappiness imaginable! And yet such as the most of Men are
overtaken withal. To prevent such an Unhapness, as it would be the brightest
Wisdom, that any Man alive can attain unto, so it should be the liveliest Care
that every Man living shall have his Mind concerned about. It is impossible to
begin this Care too soon. It is impossible to pursue this Care too much. Except
this be a Man's Chief Care, it is impossible to escape the formidable
Unhappiness. I have before me the most Important Subject in the World. We
cannot Preach too frequently or too fervently on the Subject. You cannot hear
too Attentively. I bring you this Day, those Maxims of Wisdom, which will
require the greatest Attention from you. We are a Congregation of Dying People.
The Danger of our Dying without Wisdom, it is incident unto us; it is threatening
of us; we cannot be too deeply affected with it. We live without Wisdom, if we
are not very deeply affected with it!

A Comparison is instituted between Angels and Men; to prove, That if Angels
must abase themselves before GOD, and lay aside all boasting pretensions to
perfection, much more must Men do so. The Children of Men on Earth are on many
Accounts inferior to the Angels of God, in Heaven. The Inferiority is
particularly conspicuous, in our Mortality. And indeed, we are not only Mortal
Creatures, but our Death is attended with some very Humbling Circumstances.
First, when men Die, they are stripped of that Excellency which makes them
valuable among the Living. Though men may Excel never so much, in Strength or in
Beauty, in Wealth or in Honor; in Learning or in Authority; They are carried
Naked unto the Grave. Death, deprives them, disrobes them, of those things for
which they were esteemed Excellent. Indeed there is one Excellency, which if
Men had it, would Abide with them, when they Die, and would outlive their Death.
True Wisdom would do so. But now, Secondly, Behold, how unhappy the most of Men
are in this thing, They Die without Wisdom. And this is that awful Doctrine,
which I am to insist upon.

Let Men be never so wise, they are to Die; but the most of Men are so unhappy
as to be found without Wisdom when they Die. No Wisdom can deliver any Man from
Death; But it is a fearful wretchedness attending the Death of many Men, that
they come to it without Wisdom.

I. The first Thing before us is, The Unhappiness of All Men; which yet unto
some who have a part in a Great Savior, in a great Measure ceases to be an
Unhappiness. Whatever Wisdom there be in any Men, Death is the unavoidable
Portion of all Men. There is no Wisdom that will keep off the Stroke of Death.
So some take the meaning of this Clause. In the Original it runs, They Die, and
there is not Wisdom in them; that is, no Wisdom to send off the stroke of
Death. Nulla est Sapientia qua mortem Effugiant. So it is carried by
Interpreters. The wisdom of Men signifies no more to save them from Death, than
if they had no Wisdom. The Wisdom of any Man will not give him any more
privilege, to Exempt him from Death, than the veriest Fool in the World. We
read, Eccl. 2.16. How dies the wise Man? even as the Fool. We read, Psalm.
49.10. Wise Men die, likewise the Fool and the Brutish perish. It was of old
said, concerning a wise Man, Died Abner as a Fool dies? In some Sense he did
so Die. The Wisest Man in any Court or College upon Earth, is as liable to
Death as the poorest Creature that comes within the statute of Idiocy. We read,
Heb. 9.27. -- It Is appointed for Men once to Die. The Common Law of Death is
what every Man, must submit unto. The Law runs, All Titles, Dignities,
Preferments, Excellencies etc. to the Contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.
It Is the Common Lot of Mankind; of wise Men, as well as others. They must be
none but Egregious Fools, who can dream of any Exemption from this common Lot.
Ah, Foolish Wretch, and far gone in Folly; shall the Earth be forsaken for
thee; or shall thou be permitted never to forsake the Earth! And shall a Decree
more Established than a Rock, be removed of its place, that thou may always
continue in thy place? No, we have the Sum of the Matter, and the Root of it.
Romans 5.12; Wherefore, as by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by
Sin; and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned.

First. No Natural Wisdom will secure, or excuse any Man from dying like all
other Men. We read, 1 King. 11.43. Solomon slept with his Fathers. Where is the
Politician, that can Out-wit his Last Enemy, or by his Wit elude the Approaches
of that Enemy? What Lawyer so Cunning as to Quash the Writ of Death? Academies
are emptied of their Inhabitants, as well as Hospitals. There is one honorable
Tribe of Men, whose Profession it is to prolong Life. But the Physicians cannot
instruct us how always to prorogue Death. None of them can by any means redeem
his Brother, or find out an Elixir by which his Patient may Live for ever, and
not see Corruption. They sometimes put by a Pass, which Death is making at us;
but let them Fence never so Skilfully, anon Death gives a Home Thrust, and the
Distressed Physicians look on with troubled and grieved Eyes, and own, We are now
Physicians of no Value. They dye themselves likewise; and none sooner, than
they that like Paracelsus, brag of their Immortalizing Medicines.

Secondly. No, nor will Religious Wisdom neither. We read, Josh. 1.2. Moses my
Servant is Dead. They that are wise unto Salvation, yet will not by that Wisdom
Save themselves from Temporal Death. Piety will deliver from the Sting of
Death; but not from Death it self. Piety will deliver from the second Death;
but not from the First Death. Piety will obtain a Resurrection for us, that
will bring us out of the Grave; it will not obtain a Preservation for us, that
we shall not go into the Grave. What Man is he that lives, let him live never
so piously, never so prayerfully, never so Fruitfully, who shall not see Death,
or deliver his Soul from the hand of the Grave? In fine, It was a Sentence in
the Wisdom of the Ancients; Is Vir non est, qui lapides atque edificia
corruere, et homines mori miratur. The Man that wonders to see Buildings fall,
and People die, is not worthy the Name of a Man. I remember Posidonius in the
Life of Austin, tells us, how much that Great Man was affected with that
Sentence, a little before his own going out of the World. May we all, since we
are all going out of the world, accustom ourselves to this Heart affecting
Meditation.

II. The second Thing before us, is, A much worse unhpppiness that befalls the
most of men, and the worst unhappiness that any Man can have befalling of him.
The most of Men, die before they have arrived unto the only true Wisdom. Few Men
are wise before they Die. Thus this clause is well carried by Expositors; Prius
moriuntur quam quicquam intellexerunt de Divina Sapientia. They Die before they
know what Wisdom is: They die strangers, to Divine, Real, Saving Wisdom. All Men
are, born Fools. We read, Job 11.12. Born like the wild-Asses Colt. And the
most of Men Die Fools. The lives of Men are generally spent in Folly. And they
die before the cure of their Folly.

We will Enquire; First, Whence it proceeds, that the most of Men, die before
they arrive unto Wisdom? You may be sure, The Fall of Man is the cause of this
evil. Man was ambitious of Wisdom. The Temptation of the Forbidden Fruit was, A
Tree to be desired, to make one wise. But Man by his Fall has lost his Wisdom.
A Darkness is come upon his Mind. His perverse Mind is now naturally disposed
unto Error. He is naturally Ignorant, and out of the way. His Faculties, to
discern wisely what is Right and Good, are horribly wounded by his Fall from
God. It is now come to pass, that the Children of Men come under that
Character; Romans 3.16.17. -- The way of Peace they have not know. And because
the depraved Soul of Man loves his Error, therefore the Holy God leaves him in
it. Because he will not be reclaimed from it, God lets him go on in his Error.
Because he hates the Light, God witholds it from him. He Delights in his
Darkness, and prefers and practices the Works of Darkness; God therefore gives
him up to his Darkness. We may add, what we read; 2. Cor. 4.4. The god of this
world blinded their Minds. Satan is by the wrath of God, become the Ruler of
this Dark World. Men do by Sin put themselves under the Dominion of Satan.
Satan shuts his poor Slaves up in those Dungeons, where the Rays of Wisdom do
not reach them. Sinners enslaved by Satan, may say of their Master, He has laid
me in the lowest Pit, in Darkness, in the Deeps. They are by the Intrigues of
Satan, kept so full of Business, and carried unto such a Distance from God,
that they cannot see things in a True light. So they go down to the Generation
of their Foolish Fathers, and they never see light.

Secondly. We will Enquire, How it appears, that the most of Men Die before they
arrive unto Wisdom. There needs no stronger, nor no sadder proof of this, than
what we have in the Daily Complaints of Dying Men. Some Die with very little
sense of what has been amiss in their Lives. Madness has been in their Hearts
while they have lived, and with that Madness they have gone to the Dead. But,
of them who are not perfect Sotts and Stones in their Death, the most by far,
die confessing and complaining, that they have been without Wisdom all their
Days. They own, they have never come unto Wisdom, until their Dying Hour be
come upon them. And it is well, if now they do any more, than see that they
have been without Wisdom; it is well if now they come really to get any of that
Wisdom, which they have been thus long without. We read, Prove. 5.11, 12. of,
Mourning at the last, How have I hated Instruction! The most of Men go on
foolishly all their days, in such Indiscretions, that they mourn at the last;
Oh! If I were to live over again, I would never lead my Life so foolishly as I
have done! I would order my Life after another and a wiser Manner than I have
done! When that famous Roman Cicero, was come toward the latter End of his
Life, he cried out, O me nunquam prudensem! 'Alas, I have never done the part
of a 'Wise Man, in all my Days. Thus do the most of Men cry out of themselves,
at a latter End full of Bitterness. Dying Men say; We have lived without
Wisdom. At their Death it is found and owned, they have been without it. In a
Dying Hour to be forced unto the Confession, I have until now been wholly
destitute of Wisdom! And now, no opportunity to Exert it, or, perhaps to obtain
it! --

We will Enquire, Thirdly. Who they are, which Die before they arrive unto
Wisdom. You shall shall have a brief Description of them.

First, They who Die Unprepared for Death, such Die without Wisdom. The truest
Wisdom of Man, lies, of old they said, In a Meditation of Death; I will say, In
a Preparation for death. Death finds none but Egregious Fools Unprepared for
it. We are warned, That before we die, we must be prepared for it, by a
Sanctifying Change upon us; Prepared for it, by being Renewed in the Spirit of
our Minds: Prepared for it, by turning to God, and Closing with Christ, and
having the Dispositions which will render us meet for the Inheritance of the
Saints in light. We are warned, That if we die before we are thus Prepared for
it, it will be Good for us, that we had never been born. Our Death will be but
a sort of a Trap door, by which we shall be thrown down into the place of
Dragons, a place of Torments. It can be no Wisdom to slight this warning, and
neglect this Preparation for Death. Unto one Unprepared for death, it was said;
Luke 12.20. Thou Fool! Oh! how justly, how justly may it be said unto such an
one; Ah, Fool, dying without Wisdom! The unprepared Soul, tumbles into a
dreadful Eternity, with such a shriek as that; What a Fool, Oh! what a Fool,
have I been! What horrible Stripes has my Folly brought me to!

Secondly. They who die, before they have begun to live, shall die without
Wisdom. A Man does not begin to live, until he lives unto God. He that never
begins to mind the Great Errand, which GOD sent him into the World upon, has
not begun to live. He that fills not his Life with Acknowledgements of GOD, and
studies not to Acknowledge God in all his ways, has not begun to live. He that
lives wholly to himself, and sweels away his Life, only in the Hurries, and the
Pleasures, and Amusements of this Life; may have it said of him, as, 1 Timothy
5.6. He is dead, while he lives. It Is not Wisdom; No, It Is Folly in its
Exaltation, to live at this rate. If Death overtakes a Man, while he is yet
alienated from the Life of God; If Death siezes upon a Man, before he is
experimentally acquainted with the Methods of a Godly Life: the Man dies
without Wisdom.

Thirdly. They who die in their Sins, these die without Wisdom. Sin is Folly.
Every Sinner is a Fool. In sinning we bring our selves into cause for saying,
as, 2 Samuel 24.10. I have sinned, and I have done very foolishly. Men are not
come to Wisdom, till they have left off sinning, or, while they go on still in
their Trespasses. If Men die before they are Converted from the Error of their
ways, they die without Wisdom. To die Unpardoned, is to die Miserable. To die with
Sin unbewailed, and unforsaken, and unrepented of, is to die Unpardoned. So to
die -- with Folly not abandoned, nor forgiven; To die, with the Wrath of God yet
abiding on the Soul; To die, and carry away a Guilty Conscience, which will
gnaw, and scourge, and vex the Soul, and be within it, a Worm that will never
die! Certainly, it is no Wisdom to die so!

APPLICATION.
But my Discourse must pass into a most Importunate Exhortation. And it is an
Exhortation, to be managed with the most Vehement Importunity, because we are
every one of us very nearly concerned in it. If any one of us could promise
himself to be excused from dying at all; Yea, or if any one of us could promise
himself to live so much as One Day longer, the Exhortation might suffer some
Abatement of the Flame in which it must come unto us. Oh! But not one of us can
promise any such matter. We are all concerned. My Address must be as extensive
as that; Psalm. 49.1. Hear this, all ye People. This must be the Exhortation to
us all. Immediately, Immediately become so wise, as to get beyond the Danger of
dying without Wisdom. If you enquire, and methinks you should be Inquisitive,
What is that Wisdom? GOD Himself shall give you an Answer, Job 28.28. And unto
Man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart from
evil, that is Understanding. Syrs, be assured of this. A Man may have the
Wisdom to Govern and Manage whole Nations of Men; but if he die without any
better Wisdom, How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the Morning,
who did order the Nations? A Man may have the Wisdom to understand as many
Languages as a Mithridates; but if he die without better Wisdom, he must be
lodged where he shall gnaw his Tongue for Pain, and know no Language but that
of Roaring and of Blasphemy. A Man may have the Wisdom to Calculate all the
Motions of the Heavens; but if he die without better Wisdom, he must go down to
Hell, and lie in restless Chains of Darkness there. An acute Philosopher, will
not by all his Wisdom, avoid a worse Fate than that of an Empedocles.

The greatest Case that ever can be spoken to, is now to be briefly spoken to.
What shall a Person do, that he may be rescued and preserved from the
Unhappiness of dying without Wisdom? O my dying Friends; Hearken, Hearken to
the Counsils of GOD; the Dictates and the Lessons of the truest Wisdom!

First. You must Repent of all your Folly before you die; Else you will die
without Wisdom. To Sin is to play the Fool. To go on in Sin, is to go astray in
the Greatness of our Folly. To walk in the way of Sin, is to wander from the
way of Understanding. Repentance is a Resipiscence; it is a growing wise again.
In Repentance a Man does that thing; Luke 15.17. come to himself. The Sinners
die without Wisdom surely, who go out of the world before they come to
themselves. Ah, Dying People; This, This you have to do before you die. You must
Lament before the Lord, the Miscarriages which your Lives have been filled
withal; the Violations of His Holy and Just and Good Laws, in the Course of
your Lives; Esteem it a most Lamentable Thing, that you have offended Him: You
must lay to heart that fountain of all wickedness every one of us has in his
own desperately wicked Heart; that evil Heart of unbelief, which inclines us to
depart from the living God. You must apprehend Sin as the worst evil; be
apprehensive of an hideous and horrid evil enwrapped in it; especially, as it
is a Denial of the God that is Above. You must loath and Judge yourselves, as
worthy of a terrible Destruction from God, for the offense that your Sin has
given to His Infinite Majesty. You must Believe that He is a God ready to
Pardon. Believe the offer which He makes of His Pardoning Mercy unto the Chief
of Sinners. Believe the purchase which the Blood of your Savior has made of a
Pardon, for all that will embrace the offer. You must Accept this astonishing
Offer. But Accept it, with a sincere Desire, a steady Purpose to Transgress no
more. Sincerely and stedily say, I will not offend any more. And if you have
wronged your Neighbor, you must endeavor all suitable Reparation and
Restitution. You die without Wisdom, if you die without such a Repentance. Oh!
Let it not after this be said, as, Jer. 8.6. No Man Repented him.

Secondly. You must make sure of an Interest in a Glorious CHRIST, before you
die; else you will die without Wisdom. You are sensible, That our Great Redeemer,
is for many and weighty Causes in the Sacred Scriptures, called by the Name of,
Wisdom. We read, 1 Cor. 1.30. He is of GOD, made unto us, Wisdom. Then to die
without Christ, is to die without Wisdom. Wherefore, This you have to do before
you die. You must come to an Acquaintance, and an Union, with your only Savior.
You must consent unto that Covenant, which your Savior, as the Head of His
People, has made with His Eternal Father; and be willing that He should not
only make Expiation for your Sins, but also Quicken you and Assist you to Live
unto Him. You must Receive your Savior in all His Offices, and with all His
Benefits, and have a Soul ravished with His Excellencies; and commit your all
into His Hands, and Rely upon Him for all the Blessings of Goodness. Oh! Let no
one dare to die, till he has done this. To die Christless is to die without
Wisdom, and without Hope of Blessedness! Faith is in the New Testament ever now
and then called, Wisdom. If you die, before you have obtained a precious Faith
in the only Savior, you die without Wisdom, and the Gospel being hid from you,
you are Lost, Lost for ever. If a Christ be not your Portion, you have your
Portion with Unbelievers; A Portion from which, O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver
my Soul!

Thirdly. You must have your Minds rectified with a Principle of Grace, before
you die; else you will die without Wisdom. That Principle of Grace, which
purifies the Soul of a Sinner from his Evil Tendencies, and makes a New
Creature of him, is most reasonably called, Wisdom. Thus we read; Psalm. 51.6.
Of Wisdom in the Hidden Part. A Principle of Grace, will cause a Man to act
wisely. To fear GOD, and prize His Christ, and hate all Sin, and slight this
World, and bear Afflictions patiently and fruitfully, and be a good Steward of
the manifold Favors of GOD, and be a Blessing in all Relations, and keep
joyfully looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ in an Everlasting Life:
This is to act wisely. A Principle of Grace will produce this wise Behavior. A
Soul dismissed by Death, being found under the power of such a Principle, will
be found marked for the Heavenly World. It has the Marks of the Lord upon it. A
Soul then found without such a Principle, will be found without any Claim to
the Blessings of the Heavenly Places. It will be claimed by the Destroyer; and
it can have nothing but a fearful Expectation of a fiery Indignation. My
Neighbors, Before you die, you must with a Conversion to GOD, have a Principle
of Grace wrought in your Souls. And therefore, you must Cry to the God of all
Grace, and wait on Him for it, with a most unspeakable Agony. You must Resign
your selves unto the Spirit of Grace, and solicit, and entertain His
Influences, and submit to, and fall in with, His Operations. Keep doing so,
while you Live; Keep doing it, as for your Lives. Tremble, Tremble at the
Thought of dying, till you have in you, the Spring of Everlasting Life!

Fourthly. You must wisely Measure, and wisely Employ, the Time of your Lives;
otherwise you will be without Wisdom, at the End of your Lives. It Is Wisdom to
Measure our Time well. Thus we read; Psalm. 90.12. So teach us to number our
Days, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. It Is Wisdom, not to allot upon
more Days than we have Reason for. It Is Wisdom to allow, that for ought we
know, we are entered into the very last of our Days. Again, It Is Wisdom to
Employ our Time well. Thus we read; Ephesians. 5.15, 16. See then that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, redeeming the Time, because the Days
are evil. It Is Wisdom to spend our Hours, in such a manner that we may give a
good Account how we have spent them. It Is Wisdom not to throw away our Hours
impertinently, but be always either doing or getting of Good in them all. Mind
it then, Syrs. You will die without Wisdom, if your Death surprise you; if your
Death come unexpectedly; -- if at your Death you must say; I never looked for
this! I did not imagine that I could be so near to this. You will die without
Wisdom, if your Death come upon you, before you have learnt the Skill of Living
Usefully; if your Death cut you down, before you are grown Fruitful in good
Works; and bring forth much Fruit unto God. Oh! Beware of this.

Fifthly. To Escape the Finished Folly of Dying without Wisdom, one way is, To
Learn Wisdom from the Dying. Verily, The Thoughts of a Dying Man, are those
wherein Ordinarily you hear Wisdom Justified, even by those who never in all
their Days before have been the Children of it. The Wisdom which the Children
of Exalted Folly have derided, while they thought of nothing but living always
here, is, in The Thoughts of a Dying Man, how Approved, how Applauded, how
Recommended unto the Survivers! When Men see the Days of the life of their
Vanity come to their period, they Recommend unto the World, the Religion of GOD
our SAVIOR, and a Conformity to the Maxims of it, as the only Wisdom in the
World! Ask a Dying Man, What is the Wisest Course that can be taken? He will
say; Oh! live to GOD, and live by the Faith of the SON of GOD, as soon and as
much as ever you can; And fill your life with Acts of Devotion toward GOD, and
with Acts of Benignity toward Man; And let the Views of a life to come govern
you in all Manner of Conversation.

Such Things you have a thousand and a thousand times heard from the Quivering
Lips, that have had an Immortal Soul just Expiring from them. Will Not you hearken
to the Voice of such Teachers, but Mourn at the last, for your Obstinacy and
Impenitence? O ye Fools, when will you be wise! --

And now, The Great GOD has ordered it, that a Number of Dying Men appear among
us, in some Tragical and peculiar Circumstances. Another Company of PIRATES
under Sentence of Death appear among us, and are within a few Hours to be
Executed.

Certainly, It will be the Wisdom of us all, but especially of our Seafaring
Tribe, to learn from these Dying Men, some things which the living that see the
End of these Men must lay to Heart, -- if they would not with an Hard Heart lay
up for themselves Treasures of Wrath, to be poured out upon them, in the
Righteous Judgment of GOD.

Learn from these poor Men, the Mischief of those Two Vices, wherein so many of
the Seafaring Tribe suffer the doleful Shipwreck of their Souls, and are
drowned in Perdition. The first, that of Drunkenness; And then, that of profane
Swearing and Cursing. These poor Men do, with unutterable Anguish cry out,
under the heavy Load of Guilt, which these Two Vices have laid and left upon
them. The former Vice, resigns the Sinner up to the Possession of the Devil;
and by Consequence, to all manner of Wickedness. The latter Vice, declares that
the Devil has taken an horrible Possession of the Sinner, and the Wretch cannot
now so truly say, what he use to do, My Tongue is my own; as he may say, It Is
the Devils: And being Set on Fire of Hell, it is plain, what and where a Torment
is intended for it. Being thus Warned of them, Oh! Steer clear of the Rocks,
where you see the Breakers before you!

At the same time, when, Oh! when, will the Sea no longer have cause to say of
Wisdom, It is not in me! And complain that they who follow the Sea, will so
Madly as they do, abandon themselves, and let their Souls drive to the Courses
of Self-destruction! Poor Sailours, Will you never hearken to the Voice of
Wisdom? Always be Madmen, and with Madness in your Hearts go to the Dead? Never
become a Pious, a Sober, a Serious, and a Prudent Generation? Let the Condition
of these Poor Men help you to receive Instruction and acquaint your Hearts with
Wisdom. In their Condition you see, that if you go on still in your Trespasses
a Provoked GOD can by the Hands of Sea Monsters, which through His Curse upon you
do Increase and Multiply, and become the Terror of them that haunt the Sea,
bring sore plagues upon you: And even one of these Leviathans have a permission
to pillage no less than Four Hundred Vessels of you. Yea, and what is
infinitely worse; In their Condition you see what you may be left unto: And how
far, if you remain Incorrigible in your evil ways, the Justice of GOD may give
you up to the Lusts of your own Hearts, and leave you to do those things, which
may bring a fearful End upon you, that once you little imagined. Oh! What may
you come to!

My Friends; Be Admonished by these things; And, Be wise.

But while I am addressing the poor Sailours, and beseeching them, that they
would not let the Devil, who is the worst of Masters, enslave them, nor have
their Names in the Book of, The Wicked one, I would presume upon an Address to
the Masters of our Vessels, that they would not be too like the Devil, in their
Barbarous Usage of the Men that are under them, and lay them under Temptations
to do Desperate Things. We allow, Syrs, That you must be Commanders aboard, and
you must keep a strict Hand over your Men; and you may, as Times go, too often
have occasions for Severities; But still, there must be no room for
Barbarities. Our best Commanders find they can do without such Things. The Men
must be used as Rational Creatures. Yea, Masters, you must Remember your MEN,
-- Don't you call 'em so? -- They are your Brethren. And you would certainly
find it so, that with a Merciful Usage of your Men, if you wisely maintain the
Exercises of PIETY aboard your Vessels, and be yourselves bright Examples of
it, your GOD, and the Conscience that speaks from and for Him in your Men,
would be on your side, and your Authority would be sufficiently Established.

I Conclude. And, Hear this, O all ye People, every one of you! You cannot be
secured from the Inexpressible, the Incomprehensible Infelicity of, Dying
without Wisdom, if you do not immediately come into a fixed RESOLUTION, for
that which is, The Beginning of Wisdom: Resolved for the Fear of God, and a
Life of Religion. Oh! Be not so Exceeding Mad, any of you, as to remain
Unresolved, whether the Glorious GOD be not worthy of a perpetual Homage from
you; whether a Gracious REDEEMER have not such Things to do for you, as are
worth your looking to Him for; whether the Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly
places, are not rather to be chosen, than a Devouring Fire, and Everlasting
Burnings! Will our young People, be so wise now, as to Consider their Latter
End! We read of such a Thing as that; Prove. 1.4. Giving to the young Man
Discretion. The word for, Discretion, there, may be rendered, Thoughtfulness.
Oh! That our young People would be so Discrete as to be more Thoughtful than
they often are! Oh! that they might be able to say, I thought on my ways, and I
turned my Feet unto the ways, whereto GOD has born His Testimonies. And,
Children, I now more particularly Demand your Thoughts on two Questions, in the
Catechism for Conscience, which continually comes upon you.

I demand it of you, whether you are sure of any more Time to get Wisdom, than
this very Moment, before you die? GOD has taught you an Answer to this Question;
Prove. 7.5. Boast not thy self of Tomorrow; for thou know not what a Day may
bring forth.

I demand it of you, whether if you die without Wisdom, your Folly will not be
inexcusable, your Horror intolerable, your Torture insupportable? God has
taught you an Answer to this Question; Heb. 10.31. It is a fearful thing to
fall into the Hands of the Living GOD.

I hope it is no longer a matter of Suspense with you; But you are come to a
point, Great God, Through thy CHRIST I desire to live unto thee.

The short SERMON occasioned by the Condition of these Miserables, is thus
finished. What remains, is,

The EXECUTION.
AND now, speedily, that is to say, On Tuesday, the Sentence against the Evil
Works of these Men, must be executed. One of the Four, namely, Condick, was
Reprieved. As for Fly, he had been all along, a most uncommon and amazing
Instance of Impenitency and Stupidity, and what Spectacles of Obduration the
Wicked will be, when they have by a course of Wickedness under and against
Warnings, provoked the GOD of Heaven to withold His Influences from them. The
Sullen and Raging Mood, into which he fell, upon his being first Imprisoned,
caused him to break forth into furious Execrations, and Blasphemies too hideous
to be mentioned; and not eat one morsel of any thing, but subsist only upon a
little Drinking, for almost all the remaining part of his Life. He declined
appearing in the Public Assemblies, on the Lord's Day, with the other Prisoners,
to be under the appointed means of Grace, because, forsooth, he would not have
the Mob to gaze upon him. He seemed all along ambitious to have it said, That
he died a brave fellow* He passed along to the place of Execution, with a
Nosegay in his hand, and making his Complements, where he thought he saw
occasion. Arriving there, he nimbly mounted the Stage, and would fain have put
on a Smiling Aspect. He reproached the Hangman, for not understanding his
Trade, and with his own Hands rectified matters, to render all things more
Convenient and Effectual.

When he was called upon, to Speak what he should judge proper to be spoken on
that sad occasion, at least for the Warning of Survivers, he only said, That he
would advise the Masters of Vessels to carry it well to their Men, lest they
should be put upon doing as he had done.

At the same time, he declared his obstinate Refusal, to Forgive the Person
that had been the Instrument of bringing him to Justice. When the Necessity of
that Charity was urgently pressed upon him; and advantage taken from a Recital
of the Lords-Prayer used among the Devotions of the Criminals on the present
Occasion, to urge it; he still persisted in his Unrelenting Frame; and an
Expression of that Importance was in the last words, he Expired withal. But it
was observed and is affirmed, by some Spectators, that in the Midst of all his
affected Bravery, a very sensible Trembling attended him; His hands and his
Knees were plainly seen to Tremble. -- And so we must leave him for the
Judgment to come.

The other Two, Cole and Greenville, had much greater Signs of Repentance upon
them. They made their Prayers, and seemed continually praying, and much
affected. They desired the Spectators to take Warning by them. And they
mentioned Profane Swearing and Cursing, with Drunkenness and Sabbath-breaking,
as Crimes which were now particularly grievous to them. They also justified the
Court, as well as acknowledged the Justice of the Glorious GOD, in the
Punishment they were now brought unto.

A Minister present having made a Pertinent and Pathetic Prayer, the Officer,
willing that all that was possible might be done for their good, after some
time, asked them, whether they would have another Prayer. Fly did not accept
the offer, but said, If the other Two be Ready, I am! However, the other Two
desiring it, another such prayer was made by another Minister; and after that,
another by a Third; with which they joined attentively. (while Fly looked about
him unconcerned.)

Then the Execution was finished; And Fly's Carcass hanged in Chains, on an
Island, at the Entrance into Boston-Harbour.

Cole, being one that could use his Pen, did on the Morning before his
Execution, give out a Paper, in which he Lamented his early accustoming of
himself to Profane Swearing; and Blasphemous Language; and Excessive Drinking;
and his frequent stealing of Liquors from his Master, for the Satisfaction of
them who hired him to do it. He added his bitter Lamentations, that when he
came to Man's Estate, he abandoned himself to criminal Pleasures, to Drinking,
Dancing, Whoring, and the rest. He begged all Sea-faring-Men to take Warning by
his Ignominious and Miserable Death; to which he was now brought, by the
Enticements of the Wicked. He confessed himself to be justly Condemned; and
gave abundance of Thanks, for the Assistance of Good Ministers, and the
wholesome Instructions and holy Directions they had given him, and and
expressed his Hope of entering into Heaven, by the Blood of His Glorious
Redeemer. And he earnestly desired, that this Paper might be published to the
World.

The poor Man, in the Prison, had owned unto a Minister, That from the Moment
of the Murders on Board, he never had a minutes Quiet in his Mind, but was
continually Meditating how to run away from the whole World, and if it were
possible run away from himself. The Apprehension of his having some Intention
to knock the Vessel on the Head, and perhaps the Captain, caused them, for some
Days before Mr. Atkinson's happy Revolution, to lay him in Irons, and every Day
cruelly to bestow more than an Hundred Lashes upon him; whereof he continued
Sore to his Death. He now saw the Glorious GOD, beginning to Execute on him His
Vengeance, by the Hands of his own Bloody Companions: And he endured such
Miseries, as made him look upon his forlorn Circumstances in the Boston-Gaol,
as a sort of a Deliverance. It was there endeavored, that this Construction of
his Miseries might be set home upon him. However, it was admirable to see, how
the Vengeance of GOD, sometimes makes Aceomplices in Sin, horrible Scourges to
one another!

It was a Saying of the Orientals, Happy is he, who corrects his Faults by the
Faults of others. And now, Happy would our Seafaring People particularly be,
if the Crimes and the Ends of some whom they have seen Drowned in Perdition,
might effectually cause them to beware of the Faults. with which they may any
of them charge themselves.

Upon those words used unto Achan just before his Execution, The Lord shall
trouble them THIS DAY; the Jews have a Charitable Fancy, That on THAT DAY, he
saw an end of all his Trouble; and that in the world to come he shall have no
further Trouble, but be found among the Penitent and the Pardoned. With the
Malefactors, who die Penitent and Pardoned, it will be so; But the Infallible
Judgment of who are so, is what none but GOD the Judge of all, can determine.

FINIS.

