Dr. Mather 's DIRECTIONS FOR A Candidate OF THE MINISTRY.

Manuductio ad Ministerium. DIRECTIONS FOR A Candidate OF THE MINISTRY.
Wherein, FIRST, a Right FOUNDATION is laid for his Future Improvement; And,
THEN, RULES are Offered for such a Management of his Academical and Preparatory
STUDIES; And thereupon, For such a CONDUCT after his APPEARANCE in the World;
as may Render him a SKILFUL and USEFUL MINISTER of the GOSPEL.

Nunquam meum, Juvante CHRISTO, ^ilebit Eloquium; legant, qui volunt; qui
nolunt, abjiciant.

Hieronym. BOSTON, Printed for Thomas Hancock, and Sold at his Shop in
Ann-Street, near the Drawbridge. 1726.

Studiosae Juventuti, In ACADEMIIS, Imprimis GLASCUENSI; Deinde NOVANGLICANIS;
Nec non in Anglia NONCONFORMISTARUM intra privatos Parietes Coactis; Timorem
DOMINI; Atque inde Salutem in DOMINO.
EVIGILATE tandem, O Terrae nimis inhiantes, et adhaerentes, atque Terrena
tantum Sapientes Animae, Evigilate; et per DEI Tubam jam Septimam
expergefactae, ad Opus DEI atque Diei assurgite: Vecique clamantis in Deserto
attendite.

Audite haec omnes Populi, Auscultate omnes Orbis habitatores. Nam, DEUS
Dominus Omnipotens elocutus, Terram advocat; Veniet sane DEUS noster, et non
silebit; Ignis coram eo consumet, et circa eum Tempestas erit valde procellosa.

Orbis Rector ad nos Rediens, Praecursores qui sui Reditus Appropinquationem et
Accelerationem indicabunt est Legaturus; et antequam Dies JEHOVAE Maximus et
maxim Verendus veniat, missurus est ELIAM, vel Spiritu et Virtute illius
imbutos Viros, qui alta Voce de Domino ad nos properante, se Boanerges
praebuerint.

Quemvis DEI Servum, qui Vigilantius et non Dormitantius nominari vellet,
oportet hoc Elianum obire Officium.

Et si ELIAE cuidam in magna quae per cunctas totius Orbis Regiones audiretur
Tuba Vocem emittendi facultas concederetur, hoc sane Classico nos e Veterno
nostro evocaret; SECUNDUS DOMINI CHRISTI ADVENIUS, ad Antichristi Excidium, et
Imperii illius Quarti quod Illustri suo Adventu aboliturus est, Perditionem,
est Proximo, imo et Illico, expectandus.

At sie praedicanti, non Mirandum est si perpauci sint qui Fidem adhibuerint;
et si Tibicinum Clangores et Labores Querela comitetur, -- Domine, Quis nostrae
Praedicationi credit?

Quum enim Dominus advenerit, Mundum vera ac vivida Fide (ipsius praecipue
Adventus) paene Wacuum; et cum Caelestibus Aquilis et Angelis Descensurus, quid
aliud quam quasi Cadaver in hujus Mundi Spiritu, et Moribus, et Amoribus misere
patrefactum, totam sere Ecclesiam inveniet!

In media jam sumus Nocte, qua Clamore illo, quo nil magis Tempestivum, Sponsus
advenit, Ecclesia in utramque Aurem Dormiens est excitanda. At Clamor ille,
Advenit Sponsus, vel millies repetitus, pro Excitatione vel unius inter Decies
mill vix aliquid efficiet; post vehementissimas ejusdem Repetitiones, vix
aliter quam in Aures Desunctorum, Conclamatum est.

Quum his Nunciis ac Monitis Fratres ego meos alte Sopitos, ad mollem suum, at
quidem Lethargicum et Lethalem Somnum excutiendum suscitare vellem, scio me
meis instar Loti cujusdam, Vanum Somniatorem visum fore; atque tanquam
Jocabundum ac Ludibundum et nescio quo Enthusiasmo Epilepticum hominem, eos me
tractaturos; et ut sopor eos magis placidus compeditos teneat, variis in
Vaticinia quaedam ut non adhuc impleta Commentationibus, quasi Narcoticis
quibusdam Pharmacis usuros.

Ast in Animo meo est hic DEI Sermo quasi Ignis ardens Ossibus meis inclusus,
nec amplius ego sustinere valeam, quin Iterum Iterumque hoc Fatum Terrae satis
Ignibus paratae, et Veneficae flammis damnatae, denunciem. Imo et si Nero
aliquis me illam ob causam Igne cremari jusserit, Mundi per Ignem tamen
Dissolutionem et Reformationem et Emundationem, intenta Voce praedicare atque
praedicere, non cessabo.

Cum Igne flammante cito, at quis novit quam cito! -- descensurus DEI FILIUS,
iis qui DEUM nesciunt, et Evangelio ejus non auscultant, infliget Ultionem;
suum vero in Terra, Secundo atque Caelesti nostro Adamo possidenda, patefaciet
Regnum Sanctorum, quod nobis repromissum, sed alio Statu, utpote post
Resurrectionem, confitemur.

Totam contra Sacram Scripturam ac Sanam Rationem, Inani, ne dicam Insano,
indulgent Insomnio, qui prius promissam Ecclesiae in Terra Felicitatem fore
putant, ac petunt, ac sperant, quam Dominus JESUS in Regno suo apparuerit.
Proculdubio, Regna Mundi non fient Regna DEI et CHRISTI, ante Praestitutum
Tempus Mortuorum, quo DEI Servis ac Nomen ejus timentibus, Praemium tribuetur.

In Terra nova, non in Maculata atque Maledicta Terra nostra, Sanctorum
Requies, Promissumque Sabbathum, et Regnum DEI in quo fiet Voluntas ejus in
Terra sicut et in Caelo, atque Magnalia illa de quibus DEUS per Os Prophetarum
suorum omnium quasi uno Ore Prophetantium locutus est, omnia sua confirmabuntur
Adimpletione.

Recte quidem illustrissimi in Concilio Niceno Patres, Terram nostram non aliam
quam Terram Morientium, verum Terram novam illi pronunciabant, cum amaeno
nostro Psalte, Terram Viventium: His additis, Tali Concilio ac Aeterno Marmore
et Memoria dignissimis Verbis; Praescivit DEUS quod Homo esset peccaturus;
Idcirco novos Caelos et novam Terram expectamus juxta Sacras Literas, ubi nobis
apparuerit Adventus et Regnum DEI magni et Salvatoris nostri JESU CHRISTI; et
tum accipient Regnum Sancti excelsi. Haec fuit Ecclesiae Primitivae Sententia;
Haec Pietas et Prisca Fides! In hac Fide, Te, Justine, appello Testem, in
Primitiva Ecclesia Omnes Omnino Orthodoxi Consentiebant. Et in qua quaeso,
Terra donanda est eorum qui CHRISTI et ipsorum Hosts vicerunt Coroha! In qua,
quaeso, Terra Victores cum eo Triumphantes, Bono JEHOVAE sunt fruituri!

Ast, Horror vos afficia^, O Zionis Peccatores, Tremor vos Corripiat, O
Hypocritae; In Ardoribus illius Ignis, quo Terram quidem Nostram DEUS Judex et
Vindex expiabit, ac Terram illam Novam introducet, quis vestrum diversari
valeat aut audeat?

In illo, quam Horrendo, quam Tremendo! Die, secundum Divina, et Sethi Columnis
multo stabiliora, ac nunquam in dubium vocanda Oracula, Caeli cum Stridore
preteribunt Elementa aestuantia liquescent, atque Terra et quae in ^a fiunt
Opera, exurentur. O! Quam Terribilis ille Magnus Domini Dies, cujus non solum
in Bibliis a DEO inspiratis, ubique sonant resonant que Praedictiones, verum
etiam ad Paganos penetravit Rumor, ipsos: que Stoicos perturbavit; -- Affore
Tempus, Quo Mare, quo Tellus, correptaque Regia Caeli
Ardeat, et Mundi moles Operosa laboret:
Et cujus Terrores exiguam quandam Umbrellulam, et non magis quam vere
minutissimam Imaginem, in Vesuvii Eruptionibus minacissimis, et Siciliae
absorptis et in Gehennam demersis Urbibus, adhuc habuerunt.

Fatentur permulti quidem, quod cum occisa suerit Bestia quae jam Gentes
decipit et mancipat Romana, Corpus illius Bestiae, Ignis Iacondio tradendum,
eoque perdendum fuerit: Et Sacerdotis Filia, quae Scortando se presanavit,
Vivicomburio peribit. Sed Metaphoricum Omnino fore hoc in^dium augurantur, ac
Pictos, mirum si non et Ficlus, tantum hariolantur Ignes. Vanissimum Augurium!
Quid? Et ipse secundus Domini Adventus mox suturus est, si placet,
Metaphoricus, et in Mysticas nescio quas Dispensationes resolvendus et
evanidus! Apagete, Talia Tremulorum Deliramenta!

Inundationis illius, de qua Justitiae praeco Noachus olim suae Aetatis impios
commonefecit, incredulis Derisoribus, quanta cum Commiseratione respondere
Venerandus Patriarcha potuit; Noveritis, Miseri; non Metaphoricas Undas vos
Obruituras! Aquas Literales vobis tandem et statim sentietis exitiales! Ab
Aquis in Litera intelligendis et infligendis brevi vestri andientur Gemitus!
Neque in extremis his nostris Diebus, -- Deus bone, in quae nos reserv^sti
Tempora! -- Irrisores, qui omnia sicut adhuc ab initio Creationis, ita semper
permansura opinantur, sub suis Metaphoris delitescere, et se Figurarum umbris,
a Conspectu illius qui Throno insidet, occultare queant.

Non Irrisoribus quidem, sed Somniantibus tamen, et aliorum Somnum
Conciliantibus, annumerandi s^nt, optimi Viri quam plurimi, qui improprie nimis
Allegorizando, Veritatem Tenebris ac Injuriis afficiunt. Et hos Perdilectos in
CHRISTO Fratres quam humilime monere, vel rogare et orare vellem, ut per
secundas Cogitationes melius edocti, non suo Carmine Soporem laffis in Gramine
inducere ulterius pergerent. Utinam sane quod N^pos quidam ad hos Allegoristas
Confutandos, ante quam ^vintus hoc saciat, assurgeret.

Sed Eventus hoc faciet! Imo, Diluvium Ignis hec saciet.

Propinquus est ille Dies JEHOVAE, propinquus et valde festinus; Dies Furoris,
Dies Angustiae, Dies Vastitatis, et quidem Vastissimae; Dies Buccinae et
Clangoris; Quum Igne Zeli ipsius consumetur tota haec Terra; Nam Consummationem
utique acceleratam, cum omnibus hujus Terrae habitatoribus est confecturus.

Peractis jam Omnibus Antichristi Excidium antecessuris, et exactis qui isti
Adversario permittendi fuerint Mill Ducentis ac Sexaginta Di^bus, instat
omnium Dierum Terminus; Finis instat; Instat ille Finis; Ecce, Instat! Prope
adest periodus illa; imo, et caepit jam Seculum, in quo Vates Desideratissimus
Redemptorem sentiet suo Desiderio annuentem, et in Sort sua ad illa perveniet,
pro quibus Beatus est qui praestolabitur; prope adest ille Dierum Terminus, et
non diu differendus. Mora Finis in Ecclesiae Precibus diutius, neque petenda,
neque optanda: Non; sed, Veni, Domine JESU, Veni cito! Cur tardat redire Currus
tuus? Cur incessus Curruum tuorum differunt?

His et hujusmodi ^triusque in Divino Codice Testamenti Vaticiniis premoniti,
parum vero premuniti, sed in Somno potius alto S^pulti, sumus. Ideoque sicut
Fur in Nocte, veniet ille Dies Domini: At ubi sunt illi Vigiles DEI Servi quos
non intercipiet secum secure Cantantes, Tarda^ venire Dominus!

Quum Filius DEI, qui et Filius Hominis, ut Signum in Caelo conspicietur,
quantis Angoribus et Plangoribus replebitur Flammis devastanda Terra; quae
JESUM Nubibus Equitantem, Solieque a quo prodibit Fluvius Ignis insidentem, et
Angelos Millies Mill, Myriadasque Myriadum illi Ministrantes atque
Assistentes, attonita Contemplabitur!

Mittet ille tum suos Angelos, ut Electos ex Omnibus Terrae Partibus
convocatos, e Flammis his quam formidandis eripiant; Quos in Corruptissimo
Mundi Statu, ubi suam Viam Omnis jam caro Corruperit, et in medio pravarum et
perversarum Gentium, CHRISTO obsequentes, et in ambulando cum DEO suo se
humiliantes, Thesaurosque sibi in Caelis recondentes, atque pro Redemptione
Signatos, deprehenderint.

Gens illa Justorum, TERRAM Novam, quae Paradisus Renovata fiet, in qua
regnabit Justitia, extinctis tandem Ignibus, occupabit. Atque a Peccato, Mortis
Fabro, facti immunes, et in Immortalitatem immutati, sicut Adam cum Eva sua,
Restituta Paradiso, non Cerinthiaco, sed Paradisiaco, ideoque Sanctissimo More
ac Modo, fruituri, Vineas plantabunt et Fructum earum comedent: Benedictum a
JEHOVA semen erunt, et cum ipsis prognati eorum; A Servitute ac Vanitate, cui
Creaturae jam subjectae pro Liberate Filiorum DEI suspirant a^que parturiunt,
Liberati.

Eodem Tempore, Sancti qui ante Adventum Domini Morientes et in eo Dormientes,
in illo nobis jam dilucescente Die, cum Domino adducti resurgent, in CAELIS
Novis, ac Civitate DEI ibi Elevata et Separata, cum Domino, (...), et in
quibusdam Circumstantiis Terrae Novae Incolis forsan Superiores, et, si sic
dicere liceat, Spiritualiores, in Administratione Regni Caelestis, cujus Terra
Nova tum seeds est futura, Ministerio velut Angelico fungentes, et ut res
postulabit in illo Die, sicut hodie Angeli, subinde descensuri, Commorabuntur.

Haec est illa, quam hodie justo DEI Judicio, Epicureismo qui pro Enthusiasmo
omnia Scripturaria vilipendit, fascinati et fasciati amisimus, antiqua Spes
Fidelium: Et solius hujus open Schematis, in Oraculorum quae nunquam fallunt,
post Varia, pro Aliis Explicationibus Interpretum Tentamina, Veram
Interprecationem, fas est accedere. Scrutamini Scripturas, O Acutiss;imi earum
Interpretes, quorum Accuratissimo Examini haec exploranda profero. Quaerite e
Libro JEHOVAE, et legite; et ne Expositiones vestrae huic Schemati non
consentaneae, fiant Stipula in Flammis comburenda, metuatis. At si quae
diximus, vera sunt illa, pondus habent, quam stupendum! Voce velut Leonis
rugientis, et quasi septem Tonitrua locuta fuerint, sunt publicanda.

Necessarium jam est, et Omnino congruum, ut convertantur DEO, et Uniantur
CHRISTO, illi quorum Nomina sunt in Libro Vitae conscripta, atque hoc modo sint
parati ut fiant hujus Gloriae idonei participes, illi quos DEUS noverit, atque
ex hoc Mundo ad se vocaverit. Necesse est, ut Regeneratione quadam Caelesti e
Morte ad Vitam transferantur, atque DEO in hoc Saeculo vivant, qui in Fine
Saeculi a Morte reviviscent, et suas in Caelis novis habentes Mansiones, Reges
erunt Sacerdotii Stolis candidis et splendidis amicti, Sacerdotes Regio
Diademate insigniti; et super Te^ram regnabunt. Necesse est, ut in Agro Domini
semine^ur ac oriatur Triticum, a Zizaniis been distinguendum, et a Serpentis
Progeny, iisque qui ab Igne quem Domino adventante incipientem et incensum
videbunt, servari ejulantes, hoc Fulmine ab Ore Altitonantis JESU percussi
fuerint, Abite a me Execrati in Aeternum Ignem, et quos Messores in Fornacem
Igneum DEI jussu conjicient, plane ac plene ac palam dividendum; atque ita
Terra nova illis qui vivi in Reditu Domini reperiantur, et in Occursum Domini
rapiantur, Cultoribus in Terram rursus demissis, nunquam vero morituris,
gaudeat.

Minister verbi es? Hoc age! Suadendi per te sunt Auditotes tui, et O Te terque
quaterque Beatum, si persuaseris! -- ut in PIETATEM seriam ac sinceram
attracti, habeantur digni qui effugiant ista omnia quae futura sunt, quum Dies
ille qui Fornacis instar ardebit, omnes qui in superficie totius Terrae
habitant, sicut Laqueus invaserit; et coram DEO Incarnato et Inthronisato
laetabundi consistant. Nullum tibi, praeter hoc, Negotium demandatum. Hic
Labor, hoc Opus est, in quo perpetuo desudaveris.

Christianus es? Precibus, et non Oculorum quidem (quibus in Primitiva quondam
Ecclesia) sed Mentis Fide prospicientis, Vigiliis; atque moderato ac temperato
Mundanorum Appetitu, usuque sobrio, caveas ne Repentinus et Inopinatus Domini
Adventus, te incommode intercipiat.

Imo, cum Expectatione preparate et properate, O Dilecti, ad Felicem Domini
Adventum; et quum haec expectetis, ut Incontaminati et Inculpati ab eo
inveniamini in Pace, studeatis.

Breviter; Colligenda est ECCLESIA.

Ad Ecclesiam vero Colligendam, quam Necessarii sunt Fideles Evangelii
Ministri; qui sicut Angeli medio Caelo volantes, et Evangelio Aeterno armati,
Aridis in Convalle Ossibus Verba salvifica et vivifica annunciarent?

Verum ad producendos et poliendos Verbi Divini Mirustros, quam necessariae
sunt Academiae; per quas Angeli quibus Tubae Templi committuntur ad Clangendum
se accingere potuerint?

Novit hoc Redemptoris nostri, ac Religionis Hostis, qui per Mill Technas
potestati suae subjicere Academias, ubique et nimio cum successu molitur.

Fateridum est, et nunquam satis dolendum atque plorandum, quod in plerisque
hujus Mundi Academiis, nil praeter Mundanam Sapientiam acquiratur. Philosophia
in illis tradita est mera Morosophia; et, Nomen (vel saltem Notitia) CHRISTI
non est ibi; Absque quo Cuncta Sapientia est mera Stultitia. Discuntur permulta
mox dediscenda. Quae docentur plerumque sunt, Apinae, tricaeque, aut si quid
vilius istis.

Quid prodest Linguarum Cognitio, ubi Been Loquentes non illas ut ad Been
Faciendum Instrumenta, et Cognitionis utilioris Vehicula, adhibeant? Verum haec
non Realium sed Nominalium jactata peritia, Philologos his plumis indutos,
tantum inflatos reddit, ac inaniter tumefactos?

Quid valent Caeca, et forsan Falsa, vulgaris Logicae Sophismata, ut Ratio
acuatur et adjuvetur, et e Fodinis Veritas effodiatur? De Logica in qua
permulti cum Ratione insaniunt, Nemo rectius cum Ratione praescribit et
praecipit, quam Focanus noster, dicendo; De hac Philosophiae part merito
dixerim, quod ille olim de tota Philosophia; Philosophare, sed Paucis. Quid
valent Ethnica Ethicae Deliria, ut per fallacem et fucatam Virtutem, ad
Beatitudinem imaginariam, nobis in ipsis, non in DEO, sed et absque CHRISTO,
perducamur? Non quidem Amplexanda sed potius Execranda est ista Ethica quae eo
tendit ut simus, quod Antiquitus de quibusdam conquestum est, Sine CHRISTO
Christiani. Quid valent Metaphysicae Scholasticorum Disputationes plusquam
inanes, quibus Aranearum in Cerebris Humanis texuntur telae, et Altercationes
in Tenebris per non tam Subtiles quam Futiles Distinctiones in Infinitum
foveantur? Optime quidem a Rege Sueciae, optimo Reformationis Amico, Gustavo
Adolpho, factum, quum Omnes Metaphysicas e Regno suo expulit, et exulare
Jussit. Quis est ille Fumivendulus Aristoteles, cujus Jugo Brutorum instar sua
Colla submiserunt, in Occidente diu, et in Orient adhuc, Animae quae se tamen
Rationales appellari volunt? Certissimum, quod ab Aliis praeter Melancthonem,
observatum est, Quo quis magis Aristotelicus eo minus Christianus.

Ast, quod maxim deflendum est, per non Ver^ tantum, sed et Boni amissionem,
imo ab eo Aversionem, Academiae quamplurimae, quae quasi Cubicula in Atriis
Domini esse debeant, rebus prosanis, ac malignis, et for as ejiciendis
polluuntur: Imo foeda fiunt Satanae Prostibula, Gehennaeque Seminaria;
Daemoniorum Domicilia, Spiritus omnis impuri, omnisque immundae et exosae
volucris Custodiae. Acerrimi pugnacissimique contra PIETATEM et pro Diabolo
Milites, in his Academiis educantur; et nequissimi totius Orbis Corruptores,
per earum nimirum Corruptionem, ex his Arcibus educuntur. Hae sunt Academiae,
quas Lutherus pronunciavit, Cathedras Pestilentiae, et Antichristi Luminaria.
Atque hinc, ex ore Draconis, et ex ore Bestiae, Spiritus impuri, tanquam Ranae,
prodeuntes, ad Reges et Procer^ et Populos abeunt, et ad praeliandum contra
DEUM Omnipotentem, caecutientes impellunt atque illaqueant.

Sat Miser sane fuit Academiarum status in sexto, atque plus miser in septimo,
post CHRISTUM Saeculo; quum cuncta funditus periit Eruditio, non tantum in tota
occidentali Romani Imperii part, sed et per omnes etiam orientales Regiones;
et Gentium florentissimas Romani Imperii Provincias occupantium insanda
Barbary, Scholae, suerunt omnes deletae. Imo et ipsi Caesares Magistris Artium
Liberalium constituta stipendia in omnibus Urbibus ita sustulerint, ut illas
vacantibus Literarum studiis, lugenda atque pudenda Rusticitas ubique
invaserit. Certum est, et horribile dictu; praeter exiguas Reliquias
Constantinopoli superstites, in Christiano Orb Scholam Illustrem nullum ullibi
post Mahumedis Tempora memorari; Et illas etiam Saeculi octavi initio, an vero
illo quo in Historiis quibusdam narratur modo, Incertum, fuisse extirpatas. At
Academiarum quamplurimarum quibus Literae jam resuscitatae vigent, infaelix et
infaustus, imo et long miserrimus adhuc status, ubi nihil praeter Nequitiam
armatam colatur; nihil praeter purae et incontaminatae Religionis Odium; atque
talem in Conscientias Tyrannidem exercendi libidinem, quae Ecclesiasticos
homines, in Reges aequiores qui istorum Violentiam iniquissimam cohibere et
refraenare audeant, perfide et proditorie insurgere, provocat atque accendit.

Academias ex his Ruinis eruere, et in Scholas erigere, ubi Mortalium vere
erudiantur Immortales Animae, et Salutaris DEI CHRISTI que Notitia, in qua
verissima Animarum consistit Eruditio, proponatur ac propagetur; Et Linguarum
Arriumque Laudabilium Scientia fiat, PIETATIS Ministra, et in DEI CHRISTIque
Gloriam Consecrata; Egregium hoc esset Molimen, et Viris ad Summum Dignitatis
Fastigium evehendis, maxim dignum.

In Academia Fredericiana, quae apud Hallenses floret ac fnlget, et quae
cunctis in Orb Academiis, tanquam Exemplar atque Norma praelucere debet, hoc
factum est: A Domino, ut et pro Domino, fac^um, et in Oculis nostris, ad quos
in America remotos Rei fama pervenit, Mirabile!

Aliquid pro hoc Instituto est in hoc Libellulo tentatum; Et, Est aliquid
tentasse! Grande hoc Tenues conamur: Sed ne frustra, et irrito conatu,
vehementer vereor.

Quam indignus et ineptus ego sim, qui huic Optimo Instituto aliquid conferrem,
ut Juvenilia Academicorum Ingenia, in rectam deducantur, Primo PIETATIS, ac
deinde Literaturae fructuosioris Viam, et ex Academiis tales egrediantur,
quales in manu sua Dominus tanquam Gemmas nitore suo coruscantes contineat
a^que exhibeat; non ignoro. Parvulus ego sum, et forsan paucis notus
homunculus: Minimus Doctorum Omnium, et merito infimus; ac de Eccesia been
meritorum (si Tertullianice loquar) Postremissimus. Tenuitatis meae conscius,
probe novi quam sit mihi curta supellex; Norunt et Omnes Novangli: Et qui me
Academicos alloquendi prorsus incapacem censent, Recte et mecum judicant.
Nullum esse me fateor, et ab Omnibus Nullificari, nec indignor, nec recuso:
Attamen Desideria mea pro erudiendis Juvenum animis exponendi Venia, cur et
mihi non concedatur, nullus video. Imo in Publico quo pleraeque periclitantur
Academiae Discrimine Omnis homo miles est. Et si ego etiam cum Doctioribus et
Melioribus, ad propulsandum commune Periculum, et promovendam Ecclesiarum
Incolumitatem et Edificationem, concurram, velpost illos curram; Ignoscant mihi
Commilitones. Est etiam non omnino Impossible, quod Minutius quidam,
quamplurimorum, quae post Fata tandem quiescet, Invidia Infaelix et perpetuo
impetitus, habeat nihilominu. Fautores atque Lectores, et forsan plures quam
ipse, de se semper suspicax, recenseat, quibus non ingrata sint illius talia
qualiae pro causa DEI Studia. Quum in Volumine Sacro, de Serpente Tortuoso per
Dei manum formato fiat mentio, nil praeter ipsam Galaxiam qua caelum decoratur,
quidam intelligunt. Est et hoc inter Noctis nostrae, ut ita dicam, Humanitates,
et Hallucinationes, quod idem ipse, His quidem Serpens Tortuosus, His vero
Candore ac Splendore ac Caelestibus Virtutibus referta Galaxia, appareat.

Quapropter, Vade, Liber; Et si fis Incultus, ad Excolendam tamen Academicam
Juventutem, quam queas confer Opem. Et si Perficere aliquid Magnum nequeas;
dicere, Faciebam, sufficiat. Interea DEUS indignissimo tuo Scriptori dicer,
Servus tu meus es, et Opus tuum erit penes Deum tuum: Imo et Labor tuus non
erit omnino frustranaeus.

In hoc Tractatulo, quem FILIO meo Unico imprimis consignaveram, Omnibus vero
Prophetatum Filiis jam communicarem, quid Propositum saltem, si non et
Praestitum sit, verbulo indicabo.

Scopus noster, et quod Votis maxim prosequimur, est pro formandis Evangelii
MINISTRIS, qui sint Ecclesiae Decus ac Tutamen, CHRISTIque Gloria.

Quocirca Primo Fundamentum nunquam diruendum vel deserendum statuimus, Praeter
quod nemo potest aliud Statuere, Vividae illius PIETATIS, qua si sint
Concionatores destituti, qui atra incedunt Vest, mera fuerint Cymbala
tinnientia, et eorum Doctrina omnis atque Professio futura est mera
Sepulchrorum Dealbatio. Quum ad Praedicandum Evangelium Apostoli mittendi
fuerint, Pedes eorum SOSPITATOR noster Benignissimus lavare dignatus est. Hi
Praedicatores a CHRISTO et cum Illo euntes, quid aliud Ipsi fuerint quam quasi
Pedes Domini Scipionem suae potentiae e Zione emissuri? Lavandi sunt hi Pedes;
Et ad Sanctuarii Opus nullus quidem Illotus, vel non pro veritate et per eam
Sanctificatus, est admittendus. Et vos etiam, Dilecti Juvenes, a quibus
Diabolus cupit se ornari, non minus Lavandi estis ut sitis Ter-sancti
REDEMPTORIS Ministri, et Pedes pacem super montem Evangelizantium quam
Speciosi! Et ad Vasa JEHOVAE Portanda been purgati. En, pro Vestra Ablutione,
Lavacrum Evangelicum! Lavate vos, et Purificate, et Malignitatem amovete!
Proximo ac Secundo quidem Loco, contendimus ut plantae Olearum quae Mensam jam
nostram circumstant, non solum in Viros Bonos, verum etiam in Viros Magnos
Evadant. Ideoque Optimae, raro Observatae, rariusque Usitatae, bonas Horas been
collocandi Rations demonstrantur. Juvenum Studiis Regulae dantur atque Monita
Salutaria Libri qui sint maxim. Legendi, et in pretio habendi, meritis cum
Laudibus indigitantur: Istorum vero quos oportet inter Libros prohibitos
numerari, quibusdam Notae quas meruerunt sunt inustae. In Ministerium Juvenes
mox promoti, his paginis instruuntur, ut fiant, Sal Terrae, Lux Mundi; In
Templo DEI Lumina et Columina; imo et ipsi, Templa Gloria et CHRISTO DEI
repleta; Ad Omne bonum Opus praeparati; in Domini sui Domo probi prudentesque
Dispensatores; Qui non Erubescant Operarii; Chrysostomi, et Insignes Animarum
tractandarum Artifices: Basilii, et qui associata dabunt, in dicendo Fulmina,
in Vivendo Fulgura; In sincero Sermonis Lacte distillando melliflui semper
Lactantii; Augustini et Prosperi, Divinae Gratiae potentissimi Assertores;
Verbo, Timothei, et Pastores qui servabunt seipses, et illos qui se audierint.
Ministerii tales Candidati ita instructi, e Scholis exeuntes, velut Angeli qui
Caelesti Lumine totam undique Terram redderent irradiatam, e Caelis descendere
videantur.

His Vos Eubulum hortantem consiliis, Audite Senem, [Qui Sexagesimum Tertium
jam agit Annum,] Juvenes, quem Juvenem [Quum Septendecim tantum Annos egisset]
Senes audierunt. Audite, saltem, qui vinculis nunquam dissolvendis vel
obliviscendis me vobis devinctum habetis, GLASCUENSES. Audite, etiam, quos
Viciniores ego, si non Amiciores habeo, HARVARDINENSES et YALENSES. Audite,
denique, quas Julianica Persecutio intra privatos Parietes per totam Angliam
coegit, ACADEMIAE. Audite, Dictaque omnia animo, aequa Lance trutinantes,
perpendite!

Tollite et Legite, O Literaturae Omnigenae Studiosa Juventus; At Literaturae
PIETATEM adjungite, vel potius PIETATI Literaturam; ne sitis non alii quam
Ingeniosi Nugatores, et inter Fatuos cum omni vestra Lituratura rejiciendi.
Omni Literarum Genere ut sitis eximii, serio ac sedulo Studiis vestris
incumbite. Ultra arctos minutae Doctrinae limits, Trivium nimirum et
Quadrivium, quibus Antiquorum Disciplina circums^pta fuerit, navigate.
PANSOPHIAM amate atque ambite. Horum vero Trium Axiomatum estote memores,
(quibus quidem Sapientia Veterum vobis compendiose enunclatur,) Illisque Studia
Vestra dirigite, ac in Ordinem redigite. Primum; Amor DEI est mentis
Illuminatio. Secundum; Qu^d est Anima Corpori, hoc est CHRISTUS Animae.
Tertium; N^n Titulus facit Christianum, sed Vita CHRISTO digna Quibus addenda
illa, nunquam Oblivioni tradenda, Bernardi Sententia; Da mihi Homin^m, qui
Transitoria transitory, et qui Aeterna Desiderio ampl^^titur aeter^o; ao talem
andacter pronuncio SAPIENTEM Et non Omittenda, illa Erasmi; Bona The(...) pars
est Afflatus, qui non centingit nisi Moribus ^urgatissimis.

Valete; DEOque Vivite.
THE CONTENTS.
1. DEATH Realized. P. 1. 2. The True End of Life answered. P. 3. 3. Conversion
to PIETY, accomplished. P. 15. 4. A Zeal to Do Good, betimes enkindled. P. 20.
5. The Right End of Studies, fixed. P. 24. 6. Study of the Languages, directed.
P. 27. 7. Study of the Sciences P. 33. 8. Of Poetry, and of Style. P. 38. 9. Of
Natural Philosopy. P. 47. 10. Of the Mathematics. P. 52. 11. Of History. P.
58. 12. Some Useful Proposals to Students. P. 71. 13. The Sentiments with which
the Evangelical Ministry is to be undertaken. P. 75. 14. Of Reading the Sacred
Scriptures. P. 80. 15. Study of Divinity entered upon. P. 84. 16. The Pulpit,
and the Work of it. P. 89. 17. Employments for a Vigilant Pastor. P. 106. 18.
The Genuine and Catholic Spirit of Christianity, described, and commended. P.
115. 19. Rules of HEALTH. P. 130. 20. Rules of PRUDENCE. P. 130.
MANUDUCTIO AD MINISTERIUM, OR, The ANGELS preparing to Sound the TRUMPETS.
. 1. INtending to give you some DIRECTIONS for your Proceeding in the STUDIES,
upon which you are Entering, that you may be prepared and furnished for the Work
of the Evangelical MINISTRY, to which you are designed; I shall not consult the
Method which any of the twice Twelve, Dissertationes de Studiis, (Collected by
Elzivir in one little Volum.) have given you. But the Contemplation of DEATH
shall be the FIRST Point of the Wisdom that my Advice must lead you to. In the
FIRST Place, My Son, I advise you to consider yourself as a Dying Person, and
one that must shortly put off this Earthly Tabernacle. I move you, I press you,
To Remember how short your Time is, yea, though it should reach to the longest
that is ordinarily known among the Children of Men; and how much more short it
may be made for ought you know, in the Early Anticipations of Mortality. Do
this, that you may do nothing like Living in Vain. Place yourself in the
Circumstances of a Dying Person; your Breath failing, your Throat rattling,
your Eyes with a dim Cloud, and your Hands with a damp Sweat upon them, and
your Weeping Friends no longer able to retain you with them: And then entertain
such Sentiments of this World, and of the Work to be done in this World, that
such a View must needs inspire you withal. Such a Numbering of your Days, I
hope, will compel you to Apply your Heart unto Wisdom; and Instruct and Excite
you to spend your little TIME in such Things, and so Industriously, as may be a
Matter of Comfortable Reflection at the End of your Days. The Apprehension: of
a Dying Person are usually so Wise, and so much have the Right Thoughts of the
Righteous in them, that the best Counsel which can be given you, is, Child,
Make haste into them! It cannot be too soon to come into them. They will have a
mighty Tendency to make you Serious, Discreet, and Industrious, and every way
welladvised; and all that your best Friends would have you to be. You run the
hazard of Dying without Wisdom, if you delay to come into them; and pu^ far
away that which by doing so you will make an Evil Day. It was not a Folly in
some of the Ancients, to assign the Contemplation of Death, as the main
Foundation, and main Exercise of their Philosophy; And the Young Man will
arrive to more Understanding than the Ancients; who does practice upon it. I
propose a, Vive memor Mortis, as what will be the Way to the truest Wisdom, and
no little Part of it; and as what will contribute as much as possible for any
thing to do, unto a Wise Conduct in all your Affairs. May the THOUGHTS OF A
DYING MAN come into an Early and Lively Consideration with you, and regulate
your Intentions, your Appetites, your Behaviors. My Proposal is, That you
would set apart proper Times, [And be sure, The Present Time!] to think, What
sort of Life shall I most approve when I come to Dye! In what Work shall I most
wish to have lived, when I see that I am to Dye? What Method and Manner of
Living shall I apprehend the most Eligible, when my Dying Hour is come upon me?
Behold, What will give to the Young Man Knowledge and Discretion!

2. The Apprehension of Approaching DEATH, One would think, should make you
as soon as may be Begin to Live. But you do not Begin to Live, no, you are Dead
while you Live, until you Live unto GOD. Methinks, I have already prepared you
to consider the Words which before I go any further, I shall transcribe for
you, from a Treatise Entitled, The Angel of Bethesda, which is yet, [I may
say, lying at the Pool,] unpublished. CHRISTIAN, Fill thy Life with most
explicit Acknowledgements of the Glorious GOD, and Acts of Obedience to Him.
Let even the whole Business of thy Temporal Calling be explicitly designed for
an Obedience to GOD. At the same time, Fill thy Life with Good Offices to
Mankind, and with Actions that shall be Blessings (and make the Doer a Rich
One) unto thy Neighbors. This will be Living. -- Caetera Mortis erunt. The Man
who does the most of these things is the longest Liver. In Three Sevens of
Years, One who lives at this rate may have a longer Life than a Drowsy and
Thoughtless Wretch, that should get along to Nine Hundred and Sixty Nine. I may
make the more free with the Number in my Expression on this Occasion, because
the Jewish Rabbi's venture to tell us, That the Time lost by Methusalah in
Impertinent Things, being defalked from his Nine Hundred and Sixty Nine Years,
he will have no more than Ten Years of True Life lest unto him. It is a Maxim
of Truth, Non Annu sed Factis vivunt mortales. And, They have lived longest in
the World, who have done the most Good in the World. So my Angel.

And now, My Son, though I began with Recommending to you the Thoughts of a
Death at Hand; yet, what I mean, is, to make a long Live^ and in Order to it, a
True Liver, of you.

The true END of Life must therefore as soon as may be, come to be stated and
fixed with you, and the false Ways of Sin be no longer walked in. And what can
this END be, but, The SERVICE OF THE GLORIOUS GOD? Or, as you have been taught
from your Infancy, TO GLORIFY GOD AND ENJOY HIM FOREVER. When you have
considered the Matter with the deepest Meditation, you can settle no where but
here, and you can see nothing worthy to be the END of Living, but This. May my
Life be such a continual Homage to the Glorious GOD, as He may, through His
CHRIST look down with Delight upon. If you Terminate in any Inferior End, and
rise no Higher in your Aims, than to have your SELF accommodated with such
Things as a Carnal Mind calls, comfortable Circumstances. Your Life, what is it
but a perpetual Folly, on which you may cry out, O me nunquam sapientem! All
your Achievements, though they should be never so pompous, are but empty
Futilities. Nay, How little Higher do you Aim, than the Beasts that Perish? And
how much will you deserve the Name of Brutish, which is the Denomination with
which your Herd is branded in the Oracles of GOD? A little more Hair, and
crawling upon all Four. -- and, what the Difference! But, O Star fallen and
choked in the Dust, Arise and shine, and let thy Light come, and the Glory of
the Lord be risen upon thee! It is brought about, and the True Light shines,
when you come to make Choice of This, as the main Scope of your Living in the
World; It shall be that the Glorious GOD may be gratified, in beholding through
His CHRIST the Homage which I pay unto Him; rendering and procuring
Acknowledgements to Him in all my Ways! And wisely subordinate all your
Actions, and all your Enjoyments unto it: Govern your Actions by it, and
consider them, as Parts of that Homage; Relish your Enjoyments from it, and
consider them as Helps for that Homage; and often have your Explicit Thoughts
upon it. Come into those Right Thoughts of the Righteous, with which the
Ancients were illuminated, when they determined that, Uti Deo et frui
Creaturis, does in short and at once express all the Disorder and Confusion
that Mankind is thrown into. Having such a single Eye, your whole Conduct will
be full of Light. But if you have none but some Inferior End, in your Eye, you
will have an Evil Eye; Your very Light will be Darkness; and how great your
Darkness! From that Hour that you come into this Life of GOD, and thus dwell in
GOD, it is inexpressible how Comfortably you will Walk with GOD, and have the
Blessed GOD ever dwelling in you. The GOD who forms the Spirit of Man within
him, has imprinted on your Spirit, a Tendency of Return unto Him. This
Impression is wretchedly Suppressed, and Sinned away, in your Fall from GOD,
and the Tendency woefully diverted and enfeebled. The Faculty, which we call,
The Conscience, is the Testimony of this Impression, and is, The Work of the
Law written in the Heart. If it must continue under its Depravations and
Encumbrances, what remains of it, will be only to inflict the Eternal Scourges,
and Scorches of a Self condemning Mind upon you. Such a Recovery of it, as will
restore the MOST HIGH, unto His Throne in your Soul, so that nothing shall be
Above HIM there, nor shall there be any Denial of the GOD that is Above, but
the INTENTION of a grateful HOMAGE unto the Glorious GOD, shall command your
whole Conduct; THIS is the Highest Felicity that you can aspire unto. The very
Top of what our Great REDEEMER has proposed for us, is; An UNION with GOD!

Many things there are that pass for Wisdom among the Children of this World.
But THIS is the GRAND POINT, whereof it may be asserted, Here is WISDOM; Let
him that has Understanding pass a Judgment upon it. The Syrname of old put
upon our Gildas, belongs unto the Children of this Wisdom, and unto none but
those. Until this Point be gained, nothing that is truly Wise, is to expected
from you. But let your Accomplishments be what they will, you stand in the List
of those, that must have it said of them, What Wisdom is there in them? Nay,
since the Object which a Man makes his last End, the same he makes his GOD, so
many low and base, and wrong Ends, as those wherein you terminate, until you
thus live unto GOD, are your Gods; your Life is a course of Detestable and
Abominable Idolatrics; your Portion will be among the Idolaters, who shall not
inherit the Kingdom of GOD.

It is with the utmost Importunity, that I press to have this Matter well
settled with you. Yea, Entreat me not to leave you, nor to return from
following after you, until you are brought into this Way of Living, which
distinguishes the Excellent of the Earth, from those who are but so many
Carcases falling in the Wilderness.

That you may not fall into the Hypocrisy of many Books, which wear the Motto
of, Soli Deo Gloria, upon them, while the Author in reality never aimed any
higher than his own admired self, but as a truly learned Writer detects him,
Scrip^itat sibi ipsi, ac Famae suae, interdum et Fami; Let me labor a little
more to explain this most Rational Mystery of Godliness.

GOD is Glorified, when His Infinite Perfection; are Beheld and Confessed, with
a suitable Veneration; and His Glorious CHRIST is considered with the Regards
which GOD has required for Him.

The Service of GOD lies in this Veneration; and in the Doing and Using of
those things, that shall be Subservient unto it.

Hence, Whatever contributes unto the Welfare of Mankind, and such a Relief of
their Miseries, as may give the Children of Men better Opportunities to Glorify
Him, This also is to Glorify Him.

In Glorifying of GOD, there must be a, Legitima scoporum Subordinatio; and you
are perpetually to discern, and to design, the Subordination.

But see what Provision I shall make for you. I purpose anon to lead you into
an Acquaintance with various Tongues and Arts; but I can do nothing until you
are acquainted first of all, with what I may call, much more justly than that
which has been commonly called, The Universal Discipline.

Wherefore, I will here lay before you, A Plan of Real and Regular Living,
exhibited in an INSTRUMENT, in which One whose Purpose and Manner of Life has
been known unto you, stated his Method of living unto GOD. It will be no Vanity
to say, That if the Instrument could be shown in as many Languages, as Grotius,
his, De Veritate, has appeared in, or as many as paid their Obsequies unto
Peireskius, yea, or as many as they say are spoken in the City of Cairo, it
could meet with no considerate Reader, that would not find something within
him, that would compel him to Justify it.

Here you have, what may challenge the Title of, Jmre Binah, with you.

Sic Vivitur.

With a single Eye, to keep up a Regular and Perpetual Aim at the RIGHT END, of
all that I do, and of all that I have; This will be to walk in the Light
continually. The GLORY of GOD is the only RIGHT END of all; and it will
gloriously Lighten the Mind that has an Eye upon it. But the Lamb is to be at
the same time, the Light of such a Soul, and a CHRIST is to be considered: GOD
in that Lord of Glory, is to be the Object which my Eye must be for ever to, if
I would not have my Foot in the Net of the Evil Ones.

That I may truly Live, Oh! may the Life of GOD, and of His CHRIST, be thus
manifested in me!

Every thing which the Candle of the Lord condemns as an Evil Thing,; I would
forever Abhor it, and Avoid it; Because it will incur that Rebuke, By Sin thou
dishonourest GOD.

I apprehend every Act of Obedience to GOD, as a Thing which the Eye of that
Infinite One does with Pleasure take Notice of.

That which procures any Act of my Obedience to be pleasing unto the Infinite
GOD, is the Mediation of my SAVIOR. HE has by His Obedience to GOD for me,
made Expiation for the Defects of my Obedience, and bespoke a gracious
Acceptance for it. This Obedience of His, I look upon, and lean upon, as the
only Righteousness that Justifies me. But mine has in it a faint Resemblance of
that perfect Obedience which my JESUS has yielded unto GOD for me; And it is an
Obedience, which the SPIRIT of my JESUS, influencing and actuating of me, is
the Worker of. Yea, It Is more immediately to a Glorious CHRIST, and GOD shining
upon me in Him, that I may pay my Obedience.

If I may in any Act of Obedience, or of Submission, to the Will of GOD, be a
Grateful Spectacle to HIM, or, if HE may take Satisfaction in what He helps me
to Be, and to Do, before Him, This is the Highest Felicity I can wish for; the
Top of my Ambition; the last END, the main and chief Scope, of my Life. Lord,
Beyond This, there is nothing that I can Ask or Think.

Prepared with such Sentiments, I proceed now thus to fix my Eye upon the RIGHT
END of all that my Hand finds to do, or that GOD puts into it.

Why do I attend on the DAILY SACRIFICES of the Closet and of the Household?

LORD, I desire now to pay that Homage to thee, which Thou will, for the sake
of Thy CHRIST, look down with Delight upon.

Why do I give Attendance on the PUBLIC EXERCISES of Religion?

LORD, I desire to join with thy People, in paying to Thee those
Acknowledgements, which thou art well-pleased withal.

I would also improve in Knowledge and in Goodness, and so in being what GOD
would have me to be, by conversing with such Truths as I now meet withal.

Why do I set my self to READ THE SACRED SCRIPTURES?

LORD, I desire to pay a due Regard unto the Treasures with which thou
graciously entertainest me. Yea, I would hear, what GOD the Lord will speak
unto me; and be taught what I may speak, and how live unto Him.

Why do I, in the Way of my STUDIES, go to fill the Chambers of my Soul with
all precious and pleasant Riches?

LORD, I desire to furnish my self with such Things, as may render me more
Qualified for what Service thou may call me to.

Why do I compose the DISCOURSES, which I Exhibit, either in the Press or in
the Pulpit?

LORD, I desire to communicate unto others, what may Animate them, or
Accomplish them, for Living unto GOD.

Why do I make any of my VISITS to any of my Neighbors? Or, Countenance their
Visits unto me?

LORD, I desire to let fall something in the Couference, that may be for the
good of the Company; even, that more may be Known of thee, and Done for thee,
from what passes in it.

And, When I propose to Ingratiate my self unto any People, by the Civilities
of Conversation, it shall be, that I may gain thereby the better Advantages to
prosecute Good Purposes upon them.

In Conversation, I would especially lay hold on all Advantages to introduce as
much as I can of a lovely CHRIST into the View of all that I come near unto.

My JOURNEYS must like my Visits, be for nothing, but that GOD may be served in
them.

Why do I EAT or DRINK?

LORD, I desire nothing but that I may be Strengthened for the Work, which thou
have assigned unto me.

What of the Table, may for Quality or Quantity, indispose me for Thy Work, I
will for that Cause avoid it.

And I will affect most, what I find most useful to me for the Work before me.
LORD, I would have my Appetites entirely Regulated from this Consideration.

Why do I allow SLEEP to my Eyes, or SLUMBER to my Eyelids?

LORD, I desire to have my Spirits recruited for that Work, wherein, I delight
to do thy Will, O my GOD.

In using of REMEDIES for the Relief of any Maladies, I am to be acted from the
same Consideration; That what hinders me from comfortably proceeding in the
Work of GOD, may be removed.

Why do I TRIM, CLEANSE, ADORN my Body?

LORD, I desire to Recommend my self unto them, unto whom I would be Acceptable
in my Endeavors to convey something of Thee unto them.

Why do I suffer my self to be persuaded into any brief DIVERSIONS?

LORD, I desire, that by a little unbending of my Bow, and Remitting the
Intenseness of my Essays to do Good, I may the more harden it into a Bow of
Steel; and Return with more Vigor to the Work of my GOD.

But, I will Watch for all Opporunities, to carry on Essays to do Good, in the
midst of my Diversions.

Why do I write any LETTERS?

LORD, I desire now to do something that that thou would have to be done.
Here is a Business that GOD calls me to.

And, if I can interweave any mention of any Matters in and for which, I may
bespeak Thee to be Adored, it shall be mentioned.

I will add this Article to this Point of my living unto GOD. The several
Petitions which I carry to the Glorious GOD in my Supplications, I would very
distinctly examine, What Aspect they have upon the Service of GOD? If I can see
none, I will drop them and lay them aside. But the View of an Holy Aspect in
them, and if the Voice of my Supplications truly be, Let GOD be glorified, that
shall invigorate them.

But, Finally; What is it that gives me a RELISH for the COMFORTABLE THINGS
that are bestowed upon me? What are the Things which Delight my Soul^ in the
Comforts which abate the Sorrows of my Pilgrimage?

LORD, Thou shall be the Joy of my Joy.

None of these Things are to be my Enjoyments; They are to be but Instruments.

There are SENSUAL OBLECTATIONS, which I may lawfully Taste, but always
Thankfully, in Compliance with the Order, wherein the GOD of Nature has made
them agreeable to the Senses. His Bounty is to be tasted in them; and as being
the Effects of That, they are to be Delectable.

The Sweet of my BODILY NOURISHMENTS, must lie, not in their being so much
suited unto my Palate, as in the Support they bring me for the Service of my
GOD.

This also is that which makes the REST of the laboring Man sweet unto him.

How far are my POSSESSIONS, of Lands, or Goods, or Money, to be sweet unto me?
No farther than as they are Helps to me, in the Work of GOD. And they are never
to be used by me, but when something that I may count a Work of GOD, is to be
carried on. All my Expenses are to be, on something that GOD would have to be
done: And so to spend, should be as pleasant unto me, as it can be, to Gain or
Save.

When I am a MARRIED MAN, I am doing my Duty to GOD, in conforming to the Ninth
of Ecclesiastes and the Ninth.

My CHILDREN are Valuable, and very Relishable Things. My Reason is; They are
the Subjects of thy Kingdom, O my GOD and SAVIOR: And THOU have made me
Related unto Them, and they are by THEE committed unto me, as precious Things,
in singular Circumstances, to be through my Cultivation and Erudition and
Instruction, more than any others, rendered such Servants unto Thee, as Thou
may account for a Generation.

My FRIENDS are some of my Good Things. That which makes them so, is the Good I
may do to them, or I may do by them. And further, I would not know them.

LORD, The Things which DISCOVER THEE to me, shall therefore and so sar, be
sweet; and the more Discovery they make of Thee, the sweeter they shall be,
unto me.

What and where my Relish for BOOKS, which I may be hungry for? LORD, Because I
shall see THEE, or serve THEE, the more for the Reading of them.

I do not merely once for all, settle upon these RIGHT ENDS, for the Center of
my Life, and the Consecration of my All unto my GOD and SAVIOR, but I would
often, often, even as often as I can, explicitly consider them. And if any
Thing occur, wherein I cannot see these RIGHT ENDS answered, I would be loath to
meddle with it.

As an Epilogue unto this Instrument, I would subject the weighty Words, which
a dear Brother of mine, a Professor in the Frederician University, who
understands this Way of Living, has upon it. Omnia ita facienda sunt, respectu
habito ad GLORIAM DEI; ut, etsi non semper Actus adsit hujus Intentionis, omnia
tamen fiant ex habitu et generali proposito nunquam mutando. Sed tamen actualis
Intentio, et crebra ejus Repetitio, plurimum prodest. Conscienciam enim
conservat tranquillam, animumque ob sinceram Intentionem been sibi conscium,
reddit Laetum, et in Opere ipso Alacriorem ac circumspectiorem.

. 3. But you will not come to This, until the Glorious GOD of all Grace, give
you a New Heart, and cause a Regenerating Work of His Grace to pass upon you,
and by Sanctifying Impressions of His Holy SPIRIT upon you, call you to His
Glory by CHRIST JESUS. A Carnal Mind in you, full of Enmity against GOD, will
have a perpetual Aversl^n for this Living to Him, till He shall by His
Verticordious Influences, Heal the Distempers which you have contracted in and
by your Departure from Him. Your Conversion to GOD, must be accomplished, or
else you will have no Heart, nor Skill, nor Strength, for that Life of PIETY,
which must be laid in the Foundation of all the Good, that is to be expected by
you, or from you. Now that you may arrive to all the Blessedness of a Sinner
converted from the Error of his Way, and a Soul saved from Death, I will
briefly describe to you that Process of Repentance which you must go thorough,
and which every Man that lives, and knows that he shall, but not when he shall,
see Death, is out of his Wits, if he do not immediately come into. For this
Purpose, I need not alter the Direction that my Caelestinus has already given
you; You have in unalterable Strains had the Sum of the Matter.

Take a proper season for it, and, My Son, the present season; I say,
Immediately! Therein, First, Humbly and indeed, Lying in the Dust, own your
self unable to do any thing effectually of your self in changing of your Heart,
and bringing your Soul to be informed and affected as it ought to be. Say, O
Glorious GOD, I justly perish, if I do not come unto thee; But if thou draw me
not, I shall never come unto thee. Yea, and therewithal, Humbly own, That if
ever GOD changes your Heart, and enable you to do any Good Thing, there must be
Triumphs of Sovereign Grace over the Basest and Blackest Unworthiness in it.
Say, Lord, I am utterly Unworthy that thou, who alone have the Words of Eternal
Life, should ever speak them unto me, and cause me to Live.

Under such an Humiliation, go on, and lay before your self a Catalogue of
Things Forbidden, and Things Required, in the Ten Commandments. Loath and Judge
your self before the Lord, for the Innumerable Evils, which beholding your self
in this Glass, you will see Encompassing of you. Let your Contempt of the
Gospel, and your Neglect of the JESUS, who would save you from these
Innumerable Evils, be thrown as a yet more heavy Weight into the Scale. But
then, Go back as far as your Original Sin, the Sin of the first hearkening to
the Old Serpent, and the Venom derived from thence, which is the Original of
all your Actual Sins; The Corrupt Fountain, which has run into the Streams of
the Actual Enormities and Iniquities, with which your Life has been polluted.
Own upon it; O Great GOD, Thou art Holy and Righteous in all the sad Things
that have ever been inflicted on me, and have punished me less than my Sins
deserve. I deserve to be stripped of all that may be at all Comfortable to me; I
deserve to be scourged with sore Plagues and of long Continuance; I deserve to
be thrown into the Place of Dragons, and be punished with the Devil and his
Angels.

Now, Behold the SON of GOD made Flesh in the Blessed JESUS, and profering to
do the Part of a Mediator for you; yea, making Himself Responsible for the Debt
of His People to the Law of their GOD. Behold Him undergoing the Punishment
which was due to you for your Sin, and with Bloody Sufferings making a
Sufficient Expiation that you may not be punished for it. Behold Him fulfilling
all Righteousness, in doing always the Things that please the Father; that so
you may have a Lot among the Righteous. Admire the Free Grace of the Glorious
GOD, which allows you to make this Plea, for your Justification. Plead it, that
you may be Justified. Plead it, with a Comfortable Persuasion of your finding a
Kind Reception with your SAVIOR; Don't think, that you Honor, but that you
Reproach your SAVIOR, if you doubt your Kind Reception with Him.

At the same time, take up a full Purpose of Heart, that you will cleave unto
the Lord. Let your Heart be fixed in a strong Purpose to deny all Ungodliness
and worldly Lusts, and lead a Godly, and a Sober, and a Righteous Life. But
Resign your self up unto your SAVIOR, that HE may by His Holy SPIRIT make you
perfect in every good Work to do His Will, and work in you that which is well
pleasing in the sight of GOD. Wholly Despair of doing any thing that is H^ly
and Just and Good, any further than you have your SAVIOR Strengthening of you.

Thus you have done, what you have to do, that you may lay hold on Eternal
Life. If GOD be with you in this Action, your Conversion to GOD is now
accomplished. Every thing in Heaven and Earth and Hell now looks with a most
Joyful Aspect upon you.

THIS, with ardent and constant Cries to the Gracious GOD, who gives Wisdom to
them that Ask it of Him, is the Way to come into the Experience of a PRINCIPLE
infused from Above into you, that shall be indeed CHRIST formed in you; and
CHRIST Living in you, will enable you to Do and to Bear what you shall in the
Christian Life be called unto. A PRINCIPLE of PIETY, even, the Love of GOD,
thus produced in you, shall be the Root of the Righteous, in you, perpetually
bringing forth Fruits of Righteousness, which are by JESUS CHRIST unto the
Glory of GOD. This PRINCIPLE will incline you to endeavor all possible
Conformity to your SAVIOR, in Hating and Shunning every thing that the Light
of GOD in you shall condemn as an Evil Thing; and in filling your Life with
Acts of Devotion toward GOD, and Benignity toward Men; and in Behaving
yourself as Remembering the Eye of Heaven always upon you; and in approving
yourself ever a Good Steward of the Manifold Favors that Heaven bestows upon
you; and in suffering Afflictions after a Becoming Manner; and in Hoping and
Waiting for the Joy set before you in the Heavenly World. A PRINCIPLE and an
Attainment and a Blessedness, infinitely preferrible, not only to all the
Wealth in the World, but also to all Intellectual Accomplishments and
Embellishments: And without which, all the Ornaments on which the Great Men of
the Earth value themselves are but gilded Vanities: Nor will you, being
destitute thereof, have any other Advantage of the Lustres you are seeking
after, than to have your Lamp go out in Obscure Darkness, and expire with such
a woeful Ejulation as that; Qualis Artifex Pereo! The meanest Labourer with his
Hands, even a John Urich, having the Fear of GOD in him, will be more excellent
than you, or indeed than one who has carried a Batoon in his Hands, but has
gone on without GOD in the World; and he will come to a better End, than that
wherein you must mourn at the Last, with him who said, Surgunt Indocti et
rapiunt Coelum; nos cum nostris Doctrinis mergimur in Infernum.

I am inexpressibly concerned, That you may have an Unblemished Youth, and not
be left unto such Falls now in your Youth, as may cause you to go halting all
your Days: Yea, that you may be such a Pure Nazarite, and preserved more
particularly from Criminal and Abasing Unchastities, and most particularly from
Detestable Onanism, that you may be able to say, Ah, Lord GOD, my Soul has not
been polluted from my Youth up. I cannot think of a more effectual
Preservative, than such a CONVERSION to GOD, as I now exhort you to.

. 4. Certainly, you will be brought now without much Difficulty, to what I next
proceed unto! Being thus brought into an Happy State of Reconciliation to GOD,
you are prepared, yea, you cannot but be disposed, now to hearken unto such
Subordinate Counsels as I am now to offer you: Whereof the First will be, That
ESSAYS TO DO GOOD, may fill your Life, and be the very Spirit and Business of
it, and the principal Delight. The Motto which an English Lord has upon his
Coat of Arms, is what I propose to your continual Ambition; UT PROSIM. And, My
Son, My Advice to you, is, Begin betimes to take that Noble QUESTION into
Consideration, What Good may I be capable of doing in the World? Have stated
and proper Times for it, and these as often as may be, to consider on the
QUESTION; and keep a Record of your Purposes. First with an humble and mournful
Sense of your own Barrenness, and sensible how much you want that Wisdom, which
is to find out well-advised Inventions, Look up to GOD your SAVIOR, that by
Him (who is the Wisdom of GOD) living in you, and leading of you, you may
obtain a fair View of the Opportunities to do Good, which He has put into your
Hand, that they may not be a Price in the Hand of a Fool; and a clear View of
the Methods to be taken that this Good may be prosecuted, and your Desire
sweetly accomplished. Then proceed and Enquire.

Enquire; First, What shall I do for MY SELF, that I may MY SELF Improve in
Knowledge and Goodness; and the Ends of those Means, which the Divine
Cultivation employs upon me?

Enquire, next; What shall I do for my several RELATIVES, my Kindred according
to the Flesh; That I may prove a Blessing in each of my Relations? Take a
Catalogue of them; and successively bestow distinct Thoughts upon them all.

Then go on to take some Cognizance of the several SOCIETIES to which you stand
related; Especially the Church whereof you are a Member, [and the College, if
you belong to That!] Yea, the Town, and the Land, whereof you are an Inhabitant.

Think, What Good is to be proposed and promoted here! To what an Extent, O
dear Son, and pleasant Child, may thy Projections carry thee!

Particular Persons in your Neighborhood may now also, be found out, as
Objects that Good may be done unto; The Poor for to be relieved; The Sick for
to be visited; The Sad for to be comforted; and those that are out of the Way,
to be reclaimed from the Error of their Way. Many of those whom you have
distinguished in thus doing of Good unto them, you will find prove Monsters of
Ingratitude. But let not this dishearten you. GOD is now trying of you, Whether
you will do Good for the pure sake of Good; And you will this way have
Recompenses ascertained unto you, in the Harvest, when, Whatsoever Good Thing
any Man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord.

But, because your own Capacities to Do Good may be greatly limited, you should
also have a Time to think; What Good lying out of my Reach may I see others
capable of doing more than I? And hereupon become an Humble Adviser unto them.
Yea, I could wish, You would betimes make it a Rule for your Conduct; That you
will as far as you can, always endeavor a Profitable Conversation; and in
every Company, think, whether you may not with Decency let fall some Word,
which they may be the Wiser or the Better for; and every one go from you, Aut
Doctior, aut Melior, for you.

Your Opportunities to do Good, may at first be very small, and under very
narrow Limitations. Nevertheless I press you to begin Betimes, your Enquiries
after them, and your Actions upon them; and expect, that though the Beginning be
but small the latter End shall greatly increase. That Word, Habenti dabitur,
will be Remarkably and Conspicuously fulfilled unto you, by the all-governing
Providence of Him, who has all Opportunities to do Good, entirely at His
Disposal. Your Circles will grow wider and wider; and anon expand unto
Dimensions beyond what you could at first have imagined. And, I hope, you will
esteem your Opportunities, as your Incomparable Treasures. While others are
hunting and grasping after the sordid Wealth of this World, which will
presently be found all Vanity, Vanity! You will reckon your Advantages to
promote the Kingdom of GOD, and the Welfare of Men, as much more valuable
Riches. You will be as Thankful to any One, who informs you of a Point wherein
you may Do some Good, as if he had presented you with a Wedge of Gold: And your
Maxim will be, Divitiis abundet per me lieet, qu^squis voluerit; In Operibus
mea sit Abundantia.

But then, you must n^ be so weak as to imagine, that this Way of Living will
recommend you to the Favor of This World. A sedulous Doer of Good will
certainly find himself more exposed than other Men, to be Ill-spoken of;
greatly Maligned, Reviled, Slandered. Here, Patience must have its perfect
Work. I may say, Here is the Patience of the Saints. Yea, I must say, Be very
Courageous.

I will conclude this Matter with the Words of One who knew what he Wrote. Were
a Man able to write in seven Languages: Could he converse daily with the sweets
of all the Liberal Sciences, that Polite Men ordinarily pretend unto; Did he
entertain himself with all the Ancient and Modern Histories: And could he feast
continually on the Curiosities, which all sorts of Learning may bring unto him;
None of all this will afford the Ravishing Satisfaction; much less would any
grosser Delights of the Senses do it: which he might find in relieving the
Distresses of a poor, mean, miserable Neighbor; and which he might much more
find in doing any Extensive Service for the Kingdom of our Great SAVIOR in the
World, or any Thing to redress the Miseries under which Mankind is generally
Languishing.

5. You are now in the Pursuit of that Learning, and those Ingenuous and
Mollifying Arts, which which may distinguish you from the more Uncultivated
Part of Mankind, and may accomplish you to claim a Place among them, who are
the Blessings and Beauties of their Generation. Concerning This, what I do in
the First Place Advise you to, is, To fix the END of all your Studies, and let
This be what it ought to be. Let Vives's Motto, Oculus ad Scopum, have its
Influence upon you in your whole Course of all your Studies. If you Aim no
Higher nor Better, than to render yourself Considerable, and make a Figure
among your Fellow-Mortals, or, perhaps, to gain a comfortable Subsistence in
the World, All you do is Wrong and Mean, and Vile, and the Holy GOD looks down
with Abhorrence upon you. A Bernard is not the only Christian, who has had a
true Sight of the Vanity, with which the Studies of the most that seek after
Knowledge, are carried on, and pronounced those the only Right Students, Qui ad
hoc volunt Intelligere ut Benefaciant. I hope it would not be unintelligible
unto you, if I should recommend unto your Emulation, a Flight of One, who though
I find him in the Cursed City, herein spoke like One of ours; Lord, I had
rather, could it be without Sin, that all should hate me, than that they should
Love me for myself: If all the World hate me, I should have but what is mine;
if they should Love me for myself, they would usurp what is Thine. But thus
much I cannot but wish for; That you may betimes be inspired with Sentiments,
by which the Idol that has more Votaries than that on the Plain of Dura, that
is to say, SELF, may be dethroned with you. Be aware of it, that the most of
People who shall Honor you, and Admire you, and Applaud you, will Terminate in
you, and look no further than the Worm they look next upon: GOD will not have
His Praises in what is done for you, and by you. GOD, without whom, and Before
whom, you are as nothing, will not be Remembered; And all will be as nothing, in
Remembrances of none but Ashes. A Sacrilegious Idolatry will be committed! But
a true Servant of GOD, will even deprecate it, as an Infelicity, to be made the
Object of this Idolatry: And wish, Lord, Let those that Fear thee, [and will
see Thee through me,] be those that shall turn unto me. The Love of GOD, must
make you choose rather to be left unregarded in the World, than to have those
Regards paid unto you, wherein the Infinite GOD, the First and the Last, shall
be Robbed of His Glory, which He will not give unto another. Yea, Be prepared
for Obscurities, and for Indignities, and be Reconciled unto them upon this
Account, I am now delivered from any Danger that the Robbers of GOD may make an
Idol of me! But having thus forbidden you the Wrong ones, I will tell you, what
is the RIGHT END unto which it were to be wished, that your Studies may be
Consecrated.

When you are upon seeking an Acquaintance with any Languages; Let your Aims be
these. I Desire to come at those Treasures, which these Tongues may be Keys
unto; And this, that so I may be the better furnished for that SERVICE OF GOD,
which I may be called unto.

When you are upon seeking an Acquaintance with any Sciences, Let your Aims be
these; I Desire to gain those Illuminations which may be necessary for an
Instrument of Good unto others; And this, that so I may be the better Qualified
for that SERVICE OF GOD, which will require a Workman that need not be ashamed.

When you are upon Reading any Book, Let your Aims, for ever be of the same
Importance.

To Strengthen my Advice, I will transcribe some Words of the Celebrated Lord
Chief Justice Hale; who in his Account of the Good Steward, says, I carried
along with me, in all my Studies, this Great Design, of improving them, and the
Knowledge acquired by them, to the Honor of GOD's Name, and the greater
Discovery of His Wisdom and Power and Truth, and so translated my Secular
Learning into an Improvement of Divine Knowledge. And had I not practiced this
Design in my Acquists of Humane Learning, I had concluded my Time misspent;
because I ever thought it unworthy of a Man that had an Everlasting Soul, to
furnish it only with such Learning, as would either Dye with his Body, and so
become un^seful for his Everlasting State, or that in the nex^ Moment after
Death would be attained without Labor or Toll in this Life.

Having thus fixed the RIGHT END of your Studies, Let the View of it make such
an Impression upon you, as to produce a Mavelous Industry in your Prosecution
of it: And Quicken you to observe that Maxim, Do with thy Might, what thy Hand
finds to do. Remember this; There never was an Eminent, who was not an
Industrious Man. You must be Diligent in your Business, if you would hope to
stand in any Desirable Circumstances before that Great KING, unto whose Holy
Service you are Dedicated.

That you may not suffer a Vile Impediment in your Studies, and Avocation from
them, I do now particularly warn you against the senseless Folly of an
Entanglement in any foolish Amor, while you are yet a Student at the College.
It Is time enough, to think of Marriage, when your Condition in other
Circumstances as well as that of Age, will qualify you to make a Wise Choice,
in a Point, which a very great Felicity, or a very great Calamity, for the rest
of your Days, will turn upon.

. 6. The Regulation of your Studies, is what I would now proceed unto. And for
this, though the Regulae Studiorum, Written by Chytraeus, be a Book which I can
heartily commend unto your Perusal, yet, it being Written an Hundred and Twenty
Years ago, I shall not think the Perusal of That sufficient for a Student in
our Days. I must further Accommodate you. And here, Humanity would complain of
me, if I should forbear to tell you, That the LATIN Tongue, which is more known
and used than any upon Earth, except the Arabic, is what you should for many
Reasons labor to be Ready at; and Able not only to Write, but also to Speak in
it, with Fluency as well as Purity; and confute the common Observation, that
though Englishmen do often Write [call Spencer and Burnet, for Two Witnesses,]
the best Latin in the World, yet they often Speak it but indifferently. For
this Purpose you will do well frequently, both to employ your Pen, for
composing Discourses or Epistles in it; and likewise to maintain frequent
Conferences in it, with such as understand the Phrases and Beauties of it.
Indeed, I know not a prettier Way, than this; Translate into English the
Paragraphs of some Author who writes very good Latin [say, the Enchiridion
Precum of a Boehm;] and then again, Laying aside your Author, turn your own
English into Latin; and so compare That with, and correct it from, your
Authors. But at the same time, you should familiarize yourself with the Style
of some Authors, whose Latin cannot but ever Charm you with its Elegancies. On
this Occasion, I am as far from inviting you into the Gust of Linacre, as great
a Critic as most we have had for the Latin Tongue, who, Ciceronis dictionem,
nunquam probare potuit, nec sine fastidio audire; As I am, from inviting you
into the Ciceronian Bigotry of a Bembo, or, to be as afraid as Longolius was of
using the Word, Possibile. But yet I will presume upon so much of Paradox, as
to offer you my Opinion, (though I know what Censure a Quintilian would pass upon
me, for saying) That the Latin of an Erasmus, of a Calvin, or of a Witsius, is
preferrible unto Cicero's; yea, to make up the Mess, I am content that poor
Castellio too be introduced.

From Rome you must needs pass to Greece. And I cannot but wish you so much a
GRECIAN, as not only to understand your Greek Testament, better than they do
ordinarily at this Day in Athens, in which, of all Places, it seems they now
speak the worst Greek that is any where spoken; but also, that you may at least
be able to Read a Chrysostom of the Savilian Edition; and not enjoy the Fathers
only in the Latin Translations, in which alone, the Roman Catholics,
(agreeably indeed unto the Name of their Church,) now generally choose to
publish them and peruse them. However, I cannot encourage you, to throw away
much Time, upon an Accurate Skill in the Greek Accents: But rather wholly to
drop them, when your Quill comes to convey any Greek into your Pages. For, as
the Writing of Greek otherwise than in Capitals, was introduced in later Ages
by the Monks of Egypt, who borrowed the smaller Letters now used from the
Copric; So, One shall hardly find any Accents on the Greek, in any Manuscripts
written above Eight Ages ago: Nor was the Invention of the Accents, with which
our Greek is now encumbred, of any other than a Musical Intention. And,
Vossius, with Henninius after him, are not the only Gentlemen, who have
declared earnestly against pronouncing the Greek according to the Accents: I
pray, how would a Verse of Homer sound, if it were so pronounced?

But for the HEBREW, I am importunate with you. And the more so, because it is
one Remarkable Instance of the Depraved Gust, into which we are of later Years
degenerated, that the Knowledge of the Hebrew is fallen under so much
Disrepute, as to make a learned Man almost afraid of owning that he has any
thing of it, lest it should bring him under the Suspicion of being an Odd,
Starved, Lank sort of a thing, who had lived only on Hebrew Roots all his Days.
What would an Amama, and the rest of the brave Men, who shone in the former
Age, and had Souls like the Gates of a Temple, say, if they might Rise and see
the Men of this Generation! It Is true, the Knowledge of the Hebrew is, contrary
to the old Maxim, Difficilia quae Pulchra, with very little Difficulty attained
unto. Even our little Damsels, like Blaesilla, the Daughter of Paula,
(concerning the Mother of whom Jerome reports the same, that he does of the
Daughter,) make nothing of coming at this Uncommon Ornament. And Cooper says,
truly, that if Students would spend as much Time at it in a Morning or an
Evening as they mispend on an unprofitable Pipe of Tobacco, they would in a few
Days be Masters of it. It is also to be owned, that there appears nothing more
impertinent, than a little Hebrician, Vapouring and Swaggering, as if he had
all the Learning in the World; and laying hold on all Occasions to throw out an
Hebrew Clause or Word, for nothing but the Ostentation of his mighty
Accomplishment. Nevertheless, the Knowledge of the Hebrew, is to be valued and
pursued, on this Design; 'Twill enable you to penetrate further into the deep
Things which the Spirit of GOD has laid up in His Oracles, than you could
possibly do, by seeing them only in some Translation. Though with much more Cause
than the modest Melancthon, I may confess Me vix primis Labiis degustasse
Hebraicas Literas, yet as he declared, what Hebrew he had helped him so much in
his Judgment of the greatest Matters, he preferred it before all the Wealth of a
Kingdom, so, I may humbly declare, I scarce ever take an Hebrew Bible into my
Hands, but I am gratefully surprised with something I never thought of; I ever
have some new View, and see something I never saw before. So that I do not
wonder at Luther for making a serious Protestation, that what Knowledge he had
of the Hebrew, was of more Use and more Price to him, than the greatest Heap of
Gold that could be set before him.

Indeed, I cannot but wish, that a Knowledge of the SYRIAC may come in, as an
Appendix to your Knowledge of the Hebrew: Not merely because it was the
Mother Tongue unto the Writers of the New Testament, [which is the Reason that
we have no Greek Word of the Dual Number in all the New Testament; For that
Number is what the Syriac is a Stranger to:] But chiefly because the most
Valuable and Serviceable Version that we have of the Divine Oracles, and what
may be of most Authority in many Important Points to clear up the Sense of
them, is the Syriac. And having once got the Hebrew, you will find the Syriac
easily come-at-able.

For the Living Tongues, it is a Matter of some Speculation, that almost all the
Protestants in the World, speak the Teutonic and what is derived from it;
almost all the Romanists are found in the Derivations from the Latin; the Greek
Church is mostly in the Sclavonic. If you intend any Service to the Kingdom of
GOD abroad, you may here take your Choice. But if you have any Time in your
Short Life to spare for the Living Tongues, the French will be sure in the
first Place to Court you. And, though the Complement which the Nations of Europe
have paid unto that Language, has looked like a paving of the Way, (which
doubtless, the French Academy have had in their Eye) for the extending of a
Covetous and Ambitious Monarchy, To what will never be accomplished; yet, for
the sake of your Admission to the Reading of many French Books that may be
worth your Perusal, I do not forbid your Learning of it. This, the rather, for
that albeit the English Tongue is capable of being made the most Expressive,
and the most Copious in the World, and is in these Regards much Superior to
the French; nevertheless, it may be observed, There is no Man who has the
French Tongue, but ordinarily he speaks the neater English for it.

And yet, concerning the Languages in general; The Time allowed for them,
should certainly be proportioned unto the Use you are like to make of them* Dr.
More governing himself in the Study of the Oriental Tongues by that Rule,
pleasantly and modestly compared himself unto the Man who passed by a Garrison,
with an Horse Shoe at his Girdle; which received and repelled the Bullet shot
upon him: On which he observed, That a little Armor, if well placed, will be
sufficient. I have known One who has been able to compose and publish Things in
Seven Languages; and yet confessed to his Friends, That he could never get the
Time to furnish himself with much more than the Armor of his well placed Horse
Shoe. But be sure, so much of the Armor as you cannot but foresee you may have
Occasion for, -- So much I insist upon. I am far from urging you to study so
many Languages as the Epitaph of that Great and Good Physician Kirstenius,
asribed unto him the Knowledge of.

. 7. The Languages you will consider, but as Instruments to come at the
Sciences, wherewith you would propose to go Skilfully about the Work which your
GOD shall call you to. And esteeming them as rather Helps to Exudition than any
Parts of it, you will no more Value yourself as a Scholar for Them, than the
Bare having of Tools would make one to boast himself an Artist.

If you would make a short Work of all the Sciences, and find out a North-West
Passage to them, I cannot think of any One Author, that would answer every
Intention so well as ALSTED. I take him, to have been as learned a Man as ever
was in the World; and there being so little Use made of his Concise
Exhibitions, is to me, One of the Things that I cannot but wonder at, and scarce
know what to make of.

Instead of Squandering away your Time, on the RHETORIC, whereof no doubt, you
though it, your Dugard gave you enough at School; and upon all the Tropes and
Schemes whereof a just Censurer well observes, Possunt una atque altera Hora
ita notari, ut little Notitia per omnem Aetatem sufficiat; And the very
Profession whereof usually is little more than to furnish out a Stage Player;
My Advice to you, is, That you observe the Flowers and Airs of such Writings,
as are most in Reputation for their Elegancy. Yet I am willing that you should
attentively Read over Smith, his, Mystery of Rhetoric Unveiled, that you may
not be Ignorant of what Figures they pretend unto.

But I will take this Opportunity to tell you, That there is no where to be
found any such Rhetoric, as there is in our Sacred Scriptures. Even a Pagan
Longinus himself, will confess, The Sublime, shining in them. There can be
nothing so Beautiful, or so Affectuous as the Figures every where used in them.
They are Life. All mere Humane Flourishes are but Chaff to the Wheat that is
there. Yea, they are an Hammer that breaks the Rocks to Pieces. In them the GOD
of Glory Thunders, yea, does it very marvellously! There is in them that Voice
of the Lord which is full of Majesty. For the Pulpit-Oratory, which is what you
have in View, there can be nothing more advisable, than to be a Master of
Scripture-Phrases, and employ them with an agreeable Ingenuity, on all fit
Occasions. I will add, I know not but a Lamy, in his L'Art de Parler, may give
you some hints that may be not unuseful to you.

Nor can I encourage you to spend very much Time, in that which goes under the
Name of LOGIC. If my excellent Friend Langius, in his Noble Medicina Mentis,
[which I commend unto you, to be diligently perused, as an Introduction to all
your Studies of the Sciences,] had not compelled me to a Contempt of the Vulgar
Logic, learnt in our Colleges, as a sort of mere Morology, yet a little serious
Recollection would have brought me to it. What is there usually got by the
Vulgar Logic, but only to be furnished with a Parcel of Terms, which instead of
leading the Mind into the Truth, enables one rather to carry on Altercations,
and Logomachies, by which the Force of Truth may be at Pleasure, and by some
little Trick, evaded. The Power and Process of Reason is Natural to the Soul of
Man; And those Masters of Reason, who argue the most Rationally, and make the
most Rational Researches into the true State of Things, and who take the most
Reasonable Measures for their Conduct, and who in all things arrive to the most
notable Discoveries, I pray, what sort of Logicians are they? Either they never
once read a Page of any Burgesdicius, or else they have unlearnt and forgot all
their Vulgar Logic. I am sure, they rarely trouble their Heads to recall the
Old Rules which they have recited unto their Tutors. To exhibit in the pompous
Form of an Art, what every One does by mere Nature and Custom, and fabricate it
into such a shape as that of the Vulgar Logic, and with such trifling
Applications and Illustrations, as it is usually done, appears as impertinent,
as if one should with much Formality teach the Art of Eating or Drinking or
Walking. And it might with equal Solemnity be shown, what Points of Regular
Management are exemplified by the Boys playing at their Marbles. The most
Valuable Thing in Logic, and the very Termination of it, is, The Doctrine of
Syllogisms. And yet it is notorious, that as all Syllogizing is only to confirm
you in a Truth which you are already the Owner of, so, no Logic has yet given
us all the several Ways of Syllogizing that may be run into; And it is as
notorious, that while an expanded Syllogizing is reckoned no other than an
Indecency in ordinary Writing as well as Talking, our only Syllogizing is that
which we call, An Enthymeme: Such a thing is evident, and therefore such a
Thing to be inferred from it, is also evident. Notwithstanding, lest we should
offend them, go dip into your Logic. But count it enough, if you have gone
through a Milton, or a Gutberleth, or a Watts. Indeed, some Treatises, that
clear up the Maxims of Reason, and may Strengthen you and Sharpen you in the
Use of it, you may do well to look into. The Ars Cogitendi, may pass for One of
those: And though for some Reasons, I would be excused from Recommending an Essay
of Humane Understanding, which is much in Vogue, yet I can approve your
perusing of Oldfield, his Improvement of Reason. But for the Vulgar Logic, I
must freely say, you lose Time, if you steer any otherwise in it, than, Touch
and Go.

What I say of Logic, I say of Metaphysics; which a learned Man too justly
calls, Disciplinarum Omnium Excrementum, though she would set up for the Queen of
Sciences. If you have got a Maccovius, or a Jacchaeus into your Head, you have
as much as I should care for: To which indeed some Acquaintance with a
Castanaeus, or some such Fencer for Distinctions, may be added. But then to
Weave any more Cobwebs in your Brains; to what Purpose is it? This however, is
one of the Things, which I will Affirm constantly; That as a Suarez, than whom
you cannot easily find a greater dealer in Metaphysics, after all declared,
The Hours which he took in Studying and Examining and Rectifying his own Heart,
were of infinitely more Use and Worth to him than all his Metaphysical and
Voluminous Lucubrations; you shall in like manner find, that you may easily
employ your Hours to better Purpose, than in Metaphysical and Imaginary
Disquisitions.

As for ETHICS, though such Things as the, Ethica Christiana of a Daneus, be
among the Things which cannot be spoken against, yet of That whereon they
employ the Plough so long in many Academies, I will venture to say, it is a Vile
Thing; and no other than what honest Vockerodus has justly called it; Impietas
in Artis formam redacta. It is all over a Sham; It presents you with a
Mock-Happiness; It prescribes to you Mock Virtues for the coming at it: And it
pretends to give you a Religion without a CHRIST, and a Life of PIETY without a
Living Principle; a Good Life with no other than Dead Works filling of it. It
is not amiss for you, to know what this Paganism is; and therefore you may, if
you please, bestow a short Reading upon a Golius, or a More: But be more of a
Christian, than to look on the Enchiridion of the Author last mentioned, as,
Next the Bible, the best Book in the World. Study no other Ethics, but what is
in the Bible; and consult such Books, as the, Verus Christianismus of an Arndt,
whereby Hundreds of Thousands have been bro't into the Life of GOD.

So much Ethics as treats, De Decorc, and may instruct you in the, Rules of
Behavior, I bearrily commend unto you. And yet, even these are best learnt by
a Wise Observation of what you see passes in the Conversation of Politer
People: And by wisely considering how they are indeed all Embryo'd in that one
Word, MODESTY; which Renders every one his Due, and assumes nothing undue to
ones self: Or, comprised in that one Maxim, Do and Say nothing that may be
justly offensive to the Company. The Truth is; The most exact and constant
Rules of Behavior, will be found Rules of Christianity: For which Cause it
pleased our Glorious Redeemer more than once to give them. Every Christian as
far as he keeps to his own Rules will be so far a Gentleman. And for this
Cause, I again advise you to a Careful Study of them.

. 8. POETRY, whereof we have now even an Antediluvian Piece in our Hands, has
from the Beginning been in such Request, that I must needs recommend unto you
some Acquaintance with it. Though some have had a Soul so Unmusical, that they
have decried all Verse, as being but a mere Playing and Fiddling upon Words;
All Versifying, as if it were more Unnatural than if we should choose Dancing
instead of Walking; and Ryme, as if it were but a sort of Morisco Dancing with
Bells: Yet I cannot wish you a Soul that shall be wholly Unpoetical. An Old
Horace has left us an Art of Poetry, which you may do well to bestow a Perusal
on. And besides your Lyrick Hours, I wish you may so far understand an Epic
Poem, that the Beauties of an Homer and a Virgil may be discerned with you. As
to the Moral Part of Homer, it is true, and let me not be counted a Zoilus for
saying so, that by first exhibiting their Gods as no better than Rogues, he set
open the Floodgates for a prodigious Inundation of Wickedness to break in upon
the Nations, and was one of the greatest Apostles the Devil ever had in the
World. Among the rest that felt the Ill Impressions of this Universal
Corrupter, (as Men of the best Sentiments have called him,) One was that
overgrown Robber, of execrable Memory, whom we celebrate under the Name of
Alexander the Great; who by his continual Admiring and Studying of his Iliad,
and by following that false Model of Heroic Virtue set before him in his
Achilles, became one of the worst of Men, and at length inflated with the
Ridiculous Pride of being himself a Deity, exposed himself to all the Scorn
that could belong unto a Lunatic. And hence, notwithstanding the Veneration
which this Idol has had, yet Plato banishes him our of a Commonwealth, the
Welfare whereof he was concerned for. Nevertheless, Custom or Conscience
obliges him to bear Testimonies unto many Points of Morality. And it is
especially observable, That he commonly propounds Prayer to Heaven as a most
necessary Preface unto all Important Enterprises; and when the Action comes on
too suddenly for a more extended Supplication, he yet will not let it come on
without an Ejaculation; and he never speaks of any Supplication but he brings
in a Gracious Answer to it. I have seen a Travesteering High-Flyer, not much to
our Dishonor, Scoff at Homer for this; as making his Actors to be like those
whom the English call Dissenters. But then, we are so much led into the
Knowledge of Antiquities, by reading of this Poet, and into so many Parts of
the Recondite Learning, that notwithstanding some little Nods in him, not a few
Acute Pens besides the old Bishop of Thessalonica's, have got a Reputation by
regaling us with Annotations upon him. Yea, Though One cannot but smile at the
Fancy of Croese, who tries with much Ostentation of Erudition, to show, That
Homer has all along tendered us in a Disguise and Fable, the History of the Old
Testament, yet many Illustrations of the sacred Scriptures, I find are to be
fetched from him; who indeed had probably read what was Extant of them in his
Days; Particularly, Our Eighteenth Psalm is what he has evidently imitated.
Virgil too, who so much lived upon him, as well as after him, is unaccountably
mad upon his Fate, which he makes to be he knows not what himself, but
Superior to Gods as well as to Men, and through his whole Composures he so
asserts the Doctrine of this Nonsensical Power, as is plainly inconsistent with
all Virtue. And what fatal Mischief did Fascinator do to the Roman Empire, when
by Deifying one Great Emperor, he taught the Successors to claim the Adoration
of Gods, while they were perpetrating the Crimes of Devils? I will not be a
Carbilius upon him; nor will I say any thing, how little the Married State owes
unto One who writes as if he were a Woman hater: Nor what his Blunders are
about his poor-spirited and inconsistent Hero, for which many have taxed him.
Nevertheless, it is observed, That the Pagans had no Rules of Manners, that were
more Laudable and Regular than what are to be found in him. And some have said,
It is hardly possible seriously to Read his Works without being more disposed
unto Goodness, as well as being agreeably entertained. Be sure, had Virgil wri^
before Plato, his Works had not been any of the Books prohibited. But then,
This Poet also has abundance of Rare Antiquities for us: And such Things, as
others besides a Servius, have imagined that they have instructed and obliged
Mankind, by employing all their Days upon. Wherefore if his Aeneis, which though
it were once near twenty times as big as he has left it, yet he has left it
unfinished, may not appear so valuable to you, that you may think Twenty seven
Verses of the Part that is the most finished in it, worth One and Twenty
Hundred Pounds and odd Money, yet his Georgicks, which he put his last Hand
unto, will furnish you with many things far from Despicable. But after all,
when I said, I was willing that the Beauties of these Two Poets, might become
Visible to your Visive Faculty in Poetry, I did not mean, that you should Judge
nothing to be Admittable into an Epic Poem, which is not Authorized by their
Example; but I perfectly concur with One who is inexpressibly more capable to
be a Judge of such a Matter than I can be; That it is a false Critic who with a
petulant Air, will insult Reason itself, if it presumes to oppose such
Authority:

I proceed now to say, That if (under the Guidance of a Vida) you try your
young Wings now and then to see what Flights you can make, at least for an
Epigram, it may a little sharpen your Sense, and polish your Style, for more
important Performances; For this Purpose you are now even overstock'd with
Patterns, and -- Poemata Passim. You may, like Nazianzen, all your Days, make a
little Recreation of Poetry in the midst of your more painful Studies.
Nevertheless, I cannot but advise you, Withhold thy Throat from Thirst. Be not
so set upon Poetry, as to be always poring on the Passionate and Measured
Pages. Let not what should be Sauce rather than Food for you, Engross all your
Application. Beware of a Boundless and Sickly Appetite, for the Reading of the
Poems, which now the Rickety Nation swarms withal: And let not the Circaean Cup
intoxicate you. But especially preserve the Chastity of your Soul from the
Dangers you may incur, by a Conversation with Muses that are no better than
Harlots: Among which are others besides Ovid's Epistles, which for their
Tendency to excite and foment Impure Flames, and cast Coals into your Bosom,
deserve rather to be thrown into the Fire, than to be laid before the Eye which
a Covenant should be made withal. Indeed, not merely for the Impu(...) which
they convey, but also on some other Accounts, the Powers of Darkness have a
Library among us, whereof the Poets have been the most Numerous as well as the
most Venomous Authors. Most of the Modern Plays, as well as the Romances and
Novels and Fictions, which are a sort of Poems, do belong to the Catalogue of
this cursed Library. The Plays, I say, in which there are so many Passages,
that have a Tendency to overthrow all Piety, that one whose Name is Bedford,
has extracted near Seven Thousand Instances of them, from the Plays chiefly of
but Five Years preceding; and says awfully upon them, They are National Sins,
and therefore call for National Plagues; And if GOD should enter into Judgment
all the Blood in the Nation would not be able to atone for them. How much do I
wish that such Pestilences, and indeed all those worse than Egyptian Toads,
[the Spawns of a Butler, and a Brown, and a Ward, and a Company whose Name is
Legion!] might never crawl into your Chamber! The unclean Spirits that come
like Frogs out of the Mouth of the Dragon, and of the Beast; which go forth
unto the young People of the Earth, and expose them to be dealt withal as the
Enemies of GOD, in the Battle of the Great Day of the Almighty. As for those
wretched Scribbles of Madmen, My Son, Touch them not, Taste them not, Handle
them not: Thou will perish in the using of them. They are, The Dragons whose
Contagious Breath Peoples the dark Retreats of Death. To much better Purpose
will an Excellent but an Envied Blackmore feast you, than those Vile Rapsodies
(of that Vinum Daemonum) which you will find always leave a Taint upon your
Mind, and among other ill Effects, will sensibly indispose you to converse with
the Holy Oracles of GOD your SAVIOR.

But there is, what I may rather call a Parenthess, than a Digression, which
this may be not altogether an Improper Place for the introducing of.

[There has been a deal of a do about a STYLE; So much, that I must offer you
my Sentiments upon it. There is a Way of Writing, wherein the Author
endeavors, that the Reader may have something to the Purpose in every
Paragraph. There is not only a Vigor sensible in every Sentence, but the
Paragraph is embellished with Profitable References, even to something beyond
what is directly spoken. Formal and Painful Quotations are not studied; yet all
that could be learnt from them is insinuated. The Writer pretends not unto
Reading, yet he could not have writ as he does if he had not Read very much in
his Time; and his Composures are not only a Cloth of Gold, but also stuck with
as many Jewels, as the Gown of a Russian Ambassador. This Way of Writing has
been decried by many, and is at this Day more than ever so, for the same
Reason, that in the old Story, the Grapes were decried, That they were not
Ripe. A Lazy, Ignorant, Conceited Set of Authors, would persuade the whole
Tribe, to lay aside that Way of Writing, for the same Reason that one would
have persuaded his Brethren to part with the Encumbrance of their Busby Tails.
But* however Fashion and Humor may prevail, they must not think that the Club
at their Coffee-House is, All the World; but there will always be those, who
will in this Case be governed by Indisputable Reason: And who will think, that
the real Excellency of a Book will neverly in saying of little; That the less
one has for his Money in a Book, it is really the more Valuable for it; and that
the less one is instructed in a Book, and the more of Superfluous Margin, and
Superficial Harangue, and the less of Substantial Matter one has in it, the
more it is to be accounted of And if a more Massy Way of Writing be never so much
disgusted at This Day, a Better Gust will come on, as will some other Things,
quae jam Cecidere. In the mean time, Nothing appears to me more Impertinent and
Ridiculous than the Modern Way, [I cannot say, Rule; For they have None!] of
Criticizing. The Blades that set up for Critics, I know not who constituted or
commissioned 'em! -- they appear to me, for the most part as Contemptible, as
they are a Supercilious Generation. For indeed no Two of them have the same
Style; and they are as intollerably Cross-grained and severe in their Censures
upon one another, as they are upon the rest of Mankind. But while each of them,
conceitedly enough, sets up for the Standard of Perfection, we are entirely at
a Loss which Fire to follow. Nor can you easily find any one thing wherein they
agree for their Style, except perhaps a perpetual Care to give us Jejune and
Empty Pages, without such Touches of Erudition (to speak in the Style of an
Ingenious Traveller) as may make the Discourses less Tedious, and more
Enriching, to the Mind of him that peruses them. There is much Talk of a Florid
Style, obtaining among the Pens, that are most in Vogue; but how often would it
puzzle one, even with the best Glasses to find the Flowers! And if they were to
be Chastized for it, it would be with much what as much of Justice, as Jerome
was, for being a Cic^ronian. After all, Every Man will have his own Style,
which will distinguish him as much as his Gate: And if you can attain to that
which I have newly described, but always writing so as to give an Easy
Conveyance unto your Idea's, I would not have you by any Scourging be driven
out of your Gate, but if you must confess a Fault in it, make a Confession like
that of the Lad, unto his Father while he was beating him for his Versifying.

However, since every Man will have his own Style, I would pray, that we may
learn to treat one another with mutual Civilities, and Condescensions, and
handsomely indulge one another in this, as Gentlemen do in other Matters.

I wonder what ails People, that they cannot let Cicero write in the Style of
Cicero, and Seneca write in the (much other!) Style of Seneca; and own that
Both may please in their several Ways. -- But I will freely tell you; what has
made me consider the Humcurists that set up for Critics upon Style, as the
most Unregardable Set of Mortals in the World, is This! Far more Illustrious
Critics than any of those to whom I am now bidding Defiance, and no less Men
than your Erasmus's, and your Grotius's, have taxed the Greek Style of the New
Testament, with I know not what Sol^ecisms and Barbarisms; And, how many
learned Folks have Obsequiously run away with the Notion! Whereas it is an
Ignorant and an Insolent Whimsey; which they have been guilty of. It may be
(and particularly by an Ingenious Blackwal, it has been) Demonstrated, That the
Gentlemen are mistaken in every one of their pretended Instances; All the
Unquestionable Classicks, may be brought in, to convince them of their
Mistakes. Those Glorious Oracles are as pure Greek as ever was written in the
World; and so Correct, so Noble, so Sublime is their Style, that never any
thing under the Cope of Heaven, but the Old Testament, has equaled it.]

9. What we call NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, is what I must encourage you to spend much
more Time in the Study of.

Do it, with continual Contemplations and agreeable Acknowledgements of the
Infinite GOD, whose Perfections are so displayed in His Works before you, that
from them, you cannot but be perpetually ravished into the Acclamations of, How
Great is His Goodness and His Beauty!

Do it, with a Design to be led into those Views wherewith you will in Ways
most Worthy of a Man effectually Show yourself a Man, and may with Unutterable
Satisfaction answer the main END of your Being, which is, To Glorify GOD; and
therein also Discharge the Office of a Priest for the Creation; which, how
sweet a, Token for Good, must it be unto you!

When I said, Natural Philosophy, you may be sure, I did not mean, the
Peripatetic: For I heartily subscribe to the Censure of Christianus Thomasius
upon it; Omne Tempus pro Perdito judicandum, quod in Physicam Peripateticor^m
impenditur; ita inepta et stulta ibi sunt Omnia. It is indeed amazing to see
the Fate of the Writings which go under the Name of Aristotle. First falling
into the hands of those who could not Read them, and yet for the sake of the
Famous Author were willing to keep them; they were for a long while hid under
Ground, where many of them deserved a Lodging. And from this Place of Darkness
the Torn or Worn Manuscripts were anon fetched out; and imperfectly and
unfaithfully enough transcribed, and conveyed from Athens to Rome, where Copies
were in like Manner taken of them. The Saracens by'nd by got them, and (the
Concise and Broken Style a little suiting them) they spoke Arabic; and even in
Africa there were many Aristotelean Schools erected. They were from thence
brought over into Spain, and Exhibited with such Translations and Commentaries
as it pleased the Arabians to bestow upon them. When Learning revived under
Charlemaigne, all Europe turned Aristotelean; yea, in some Universities they
swore Allegiance to him; and, O Monstrous! if I am not misinformed, they do in
some Universities at this Day foolishly and profanely on their Knees continue
to do so. With the Vile Person that made himself the Head of the Church at
Rome, this Muddy-headed Pagan divided the Empire over the Christian World; but
extended his Empire further than he, or ever any Tamerlane. For the very Jews
themselves became his Vassals, with a Tradition of his having some Relation to,
or at least some Acquaintance with, their Fathers. And though Europe has, with
fierce and long Struggles about it, begun to shake off the Shackles, he does to
This Day, under the Name of Aplis, continue to Tyrannize over Humane
Understanding in a great Part of the Oriental World. No Mortal else ever had
such a Prerogative to Govern Mankind, as this Philosopher; who after the
prodigious Cartloads of Stuff, that has been Written to explain him [For within
a few Centuries after Albertus Magnus, there were Twelve Thousand Authors that
wrote upon him; or followed him and defended him; and by a probable
Computation, there have since been more than as many more!] he yet remains in
many other Things besides his Entelechia sufficiently Unintelligible, and
forever in almost all things Unprofitable. Avicen, after he had read his
Metaphysics Forty times over, and had them all by Heart, was forced after all,
to lay them aside, in Despair of ever Understanding them. Have done then, with
your Magirus, and your Eustachius, and your Heereboord; and the rest of the
Jargon-Writers. Just so far as to see a little what they say, you may look into
them; Whatsoever is more, comes of Evil, and Evil will Come of it.

Some Eminent Persons, besides a Sennertus and a Val^sius, tired with the
Academical Futilities, have at length betaken themselves to the best School for
Philosophy as well as for Theology. The Mosaic Philosophy in the Scheme that
Comenius has given of it, is much admired and embraced in some Reforming
Universities; and you will do well to bestow a deliberate Reading upon it. The,
Philosophia Vetus ac Vera, of the rare Dickinson, has given us a yet finer
Piece of Mosaic Work, which must always be honorably spoken of. But, though it
be true, that the Sacred Scriptures have a wondrous Philosophy in them, and a
Memorable Dutchman has lately demonstrated, that, according to what every Day
makes more and more Evident, the Prophetic Spirit from whose Inspiration they
are given to us, knew and owned, the now most indisputed Things which occur in
the Discoveries of our Modern Philosophy; yet it is now plain, the First
Chapter of Genesis, (as well as the rest of the Bible, which refers to the
System of the World,) has not been well understood by most of the Gentlemen
that have writ upon it. However, because of the Regard therein paid unto Moses,
and the Traduction of our Philosophy from the Holy Fountains, (though Plato be
advanced with him) I do particularly approve your perusing of the, Philosophia
generalis, written by our equally Modest and Learned Gale, so as to make
yourself a Master of it. I cannot but confess, that the Hypotheses which the
more Ingenious and Inquisitive Sons of the Wild Asses Colt, have hitherto
mostly valued themselves upon, have been too justly called, Philosophical
Romances, and it may be, what is now most in Vogue, may ^non be refuted and
refused like its Predecessors. Nevertheless, I would have you take wha^ may
appear least likely to prove Romantic: And therefore, as thorough an Insight as
you can get into the Principles of our Perpetual Dictator, the Incomparable Sr.
Isaac Newton, is what I mightily commend unto you.

Be sure, The Experimental Philosophy is that, in which alone your Mind can be
at all established. For this Purpose, besides your more occasionally Conversing
with such things as, our Philosophical Transactions, and several Communications
of our Illustrious Boil, and of Hook, and of Grew, and Cheyne, and Keil, and
those also that have written the Natural History of several Places, [and such
Outlandish Writings as those of Bartholinus, and Borellus, and the German
Ephemerides] I would Commend unto you, The Religious Philosopher, of the
Admirable Nieuentyt; and what has been communicated by our Industrious Ray, and
our Ingenuous Derham, who still nobly serve Religion as well as Philosophy. And
whatever it might be for me to say so unto any One else, I hope, it will be no
Indecency for me to say so unto you; That if you desire to see the largest
Collection, I have yet seen of the Discoveries which the last Age has made in
Philosophy, adapted unto the general Capacity of Readers; and short Essays upon
every Article, to Show and Raise those Dispositions of PIETY, wherein the Works
of the Holy and Blessed GOD invite us to Live unto Him; together with the First
Claim that I have ever yet seen so explicitly made on the behalf of a Glorious
CHRIST, and the Consideration due to him in our Philosophy; you have this
prepared for you in a Book Entitled, THE CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHER.

Above all, I would have you see to it, that you be not, like some haughty, and
short-sighted, and half-witted, Smatterers in Philosophy, seduced into the
Folly of doubting the Existence or Providence of a Glorious GOD, by a Study,
which, if well-pursued, would Compel you to come in to a Strong Faith,
wherewith you would give Glory to Him, on all Occasions. I hope, every step of
your Study, will give you more and more Satisfaction, of what One of our Best
Philosophers, the Author of, The Natural History of the Earth, adheres unto;
That as the World was at first Created, so it has been ever since preserved, by
the Immediate Hand of GOD. You will see, That the Influences of one thing upon
another in the Course of Nature are purely from the Omnipotent and Omnipresent
GOD, actually forever at Work, according to His own Laws, and putting His Laws
in Execution, and as the Universal Cause producing those Effects, whereof the
Creatures are but what One may call, The Occasional Causes. You will also be
often and quickly carried up into those Immechanical Principles, from whence,
The next step is into GOD! The Gravitation of Bodies is One of them; For which
No Cause can be assigned, but the Will of the Glorious GOD, who is the First
Cause of all. Child, See GOD in every Thing! Own Him, Fear Him, Love Him; Study
Philosophy with a perpetual Intention to do so. Remember, GOD is to Spirits,
what Center is to Bodies. And, A Mind that from the View of the Glorious GOD in
his Works, is carried into Acknowledgements of a GOD infinitely Worthy to be
Loved and Praised and Served and Relied upon, becomes a Temple filled with the
Glory of the Lord. Visit for this Purpose the several Classes of the Creatures:
Walk through the World; [and be so far a Peripatetic!] and in this generous
Exercise, Fear GOD and give Glory unto Him.

10. The MATHEMATICS will be, next unto Philosophy, a noble Study for you; The
most Essential Parts whereof, you have in the Cursus Mathematious of an Ozanam
so delivered unto you, that indeed you will hardly need any more. Though you are
shaping for a Divine, yet I should not be sorry to see you as Exquisite a
Mathematician as the Excellent Pitiscus, who, though he were a Divine, yet
without a Tutor became such an High Attainer in this Real Learning, that
Melchior Adam cries out, Illud Mirandum! upon it: And it caused the Noble Tycho
Brahe to say, Optarem plures ejusmodi Concionatores reperiri: forte plus esset
in iis Circumspecti et Solidi Judicii. I should not be sorry to see a Wallis,
or a Wilkins, or a Barrow, revived in you, if your Genius lead you to it.

Besides the other Uses of ARITHMETIC and GEOMETRY, [wherein an Hill and an
Euclid, or, The Young Mathematicians Guide of a Ward, instead of Both, may
singularly be commended for you,] you will find this Benefit by the Study of
them; They will Necessitate and Habituate your Mind unto that Strong Attention,
which will marvellously Qualify you for more Important Services, and make a
Strong Reasoner of you, and a very Regular and Cohaerent Speaker. They were
distinguished by the Name of Mathesis, and made the First Learning in some
Ancient Schools, for this very Reason. And you may be sure, I should reckon it
a further Encouragement unto the Study, if the General Rule might hold without
any Exception, That Great Mathematicians use to be Men of Good Morals; It seems
that their Intense Applications and Speculations are inconsistent with
Debaucheries. While you are thus employed, Methinks, it might be a pretty
Diversion to go through some of Leybourn's Mathematical Recreations.

But you must also soar Upwards, to the Seize of ASTRONOMY. For though of
later Ages, the Voluminous Tostatus whom they complemented as having all the
Learning in the World, were no better an Astronomer, than Justin Martyr, and
Ambrose, and Theodoret, and Chrysostom, and Austin himself, who in the more
Early Ages declaimed violently against the Spherical Figure of the Heavens; I
should be loath you should through Ignorance in Astronomy, ever fall into what
even a Jerome would call Stultiloquium in Ecclesia. Wherefore, I cannot but
advise you to be well instructed in the Astronomical Lectures, as of an
Accurate Keill, so of the Acute Whiston; while we are Mourning, that he who so
excellently serves us in Astronomy, should so unhappily hurt us in Divinity,
and call into Question, (as a Dubious Problem) the Infinite and Eternal Godhead
of Him FOR whom, as well as BY whom, the Sun and the Stars were created.

At the same time, I hope, there is no need of my saying any thing to dissuade
you from the Study of JUDICIAL ASTROLOGY: The most Injudicious Thing in the
World: All Futility; All Impiety; All of a Piece with the ridiculous Whim of a
Gaffarel, who maintains, That the Stars in the Heavens do stand ranged in the
form of Hebrew Letters, and that it is possible to Read there whatever is to
happen of Importance throughout the Universe. And yet perhaps, there may be
some Need for me to Caution you against being Dismayed at the Signs of the
Heavens, or having any Superstitious Fancies upon Eclipses and the like
Occurrences, or thinking that if there were a Conjunction of all the Planets in
Pisces, it would portend that the World should be Drowned. Yea, I am willing
that the Cometomancy which has hitherto so much reigned, even in the most
Honest Minds, be laid aside with you; and that you be apprehensive of nothing
Portentous in Blazing Stars, except it should be apprehended, that in their
Elliptic Motions they may make so near an Appulse unto this Globe as to bring
some Confusion upon it. For my Part, I know not whether all our Worlds, and
even the Sun it self, may not fare the better for them. Some, that know more
than I, do think so. Indeed, if you persuade a World, here lying in Wickedness,
there to see a Praesage, and to take a Warning, from the tremendous View of a
World in a State of Punishment, I will say, Go on and Prosper.

But I will now so far fetch you down from the Stars, and set you down on your
Native Soil, as to tell you, That there is nothing Mathematical to which I more
advise you, than the easy Study of GEOGRAPHY. Perhaps the Situation of
Paradise and of Palestine, and of the Places mentioned in the Sacred
Scriptures, may be what you would be willing to be first of all acquainted
with. And for this, Let the Admirable Bochart be your principal Instructor.
What has been chiefly taken from him, and from two or three more, in three or
four Octavo's under the Title of Sacred Geography, [by one W^lls,] may herein
also be of some Use to you. The Pisgah Sight of a Fuller, will be read with a
Pleasure equal to the Profit; and the Palestina Illustrata of a Reland, perhaps
with a Profit greater than the Pleasure. But you will not give over, till more
of the World, has come into your Knowledge, than the Decree of an Augustus
could reach unto. Wherefore, after a Morden or a Gordon, [together with a
Varenius,] has given you a more Compendious View of the World, I say no thing
of a Work Entitled, Geography Rectified, because it is not easy to find a Work
that more wants to be Rectified; but what I say next, is, that the Atlas
Geographus, will be a yet more instructive Guide for you, in your taking the
Tour of the several Regions in it. You may then, as your Inclinations may carry
you, with Delight and Safety make your Visits to particular Countries and Citys,
in the Descriptions given of them. And here, while I suppose, that what a
Cambden has given you in his Britannia, will be no unacceptable Entertainment
for you, I cannot but notify it unto you, that, The English Empire in America,
described by One Oldmixon, is the most foolish and faithless Performance in
this Kind, that ever Mankind was abused withal. I am desirous, that you proceed
and peruse many of the Travels that have been published; and (if you dare not
venture upon a Purchase) by conversing with many more than what are exhibited in
that Rich Collection which goes under the Name of, Itinerantium atque
Navigantium Bibliotheca, you may with little Expense or Hazard become a notable
Traveller. In your thus Riding a Circuit, you will especially inform yourself
about, The State of Religion, in the World: [And methinks, Pagets
Christianography, and Brierwood's Enquiries, may particularly deserve a Reading
with you:] And you will have your Heart thereupon raised in Sentiments of
Gratitude unto a Sovereign GOD, who has cast your Lot among a People whom He
has known above most of the Families of the Earth: Even so Righteous Father,
for so it pleases thee! -- and Compassion for a World over so much of which the
Powers of Darkness continue to Tyrannize: Disposed like an Owner of, Sellers
New System of Geography, whom I found inserting with his Pen this Note at the
End of it; Peccantis et Perditi tam vasti Mundi, miserere Deus! Yea, In fine,
Let me tell you, This Easy Study will not only furnish you to maintain a
Profitable Conversation, and a Communication that may minister Grace, and be
ever Acceptable, to the Hearers: But if you prove a Man of Concern for the
Kingdom of GOD in the World, it may bring you to form those Projections, by
which, as little as you are in your own Eyes, whole Nations may anon come to
fare the better for you.

For MUSIC, I know not what well to say. -- Do as you please. If you Fancy it,
I don't Forbid it. Only do not for the sake of it, Alienate your Time too much,
from those that are more Important Matters. It may be so, that you may serve
your GOD the better, for the Refreshment of One that can play well on an
Instrument. However, to accomplish yourself at Regular Singing, is a thing that
will be of Daily Use to you. For I would not have a Day pass you without
Singing, but so as at the same time to make a Melody in your Heart unto the
Lord; Besides the Part you may bear, In Hymnis suavisonantis Ecclesi^e.

I will conclude this Article, with a Remark made by Perault, in his Account of
Illustrious Men. Some Reproached Gassendus, for not knowing enough certain
parts of the Math maticks. Whereupon he says; Whether he was actually Ignorant
of what was most Abstruse in these Sciences, or whether he Neglected (...) he
could not but be the more Commendable for it. There is something of Little, in
tying ones self up too much to little Things; and even of Imprudence too, to
consume therein a Time, which may be employed more usefully on other Knowledge.

. 11. If the Emperor Basil had not in his Instructions to a Son, recommended
unto him HISTORY, as a Way of Traveling without Fatigue, yet you may be sure,
My SON, I should have recommended unto you an Acquaintance with HISTORY, as one
of the most Needful and Useful Accomplishments, for a Man that would serve GOD
as you Propose to do. The Praises of that Method which they that handle the Pen
of the Writer, have taken to stop the Flood of things, and give a Consistency
and a Duration unto them, that Historians usually begin their Works withal, and
the Flourishes about, Lux Veritatis, Vita Memoriae, Magistra Vitae, and I know
not what, are as unnecessary on this Occasion, as they are on that whereon we
commonly have them. And though perhaps we cannot meet with such Historians, as Le
Moyne pleases to require, but such as he says, Will not appear until the Year
when the Philosophers Stone shall be discovered; yet I would not have you
discouraged from Reading the Best we have. But for this Purpose, I shall be far
from advising you to impose on yourself, the tedious Task of Reading over the
Hundreds of Histories, which Degory Whear, or the Frenchman who has more lately
written, L'Histoire des Histoires, may obtrude upon you, except you were to
have the long Life of an Antediluvian; and even then also, to Read them all
would be to spend much Time impertinently. Pehaps a Concise Body of Universal
History, may be very properly laid in the Foundation of your Historical
Studies. And though Hornius, his Arca Noae, be Admirable, and Sleidans little
Book, De quatuor summis Imperiis, be far from Despicable; yet I cannot presently
think of a Better, than Matthias Prideaux, his Easy and Compendious
Introduction for the Reading all sorts of Histories. Proceed then, to some
Volumns of larger Dimensions; Among which I can tell of none that I could more
heartily commend unto you, than Howel, his Institution of General History: And
upon this, add, Pussendorf's Introduction. But I will here Betimes lay in for
this; In Reading of all History, ever now and then make a convenient Pause; to
think, What can I see of the Glorious GOD in these Occurrences? And always
remember, The Providence of the Glorious GOD in governing the World, is now
under my Contemplation.

Doubtless you will have a Desire, if you can find a Leisure, to Read some
Histories of Particular Countries. And here, as I know none better than Mezeray,
for France; Mariana, for Spain; Grotius, for Holland; Knoles with Rycaut, for
the Ottoman Empire; Ludolphus, for Abyssinia; Crull, for Russia; [there are
several small Story-tellers for Persia, and Indoustan,] Martinius, and some
other Jesuits [but you must Remember, they are Jesuits!] for China; Martyr,
or Acosta, or Ogilby, for America; Buchanan, for Scotland; and Cox for Ireland;
So, I would prefer Baker, for England; especially, if you could come at an
Edition that was printed before what they call, The Restoration. The Memorials
of English Affairs, from the supposed Expedition of Brute into the Island,
until the coming of K. James, I. [Don't something in the Title sound a little
oddly?] written by Whitlock, or the little, Medulla Historiae Angelicanae, may
also be to you a pretty Abstract of our English History.

But the mention of English Affairs pushes me, even with some Anticipation,
into the Caution which I am to give you, about Reading all our Common
Histories, but none more than the English ones; That is, To believe with
Discretion. Alas, The Vanity which attends Humane Affairs! As there are many
Men and Things that are scarce mentioned in True History, which deserve a
mention more than some that are universally celebrated; What Hero's are buried
among those who lived before the Days of Agmemnon? And Walter Plettenberg is
less known than a Turkish Pyrate: What has been ponderous has (as my Lord Bacon
expresses it) been sunk to the Bottom in the Stream of Time, while we have
Straw and Stubble swimming a top: So, it is a thing, that may be too truly, but
cannot be too sadly, complained of; That the Instances wherein False History has
been imposed upon the World, are what cannot be numbered. Historians have
generally taken after their Father Herodotus: And even One of themselves,
Vopiscus by Name, has expressly said of them, They are all them Liars: This
Witness is True! Though they have not all of them always been such Mercenary
Villains as Bishop Jovius, or that scandalous Fellow, who more lately so hired
himself out as an History Writer for the highest Bidder, that his Countrymen,
the Italians, fixed that Motto on him, Not according to the History but the
Salary; yet One who gently enough Criticizes on them, too Justly questions,
Whether any Modern Historian has thought of any more than pleasing the Prince
or Party for which he wrote. The Ancient are not much better than the Modern;
Whereof we have a notorious and amazing Example in Josephus. It would be too
long a Digression to relate his Vile Prevarications; which have compelled us to
concur unto the Censure passed by our Gregory upon him; That being Ambitious to
have his Work find Acceptance among the Heathen, he did so compose his History
as to propose nothing that might appear Incredible to them, and not have some
Congruity with what had been, and was likely again to be among them. Indeed all
honest Men are scandalized, no less than Castrius, at the Pains he takes to
make his Court unto the Roman Princes by his Heathen Judaism; wherein, as One
says, he was more Impious than the Philistines who placed the Ark by Dagon.

What a fine Story are we like to have, of as Infamous a Reign as ever was in
the World, and a Tyranny all made up of Treacheries, and Robberries, and
Cruelties that cannot be paralleled, when it comes from Three Poets, each of
them, with a Pension of Twelve Thousand Livres a Year, to give us a Panegyric
instead of an History, and outdo a Paterculus blanching his Tiberius! How
little many Representations of Matters in Histories are to be relied upon,
methinks, it may be a little illustrated from the Two chief Commanders in a
Memorable Battle of Belgrade, both of which, wrote the History of the Battle,
without the least mention made by the one of the other each assuming to himself
the entire Honor of the Day. You will certainly say, Who can understand his
Errors? -- When the Admirable Erasmus himself mistakes one Man for two, in
writing of what was a great while ago; and three professed and eminent
Historians give us a very wrong Account of the Gentleman who a much less while
ago, founded the Charter House,; and though no Writer of History ever were more
Meritorious, than the Incomparable Thuanus, yet Learned Men have said of his
Performance, that it contained, Multa falsissima et indigna. Yea, there are
Historians, of whom one can scarce tell which to admire most, the Nature of
their Lies, or their Manner of telling them; I mean, the Impudence with which
they tell them. For Instance, it is pretty well, that Hozier the French King's
Genealogift, has discovered no less than Four Thousand wrong Things in
Varillas, the same King's Historian; And another observes, every single Page in
him, has almost as many Errors, as a Printers ordinary Table of Errata. But
then, what an Impudent Fellow was Philanax Anglicus, when he accused Calvin of
Delicacy, and Epicureanism in his Way of Living; and quotes Florimond de Remond
for a Witness of it; who, he says, has left us a lively Image of him. Whereas,
if you consult this Florimond de Remond, the lively Image which he gives of
Calvin, is, That from his Youth he macerated his Body with Fasting, and that
hardly could be found a Man that equalled him for his Laboriousness. Be sure,
the late Historians, that pretend unto an, History of England, for us, write
with such flagrant Partialities, and are such evident Leasing-makers, and palm
upon you so very wrong and base Exhibitions, especially of late Occurrences,
that one may as well believe the True History of a Lucian, as yield any Credit
unto them. If you must read them, yet as to things that passed in the former
Century, I would hardly so much as look upon many of them. And among These,
though several are bad enough, yet there is none that has done so Ill as an
Eachard, (I mean, in his English, and not in his Roman History,) who should not
be admitted into the Library of a Gentleman that has any Concern for Truth;
except he will assign him a Place on the same Shelf, with the Grand Cyrus, or,
Cleopatra. A late Critical History of England, has done some Justice upon him.
Indeed the Historians never keep closer to the Way of Lying, than in the
Relation they give of those Twenty Years, which passed after the Beginning of
our Civil Wars, and afforded a very ample and fertile Field, for their Faculty
to work upon. Among these, the Romance that goes under the Title of, The
History of the Grand Rebellion, and is fathered on the Earl of Charendon, I
would have you more particularly treat with the Disregard that is proper for
it. If you would come at all near to the Truth of what Concerns those Times,
you must look for it, in Whitlock, his Memorials of English Affairs, from the
Beginning of K. Charles I. to the Restoring of K. Charles II. And Rushworth his
Collections. And yet even there, some of the greatest Persons and Actions have
not always Full Justice done them. I do particularly Advertise you, That the
Mighty Man, whom not only our King William (as Fleming reports) had a very high
Esteem for, but also his most bigoted and bitterest Enemies confess to have
been a Matchless Hero, and (as even Sr. Roger Manly himself, as well as many
more of his Bran, acknowledges) Not unworthy of the Supreme Height of Empire
which he attained to, has never yet had his History fairly and fully given; and
when you read it given (as they are now Approaching toward it) with the
greatest Impartiality wherein you have hitherto seen it, you may bear ^is in
your Mind, that the Principal Stroke in his Character, and the Principal Spring
of his Conduct, is forever defectively Related.

As for such Abominable Pens, as what the Athenae Oxonienses of a Wood have
been Excretions from, you cannot sufficiently Despise them and Abhor them. And
I will further tell you, That if in any History, you happen to find any
Vindicating or Favorable Passages of old A Bishop Laud, Let these be
Shibboleth enough with you, to do the Office which the Rattle does for the
Serpent, which our Country is no Stranger to. Yea, and when you Read, even such
Conscientious Historians, as a Baxter, and a Burnet, you must make Allowances
for some Hearsays, which led them into Mistakes; and for certain Prejudices,
the Tincture whereof a little influenced their Views of what they were
disaffected to.

Having thus armed you, for a Walk among the Woods of Civil History, I must now
propose CHURCH HISTORY, with a yet more earnest Wish, to have you
well-acquainted with it. For, although Grotius observes, Qui legit Historiam
Ecclesiasticam, quid legit, nisi Episcoporum Vitia? And others have been so
Satirical as to say, Ecclesiastical History is nothing but many large Volumns,
containing some few of the Squabbles of the Bishops, and Inferior Clergy, with
One another, and all the World. Nevertheless a Divine has a Blemish upon him,
almost as Disqualifying as any of the Hundred and Forty which the Jews reckon
to bring a Priest of theirs under Incapacities, if Church History has not
instructed him for the Business of the Sanctuary.

Now, for a Regular System of Church History, I know not that I can tender you
a Better, than Spanheim, his Introductio ad Historiam et Antiquitates Sacras;
To which, by all means add, Hornius, his Historia Ecclesiastica: And Usher,
his, De Christianarum Ecclesrarum Successione et Statu. If you would have what
is English, and Easy, it is done to your Hand by a Scotchman, that is to say,
Patrick Sympson, in his History of the Church. Somewhat larger than these, and
never enough to be commended, is, Hottinger, his, Historia Ecclesiastica Novi
Testamenti But then, I would have you, if you don't wholly Peruse, yet by all
means Possess, and often Visit, the Ecclesiastical History of the
Magdeburgensian Centuriators; Of which noble Work I will say, what Spanheim
said before me; That it is, Bibliotheca totius Christianae Antiquitatis. --
incredibili cum Studio, Fide optima, Meth do utilissima, cong^sta.

There have been also more particular Essays of Church History, which you may
do well to find some time for Conversation with. Such more especially are what
we have had from Eusebius, whom they call The Father of Church History;
Together with, The Tripartite History, of Socrates, and Theodoret, and Sozomen,
continued by Evagri^s. As a kind of a Postscript whereunto, you can scarce Read
a more profitable Thing than, Vedelius, his, Prudentia Veteris Ecclesiae. But
you may prudently Join with it, Millar, his, History of the Propagation of
Christianity. And with how much Edification run over, Illyricus, his Catalogus
Testium Veritatis! Coming lower down, I am fond of your Familiarity with a
Book, very little known among us; It Is Regenvolscius, his, Systema
Historico-Chronologicum Ecclesiarum Sclavonicarum. But you will do well also to
read Sleidan, his, Commentaries; Moreland, his History of the Waldenses;
Calderwood, his Church History of Scotland; Fuller, his Church History of
England: And Burnet, his History of the Reformation Therein make wise
Reflections on the Providence of Him, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth,
for the upholding of His Kingdom in the World. Nor should our Martyrologies be
left unconsulted. But in them you will behold the Cup given to CHRIST Mystical,
in the Sufferings of His Faithful People; and admire the Operations of the
SPIRIT that strengthened the Sufferers with such Patience, and such Fortitude:
The Grace given to the Children of Men! As for the Histories of Councils, if
Angelocrator's brief Epitome Conciliorum do not content you, I cannot wish you
to go beyond Coriolanus. The more Elephantine Books of them, I will not so much as
give you the Titles; But instead of them, I pray read Baxter, his,
Church History of the Government of Bishops and their Councils. Nevertheless,
The History of the Council of Trent, and the, Acta of the Synod of Dort, I
could be glad, if you could give some Winter-Evenings to. And what an
Illustrious Person has offered as a KING upon, The Discipline of the Primitive
Church; and, The History of the Creed; must by no means be forgotten in the
Visits of your Studies.

But Cicero is not the only Gentleman, who has been able to say, That in
History they have especially studied the Pourtraiture of Wise Men, who have
been before them, to imprint on themselves as far as might be, the Resemblance
of them. I hope you will do so too; and read the Lives, especially of them who
have done worthily in Israel: Not only on the Intention of rendering Praises to
the Glorious GOD, who did such Things as you will see done For and By these
notable Men, but also Intending in as many Points as may be, to Go and Do
likewise. Be sure, that whatever you see Great, and Good, and Bright, in any
Excellent Person, whose Life you have in your Hands, you look off to the
Glorious JESUS, as having in HIM all these Excellencies after a Transcendent
Manner, and as being the Author and Giver of them to the Distinguished Gloworm.
And when you read of any imitable PIETY in any of them, think with your self;
The Virtues of this Man, were first i^ the JESUS that called him into this
mavelous Light, and from him it was derived unto this Believer. O my SAVIOR,
Let me also feel such Influences of thy Holy SPIRIT as may change me into the
same Image from Glory to Glory! More particularly, There are two little
Octavo's Entitled, Biographia Ecclesiastica, or, The Lives of the most Eminent
Fathers of the Christian Church, which you must needs make yourself Owner of.
And if you go into Cave, his, Lives of the Fathers, you will be well
entertained there. The Lives written by Melchior Adam, may be very Edifying for
the Latin as well as the Matter of them. So are the Vitae Selectorum aliquot
Virorum, which One (they say, a Bates) has bound up in a Bundle for us. In
Witten, his Memoriae Renovatae, you may ever now and then find an Oration,
which an Hour will not be unprofitably thrown away, that shall be afforded to.
Indeed, Frehe^us, his Theatrum, has in it such an Abbreviation of Lives, that
his Pictures will give you almost as much Pleasure as his Accounts, of them
that have been Men of Renown in the Congregation of the learned: Yet I can tell
you of Theaters much less worthy to be gone unto. And though there hardly ever
was a more Dull and Lifeless Transcriber than our S. Clark, yet in the
Collections of Lives that go under his Name, there are very many highly worth,
not only your Considering of, but also your Conforming to them: And you may
read his Collections, with another sort of Reliance, than you can the Romances
of a Simeon Metaphrastes; whom even a Baronius himself is ashamed of. Of the
many Lives that have been published since those Collections, there are so many,
which you will not be either Weary or the Worse, for casting your Eye upon, that
if I should go to tell you which, I shall tire you with too long a Catalogue.
If I should enter upon it, I hope, I should steer clear, of Bellarmine's
Disingenuity, for which our Prideaux well taxes him, who in his Book, Of
Ecclesiastical Writers, has not the Honesty to Name one of our Side; But I
would encourage you to read the Life of a William Burkitt, as well as of a
Philip Henry; and what you have in Fuller, his Worthies of England, and what a
Walton has Collected, as w^ as what you have in the Life of a Guthry, an Angier
a Flavel, and a Dorney; a Dr. More, as well as a Dr. Manton; a Dr. Horneck, as
well as well as a Dr. Owen. I had left unmentioned the Parent^tor which gives
the Life of Dr. Mather, if the Old Usage it has met withal, had not compelled
me to mention it. But now, I have Reason more than ever to say, Let that
History be taken in among those, that (particularly for Variety) may have some
Consideration with you.

In fine: It Is possible you may find a Church History, wherein the Lives of
Good Men may be the most significant Ingredients of the Composition. If you do,
I wish you the Satisfaction of Time well spent in such harmless Company.

I have nothing to add, but that you must have the Clock of Time set right with
you, by CHRONOLOGY, if you would be an Understanding Traveller in History. For
the Chronology of the Bible, I can refer you to none so well as to a Whiston,
whose Decisive Searches do supersede all the Trouble of repairing to those who
have writ before him. And for the Chronology of all Ages, our Tallents has by
his Tables prepared such a Feast for you, that you will have little Need of
repairing to any other Quarter. An Usher, a Calvisius, a Baily, will enrich
your Library; and it may be worth your while to have them at hand upon
Occasion. But for a Daily Recourse, you can have nothing at hand more
Expeditious, or more Comprehensive, than the Thesaurus Chronologiae of the
Gentleman, whose Name was very truly Anagrammatized into Sedulitas; in which
Quality I wish you may make a Pattern of him.

That your Library may be furnished with a Magazine of History, to which you
may continually go for every thing that your Mind may lead you to, the,
Theatrum Humanae Vitae, of a Zuinger, in the last and large Edition, is one of
the Best that I can advise you to. For Occasional Readings, you may do well to
divert yourself with Camerarius his Horae Subcesivae; with Prideaux, his
Connection; and with such Things as Wanly, his History of Man; and Cambdens
Remains. I would have added, a Montfaucon his Antiquities Explained, if I could
have told you, how to come at so costly a Collection. But I may add, Lewis's
Hebrew, Kennet's Roman, and Potter's Greek Antiquities as worthy your Having
and Reading.

But for a yet more Immense Treasure of History and of all that belongs unto
it, Hofman has a Lexicon for you in Four stately Folio's, which alone may be
called, A Library. The Great Historical Dictionary now appearing in English,
has been growing from Stephens's Time, through the Hands of Loyd, and Moreri, and
others, till at last, an odd Man by hurting and mangling of it, and making some
Additions (whereof many are none of the best,) unto it, has obtained that it
must go under the Name of Collier: A Fate quite the Reverse of what has
befallen Calepine. It should with all its Faults be in your Library; But then,
The Critical History of Bail, if you can be enriched with it, will not only
correct many of the Faults in that, but also be for you almost another Library.
It Is a Work to be wondered at! Only guard against the Manichaean Sophistry,
sometimes appearing in it.

And here it may be a proper Time for me to say; When you see such astonishing
Effects of Erudition and Application, produced from the Sons of Men, as you
will find in some that have been (and others that might be) mentioned, Let the
Sight still produce from you some due Acknowledgements of the Glorious GOD; My
GOD, I adore thy Power, thy Wisdom, thy Goodness, Conspicuous in these
Wonderful Performances!

But for the Close of all, I will give you this One Hint of a more general
Importance. There are Books, which for the Grateful Stores of Learning amassed
in them, I cannot but wish, that you would in the Parentheses of your Studies,
often repair unto. Those which among these, I would more particularly single
out for a Recommendation to you, are, the, De Veritate Religionis Christianae,
of a Grotius: The Demonstratio Evangelica, of a Huetius; The Theologoumena, of
an Owen; Every Thing of an admirable Hospinian; or Heidegger; The Apology of an
Hakewel; The Miscellanea, and Meletemata, of a Witsius; Parker on, The Cross:
Basnage his History of the Jews: Adding, the Origines Sacrae of a
Stillingfleet; the Court of the Gentiles, of a Gale; and the, Antiquitates
Biblicae, of a Dietenious.

. 12. Even while you are yet in your Early ^uth, and but in your Course toward
the Fair Havens of Theology, at which I am now quickly to Land you, I would
advise to Two Things, whereof you will certainly find an inexpressible and
almost incredible Advantage.

One Thing that I advise you to, is This. Keep your QUOTIDIANA. I mean Have
your Blank Books, in which Note with your Pen, for the most Part Every Day,
[Let there be, Nulla Dies sine Linea!] Some Notable Thing, which in Reading you
have newly met withal. By this Action you will fix the Valuable Notion in your
Mind: And in a few Years, you will have a Treasure, from whence as a Scribe
instructed for the Kingdom of Heaven, you may bring out Things New and Old, and
have agreeable Grains of Salt for all your Discourses. You will not for this,
Use the Unequal Way, of entering the Riches, of your Quotidiana, in Pages with
the Titles of a Commonplace at the Tops of them, whereof some will be soon
Crammed, and others remain Empty, perhaps all your Days: But, Enter the Things
as they come, with only affixing the Number to them: And have, at the End of
the Books an Alphabetical Index, of the Matter, with the Number at which it is
to be met withal. Here you will anon have an inexhaustible Magazine; and if you
live to Old Age, you will find, that, like Old Photius, you have prepared an
Hive then to live upon. I will not say, you will be quickly as rich as Craesus;
for poor Craesus will have no Riches comparable to what you will have in your
Collections.

Another Thing that I advise you to, is This. Form a SODALITY. What I mean, is,
Prevail with a Fit Number, [ Six or Seven may be a Competency, or Fewer, if you
cannot find so many,] of Sober, Ingenious, and Industrious Young Men, to
Associate with you, and meet One Evening in a Week, for the spending of Two or
Three Hours, in a Profitable Conversation. At this Interview, Let there be
always a sort of Director, who shall propose this Question, (and see, that
without needless Digressions and Excursions it be kept close unto,) What
Remarkable and Memorable Matter has occurred in late Studies, that is thought
now to be offered? Let the Question be Articulated, and more particularly and
successively turn upon these Articles. I. What in Philology? II. What in
Philosophy? III. What in Geography, and the rest of the M thematicks? IV. What
in History? V. What in Illustrations of the Sacred Scriptures; Or, Biblical
Curiosities? Let each Person, in what Order they shall agree upon, give his
Report as Concisely as may be. But it will not be expected, that each Person
should be prepared, at every Time, with something on every Head: It is enough,
that he bring in, for that Cell, which he happens to be best furnished for. All
Altercations, and all Impertinencies, are to be forever banished from those
Communications of the Sodality. But how much could I wish, that you could gain
one Quarter of an Hour in the close of all, to relate, What rare Flight or fine
Stroke of the Christian Asceticks, has been met withal; and what for the
Animation of Practical PIETY? Behold, a way to clench the Nails that have been
struck into your Minds; and a Compendious and Charitable Course to come at the
Wealth, which the Diligence of your Brethren has made them the Owners of;
together with the generous Pleasure of making them the Partakers of yours.
'Twill have a Tendency also to qualify you for Useful Conference in other
Company; and make you a Speaker, whose Words may always be as the Choicest
Silver, and as Fruits from the Tre^ of Life to such as you Converse withal. It
was a Remark that Plato made a good while ago; That the true Manner of Teaching
Sciences, is by Conversation. And, We never well understand a Truth, if we are
not in a Condition on all Occasions to make it known unto such as are for the
receiving of it.

Because of its being somewhat Akin to This, and because we are just now
entering upon the Study of DIVINITY, I will, though there may seem almost some
Anticipation in it, here Transcribe a Passage from the PATERNA, of One whom it
may be, you are not wholly a Stranger to; and who was himself but a very Young
Man, when he was engaged in the Projection referred unto.

I singled out a Number of Students, who had passed through their Cursus, in
Philosophical and Academical Studies, and were just entering into the World.
These Young Gentlemen met once a Week at my Study; where we carried on a Course
of Disputation upon the Body of Divinity. In the several Common Place Heads of
Divinity, where any notable Controversy had been managed in the Church of GOD,
we had a Solemn Disputation on the Controverted Question. In this Disputation,
I was always the Moderator, and still concluded with a Discourse, which by
Argument established the Truth, defended by the Respondent. But, because upon
every Head of Divinity there were Multitudes of Questions, not so worthy of a
Solemn Disputation, These I laboriously gathered up, and giving them to the
Society, at some^ our Meetings, we came all prepared, with Brief, but Strong
and Proved Answers to them; which we accordingly delivered in our Order. The
Benefit of these Exercises, we found Unspeakable!

. 13. All this while I have been proposing to bring you on toward the
Evangelical Ministry, and the Study of THEOLOGY for it and in it, after such a
Manner, as to render you a Skilful Artist for the Work of your GOD.

Now, Surely it is not at all Congruous to Study Divinity upon any other than
Divine Principles: But when you are in the Approaches of THEOLOGY, more
particularly fixing your Purpose, to be [ If the Lord will!] a MINISTER of the
Gospel, it is necessary, that since you Desire a Good Work, it may be upon a
Good End that you do it. Let such Noble Considerations as these, have their
Influence upon you.

A WORK I have now before me, wherein I am to be perpetually rendering
Acknowledgments to the Glorious GOD, in Enquiries for, and Confessions of, the
Truths, of His Holy Religion; and procuring Acknowledgements to Him from
others, by acquainting them with such Truths, and persuading them to that
PIETY, which they are thereby to be led unto.

A WORK, whereof the Main and the Next Intention is, To restore the Throne of
GOD in the Soul of Man, and bring the Sons of Death, into the Life of GOD, and
into those Methods of PIETY, wherein they will Glorify GOD and Enjoy Him
forever.

A WORK, whereof the Grand Aim is to exhibit the Glories of a Lovely REDEEMER,
of whom, How Great is the Goodness and the Beauty! And fill up His Mystical
Body by bringing in to Him, those whom His FATHER has given to Him; and whose
coming under the Shadow of His Wings, was the Joy set before Him, to Comfort
Him in His Travailing Agonies.

A WORK, which is to turn the Children of Men from Darkness unto Light, and
from the Power of Satan unto GOD, and Instruct, and Assist, and Animate the
Children of GOD, in Choosing, and in Doing, the Things that please Him, and
Raise Living Temples for GOD, and fill them with His Glory.

In fine, A WORK, which, if done with all Good Fidelity will in a Future State
be followed with astonishing Recompenses. -- Thy Work shall be Rewarded, faith
the Lord!

Unto this WORK, as a Work that indeed carries its own Wages in it, and a Work
which on these Illustrious Accounts, no other Calling may be compared unto, you
will now bring yourself under a most Solemn DEDICATION. With an Heart
marvellously set upon this Work of GOD, Humbly thus Declare unto Him. Glorious
GOD, Owning myself utterly unworthy of such a Favor, I desire to Devote myself
unto the Service of my SAVIOR; and I entreat of Thee graciously to Accept of
me. Sensible that I can do nothing, I Resign myself up unto thy Holy SPIRIT, O
my GOD, and my SAVIOR, that He may Possess me, and Furnish me, and Quicken me
for Thy Service; and carry me through all that I may be called unto. And since
all Opportunities to Serve Thy Kingdom in the World are entirely at thy
Dispose, I Rely upon thy Providence to find out Opportunitios for my doing of
Good; Resolving with thy Help, to be satisfied with what I shall see the Thing
appointed for me.

Being brought under such a Consecration to GOD, Now proceed in your
Preparation for the Service o^ the Sanctuary. In which, as you pass along, I
cannot but wish, that the Admirable Witsius, his Oration, De Vero Theologo,
might be so considerately Read by you, as to leave a deep Impression upon you.

It is a Speech of Jacob Alting, with which I am Willing your Mind should be
deeply tinctured; Majus est in Ecclesia aliquid dixisse, quod ad ejus
Edificationim pertineat, quam summa inter Homines Gloria, et Potestate gavisum
fuisse. And I will hereupon mind you of it, That One of the greatest Personages
(an Archbishop and a Lord Keeper) in the English Nation once uttered this
Memorable Speech; I have passed through many Places of Honor and Trust, both in
Church and State, more than any of my Order in England, for Seventy Years
before. But were I assured, that by my Preaching I had Converted but one Soul
unto GOD, I should herein take more Comfort, than in all the Honors and
Offices that have ever been bestowed upon me. You are entering upon a Work, that
will keep you continually in the Way of this Incomparable Satisfaction; And, I
hope, that you will Rejoice in the Way of bearing Testimonies for GOD, more
than in all Riches; and that the Saving, or Enlightening and Edifying of One
Soul at any Time, will be a Matter of more Joy unto you, than if all the Wealth
of Ophir should flow in upon you. If such Men of Quality, as George the Prince
of Anhal^, and the Lord of Chandieu who goes under the Hebrew Name of Sadeel,
and the Noble John Alasco, (to say nothing of Titus, to whom they assign a
Noble Extraction among the Cretians,) counted themselves gloriously Enriched in
Opportunities to Preach the Unsearchable Riches of CHRIST; Yea, Or if the most
Opulent Monarch that ever Israel had, even Solomon in all his Glory, has
assumed the Title of, The Preacher; It was no Diminution unto their Quality, to
be employed in a Work of this Importance. I will not say, You are taken in
among the great Men of Achaia, but more than so, GOD raises the Poor out of the
Dust, and sets you with the Princes of His People, when He thus employs you. It
pleases me, when I read such a Passage as this drop from the Pen of, a Person
of Quality, in his, View of the Soul. It is certainly, the Highest Dignity, if
not the Greatest Happiness, that Humane Nature is capable of, here in this Vale
below, to have the Soul so far enlightened, as to become the Mirror, or
Conduit, or Conveyer of GOD's Truth to others.

But then, Be Armed! Be Armed, as a Good Soldier of JESUS CHRIST, for an
Employment, wherein Grievcus Discouragements, Heavy Difficulties, more than can
be Numbered, are to be looked for; and Things to be endured, whereof it is well
for you that you may say, I know not the Things that shall befall me!

Be Armed, for a Warfare, wherein you will have Wonderful Temptations
assaulting of you, repeated on you. I need not quote an Ecclesiasticus, to tell
you so. What Low, and Mean, and Straight Circumstances for this World, must you
probably be confined unto? What Mischiess from the Ungodly and Unrighteous Men
that fill this World, will your Appearances for the Cause of GOD, probably
bring upon you? In short, you will find yourself entered into a Wine-(...); and
I must give you Austin's Advice, ^repara^te ^ad Pressuras: But let every One of
your ^ressures fetch Good Liquor from you. Yea, I will Fore-warn you of it,
That if you move at all out of the Common Road with singular Activities, I
believe, you will hardly ever be engaged in any special Service for the Kingdom
of GOD, but you shall either just before it, or after it, meet with some
special Trouble; Either in some shock upon your Health; Or, in some Storm of
Groundless and Senseless Obloquies among the People; Or, (which is often, the
Worst of all,) some horrid Colaphisations from the Wicked Spirits on your Mind,
strangely filling you with Consternations, and Confusions, which be they never
so unreasonable, yet will be Intolerable. There may be some special Reven^e
(...) Satan in these Molestations upon you, for the special Service to CHRIST,
at which he is enrag^d; But there is the Wisdom of our Faithful REDEEMER for
Holy Ends permiting and ordering of them; Especially to keep you in the Dust,
and in the midst of continual Annibilations, that the Strength of your Glorious
Lord, may be Conspicuous in the Weakness which you find yourself reduced unto.
But now, in the Foresight of all this, can you bravely Resolve; O my SAVIOR,
Though I foresee that I shall be exposed unto many Things as uneasy as many
Deaths, if I go on to lay myself out for the Service of thy Kingdom, yet with
thy Help, I will go on; I will do it unto the Uttermost. And I will cheerfully
Rely upon Thee, to make me a Conqueror, and more than a Conqueror, over all. I
Believe and I am sure, that the Issue will be Glorious!

My Son, The Spirit of Martyrdom is upon thee: Thou shall be crowned among the
Martyrs of the Lord.

. 14. Can a Man be a Thorough Divine without Reading the SACRED SCRIPTURES? No,
Verily; Not so much as a Common Christian. Read them, Child; I say, Read them,
with an Uncommon Assiduity. To Dig in these Rich Mines, make it your Daily
Exercise. Hold on doing so, until you are, I will not say, Bonus Textuarius,
but until you are, An Eloquent Man, and Mighty in the Scriptures.

To this Purpose, My Advice to you is, That it be your Practice, to Read the
Sacred Scriptures in the Porismatic Way; Or, with a Labor to observe and
educe, the Doctrines of Godliness, which this inexhaustible Storehouse of
Truth, will yield unto them that are seeking after it. Make a Pause upon every
Verse, and see what Lessons of Piety are to be learnt from every Clause. Turn
the Lessons into Prayers, and send up the Prayers unto the GOD, who is now
Teaching of you: As Arrows from the Hand of a mighty Man, send them up with
Lively Ejaculations unto the Heavens. What Exercise can be more Enlightening,
more Sanctifying, more Comfortable, than such an Intercourse, of GOD uttering
His Voice, and, Lo, a mighty Voice! -- unto you, and your Holy Returning of it,
unto Him, in such Echo's of Devotion! I will say this for your Encouragement.
In your Searching of the Scriptures, you will forever have something that is
New to entertain you. They are a Treasury, which (beyond that at Venice) you
cannot reach to the Bottom of. Austin in his Epistle to V^lusius has not said a
Thousandth Part of what may be said, about fetching still every Day fresh
Entertainments and Advantages from them, after one has already Spent an Age in
the Study of them. The Jews have Reason on their Side, when they say of the
Scripture, Versa eam, et Versa eam, nam onmia sunt in ea.

I will Refine yet a little further upon this Proposal; And, I will show you an
Excellent Way, how in Reading of the Sacred Scriptures, you may make an
Admirable and Effectual Application of the Leaves, which are for the Healing of
the Nations; and have the inestimable Blessings of, An Healed S^ul, conveyed
unto you What I intend is my Speners Direction: Praemissis Plis Precibus,
Affectum Scriptorum Sacrorum Devota Attentione observent, eumque Affectum
assumere studeant. The Holy Men of GOD who wrote this astonishing BOOK, were
moved by His Holy Spirit, in it, and for it; and the Spirit of Holiness at the
Time of the Inspiration made suitable Impressions on the Affections of His
Faithful Servants. When the Holy SPIRIT with His Afflations, disposed them to
write what we have in our Hands, He doubtless produced in their Hearts, those
Motions of PIETY, which were agreeable and answerable to the Matter then
flowing from their Pens: They are very Legible, and an ordinary Capacity may
discover them These Motions of PIETY, in the Soul; -- By these Things Men live,
and in all these Things is the Life of your Spirit. Now, Do you lay One
Sentence, and then Another, and so a Third, of your Pible before you. Find out,
which of these Affections is Obvious and Evident, in the Sentence under
Consideration. Try, Strive, Do your Best, that the same Affections may Stir,
yea, Flame in your Soul. Be Restless, till you find your Soul Harmonizing and
Symphonizing, with what the Holy SPIRIT of GOD raised in His Amannensis at the
time of His Writing. Be not at Rest, until you find your Heart Strings quaver
at the Touch upon the Heart of the Writer, as being brought into an Unison with
it, and the Two Souls go up in a Flame together. Consider what Affections of
PIETY are plainly discernible in the Word that is before you; and then, with a
Soul turning unto the Lord, assay to utter the Language of the like Affections.
E're you are aware, you will be caught up to Paradise; you will mount up as
with the Wings of Eagles! I have had Opportunity elsewhere to say, If I
constantly affirm this, That all the Commentators in the World, are poor Things
to interpret the Bible, in Comparison of an Illiterate Christian, thus coming
with a sanctified Soul, to make his Practical Commentary; I could quote a very
great Person, who will not leave me alone, but will affirm, Commentarius sine
hoc Adminiculo (pio Sacrorum Motuum scrutinio) Conscriptus, est Vere
Commentarius, et Nomine, et Omine talis, id est, Commentis cerebri refertus.
Among all the Hermeneutic Instruments for the opening of the Scriptures, We may
say of This; There is none like it.

The Commentaries of our Henry on the Bible, have outdone most that we have
yet had, in this Regard: The SPIRIT which dictated the Sacred Scriptures,
operating on the Mind of the Commentator, in the Dispositions and Observations
of Experimental Piety. The Erudition also appearing, without Affectation of
Appearance, in them, is far from Contemptible. I wish you furnished with them.
What is done by Pool and his Continuators, is highly Valuable; and may be of
Use, not only for Occasional Inspection, but also for Diurnal Meditation. How
Happy should we have been, if an Hutcheson who has done so well on Job, and on
the Smaller Prophets, and on John, had left us the like Operations on the rest
of the Bible? Or, if a Caryl on Job, a Greenhil on Ezekiel, a Buroughs on
Hosea, an Owen on the Hebrews, a Manton on James, and a Jenkins on Jude, were
accompanied with others like them on the rest of Sacred Pandects?

Being upon your Daily Exercise, I will add no more; But this I would advise
you, Wherever you in any Reading meet with a curious Illustration of a Text,
Prize it, Sieze it, Enter it in Papers where you may design a Lodging for such
inestimable Jewels. Like Hezekiah, have your Treasures for Precious Stones: And
let these be such unto you. Get such an Amassment of them, that among them you
may be like the King of Tyrus; and Walk up and down in the midst of the Stones
of Fire, when you are upon the Holy Mountain of GOD. One of these may be worth
an Ingot of Gold, and a whole Discourse may be rendered Acceptable, by having
such a Jewel studded in it.

. 15. Let the Men who Corrupt the Earth, and have nothing but their Cassocks,
to claim the Name of Divines for them, Sit in the Seat of the Scorner, and
Laugh, and Scoff, at all Systematical Divines as long as they please, there are
SYSTEMS OF DIVINITY, which I most seriously advise you, to be most intimately
acquainted with.

And here, Either a Wollebius, his, Manuductio ad Theologiam, or, an Amesius
his, Medulla Theologiae, or, a Marckius, his, Compendium Theologiae; I would
have you to get so into your Head [and, Heart!] as to be a perfect Master of
the System.

Go on then, to Read with a strong Attention, the, Synopsis Purioris
Theologiae, of the Leyden Divines. Usher's Body of Divinity is Orthodox and
Excellent; and is accommodated with the most agreeable Texts of Sacred
Scripture upon every Article. For this, and all good Theological Purposes, get
as much of, and be as much with, H. Alting, as ever you can. He has been
called, Theologus Scripturarius, and every thing of his is Valuable: All that
is done by that Hund, has much of Heaven in it. Tuckney, his Prelectiones, are
an inestimable Treasure. So are those of Prideaux. The Works of an Hemingius
deserve a greater Title than that of Opus^ula. The Loci Communes of Aretius,
have uncommon Riches in them. Edwards, his Theologia Reformata, also will be no
Contemptible Treasure for you, on all Occasions. You might Wonder at me, if I
should forget Calvin's Institutions, to which the Concurrent Opinion of them
that wished well to the Reformed Religion assigned a Preference before all the
Writings that the Church of GOD has enjoyed since the Apostolical; as the well
known Distich has informed you. Some that have written on, The Creed, are
highly Worthy of being your Instructors. Particularly, a Pearson, and a
Witsius. But after all, there, is nothing that I can with so much Plerophorie
Recommend unto you, as a Mastricht, his Theologia Theoretico practica. That a
Minister of the Gospel may be Thoroughly furnished unto every Good Work, and in
one or two Quarto Volumns enjoy a well furnished Library, I know not that the
Sun has ever shone upon an Humane Composure that is equal to it: And I can
heartily Subscribe unto the Commendation which Pontanus, in his Laudatio
Funebris upon the Author, has given of it. De hoc Opere confidenter affirmo,
quod eo Ordine sit digestum, tanto rerum pondere praegnans et tumidum, tanta et
tam varia Eruditione refertum, ut nescio an in illo genere usquam Gentium
exstet aliqnid magis accuratum et elaboratum. I hope, you will next unto the
Sacred Scripture, make a Mastricht the Storehouse to which you may resort
continually. But above all things remember the Dying Words of this true Divine;
which he uttered Altissima Voce, [And, I wish, all that study Divinity might
hear it!] Se nulla Loco et Numero habere Veritatis Defensionem, quam sincera
Pietas et Vitae Sanctitas, individuo nexu non comitetur.

But, if you are laying in for a Library, there are Two or Three Divines, whose
Works alone, will afford you a Copious Library, and you may on almost every
Subject repair unto them, and see what almost every Writer has offered upon it.
Such more particularly are, Gerhard, his, Loci Communes; and, Voetius, his,
Selectae Disputationes, et politia Ecclesiastica.

That you may have a general Insight into POLEMIC DIVINITY, and at once make a
short Visit with Safety, to the Camp in the Valley of Elah, and see the Men of
Israel fighting with the Philistines, you have much done for you in Prideaux,
his, Fasciculus: But there are two little Duodecimo's, which for this Purpose
are worth more than Twelve times their Weight in Gold; These are the, Turris
David, and the, Turris Babel, of the Wondrous Alsted. There is also a little
Book in the English Tongue, Sinclare, his, Truths Victory over Error, which is
worthy to be called, Enchiridion Militis Christiani. I will say nothing of a
little Book published among ourselves under the Title of, Supplies from the
Tower of David.

As for more particular Controversies in Religion, I will not perplex you with
a Tedious Catalogue of what has been best Written on the several Controverted
Points. You will not much trouble yourself with them, till the Providence of
GOD call you to the Wars, and bring the Occasions for it.

However. that I may leave nothing untouched that you may look for, I will just
say thus much. To encounter the Romanists, you will be admirably furnished in
the Panstratia of a Chamier, or the Synopsis Papismi of a Willet, or the very
learned Works of a Jackson. To confute the Arians, I commend unto you, a
Waterland, and a Guise, and a Pike. To confute the Socinians, I commend an
Owen, an Abbady, and a Cloppenburg, and a Stilling, fleet, and a Bisterfield.
Upon the Quinquarticular Controversies, you will see who is to Friend, in Prin, his
Antiarminianism. To which, I would have you add, the Veritas Redux, of an
Edwards. The Antipedobaptists have been confuted by such an Army of Writers,
that except I should single out a Baxter, I can scarce tell whom to pitch upon
for your Assistance. A little Conference Entitled, Baptistes, reprinted among
us, will give you the Sum of the Matter. Faldo has done enough against the
Quakers. For the Theologia Gubernetica, as it is called, I will only mention to
you, The, Politia Ecclesiastica of a Parker; The Altar Damascenum of a
Didoclavius; The Fresh Suit of a Gillespy; A Baxter, of Episcopacy; and a
Pierce, his Vindication of the Dissenters; and an Owen, Of the Nature of the
Gospel Church.

But it is of the last Importance, that you be a GOOD CASUIST: And an Ames, in
his Casus Conscientiae, an Alsted, in his Theologia Casuum, a Baxter in his
Directory, and a Baldwin, in his Book, De Casibus Conscientiae, have done what
will abundantly Qualify you to pass a Judgment upon the Cases, that may ly
before you, and well distinguish the Clean from the Unclean, in your Discharge
of your Ministry.

Abundance has been written, to recommend, The Study of the FATHERS: And it has
been recommended by none more than some Neotericks and Innovators, who have had
very Indirect Intentions in it, and hoped that the Fathers might help them with
some Traditions, where the Scriptures failed them. What Attempts have there
been therefore to set the Epistles of Ignatius almost on the Level with the
Epistles of our Inspired Apostles; while after all the learned Impertinencies,
wherewith some would maintain the larger, and some the lesser Copies of those
Epistles, and painful Disputations, on the Problem, How many of them are
Genuine; They are all of them Impostures, and not worthy of any Notice with
you. What ado has there been, to set up, The Apostolical Constitutions as the
most Valuable Part of the New Testament; when they are evidently despicable and
detestable Forgeries; and the Collections of some Ignorant Arian in the Fifth
Century? You may be sure, that in the Study of the Fathers, I shall at least
advise you to so much Knowledge of them, as Daille in his Excellent Book of,
The Use of the Fathers, will instruct you in. But, though the Fathers had such
Errors, that we may most sensibly Bless GOD, for His granting us the
Scriptures, to be on all Accounts Better and Safer Guides unto us, and the
Fathers themselves do times without Number urge us to take none but the
Scriptures for our Guides, and their notorious Deficiences in several Points of
Literature, laid them under Disadvantages enough to pall and spoil our
Adoration of them! Nevertheless, there are those Writings of the Fathers, which
I would have you no Stranger to. If you bestow a Perusal upon, the Epistles of
Clemens Romanus, and the Apologies of Justin Martyr, and of Tertullian, and the
Book of Origin against Celjus, you will do what I would have you to do. And I
am willing you should look upon the Dialogue of Minutius Faelix as one of the
most celebrated Monuments of Antiquity. But how can I persuade you to peruse
all the Folio-Volumns, of both the Greek and Latin Fathers? Indeed. I look on
Theodoret, as the best Expositor of the Bible among all the Fathers; and there
are very Notable and Refined Expositions often occurring in him; Yet I shall
direct you to do little more than Consult him upon Occasion. I value Chrysostom
almost as much as much as they tell us Aquinas did: Yet I shall only wish you
to attend upon him in some Select Homilies; and, Consult him upon Occasion. I
am not so enamoured on Austin, as (like Jansenius) to Read over all his Works
ten times, and his Book, De Gratia, thirty times; I shall count it enough, if
you go through his, Confessions, and his Meditations, and his De Civitate Dei,
and some Numbers of his Letters. Scultet in his, Medulla Theologiae Patrum,
have given you such Abstracts of what has been written by many of the Fathers,
as your Eye to good Purpose may dwell upon. But for a more agreeable and
profitable Study of the Fathers, I shall propose, That you go through Dupin, his
Ecclesiastical History: And where you find an Account of any Subject handled by
any Father, which you have a particular Inclination to see what they say upon:
Then turn to the Author, and seek for further Satisfaction.

. 16. After all this Preparation for the Sanctuary, you are now coming to feed
the Flocks on the High Mountains of Israel; Coming into an Employment among the
People of GOD, in which, I wish you may prove like the Angel, in the
Revelation, that came down from Heaven, and the Earth was lightened with his
Glory. I am now going to bring you into the PULPIT: Which I hope, you will
ascend [as Luther, when he was much older than you, says, he still always did!]
with a Trembling Soul; and remembering that you are to stand, where, that which
the Jewish Senator said unto the greatest Person among them, is what the People
of GOD may say unto you; Non stas coram nobis, sed coram eo qui dixit, Fiat, et
factus est Mundus.

There is a Troop of Authors, and even an Host of GOD, who have written on, The
Pastoral Care, from the Days of Gregory, down to the Days of Gilbert; Yea, and
since these, every Year some to this very Day. I cannot set you so tedious a
Task, as to Read a Tenth Part, of what has been offered on the Art, and the
Gift, and the Method of PREACHING. If you Read, the Pastor Evangelicus, of a
Bowls; Or, The Preacher, of an Edwards; you will do as much this Way, as I
shall at present ask you to do.

The First Thing, which I have to demand of you, is, That you entertain the
People of GOD, with none but Well-Studied Sermons; and employ none but well
beaten Oil, for the Lamps of the Golden Candlestick: And be nothing like him,
who was among the Jews called, The Plagiary Prophet, and whose Punishment was
not an easy one. Heaven forbid, that you should be one of those Pitiful
Parsons, to whom there has been that Advice given for the Discharge of their
Pastoral Care; That they should use other Men's Sermons, rather than make any
of their own: But in the Choice of these, use great Judgment, and not take an
Author that is too much above themselves; for by that, Compared with their
ordinary Conversation, it will too evidently appear that they are not the
Authors of their Sermons. It Is true; The Composures of them that have gone
before you, may be of Use unto you, to supply you with Useful Hints for the
Composing of your Sermons. And some have ingeniously asserted it, That a Man of
Mean Abilities, may come to fall very little short of the Ablest Preachers, if
he so carefully Peruse their Sermons, as entirely to digest them, and then,
laying them out of his View, proceed in his own Way, and in his own Style, to
deliver them. Let that be as Men please; This I insist upon; That when you are
to Preach, you should go directly from your Knees in your Study to the Pulpit;
and when you are thus on your Knees in your Study, you should bewayl the Faulty
Defects in your Life, which the Subject you are to treat upon should lead you
to a pentient Confession of: Humbly bewayling it also, that your Sermon is no
better fitted for the awful Service that is before you. Your Sermon must also
be such, that you may hope to have the Blood of your SAVIOR sprinkled on it,
and His Good SPIRIT breathing in it. A Sermon likewise it must be, that shall
discover you to be a Workman; and be, like the Peace Offerings of old, an
Oblation, which, as the People of GOD have their share in it, so, it is
presented unto the Glorious GOD Himself, the Great King, whose Name is
Venerable. How such things as these, can be Compatible to stolen Sermons, or
Concomitant with them, I cannot imagine!

I pass on, to advise you, That when you become a settled Prcacher the Subject
of your Sermens may be so well chosen, as to do therein the part of a Prudent
and Faithful Steward, who dispenses to every one their Food in the Season
thereof; and a Vigilant Watchman, contriving such Words in Season, as will be
fitly spoken. You may do well to go through the whole Body of Divinity, in a
proper Method, and therein declare the whole Counsel of GOD. There are also
some Rich Portions, and Paragraphs of the Sacred Scriptures, wherein the SPIRIT
of GOD lays together an admirable Variety of important Subjects, which you may
do well to handle, in the Order wherein He has provided them for you. But
still, notwithstanding the Connection of your Discourses, I would have you
leave Room for Occasional Subjects; and have your Parentheses of Sermons on
such Things, as you may apprehend the Necessities of the People may more
immediately and importunately call for. So, being as a Thick Cloud that has
Water bound up in it, you shall (as the Ancients expounded that Passage in Job)
distill it in Drops, Juxta Exigentiam Auditorum. That you may be led from time
to time unto such Subjects as may best answer the Designs with which your
Ministry is to be carried on, you must have your Eyes ever toward the Lord,
and with Solemn Supplications look up to Him, who Ministers Seed to the Sower.
But let me particularly commend one piece of Discretion unto you; which is,
That you may be so laid in Aforehand, as never to be at a Loss, what Subject
your Studies are to proceed upon. From the Want of this Provision, how often
have I known a Preacher spend almost as much Time in determining what Subject
he should preach upon, as there need go for the making of a Sermon upon it! But
I very much Object against your being too long upon a Subject: Which way of
tedious Amplification, must needs leave much of the sacred Field unplough'd
upon, that is too rich to ly always neglected; and produce many Sermons as
little to the Text, as I suspect many of that German Divine's were, who
undertook to go over the whole Book of Isaiah, and was no less than Twenty
Years on the First Chapter of it.

And here, I cannot go any further, until I have given you my Sentiments upon
something that calls for a great Consideration with you.

Among all the Subjects, with which you Feed the People of GOD, I beseech you,
Let not the true Bread of Life be forgotten; but exhibit as much as you can of
a Glorious CHRIST unto them: Yea, Let the Motto upon your whole Ministry, be,
CHRIST IS ALL. It has been among the Grievous Things, which I have seen in the
Days of my Pilgrimage, that not only in some of the most celebrated Sermons,
which we have seen published on the most Illustrious and Memorable Occasions, a
CHRIST is (not one Tenth Part so often mentioned, as He is only in the Ten
first Verses of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, I say) not so much as
once mentioned; but also some of your Great Men have it related of them as an
Instance of their Wisdom, that they gave it as their Advice unto Ministers,
That they should not Preach much about the Person of CHRIST. I have thought;
Would a Blessed PAUL have uttered such a Word! A PAUL, who said, I determined
to know nothing among you, save JESUS CHRIST, and Him Crucified. It is reported
by some Travelers, That in the Mah^metan Moschs, there are sometimes whole
Sermons on the Glories of a JESUS. And shall they who call themselves
Christians, and would be honored as Ministers of the Christian Religion,
preach as if they were ashamed of making the Glories of a JESUS, the Subject of
their Sermons; and so rarely introduce Him, as if it were an Indecent Stoup to
speak of Him! GOD forbid! I make no Doubt of it, That the almost Epidemical
Extinction of True Christianity, or what is little short of it, in the Nations
that profess it, is very much owing to the inexcuseable Impiety of overlooking
a Glorious CHRIST, so much in the Empty Harangues, which often pass for
Sermons. Alas, That there should be so many Preachers, (I cannot say of the
Gospel!) to whom there might be commended as proper for them, the Treatise
Entitled, Paraenesis ad Pseudo-Evangelicos nostri Saeculi, de CHRISTO DEO
ipsis IGNOTO! The Holy SPIRIT of GOD forever aims at nothing more, than what
our SAVIOR has declared in that Word; He will Glorify me: And that Holy SPIRIT
withdraws from the Ministry, which has in it little Concern to Glorify Him; and
it is therefore an Unsuccessful Ministry. Let your Performance in the Pulpit be
what it will, I must freely tell you, Non sapit mihi, nisi sonuerit ibi JESUS.
What I wish for and urge to, is This; That your Knowledge of the Mystery of
CHRIST, may Conspicuously shine in your Sermons; and that it may be esteemed by
you, as a Matchless Grace given you, if you may Preach the Unsearchable Riches
of CHRIST unto the World. The Heavens do Praise that Wonder; the Angels in the
Heavens are swallowed up in the Praises of that Wondrous ONE! Be, like Them,
never so much in your Element, as when the Person, the Offices, the Benefits,
the Example, the Abasement, and Advancement of a Glorious CHRIST, are the
Subjects of your Sermons; yea, r^ckon that the Truth is not well discerned, nor
the Word of Truth well divided, until you have the Truth as it is in JESUS; HE
is that Light of GOD, in which you will See Light, and every Truth will be set
in its True Light before you. In every Article of the Treatises which you bring
into the Assemblies of Zion, ponder upon This; What Aspect a Glorious CHRIST
has upon the Truth now before you, and let your Hearers be made sensible of it.
Yea, Whatever Point you are upon, Think, What is there in my SAVIOR, which
this Point leads me to think upon! If you Preach on the Evil of Sin, and the
Misery of Man fallen by Sin, still carry your Hearers to their mighty and only
SAVIOR; When you Preach on the Duties of a Godly, and Sober, and Righteous
Life, still carry your Hearers to their SAVIOR, as not only affording a
Pattern for all those things, but also as Offering to live, and act, and work
in them, as a Principle of Life, by which alone they can live unto GOD. Let me
tell you, to take the Way of Norris and Company, to come at the Love of GOD,
without a CHRIST by the Law of the Spirit of Life in us making us free from the
Law of Sin and of Death; Verily, 'Twill never do! A Mohammedan Abubeker, in a
Self taught Philosopher, has as high Flights of Divinity as many of these
Divines. Be a Star, to lead Men unto their SAVIOR, and stop not until you see
them there: Be assured of this; The Infinite SON of GOD is ineffably dear to
His Eternal FATHER; And our SAVIOR has given us this Assurance, If any Man
serve me, him will my Father Honor. If you set yourself above all things, to
Glorify the CHRIST of GOD, and affect yourself and others with His, -- How
great Goodness and Beauty! And use all the Methods you can devise, that He may
be Exalted, and be Extolled, and be very High; you will be taken in among the
Favorites of Heaven, and be a Man greatly Beloved. The Angels who with a
perpetual Veneration and A^onishment, stand about His Glorious High Throne; the
Ministers who Do His Pleasure, and are never so well pleased, as when they see
Him Glorified; These will with Delight look upon you as their Fellow Servant,
and will at His Orders be on the Wing to do mavelous Kindnesses for you.

But then, I must herewithal advise you, That the Genuine Doctrines of Grace,
be all of them always with you, as the very Salt and Soul of your Sermons: They
will be Putrified Things without them! Assert always the Necessity of Turning,
and Living unto GOD; and yet such an Impotency in the wounded and corrupt
Faculties of Man, as renders a Supernatural and Regenerating Work of Sovereign
Grace, necessary for it. Show People how to plead the Sacrifice of our SAVIOR,
that they may be Forgiven, and how to lay hold on His Righteousness, that they
may be Accepted with GOD. Show People how to Overcome, and Mortify, and Crucify
their Evil Appetites, by repairing to the Cross of our SAVIOR; and how to
derive Strength from Him for the Doing, and the Bearing of all that they are
called unto. Show the People of GOD, how to take the Comfort of their Eternal
Election, and Special Redemption, and Ensured Perseverance; and at the same
Time fetch mighty Incentives to Holiness, from those Hopes, which will forever
Cause those that have them to purify themselves. Gospellize to them all the
Commandments of the Law, and show them how to obey upon the Principles of the
Gospel: And how the Precepts of the Gospel are also so many Promises of it.
With a strong Application Study the Covenant of Grace, and let the Spirit of
that Covenant animate and regulate all your Performances, when you Bless the
Lord in the Congregations. In these Truths there are the Articles, which the
Church either stands or falls withal. They will be the Life of your Ministry:
Nor can the Power of Godliness be maintained without them. The Loss of these
Truths will render a Ministry Insipid and Unfruitful; and procure this
Complaint about the Shepherds, The diseased ye have not strengthened, neither
have ye brought again, that which was driven away.

That you may be well versed in these Truths, it will be requisite, that your
Main Reading may not be of such Books that have been much in Vogue, ^nce Real
and Vital PIETY has been so much Banished out of the World, but are as Lame in
these Points, as that which is [ unjustly and unsafely enough] Entitled, The
Whole Duty of Man. There is a Set of Books which of late Years have brought in
a Fashionable Divinity; with the Authors whereof, I cannot but be in as Ill
Terms, as Gildas was with his British Clergy, when with him a Man was, Non
eximie Christianus, who did not call them rather the Betrayers, than the
Ministers of the Gospel. I can by no means wish you to take your Divinity from
them; or to be unacquainted with the Castigations, which GOD has raised up one
of their Church [an Edwards, I mean,] to bestow upon them. In short, If a Book
that pretends to describe the Way of a Sinners Reconciliation unto GOD, says
nothing of, By the Obedience of One, many made Righteous: If a Book that
pretends to direct a Christian Life, says nothing of a Conversion to GOD, and
of being Joined unto the Lord, through His One Spirit Quickening of us: And if a
Book [that shall be written perhaps by One who has subscribed our Thirty Nine
Articles,] dresses up our Doctrine of Predestination in the Fallacious and
Invidious Terms, and the Bearskins in which it is now commonly Exploded, and
proclaims the Author did not Believe in his Heart, the Articles and Homilies,
which his Prevaricating Hand made a Subscription to, [Or if it be a Book that
shall any where spitefully link Rome and Geneva together:] Hunc tu, studiose,
caveto. I had as good plainly say, Let not Scott, and Company, be the Men of
your Counsel.

You may Expect, that I should more Positively say, What English Treatises of
Practical Divinity, I would commend unto you. But here I am encumbred as
Hevelius was, when he would have so partitioned his accurate Selenography as to
have done Justice unto the Names of all the more Illustrious Astronomers. Yea,
so Great is the Army of them who have published the True Gospel, that I cannot
pretend unto the long List of them that have come to the Help of the Lord.
However, there are a few that must be particularized for you. More particularly
then, If you would see the Covenant of GOD and the Gospel in an Evangelical
Exhibition of it, Let Strong on the Covenant (though under the Disadvantages of a
Posthumous Work) be precious to you as the Golden Wedge of Ophir. If you would
see Sound Doctrine, the Works of an Owen have it for you: And I am glad to see,
how much esteemed they are in the North-British Universities. You have a
Goodwin that will place you among the Children of Light, and will give you the
very Marrow of the Doctrine which is according to Godliness: He often soars
like an Eagle; Perhaps, you would have been content, if sometimes a little more
Concisely. Every thing of a Polhil, is Evangelical and Valuable: Especially
his, Speculum Theologiae in Christo. When your Heart and your Pen want the Holy
Fire to be quickened with you, a Baxter will bring you a Coal from the Altar
for it. Yea, to fetch a Metaphor from another Element, he may be called, as you
may remember who was of old, An Ocean of Divinity. To say of that very Great
Man, That if he had not meddled in too many things, he would have been esteemed
one of the Learned Men of the Age, it is to speak a Thing which I don't well
understand: For his meddling in so many Things, and writing more learnedly upon
the most of them (except his Expositions) than the most of them who have
written upon perhaps but one or two of the Things, to me renders him One of the
most Learned of the Age. In a Charnock you will have Substantial Divinity, and
of the Right sort. A Bates will treat you with Angels Food. An How will set
Manly Religion before you. In a Flavel, you will find the true Savor of Plain,
Lively, Useful Preaching. What a Collings has written on Providence, is well
performed. And what a Ford has written on, The Spirit of Bondage and Adoption,
is as fine as any thing I have seen for, the Experimental And, though a Doolittle
may not pass for one of our Greatest Men, yet having in his Book on the
Catechism, given us the Body of Divinity all in a Flame, I am willing that it
should be, [what Zoroaster called his famous Book, Zundavesta, which, though
written above two and twenty Hundred Years ago, we still have in our Hands,] a
Fire Kindler for you, and put you in the Way after an Awakening Manner, to set
Conscience about its Work, when you come to that Application, with which your
Sermons are still to be enlivened. If you go further back, and even up to a
Perkins, you will find in many Treatises, that Good old Puritan Divinity, which
the Honors of, The old Way, belong unto: And, No Man having drunk that old
Wine, and such Books, as the Christians Daily Walk, of a Scudder, will much
desire the new, but he will say, The old is Better. If we mean to go to Heaven,
we shall not miss our Way by having Isaac Ambrose in our Company. I say nothing
of a Preston, and a Bolton, and a Capel, and a Fenner, and a Rogers, and a
Sibbs, and an Hall: All highly Valuable. But I cannot forbear saying, the
Writings of the Dyke's, (both Daniel and Jeremiah) have a singular Flavor and
Vigor in them. Every thing of an Arrowsmith, is admirable. A Gurnal will
furnish you with a Magazine, of Good Things. Of an A. Burgess, I may say, He
has written for thee Excellent Things. A Reinolds too must be taken into the
List of them, who have written what none will Repentt he Reading of. His
Preparations are Fat things full Marrow, Wines from the Lees well refined. And
some things of a Buroughs, especially his, Moses's Choice, will not make you
complain, that you have lost your Time in Conversing with them.

In fine; The Six Volumns of, The Morning Exercises, will give you such a
Variety, both of Matters and of Talents, that I could wish you may not be
without them.

I may not omit giving you the best Encouragment I can, to allow unto a Box of
North-British Authors, a standing in your Library, and often resort unto it.
The Jews have a Fancy, that when our Almighty Creator, bespangled the Heavens
with the Stars of Light, He left a space near the Northern Pole, unfinished and
unfurnished, that if any After-God should lay claim to Deity, a Challenge to
fill up that space might Eternally confute it. But in the Firmament of the
Church, that Northern Part which belongs to Scotland, has been illuminated with
Stars, even enough to make a Galaxy. And though the assiduous Employments of the
Parish and the Pulpit, which are enough to take up all the Time of their
Pastors, have prevented, [which, it is a Pity!] the appearing of so many
Writers, among them, as might otherwise have dispensed their sweet Influences
to us; yet their Pens have not been Idle. Of these we have several Commentators
on the Sacred Scriptures: [Among which, a Durham, -- especially on the
Commandments! And a Weemse long before him has given us a rich Amassment of
Biblical Treasures, well worth your having.] We have several who have enriched
us with Bodies of Theology; [Among which, a Scharpius.] We have several
Champions for the Doctrines of Grace; [Among which, a Rutherford.] We have
several Historians; [Among which, I will not say, a Spotswood, so much as a
Calderwood: and very lately, a Woodrow.] We have several Defenders of the
Gospel Worship, and the Gospel Church State; [Among which, a Gelaspy, a Lauder,
a Willison, and a Jameson. The Eagle-Ey'd and Miraculous Man last mentioned,
has also obliged us, with, Spicilegia Antiquitatum, which are invaluable, and
preferrible to a Whole Vintage of many other Literators.] We have several
Practical Tractators; [Among which, a Guthry, and a Clark, and that Wondrous
Youth, whose Green Years could not withhold from him the Wisdom and Esteem, as
he wore the Name, of, Gray!] It had been some Injustice as well as Ingratitude
in me, to have left these unmentioned. And if a Burnet might not have been
thought a little too much Anglified for it, he should also have had a mention
among the Illustrious Pens of Scotland.

About the Way of Studying a Sermon, I exhort you, That all be with a Spirit of
PIETY, and therefore very Prayerfully, carried on. It Is no more than what the
Nature and Intent of the Service highly calls for. First look up to Heaven,
with Dependence upon a Glorious CHRIST, for His Influences and Assistences to
carry you through what you have in Hand. Yea, Repeat the Invocations, with fresh
Elevations of your Eyes to Him from whom comes all your Help, whenever you
Return, after any Intermission of your Study upon it: O my GOD and SAVIOR,
without Thee I can do nothing; Help me, Help me! Send forth thy Light and thy
Truth unto me! This will be equivalent unto the Practice of such Devout Men, as
a Bradford and a Cartwright, Of whom they report, They studied their Sermons on
their Knees. And when you have dispatched a Paragraph of a Sermon, I wish it
might be a frequent Practice with you, To make a Pause upon it; and get your
Sermon by Heart, I mean, get your Heart suitably touched with what you have
prepared, before you go any further, and cast into the Mould of the Sanctifying
Truths, by such Confessions and such Petitions, as you may Dart up to Heaven
upon them. At least, let this be done, in your Perusing of your Whole Sermon
before your Preaching of it. Some celebrated Preachers have piously declared,
They never durst preach a Sermon to others, till they have got some good by it
themselves. To feel what you speak, how wondrously will it qualify you to be a
Lively Speaker! 'Twill bring you to deserve the Title of a Rabbi Hadarsan.

Be careful evermore to Preach Scripturally; and employ the Sword of the
Spirit, if you would hope to do Execution. Pertinent Scriptures Demonstrating
and Embellishing every Article, will well become one, who would Speak as the
Oracles of GOD. For your Aid in this, I cannot but recommend unto your Use,
Ravenellus, his Bibliotheca Sacra, as one of the most Useful Books in the World
for a Preacher, that would at once have in one Regular, Orderly, Advantageous
View, before him, the Sum of what the Scriptures have said on every Subject: A
Work, that is moreover full of Expositions and Illustrations. There is also a
Book Entitled, A Common Place Book to the Holy Bible; worth being always at
Hand with you.

It would be well, if you could likewise come to say with the Prophet, I have
used Similitudes: And accustom yourself to find out Similitudes, wherewith you
may cloth your Ideas, and make them sensible to the lowest and meanest
Capacities, yea, to all Flesh. Thus to seek out Acceptable Words, would render
you a most Profitable as well as Agreeable Preacher. It would marvellously
fasten the Nails, and be some Imitation of the Preaching, which He that spoke
so as never Man spoke, has given you a Pattern for.

In your Preaching that you may Save them that hear you, I wish you may with
all possible Dexterity spread the Nets of Salvation for them. And therefore
often exhibit the Terms of Salvation, and the Proposals of the Gospel, in such
a Manner, and so importunately soliciting their Consent unto them, that by the
hearty Speaking One Word, in the Echo's of Devotion thereupon, they may be
brought into them. Exhibit unto them, the Desires of PIETY, in such a Manner,
that they must have their Hearts burn within them, and they must be Hearts of
Stone indeed, if they take not Fire immediately. When you also describe the
Graces of the New Creature, give the Description in the Language of PIETY,
acting those Graces; wherein, if they come into a Consort with you, their Souls
are gained unto GOD, at the very Moment of your Instructing them. Oh! That you
may be a Wise Winner of Souls! And while you are Preaching, may the Holy SPIRIT
fall on them that hear the Word!

For this Purpose I would have you usually Try, as much as with Good Judgment
you can, to set the Truths on Fire, before you part with any Head that you are
upon; and let them come Flaming out of your Hand with Excitations to some
Devotion and Affection of Godliness, into the Hearts of those whom they are
addressed unto. The Tongues with which the Holy SPIRIT made His Descent, on the
first and best Preachers of the Gospel that ever were in the World, were
Flames, and had the Appearance of an Heavenly Fire upon them.

It Is Pity but a Well prepared Sermon should be a Well pronounced One.
Wherefore, Avoid forever, all Inanes sine Mente Sonos; and all Indecencies,
every thing that is Ridiculous. Be sure to speak Deliberately. Strike the
Accent always upon that Word in the Sentence which it properly belongs unto. A
Tone that shall have no Regard unto This, is very Injudicious; and will make
you talk too much in the Clouds. Don't Begin too High. Ever Conclude with
Vigor. If you must have your Notes before you in your Preaching, and it be
needful for you, De Scripto dicere, what even some of the most famous Ora^ors
both among the Grecians, and among the Romans did, [ Pliny says, Orationes, et
nostri quidam et Greci Lectitaverunt] yet let there be with you a Distinction
between the Neat using of Notes, and the dull Reading of them. Keep up the Air
and Life of Speaking, and put not off your Hearers with an heavy Reading to
them. How can you demand of them to Remember much of what you bring to them;
when you Remember nothing of it yourself? Besides, By Reading all you say, you
will so cramp and stunt all Ability for Speaking, that you will be unable to make
an handsome Speech on any Occasion. What I therefore advise you to, is; Let
your Notes be little other than a Quiver, on which you may cast your Eye now
and then, to see what Arrow is to be next fetched from thence; and then, with
your Eye as much as may be on them whom you speak to, Let it be shot away, with
a Vivacity becoming One in Earnest, for to have the Truths well entertained
with the Auditory.

Optimus est Orator, qui dicendo, Animos Audientium, et d^cet, et delecta^, et
permovet.

Finally; Let your Perorations [from which, Noscitur Orator] often be, lively
Expostulations with the Conscience of the Hearer; Appeals made, and Questions
put, unto the Conscience, and Consignments of the Work over into the Hands of
that flaming Preacher in the Bosom of the Hearer. In such Flames you may Do
wondrously!

. 17. Upon the due Discharge of the Pastoral Duties, in which you must labor
to know the State of your Flock, and lay hold on all Occasions to drop the
Lessons of PIETY upon them; and, how to manage the Pastoral Visits with an
admirable Dexterity and Fidelity; and therein to be forever scattering Books
among them, which may be lasting Monitors unto them, and a Salt for their
Preservation; Yea, and be scattering Alms, like the liberal Showers from above,
upon the Indigent among them: I suppose, I need now do no more than give a
short Hint unto you, That such Things are to be thought upon. All that I will
now say to you upon this Pastoral Watchfulness is This; That when certain
Shepherds were Keeping Watch over their Flocks, Lo, The Angel of the Lord came
upon them, and the Glory of the Lord shone round about them!

Among the Employments of a Vigilant Pastor, I cannot avoid saying of
something, De Catechizandis Rudibus; and putting you in mind, That Great Things
may be done in the Way of Catechizing. A Work this is, for which the Greatest
Men in the Church of GOD, have not thought themselves too Great: And some
Eminent Persons comingtowards a Superannuation for other Services, have by
applying themselves almost wholly to This, continued very Serviceable to the
last. In this Exercise, to break the Answer now and then into Smaller
Questions, and so drop it into narrowmouthed Understandings; and thereupon to
graft Exhortations, which may draw the Catechumens into the declared
Resolutions of PIETY; and more particularly show them, the Blessings for which
they are to make their Supplications, and gain a Promise from to do so: This is
one of the Things, where an Abundance of Wisdom and Prudence, may be
demonstrated. Among the many Hundreds of Catechisms, which have made their Way
into the World, What is now most in Use, is, The Assemblies; which was composed
by Dr. Tuckney, Dr. Arrowsmith, and Mr. Newcomen, and Adopted and Emitted by
the most Venerable Convention of Divines, that was ever seen in our Nation. But
some have thought, that This, like all other Humane Composures, might be
capable of some Amendment. And I could myself particularly wish; That among the
Articles of, The Misery of the Estate into which Man fell, there might be
inserted, And enslaved unto the Powers of Darkness: And that among the Articles
of, CHRIST Executing the Office of a Priest, there might be this Clause
inserted; In performing perfect Obedience to the Law of GOD, the Everlasting
Rule of Righteousness: And that among, The Benefits which in this Life do
accompany Justification -- there might be inserted, The Ministry of Good Angels
for our Good, and Succor against the Temptations of the Devils. Though it is not
for you to correct the Catechism, yet you may in your Catechizing do Justice to
these Important Articles. Up, and be Doing; and be thus, An Instructor of the
Young; Yea, an Angel to the Little Ones.

But no Good is to be any further expected from you, than it may be Reported of
you, Behold, He PRAYS! You must, like the Camel, receive all your Burdens on
your Knees: And your whole Work must be carried on, with a continual Praying
over it.

For your Secret Prayers, I can bate you nothing of David's, and of Daniel's
Number, Three times in a Day: For your Pious Ejaculations, I have nothing
against the Number, which they report of the Apostle Bartholomew, [One Hundred
in a Day!] Yea, Or that which they report of a Father whose Name was Paulus;
[Three Hundred in a Day!] If you can attain so far to have your Eyes ever
toward the Lord. Excellent is the Counsel of Lansbergius, in his Enchiridion
Militis Christiani, [And by the Way, Erasmus, his Golden Book of the same
Title, I earnestly advise you to the Reading of!] Ex Omnibus quae vides,
quaequae audis, disce orandi sumere Occasionem, mentemque ad Deum elevandi.
Besides your stated Prayers for every Day, you will also have Numberless
Errands to Heaven, which will oblige you frequently to make your Occasional
Addresses thither upon Emergencies. But what in a very particular Manner I
advise you to, is, Now and then to set a part WHOLE DAYS for Interviews with
Heaven; and this with such Fasting as you may find you are able to bear, and
may be for the Help of your Devotions. On such Days, go through a Process of
Repentance, which cannot be too often Repeated. Renew your Flights unto your
SAVIOR, that you may be more Quickened in the Life of GOD. Present the
Sacrifices wherein you shall offer up your All unto Him, and embrace and enjoy
a CHRIST instead of All. Carry to Him all your Concerns; and let all your
Desire be before Him, and none of your Groaning be hid from Him. Let your
Petitions for Others, and for all the Societies you belong unto, Express the
true Spirit of Grace in your Supplications, and be like those of the Man
greatly Beloved. Soar up as high as you can toward an Union with GOD. Intermix
all along, the Reading of proper Things, wherein GOD from the Holy Oracle may
Commune with you; and you may Assist and Inflame the Work wherein you are
engaged. Let the Minutes of Spaces between your Devotions, be filled with
Reflections, that may have a Tendency to bring you into Abasements of your
self, or into Adorations of your GOD; and from your Heart within you, Let them
go up silently unto the Lord. Conclude all, with Holy Projections and Purposes,
for further Improvements in a Careful, Fruitful, Humble Walk with GOD. But how
much could I wish, That in this Religion of the Closet, you may know what it is
to keep Days of Thanksgiving too? Such Days, you may fill with Contemplations
on the Perfections of the Infinite GOD, and the Glories of your Almighty
REDEEMER, and the wondrous Things which He has done; and the Ministry of His
Angels: And with Enumerations of the Favors, which both on Spiritual, and on
Temporal Accounts you have received from Him; Whereof you should make Explicit
Acknowledgements unto your Powerful and Merciful Benefactor, and particularly
see and own how Undeserved they have been, and how Distinguishing they have
been, and how the contrary Sufferings of CHRIST have purchased them. You will
upon Trial find a Day of the Summer Solstice too short for the Pleasa^ Work now
before you. Here you may intermix the Songs of the Redeemed; adding the Perusal
of what you may find written for the Help of the Heavenward Salleys, wherein
you are mounting up as with the Wings of Eagles. You will do well, to keep the
Holy Fire alive all the Day, by making all the Objects which occur to you in
the Intervals of your Devotions, but a Fuel that your Praises to GOD shall
seize upon, and go up in short Motions of Soul unto Him. Conclude all, with an
Ingenuous Meditation on that Question, What shall I render to the Lord for all
His Benefits? These Days will not only obtain mavelous Blessings for you, but
also leave a Caelestial Flavor and Grandeur on your Mind, and infuse a
becoming Discretion and Gravity into all your Conversation.

One Consequent of these Things will be, what I am very sollicitous you should
arrive unto, That is to say, An Ability to express yourself in Prayer to the
Glorious GOD, and spread the Cases of the People before Him, on all Occasions:
An Ability without which, I shall not Judge you Qualified for an Ordination to
the Pastoral Care of a Flock, among the Churches of GOD: But worthy to have an
ANAXIOS, cried out upon you.

In your doing This, you will have notable Opportunities to bring them into the
Frames of PIETY, which are to be wished for them.

Whatever Truths at any time you would most efficaciously Preach unto them, you
may make them hear you Pray down these Truths into them, with a most surprising
and most subduing Efficacy.

I can by no means approve of your Leaning on the Tool of a Foolish Shepherd,
and your Living on the Lifeless Forms of any Liturgy. I cannot commend any
Liturgy to you, except that which Baronius, taxed good old Agobardus for
keeping to. I can do no other than tell you so, after a Bellarmine himself has
confessed, That in old times, there was no Form of Prayer prescribed, for all
to be bound unto, but every One might make what Prayer he pleased, if but the
Analogy of Faith were kept unto. And Chemnitius with a whole Army of
Protestants, have irrefragably proved, That this Confession of Bellarmine is
true; and, Apud Veteres Ordinem Celebrandi fuisse Arbitrarium. The Ancients all
agree to it, That in the Earlier Days of Christianity, the Ministers prayed
every where, As they were Able. Indeed, there was no General Imposition of any
Service Beok, until the Emperor Charlemaigne at the Solicitation of the Pope,
introduced it, with Persecution; which was not until the Entrance of the Ninth
Century, when all manner of Superstitious Usages were brought into the Temple
of GOD. Some Judicious Men have complained of the French Liturgy composed by
the Excellent Calvin, for not having sufficient Collects of Thanksgiving, but
being all Petition. And whereas these three Things, Confession, and Petition,
and Thanksgiving belong to every complete Prayer, I have heard some enquire
whether according to this Rule, there can be readily found One complete Prayer,
in another Liturgy, which I cannot commend unto you, for such a Model of
Perfection, as its admirers have esteemed it. But waving here those many and
weighty Exceptions against the English Common Prayer Book, which will forever
cause Myriads of Considerate Christians to be dissatissied with it, I will only
Quote some Words that I find falling from the Pen of an English Nobleman. There
may be too great a Restraint, [ he says] put upon Men, whom GOD has
distinguished by giving them not only good Sense, but a Powerful Utterance too.
When a Man so Qualified, endued with Learning too, and above all, adorned with
a Good Life, breaks out into a Warm and Well-delivered Prayer before his
Sermon, it has the Appearance of a Divine Rapture; He raises and leads the
Hearts of the Assembly in another Manner, than the most composed or best
studied Form of Set Words, can ever do: And the Pray Wee's, who serve up all
their Sermons with the same Garnishing, would look like so many Statues, or Men
of Straw in the Pulpit, compared with those who speak with such a Powerful Z^al
that Men are tempted at the Moment to believe, that Heaven itself has dictated
these Words unto them. I cannot but think, that good Sense was that which
dictated these Words unto the Marquess of Halifax. And I hope, your Prayers
will be such as he has therein described unto you.

I am sorry, that I must, [But I must!] conclude my Advice for your Diligence
in the Discharge of the Pastoral Duties, with a Warning, That you must not
wonder at it, if you find, that you serve many Ungrateful People, and may be
many Ways Mal-treated by them, who are under the strongest Obligations to
support you, and reduced unto the humbling and creepling Circumstances of a,
Res Angusta Domi: Yea, be oppressed with grievous Defraudations from them, whom
GOD will many Ways punish for their Ingratitude. If it should be so, yet
Remember, you are in the Service of a Glorious LORD, who not only says, I know
thy Service, but orders those Things to fall out, upon which He may with
Infinite Pleasine also say, I know thy Patience. Be not now discouraged from
still devoting yourself to the public and private Labors of your Ministry: Be
wholly in them; and therein Labor to Overcome Evil with Good. Suffer any
thing, rather than in the Methods of the Law, do that which will ruin the
Success of the Gospel, and utterly extinguish the Hope of your doing any more
Good by your Ministry among them. Cause them to feel, that you are travailing
with Agony for the Eternal Salvation of them and theirs; and that the Gaining
of one Soul to GOD by your Ministry, will be of more Account with you than any
Gain of this World; than all the Wealth in the World. Be they never so Unjust,
yet nobly hold on Raining the Blessed Showers of Heaven upon them! Thus with a
Strong Faith which gives Glory to GOD go on with a Watchful, Painful, Faithful
Ministry, keeping your Eye on the Sixth Chapter of Matthew, and Relying on your
SAVIOR for your Subsistence: And, Never Fear! Never Fear! He will with strange
Interpositions of His Providence, yea, with Conspicuous and Mavelous
Operations of the Angelical Ministry, send in Seasonable Supplies for you; and
often make the Season of them such as notably to add unto the Comfort of them.

-- Yea, sooner than Starve, the Ravens will bring Food unto you. Regenvolscius
relates it, in his, History of the Sclavonic Churches; It was a wretched Custom
of the Papists, that when they had run One of the Holy People into Prison, they
would there, by a progressive Substraction of all Subsistence from him, starve
him to Death. Matthias Dolanscius was a Prisoner designed for such
Circumstances, in the City of Prague, -- and at length all the Attempts of the
Godly People, and of a gracious Matron among the rest, secretly to relieve him,
had a total stop given to them. Now, One Day, when he was on the very point of
Starving, he cast his Eye toward the Grate of the Prison, and saw a little
Bird sitting there, with something in his Bill. His Curiosity leading him
thither, the Bird flew away: but left a bit of Cloth, in which, when he took it
up, he found a piece of Gold: And with this piece of Gold, he found Ways
tolleraby to furnish himself with Bread, until the Death of the King: On and by
which he obtained his full Deliverance.

This I will say to you; Hold on, Hold on, Always at Work for a Glorious
CHRIST; and rather than you should starve, Matthias Dolanscius's Bird shall be
sent unto you! And unto that Question, Lacked ye any thing? You shall be able
to give a Comfortable Answer.

. 18. Too Weighty are the Words of the pious Hen. Will. Ludolf, to be left
untranscribed, when I am treating you, with the Things which I am desirous to
have greatly considered with you. It a great unhappiness, that the greatest
part of the Clergy of all Communions, do not perceive, that GOD is upon His Way
to break down all the false Draughts and Schemes, which the Antichristian
Spirit of Sectarism has contrived instead of Substantial Christianity, which
is, The Restoring of the Image of GOD in the New Creature, or, The Kingdom and
Life of GOD within us. I press you to employ the deepest Meditation on this
Important Matter. When the Lord GOD Omnipotent comes to shake not the Earth
only, but also Heaven, it is, That those Things that cannot be shaken may
remain. What are those Things that cannot be shaken? But those MAXIMS of the
Everlasting Gospel, wherein all Good and Wise Men are United, and all Men
become Good and Wise, when they come into that Union with them: The MAXIMS,
which the more they are studied, and the Wiser, and the Better, they are who
study them, the more they will be approved of: The MAXIMS which are directly
calculated for the Grand Intentions of, Glory to GOD in the Highest, and Peace
on Earth from a Good Will in Men toward one another. It Is even the First born
of my Wishes for you, That you may be one of those Angels, that shall fly
through the midst of Heaven, with this Everlasting Gospel, to preach it unto
them who dwell on the Earth, and move all the People of GOD, though of different
Persuasions in lesser Points, to embrace one another upon the Generous Maxims
of it, and keep lesser Points in a due Subordination unto the Superior Maxims,
and manage their Differences upon those lesser Points with another Spirit, than
what the Disputers of this World in the several Sects of Christians keep
commonly Cutting One another withal.

To assist you in the Discovering and Determining of these Everlasting MAXIMS,
I will not merely refer you to the Sentiments of a Judicious Davenant, in his,
Adhortatio ad Fraternam Communionem inter Evangelicas Ecclesias, or those of a
Sharpsighted Baxter, who was a Pen in the Hand of GOD, when he wrote his
Catholic Unity, and, The True and Only Way of Concord: Much less, will I
prosecute the Proposal of our celebrated Usher, That if at this Day we take a
Survey of the several Professions of Christianity, that have any large Spread
in any Part of the World, and should put by the Points wherein they differ from
One another, and gather into One Body the rest of the Articles, wherein they
all generally Agree; we should find, That in those Propositions, which without
Controversy are so Universally received in the whole Christian World, so much
Truth is contained, as, being joined with Holy Obedience, may be sufficient to
bring a Man unto Everlasting Salvation. Neither have we Cause to doubt, but
that as many as do Walk according to this Rule, (neither overthrowing that
which they have built, by superinducing any Damnable Heresies, thereupon, nor
otherwise Vitiating their Holy Faith with a lewd and wicked Conversation) Peace
shall be upon them. I will rather exhibit the MAXIMS in such a Manner, as to
make the best Provision, against that loathsome thing, A Lifeless Religion;
whereof an Irreligious Life, will be the Natural Consequence. In short, I may
as with a Burning Glass, [Oh! That with an Irresistible Heat from Heaven upon
you!] Contract into a little Room, the Sum of the Matter, and the PIETY, which
will be sound a Sure Foundation for an UNION among all Parties of true
CHRISTIANS, however they may be Denominated or Distinguished. As our SAVIOR,
whom His FATHER hears always, has prayed, for His People, that they all may
be ONE, so, it is impossible, that all the Genuine People of GOD should not
Unite with one another in much greater Things, than those in which it is
possible for them to Dissent from one another. Such Things are those Graviore
Evangelii, which to cut short the Work in Righteousness, I shall in these Three
MAXIMS compendiously set before you.

I. The ONE most High GOD, who is the FATHER, and the SON, and the Holy SPIRIT,
must be my GOD: And I must make it the main Intention of my Life to Serve and
Please Him, in all Holy Obedience and Submission to Him, Remembering that His
Eye is always upon me; and be afraid of every Thing, which His Light in my Soul
shall condemn as an Evil Thing.

II. A Glorious CHRIST who is the Eternal SON of GOD, Incarnate and Enthroned
in the Blessed JESUS, is the REDEEMER, on whose great Sacrifice I must Rely for
my Reconciliation to GOD, looking to Him, at the same time, that I may live
unto GOD by Him. Living in me: And under His Conduct I am now to expect a
Blessedness in a Future State, for my Immortal Soul; to which He will restore
my Body, when He shall come to Judge the World.

III. Out of Respect unto GOD and His CHRIST, I must heartily Love my
Neighbor, and forever do unto Other Men, as I must own it Reasonable for them
to do unto myself.

The Foundation of GOD is in these Holy Mountains. While these Glorious MAXIMS
are [as, why should they not be? I am sure much more Questionable Ones, are
daily required for to be] subscribed unto, it is to be wished, that these Two
[I can scarce call them. Two more] may in Subserviency to the First Three, be
also brought into the Subscription.

I adhere to the Sacred SCRIPTURES, as the sufficient Rule, for Belief, and
Worship, and Manners, among the People of GOD, and I would maintain a Brotherly
Fellowship with all Good Men, in the Things wherein I apprehend them to follow
these Divine Directions.

And,

I Declare for the just Liberties of Mankind, and of our Nations: And for a
Christian Encouragement in the Church for all that observe the Grand MAXIMS of
PIETY, accompanied with a free Indulgence of Civil Rights in the State, unto
all that approve themselves Faithful Subjects and Honest Neighbors, and such
Inoffensive Livers, that Humane Society cannot complain of Disturbance from
them.

I will not now suppose a Quinquarticular Controversy, but rather propose a
Ternarticular Period of all Controversies. And the very first Thing, that I
offer upon it, is, That in these MAXIMS, of Godliness, which are all without
Controversy, you behold all Controversies of Religion, as coming to an Amicable
and a Comfortable Period. My Advice to you, is; That when you make some Figure
in the Field of the Church-Militant, you be drawn as little as may be, into any
Eristic Writings; wherein you shall be surprised unawares into the Errors of
Passion, and into the Follies of taking Pains to convince a few Readers that
you have more Wit than your Antagonist. Every Man who pulls at the Polemic Saw,
and manages any Controversy in Religion, always pretends a Zeal to uphold in
the Issue of the Disputation, some certain Point of Practical PIETY, which is
in these Indisputable MAXIMS declared for. If it were not from a zealous
Concern which the Contenders have that the Practice of Piety, may not suffer in
such a Point, they profess, that they would not contend so earnestly for the
Faith. If they cannot sincerely make this Profession, they are but Litigious,
and Vexatious, and the Gladiators are to be hissed off the Theater, by all that
wish well to Christianity. Now, how commonly are both Parties well agreed, in
the Point of PIETY, which the One says, cannot be preserved but upon his
Positions; and the other says, cannot be preserved if his be denied? Be sure,
All the Truly Pious are so! But, if both Parties are agreed for that PIETY,
which is the Main, and the Scope of all, how much Good may you do, if you can
so Syringe the Odoriferous Water of the confessed MAXIMS upon them, that the
Quarrelling Hives in the Loss of their Distinction may give over their
Quarrels, and the Children of Jacob not fall out by the Way, or be so angry
about the Way, seeing they are Brethren? Or, if the Brethren will yet fall out,
and the Controversies must go on, and you are called forth to bear a Part in
them, yet, My Son, continue to play these Engines, for the extinguishing of the
Fires; Govern your Mind, and your Pen, by the MAXIMS of PIETY; persuade others
what you can to do so too; and carry not on any but the Wars of the Lamb in
your Contestations. What I could most of all wish for is, That for your Defense
of the Truth, which is always for PIETY, you do what you have to do, mostly in
that Positive Way, of asserting, and evincing, and advancing the PIETY, which
the Truth you would have to be defended, is to animate. Conscience will quickly
come in, with a Testimony on the behalf of that PIETY; and the Truth which
appears necessary to support that PIETY, will easily be taken in, and not
easily parted with. This is for the most part better than the Elenctic Way of
sheltering the Truth from the Assaults which they that corrupt the Earth would
make upon it: Instead of Swords, it is to employ Plough-Shares; Instead of
Spears, it is to employ Pruning Hooks; and the State and Work of Paradise is a
little emulated and anticipated.

But, if the Elenctic Way become necessary to be taken, and if you must go down
into the Battle, and smite the Enemies in the Valley of Salt, I again, and
again say, Take heed unto your Spirit: Let the Designs of PIETY Regulate your
whole Proceeding. Furnish no new Matter for the old Complaint of, -- Sibi
ferales plerique Christiani; and add nothing to the Instances of such Outrages,
as the Jesuits have with Derision censured in the Controversal Writings of the
mutual Firings between the Lutherans and the Calvinists.

Lutherans, and Calvinists! -- Inasmuch as I have thus unawares mentioned
These, I will upon these make the Experiment, [whether with any better Success,
than my dear Pitiscus did, I know not!] how far a Syneretism of PIETY will
Unite the People of GOD, or Abate their Cursed Anger, and Cruel Wrath against
One another in pursuing of Religious Controversies. The Sagacious Baron
Pussendorf, while he despairs not of breaking down the Partition Wall between
those two mighty Parties of Protestants, in other Parts of it, yet it appears
unto him little short of Desperate, when the Sublime and Obscure Doctrines of
Predestination (wherein Luther and Calvin themselves, were better agreed than
their Followers,) come to be considered. However, even here also at last he
takes Courage, and says, If ever there is to be a Better Condition of Mankind,
and an Happier State of the World, it is not to be Expected, but from a serious
and universal Practice of Christian PIETY. Let us then with a little Patience
hear both Parties declare themselves.

Say, Master Lutheran, What is the PIETY, for the maintaining whereof you so
eagerly advance your Principles? His Answer is; I would not have the most Holy
and Sin-hating Lord, Reproached as the Impeller of the Sin whereof he is the
Revenger. I would not have our Merciful Father blasphemed, as dealing after an
Illusory Manner with Men, when He invites them to His Mercy. I would not have
any among the fallen Race of the First Adam, shut out from the just Hopes of
Life in the Death of the Second Adam. I would not have Impenitent Unbeliever;
cast upon GOD the Blame of their Impenitency; but the Wicked lay wholly on
themselves the Fault of their own Destruction. I would have Men Work about
their own Salvation, with a much Diligence and Vigilance, as if all turned upon
their own Will and Care whether they shall be Saved or no. The pious Calvinist
hears all this with Pleasure; and can say, My Brother, In all these Things my
Heart is with you.

But now, Master Calvinist, it is your Turn. Say, what is the PIETY, for the
maintaining whereof you so eagerly Prefer your Principles? His Answer is; I
would have our good GOD, forever adored, as the Original of all the Good, that
we Have, or that we Do. If Men arrive to any Good Spiritual as well as
Temporal, I would have our GOD praised for it; and I would have His Favors
confessed as most Unmerited by us in all our Praises. I would not admit the
least Insinuation, as if the King Eternal, who is the Only Wise GOD, had not an
Infallible Foreknowledge from all Eternity of whatever comes to pass in Time. I
would have all that come unto Everlasting Life, to admire the Everlasting Love
of GOD unto them; and with Endless Admirations own, That their SAVIOR has done
more for them, than for others. I would have Men look up to GOD, with ardent
Prayers for His Gracious, and Enlightening, and Sanctifying Influences, and
Pray unto Him as the GOD of all Grace, and the GOD who gives Repentance, and
Remember that Faith is the Gift of GOD. I would have Man to be very Humble, and
humbly to Annihilate himself before the Glorious GOD, with whom there is
terrible Majesty. The pious Lutheran hears all this with Delight; and can say,
My Brother, My Heart cannot but concur with you, in such Things as these.

At the same time, they both find that the several Schemes, with which they
would have this PIETY served, are encumbred with Insuperable Difficulties; and
the Lutheran may have retorted upon him those very Difficulties which he thinks
he sees the Calvinist overwhelmed withal. The old Law, Qui non vetat cum potest
Jubet, Encumbers Arminius with as hard Consequences as he charges on Gomarus.
Maimonides will tell you, how much the Jewish World, and Cicero how much the
Pagan, has been divided, in their Opinions, De Fato. Among the Papists, how do
the Dominicans, and after these, the Jansenists, and their Opposites, keep in
the dark, buffeting one another upon them? So that after all, It Is PIETY that
must bring all to rights: and Melancthons Resolution; Officium agamus, et
Disputationes de Predestinatione seponamus.

The Experiment may be made on many other Doctrines, [Among which, I pray, take
notice, you will never find me mentioning the Damnable Heresies, of the Arian, and
the Socinian!] wherein they that have the true Fear of GOD, and Love of CHRIST,
may have their Differing Sentiments; -- Incolumi semper Amicitia.

Instead of my going on to do That, I rather pass now to say, That I would have
you lay aside all Thoughts, of any Foundation for an Union among the Professors
of Christianity, but what shall be in the Unity of the Spirit; or that Work of
the Holy SPIRIT on the Hearts of Men, that inclines them to Glorify GOD with an
Obedience to His Will revealed in His Word, and Glorify CHRIST with a
Dependence on Him for all their Happiness; and Love their Neighbor as
themselves. Other Foundation can no Man lay! All Attempts to build the Tower of
Zion on any other Foundation, will come to nothing; You Will prosper no better in
them, than they who go to build a Tower of Babel. But then, Let ALL that are by
Visible PIETY qualified for it, find a due and a kind Reception with you. Let
your Feet stand in a large Place, and, Add unto your Faith, Godliness, and unto
your Godliness, Brotherly-kindness, and unto your Brotherly-kindness, Charity:
And, Pay the Regards of Brethren in CHRIST, unto all those, who by owning and
living the Everlasting MAXIMS of PIETY, may claim what the true Citizen of Zion
will yield unto them that Fear the Lord. Allow to, yea, Challenge for, this
People, the Rights which belong unto them, and the Liberties with which the SON
of GOD has made them free. The People, who Worship GOD in the Spirit, and who
Rejoice in CHRIST JESUS, and who have no Confidence in the Flesh, or, value not
themselves upon a Religion which is nothing but Flesh, and exterior; THESE are
the true People of GOD: The PEOPLE, which have the Promises in the Covenant of
GOD pertaining to them; and whereto the Kindnesses, or the Injuries that are
done, are done unto their Glorious Head, in the Heavens. Be not such a
Donatist, as to dream, that the People of GOD are no where to be found, but in
One Party, which you have your greatest Esteem for. But, look for them, as to
be found under various Forms; and let your Judgment, how it fares Well or Ill
with the People of GOD in the World, fetch its Measures not from the Good or
Bad Circumstances of One Party only, but from the Prevailing or the Suppressing
of true PIETY, and what has a Tendency to That, wherever it is to be met withal.

Challenge for this People, a Power to Associate, or form Assemblies for the
Worship of GOD our SAVIOR, according to the Directions which they apprehend
his Gospel has given them. Challenge for the Societies of this People, the
Power to elect their own Pastors; which was one of the Last Things lost in the
Robberies which the Man of Sin committed on the Temple of GOD. Challenge for
these particular Churches, the Rights of Sacred Corporations, that have all the
Needful Power of Self-Preservation, and Self-Reformation: Yet obliged in Things
of common Concern, so far to act in Conjunction with other Churches Walking in
the Faith and Order of the Gospel, as to Consult them, and be Directed and
Restrained by them, on just Occasions.

For Communion in these Churches, and Admission to all the Privileges and
Advantages of the Evangelical Church State, I would have you insist upon it,
That no Terms be imposed, but such Necessary Things, as Heaven will require of
all, who shall Ascend into the Hill of the Lord, and stand in His Holy Place.
Be sure to stand by that Golden Rule, Receive ye one another, as CHRIST has
received us unto the Glory of GOD; That is to say, Those of whom it is our Duty
to Judge, that our SAVIOR will Receive them to His Glory in the Heavenly
World, we ought now to Receive unto all the Enjoyments of our Christian
Fellowship: And let the Table of the Lord have no Rails about it, that shall
hinder a Godly Independent, and Presbyterian, and ^piscopalian, and
Antipedobaptist, and Lutheran, from sitting down together there. Corinthian
Brass would not be so bright a Composition, as the People of GOD in such a
Coalition, feasting together on His Holy Mountain. I wish, they do not see the
Fate of Corinth, to compel them to it! -- Though in the Church that I serve, I
have seen the grateful Spectacle! -- This I must say; A Church that shall
banish the Children of GOD from His Holy Table, and shall exclude from its
Communion those that shall be Saved, merely for such Things as are Consistent
with the Maxims of PIETY, does not exhibit, The Kingdom of GOD, unto the World,
as a Church ought to do. Churches that will keep up Instruments of Separation,
which will keep out those that have the Evident Marks and Claims of them that
are One with CHRIST upon them, are in Reality but Combinations of Men, who
under Pretense of Religion, are pursuing some Carnal Interests. Their Diana is
very Visible! It Is a Complicated Profanity and Hypocrisy, that these Churches
are to stand indicted for. It is to be lamented, That more Churches than One
have the Guilt of a very sinful Schism to be charged upon them, for their
Chasing from their Communion, and the annexed Encouragements and Emoluments,
many of the Righteous Nation, which have the Gates of Heaven standing open for
them: and yet such is the Mystery of Iniquity, that at the same time they make
Outcries of Schism, against the Conscientious People, for keeping out, while
they violently shut the Doors upon them. Yea, There has been One Church [Tho' I
have never heard of but One!] which has punished and even destroyed Multitudes
of Godly Men, for not Conforming to things which the Imposers themselves have
confessed Indifferent.

I hope, I have said enough, to disengage you from all Schismatical
Combinations, and Intimate the Catholic Spirit, which I would have to be
exercised, in the whole Progress of your Ministry. Cath^licism without Popery,
is the Title of an Essay, which therefore I particularly commend unto a Perusal
with you.

Finally. As it must be the Grand Aim of your Ministry, to propagate the PIETY
of the Everlasting Gospel; And though vain Men may boast what they will of this
or that being the Best constituted Church in the World, and celebrate their own
Admirable Constitution, yet that should be esteemed by you the Best constituted
Church, in which the PIETY of the Grand Evangelical Maxims, is most Animated
and Exhibited; and That the Best Constitution, which is most calculated for the
Cultivation of this Indisputable PIETY: So, I would have you go forth to it,
under a strong Tincture of this Apprehension, That a Church which makes the
Terms of Communion very different from the Terms of Salvation, and excludes
from any Means of Salvation, or from any due Expressions of Brotherly-kindness,
those whom it is a Duty to acknowledge as Brethren in CHRIST, is guilty of an
Iniquity, against which all Good Men ought to hear a Testimony.

There are Concurring with you, Hundreds of Thousands of Generous Minds, in
which this Apprehension lies now shut up as an Aurum Fulminans: But it will
break forth more and more, As the Day approaches, and as Men improve in Manly
Religion, in Explosions that will carry all before it: And the Mean, Little,
Narrow Souls, that know no Religion, but that of a Party, and their Secular
Interest, will become deserted Objects for the Disdain and Pity, of them who
have taken the Way that is above them. I hope, You will do all you can, to
strengthen your Brethren, as GOD shall give you, [ And may He give you!]
Opportunities.

To have done: My Concern to see you a Divine of the Right Stamp, will not
permit me to conclude, without One little piece of Over-weight added unto the
Advice that has been given you.

Having established your self in Sound Theology, by Reading such Systemes as I
have already told you of; unto which, I cannot but now tell you, an admirable
Turretine should be annexed, as one hardly to be equalled; Nor is, Cocceius de
Faedere, to be omitted: [If I said nothing of P. Martyr, and of Polanus, and of
Musculus, and of Bucanus, and of Ursinus, and of Essenius, and of the Theses
Salmurienses, and several more, it was not because I despised them, nor would I
have you to do so. However I allow you to make that Interpretation of my
Silence about those they call, The Schoolmen: Among whom, if you have The Sum
of Aquinas, you have the Sum of all that I shall commend unto you:] Now bestow
some Reading on a few Books, which refer to the Christian Asceticks; and which
teach the Orthodox Pietism; and which are designed peculiarly to kindle and
cherish the Life of GOD in the Soul of Man. Read particularly T. Akempis, his,
De Imitatione Christi; Gerhard, his, Meditationes; Besoldus, his Axiomata
Philosophiae Christianae; Spener, his, De Natura and Gratia; And, Voetius, his,
DeExercitijs Pietatis. I stop here, as I have done heretofore, for that Reason,
Discentem Onerat Librorum Turba, non Instruit. I wish that you may feel good
Impressions from these; and that what has been called, The Apotheosis
Christiana, may be what you shall thus arrive unto.

19 I have yet more to do; I may not leave you, till I leave a few RULES OF
HEALTH with you; which I shall do with the utmost Brevity.

Having first encouraged you to cultivate an intimate Acquaintance with some
Wise and Good Physician, who may have the continual Inspection of your Health,
in your Friendly Conversation with him, I will defend you with the ensuing
Admonitions.

I. The most Acute Physicians, find themselves compelled, with our Cheyne, unto
this General Direction. The Grand Secret and Sole Method for Long Life, and so
for the Health which will befriend and sweeten it, is, To keep the Blood and
Juices in a State of due Fluidity. And nothing will do this, but keeping much
to a Spare, Lean, Fluid sort of a Diet. All who live long, and without much
Pain, and after such a Life at length Die easily, are such as Live Abstemiously.

II. Borellus has a Remark on many Students falling into a Consumption, That it
often proceeds, A Fumo candelarum hausto in Musaeis undique Clausis.

You will undergo the less of this Hazard, if you mind the Report of Manlius;
Ego multos Periculosos Morbos et Miserias hujus Corpusculi mei Vito, hac unica
Ratione, quod semper utor Diligentia, cito eundi cubitum.

III. The Medicina Gymnastica has done Miraculous Things. Bodily Exercise
profits; But no Exercise comparable to that of moderate Riding; whereof, the
Reason why we find no more in the Prescriptions of the Ancients, (though Galen
has a Chapter about it) for the Recovery of the Feeble, is because they were so
simple as to Ride without Stirrups. The Saddle is the Seat of Health. As for
the Games, which Exercise the Spirit and not the Body, particularly, the Noble
and Ancient Game of Chess; These are by no Means proper for a Student.

IV. It Is an Observation of that Great Man, the Lord Verulam, Nihil magis
conducit ad Sanitatem et Longaevitatem, quam Crebrae et Domesticae Purgationes.
A Family-Purge now and then taken, may be of Service to you. Pillulae Ruffi,
especially when Chalybeated with adding about a third part of Sal Martis: Or
else; A Bottle of Anniseed Water, with a Dram or two of Rhubarb steeped in it;
These you may conveniently have always at hand for this Purpose.

V. Vander Heidan, has not related an hundredth part of the Virtues, in Cold
Water. I tender you the Advice which the Aged Servant of GOD gave to his Valued
Son, Drink not only Water; but use a little Wine for thy Stomachs sake. And yet
I would say, upon Drinking a Glass of Generous Wine, often take a Glass of
Water. And if the Beer they bring you, be too Strong, dilute it with putting a
sufficient Quantity of Water into it. But never take Water, or any thing else,
Cold, when you are Hot with Labor. There is Death in the Pot.

When you have run the hazard of disturbing your Stomach, with Ingurgitations
from a Full Table, a Draught of Cold Water, will do Good like a Medicine.

Going to Bed, and Sweating from a large Draught of Cold Water, not only stops
and cures a Cold, but also often extinguishes a Fever at the Beginning.

Daily to wash your Head and Mouth with Cold Water, is a Practice that cannot
be too much commended; If it were only for saving you from the Toothache.

For a Frequency in the Use of the Liquors, which they call Spirits, be as
afraid of it, as you would be of a Familiarity with Evil Spirits.

VI. When you go to Infectious Places, one of the best Things you can do, is to
hold and chew a bit of Myrrh in your Mouth.

VII. To feed much on Salt-Meats, will not be for your Safety. Indeed, if less
Flesh were eaten, and more of the Vegetable and Farinaceous Food were used, it
were better. The Milk-Diet is for the most part some of the wholesomest in the
World! And not the less wholesome, for the Cocoa-Nutt giving a little Tincture
to it.

VIII. Shall I smoke Tobacco? Answer; Be sure Not, if I can help it. Or let
Alsted answer for me. Maximus Tabaci Abusus est, quotidiano ejus usu,
semetipsos, et bonas Horas perdere, et ex cerebro, mentis nobilissima sede,
caminum et cloacam efficere. In the Duchy of Berguen, People may not Smoke,
without purchasing a License for it. If you were to purchase of me a License
for it, I know not how high Terms I should hold you to. If you want an
Hydragogue, there is one preferrible in chewing some such Thing as a bit of
Mastich; which would also whiten your Teeth, and sweeten your Breath, which
Tobacco poisons. If once you get into the way of Smoking, there will be extreme
hazard, of your becoming a Slave to the Pipe; and ever Insatiably craving for
it. People may think what they will; But such a Slavery, is much below the
Dignity of a Rational Creature; and much more of a Gracious Christian. I am
sure, what the Great Voetius writes upon it, is very true; Minime convenit
viris honest is et gravibus; nominatim Ministris et Ministerii Candidatis.
There can be no Apology for your taking up the slovenly Practice, and the Pains
that must be taken to conquer the Poison, if you are not well advised and
assured, That your Health requires it. But I shall only recite what you will
find in Two very considerable Writers, that you may form the better Judgment
upon it. The One of these Writers is Magnenus; who though he be a mighty Friend
to the Use of Tobacco, yet acknowledges, That it is not easy to relate, what
are the Damages, which the Inordinate and Immoderate Use of this Fume does
bring with it; for besides the insatiable and greedy Lust of taking it, by its
daily Use, the Memory is impaired, the Stomach violated, the Brain exiccated,
and the Life shortened; and the Offspring damnified. Yea, he lays this down as
an undoubted Assertion; That the frequent and familiar Use of it, can be good
for no Man. The Other is our Gale, who from his own Experience taxes the Smoke
of Tobacco with very Noxious Qualities: He says, He found it made more Humors
than it brought away; and though it opened his Body for the present, it proved in
that very thing a Prejudice afterward; and Nature was but the more Sluggish
and Feeble anon, for the Force in this way put upon it. He says, At last I came
under a fixed Resolution to deliver my self from this Vassalage; And this I
account not the least Deliverance of my Life. And yet, after all, I am not so
Inflexibly set, as utterly to deny you the Use of Tobacco, if you are sure of
any Benefit from it. Only I insist upon it, That you be, [If I may use a
Phrase, that if it may seem to trespass upon Good Sense, it shall yet have as
much as the Thing I write against] Excessively Moderate in it. And if you are
growing so Wise as to Retrench and Reform any Intemperance in it, which you may
have been unawares drawn into, do it not at Once, but by Degrees, lest by too
quick a stop to an usual Discharge, your Health may be endangered. But, upon
the whole; If you have hitherto escaped this Epidemical Contagion, and are not
yet a settled Inhabitant of the Terra del Fuogo, I cannot advise you in better
Terms than those; It is Good for you to abide even as you are; And, If you may
be kept free, choose it rather. Yea, My Son, If Smokers entice thee, consent
thou not. It is good Advice; and if you take it, you will one Day Thank him
that gave it.

But if I am against your taking Tobacco in Smoke, you may be sure, I shall not
approve your taking it in Snuff. How shameful a thing it is, for People of
Reason to confess, that they cannot live easily half an Hour together, without a
Delight so Sensual, so Trivial, so very Contemptible, as that of Tickling their
Olfactory Nerves a little? And even bury themselves alive, in pungent Grains of
titillating Dust? A Learned Physician of the French Nation, will tell you, how
many Diseases of the Genus Nervosum, do issue out of that Pandora's Box, from
whence the Pinch of Snuff is taken. A Quincy will tell you, how wretchedly it
spoils the Appetite. And a Cheyne will tell you, how much the Eyes as well as
the Stomach fare the worse for it. You may dream, that the Passage through the Os
Cribriforme will not permit the Gross Powder of your Snuff to enter into your
Brain; yet some very thin and fine Parts of it will find their way thither. And
what Mischiefs must needs follow a Brain so poisoned? Nay, One would think,
that the great Snuff-takers had their Brain already touched; or they could not
be so obstinately and incurably attached unto an Evil Habit, which their Folly
has brought upon them. A very just Motto for the Snuff Box might be, A LEADER
TO THE COFFIN. If it be offered you, Away with it! I say again, Away with it!

IX. A Knight of my Acquaintance visiting the famous Dr. Lower, in his last
Sickness, asked him for the best Advice he could give him, How to preserve his
Health, and prolong his Life; the Doctor only answered him, Don't eat too much!
After some other Discourse, the Knight not imagining that the Doctor had
thoroughly answered his Enquiry, repeated it. The Doctor thereupon only repeted
his Answer; Why, Didn't I tell you; Don't eat too much! -- And, further said
not. Sr. Theodore Mayern on his Deathbed gave this Advice to a Noble Friend,
that asked his Counsil for the proservation of of his Health. Be moderate in
your Diet; Use much Exercise, and little Physic. I would have added, Guard
against injurious Changes of the Weather; and especially be exposed unto the
Night-Airs as little as may be.

X. Baglivi is not the only Gentleman, who has observed, how much Tranquillity
and Serenity of the Mind, contributes unto the Health. Hofman in his Treatise,
Des Moyens de vivre Longtemps, has observed, That in the way of keeping the
Mind Quiet, the Fear of the Lord tends unto Life. An Holy and an Easy Mind, is
the most Healthful Thing under Heaven: The most potent Prophylactic in all the
World. I need say no more.

Only This. Forever Obsta Principijs. -- If any Sickness come upon you, be sure
to be Sick soon enough. Maladies taken at the Beginning may be easily and
presently conquered; when -- Delays are dangerous. And if you are upon a
Recovery from any Malady, Ben't Well too soon^

20. I have now no more to do; but only single out a Few RULES OF PRUDENCE, the
Observation whereof may be your Preservation from very many Wrong Steps, in the
Way you have now before you. It cost the Prussians, the Trouble of a War,
before they could oblige their Neighbors, to call them no longer Brutos, which
they did before the Tenth Century, but, Prusses, which signifies, it seems, A
Prudent People. I wish it may cost you no more Trouble, than only a little
Reading of, and Thinking on, certain Maxims of Prudence to render you one of
that People. I shall not say, how much it has cost me, and what a Dear-bought
Experience it is, that has enabled me to recommend them.

I will first suppose, That you take that Course of PIETY, If any lack Wisdom,
let him ask it of GOD: And, That you study the Book of The PROVERBS, which our
Bible is enriched withal. I will also wish you to read, the Lord Verulam, his
Essays. And I will mind you, That one has lately written a Book, to show, That
Wisdom lies in the not doing that which may any way prejudice Humane Society,
of which we are a part, but on the contrary make all our Actions tend to the
Benefit of it. Then, I will offer you such Hints as these.

I. The Italian Maxims are no Imprudent ones. One must not Spend all he has;
nor Do all he can; nor Tell all he knows; nor Believe all he hears.

And there is a Sentence of a Greek Poet, worthy to be remembered with you;
which in plain English will tell you, No wise Man will be taken a second Time,
in an Error he has suffered for.

II. It is a Lesson worth more than an Ingott of Gold, which one who saw many
Things, has left, for what is to be uttered in Company; Bis prius ad Limam quam
semel ad Linguam. Think before you Speak; Think before whom you Speak; Think
why as well as what you Speak. And Remember, In multiloquio Stultiloquium; And,
Least said soonest mended.

It is a very prudent Remark; If one observes these Three small Imperatives,
Audi, Cerne, Tace, he will need no other Passport for Traveling over the
World. You will have a good Note of Wisdom, with two Satellits to it, in my
reciting to you the Observations of a very Discrete Man, who said; He had often
got hurt by by eating too much; rarely, by eating too little; Often got hurt by
wearing too few Clothes; rarely, by wearing too many: Often got hurt by
Speaking; rarely, by holding his Tongue.

III. You find Homer assigning That as the Reason, which made his Patroclus to
be Universally Lamented at his Death, He knew how to be Goodnatured unto all
Men. You may come to be almost Universally Beloved while you Live, if your Good
Nature, [and Good Humor; what no Nation or Language but ours, has a proper
Term for!] appear in continual Demonstrations, which will satisfy every one;
That you shall Delight in doing all Good Offices which they can Desire of you;
and, That if you see or hear any thing Disreputable in them, you will
generously cast and keep a Mantle over it.

IV. I have heard one say, That there was a Gentleman in the Nineteenth Chapter
of the Acts, to whom he was more endebted, than to any Man in the World. This
was he, whom our Translation calls the Town Clerk of Ephesus; whose Counsil it
was, To do nothing Rashly. Upon any Proposal of Consequence, it was an usual
Speech with him, We Will first advise with the Town Clerk of Ephesus. One in a
fond Compliance with a Friend, forgetting the Town Clerk, may do that in Haste,
which he may Repent at Leisure; may do what may cost him several Hundreds of
Pounds, besides Troubles which he would not have undergone for Thousands.

V. Let the Judges Motto be yours, Prudens qui Patiens. You will for ever find,
The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God. And, There is nothing done
so well in a Passion, but what may be done better out of it. There is a
Conspicuous Wisdom in Meekness. If you find your Spirit heated in Discourse at
any Time, Now, Now, is a Time for the Bridle; I will take heed to my Ways, that
I Sin not with my Tongue. There is Danger lest a Moses himself Speak
unadvisedly with his Lips, when his Anger is moved. Suppress rather than
Express too warm Resentments, whatever be the Provocations. There will be
nothing lost by doing so. -- Motos praestat componere fluctus.

VI. If you feel a Violent Impulse hurrying you into an eager pursuit of any
Matter, be Jealous, be Afraid, lest you be led into Temptation. Examine it over
and over again; and be upon a most sedate weighing of the Matter, well-assured,
That it is what will not be Repented of.

VII. Let it be as a Law of the Medes and Persians with you, That you will
never sacrifice any Hours of a short Life, in Contentions: Especially in
Personal Contentions, and Quarrels and Squabbles, and Vitilitigations.
Abundance of Sin will be unavoidably committed in them; And, The Game will not
pay for the Candle. Remit rather of much Right, which you may have a Claim
unto, than Contend for it. This is the meaning of, Let your Moderation be known
unto all Men. In using an uncommon Lenity and Forbearance, and Condescension,
under unfair Usages, you will find, The Lord u at hand; Ready in strange Ways
to make you Reparation for the Wrongs that Men may have done you. Yea, Why may
you not look on the Peace you purchase by it, as a sufficient Reparation?

VIII. Sometimes a Vindication may be necessary. In what Cases -- Wisdom will
be profitable to direct you. But, if it be at any Time whispered unto you, that
any one has Despised you, Derided you, spoken Diminutively of you; the Best
way, for the most part, is, For you to take no more Notice of it, than a
greater Man [a Theodosius] would have done of such a Contempt cast upon him.
Let them that have abused you, know nothing that you know any thing of the
matter. For such is the Baseness of many People, that (measuring you by
themselves) they will hate you, because you know that they have hurt you; and
they will persist in their Hatred, which they must Justify, because they
imagine, that you cannot Forgive them. Whereas, If you be Silent, and as one
that hears not, GOD will probably Reward your Patient Silence, by making those
very Persons anon prove some of the most cordial and useful Friends you have in
the World.

IX. Don't Use your Pen, and Lose your Time, in Eristic Writings, any more than
unquestionable Duty and Prudence makes to be absolutely Necessary. Writing upon
a Point, and in the Way and Strain of Controversy, will not only have a
Tendency to discompose the Peace of your Mind, but miserably Divert the Studies
of a short Pilgrimage, from such things as would be much more Profitable for
your self and others. Anon, the Grand Point of the Controversy will be, only
Who has most Wit or Grace of the Two, you, or your Antagonist. A mighty
Business! If Jerome were pleased in an Hectoring way to forewarn his Opponents,
that he was, Cornuta Bestia; I hope you will not be so.

X. If Calumnious Quills have publicly scratched you, -- An Respondendum
semper Calumniis? -- No. Look as far back as Two Thousand Years ago, and you
will find even a Plato giving a Pattern to a Christian, in his declining to
take any Notice of the Invectives which a Xenophon had used upon him. -- It may
be, the Scribblers, are sorry Scoundrels, and such vile Children of Sheth, as
it is beneath you to let them know that you have so much as read their Follies.
-- Or be they what they will, for the most part, the best way will be to, Shine
on, Regardless of what the Batts and Owls may mutter against you. Or, if that
Metaphor be too Sublime, let me say, At least As the Moon among the lesser
Fires, keep a steady Pace, Walking in your Brightness, notwithstanding the
unregardable Allatrations of your Adversaries. If they persecute you with
Libels, it is a notable Hint, that Le Clero has given you. Instead of answering
them, write such learned and useful Books, as will be of perpetual Service to
Mankind. These will procure such a casting and lasting Testimony for you, that
there will need no more to make a Man ill though it of, than this; That he was a
Thersites to you, and one that wrote against you. These Books will be durable
Monuments of your Valuable and Honorable Character, when the Libels of these
poor Animalculicuncles will perish among the Wast-Paper, which the Haberdashers
of small Wares have occasion for.

And if any Preacher should be so impertinent as to have any Girds at you in
the Pulpit, remember the Advice of the sweet-spirited Melancthon to Vitus
Theodorus, when the hot-spirited Osiander had preached against him; I charge
you, Don't Answer the Man; Hold your Peace; Go on in your Ministry as if you
had heard nothing! -- The Gentleman soon found his Account in hearkening to his
Candid Adviser.

That what I am driving may stick, you shall have it in the Form of two old
Rusty Nails; The One, Magnum Contumeliae Remedium Negligentia; The other, Sile,
et funestam dedisti Plagam.

As wicked a Fellow as ever polluted a Pen, yet has this Passage worth
transcribing from him, while his Name is not worth mentioning. The Malice of
Ill Tongues cast upon a Good Man, is only like a Mouthful of Smoke, blown upon
a Diamond, which though it clouds its Beauty for the present, yet it is easily
rubbed off, and the Gem restored with little Trouble to its Genuine Luster. But
an Honester Pagan than he, has told you, Perditi Hominis profligatique
Maledictis, nullius Gloria dignitasque Violatur. Old Cicero tells you so.

XI. Be Sociable. But throw away as little Time as ever you can, upon the
Temporis Fures; especially upon Impertinent Company. Keep Company; but let it
be chiefly with such as are your Superiors; your Familiarity with whom, will
be Reputable and Serviceable to you.

XII. While you are yet in your Younger Years, be always furnished with a Stock
of Weighty and Useful Questions. By wisely and humbly offering These, and with
the Modesty of One desiring to be Instructed, you may commonly lead the
Conversation, even with your Superiors, and almost necessitate a Profitable
Conversation. You may be, as R. Jeremy was called, The Master of the Questions.
A Discretion in this point, is a distinguishing Thing. But whenever you are
Arguing, ordinarily propose every Thing rather Socratically than Dogmatically.
Be not Positive; much less Clamorous; least of all Furious. But keep up an Air
of Modesty, and carry on your Discourse, in the form of proper Questions; and
as one willing to be instructed by him whom you are disputing with. It Is an
Excellent Wisdom, this; To Argue Handsomely.

XIII. Find out some very Wise, and some very Good Person, whom you may choose
to make, what we call, A Bosom Friend. But be very careful of your Choice; For,
A Faithful Friend, who can find? When you have such an One, ask his Advice in
all Matters of Importance. Nevertheless, even here, keep your Stops, as to
trusting him, with such Secrets as may put it into his Power to Hurt you. At
least, rarely commit any Secrets to any Persons, but such as may have it as
much for Their Interest as it is for Yours, to keep them so.

XIV. Lay Hands suddenly on no Man! -- There is in the Wisdom of the Ancients,
a Caution against, Blessing a Friend with a loud Voice, Rising early in the
Morning. There is a mavelous Wisdom as well as Goodness, in speaking Well of
every One, as far as we can, on all Occasions, and even watching for all
Occasions to do so. And Evil speaking has an Indiscretion as well as Indecency
in it; for the very Birds of the Air strangely report the Matter. But yet there
is often a Want of Wisdom, in our being either too Copious, or too Early in our
Commendations: Too High, or too Quick. You may sooner than you think for, see
your Commendations Consuted; and be obliged [as even Calvin once,] to Revoke
your Dedications.

Qualem commendes etiam atque etiam aspice. XV. Let no Man of Quality engage
you, and attach you so far to his Interests, that you shall run the hazard of
Abating the Success of your Ministry, and Abridging your Opportunities to Do
Good unto many, upon his Account. You will find such Men, what the Oracles of
GOD foretell you shall, when you put your Trust in them. They will soon fall
out with you, if you don't keep Touch with them, in all their Designs; and when
you cease to be their Tool, they will most Forgetfully and Ungratefully abandon
you. Nor will it be Wisdom in you, to go any further in appearing for any
Government, [As the World now goes!] than Duty calls you to it. -- If you do,
-- I can tell, How you shall be Requited for it! If any Factions arising in the
Commonwealth, solicit your Imbarcation in them, keep close to the Business of
your Ministry, and say, I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down;
Why should the work cease, while I leave it, and come down to you? To be a
State-Martyr, -- it is what I cannot advise you to be ambitious of. I have
nothing to say, for such a Crown of Martyrdom. Yet thus much I insist upon.
Besure to keep forever Loyal and Faithful to the Protestant Line, for the
British Scepter.

XVI. Gain by every Thing! Let Reproaches make you consider, To what Excellent
Virtue and Action, would He that has bidden this to befall me, thereby Awaken
me? Yea, Let all Disasters make you consider, What Admonition does my GOD now
send unto me?

XVII. If you have laid up an Inexhaustible Store of Stories, accommodated unto
all the Purposes of the Profitable and the Agreeable, and have the Skill of
telling them Handsomely, and with a Deliberate, Expressive, Unstumbling
Brevity, and produce them on many Occasions, you may not only Ingratiate
yourself wherever you make your Appearance, but also obtain almost any Request
that you shall make one of them a witty Introduction to. The Precious Stones
that every one sets a Value on, are called, Pleasant Stones. But let not your
Pleasancy, degenerate into any unbecoming Levity. Forever so Regulate it, and
so Moderate it, that it may Gracefully Terminate in the most Serious Discourse,
and if it may be, in the Inculcation and Insinuation of some serious Maxim,
which may be Good for the Use of Edifying.

XVIII. In Public Transactions, and especially when any thing is driving,
about which the People of GOD may be divided in their Sentiments, let there be
a continual Terror of GOD upon you, lest you unawares fall in with something
that may be Inimical or Detrimental to the Kingdom of GOD: Continually
suspicious, lest some Stratagem of Satan may draw you into something that may
gratify that Great Adversary. For Example; Things may look very plausibly, and
there may seem a laudable Regard paid unto Peace, and Love, and Charity in
them; and yet it may be a prostituted Charity, which going so far as to embrace
those for Brethren in CHRIST, who are Enemies to Him, it may prove a Treachery
to the most Glorious Cause in the World. And so, there was once in the Low
Countries, that pressed under the Name of Moderation, which others found and
called, Mnrderation.

Be very Thoughtful, and very Prayerful on such Occasions.

XIX. It may not be amiss for you to have Two Heaps. An Heap of
UNINTELLIGIBLES; and an Heap of INCURABLES. Ever now and then you will meet
with something or other, that may pretty much distress your Thoughts; But the
shortest Way with the Vexations will be, To throw them into the Heap they
belong to, and be no more distressed about them.

You will meet with some Unaccountable and Incomprehensible Things;
particularly, in the Conduct of many People. Throw them into your Heap of
Unintelligibles; leave them there. Trouble your Mind no further; Hope the Best,
or Think no more about them.

You will meet with some Unperswadeable People; No Counsel, no Reason will do
any Thing upon the Obstinates: Especially, as to the making of due Submissions
upon Offenses. Throw them into the Heap of Incureables. Leave them there. And
so do you go on to do as well as you can, what you have to do. Let not the
Crooked Things that cannot be made straight, encumber you

XX. It Is a Trespass on the Rules of Prudence, never to know, when to have
done. Wherefore, I have done!

And now, Go thy Way, O thou SON Greatly Beloved; and Work in thy Lot Livelily,
and Prayerfully, and Cheerfully to the End of thy Days; And Wait and Look for
what the Glorious LORD will do for thee at the End of thy Days; in those
Endless Joys, wherein thou shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and
as the Stars forever and ever.

Audendum est, ut illustratr Veritus Tatea^, multique ab Erro^e Liberentur.
Lactant. A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS For a Young Student's Library.
BAiley's English Dictionary. Ward's Introduction to the Mathematics.
Kennet's, Roman Antiquities. Potter's, Archeologia Attica. Lewis's Origines
Hebraeae. Gordon's Geographical Grammar. Wells's, Sacred Geography. Mat.
Prideaux, his Introduction for Readi^ all Sorts of History. Whiston's
Chronology. Spanheim, his Introductio ad Historiam Sacra^ The Christian
Philosopher. Whitlock's, Memorials, both Volumns. Fuller's Worthies of England.
Leigh, ^his Critica Sacra, both Parts. Charnock's Works. Pool's A^notations.
Strong, On the Covenant. Polhil, his Speculum Theologiae in Christo. The
Leyden, Synopsis Purioris Theologiae. Maestricht, his Theologia
Theoretico-practica. Ravenellus, his Bibliotheca. Edwards, his Preacher. And,
Theologia Reformata. Arndt, his Verus Christianismus. The, Commonplace Book to
the Holy Scriptures.
FINIS.
Erratula, Vix notatu digna; sed Corrigenda tamen.

PRaef. Page x. Line 5. r. igneam. P. 7. l. 32. read Scriptitat. P. 15. l. 18.
r. Subjoin. P. 41. l. 1. add, that. P. 45. l. 10. r. Things. P. 61. l. 17. r.
at the. P. 75. l. 1. r. some of. P. 77. l. 16. r. Edificationem. P. 83. l. 19.
add, the. P. 87. l. 14. f. Fresh Suit, r. Dispute. P. 107. l. 30. add, them.

Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, a WORK, which has been much and long desired, and
has been with much Care Prepared and Revised, and it is judged, may prove in a
more than Ordinary manner Serviceable to the Candidates of the Ministry, for
whom it is especially designed, as it is also for the Satisfaction and
Establishment of all the Churches, (and not improper to be bound up with this,
Manuductio,) Recommended with an Attestation written by the Memorable Dr.
Increase Mather, Three or Four Years before he died.

Entitled, Ratio Disciplinae Fratrum Novanglorum. Or, A Faithful Account of
the Discipline professed and practiced in the Churches of New England; with
Interspersed and Instructive Reflections on the Discipline of the Primitive
Churches.


