Ratio Disciplinae Fratrum NOV-ANGLORUM. A Faithful Account OF THE DISCIPLINE
Professed and Practiced; IN THE Churches OF New England. With Interspersed and
Instructive REFLECTIONS on the DISCIPLINE of the Primitive Churches.

Ezekiel. XLIII. 11. Show them the Form of the House, and the Fashion thereof, and
the Goings out thereof, and the Comings in thereof, and all the Forms thereof,
and all the Ordinances thereof; -- And write all in their Sight, that they may
keep the whole Form thereof, and all the Ordinances, thereof, and do them.

BOSTON: Printed for S. Gerrish in Cornhill. 1726.

AN ATTESTATION, From the very Reverend Dr. Increase Mather.
THAT the Churches of NEW ENGLAND have been originally of the CONGREGATIONAL
Persuasion and Profession, is known to every one. Their Platform does expressly
dislike and disclaim the Name of INDEPENDENT. The Reason why that Name has been
imposed upon them, was, Because they maintained, that a Particular, and
Organized Church, has entire Power within it self, to manage the Affairs of the
Kingdom of CHRIST, and the holy Discipline belonging to it, without a
Dependence on any superior Power on Earth. They Revere Synods, and
Ecclesiastical Councils, consisting of Elders, and Brethren, sent as Messengers
of the Churches, when want of Peace or Light, shall call for their Advice; but
they Esteem not stated Councils, or Synods, with a Juridical Power to be of
Divine Institution.

What the Arguments were, which did satisfy them, that the Congregational Way
is the way of Truth; It Is to be seen in the Books Published by those eminent
Servants of CHRIST, who first settled Churches, in these Parts of the World;
especially such as Mr. Cotton's Treatise of, The Keys. There is a Book under
the Name of that Great Man, called, The Way of the Churches, which was
published by a Brownistical Author, without Mr. Cotton's Consent or Knowledge.
But in a Discourse after that was published, he refers the Reader, who desires
to know his Judgment about Church Discipline, unto his Book of, The Keys, and
not that of, The Way.

Another of the most eminent Divines that ever New England saw, was Mr. Thomas
Hooker, Pastor of the Church in Hartford. The Survey of Church Discipline,
drawn by him, is a most Acute, Accurate, Logical Composure; some look upon it
as Irrefragable, Unanswerable. It had the Approbation of all the Ministers,
that were then in that and the next Colony.

Mr. Norton also in his learned Answer in Latin to the Enquiries of Apoll^nius
(a Dutch Divine) argues clearly and strenuously, in Defense of the
Congregational Church Discipline: A Book whereof Dr. Hornbeck, the famous
Professor in Leyden, expressed a singular Esteem.

I might have mentioned, what my Father has written, for the Defense of these
Churches, in Answer to two famous Divines, Mr. Charles Herle, and Mr. Samuel
Rutherford.

It is true, that for certain Modalities, there has been a Variety of Practice,
in these Churches; as there was in the Primitive; But in Essentials, both of
Doctrine, and of Discipline, they agree. The Eccentric are but few; nor are
there so many late Innovations, as to deserve any notice to be taken of them.

We look upon Reforming Presbyterians, as our dear Brethren: Among whom we have
in particular a most brotherly Affection, for those in Scotland. When any come
from thence, furnished with Testimonies of their Good Conversation in CHRIST,
they are as welcome to our Communion, as any Members of our own Churches. When
the Persons of Both Persuasions in London became united Brethren, the Tidings
thereof were highly acceptable to the Churches of New England, in which they
are ever so.

In the Title Page of our, Platform of Discipline, which was agreed by the
Elders, and Messengers of the Churches in the Synod at Cambridge; 1648. it is
said to be, Gathered out of the Word of GOD. It appears by the Historical
Relation here faithfully given of what is Practiced in the Churches according
to that Platform, that it agrees as with the Apostolical Time, so with the
Practices of the Christians in the Age next unto the Apostles; except in some
Superstitions, which the Churches of New England never had among them.

The Churches here, were Planted a noble Vine. Indeed it was not with respect
to the Fundamentals in Doctrine, that our Fathers came into this Wilderness.
For they agree to the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, (as fully as
any, and more fully than many,) of the Conformists in that Church. But it was
with Regard unto Church Order and Discipline, that our pious Ancestors the Good
old Puritan Nonconformists, transported themselves and their Families, over the
vast Ocean to these goings down of the Sun. On which Account, a Degeneracy from
the Principles of pure Scriptural Worship and Order in the Church, would be
more Evil in the Children of New England, than any other People in the World.

May what is here performed, (with an Erudition, as well as a Fidelity, which I
hope, will Recommend the Work,) be blessed for their Direction and
Establishment in the Good old Way, in which their Fathers have walked; The
Writer of this Ratio Disciplinae will then have cause to rejoice in this his
Labor.

Boston. 10, d. X. m. A. D. 1719. Aetatis, LXXXI. Increase Mather.

THE Introduction.
THOSE English Colonies in America, which are distinguished by the Name of
NEW ENGLAND, were formed upon the Glorious Design, of erecting CHURCHES,
wherein the Reformation should be carried on, unto farther Degrees of
Scriptural and Primitive Purity; than would be allowed by the Times in Europe,
not yet wholly recovered out of the Antichristian Apostasy.

The Planting of these CHURCHES, (which, having obtained Help from GOD,
continue unto this Day) was one of the MAGNALIA CHRISTI, in that Age the has
passed over us: The History whereof has in a large Volumn, of such a Title,
been given to the World. There may be a Misinterpretation, if That should now
be said; which has been often said, That as the Adversaries of this Country,
(which has many more than Twice seven times Seven Golden Candlesticks
illuminating of it,) have heretofore, even to a Proverb, sped as Ill, as those
that Adversaried the Ancient Piccardines, thus it has been also observed, That
Remarkable Blessings from GOD have recompensed the Good Offices, that well
disposed Persons have done unto it. Instead of making any such Observation, it
is enough to say, There (...) those in other Parts of the World, who wish ^ell
unto the Country, and have at Heart the Interests of it: A Country which one of
the most celebrated Pens in Great Britain, could not mention, but in those
Terms; A Place of as serious Piety as any I can hear of under Heaven. It is
partly with an Eye to the Satisfaction of such Good and Just Men that an
Account of the Churches here, and what they are, and what they do, is now to be
exhibited; And, no doubt, One Effect of it will be, that it may bespeak a
Continuance of Good Offices, from such as are the Friends of Pure and Undefiled
Religion. And the Best of Protestants in Europe, will Judge, how far a People,
whom a Great Man in an English Parliament vouchsafed once to call, The Best of
Protestants, be worthy to be looked upon, as their UNITED BRETHREN.

With such, and with all that have reigning in them, the Generous and Catholic
Spirit of Christianity (whereof One has given us this true Pourtraiture, C'est
Esprit universel, qui ne connoist point toutes ces Distinctions Charnelles,
Lesquelles divisent aujourd hu^ tant des petits Esprits dans le Monde, (A
Catholic Spirit which is above the carnal Distinctions, that make such
Divisions at this Day, among the Narrow Souls of the World] it will be far from
any Prejudice, but, we are well assured, it will be very grateful unto them, to
understand, That the Differences between PRESBYTERIAN and CONGREGATIONAL, seem
hardly to be known in this Country Though the Discipline Recommended by the
SYNODS of these Churches, be that which we call CONGREGATIONAL, yet it is their
Desire and Study, that a Good Man, who long since wrote an Unio Reformantium,
should not be mistaken, when he said, The Congregational are a Choice, if not
the Best part, of the Presbyterians. Reforming Presbyterians retiring sometimes
from England, and Scotland, and Ireland hither, have been as heartily esteemed
and embraced here, as any of the Pastors born and bred in the Land; and as the
Churches of New England have imposed nothing on them, that they could
conscienciously have any Scruple of; (Especially not Reordination:) thus they
have not only conformed unto the Customs of the Churches, but have even made
Conscience of doing so. Yea, Though the Churches of New England cannot admit of
many things, which they reckon Deformities retained in the Church of England,
according to its present Canonical Constitution, yet they cannot see, why they
may not claim to be Real, and even some of the Soundest Parts of the True
Church of England, according to the Intention of the first Reformers. And
therefore in an Address of the New-English Ministers, unto the Earl of
Bellomont, when he was Governor of New England, they not only asserted this
People to be, A Nation of Nonconformists, which those in Scotland, justly look
upon as their UNITED BRETHREN; but also declared, their Churches to be those
wherein the Pure Doctrine in the famous Articles of the Church of England, is
owned and preached with all possible Purity, and the Primitive Discipline,
which even the Liturgy of the Church of England wishes to see restored; is
practiced. They will with Satisfaction understand it, that not only those of
the Scotch and French Communion, are admitted into Communion in the Churches of
New England, when they come with Testimonials to ask for it; but they make only
the Substantials of Religion, or that Vital Piety wherein all Good Men are
united. the Terms of Communion among them, and they do with Delight see Godly
Congregationals, and Presbyterians, and Episcopalians, and Antipoedobaptists,
and Lutherans, all Members of the same Churches, and sitting together without
Offense about their lesser Differences, (in the same Holy Mountain) at the same
Holy Table. And if it should now be said concerning them, to the Governors,
that come over with the Royal Commission, to take the Charge of them, this will
not be the First Time that it has been said; While our Churches are not built
on any Foundation but the Maxims of the Everlasting Gospel, plainly Exhibited
in the SACRED SCRIPTURES, and know no Terms of Communion, but the Indisputable
Points of that solid Piety, wherein all Good Men are united, we assure our
selves that Governors, who have no Partiality for little Parties in Religion,
will count them Worthy of their Protection, and will commend them to the Royal
Favor upon all Occasions.

There is no need of Reporting what is the Faith professed by the Churches in
New England; For every one knows, That they perfectly adhere to the CONFESSION
OF FAITH, published by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and afterward
renewed by the Synod at the Savoy: And received by the Renowned Kirk of
Scotland The Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, also, are more
universally held and preached in the Churches of New England, than in any
Nation; and far more than in our own. I cannot learn, That among all the
Pastors of Two Hundred Churches, there is one Arminian: much less an Arian, or
a Gentilist. Yea, the Neonomian and Antinomian Errors, about the great Point
of, A Sinners Justification before GOD, which a while since bred such a
Scandalous Contention among the Nonconformists in England, have not yet
straggled over the Atlantic, to disturb this happy People.

-- Foelices nimium sua si bona norint! It is well known, that the Points
peculiar to the Churches of New England, are those of their Church Discipline.

And we shall therefore in the first Place, offer a Sum of their PRINCIPLES.

We will proceed then to Describe the PRACTICES in which they generally manage
and uphold their Principles. And that the Story may be the less Insipid, we
will take the leave to Salt it now and then with Interspersed Notes of what we
find practiced in other Churches; especially in the Primitive: [Wherein you
will also Excuse the Complement unto Vossius and Henninius in leaving the
little Greek we use without the Encumbrance of the Novel and needless Accents
upon it: Yea, since we are in a Book of Primitive Things, we will hope to be
excused, if ^he want of Types in our Press, compel us to give what little Greek
we use, in Capitals: For the writing of Greek otherwise than in Capitals, was
introduced in later Ages, by the Monks of Egypt, who borrowed the smaller
Letters now used, from the Coptic:] Which will be the more easily pardoned,
when it is remembered that in our brief Remarks, we shall a little imitate what
was done in the RATIO DISCIPLINAE FRATRUM BOHEMORUM, written by that
Incomparable Comenius, who once had resolved upon coming over, at an Invitation
to become the President of Harvard College in this Country, if he had not, by
being invited unto Sueden, been diverted from it.

. For the PRINCIPLES of these Churches; they are declared in their, PLATFORM OF
CHURCH DISCIPLINE; which has been so often published, and is in so many Hands,
that there is no need of giving here a New Edition, or indeed any Abridgement
of it. And there is the less need of such a Repetition, because their
Principles will be all along sufficiently discovered, by their Proceedings, and
the Methods and Customs obtaining among them, which are now going to be
related. Let this only be here observed, and still Remembered; Those Reverend
Persons of the Presbyterian Way, who published their Jus Divinum so many Years
ago, do expressly say, That they agreed with the Things of the greatest
Concernment in it; and that those things wherein they differed from it, were of
lesser Consequence, whereof their Debates were not Contentiones but Collationes.

But Besides, and indeed, Before, the Platform, there were several Treatises
long ago published, wherein the Principles of these CHURCHES, were, as with
Loud sounding Trumpets, proclaimed unto the World.

One of them was, the famous COTTON's Book of, The Keys; Which the celebrated
Rutherford approved, as being sound in every thing; except (as he thought) that
of not giving Authority quite enough to Synods. The Memorable Owen, attempting
to write an Answer to that Book, was instead of Confuting it, so Conquered by
it, that he came entirely into the Sentiments of it; and so lived, and so held,
and so wrote, all the rest of his Days.

Another of them was, the Responsio to a Sylloge Quaestionum sent hither from
Zeland; which Answer was written in Latin by the famous NORTON, at the
Unanimous Desire and Order of the Ministers then shining in the Country. What
Satisfaction it gave, may be gathered, from the Attestations of Dr. Goodwyn,
Mr. Nigh, Mr. Sympson unto it; Yea, and from the Respectful mention, with which
Dr. Hornbeck magnifies the Reason and Candor of the Author, even in those
Points, wherein he dissents from him. Dr. Fuller also in his Church History has
these Words upon it; Of all the Authors I have perused concerning these
Opinions, none to me was more Informative, than Mr. John Norton, One of no less
Learning, than Modesty, in his Answer to Apollonius, Pastor of the Church in
Middleburgh.

The Church State of New England, even in these Exhibitions of it, is, by
reason of Strength now come to more than Fourscore Years; But the Strength
holds; it is to be hoped, that it will not be soon cut off; or indeed ever fly
away.

Some have, suddenly enough, pronounced the Churches of New England, as too
little agreed among themselves in the Affairs of their Ecclesiastical Policy.

But certainly, there is a General Agreement among them in these Articles.

First. A People resolving to adhere unto the Maxims of the Everlasting Gospel,
and live unto GOD according to all the Rules of Incontestible PIETY, and
appearing in a competent and a convenient Number, to form an Assembly for the
Worship of GOD our SAVIOR, in all His Institutions, may Associate for that
Purpose; and (if their Assembling will be no evident Prejudice unto the Kingdom
of GOD, and Welfare of Men, in Societies already formed for that Purpose,
whereof they ought to be the Members,) they have a Right so to do.

Secondly. A Body of such People, so Associating, are an Instituted Church, and
have all the Rights of a particular Church belonging unto them; A Spiritual
Corporation, which has Power to observe the Appointments of our SAVIOR, and
Elect what Officers He has appointed for them, and Censure such Offenders as
may prove Roots of Bitterness unto them.

Thirdly. The Pastors that such a Church has chosen to Watch for their Souls,
qualified for their Work, and Accepting the Charge, have a Power to manage the
Public Sacrifices of the Gospel in their Flocks, and particularly to administer
the Sacraments of the New Testament unto the proper Subjects of them.

Fourthly. Every Church thus formed as a People for the Praise of GOD, ought,
in Things of common Coneern, which will affect the Tranquillity, or demand the
Acknowledgement, of other Churches, bound up in the Faith and Order of the
Gospel with them, to pay a great Regard unto their Advice, and ask for it on
recurring Occasions.

Fifthly. The Sacred Scriptures are the sufficient Rule for Belief, and
Worship, and Manners, among the People of GOD; And a Brotherly Fellowship is to
be maintained with all Good Men, in the Things wherein we apprehend them to
follow these Divine Directions.

At the same time they are for extending Indulgence further than they can
Communion, and are for an Indulgence of Civil Rights in the State unto all that
approve themselves Faithful Subjects, and Honest Neighbors, and such
Inoffensive Livers, that Humane Society cannot complain of Disturbance from them

True ELEUTHERIANS will consider, how far any further Agreement may be
Necessary: And whether those unreasonable Sons of Procrustes, the Narrow-soul'd
and Imperious Bigots for Uniformity, will do Religion any real Service, by the
pressing of it.

Behold, The Puritanismus Novanglicanus!

. Such a Foundation being laid, the Superstructure is now waited for. It will
be seen in the PRACTICES of the Churches, which are now going to be related.

[Let it be remembered; The Indians in the Massachuset Province, are all
Christianized; except the Eastern Salvages, which have been Antichristianized
by the Popish Missionaries. Among our Christianized Indians, there are not only
many Worshipping Assemblies; but also a Number of Gathered Churches walking in
the Faith and Order of the Gospel: And these endeavor in all Points all
possible Conformity to the English Churches of the Country in their
Administrations.]

We Proceed unto the Methods and Customs, IN THE CHURCHES OF New England.
ARTICLE I. The Gathering of a CHURCH.
. 1. A Number of Christians, either swarmed into a New Plantation, or finding
the Church to which they have belonged, grown to such Circumstances, that it
may be for the general Advantage to have a New Church formed in the
Neighborhood, first settle their Number, and assure themselves that their
Number is Competent and Resolved for the Undertaking.

The Jews of old held, That less than Ten Men of Leisure, could not make a
Congregation. It Is perhaps in Opposition to this Tradition, that our Savior
said, Matthew. XVIII. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name,
there am I in the midst of them. And hence Tertullian encourages himself to
say, Ubi tres, Ecclesia est, licet Laici. Nevertheless, because it has been
apprehended, that a Rule of Church Discipline in the Eighteenth Chapter of
Matthew, cannot be well reduced into Practice, by any Number under Seven, and
for more Reasons that might be rendered, Seven is the least Number that has been
allowed among us, as capable to form a Church State for the Enjoyment of all
special Ordinances; But usually there is a larger Number expected.

. 2. The MEN who by mutual Conferences with one another, are come to a good
Understanding and Resolution for the Gathering of a Church, are usually such as
are already the Members of other Churches; and obtain an Allowance from the
said Churches, for them to bear a part in this Action; which Allowance is
usually signified in a Written Instrument If any of them are not so, they give
to these Brethren such an Account of their Qualifications for the Work now
before them, and they are so satisfied in their Faith, and Repentance, and
Behavior, that they admit them into their Number.

. 3. In former Times, a Church of Brethren has been sometimes Gathered, without
any One in their Number yet Elected or Expected by them, for their Pastor. And
the Gathering of a Church has been the sole Work of the Day, without the
Ordination of a Pastor. The Work has been carried on with admirable Solemnity,
and left an Everlasting Impression on the Multitude of Spectators: A Work full
of Hol Glory. But in later Times, a Church is rarely Gathered, without a
Candidate of the Ministry, being one of the Number for the intended Coalition;
who has been for some while a Preacher unto them; And on the Day of their
Gathering, his Ordination is also solemnized.

. 4. The Persons who are engaging and combining for the weighty Undertaking of
Gathering a Church, set a part a Day to be spent by them together in Prayer
with Fasting, that they may prepare for what is before them, and confess their
Dependence on Heaven for Favors which they own themselves unworthy of, and
obtain the Blessing of GOD; [On which Day, they privately together Sign their
Covenant.] Sometimes more than one such Day; Sometimes in a Public Assembly,
where the Neighboring Pastors come to instruct and assist them. They think it
proper to make a very Great Preparation for an Undertaking the most Holy, and
Awful, and Heavenly, that can be on this side Heaven engaged in.

. 5. In time convenient the Good Men of this Intention, (who from first to
last, privately wait upon Pastors in the Neighborhood for their Direction)
send Letters unto the Pastors and Churches of the Neighboring Towns, (what
number they Judge convenient) wherein they report what they intend, on a Day
therein specified; and request that the Pastors with other Messengers or
Delegates of the said Churches will please then to Countenance their
Proceedings, at the Place also specified. The Pastors Read these Letters, to
their Churches, and the Delegates or Messengers to accompany them, unto this
Transaction (upon the Nomination of the Pastors, with Liberty then allowed for
the Brethren, to nominate any more if they see Cause) are by some Vote approved
and appointed for it.

. 6. The Council of Elders and Messengers from the Churches of the Vicinity,
convening at the Time and Place assigned, and choosing their Moderator, the
Candidates of the New Church appear before them, and present unto them a,
Confession of their Faith, and therewithal the Covenant or Engagement, in which
they recognize their Obligations, to serve the Great GOD their Savior, and to
walk with one another, in the Faith and Order of the Gospel. They produce also
the Testimonials of the Allowance which the Churches whereto they formerly
belonged, have given them to Transfer their more immediate Relation unto the
Society now to be gathered. In the former times, the Brethren on this Occasion
also exhibited, either Orally or in Writing, some account of each Man's
Conversion from his unregenerate State unto serious Piety; or, The Reason of
the Hope which is in him, that a Saving Work of Regeneration has passed upon
him. This is for sundry Reasons not now so much insisted on.

. 7. A vast Assembly of Christians from the Vicinity usually come together on
such an Occasion; and fill the Meeting House. But Care is taken to leave some
vacant Seats in the Meeting House, for the Council; who now walk together unto
it, First, the Past^rs, and then the other Delegates of whatever Quality. The
Associated Brethren likewise take a Place together, which is left empty for
them.

A MEETING HOUSE is the Term that is most commonly used by the New English
Christians; Though as long ago as Eusebius, yea, and as Tertullian, the Term of A
Church was used for it. And every Town for the most part, can say with
Tertullian, Nostrae Columbae Domus Simpiex; They have modest and handsome
Houses for the Worship of GOD; not set off with Gaudy, Pompous, Theatrical
Fineries, but suited unto the Simplicity of Christian Worship. Holiness of
Places is however no more believed among them, than it was in the Days of
^lemens Alexandrinus, who says, PAS TOPOS IEPOS -- Every Place is in truth
holy, where we receive the Knowledge of GOD; or in the yet earlier Days of
Justin Martyr, who says, EN PANTI TOPO TS IS -- In every part of the Earth, GOD
has promised that He will accept our Sacrifices.

. 8. Ardent PRAYERS are then poured out, pertinent unto the Solemn Action then
before them; wherein the Glories of the Great GOD, and our Savior are
confessed, and His Blessings on His Churches, are implored, especially on That
which is now gathering.

A SERMON agreeable unto the Action is then also preached; unto which a Prayer
is added.

The Prayers are usually made by several Ministers, which either the Council,
or at least the Moderator of the Council calls the reunto.

After this the Moderator signifies unto the Assembly, That there are then
present a Number of Christian Brethren [whose Names he recites out of a List
before him, and at the reciting whereof they immediately stand up, in Token of
their Disposition to proceed,] Intending with the Help and Leave of our
Glorious LORD, immediately to gather themselves into a Church before Him. And
he offers unto the Assembly, a Liberty to make any Objection, if they have any
to make, against any one Person or Matter in the Present Proceedings.

Upon a Convenient Pause, no Man objecting the Moderator turns himself to the
Council, and proposes to Them, that if they do approve of the Brethren
proceeding unto the Action that is now before them, and Consent hereupon to
receive them and regard them as a CHURCH of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, their
Silence will be taken to signify it.

Hereupon the Moderator in very solemn Terms, does call upon the Brethren, that
with Hands (and Hearts!) lifted up to Heaven, they now attend and consent unto
the COVENANT of GOD, which is now to be read before them. So He reads, [while
They keep their Hands lifted up to Heaven: Or at least lift them up at his
Direction at the End of the Reading:] The main Articles in the Covenant of
Grace, concluding with what more particularly concerns the Evangelical
Church State, unto the Duties whereof they now more particularly recognize
their Obligations.

To this Effect.

We whose Names are hereunto subscribed, apprehending our selves called of GOD
into the Church State of the Gospel, do first of all confess our selves
unworthy to be so highly favored of the Lord, and admire that free and rich
Grace of His which triumphs over so great Unworthiness; and then with an humble
Reliance on the Aids of Grace therein promised for them, that, in a Sense of
their Inability to do any Good thing, do humbly wait on him for all, we now
thankfully lay hold on His Covenant; and would choose the Things that Please Him.

We declare our serious Belief of the Christian Religion, as contained in the
Sacred Scriptures, and with such a View thereof as the Confession of Faith in
our Churches has exhibited; heartily resolving to conform our Lives unto the
Rules of that Holy Religion as long as we live in the World.

We give up our selves unto the Lord JEHOVAH, who is the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Spirit, and avouch Him this Day to be our GOD, our Father, our
Savior, and our Leader, and receive Him as our Portion forever.

We give up our selves unto the Blessed JESUS, who is the Lord JEHOVAH, and
adhere to Him as the Head of His People in the Covenant of Grace, and rely on
Him as our Priest, and our Prophet, and our King, to bring us unto Eternal
Blessedness.

We acknowledge our Everlasting and Indispensible Obligations, to glorify our
GOD in all the Duties of a Godly, and a Sober, and a Righteous Life; and very
particularly in the Duties of a Church State, and a Body of People associated
for an Obedience to Him, in all the Ordinances of the Gospel: And we thereupon
depend upon His gracious Assistances for our faithful Discharge of the Duties
thus incumbent on us.

We desire and intend, and (with Dependence on His promised and powerful Grace)
we engage, to walk together as a CHURCH of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, in the Faith
and Order of the Gospel, so far as we shall have the same revealed unto us:
Conscienciously attending the Public Worship of GOD, the Sacraments of His New
Testament, the Discipline of His Kingdom, and all His Holy Institutions, in
Communion with one another, and watchfully avoiding sinful Stumbling Blocks and
Contentions, as becomes a People whom the Lord has bound up together in a
Bundle of Life.

At the same time, we do also present our Offspring with us unto the Lord;
purposing with His Help, to do our Part in the Methods of a Religious
Education, that they may be the Lord's.

And all this we do, flying to the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, for the
Pardon of our many Errors, and praying that the Glorious Lord who is the Great
Shepherd, would prepare and Strengthen us for every good Work, to do His Will,
working in us that which will be well pleasing to Him; To whom be Glory forever
and ever. Amen.

This done, the Moderator makes a Speech, wherein he declares unto the
Brethren, their Acceptance into the Number of the Churches, and mightily
exhorts and charges them in the Name of the most Glorious LORD, that they
endeavor now in all things, to live according to the Profession which they
have thus made, not only before Men, but in the Presence of the Great GOD, and
of His Holy Angels; and he invites the whole Assembly to give Thanks unto GOD,
for the Blessings of the Gospel, which they are led now to take Notice of.

. 9. In former times, it was no rare thing for the Public Solemnities of a
whole Day, to be assigned unto that one Action, of Gathering a CHURCH, and to
defer unto another Day the Action of Ordaining a Pastor to the Church: But in
later times these two Actions are generally carried on together; that is to
say, on the same Day that the Church is Gathered, the Pastor of the Church is
also Ordained. Sometimes on these Occasions, the Action of gathering the Church
has been managed more privately in the Presence of the Delegates from the
Neighborhood: and contenting themselves with such a private and previous
Management of that, they have then gone to the Meeting House more publicly, in
a great Assembly to carry on that other Action of Ordaining the Pastor of the
Church. But many Good Men rather choose and wish, that this great Action, may be
done in as public a Manner as may be; For it is indeed one of the greatest
Things that can be done among the Children of Men; It Is a Glorious Homage paid
unto the Son of GOD, and a Testimony born to His Religion; It Is rarely
performed when in the Hands of a wise Moderator, without Floods of Tears in the
affected Spectators, and lasting Impressions of Piety upon them.

. 10. The CHURCH COVENANT thus used in the Churches of New England, is by
Intelligent and Considerate Persons, looked upon as no other than the Covenant
of Grace more particularly applied unto the Duties and Concerns of particular
Churches. Particular Churches are in their Apprehension an Institution of our
Lord Redeemer; and there are particular Duties, which the Members of these
Churches owe unto their Elders, and unto one another. The Church Covenant is
but an Acknowledgement of the Obligations to these Duties lying on the Members
of the Churches. No Body denies that GOD commands Men to acknowledge their
Obligations to the Duties of their several Relations: But then it appears very
plain, that the more explicit they are in such a Transaction, on such an
Occasion as that of Gathering a Church, it is the Better on all Accounts; And
the Great King whose Name is Venerable, is always to be served with our Best.
It is an Ancient Maxim not peculiar to the Persons of the Congregational Way,
Foederata Conjunctio constituit Ecclesiam. And indeed, it seems beyond all
Contradiction, That where Men do not, Implicitly at least, Agree, and Engage to
Worship our Savior together, according to His Laws, they cannot be esteemed, a
Church. But then, if an Implicit Covenant be of such Importance to the Being of
a Particular Church, it is argued, surely an Explicit Covenant is Expedient,
Profitable, Desirable. Without something of this Nature, it is asked, How can
there be such a Joining and Cleaving together, as there was Exemplified for
Christian Churches, in that which was the Mother of them all! Acts II. 42.

Antiquity is no Stranger to this Notion. It Is Tertullian's Description of a
Church, Corpus sumus, de Conscientia Religionis, et Disciplinae Unitate, et
Spei Foedere: Which is as much as to say, A Body United for the Conscientious
Observation of the Duties of Religion, by an Agreement in Discipline, and a
COVENANT of Hope for Eternal Blessedness. The same Tertullian, in his Apology,
says, that the Christians then Assembled, Ad Confoederandam Disciplinam; which
intimates, that they had a Discipline, and a COVENANT for the Discipline.

Pliny the Governor of Bithynia relates, in his Letter to the Emperor [which
our Tertullian also refers to,] That some Renegado Christians, being Examined
about the secret, but sacred Conventicles of the Faithful in those Primitive
Times, confessed no worse of them than this; That they entered into a COVENANT,
Ne Furta, ne Latrocinia, ne Adulteria committerent, ne Fidem fallerent, ne
depositum abnegarent.
To do no dishonest Thing in the World.

In the Apology of Justin Martyr, who lived within a few Years of the Apostles
themselves, we find the Christians who were admitted into Church Fellowship,
agreeing in a Resolution to conform in all Things to the Word of GOD: Which
seems to be as truly a Church Covenant, as any in the Churches of New England.

And these Churches hope that they shall not hear that Reproached as a New
Invention, which was practiced in the Second and Third Centuries.

The famous Dr. Hornbeck, a Professor in the University of Leyden, who wrote in
Defense of the Presbyterian Church Government, has published his Approbation of
what the New-English Divines Cotton, and Mather, and Norton, wrote in Defense
of their Explicit Church Government.

And Zepperus writes it as the Manner and Order of the Churches in Holland;
That when any Persons are admitted unto the Lord's Table there, they make a
public Profession of their Faith before all the Church; and likewise COVENANT,
that they will continue in that Faith, and lead their Lives accordingly.

Several Synods in Holland have required Personal Covenanting with GOD, and the
Church; and the Incomparable Voetius highly applauds their doing so.

One of the Episcopal Way complains of the Reformed Churches in France, That
they would not admit a Man to the Lord's Table without a Promise (or COVENANT)
of continuing in the Faith. It Is no more indeed, than what we find provided by
their National Synods; That none were admitted as Members of the Reformed
Churches in France, without a public entering into a COVENANT of GOD, with
Submission to Discipline.

The very learned Parker gives this Account of the Reformed Churches, (whereto
Persecution had exiled him) That when any Person seeks for Admission into
Church Communion, his Name is published in the Congregation, that if any one
has ought to object against the Person propounded, he should acquaint the
Elders therewith. If nothing is brought against him, he is admitted, but not
without a Solemn COVENANT with GOD, and the Church: And to the Church he
promises to walk as becomes that holy Fellowship: That he will submit unto the
Discipline of the Church; and that he will watch over the Brethren of that
Communion, according to the Command of CHRIST.

In fine, the Churches of New England appear well satisfied with the Words of
the famous Baxter. I conclude, That whatever some particular Persons may be
guilty of, there is no real Difference between the Presbyterians and
Independents, in the Point of Church Covenant. -- GOD forbid, That any Faithful
Minister of CHRIST, should fight against that which is profitable to the
Well-being of a Church, merely because the Church without it may have a Being.
Then must we plead for Hunger and Want, and Calamitous Diseases, that leave us
but the Being of Men. Nature and the Scripture Praecedents in the Old
Testament, and the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Ancient Practice of the
Churches, do satisfy us of the Usefulness of holy Covenants, prudently,
seriously, and seasonably made.

If the Church thus formed, have proceeded (as they usually do) unto a Good
Agreement about a Person to be their Pastor, the Ordination of this their
Pastor is also consummated, at this Time, in the Assembly, immediately upon
their Confoederation. The Methods of it are to be fetched out of the ensuing
Article.

ARTICLE II. The Ordaining of a PASTOR.
. 1. WHEN a Church wants a PASTOR, they do first, by Prayer with Fasting,
humbly supplicate our Ascended Redeemer, who gives such Gifts unto Men, that
He would give unto them, A Pastor, after His own Heart.

Then (except the Providence of Heaven have otherwise laid Prospects of
Supplies before them,) upon Consultation with the Christian Inhabitants of the
Town, ask Information from the Ministers in their Vicinity, or from the
Governors of the College, What Young Men, may be most likely to be serviceable
unto them. And being thus, or otherwise informed, the Committee whom the Church
usually have to act on their behalf, in such an Affair, invite one or more of
these Candidates, to preach a few Sermons among them.

Hereupon they hope for an Opportunity, to observe, whether any of these
Candidates answer the Character which a famous Council at Carthage required in
one to be ordained; Before all things, to have a good natural Wit, to be apt to
teach, to be moderate in his Conversation, to be sober in his Life, to be
diligent, humble, affable, full of Compassion; to be learned, to be instructed
in the Law of the L^d, to interpret the Word of GOD soberly and prudently, and
to be able in a clear and plain Manner to explain the Doctrines of Faith.

One Reason why the Churches have been heretofore less Explicit and Accurate,
than otherwise they might have been, in a Solemn Examination of those whom they
Elect and Ordain for their Pastors, has been, because they never Elect any but
such as are already admitted as Communicants at the Holy Table in the Churches.
And the Churches admit none, but such as give them full Satisfaction of their
being Sound in the Faith, and Persons of a godly Life.

. 2. If there be a Candidate, for which they take a singular Liking, perhaps,
they Renew their Invitation unto him, to preach the Word of GOD among them, in
a more Constant Way, for some Time convenient. Or, However in Time convenient,
the Brethren of the Church meet and pass a Vote of this Importance;

That they will make an orderly Proceedure, with all convenient Expedition, to
choose and call Mr. A. B. unto the Pastoral Care over them; Now, upon Trial
being satisfied of his Ability, and Fidelity, for the Discharge of that Office
unto them.

The Church after this, have a Meeting with the other Inhabitants of their
Neighborhood, who are not yet arrived unto the State of Communicants; When
they do all together put it unto the Vote, Whether they have no Objection
against the Choice of Mr. A. B. to be the Minister of the Place; but shall
concur to support him in the Exercise of his Ministry.

Except the Major-Part of the Inhabitants (inclusive of the Communicants) do
agree to this latter Vote, the Act of the Church, does not in the Law, make the
whole Taxable in the Maintenance of the Minister which the Church does choose.

In Case of a Difference between the Church and the Inhabitants on this
Occasion, the Law provides the Remedy of a Council, from three Neighbor
Churches, to decide, Whether the Inhabitants ought to acquiesce in the Choice,
wherein the Church has gone before them.

3. Though the Law of the Place, about the Choosing and Settling of a Minister,
(which has had the Royal Sanction) be a very wholesome Law, and have much of
the Gospel in it, yet there grows too much upon the Inhabitants, who are not
yet come into the Communion of the Churches, a Disposition to supersede it, and
overruled it; Many People would not allow the Church any Privilege to go
before them, in the Choice of a Pastor. The Clamor is, We must maintain him!

Some of our Divines having been on such an Occasion consulted withal, have
exhibited their Sentiments in these Conclusions.

A Body of Christians Associated for all the Ordinances of the Gospel, are a
CHURCH of our Glorious LORD, which have among other precious Privileges, a
RIGHT from HIM, To choose their own Pastors.

The Churches which have recovered the Exercise of this RIGHT from the
Oppression of Man, under which many Churches of the Reformation are to this Day
groaning, ought to keep the Precepts, and the Favors of the Lord, and not
easily part with what He has given them.

To introduce a Practice in the Choice of a Pastor which being followed, may
soon bring a Pastor to be chosen for a Church, which few, yea, none of the
Church have ever Voted for, would be to Betray and even Destroy a most Valuable
RIGHT, that such a Society has a Claim unto, and many Evil Consequences are to
be expected from it.

Nevertheless a CHURCH in the Exercise of its RIGHT, ought in all possible Ways
consistent therewithal, to consult the Edification and Satisfaction of their
Neighbors; especially of those on whose Assistance, to carry on their Affairs,
they may have much Dependence.

The Church ought so to manage their Choice that if the Neighbors have any
just Dissatisfaction, all the Respect required by Scripture, Reason, and
Gratitude, may be paid unto it.

To express the Condescension, in the close of these Conclusions, the Churches,
do sometimes, by their Vote, make a Nomination of Three or Four Candidates; For
every One of which the Majority of the Brethren have so Voted, that whomsoever
of these the Choice falls upon, it may still be said, The Church has Chosen him.

And then they bring this Nomination unto the other Inhabitants, to join with
them, in a Vote that shall determine, which of them shall be the Man.

But what must be the Age of the Candidate?

Without any Information from the Gentlemen who have (like Bartholomaeus
Agricola) written, De Aetate ineuntium Officia; We know, not only what was the
Age of Admission to the Exercise the Priesthood under the Mosaic Law; but also,
how critical the Gentiles were about it; Alexander ab Alexandro sets the Age,
when One would think it fitter to lay down than to take up an Office; And we
have Cicero's Exclamation; Quae major Contumelia est, quam venire in
Sacerdotium imberbem Adolescentulum? Nevertheless, in these Days of the
New Testament, there is nothing certain defined about the Number of Years,
which a Minister of the Gospel, must have passed before he be ordained. Some
Councils have set a Number of Years for it; But the learned Reizius passes a
Censure on them, as having done Incautelously; and he brings the Instance of
Timothy, who while he was but a Young Man, so discharged the Evangelical
Ministry, as to be no dishonor to it: And the Words of Bullinger have their
Weight in them; Hominem Ingenia, non a Vetustate, ut Vina, aestimanda sunt; sed
ab ipsa probitate et Eruditione. Accordingly the Churches of New England,
consider not so much the Age, as the Worth of a Candidate for an Ordination in
them. And their Glorious Lord often blesses them with Elihu's; They often see
very Young Ministers, who give them Occasion to think on the Jewish Maxim,
Sapiens appellatur Senex, etiamsi Diebus sit Exiguus.

. 4. Now they proceed unto a Salary, to be offered unto the Minister, whom they
have chosen. [To which there is usually added somewhat also, which they call, A
Settlement, in order to some Subsistence of his Family, in Case he die among
them.] This no doubt, will be moderate enough: But such as they may think will
suffice a Divine of that Order, which Erasmus has described in his Preface to
his New Testament. Is mihi THEOLOGUS est, qui non Syllogismis Art contortis,
sed Affectu, sed ipso Vultu atque Oculis, sed ipsa Vita doceat, aspernandas
esse opes Christiano, non esse fidendum hujus Mundi Praesidiis, sed totum
oportere pendere de Caelo.

There have too frequently all along been culpable Proceedings, and a
Withholding of more than is meet, in the Churches under the Dispensation of the
New Testament; relating to this Affair: And they that have abhorred Idols, have
yet committed Sacrilege. Besides more early Reservations of the Church-Stock,
only TOIS DEOENOIS, Chrysostom tells us, that in Elections, those of the
Competitors that had Estates of their own carried it, because the Churches
would save the Charges of maintaining them. Yea, some Councils expressly, and
sinfully enough, provided, That Ministers, though learned Men, should subsist
themselves on some honest Employment, with a Proviso, which it is a Wonder how
any Wise Men could propose it, That it be no Prejudice to their Office. And how
strait handed this way many Professors of Religion in the Churches of the
Reformation have been, has been known and felt, and thousands of times
complained of.

The Churches of New England have not so learned CHRIST. They make the most
public Recognitions, of their Obligations to that plain and just Law of
CHRIST, They which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. And a Decree
of a National Synod of the Reformed Churches in France, has been considered
among them; which ran in those Terms; All the Churches shall be desired to shun
Ingratitude unto their Ministers, a Sin too rife among us; and take special
Care, that they be more respected and their Labors better rewarded: Not to
enrich and fatten them, but to give them a becoming and sufficient Maintenance.

In some Churches, the Salary of the Minister is raised by a Voluntary
Contribution; especially in populous Places, and where many Strangers resort;
But in others, a Tax is levied for it; there being too much Truth in Luther's
Words D^ri^r profecto^ e^ misere viverent Evangelii Ministri, si^ex libera
Po^ali Contributione o^sent sustentandi.
. The Ministers of the Gospel would have a poor Time of it, if they must rely
on a free Contribution of the People for their Maintenance. In those (which are
almost all) Parts of the Country, where the Stipend of the Minister is raised
by a Tax upon the People, the Case is thus. The Laws of the Province, having
had the Royal Approbation to ratify them; they are, The Kings Laws. By these
Laws, it is Enacted, That there shall be a Public Worship of GOD in every
Plantation; That the Person Elected by the Majority of the Inhabitants to be
so, shall be looked upon as, The Minister of the Place: That the Salary for
him, which they shall agree upon, shall be levied by a Rate upon all the
Inhabitants. In Consequence of this, the Minister thus Chosen by the People, is
(not only CHRIST's, but also) in Reality, The Kings Minister. And the Salary
raised for him, is raised in the Kings Name, and is the Kings Allowance unto
him. If the most of the Inhabitants in a Plantation, are Episcopalians, they
will have a Minister of their own Persuasion. And the Dissenters, if there be
any, in the Place, must pay their Proportion of the Tax, for the Support of
this Legal Minister. In a few of the Towns, a few of the People, in Hope, of
being released from the Tax for the Legal Minister, sometimes profess
themselves Episcopalians. But when they plead This for their Exemption, their
Neighbors tell them, They know in their Conscience, they do not as they would
be done unto. And if a Governor, go by his Arbitrary Power, to supersede the
Execution of the Law, and require the Justices and Constables to leave the
Episcopalians out of the Tax, the People wonder, he is not aware, that he is
all this while, forbidding, That the King should have his Dues paid unto him;
and forbidding the Kings Minister to receive what the King has given him.
However, the generous Condescensions that have been sometimes made in this
Matter, are such, that the People of New England have therein Exemplarily,
adorned the Doctrine of GOD their SAVIOR, and have done what has not been
ordinarily exemplified among any other People. Sometimes the Quakers also, have
given some Occasion for Uneasiness. But, Where Quakerism is troublesome, some
Towns are so wise to involve the Salary of the Ministry in a general Rate for
all Town Charges, and so the Cavils of those, who would else refuse to pay the
Rate for the Ministry, are obviated.

How many of our Ministers, do yet generously spend very much upon their own
Estates: And how unfairly and untruly, some of them have often been defrauded
of their Dues; and how patiently and holily they have encountered their
Temptations, has been known unto their Glorious LORD.

. 5. Things being thus prepared, the Brethren of the Church, do by a renewed
Vote, now declare, That they make Choice of Mr. A. B. to be their Pastor; and
appoint certain Persons to wait upon him, with a Report of this their Vote, and
consult with him about a Day for his Ordination.

In these Proceedings there is a Seasonable Care taken, That if he were a
Member of some other Church, he have his Dismission, (his Relation declared to
be transferred,) unto that which now have their Eye upon him, to be their
Pastor; that as near as may be, according to the Primitive Direction, They may
choose from among themselves.

. 6. The Day for his Ordination being agreed upon, the Brethren agree with him;
what Churches they will desire to be present at the intended Solemnity. Letters
are then addressed unto each of these Churches; Informing them, that they have
made Choice of such a Person for their Pastor; and Requesting them, that they
would by their Elders and Messengers, afford their Presence and Countenance,
and Assistence, unto his Ordination; [ At the Time and Place now specified:]
and concluding with such Expressions of holy Affection and Charity as would be
dictated by our holy Religion, on such an Occasion. The Letters are Subscribed
by such of the Church, as are judged most suitable to do it, In the Name of the
Church.

The Brethren use to make Choice of some Neighboring Pastors, (among those
whom they have sent unto,) to perform the IMPOSITION OF HANDS in the designed
Ordination; And One among them to make the Prayers, and give the Charges in
that Action: Unto which One at least, they privately some Days aforehand,
signify what they have thus Voted, that so he may prepare to answer their
Expectations. And in all those Points, they have a private Conference and
Concurrence with the Person that is to be ordained.

Sometimes the Church leaves it unto the Ministers of the Council, at their
coming together on this Occasion, to determine, Who of their Number shall take
part in the Imposition of Hands, at the Ordination.

. 7. When the Council of the Neighboring Pastors, and the Messengers whom the
Churches addressed unto, have chosen to accompany them, do come together, unto
the House assigned them, and formed themselves into a Council with the Choice
of their Moderator, [where the Deacons of that Church are now attending upon
them,] the Church send some of their principal Brethren, to inform them, that
they have desired such a Reverend Person (unto whom accordingly they now apply
themselves,) to manage the Votes, and give the Charge in the Ordination to
which they are now approaching: And what Reverend Persons they have desired for
to join with him in the Imposition of Hands.

The Council then (if they have no Objection to make against the Intentions of
the Day,) appoint one of their Number to give the Fellowship of the Churches,
in their Name, unto the Person that shall be ordained.

Thus we find in the Primitive Times; A Pastor elected by the People, was
ordained, (as Eusebius expresses it,) With the common Consent of the Bishops in
the Vicinity.

The Council then walk in order, with the Person to be ordained, unto the
Public Assembly: which is usually a very thronged one: But with some Seats
left appropriated; some for the Council now convened; some for the Brethren of
the Church whose Vote is anon to be called for. For as Jerome of old, Requiritur
in Sacerdote ordinando, etiam Populi praesentia. And Cyprian would have the
Pastor Established in the Presence of all the People, who have narrowly
observed his Conversation.

. 8. The Day is (or should be!) kept a Sacred Fast unto the Lord.

In former times, on the longer Days, it was no unusual Thing, to have Two
public Meetings, both a Forenoon, and an Afternoon Service, on this Occasion.

The Custom has been, that among the other Exercises of the Day, the Person
expecting his Ordination, does by Praying and Preaching before the Assembly,
give some Discovery, that he understands the Work, to which he is now to be
Separated. Several of these, have been afterward published, by which it may be
seen, how comparable to fine Gold, have been the Nazarites.

Of later Times, it is grown Customary, if there be time for it, for some Elder
Divine also to give a Sermon proper for the solemn Occasion; and for some such
to make some of the Supplications.

Yea, Sometimes the Person to be Ordained has of late been excused from
Offering any Sermon at all on this Day; it being (by some) thought more decent
for some Elder Divine, to deliver such Things as are most proper for the Day.

When these are over, The MODERATOR, mentioning the Reason of their being thus
assembled; First, applies himself unto the Elders and Messengers of the
Churches there present, and signifies unto them, That if they have any
Objection to make against the Ordination which is now otherwise to be proceeded
in, they have now an Opportunity to offer it.

None being offered; (after a due Pause) he then applies himself to the whole
Congregation, and particularly to those who propose to sit under the Ministry
now to be established, with an Intimation, That if any of the People know any
thing, either in the Doctrines or the Morals of the Person, who now stands a
Candidate for an Ordination, that may be a just Objection aagainst him, they
have now a Liberty to tender it.

Nothing being tendered, he now applies himself unto the Brethren of the
CHURCH, who have called the Assembly thus together, desiring them, That, if
they abide by their Choice of Mr. A. B. to be their Pastor, and will according
to the Word of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, submit unto him as their Overseer, and
One who is to Watch for their Souls, they would signify it by lifting up their
Hands.

It Is very certain, That the Right of a Church, To Choose its own Pastor, was
Recognized and Exercised, in all the Times of Primitive Christianity; Yea,
'twas one of the Last things that the Man of Sin ravished from the People of
GOD. The Liberty in this Matter, with which our Ascended REDEEMER has
enfranchised and enriched His Churches, appears to have been so conceded by His
Apostles, that when we read, [Act. XIV. 23.] They ordained them Elders in every
Church; it is evident from the known use of the XEIPOTONIA which was used in
it, that the Text is to be read, They had by the Suffrages of the People,
created them Elders in every Church. The Apostles only Praesided, and the
People under their Conduct Elected. The taking away of this Privilege from the
People, is by Calvin justly called, Impia Ecclesiae Spoliatio; A Spoil
impiously committed on the Church of GOD. Yea, Our English Bibles themselves,
until they had undergone Episcopal Correction, at this Text, put in the Words,
By Election; and the Margin had this Note; The Apostles did not thrust Pastors
into the Church, through a Lordly Superiority, but chose and placed them by the
Voice of the Congregation. All Antiquity confesses the Part which the People
had in the Choice of their Pastors. The Emperor Constantine, writing to those
of Nicomedia, could say to them, That it was in their Power, to make Choice of
what Pastor they pleased; and it freely depended on Their Judgment. And the
Council of Calcedon, speaking of the Church at Ephesus, could say, That such a
Bishop should be given them, as should be elected by the Consent of those whom
he was to feed. Yea, this Right was most notoriously claimed by the, Plebs
obsequens Praeceptis Dominicis, et Deum metuens, the godly People, in the
C^prianic Age; It was then Incontestibly allowed, Plebs ipsa maxim h^beat
Potestatem, vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi! The Power
of Electing and of Rejecting their Pastors, let the People have it.

We all know, what Confessions of this Matter, the Protestants in defending the
Reformation, find themselves compelled unto.

But, no Wonder! When Father Paul himself, in his Treatise, Of Beneficiary
Matters, expressly says; Pope Leo shows amply, that the Ordination of a Bishop
could not be Lawful or Valid, which was not Required by the People, and
Approved by them; which is said by all the Saints of those Times; and St.
Gregory thought Constance could not be consecrated Bishop of Milain, being
Elected by the Clergy, without the Consent of the Citizens, who by reason of
Persecution retired to Genoa; and he prevailed, that they should be first sent
unto, to know their Will; A Thing worthy to be noted in our Days, where that
Election is declared to be Illegitimate and Null, in which the People have any
Share. Thus, (a, Rara Avis in Terris!) An Honest Romanist. Even in Rome itself,
the People Elected their Bishop, until the Twelfth Century. And a Council in
the middle of the Seventh Century, makes the Ordination of a Bishop to be Void,
where he is not Elected by the People No wonder, that Protestants, and
especially New-English Ones, lay so much Stress on the Choice which a Church
makes of a Pastor. Even Bzovius the Jesuit, gives diverse Reasons, why the
Popular Election of Ministers continued for many Ages, and even to the Days of
Charlemaign; One is, That Pastor and People may have a Due Love to one another.
Yea, Upon quoting an Order of a Council at Rome, Ab omni Ecclesia eligatur
consecrandus Episcopus, and an Order of another Council at Clermont, Episcopus
omnium conscendat Electione, a Learned and Worthy Presbyterian (Mr. Lauder) of
Scotland, carries his Remark so far, as to say, Hence it is evident, That
Persons are Constituted or made Bishops, by the Election of the People, and not
by Ordination which is performed by the Bishops.

. 9 Their Suffrage being then given the Moderator turns to the Person, whose
Ordination is now carrying on; signifying, That since he observes the Call unto
the Ministry of the Gospel, and unto the Pastoral Charge of the Flock in this
Place, which has been given him, it remains for him to declare his Acceptance
of it! The Expectant (whom in the French Reformed Churches they called, The
Proposan,) hereupon turns himself to the Assembly with a Declaration of this
Importance; That with an humble Reliance on the Glorious Head of the Church,
for His Gracious Assistances, he does accept of the Work, and Charge to which
he is invited; Requesting the Prayers of all Good Men that he may obtain the
Mercy to be found Faithful unto the Lord, and unto His People.

The Moderator now goes on to say, that such and such Persons having been
desired to join in the Solemn Imposition of Hands, on the Person who is now to
be set apart, for the special Service of the Sanctuary, they shall proceed unto
it.

Dioscorus the Bishop of Alexandria, was ordained by no more than Two Persons;
nevertheless, the Council of Calcedon owned him, and frequently termed him, The
most Reverend. The odd Ordination of Evagrius, we say nothing of.

The Churches of New England, have not yet limited any Number, as necessary to
this Action; though rarely fewer than Three, have been employed on this
Occasion.

They then laying their Hands on his Head, He who was chosen to that Service,
makes an ardent Prayer unto the Glorious GOD; particularly, Acknowledging the
Glories of the enthroned JESUS, and the Great Things done for and in the
Church, by that Prophet, and Priest, a^^ King thereof; and Petitioning the Lord
now to accept that Servant of His which is here set apart for the special
Service of His Gospel and Kingdom in the World.

The Prayer being finished, he proceeds, (Their Hands continuing still imposed)
with a Speech unto the Person under their Ordination, which is a most solemn
and awful Charge unto him faithfully to attend the Duties of his Ministry: In
some such Terms as these.

Whereas You, on whom, we now, to declare so much, do Impose our Hands, are
called unto the Work of the Evangelic^l Ministry in the Church of the Living
GOD, and unto the Office of a Pastor in the Particular Church of the Lord, with
which we are now assembled; we do now introduce you into that awful Station. We
therefore charge you, before the Great GOD, and our SAVIOR the Glorious Head
of the CHURCH, That you take heed unto the Ministry which you have Received
from the Lord, plainly, and faithfully, and ^atchfully to fulfill it, and as one
that must give up an Account unto Him; That you feed the whole Flock whereof
you are now made an Overseer; and therein study to show yourself approved of
GOD, and a Workman that needs not be ^ed; That you Pray without Ceasing, and
give yourself to Reading and Meditation, and Preach the Word, Instruct,
Reprove, Exhort, with all the Long Suffering that becomes a Servant of GOD;
That you administer the Sacraments of the New Covenant, as a Wise and Good
Steward of those heavenly Mysteries; That you impartially dispense the
Discipline, with which the House of the Lord is to be ordered, and His Kingdom
expressed and maintained, making a Difference between the holy and profane:
And, That you be an Example of the Believers, in your whole Conversation, with
all Piety and Charity, endeavoring to exhibit the Graces of that Lord unto
whose peculiar Service you are now devoted. And, If you keep this Charge, We
declare unto you, That the Lord of Hosts will give you a Place among His Elect
Angels, who doubtless, do now stand by as Witnesses of the solemn Action,
wherein we are now engaged; Witnesses to the Bonds and Vows of GOD, which you
have now with all possible Solemnity taken upon you; yea, We declare unto you,
that if you do this, when the Lord JESUS CHRIST shall appear, you shall appear
with Him in Glory; He who is the Chief Shepherd, will then give you a Crown of
Glory, that shall never fade away.

Hereupon in another Prayer (Their Hands remaining still imposed) he proceeds
to recommend the Person thus ordained, unto the Mercies of the Glorious LORD;
Beseeching the Holy Spirit of the Almighty, to possess him, and mightily
improve him, and assist him, and succeed him; and make him Faithful unto the
Death; and be also gracious unto the Flock which is now committed unto him.

This being done (and the new Pastor having received Prayers by the Hand, as
the Phrase for it was among the Ancients;) The Moderator declares unto the
Church, that this Person is now their Pastor; Advising and Exhorting them to
acknowledge him as one set over them in the Lord, and esteem him very highly in
Love for the sake of his Work, while he Labors among them.

The Moderator then signifies to the Assembly that a certain Minister then
present, is chosen by the Elders and Messengers of the Churches, to give in
their Name, unto the Person thus ordained, The Right Hand of their Fellowship.

It was required in the Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Protestants in France;
The Prayer being ended and the new Pastor standing up, Two Deputies of the
Synod or Colloque, shall in the Presence of all the People give him, THE RIGHT
HAND OF FELLOWSHIP. So it is in the Discipline of their New-English Brethren.

The Minister now steps forth, and before the whole Assembly, having spoken
what he thinks fit about the Evangelical Affairs of the Churches, he applies
himself unto the newly Ordained Person; Telling him in the Name of the
Churches, What they Wish, and what they Hope concerning him; and that in Token
of their acknowledging him, as a Minister of the Gospel regularly ordained, and
of their Satisfaction in the Proceedings of the Church, which have thus invited
him unto the Exercise of the Ministry, he does now give him the Right Hand of
Fellowship: (and so he gives him his Right Hand:) Even as James, and Peter, and
John of old, unto Paul and Barnabas; owning a Fellowship in the Service of the
Lord.

The Speeches on these Occasions, are now usually Concise and Short. But
formerly, they were sometimes Ample and Copious. Yea, several such Speeches
have been preserved in our Printed Monuments.

That this Action may be illustrated, here shall be one Instance given of such
more extended Speeches; and the rather because of some Illustrations upon the
Affairs of the Churches contained in it.

The Churches of New England, though in their Congregational Constitution, they
do the most nearly of any answer the Primitive, (which are now proved for to
have been such beyond all Contestation,) yet from the very Beginning have
renounced the Name of Independent; and have justly and wisely declared against
such an Independency, as would leave them Unrelated to each other, and
Unconcerned in each others Interests. Every particular Church is to consider it
self as a part of the Catholic, and owes a Duty to the whole Visible Church of
our Lord in the World. (...) Church therefore are Consociated for mutual
^munion, and mutual Assistence, and have so much Dependence on one another,
that in Things of a more General Importance, and in such Things as may Affect
the Vicinity, they abhor to Act alone. Upon that Passage in the Epistle to the
Romans, The Churches of Christ salute you, I remember, that not only our great
Calvin observes, The Holy Spirit would mutuo Amoris nexu devincire, bind the
Churches of the Lord fast to one another in the Bonds of Love: But also Grotius
himself has this Note, The Communion to be maintained between particular
Churches, is here intimated and animated.

One special and singular Occasion for this Communion of Churches, is when a
Pastor is ordained in any of them; one for whom the Acknowledgements, due to
such an one, are expected from All the Churches in the Neighborhood.

In Pursuance of this Intention, the Delegates of the Neighboring Churches
which were addressed for their Countenance to the present Action, have
commanded the unworthiest of their Number, in their Name, to express their
Fellowship, with this Church of the Lord, on the acceptable Occasion that is
now before us.

It is not enough to bear me out in the Action which I am now called unto, That
there is the same Action done, among our Brethren in the Reformed Churches of
Europe; They are Scriptural Precepts or Patterns, from which we are to fetch
our Warrant for what we do. And, O Churches of the Lord, Your Beauty and Safety
will be in keeping forever close to such a Warrant in all your Administrations!
It Is in the sacred Scriptures that we find the Ministers of GOD, giving the
Right Hand of Fellowship to one another, owning their Fellowship in the Service
of our Savior, when they perceived the Grace that was given to them.

In the Name of the Churches who have done me the Honor, to employ me in
expressing their Sentiments on the present Occasion, I now declare, That we
have an abundant Satisfaction in the Choice which this Church has made of the
Pastor whom we have now seen ordained; And that we shall be ready to Assist and
Strengthen this Holy Flock of the Lord, and this their Shepherd, unto the best
of our Capacity, on all Occasions. I declare that we Ace^pt the Person thus
ordained, as one regularly brought into the Pastoral Character; one that has
the Legitimate Vocation and Investiture of a Minister of the Gospel. And since
the Scriptures of the New Testament, have so evidently asserted, the Validity
of an Ordination by the Hands of the Presbytery, and informed us of no Order in
the Church superior to it; since the Catalogus Testium Veritatis, as I may
call it, or the Testimony of the Faithful in all Ages, has afforded such a
Cloud of Witnesses unto the Truth of this Assertion; and since I cannot
understand, that there are any Churches in the whole Continent of Europe, I
say, I know not of any Protestant and Reformed Churches in all the Continent of
Europe, which do not subsist upon an Ordination, from an Order not superior
unto that of our Pastors; I know not why we should be so Unwise, not to say,
profane, as to confess the least shadow of a Reason, Why the Validity of our
Ordination should be questioned.

But then, I am to declare what we Desire for, and what we Expect from the
Person, whose Ordination to the Evangelical Ministry has been thus far
proceeded in.

Sir, It Is our Hope, that you will in the Discharge of your Ministry, study to
Approve yourself a Workman that need not be ashamed; Be an hard Student at
home, and a good Steward abroad; that you will have such a Delight in your
Work, as an excellent Person once unjustly silenced from his Work, had for his,
when he could say, No King ever swayed a Royal Scepter with such Pleasure, as I
have in Preaching the Gospel of my Glorious Lord: But then, That you will carry
on your Work in such a Holy, Devout, Experimental Manner, as has been observed
of several famous Ministers of whom it is recorded, That they never durst Preach
any Sermon unto others, until they had first sensibly got some good by it
themselves. May you, Sir, particularly receive your Burdens (as the Camels do)
upon your Knees; you keep always in the Praying Posture that you may be carried
through them. It Is our Hope, that in your Ministry, yea, and in your whole
Behavior, you will have your Eye upon a Glorious CHRIST continually, and be a
Star always leading your Neighbors unto Him. You will observe the Description
once given of one, for whom a Preferment was Designed, Nihil ardet, nihil
appetit, nihil somniat praeter JESUM CHRISTUM: To know, and serve, and Resemble
a precious CHRIST will be the Top of your Ambition. It Is our Hope, That you
will extend your Pastoral Cares with most engaging Adaptations, to every part
of your Flock, but very particularly the Young People in it; Instruct them,
Advise them, lay the Cha^ges of GOD upon them, and with irresistible
Importunity persuade 'em to Early Piety; Be earnest with them, and never
satisfied until you see them come to Religion in earnest, I will add but one
Word more, The Churches of the Neighborhood Hope it of you, That you will be
Faithful to their True and Best Interests: That is to say, That you do your
part for the preserving them, upon the Glorious Foundations of Conformity to
the Laws of our Savior, which was the professed End of these Plantations. A
New Meeting House erected by a Church of our Brethren on the other side of the
Atlantic, had those Words engraven on the Walls of it; Built not for a Faction,
nor a Party, but for promoting Faith and Repentance, in Communion with all that
Love our Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity. It is the Glory our Churches, that
this noble Motto belongs to them, Not for a Faction or a Party, but for
promoting Faith and Repentance, in Communion with all the true Lovers of our
Savior. And the Sentence of a Worthy Man, who walked in our Way, expresses the
Spirit which our Christians generally make Profession of; I will be one with
every one, that is one with Christ. Such the Terms of their Communion, that we
see godly Presbyterians, Independents, Episcopalians, Antipaedobaptists, and
Lutherans, all in the sweet Harmony of Piety, sitting together at the same
Table of the Lord in them. Nevertheless they think it their Duty, and yours
too, Sir, to be steadfast in that scriptural Purity, wherein we shall express
our Loyalty and Chastity to the Glorious LORD who is our Lawgiver; and who
continues His Favor to them that Love Him, and keep the Second with the Rest
of His Commandments.

In Token hereof, I now give you, Sir, The Right Hand of our Fellowship; -- And
at the same time when we take you into ours, we carry you to him who holds the
Stars in His Right Hand; There we put you; There we leave you; There we hope
you will find a Crown of Life laid up for you, which the Lord at His appearing
will give to them that Serve Him.

In the famous and holy Churches of Bohemia, the Minister at his Ordination,
had no sooner given his Oath unto GOD and the Church, to persevere in the
Duties of his Ministry, but the Ordainer called for the Seventeenth Chapter of
John to be read, saying, That your Faith of Help from Heaven may be confirmed,
hear your Eternal High Priest thus praying for you! And as the Historian says,
Raro absque Lachrymis auditur. Sir, Let the Seventeenth Chapter of John, be now
your Consolation, and let the Assurances it gives you fill you with Tears of
Joy.

It was an Article given in the Charge to Ministers in ancient Ordinations,
Think on Eternity, Think on Eternity! Be faithful, Sir, and then know that you
have before you an happy Eternity. When your Great Master shall bring you to
walk with those who stand by, even the Elect Angels who stand by as Witnesses
of what is done this Day, and of the Charge which you have this Day received,
you will not repent of your Laborious and Assiduous Endeavors to serve His
Kingdom in the World: You shall receive sufficient and Eternal Recompenses.

But our Fellowship is extended, and must accordingly be expressed, unto the
Flock, which now see ordained for them the Pastor which they have Elected.

You see, My Brethren, the Person to whom you are now to pay the Respect that
is due unto your Pastor; and we hope his Conduct will be such as to deserve it.
What that Respect is, you need no other Monitor to inform you, after you have
read, 1 These. V. 12, 13. We beseech you, Brethren, to know them which labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them
very highly in Love, for the sake of the Work they do. Yea, The common Rules of
Reason, and of Conscience, will soon lead you to your Duty, if you will but
hearken to the Dictates. This Pastor is yours; His Time is yours; his Strength
is yours; his Talents are yours; his very Life it self is yours. He must Live
with you, and if his Master call him, he must Die for you. Do you now consider,
Syrs, what you owe to him! Will Not you Love him, and Prize him, and Pray for him,
and Support him? He will meet with Temptations enough from other Quarters; I
beseech you, let there be nothing in your Carriage toward him, that shall add
unto his Temptations, and grievously discourage him. You will in this Matter
find a sweet Reciprocation of Benefits. The more Good you Get by him, the more
you will Do for him. And the more you Do for him, the more Good you will Get by
him. Yea, GOD will reward your Kindness to him with such Spiritual Blessings*
of Souls thriving under his Ministry, as will carry rich Compensations with
them. Syrs, This is he, from whose Ministry you look to be prepared and ripened
for the Heavenly World, and see your Children brought thither after you; And
Oh! the Satisfactions with which you will meet each other in that Glorious
World; when you shall say, Great GOD, I bless thee that ever I saw the Face and
heard the Voice of this thy Servant; And he shall say; My GOD, I bless thee for
all the Good, which thou did employ me to do for these thy Chosen Ones! A
Satisfaction and a Consolation, beyond what any Tongue may declare, or any
Heart conceive! --

All this is done, as the Reporter of the like Usages among the more ancient
Churches in Europe, expresses it, Spectante et plerunque illacrymante populo;
before a Bochim of well-affected Christians.

A Pertinent Psalm (such as the XXIII; or part of the LXVIII; or part of the
CXXXII.) is now sung; appointed by the new Pastor; who then pronounces the
usual Blessing with which the Assembly is dismissed.

The Council with other Strangers of Note retire, according to a Direction then
given; where (to use the Words of the Bohemian Discipline) Coenatur modeste,
cum Timore Domini, piis et amicu Colloquiis.

For these things the Churches of New England have no Forms among them; and
being well established in the Things they find the less want of any Forms. They
are instructed and united in the Substance, and their not being tied unto
Forms, does but give them the Delight of the more Variety, in Expressions and
in Circumstances. They may say, as Comenius of the Rites in the Bohemian
Churches S^ praescripta tantnm recitantur semper, quid erit quod attentionem
excitet? Liberum est apud nos, quicquid ad excitatum Zelum faciat, juxta
Occasionum Varietatem, e Sapientiae Mysticae Thesauris depromptum adhibere.
Unde fit, ut sine novo Cordis Affectu, sacris Mysteriis vix unquam intersint
pii Audltores.
. If we should only recite prescribed Forms, what would there be to excite
Attention? We are free, to stir up Zeal, by varying upon Occasion, with
Treasures taken out of the Holy Scriptures; whence it comes to pass, that the
pious Auditors continually find new Affections raised in their Hearts, when
they are present at the Transactions among us.

. 10. In some Churches of the Reformation, (bordering upon Suitzerland) the
People, after the public Performances of a Candidate have recommended him to
them, Choose him for their Pastor; Whereupon the Minister only preaches an
Ina^guration-Sermon, and so without any further Ceremonies of Ordination, goes
on with the Exercise of his Ministry. It Is not so in the Churches of
New England; Except a Person has been once already ordained. But in this Case,
a Minister (suppose Removing from a Church here, or in some other Country,
where he has been already ordained) being Elected and Invited unto the Pastoral
Charge in any of these Churches, a Day of Prayer is kept, and the Choice
renewed, and the Charge accepted, in the Presence of Delegates from other
Churches: And no further Imposition of Hands is used for his Instalment.

. 11. Sometimes it has fallen out, that in some of the distant Provinces and
Plantations, destitute of Ordainers, a godly People associating for the Worship
of GOD our Savior, have signified unto some of the Pastors in this Country,
That they Desire such a Person (as they mention) to be ordained here, and sent
from hence unto them. The Pastors thus applied unto, have here called a public
Assembly, and have in their Presence given this Person an Opportunity
publicly, and with all due Solemnity, to declare his Accepting the Pastoral
Care of the Flock that have sent for him: And so they have Ordained him: and
sent him away with proper Testimonials.

ARTICLE III. The Usual Services which every Lord's Day calls for.
. 1. A Church is thus furnished with a Pastor; And sometimes with more than
one; In which Case, One of them formerly was distinguished by the Name of a
Teacher: Though in regard of their Work, and their Power, among these Churches,
it has been so much Distinctio sine Differentia, that more lately the
Distinction is less regarded. And their being mentioned so together, as they
are in the sacred Oracles (Ephesians. IV. 12.) is pleaded for little short of an
Identity between them. Let us now see, how he endeavors to irradiate the House
of GOD, when he is thus fixed in the Golden Candlestick.

Every LORD's DAY, the Congregation meets twice; and so has both a Morning and
an Evening Sacrifice. These are as Tertullian says of the like in his Time,
Dominica Solennia, The Lord's Da^ Solemnities.

2. As these Churches, have the Incontestible Judgment and Practice of the
Primitive; (directed by the Spirit of GOD who calls the first Day of the Jewish
Week, Rev. I 10. The LORD's Day,) harmonizing with them in their Sabbatizing on
the Lord*s Day; and may say that which Dimysius of Corinth wrote unto the
Church of Rome, This Day being the Lord's Day, we keep it Holy. And as their
Judgment and Practice is according to that in Clemens of Alexandria; A true
Christian according to the Commands of the Gospel, observes the Lord's Day, by
casting out all evil Tho'ts, and entertaining all good Ones, glorifying the
Resurrection of the Lord on that Day. So they keep up the Term of, The LORD's
Day: and look upon it as an abuse to call it, Sunday: Though the Day being the
Christian Sabbath, it is as frequently called, The Sabbath, and, The Sabbath
Day, among them. There is an unhappy Passage in the Rhemish and Romish
Annotations upon the New Testament, concerning the Protestants; While they say,
Ministers, let us say, Priests; when they call it a Communion Table, let us
call it an Altar; Let us keep our Old Words, and we shall keep our Old Things.
But then, these Rhemish Annotators themselves, condemn the Name of Sunday as
Heathenish. The Churches are sensible, That the Pagans first called this Day by
the Name of Sunday, and that it was a stroke of their Idolatry to call it so;
it was to express the Dedication of the Day unto the oldest and brightest Idol
in the World. Though they let the Planetary Names for the other Days stand in
their present Indifferency, (however no better a Man then Polydore Virgil
complains of that!) nevertheless, they incline to think, that the Third
Commandment as well as the Fourth, obliges them to allow unto the Lord's Day
the Name which He has himself challenged for it. They are not ashamed of
Confessing their LORD, or of Confessing that this Day belongs to him. It Is
true, some of the Ancients, as both Justin Martyr and Tertullian, do sometimes
in their Apologies, call the Lord's Day, by the Name of Sunday: But there is
this to be Apologized for them, That they directed their Apologies unto the
Pagans, who would not have readily understood another Name. And then that the
Churches may not be thought more nice than wise in this Matter, they can quote
from the great Ambrose a Passage of that Import, The Day which is called The
Lord's Day, in the Church, is called Sunday by the Men of the World. And then
the greater Austin has shown them, That the Manichees in those Days, rather
than the Christians, called the Lord's Day, by the Name of Sunday: But adds,
for our Parts we call it the Lord's Day, because on it, we Reverence not the
Sun, but the Resurrection of the Lord. And they find him elsewhere very earnest
for the Heathen Name to be laid aside; saying, It Is a manner of speaking that
becomes not a Christian Mouth. They remember also, that Philastrius would have
the Use of that Name with Christians reckoned little short of Heretical.

. 3. The Hours taken for the two Meetings on the Lord's Day, are such as they
Judge may most suit their Edification. Where any Number of the People have
their living very remote from the Meeting House, the Time of Intermission
between the two Meetings is usually shortened for their sake; and they stay in
or near it. But how do they spend this Time? The more faithful and watchful
Pastors, are put upon using their best Contrivances, that their Employments may
be most agreeable, and most serviceable to the Interests of Holness. It has
been proposed, That Repetitions of, or Conferences on, the Word of Christ may
be some of the Employments.

. 4. The Pastor (after the Bills which any of the Neighbors put up, desiring a
Remembrance in the public Prayers or Praises, on their special Occasions, have
been Read) begins with PRAYER.

The Holy Man whom Chrysostom counted it his Happiness to hear Praying before
Sermon with pertinent Petitions and Thanksgivings, did say nothing (as he says)
before these Prayers.

Basil tells, The President, going up to Teach in the Pulpit, first made sure
of Prayers, That by the Grace of Christ, the Good Spirit might mercifully
direct their Minds in the Way of Peace.

The Martyr Cyprian made Prayers for himself and his Auditors, as well as
brought Words which he fetched from the Fountains of the Scripture.

The holy Austin advised all Doctors to pray, before they gave their Tongue the
Liberty to preach. And he practiced accordingly.

Thus, it is Prayer that begins the public Exercises in the Churches of
New England.

They have no LITURGY composed for them; and much less have they any imposed on
them. The Pastors reckon, that the Representation of their Peoples Condition in
Prayers, with fit Expressions of their own choosing, is a necessary Gift and
Work of the Evangelical Ministry. They seek the Gift; They do the Work; and
with a great Variety (ordinarily) every Lord's Day, they present before the
Lord, the Condition of their Congregations in their Adapted Supplications. In
these their Supplications, when they have acknowledged the Glorious Perfections
of the Infinite GOD, and mentioned the Spiritual Blessings which the Covenant
of Grace invites them to take notice of, and which perhaps the Subject they are
anon to handle does lay before their more particular Notice, they pass on to
Intercession and giving of Thanks for all Men; For Kings and for all in
Authority, and for others, and every thing, as the Matter may require. It seems
evident unto them, That the Praying in (or by) the Holy Spirit, mentioned in
the sacred Oracles, was not merely a Gift Miraculous and Extraordinary, or a
thing to cease in after Ages; Because the Apostle exhorts All Christians to
exercise it; which how could they do, if they had it not? Or, if they all might
have it, how was it Miraculous and Extraordinary? Our Pastors by blowing up the
Flame of the Gift, attain to such Measures of it, that their Flocks apprehend a
Liturgy would be a sensible Injury unto them. Nor are there known many
Instances among them, like those which Austin mentions in his Time; Aliquos
Antiscites et Ministros Ecclesiae, cum Barbarismis et solaecismis Deum
invocare. The notable and expressive Words dropped from the Pen of the Marquess
of Halifax (which noble Person was little enough in Danger of being taken for a
New English Puritan) have been read among them; There may be too great a
Restraint put upon Men, whom GOD and Nature has distinguished by blessing them
with an Happy Talent, and giving them not only good Sense, but a powerful
Utterance too, has enabled them to gush out upon the Attentive Auditory, with a
mighty Stream of Devout and Unaffected Eloquence. When a Man so qualified,
endued with Learning too, and above all adorned with a good Life, breaks out
into a Warm and Well-delivered Prayer before his Sermon, it has the Appearance
of a Divine Rapture; He raises and leads the Hearts of the Assembly, in another
manner than the most Composed, or best Studied Form of set Words can ever do;
and the Pray wee's who serve up all their Sermons with the same Garnishing,
would look like so many Statues, or Men of Straw, in the Pulpit, compared with
those, who speak with such a powerful Zeal, that Men are tempted at the Moment
to believe, Heaven it self has dictared their Words unto them. Certainly good
Sense dictated these Words unto that English Nobleman!

The Churches count it good Sense and very Reasonable, That the Ministers of
the Gospel who submit their Capacities and Abilities to a due Trial, should
enjoy the Liberty, which was confessedly left us by our Savior, and His
Apostles; who never provided any Prayer Book but the Bible for us. They
believe, that our Savior and His Apostles knew the Necessities of His
Churches; and they are afraid of any Inventions, that may carry in them the
least Reproach upon His Infinite Wisdom. They believe, That our Enthroned
JESUS, has promised unto ordinary Officers in His Churches, until the End of
the World, a Continuance of sufficient Gifts, to discharge their Offices. They
believe, That if there be found a Decay of Gifts in the Churches, the Remedy
must be for Christians to return unto Him, who has chastised their
Slothfulness, their Carnality, their Apostasy, with a withdraw of His Holy
Spirit from them; and not by finding out an unhappy Expedient, that should
rather confirm them in the lamentable Condition, into which they are fallen.
Reader, This is the New English Puritanism! And as far as they can learn, they
have the Practice of the Primitive Churches to countenance them in it. If a
Servioe Book had not been a thing utterly unused in the Primitive Churches, we
may be sure Bellarmine would never have confessed Non fuisse Antiquo tempore,
praescriptum certum Canonem Orationum, qui omnes obligaret, sed permissum
fuisse, ut quisque componeret Preces, modo eae Analogae essent Fidei.
, That in old Times there was no Form of Prayer prescribed, but every one might
make what Prayer he pleased, if it were but according to the Analogy of Faith.
Chemnitius, and a whole Army of Protestants, have proved, That this Confession
of Bellarmine is true, and, Apud veteres Ordinem celebrandi fuisse Arbitrarium.
Indeed the Churches of New England continue to this Day in such Ignorance (the
Gentlemen of the Liturgy, will doubtless pity them!) that they know no
footsteps of any Service Book, until the Liber Officialis (which also was
rather a Directory than a Liturgy) mentioned in the fourth Toletane Council,
more than Six Hundred Years after the first Coming of our Savior. And the
first Planters of these Churches hoped, That more than Six Hundred Years will
pass, or, as we may rather say, that the Second Coming of our Savior will
arrive, before there will be universally received among them, any Liber
Officialis, but the Sacred Scriptures: Nor will they speedily or easily reckon
that as a Fault, which Baronius taxes for such an one in old Agobardus, Cum
praeter Scripturas admittere in sacris Officiis nihil vellet; It seems he would
have the Bible be the only Service Book. The Prayers offered up in the Churches
of New England, must then have that Account given of them, that Justin Martyr
gave of those in the Primitive Churches; The President (or Pastor) sends up to
Heaven Prayers and Praises OS DYNAIS according to his Ability. And the Pastors
herein follow the Directions of Basil, who having said, There are two sorts of
Prayer, Thanksgiving and Petition, advises to begin with the former, and
therein make Choice, APO TON AGION GPAPHON of Scripture Expressions, and so
pass on to the latter OS DYNASAI as thou art able.

Indeed, We are not ignorant, That the Pagans of old prayed by a Form. In their
public Prayers, they had a Monitor, who did praeire Preces de scripto.
Apuleius informs, us that among the Graecians, the Monitor, who was called
Grammateus, did from a Pulpit, De Libro fausta precari, pray out of a Book.
Pausanias informs us. That the Monitor who was also called ANP AGOS, being a
Priest, first put on his sacred Habit, and then said a Prayer EK IAOY out of a
Book. Livy informs us, That among the Romans, their extraordinary Ritual was in
the Books of the Sibyls, and at other times they had praescribed Prayers, and
read their Prayers, e public^s Tabulis out of their Common Prayer Book; and
that there was Solenne Precationis Carmen, a Common Prayer Book among them, to
preserve their Conformity in Religion. But we have we been told that the
Primitive Christians did not pray so. For this they will not insist on
Tertullian's famous Passage of their praying sine Monitore, quia de Pectore;
though even from thence, Bp. Bilson concludes, That free Prayer was then used;
and Bp. Hall concludes, That the Mode of Praying was not then under any
superior Injunction: They can give up this Tertullianic Passage, and find
Apology enough to plead for them in others of the Ancients: Particularly, in
Origin, who relates, That both in the Grecian and Latin Churches, which
divided the whole Evangelized World between them, they prayed every one OS
AYNATAI, as he was able. Arch Bishop Usher has given us Assurance, That the
Irish Churches for Eleven Hundred Years, and the British and Scottish, if not so
long, yet long after Austin, the Monk, retained such a Liberty herein, as was
of old enjoyed in all Quarters of the World. Nor did the old Hebrews know any
such Thing as a stated Form of Prayer; In these Churches it is thought so,
because of certain Words which those among them who have consulted R. Bechai,
do from him quote unto them, Thou may do well to know (says the Rabbi) that
from the Times of Moses our Master, to the Times of the Great Sanhedrim, there
was no usual and equal form of Prayer in Israel; because every one made his
Prayer for himself, according to his own Knowledge, and Wisdom, and Utterance.
Indeed at this Day, they have a Liturgy: but they have a Tradition that the
Christians have theirs from Armillus: that is to say, -- Every one knows, Who?

Conformable then to the Best Antiquity are the Churches of New-English
Nonconformists. The most likely way to bring such a Novelty as a Liturgy into
request among them, would be; for the Churches first of all to sink into so
bad, a State, as Chrysostom complains they began to be in his Time, Like Houses
burnt down, by having taken Fire, with all the Pillars that have supported
them; Or, for their Pastors first of all to degenerate into the Barbarous
Darkness of those Ages, when the Bishops assembled in Councils were so
Illiterate, many of them, that they must get another to subscribe their Names
for them, with this Confession annexed, Propterea quod Literas ignorem, and
when they ordained (as did Eusebius of Pelusium) APAIDEYSIAS THPEATA KAI DAI
ONAS ALASTOPAS.

. 5. The former and larger Prayer of the Pastor being finished, then (as
Tertullian tells us how in his Time, Psalmi canuntur) a PSALM usually succeeds.
In some the Assembly being furnished with Psalm-Books, they sing without the
stop of Reading between every Line.

But ordinarily the Psalm is read line after line, by him whom the Pastor
desires to do that Service; and the People generally sing in such grave Tunes,
as are most usual in the Churches of our Nation. Basil thus mentions the order
in the Primitive Churches. First Praying, and then Singing.

It is manifest from Tertullian, that in the Primitive Churches, the Christians
used not only Hymns collected out of the sacred Scripture, but such as were
conceived and composed by themselves; Ut quisque de Scriptura, vel de proprio
Ingenio potest, provocatur in medium Deo canere. Socrates mentions the Psalms
written by Chrysostom; and Eusebius the Psalms written by Nepos. Nor was it
otherwise in the Bohemian Churches, of the later Ages, where they were provided
with a Cantional, of above Seven Hundred and Forty sacred Songs, besides the
Davidical Psalms. But the Churches of New England admit not into their Public
Services, any other than the Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, of the Old and
New Testament, faithfully translated into English Meter. No, not so much as
the, Te Deum; An Hymn which indeed is not mentioned by any Author more Ancient
than the Rules which old Benet wrote for his Monks, about the middle of the
Sixth Century. Nor, The Song of the Three Children, an Hymn everywhere
unmentioned until the Fourth Council of Toledo, in the Seventh. In this thing
they agree to the Act of the Laodicean Synod, That no private Psalms be used in
the Church. And they almost confine themselves unto the Limitations enjoined by
the first Synod of Bracara, Let nothing be Sung in the Church, but the Psalms
of the Old Testament Extra Psalmos Veteris Testamenti, nihil poetice compositum
in Ecclesia Psallatur.
.

And if Austin could blame the Donatists, for leaving of the Psalms of David,
and singing Hymns of their own Invention, it is a Point wherein the Churches of
New England have not been hitherto blameable. The private Companies and
Families of the faithful among them, indeed have sometimes employed what
Versified Portions of Scripture and other devout Hymns they find for their
Edification.

But when they Bless GOD in their Congregations, they keep to such Psalms, as a
Theodoret mentions as preferrible in the Judgment of several of the Ancients,
above any others: That is to say, Those in our sacred Psalter, and some other
Poetical Paragraphs, of the sacred Scriptures Versified.

The first Planters of New England, were not long without a Version of the
Davidical Psalms, and of several other Songs in both Testaments, made by the
united Endeavors of several Persons. In this Version, the Poetry may indeed
want refining; yet the nearness and closeness of the Translation unto the
Original, may make some amends for other Defects. These holy Psalms by some
Congregations are sung over in Order as they ly; (at least in the Psalmody for
one part of the Day;) And in others, are sung, as the Minister singles them
out, for to accommodate the Subjects and the Designs before him. How many may
make Austin's Reflection; Quantum flevimus in Hymnis suavisonantis Ecclesiae!

Their Way of Singing is not with such BOAI ATAKTOI, disorderly Clamours, as
were condemned by the old Council of Trullo: But in such Grave Tunes, as are
most used in our Nation; and it may be hoped, not without some Sense of that
which Zonaras gives as the Reason of the Trullan Condemnation, The Singing of
Psalms is a Supplicating of GOD himself, wherein by humble Prayer we beg the
Pardon of our Sins. Their Psalmody is neither set off with the Delicacies,
which Austin complained of, nor is it rendered unseemly by the Exorbitances we
find rebuked by Chrysostom. It has been commended by Strangers a^ generally not
worse than what is in many other parts of the World; but rather as being
usually according to Origens Expression, EELOS KAI SYPHONOS Melodiously and
Agreeably. However, of later Times they have considerably Recovered it, and
Reformed, and Refined it, from some Indecencies, that by length of Time had
begun to grow upon it. And more than a Score of Tunes are heard Regularly Sung
in their Assemblies.

. 6. The SERMON follows. The Pastor proceeds to the Service which Athanasius
tells Draconicus, the People expected from him, when they elected him to his
Bishopric: Even, To bring Meat out of the Doctrine of the Scriptures. The
Churches of New England, though they use not the Ceremony (which was frequently
used of old) of putting the Bible on the Heads of their Ministers in their
Ordinations, yet they expect the Heads, and Hearts, and Lips of their Ministers
to be employed in opening the Bible unto them. They approve so far of the
Ancient Canons, (whereof Herald of Tours made a Capitulary) That Ministers
should preach to all the Faithful, the Doctrines of Faith; the Incarnation of
JESUS CHRIST, His Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension; The Gift of the Holy
Spirit, and the Remission of Sins. They reckon with Gregory (him who has been
called, The Great) That for a Bishop to abstain from Preaching is a filthy
shame, and a wicked thing, and a Token of Death. And they are of Jerem's Mind,
That no Testimony of his Virtues can profit him, if he be not able to teach the
People committed to him.

Accordingly, bespeaking Attention, he reads a Text, longer or shorter, as he
pleases, from the sacred Scriptures, and then makes a Sermon (which the
Ancients called a Treatise) thereupon; or, to speak in the Style of Justin
Martyr, After the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, the Minister makes an
Oration, wherein he instructs the People, and exhorts them to the Imitation of
such excellent Things. Or, in the Style of Origin. What is read being
Explained, he excites the People to Piety toward the Blessed GOD, and other
Virtues, the inseparable Companions of Piety.

In doing this necessary part of his Office, being bound (as Hilary well says)
to serve the Church in Preaching the Gospel, he gives himself a Liberty, either
to Preach over the Body of Divinity in order, (a Practice of unknown Advantage
to the Preacher, as well as to the Hear^, (...) To preach over certain
paragraphs of the Bible; Or, To handle such Doctrines and Cases, as he may
judge most necessary; Or, To accommodate himself unto special Occasions, that
should have such a Notice taken of them; and particularly the Sacramental. Nor
are the Pastors of New England altogether insensible of what is well observed
by our Doctor Owen; That the Work of the Ministry is not by any means more
evacuated, and rendered ineffectual, than when Ministers have not a certain
Design to deal with their Hearers according to what they are persuaded, that
their Spiritual State requires. A general Preaching at Random, without a
special Scope, directed by such a Persuasion, turns the whole Work, for the
most part, both in Preachers, and Hearers, into a useless Formality.

The Tractators (as the Preachers were called) in the Primitive Churches, did
often use to sit in their Exercises. Chrysostom we find still doing so; Though
Gregory Nazianzen rebukes the Height and Pride of the Thrones in which the
more supercilious Bishops of those Times (and such as the Council of Antioch
did rebuke Samosatenus for) did Seat themselves. But in the Churches of
New England, the Pastors do stand when they Preach; and (otherwise than in the
Churches of the French Protestants) They stand unco vered.

The Length of a Sermon among them, is very much like the Length of (...)
Tractate among the Ancients. Jerome admo^^shed Austin, That he should not be too
long least the Sermon being too long dra^n ^^t, should not be well
comprehended. Gregory Nazianzen remarked 'That Satiety in a Sermon was no less
an Enemy to the Ear, than too much meat to the Body. Basil would therefore End
his Morning Sermon the sooner, least he should make his Hearers dull against
the Evening Assembly. And Chrysostom compared the People to Infants, which were
to have their Meat by little and little instilled into them; for which Cause,
he says, Care was taken that the Teachers should neither weary themselves, nor
the Hearers, with a Multitude of Words. Accordingly they generally limited
themselves unto about an Hour. Wherefore both Basil and Austin we find
sometimes declining to speak, What they could not finish in the space of an
Hour. And Chrysostom reproved those who thought much to give unto the Lord, One
or Two Hours, out of an Hundred and Sixty Eight, of which a Week is composed.
Nevertheless they did not so limit themselves unto an Hour, but that if they
saw Occasion, they would enlarge beyond it, and plead (as Austin did) the
Exemple of Paul Preaching till Midnight, for their Preaching a good way into
the second Hour. Much hereabouts the Sermons of New England.

But then the Ancients often took a Liberty for one thing, which would be in
these Churches (if ever allowed upon some extraordinary Emergencies unto
Persons of extraordinary Abilities,) but rarely approved; They commonly
Preached Ex tempore: Thus both Jerome and Ruffin agree concerning many Homilies
of Origin, Has Ex tempore in Ecclesia peroravit; and, In auditorio Ecclesiae Ex
tempore, non tam Explanation is quam Edificationis intention perorata sunt.
And all that we have now of Cyril of Jerusalem, are, as Vossius observes,
Catecheses SEDIASTHEISAS, extemporales. Thus we find some of them, like
Nazianzen, Preaching from the Psalm which happened to be sung before the
Sermon. And Flavianus advised Chrysostom, To use an extemporary faculty in
preaching. In Compliance with which Advice, Georgi^ Alexandrinus writing his
Life, tells us, that the People saw him sometimes AYTOSEDOS, Ex Tempore
preaching unto them. And though Atticus had not the like Accomplishments of his
Predecessor Chrysostom, yet Socrates tells us, that by Labor and Practice, he
also attained unto the Faculty of delivering himself ex Tempore unto his
Auditory. Jerome, it is true, was no constant Preacher, but several of his
Discourses now in our Hands, were as himself tells us, Ex temporales
Dictationes, taken in short Hand; And his Interpretation of the Three Books of
Solomon, was Tridui Opus dispatched in three Days time. Augustine likewise, as
Erasmus observes, used Extemporali Dictione, in his Preaching; and he judges
this Father more excellent in his Extemporal Discourses than in his Elaborate;
as if he had been what the Historian says of Tiberius, Ex tempore quam a Cura
praestantior. Firmus the Manichee was converted by one of those Discourses, and
the World had not now enjoyed them, if they had not been taken, Per notarios ex
Ore Loquentis. A Faculty of Preaching with little Study, has been by too many
it may be endeavored in the Churches of New England; and there have been
diverse Temptations leading to it. But well studied Sermons are those which
among Judicious Christians in these Churches find the best Acceptance, and are
the best esteemed: The Churches do not ordinarily reckon it a Commendation for
their Ministers, e Manicis Concionem excutere. If they hear of Ministers
boasting that they have been in their Studies, only a few Hours on a Saturday,
or so, they reckon that such Persons rather Glory in their shame. Sudden
Sermons, they may sometimes admire from their accomplished Ministers, when the
suddenness has not been a chosen Circumstance; But as one of old, when it was
objected against his public Speeches (in Matters of less Moment than the
Salvation of Souls) That they were studied, replied, I should blush at the
Incivility of treating so great and wise a People, with any thing but what
shall be studied ^bescerem optimo Jure si tantae Multitudini consulens dicerem
(...) tempore.
. So the best Ministers of New England ordinarily would blush to address their
Flocks without Praemeditation.

However as the Ancients did not content themselves on the Lord's Days without
preaching twice, which diverse Passages in the Homilies of others besides
Basil, do demonstrate, no more do the Pastors of these Churches; who, as 'twas
said of Basil, by their Sermons, Bring first Morning Food, and then Evening Joy
to their Hearers: And as Chrysostom speaks, 'Being wearied with the Labors of
the Forenoon-Service, reserve the Rest until the Afternoon. Indeed, they do
not, as diverse of the Ancients, preach every Day. Austin sometimes did it;
Cyprian sometimes did it; Alexander, as Nicephorus affirms, did it. And so did
Calvin among the Moderns. Neither the Pastors nor the People, in the Churches
of New England can attend so frequent Opportunities of Public Preaching.
Nevertheless, the frequency of Opportunities to Preach, has been very Great
unto some New-English Divines. There have been of them able to speak in Terms
like those of Chrysestom, I have spoken to Day, and Yesterday, and the Day
before yesterday, and shall speak Tomorrow. They have preached no less than
five Days together; yea, more than twice five Days together, and more than once
on some of those Days, and unto Great Auditories. And it has been thought by
some, (...) Preaching often has but the better disposed them unto often
Preaching; As an Oven lately heated, needs less Fuel to heat it over again.

It is well known, how the Custom of Preaching with Notes came to be taken up
in our Nation. It was very little Practiced or Approved in This Country, till
of later Years: But it is now become extremely Fashionable: And no doubt some
Sermons are the better Composed for it, though it will require good Management if
they be not the less Affecting. Indeed, it is no new Thing, for as eloquent
Speakers as Augustus himself, (who began the Custom) to have Minutes of their
Speeches before them: And Cicero himself did sometimes, De Scripto dicere. Yea,
Pliny tells us, Orationes, et nostri quidam, et Graeci Lectitaverunt. There are
Ministers in the Country, who still Preach without Notes before them; and their
Performances are justly and greatly esteemed. But, -- Apparent Rari -- And many
Ministers who have their Notes before them, yet speak with so much Vigor and
Fervor, that their Hearers do not think themselves unspoken to. The Severity
of some Foreign Churches utterly Forbidding all preaching with Notes, is not
exercised in the Churches of New England. And yet it seems to be generally
wished, That the Preachers would keep to such a middle Way in it, as not
thereby to lose or blunt, the Vivacity of their Delivery; but, as it has been
sometimes expressed, Cast their Eye upon the Quiver, for the Arrow to be
fetched from thence, and yet not keep it entirely fixed on the Quiver, all the
while the Arrow is delivering.

. 7. The Sermon being finished, the Pastor makes a shorter Prayer, wherein he
recommends the Sermon, and the principal Documents of it, unto the Operations
of the Holy Spirit for the effectual Applications thereof unto the Hearts of
the People.

Then, (at least in the Afternoon) there is another Psalm sung.

In some of the Congregations, they have also on the Afternoon of the Lord's
Day, before the latter Psalm, a COLLECTION, according to the Apostolical
Direction, 1 Cor. XVI. 2. Upon the first Day of the Week, let every one of you,
lay by him in Store, as GOD has prospered him. The Primitive Churches also did
it, in the Days of Justin Martyr, and of Tertullian, as the Writings of those,
and others in that Age, assure us. And the Ecclesiastical Expenses of the
Churches, are defrayed, or at least, assisted, out of these Contributions.

. 8. In the Churches of New England, it would be thought a Disorderly thing, if
in the Time of the public Service, any Gentleman should get a Minister, to
carry on a private Service in his Family, or with any of the Neighborhood.

It may be added, That though the Communicants in the Churches of New England are
not constantly tied unto their own Pastors, yet if they should not Ordinarily
hear them, when they are able to do it, the Omission would be thought a
Disorder.

Moreover, That Custom of Persons falling to their Private Prayers at their
first coming into the Assembly, in the time of public Worship, is in these
Churches, neither practiced, nor approved. So far as it openly proclaims a
secret and singular Devotion, it is condemned as a Pharisaical Ostentation. So
far as the Holiness of Places is the Ground therein gone upon, the Principle is
disowned. So far as it interferes with other Ordinances then managing, it is
accounted such a Diversion as puts a Disrespect upon them. It is reckoned a
Vanity, that a Christian cannot have his Devout Ejaculations, without
signalizing them unto the Notice of his Neighbors. And they Concur with what
our Clarkson and other Divines have offered; That this is against the Apostles
Rule for the Regulation of public Assemblies, in 1 Cor. XIV. 40. Let all
things be done decently and in order.

. 9. These are the more stated Exercises of every Lord's Day, (and the Lectures
on the Week Days imitate them) in the Churches of New England. When these are
dispatched, the Pastor dismisses the Congregation with pronouncing a
Benediction; wishing, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of GOD, and
the Communion of the Holy Spirit to be with them all. It Is often praefixed with
a, Blessed are all they that hear the Word of GOD and keep it. Sometimes there
is also specified the Obedience of Faith, unto the main Doctrine insisted on in
the foregoing Sermon.

. 10. It has been enquired by many excellent Persons; Whether the public
Reading of the whole Scripture in order, to our Congregations without preaching
thereon, be not an Ordinance, the Omission whereof is culpable among us? It
must be confessed, That the Practice has not been so generally taken up, as
many have wished for. And that the thing may be fairly represented, Those who
have hitherto continued in the Omission have pleaded; That they could not at
present see either Precept or Pattern for the Reading of the Scriptures in our
Churches, without Exposition upon it; nor does it seem to belong unto the Work
of a Pastor: That, in every Sermon duly composed, a considerable Portion of
the Scripture is read, with the Advantage of its being reserred unto its Place
and Use in Divinity: That, for those who are Gifted that way to go over greater
or lesser Paragraphs of Scripture, with Expository Lectures upon them, is a
thing much to be desired: but the Gifts of some Persons may be more profitably
employed in another Way handling the Word of GOD: That, there are some Chapters
of the Scripture, which perhaps may not be so proper to be read publicly in
our Congregations; And finally, That we should be wary, how we introduce into
the Congregations an Exercise which may at all invite private Christians, to
neglect any of their Duties in their private Families; whereof that of Reading
the Scriptures is one.

On the other side, There is no Name held in greater Veneration, than that of
the Memorable JOHN COTTON, in the Churches of New England, which yet will not
build on any Foundation but that of the APOSTLES. This eminent Person, in a
Book about Singing of Psalms, Printed in the Year, 1647. over and over again,
does insist upon it, That the very Reading of the Scriptures, tends to
Edification, as being an Ordinance of GOD; and the Expounding and Applying of
them by the Spiritual Gifts of Ministers, is another Ordinance. He does insist
upon it, The very Reading of them is an Ordinance of GOD; and no Ordinance of
GOD is empty, and beggarly and destitute of the Spirit: which is the Vanity of
Men's Traditions, and may not be imputed to any of GOD's Ordinances. Deuteronomy. XXXI.
11, 12, 13. XXVII. 14. to 26.

Accordingly the Custom of Reading the Scripture without Explication and
Exhortation upon it, is practiced in many of our Churches. They look upon such
an Exercise of Piety, to be an Ordinance of GOD, and a proper Expression of the
Respect which we owe unto His Lively Oracles; In our Confession of Faith also,
The Reading of the Scriptures is distinctly mentioned, with, Preaching and
Hearing the Word of GOD, as parts of Religious Worship; And they think, they
cannot without it, vindicate our Churches from the Imputation, which some who
differ from them will cast upon them for the Omission of it.

It is also true, That in many of the Reformed Churches, the Work of Reading is
not assigned unto the Pastors; They as well as the Primitive, have other, to be
the Readers. But none of our Pastors think themselves too considerable, to be
the Readers of the Letters which our Glorious LORD, has in His Bible sent unto
His Creatures.

The Churches which yet omit this Exercise, do speak of it still with a
becoming Reverence; but many seem to wish, that it may have an Exposition or
Application still attending of it. They have been informed by Justin Martyr,
That in the Christian Assemblies of the Primitive Times, Interpretation usually
followed upon Reading the Scriptures. In Origen's Time, we find the Sermons
were Explanations of the ANAGNOSATA, or, the Readings. Though in Cyprian's Time,
There was a Reader distinct from the Presbyter, yet from the Name of Doctor
Audientium then put upon him, some learned Men conclude, that even he did more
than barely Read. Though in Austin's Time, they commonly had Three Lections, yet
we find the Minister still Preached upon them: for which Cause we find some
Sermons of his beginning. Tres has Lectiones quas audivistis. A valuable
Presbyterian, Mr. Boyse has let fall this Passage; For laying aside the
Exposition of what is Read, I would Recommend the excellent Words of Austin,
(on 1 Johan.) where speaking of the Scripture, he says, Quare legitur, si
silebitur; aut quare auditur, si non exponitur? And those of Bernard, (Temp.
55.) Non tradit Matter parvulo Nucem integram, sed frangit eam et Nucleum
porrigit. The Scriptures of both Testaments do likewise furnish us with
Intimations of something that looked that Way, in the Jewish Assemblies, (Neh.
VIII. 8. Luke IV. 16, 12. Acts XIII. 15. and XV 21.) The Pentateuch was divided
into fifty four Parashoth, or Sections, which they Dead over in the Synagogue
every Year; and when Antiochus forbad the Reading of the Law, they Read the
like Sections of the Prophets; After which it became Customary to Read both
together. But Philo tells us, when one of the Elders, does Read the Law, KATH'
EKASTON EXGEITAI, He expounds it severally. Yea, as long ago as the Babylonish
Captivity, this was unquestionably one Exercise in the Holy Convocation every
Sabbath Day, that the Levites were to teach the People the (Meaning of the)
Law, as well as put Incense upon the Altar, and they were to instruct Israel in
the Word of GOD. The Gemara has an Observation, That Reading was no Ministry.
But indeed the Interpretation which after the Captivity, they insisted on,
seems to be chiefly intended, for the rendering of the Scripture in the Language
then Vulgarly used among them; However not only so.

The Result of these Considerations is, that in many Churches, the Reading of
Chapters in Course, with a short Prayer for a Blessing on it, is one of the
Public Exercises; nor is any Offense taken in others at them for doing so.
It Is also by very many of the Pastors wished, that more of the Scriptures were
publicly Read, with all due due Solemnity in their Assembly: Yea, the Practice
obtains more and more; the most of the Pastors appear disposed for it. Be sure,
To put the Term of dumb Reading, on the Reading of the Scriptures without an
Expository Operation of the Reader upon it, is esteemed improper and indecent.
If there be not a perfect Harmony in the Churches about the Manner of
performing this Duty, however there is a perfect Charity; It breeds no
Differences. Yea, That the Scriptures be publicly Read, in some sense, it may
be said, They are all Agreed.

ARTICLE IV. The Administration of the Sacred Baptism.
. 1. IN the Churches of New England, as well as in all other well ordered
Churches, the Pastors or Teachers, (and they only) administer the Seals of the
New Covenant, unto those who do upon the Preaching of the Gospel accept
thereof; And the Lord's Day is the usual Time for their discharging this Part
of their Stewardship. So in the Days of Cyprian, we read, Non nisi in Ecclesia
praepositis licuit baptizare.

. 2. The Principle which the Churches do generally go upon, has been thus
declared. The Laws by which our SAVIOR will have His Kingdom to be governed,
are administered in the Corporations thereof. Particular Churches of Believers,
associating to Worship our SAVIOR in all His Ordinances, when furnished with
Pastors, are such Corporations. But the Great KING has many Subjects in His
Visible Kingdom, who are not yet constituent Members of the Corporations. They
who openly profess the Christian Religion, and make Choice of the True GOD, for
Their GOD, and submit unto the Laws of His Kingdom, and have nothing in their
Conversation that may give a notorious Contradiction to this Profession; These
are to be owned as, The People of GOD. We durst not say, There is no Difference
between These and Pagans. We cannot but own These, for Subjects in the Visible
Kingdom of our Glorious LORD. We cannot answer it unto GOD, or His People, to
deny unto These, and unto the Offspring of these, the Baptism, with which the
Subjects of our SAVIOR, are to be Distinguished and Acknowledged.

There appears a Lively Emblem of this Matter in the Constitution of the
English Government.

But it has been said, -- The Offspring of These. -- The First Planters of
New England, having their Eye very much upon the Welfare of their Offspring, it
cannot be wondered at, if the Churches are for having their Offspring brought
with them into the Covenant of their GOD. They find the Covenant of Grace under
the Old Testament, extended unto the Offspring of the Faithful: And they have
not yet seen any Scripture in the New to cut them off, or shut them out. No;
But the Infants of the Faithful are there called, Holy Ones; And they think,
Holy Ones ought to be Baptized, and come under a Baptismal Consecration. They
do not know, That our Gracious GOD ever took a People into His Covenant, but He
took their Offspring with them.

Wherefore,

The BAPTISM of the Lord, is administered in the Churches, not only unto those
who actually and publicly give their Consent unto the Covenant of Grace, but
also to the Infants of such Visible Believers. They do not think, that in thus
practicing of Infant Baptism, they can be charged with departing from the
Practice of the Primitive Churches. Origin expressly says, Parvuli baptizantur
in Remissionem Peccatorum; Little Children are baptized; Even such as he
supposes to be, under three or four Years old. The Testimonies of Irenaeus and
Cyprian, for Infant Baptism are well known. And it is well known that an
Affrican Council whereat Threescore and Six Bishops were present, A. C. 254.
Considering the Case, Whether Infants might be baptized, before the second or
third, or eighth Day, determined the Baptism of Infants to be performed as soon
as it was possible to be expected: Baptism they would have observed, Magis
circa Infantes ipsos et Recens Natos, rather for new born Infants than for any.

. 3. But Baptism is here, after this Manner fought for.

The Adult Person, first applying himself to the Pastor, the Pastor examines
the Knowledge and the Belief of the Person, and obtains also, a Testimony of
his Good Conversation, and therewith perceives the Dispositions of a Saving
Faith, at least hopefully begun in him.

The Person is then publicly propounded by the Pastor in the Congregation; As
having offered his Desires to be received into the Covenant, and under the
Government of the Lord.

A Week or two after this, if no Scandal be objected, the Pastor publicly
mentions it in the Congregation; That such a one is to draw near, and receive
what he has desired and sought for.

Whereupon he tenders unto the Person, the Covenant of Grace, in Terms of This
Importance.

You, Professing a serious Belief of the Christian Religion, as it is contained
in the sacred Scriptures, and usually embraced by the Faithful in this Place,
(and explained in our well-known Catechism;) do give up your self to GOD, in
our Lord JESUS CHRIST; Resolving, with His Help, to conform your Life to the
Rules of that Holy Religion, as long as you Live, and Repenting of all things
wherein you have transgressed those Rules of Holiness. You give up your self
unto the LORD JEHOVAH, who is the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and
receive Him, as your GOD and Portion. You give up your self unto the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, who is the Lord Jehovah, and Rely upon Him as the Head of His People in
the Covenant of Grace; and as your Prophet, and Priest, and King for ever. You
submit to the Laws of His Kingdom, as they are administered among this His
People: And will herewith be at Pains to obtain that further Preparation of the
Sanctuary, which may embolden your further Approaches to the Enjoyment of GOD
in all His Ordinances. [This last Clause is lest out, when the Person is
presently on the same Day, after his Baptism, to enter further into the
Covenant for Admission also to the Holy Table.]

I said, -- [ with Terms of this Importance] because if in the short
Renunciation of the Flesh, and the World, and the Devil, used at Baptism in the
Primitive Times, they used such a Variety of Terms, that we can Count more than
Twenty several Variations of that short Sentence, which we have met withal in
the Writings of the Ancients, there can be no mighty Damage or Danger in it, if
the Expressions of this Matter be varied in these Churches; while the
Variations are all still with Terms of this Importance.

And now, the Person expressing his Consent hereunto, is qualified for the
Baptism of the Lord, both for himself, and for his House.

Thus Justin Martyr informs us, That in his Time, it was expected, That Persons
should give good Proofs of their Resolutions to lead a Pious and Religious
Life, and protest their Assent and Consent unto all the Christian Verities,
e're their Claim to Baptism could be acknowledged.

. 4. Private Baptism is not used in the Churches of New England. They agree
with the Divines of Leyden, who condemn it as a Disorder, because, Baptismus
publici Ministerii, non privatae Exhortationis est Appendix. They say with
Calvin, Since our Baptism has with it our solemn Introduction into Church of
GOD, -- it should be administered still in an Assembly of the Faithful; to which
indeed a Temple is not always necessary Imprimis observandum est, cum istud
Sacramentum complectatur facramet solennem Incroductionem in Ecclesiam Dei,
sitque Testimeni^m Coelestis nostri Municipatus, in quem ascribuntur (...),
ques Deus adoptar sibi, fas non esse administrare Baptismum, nifi in Coetu
Fidelium: Non quidem ut Temp^m requiracur, sed ut ubivis Numerus aliquis Fide^m
convenia^, qui F^ C^rpus consic^at.
--. They say with Beza, The taking in, and cutting off a Member of the Church,
are to be alike Circumstanced in This; that a Church Assembly should be called
together for it Par Ratio est Membrum E^ adjungendi e^ abscindendi, non nist
convocato Ecc^ C^: P^ as Domos non moror, (...) Ecclesia, i. e. Communis
Coetus, in iis cenveniat.
But none can say more unto their Mind than Did lavius; The Sum of whose
Reasoning is this: That the Communion that we maintain with the Universal
Church in the Sacrament of Baptism, cannot be regularly expressed, but in an
Assembly of some visible particular Church: And since, as Chrysostom says, The
Keys of the Sacraments are delivered unto the Church, a Pastor therefore,
should make his Dispensation of Baptism in some Church: And since the
Sacraments are not only Symbols of Grace exhibited unto us, but also as Aquinus
expresses it, Protestationes Fidei nostrae coram Mundo, Professions of our
Faith before the World, therefore Baptism should have an Open and a Public
Celebration. The Ethiopian Treasurer and the G^^ler were indeed more privately
baptized: But it was by extraordinary Officers, who were themselves equivalent
unto whole Churches; and it was before Churches were yet gathered in the
Neighborhood. Nor can the sacred Ordinance of Baptism so well be preserved
from Abuse and Contempt, if it be left unto private Administrations. Wherefore
upon the whole, (says Calderwood, and so They generally) Baptism should not be
administered any where, but in a public Church Assembly Baptismus non est
Celebrandus, nisi in publico totius Eccles^ Coetu.
. And the Churches of New England add, That since, as Churches, they owe
special Duties to the Baptized, they think it Reason, that they should see the
Baptism.

. 5 At the Baptism the Pastor begins with a short Prayer, consisting of
Passages properly introductory to the Action before him; and particularly
supplicating for Assistance and Acceptance, in that solemn Dedication to GOD,
which the Person to be baptized is now passing under.

It is a little surprising to read the Liberty which many of the Ancients took,
in celebrating this First Sacrament of the New Testament. Some used the Form, I
baptize thee; Others, Be thou baptized; Others, This Person, or, Servant of
Christ, is baptized. The Latin Churches would use the Term, Tingo, as well as
Baptizo. Some used the Form, EISONOA, others, E^NOATOS. With Tertullian it was,
In Nomen; With Cyprian it was In Nomine; And with some, The Name, was quite
left out, and it was, Into the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Yea,
some were so faulty, that they did, not expressly Name, every Person in the
Trinity: but only the Name of Christ, or of the Lord Jesus, or of the Lord.
Basil defended this, by the Plea which Irenaeus had used before him, in the
Defense of it; That the Name of One is an Acknowledgement of the whole.
Agreeably whereto Theophylact affirms, That he who is baptized into the Name of
JESUS CHRIST, is baptized into the Trinity; for the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, are not parted. And Ambrose affirms, Qui unum dixit,
Trinitatem signavit. Others there were, who though they expressed the Three
Persons of the Godhead in the Words of our Savior, yet enlarged upon them. It
seems by Justin Martyr, that such Words as these were sometimes used; In the
Name of the Father of all things, and of our Lord God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, and of the Holy Spirit, this Washing with Water is performed. And
sometimes the latter Clauses were thus varied; In the Name of Jesus Christ, who
was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and in the Name of the Holy Spirit who by
the Prophets foretold all Things, concerning Jesus, he that is to be
illuminited is baptized. Briefly, they though it a, TAYTON PPOSDIANOIAN a
Conformity in Sense, to be sufficient; without confining themselves to the
Words mentioned (I say mentioned, because Mr Gillespy will not let me say,
prescribed,) by our Savior.

But in the Churches of New England such a Liberty is neither practiced nor
approved. In their Baptisms, the Pastors, pouring of Water with his Hand, on
the Face of the Person before him, confines himself to the Words of the
Institution. Prefacing the Christian Name of the Person, [or saying, This
Person (or Infant) whose Name is, [so or so,] I Baptize, or, [especially if it
be an Adult Person, I baptize thee,] in [or, into] the Name of the Father, and
the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

Upon this the Pastor annexes another short Prayer, wherein he commends the
Infants, (if they be such) with their Parents, or the Persons baptized, unto
the Mercies of GOD, in the New Covenant, now sealed unto them. He prays for the
Mercies of the Covenant; particularly, that Application of the Blood of
Sprinkling, and that Effusion of the Spirit of Grace, and that Portion in the
Resurrection of the Just, whereof Baptism is to the Faithful, a Token for Good:
And such a part in the Heavenly City, as God has prepared for them to whom He
will be their GOD. He subjoins Petitions, that they, (and all) may as they grow
up, remember also the Duties of the Covenant. And the Petitions on this
Occasion put up for the Young People of the Flock, that they may be mindful of
their Baptismal Engagements, and become shining Examples of Early Piety, are
sometimes very flaming and Pathetical.

Some few, instead of this latter Prayer, do give the Parents a brief
Admonition to bring up their Children in the Narture and Admonition of the
Lord. Be sure, if an Adult Person be baptized, an Admonition, has been
sometimes, thought very agreeably to accompany the latter Prayer.

. 6. The Rite of Dipping or Plunging is not now used in the Baptisms of any
Churches, except some of the Antipaed^baptist Way: Though some have used the
Dipping of the Face. They apprehend, that the Lord has required no more for the
External Rite of Baptism, than a Sacred Washing in the Name of the Father, and
the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and that the Degree of this Washing is lest unto
the Discretion and Convenience of His People. In Hot Countries it might well
enough be by Dipping; In Cold ones Affusion, or Aspersion may be enough;
Dipping they fear would hardly keep in good Terms with the Sixth Commandment,
in hazarding the Life of some Disciples; or the Third, in expecting of Miracles
to keep them alive. The Proof of a Total Dipping in the scriptural Examples of
Baptism, does not appear so plain and full, that they should lay the whole
Stress of the Sacrament upon it. What we read of our Savior at His Baptism, is
only, that He went up from the Water. There must be a Descent unto the side of
a River; And like Solomon crowned by the side of a River, our Lord might there
have the Water poured upon Him, without a complete Immersion. All that can be
proved of what passed between the Evangelist and the Ethiopian, for the Baptism
of the latter, is that they came to the Bank of a Brook, which both Jerome and
Sandys represent as a very unlikely one for an Immersion to be performed there.
Indeed, the Baptisms of John did require much Water; For, while the Rites of
Purification were continued among the Jews it would have been thought a Scandal
for one Vessel of Water to have served successively for the baptizing of
diverse Persons. If it were so, there were occasion of much Water to supply,
though but a Basin for a Person. And indeed it looks not very probable, that John
stood so many whole Days together in the Water, as he must have done, if he
dipped all that he baptized in the few Months of his Ministry, which were
doubtless many Thousands. Yea, there are some Examples of Baptism, where the
probability seems rather on the other side; that there was not an Immersion in
it. Especially when we read of whole Households baptized in the Depth of the
Night, and at a private House, where it is not so easy to suppose a Depth of
Water for the Action. It is well known, that the Benefits sealed by Baptism are
set forth by Sprinkling, [1 Per. 1. 1. Isai. 1. 11. 15. Ezekiel. XXXVI. 25.] Now,
if the thing signified, be a Sprinkling, what need the Sign be any more than a
Sprinkling? And whereas there is a Baptism of the Holy Spirit, we do not read
of Men's being dipped into the Holy Spirit, but of the Holy Spirit being poured
upon them. The Word Baptize may signify any Washing whatsoever. The Washing of
no more than the Hands is called the Baptism of the Man. [Luk. XI. 38. Mar.
VII. 4.] And why should not the Washing of the Face be so? Yea, we read, Heb.
IX. 10. of Diverse Baptisms. And we are certain, a very great part of them were
no more than Sprinklings. And indeed, none but Sprinklings are expressly
mentioned in that Context. Such a Mistake it is, to say, that a Sprinkling is
not called Baptism in the holy Language. The Holy Spirit expressly calls it so.
It refers especially to Numb. VIII. 7. Thus shall thou do unto them to cleanse
them; Sprinkle Water of Purifying upon them. Indeed, we read of being, Buried
with Christ in Baptism unto Death. But it is not so much our Baptism as our
M^tification, that is to resemble the Burial of our Savior. We are by Baptism
obliged unto a Conformity unto the Death of our Buried JESUS, and unto His
Rising again; unto His Death, by our Dying to Sin; unto His Rising again in our
Living to GOD. Our Baptism is not so much that Burial, as the Seal of our
Obligation to it. Baptism is also a Sacrament that seals the Resurrection of
the Faithful from their Graves, wherein we are first buried, as Christ was, and
then raised like Him. Here is nothing to Intimate that in Baptism our Bodies
must be all under Water. When a Man is buried he does not walk into the Grave
himself, nor is he in the least active to put a Leg or a Foot into the Earth.
Yea, our Mode of Baptism seems more like to a Burial, than that of Plunging;
For the throwing of Water on the Person is more like to the throwing of Earth
upon the Dead. Some have apprehended a little Weight in this Consideration.
Among the Antip^edebaptist Brethren, the Person to be Baptized goes into the
Water himself, to a considerable Depth, so that the Administrator does not
baptize all that Part of the Body which the Person to be baptized carried into
the Water himself. Now no Man does baptize himself; No Action of the Person to
be baptized, is any Part of the Baptism. It follows, that the Washing of the
Body, but in Part, may be sufficient for the sacred Baptism. And, if the
Washing of the Body but in Part, may be sufficient for the sacred Baptism, then
the Washing of the Face, that Nobler and Proper Part, may be sufficient.

It is true; Baptism was often administered in the Primitive Churches by
Dipping; Yet it was not seldom administered by Sprinkling; And Cyprian
particularly argues very much for the Sufficiency and Validity of such a
Baptism.

It may be added, There having been some Insinuations made unto the World, as
if the Streets here were crowded with Unbaptized People, because the Churches
have not such Terms of Initiation here, as are practiced in other Protestant
Churches, it is to be now declared, that this is a most unaccountable Calumny;
for it is well known there is not one Person in all the Country free from a
scandalous and notorious disqualifying Ignorance and Imp^ety, but what may
repair to some Hundred Ministers in these Colonies and be Baptized.

ARTICLE V. The Administration of the Holy Supper.
. 1. THE SUPPER of the Lord is not usually administered in the Churches of
New England, but unto such as appear somewhat Confirmed in the Dispositions and
Resolutions of Christianity. They consider, That the Churches of our Lord in
all Ages, and the greatest Lights in the Churches both Ancient and Modern
(except such as have admitted Infants to the Eucharist) have concurred in this
Principle, That Baptism is of larger Extent, than the Supper of the Lord, and
that many within the Visible Church may have the former for their Children,
while they Themselves yet want some Actual Fitness for the latter. It appears
that the Baptized of old were Confirmed, before they might partake of the Holy
Supper; and none was a TELEIOS, or Person in full Communion among some of the
Primitive Churches, until he had given some Evidence of his being Sanctified by
the Holy Spirit. Indeed it might not be altogether as it should be, but so it
was, if we be not much mistaken in our Church History; it was no rare thing
that not All, it may be not Half, it may be not one Third of them who made a
Profession of the Truth, and attended upon the Preaching of the Gospel (many of
whom also underwent Martyrdom itself) were admitted as complete Members of the
Church, into all Parts of its Communion; And there were sometimes but little
Churches in Places that had many Christians in them.

The Churches of New England will not be censured for a Novelty of their
Discipline, in their Endeavor to have their Communion as it was in Justin
Martyr's Time, when the Supper was administered unto no Man, but one that was
bapti^ed, and one who Believed the Doctrines of Christianity, and IOYNTI OS O
PISTOS PAPEDOKEN. One who lived according to the Laws of our SAVIOR.

Since the Reformation, it is well known, that the most eminent Reformers, not
only in their Doctrine asserted, but also in their Practice attempted, a
stricter Selection of those that should be admitted unto the Lord's Supper,
when they have been larger in the point of Baptism; and they went upon this
Principle, That not all the baptized Christians, but such as might be reputed
able and careful to Examine themselves, and discern the Lord's Body, are to be
received unto the Supper of the Lord.

It would fill many Pages, to recite the many Passages, in the Writings of the
Reformers, which countenance the Churches of New England in their Way of a
stricter Selection. Two shall supersede all the Rest; The One shall be of a
Lutheran. It Is Gerhard, who says, That not all Christians are to be admitted to
the Holy Supper, but according to ' Paul's Rule, they that Examine themselves,
discern the Lord's Body and show forth the Lord's Death: All those therefore
are excluded, who either will not, or cannot Examine themselves. The other
shall be of a Calvinist; Beza it is, who says, That no one is to be admitted
unto the Lord's Supper, except he has one way or other, so given an Account of
his Faith, as that the Pastor may probably gather, not only that he was born in
the Church, but that he is indeed a Christian. And there are many Passages in
the Confessions of the Protestant Churches abroad, which declare for a special
Selection of those whom they admit unto the Table of the Lord. The Churches of
New England, have hitherto been thus persuaded; And as the famous Ursinus and
Paraeus have taught them to make this Distinction; Great is the Difference
between Baptism and the Supper; For Baptism is a Sacrament of Entrance, and
Reception into the Church; but the Supper is a Sacrament of continuance in the
Church, or a Confirmation of the Reception made before; And Regeneration by the
Holy Spirit and Faith, or an Inclination unto Faith and Repentance suffices
unto Baptism; but in the Supper, it required that they show forth the Lord's
Death, and Examine themselves, whether they have Faith and Repentance; Thus a
famous Divine of their own, Mr. Thomas Hooker, has thus expressed their Sense;
Baptism is the Entrance into Christ's Family; There is much more to be looked
at, to make a Person capable of the Supper of the Lord; A Man must be able to
Examine himself; He must not only have Grace, but growth of Grace, -- so much
-- as to search his own Heart; and he must be able to Discern the Lord's Body.
If it should be imagined, That I do the part of an Advocate, rather than of an
Historian, in this Paragraph, Satisfaction may be had from Reading the Fourth
of the Seven famous Propositions, concluded by a Synod of our Churches; Adult
Persons are not therefore to be admitted into full Communion, merely because
they are and continue Members, [ being Baptized in their Infancy] without such
further Qualifications as the Word of GOD requires thereunto. And from Reading
the large Defense thereof composed by Mr. Richard Mother and Mr. Jonathan
Mitchel, and approved by no small Assembly of the New English Ministers.

And yet, it must be acknowledged, that a great Part of our Pastors, even of
those who can Baptize upon the Qualifications of the Synod, own, they cannot see
why any Adult Person should be received into the Covenant of GOD and of Grace,
to obtain Baptism for themselves or theirs, of whom they cannot say, They shall
immediately be welcome to the Table of the Lord, if they desire it; and that it
must be owing unto their own declining an immediate Approach unto the Holy and
Aweful Table, if it be denied unto them. All turns upon a Visible Conversion to
serious PIETY.

. 2. Accordingly, the Usages of these American Churches, may be truly reported
in the Words used by Origin concerning the Primitive; After those that are
converted, make such Proficiency that they appear to be sanctified by the
Divine Word, and unto the utmost of their Power live in a better Manner, then
at length we call them to our Mysteries. Or in those Words with which that
Father Vindicates those Churches from the Reproaches of Celsus, about the
Qualification of their Communicants; The Christians do PPOASANIEIN TASPSYAS
exquisitely search the Souls of their Hearers, in order to their Admission to
full Communion.

Indeed there is a Variety both of Judgment and Practice in the Churches of
New England upon this Matter; However it produces no troublesome Variance or
Contention among them.

Some eminent Pastors (and some of their Churches) are of the Apprehension;
That the Terms of Communion are an Ordinance of Christ, and must have a Word of
Institution to Warrant them. And according to the Gospel, Orthodoxy in the
Profession of the Truths of the Christian Religion, under which is comprised a
Knowledge of these Truths, and this attended with a Conversation that becomes
the Gospel of Christ, is that which is the Ground of reputing them to be
Believers, and Receiving them into our Fellowship; and whatsoever more is
required as a Test, is Supra Statutum. Yet there are some things, which though
not regularly Required, may without Sin be Complied withal.

Others apprehend, That nothing short of a Probable and Credible Profession of
a Justifying Faith, qualifies for the Eucharist; where the Benefits of that
Faith are sealed unto us: And, That in many a Man, of a Conversation free from
Vice in the Opinion of the Neighbors, a good Examination may render it not
probable and credible unto a Rational Charity, that he has yet attained unto a
Justifying Faith. And, that therefore the Candidates of the Communion should be
Examined, not only about their Knowledge, and their Belief, and a Conversation
free from Scandal, but also about their Experimental Piety. Because it appears
unto them the Law of Christ, That Communicants at the Table of the Lord, should
be such as can and will Examine themselves; The Pastors thus persuaded, that
they may do the part of Porters to the House of GOD, Examine those that seek
Admission into the Particular Churches, and would so have the Holy Table always
free to them, Whether they have Examined themselves; and what they find or hope
upon their Self-Examination? Indeed the Discipline of the Churches has (in
their Platform) Charirably provided, That the weakest Measure of Faith is to be
accepted, in those that Desire to be admitted into the Church; such Charity and
Tenderness is to be used, as the weakest Christian if sincere, may not be
excluded, or discouraged: Severity of Examination is to be avoided. According
to this, that many of those who in their Adult Age, are admitted unto Baptism,
do not presently also come unto the Lord's Supper, it seems owing rather to
their own choosing to stay till they are more satisfied in their Qualifications,
than from the Churches refusing to admit them, should they desire it.

But the Pastor now demands a serious and sensible Answer to some such
Questions as these.

What Education had you in your Younger Years? And (if Religious) what Effect
had this Education?

Have you been thoroughly awakened ever to see the Miserable Condition, which
by your Departure from GOD, you are fallen into?

And, What has been your Course, where your Flight, for Help under these
Awakenings?

What are the Blessings for which you repair to your Admirable SAVIOR?

Which Way do you hope to be Justified before the Glorious GOD?

What is the Sanctity, the Purity, the Piety, which will always be the
Character, of the Justified Believer? And what is it You Desire and Resolve,
concerning a Life of Piety?

Is every Sin Grievous and Odious to you? And is there no known Sin wherein you
indulge your self?

Do you in a Course of Obedience unto GOD, endeavor to express a Respect unto
all His Commandments?

Can you Remember any special Word of GOD, by which you have been sensibly
quickened in Living to Him?

At the Table of the Lord, whereto you would now make your Approaches, what are
the Outward Elements and Actions used there? And what is it that they signify?

What are the Preparations and the Dispositions, that you would come to the
Table of the Lord withal.

What are the Considerations that now move you to ask an Admission to the Table
of the Lord?

In the Renowned Churches of Bohemia, there was before every Celebration of the
Communion, an Examen Conscientiarum, wherein the Pastor examined the People,
How they profited by the Means of Grace? And it is credibly Affirmed, That
Luther, when he saw the Discipline of those Churches declared, Confitebatur
dolorem suum, quod ab ipsis reflorescentis Evangelii primordiis, quosvis absque
Discrimine ad Coenam Dominicam admisisset, quodque Disciplinam Fratrum
Disciplinae similem apud suos non Constituisser.
He was very sorry that the other Churches of the Reformation had been so
Remiss in Admissions to the Communion. But in the Churches of New England, the
Pastors do, only once for all, Examine the Spirits of the People, with
pertinent Questions, before they Grant them an Admission into the State of
Communicants. And herein they have not been very far from the Opinion of
Chrysostom, who explaining, Holy Things for Holy Men; (A Sentence often made
Use of in the Primitive Churches) has these Words, If any one be not Holy, let
him have no Access. And freedom from Wickedness does not make one Holy, but the
Presence of the Spirit, and plenty of Good Works. I would have them not only
free from Dirt, but also to be White, and Fair, and Beautiful.

In very many of the Churches, the Answers of the Examined Person to some such
Questions as those, are taken in Writing by the Pastor from the Mouth of the
Person; [or a Brief Relation of the Desires to live unto GOD which are now
working in hi^. Heart, and of the Means and Ways wherewith such Desires have
been enkindled in him;] or else it is brought ready written, by the Candidate of
the Communion; and unto it there is added, either a Confession of Faith, of the
Persons own composing, or a briefer Intimation of what publicly received
Confession or Catechism, he chooses to acknowledge as containing the Principles
of Religion, he would adhere unto. This Instrument the Pastor communicates unto
Church, on some Convenient Opportunities: But sometimes he reports to the
Brethren the Minutes of the Satisfaction he has received from the Person, who
is now offered unto the Communion, without the Formality of an Address in the
Name of the Person unto them, only saying, On my Inquiry he informs me so and
so. It Is thus especially, when some Godly Scotchmen, who have scrupled the
Modes of the New English Relations, have asked an Admission to the Communion.
The Circumstances of Time, and Place, and Publickness for these Matters, in the
several Churches are very Various; and left unto their own Discretion. And
there is now generally a great Relaxation of several Severities, in the Modes
of these Matters, formerly required in some of the Churches. For indeed, on
this Occasion one may use the Words of the Roman Historian, Nocuit antiquus
Rigor, et Nimia Severitas, cui jam non pares sumus.

. 3. The Apprehension that appears to govern the Churches of New England, is,
That be a Church State never so specious, it will be but a Dead Carcass in the
Eyes of the Everliving GOD, yea, the Holy One will say, Bury it out of my
Sight, if there be not real and vital Piety animating of it. The Church is not
the King's Daughter, nor is there any true Glory belonging to her, if she be
not all Glorious within, by an heavenly Piety Disposing and Adorning of her;
The Piety, which lies in living to GOD, and by the Faith of the Son of GOD, and
paying the constant Homage of our Souls unto Him, and Loving our Neighbor, and
expressing that Love to the Life, in a continual Endeavor to do as we would be
done unto. As this is the truest and only Wisdom, so it is the truest and only
Basis for an Union in the Churches of GOD. Accordingly it is the Design of these
Churches, to make the Terms of Communion run as Parallel as may be with the
Terms of Salvation; and exclude none from their sacred Fellowship, who have
truly their Fellowship with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ; and
receive all that our SAVIOR will Receive unto the Glory of GOD. If any of the
Churches insist on any little Modalities in their Admissions, they are all with
an Eye the necessary Qualifications of the most Substantial PIETY; and it is to
be hoped, they will be softened and ordered, and on Occasions Varied
accordingly.

A Charitable Consideration of nothing but PIETY in admitting to Evangelical
Privileges, is a Glory that the Churches of New England, would lay claim unto;
Churches of which one of their Pastors once gave this Account unto his
Correspondents in the Lower Saxony; Quod se nullis Communionis Conditionibus,
nisiquae sint et Unionis cum Christo, Aeternaeque Salutis Conditiones,
astringant. Cunctos ad Dei Gloriam a Christo admissos, ad sacram cum ipsis
Eucharistiam, et ad omnia Ecclesiastica Privilegia fatentur admittendos.
Calvinistae sunt qui Lutherranos; Presbyteriani qui Episcopales; Poedobaptistae
qui Antipaedobaptistas, modo sincera in illis Pietas resplendeat, et si
manifesto Deum timeant, Justitiamque operentur, benignissime amplexantur.

. 4. Before the Persons who have thus privately addressed the Pastor for
Admission into the Church, are publicly admitted, he propounds their Names
unto the Congregation, with an Intimation of what they have desired. He takes
his Time to Read or Tell unto the Church, (and sometimes as many of the mixed
Assembly as please, are allowed also to stay,) what he judges proper of the
Examination, which has been taken of their Pious Dispositions or Experiences;
Adding, that he has received an Encouraging Testimony of their Conversation.

The Candidates of the Communion, at the proper time for it, standing forth,
now the Pastor calls upon the Brethren of the Church, to signify their Consent
unto the Admission of these Persons unto their Communion, by lifting up their
Hands; [For in all these Points, their Church Government is not unlike the
Government reported by Plato to have been sometimes in Athens, which Grotius
also tells us was the Government of the Primitive Churches; APISTOKPATIA ETA
EYDOKIAS TOY PLTHOYS. An Aristocracy ordering all things with the good liking
of the People.

This being signified, the Pastor then applies himself unto the Candidates,
after some such Manner of this.

In the Fear of GOD, you are now to attend unto His most Gracious COVENANT; and
may you by the Help of His Grace, give a most hearty Consent unto it.

You do now sincerely and very solemnly give up your selves unto the Glorious
GOD, who is the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and receive Him as
your GOD and Portion; Desiring to live unto Him. You do give up your selves
unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, who is GOD manifest in Flesh, as unto the Head of
His Chosen People, and receive Him as made of GOD unto you, Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Holiness, and Redemption. You do likewise give your selves
unto this Church of His; engaging with His Help, in the Communion thereof, to
attend upon the Ordinances of the Gospel, while your Opportunities to be
thereby Edified in your most Holy Faith shall here be continued unto you.

They by a proper Action showing their Consent hereunto; he adds;

We then the Church of our SAVIOR in this Place, do receive you into our
sacred Fellowship, and promise that by His Assistence, we will treat you with
such Affection and Watchfulness, as your sacred Relation unto us now calls
for. This we do, imploring of our Lord, that both we and you, may obtain Mercy
to be faithful in His Covenant, and Glorify Him with the Holiness that becomes
his House forever.

A brief Prayer, wherein Thanks are given for the Gospel and the Success of it,
and a Blessing is implored on the Church, and on those who now ask to be added
thereto, and on others that may ask to be added, has been thought proper on
these Occasions: Either at the Time of their Admission; or at the Time when
their Qualifications for it, are exhibited.

The Pastor having thus propounded the Covenant unto the Candidates, oftentimes
makes a short Monitory Speech unto them; and perhaps recommends to them a
Passage of the Divine Oracles, which he would have them all their Days to think
upon.

The Persons are after this reputed Brethren of the Church, capable of
Occasional Communion with any other also, wherever they may see Occasion to
desire it.

And they who from the State of Disciples, thus pass into the State of
Brethren, are the only Persons for whose formal Votes, the Pastors do call in
managing any Part of the Ecclesiastical Discipline.

I know not whether it will do the Part of an Effectual Apology, for the
strictness of these Doings in the Churches of New England: But I will here
observe, That it has been a Proposal made by some Conformable Divines, in the
Church of England; Would it not very much conduce unto the Glory of GOD, and
the Edification of the People in their most Holy Faith, if every Person
Baptized into the Christian Faith should be obliged, when he comes unto Years
Discretion, to appear in the Public Congregation, there to make a Confession of
his Faith, and recognize his Primitive Engagement; and that the Minister should
recommend the Person unto the Grace of GOD, that he may be established, and
persevere, and continue for ever? Yea, there have lately been in the City of
London, many Religious Societies, living in Conformity to the Rites of the
Church of England, whereof the Relater says; It is required of such as join to
them, that they give the Society a solemn Account of their Sense of Spiritual
Things, with the real Motives, which lead them to this Undertaking, and what
they seriously Purpose as to their future Life. This is many times done in
Writing, -- penned with such an honest, affectionate, and undisguised Style,
with such pious and sensible Expressions, and in so modest and humble a Manner,
that they would mightily affect any pious Person to read them, and move him to
break forth into Pathetic Praises to GOD, who has given such Grace to Young Men
in so degenerate an Age. These Religious Societies have strict Orders among
them, relating to a holy Life, and an Exemplary strictness of Conversation; To
which every Member, after Mature Deliberation subscribes his Name, with his
Resolutions to live up unto them. The Churches of New England will not
certainly be blamed After this!

. 5. We are not Insensible, That in the Fourth and Fifth Ages of the Primitive
Christianity, it was counted an heinous Crime, to publish the Prayers and Rites
used in the Sacraments; Yea, they counted it a sort of Sacrilege, and worthy,
Prolixiori Anathemate. Nor did they think, as Basil intimates, That they could
be called Mysteries, if they were Exposed unto common and vulgar Notice. None
of the AYTOI might be present at these Devotions; They secluded the Catechumens
from them; They declined all Recital of them in their Sermons to a Promiscuous
Auditory, cutting off with such an Aposiopesis, as, nerunt Fideles. To write
them, was reckoned unlawful, They were Mysteria Chartis non Committenda; They
were APPTA, and AGPAPHA, Nevertheless, I would now pass on, boldly and freely
to describe the ESOTEPIKA, the most Sacred, and most Secret, of the
Transactions in the Churches of New England; Believing that the Christians of
old in their great Reservations, too much accommodated themselves unto the
Pagans; among whom (as Justin tells us) Mysteria enunciasse, was a grievous
Crime; and some tell us of those who died for it.

The Churches, like the Primitive, have no Times universally stated for their
Celebration of the Eucharist. Some have it once in Four Weeks, some in Six,
some in Eight, and some, the first Lord's Day in every Calendar Month; and some
the last: Some in the close of the Afternoon: but most in the close of the
Forenoon. And the Pastors likewise reserve to themselves a Liberty of Altering
the Times as they judge fit upon Emergencies.

The Churches do generally see no Necessity of taking the Evening for the only
Time of Celebrating the Lord's Supper. For though it be called by the Name of
DEIPNON, it is well known, that in the Ancient Greek Authors, as Ancient as
Homer himself, the Word is used for a Dinner, for a Breakfast, for any Eating,
as well as for a Supper. And Coena, which is the Term that Answers it in Latin,
signifies any Eating in Common. Yea, the English Word Supper does not
necessarily imply Night-Eating; The last Meal in the Day is a Supper, though it
be several Hours before Night; and the Word being derived from SOPPE (which is
Bread that is dipped in some Liquid thing) the Diet rather than the Season of
Eating, is therein intimated. Wherefore the Churches do generally count
themselves obliged no more to the Time of Night for the Lord's Supper, than to
the Place of an Upper Chamber for it, or the Number Twelve of the Communicants.

Thus, though Tertullian mentions the Celebration of the Lord's Supper, as
being Tempore Victus, or at Supper-time; From which time of their Assembling,
the Heathen probably took Occasion to accuse them of putting out their Lights,
and then doing unknown Deeds of Darkness; yet the same Tertullian mentions the
Celebration of the Sacrament also Antelucanis Caetibus, or in the Morning
before break of Day; and the Pagan Pliny confirms the Report. Cyprian likewise
mentions the Administration of it, both in the Evening and the Morning. It
seems every Church then did, in this Matter, what best suited their own
particular Circumstances.

When the LORD's SUPPER is to be administered, the Pastor gives Notice of it a
Week before hand. And when the Lord's Day for it arrives, he usually
accomodates the solemn Occasion before him, with a Sermon upon some agreeable
Doctrine of the Gospel. In most Places there are held private Meetings of the
Christians, on some Day of the Week, Preparatory to the Communion; and it is a
frequent thing for the Pastor to be present at some or other of them; or else
perhaps to hold a Public Lecture. But now on the Lord's Day, the Ordinary
Exercises being finished, the Rest of the Assembly are dismissed, except any
devout Persons, who stay scattered here and there, at some Distance from the
Communicants, to be Spectators of the Mysteries. The Communicants now seating
themselves together in the Body of the Meeting House, the Pastor descends from
the Pulpit unto the Table, which now stands furnished with the Sacramental
Elements, before the Seat, usually designed for the Deacons, in the Sight of
all the Communicants, and the Deacons do stand waiting before it.

The Pastor having first mentioned the Names of the Persons (if there be any
such) belonging to other Churches, who request a Part in the present Communion,
he then addresses himself with all possible Solemnity, unto the Celebration.

In some Churches, there is first, as there was in some of the Primitive, a
Solita Praedicatio, or a Speech only unto the Communicants, to prepare them for
the Action: But this is not in all.

With a short Passage equivalent unto the Sursum Corda of the Ancients, [which,
by the Way, confutes Transubstantiation] he bespeaks their Attention. But then,
either he reads the whole Paragraph, Luke XXII. 19, 20. Or, 1 Cor. XI. 23, 24,
25, 26. Or else, Makes the Recitation by Parcels. First, he says, Our Lord
JESUS CHRIST in the Night wherein he was betrayed, took BREAD. Upon so saying
he touches with his Hand the Loaves of Bread in the Dishes, (or takes the
Dishes toward him) now before him, uncovered, where they were aforehand
fitted, easily to be broken in Pieces.

He adds; And HE BLESSED it; -- whereupon the Communicants now standing up, he
now pours out a Prayer before the Lord, filled with the Acknowledgements of
the Evangelical Truths, which this Institution invites us to think upon; and
Supplications for the Divine Blessing, upon that Part of the Sacrament, now
before them, and upon themselves in the Receiving of it. I may describe the
Prayer in the Words of Justin Martyr; The Minister gives Praise and Glory to
the Lord of all, through the Son and the Holy Spirit; and in a large Manner
renders particular Thanks for the present Mercies; who when he has ended his
Prayers and Praises, the People say, Amen.

The Prayer being finished, the Communicants again sit down, and the Pastor
says, Our Lord JESUS CHRIST having Blessed the Bread, He BROKE it. Whereupon he
proceeds to the Breaking of the Bread, in the View of the Communicants, who for
the most Part are silently left unto their own Meditations, during this Action;
though some of the Pastors Excite and Assist the Meditations of the People, by
now and then uttering a Sentence of the sacred Scriptures, or of their own
Pathetic Thoughts, unto them.

When the Bread is all Broken into convenient Parcels, he says to this Effect:
Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, having broken the Bread, He GAVE IT unto His Disciples,
saying, This is my Body which is broken for you, take it, and eat of it, and do
it in Remembrance of me. Wherefore in the Name of that Glorious Lord, I now
invite you, to TAKE, and EAT hereof; and to do it in Remembrance of Him. So, He
himself Takes and Eats of this Bread: But as he takes it himself, he gives the
Dishes unto the Deacons, by whose Help they are handed about among the
Communicants, until they do all, sitting in a Devout Manner [In the Primitive
Times, Reader, we are very certain, they did not use to do it, Kneeling!] Take
and Eat thereof. In Tertullian's Time and Place the Communicants did not
receive the Elements, De aliorum Manu quam Praesidentium: But in the Churches
of New England they do as in Justin Martyr's; DIAKONOI DIDOASIN. The Deacons
give the Consecrated Bread and Wine to those that are present.

The Deacons returning with the Remainders, the Pastor stands up, and Enquires,
Whether any to whom that Bread of the Lord, and of Life, should have been
given, have not received it? If a Sign of any such be given, it is carried unto
them. And when all are served, the Deacons do then sit down and partake of
their Portion also.

And here one Remark more may be inserted. In the Primitive Churches, the
Deacons did mostly with their own Hands give the Bread unto each of the
Communicants. Only in the Church of Alexandria, I find it insinuated by Clemens
Alexandrinus, that each of the Communicants there took the Bread himself out of
the Plate when it was consecrated. And the Churches of New England are in This,
like that of Alexandria.

The Pastor then rising, takes a Cup of the Wine that is now in the Flagons and
the Tankards on the Holy Table; and says, Our Lord JESUS CHRIST after the same
Manner TOOK THE CUP; adding -- And He GAVE THANKS.

The Communicants thereupon again standing up; he pours out a Prayer, of the
like Importance, the like Tendency, with the former. Indeed, in the Primitive
Churches, there was usually but one long Prayer before the Distribution of the
Elements; which also were both of 'em at once consecrated. But in the Churches
of New England, so far as I am informed, the Pastor makes Two Prayers, a first
before the Distribution of the Bread, and then a second before the Distribution
of the Wine in the Eucharist.

Then filling out the Wine from the Flagons into the Cups, [Though the Pouring
out of the Wine is not properly one of the Sacramental Actions, and if there
stand any Tankards on the Table ready filled, it is accordingly omitted there;]
he proceeds to speak unto this Effect, Our Lord JESUS CHRIST hereupon GAVE the
CUP to His Disciples, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which
is shed for you and for many for the Remission of Sins; TAKE it, and all you
DRINK of it, and do it in Remembrance of me. Wherefore in the Name of that most
Gracious Lord, I invite you to TAKE and DRINK hereof, and to do it in
Remembrance of Him. So he himself Takes and Drinks of the Wine, and the Deacons
do Dispense and Disperse the Cups among the Communicants; who still using the
Table Posture of sitting, do in a devout Manner Take and Drink thereof. The
Deacons return with their emptied Cups unto the Pastor, who again fills them,
till there be no more Occasion. And when all seem to be served he inquires,
Whether any to whom that Cup of the Lord, and of Blessing, hen belonged, had
been omitted in the Dispensation? -- The Deacons then sit down and partake as
before.

A Psalm chose (and in some Places read) by the Pastor, is hereupon Sung by the
Communicants. This in the Primitive Churches was usually done before the last
Prayer. Some of ours do it after.

The Pastor now (as Tertullian says, Oration Convivium dirimit) passes on to a
third Prayer; consisting of the most Raised Thanksgiving to GOD, and Assurance
of the Blessings in the New Covenant, sealed by this Ordinance. And as
Chrysostom tells us, one had need have the PAPPSIA, the Confidence, the
Liberty, and the Enlargements of a Moses or Elias, to Pray as they did use to
do in the Primitive Times at the Eucharist; It may now be said, That some of
the Pastors often pray with very much of the Spirit of a Moses, or an Elias, on
these Eucharistical Occasions. Or, the same Account may be given of them, that
Nazianzen gives of the Prayers made by his Venerable Father in the Celebrating
of the Eucharist; They have been made, PAPA TOY AGIOY PNEYATOS, by the Holy
Spirit of GOD.

Many of the Churches, every time the Eucharist is administered, but some once a
Quarter, some once a Year, have what Justin Martyr calls in the Primitive
Churches, TA SYLLELOENA, and what Tertullian calls Deposita Pietatis; their
Contributions, wherein they gather Money to relieve the Poor, as well as to
defray the Charges of Eucharist. What was gathered in the Primitive Churches
was committed unto the Pastors, to relieve Widows, and Orphans, and Prisoners,
and Strangers, and in a Word, All that were in Want. In the New-English it is
committed unto the Deacons.

This done, the Pastor pronouncing a Blessing dismisses the Assembly.

. 6. It being a main Scope of the Lord's Supper to be a Sign and Seal of that
Mystery, The Communion of Saints; wherein, as many Grains make but one Loaf of
Bread, and many Drops make but one Cup of Wine, so, many Saints make but one
Church; The Churches of New England judge it not so proper for one or two, by a
Bed side, or the like, to celebrate this Ordinance: But choose rather to say,
with Cyprian, Sacramenti Veritatem Fraternitate omni present celebramus; The
whole Fraternity come together for it. And in laying aside the private
Celebration of the Eucharist, they have not only the Writings of such
Reformers, as Musculus, and Bullinger, and Beza, and Danaeus, and Aretius, and
other Great Names, but also the Custom of the French, the Dutch, the Scotch,
and the purest Churches of the Reformation, to encourage them. Nor yet would
they have reckoned this enough, if the Scriptures had not Intimated, that there
must be a Synaxis, an Assembly, of a Church coming together for the Purpose;
and enough to be called, Many. Wherefore the Churches of New England agree to the
Advice of the Excellent Alting; Let the Well often Appoach unto the Supper of
the Lord, and let the Sick recall to mind what they formerly enjoyed in such
Approaches: Contenting themselves with a Spiritual Communion; according to that
of Austin, CREED ET MANDUCASTI.

ARTICLE VI. The Pastoral Care Exercised in the more PRIVATE SERVICES of it.
. 1. A Pastor being one that is to watch for the Souls of his Flock, as one
that is to give an Account, there are Private as well as Public Services
expected from him; whereof the first and not the least, is that of CATECHIZING.

The Work of a Catechist was often a Distinct Office, in the Primitive
Churches: But it is reckoned incumbent for the most Part upon every Pastor in
the New English: And there is much Variety used in the Discharge of it.

Formerly, There were several Divines in these Churches (it were easy to reckon
more than a Decemvirate of them) who, like Cyril, and some others of the
Fathers, composed and published Catechisms of their own, which were designed
more peculiarly for the Edification of the particular People, with whom they
were travailing.

There is not above one or two of those, used at this Day. That which is most
so, is the Milk for Babes, which many of our Children have their Instruction
begun withal. But the Catechism which now generally obtains is that of the
Assembly of Divines, (prepared originally by a Triumvirate never to be
forgotten, Dr. Arrowsmith, Dr. Tuckney, and Mr. Newcomen,) whereof the general
Opinion, is, That no Man's Reproach can lessen, and no Man's Applause can
heighten, the Reputation that belongs unto it. Albeit there are those also, who
even in this find some Deficiencies, and some Redundancies.

By some of the Pastors, the Work of Catechizing, and the Task of a Pantaenus,
or an Origin, has been done, with a special Aim and Hope to attend the Great
and Good Preservative of the Churches, which has of old been known by the Name
of, CONFIRMATION; That is to say, when the Children Baptized in the Churches
come to be of Age, the Pastors do send for them, and Examine them discreetly
and faithfully, concerning their Improvement in Knowledge, and Conversion to
GOD, and Resolutions for a Life of PIETY, and Inclinations to the Remembering
and Renewing of their Baptismal Covenant. Those in whom there are found the
Agreeable Symptoms of a Regenerate Mind, are advised immediately to apply
themselves for a CONFIRMATION of their Church Membership, in a full Communion
with the Churches. Those who are found of a more discouraging and undesireable
Character, have suitable Admonitions bestowed upon them; Until they have
hearkened whereunto, they may not expect the Privileges of Adult Members in
the Churches of the Lord. But other Pastors have yet their own Methods.

Some of the Pastors do on the Lord's Day, in the Afternoons, before the
Sermon, make the Young People publicly to Answer the Catechism.

Others of the Pastors do on some Weekdays, publicly hear their Young People
answer to the Catechism. And then they make a short Sermon, upon one of the
Questions. Or, perhaps upon some Text, for the Animation of Early Piety.

There are yet others who send for the Young People to their Houses, numbering
and sorting of them as they think fit; and then, when they have Answered the
Catechism, there are Pastoral and Personal Admonitions given unto them, to
Remember their CREATOR in the Days of their Youth.

Some of the Pastors choose to do this Part of their Office after the Pauline
way, To teach from House to House. And perhaps no way more significant! The
Pastor may send aforehand unto such Families as he intends, an Intimation that
he intends at such a Time to Visit them: And coming to the Families, he assays
with as decent and as pungent Addresses as he is able, to treat each Person
particularly about their Everlasting Interests. And unto the Young People, he
puts Questions of the Catechism, from the Answers whereof he makes as lively
Applications unto them as he can, for the Engaging of them in the Service of
the Lord. No doubt, he seldom leaves a Family, without many Tears falling from
Souls, desirous to Fear the Name of GOD.

Thus the Pastors do sometimes Imitate the Example of Chrysostom, of whom we
find, That he would Inculcate Things on his People, with private
Communications. And of Cyprian, who would Go to every one that was committed to
his Care, and Exhort them, according to the Ministry of the Lord, and of His
Gospel: And of Austin, whose Private Labors to instruct^ his Flock are
celebrated by Posidonius. They are sensible of what is Urged by Prosper, That
Bishops are called Watchmen, because they should Watch the Actions of all Men,
and with an Aim of Religious Curiosity spy out, how every one lives, with his
Household in his House: What good Men they approve, they are to Confirm, by
Honoring them; whom they observe to be Vicious, they are to Amend, by
Reproving them.

. 2. The VISITATION OF THE SICK, (and so, of the Afflicted) is a Work for which
there are particular Officers, Men of Piety, and Gravity, and Experience,
appointed in some Churches of the Reformation. And others as well as the Great
Voetius, make a fair Apology for it.

But in the Churches of New England, that Work is incumbent on the Pastors, and
accounted no little Part of the Pastoral Care.

In other Afflictions (as the Loss of Desirable Relatives, or singular
Temptations, and Exercises) the Pastors do Visit their People, and suit their
Discourses unto the Occasions; and perhaps put suitable Books of Piety into
their Hands. And then they usually Pray with them, that they may carry it well
under their Afflictions, and that the Holy Ends thereof, may be obtained upon
them. Thus particularly they make the Heart of the Widow to sing with the Joys
of Piety.

But the SICK are a special and frequent Object of the Pastoral Care. The
Pastors, when the Sick Person sends for them (and often without their sending,
and though they forget their Duty, to call for the Elders) have a very serious,
and sometimes a very difficult Work to do. If the Sick be capable of Receiving
Instruction, the Pastors now set before him, in lively Terms, the Miserable
State which by Sin, both Original and Actual he is fallen into: and seeing him
affected with a Sense of his Misery, they then as livelily propose to him the
Remedy in a Great SAVIOR provided for him. In the Directories prepared many
Ages ago, for the Visitation of the Sick, it was directed that the Sick Person
should say, O my GOD, I now place the Death of my Lord JESUS CHRIST between
Thee and my Sins: Thus our Pastors do assist the Sick Person, all they can, to
place his Faith in the Sacrifice, and the Righteousness of a Glorious CHRIST,
for Deliverance from Eternal Death, as well as Temporal. They Tender the
Covenant of Grace to him in the several Articles of it, and obtain his Explicit
Consent unto them all. They repeat the Calls of the Gospel to him, and they
obtain such Answers thereunto, as to make it hopeful that they are become
Effectual. They set before him the very great and precious Promises of GOD unto
returning Sinners, and especially such Words of a Merciful SAVIOR as that
[worth a Thousand Worlds!] Himthat comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.
They go through a Process of Repentance with him; Urging him to look upon the
Sins of his Heart and Life with a due Contrition for them; to make the Flight
of a Distressed Soul unto the Open Fountain for the Forgiveness of them; and
therewithal to resign up his Mind unto the Holy Spirit, that he may be made a
new Creature, and be brought into the Life of GOD. And that Repentance may have
its perfect Work (if they apprehend Occasion for it) they exhort him, That if
he have wronged any Neighbor either in his Estate or his Esteem, he would now
make him all possible Reparation; Or, That if he has had any Companions in
Impicty, he would now give his faithful Warnings and Rebukes unto them. If the
Patient has been of Conspicuous Piety, they comfort him with the best Views
they can give him of the Heavenly World, of which he is now upon the Borders,
and of the Rest which remains for the People of GOD. Finally, A Profound
Resignation to the Will of GOD, is recommended as what He is well pleased
withal.

When these things are done, as far as there is Opportunity for them, the
Pastors proceed unto their Prayers, wherein such Purposes as these are
Considered and Prosecuted.

The Glorious GOD, who is the Father of Mercies, and our most Merciful Father
in our Lord JESUS CHRIST, is acknowledged as commanding us to Love one another,
and with a Spirit of Love to Pray for one another.

The Providence of GOD our Maker, is acknowledged as ordering the Condition of
the Sick Person, and as performing the Thing that is appointed for us, in all
Occurrences.

GOD is adored as Wounding, and as Healing, as Killing, and as Quickening, and
as the Sovereign GOD before whom we are as the Clay before the Potter.

-- Adored as a Righteous GOD, unto whose Justice we have by our Sins sorfeited
our Lives, and all the Comforts of them.

-- Adored as a Gracious GOD, and one ready to pardon; and having in the
Mediation of the Great SAVIOR provided an admirable Way sor His Pardoning
Mercy to reach unto us.

The Application of this Mercy, with the Blood in which it flows down, unto the
Soul of the Sick Person, is then implored. And it is therefore asked, that he
may with a Repenting Soul, bewail all the Errors of his Life; all his
Forgetfulness of GOD, and of the Errand which GOD sent him into the World upon;
all his Violations of the Divine Laws, and of his own Vows; all his Neglect of
the Great Salvation; all his Misimprovements under Means of Good; all his
Misbehaviours in all Conditions, and all Relations, and all Employments; and
above all that he may lay to Heart the Fountain of Sin in his Heart, which he
brought into the World with him.

It is hereupon asked, That with a lively Faith, he may be helped from above to
make the Flight of a Distressed Soul, unto the Blood which Cleanses from all
Sin, and plead the Sacrifice of our Great SAVIOR for His Atonement, and make
the Righteousness of our Great SAVIOR his only Plea for his Acceptance with
GOD. But that he may be made willing at the same Time to submit unto the Spirit
of Grace, and all His Gracious Operations; and that he may accordingly have the
Experience thereof, quickening him to Turn and Live unto GOD; and that the
Sanctifying Work of the Holy Spirit upon his Mind, may prove a Real, Thorough,
Saving Work, and an Hope that will not make ashamed; and that the present
Circumstances of the Sick Person may contribute unto it.

It is then prayed, That his Health may be restored, and his Life prolonged;
and that he may come out of his present Illness as Gold out of the Fire. But
that if he must now be called out of this World, he may go away with all
possible Resignation to the Will of GOD, and finish well, and go cheerfully
through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, and be presented Faultless before
the presence of His Glory with Exceeding Joy.

Hereupon suitable Mercies are also asked for the Relatives.

And it is asked for the By standers, that all may be duly affected with a
Sense of our Frailty, and speedily get into good Terms with Heaven, and leave
nothing undone, that Men will wish to have done, when the Dying Hour comes upon
them.

If they be Sick Children that are prayed withal, Pains are taken, in the first
Place, to dispose the Minds of the Parents unto the Holy Resignation with which
they are to offer the Sacrifices now called for. And then the Prayer takes
Notice of certain peculiar and adapted Articles.

It owns the Providence of GOD, without which not a Bird of the Air falls to
the Earth.

It bewails the sad Effects of Original Sin, appearing in the Miseries that
attend us, even from our most Early Infancy.

It prays for the Recovery of the Child: But that if the Child be to Die, it
may yet have a Soul sprinkled with the Blood of the Lumb of GOD, and bound up
in the Bundle of Life.

It puts the Child into the Hands of the Great SAVIOR, that good Shepherd, who
has said, Suffer little Children to come unto me.

It entreats for the Parents, the Graces proper for the Occasion, especially
the Repentance of Sin thus brought unto Remembrance; and a sensible Improvement
in all Piety; with a Part in a Glorious CHRIST, which will abundantly make up
all their Losses.

. 3. Though the Churches of New England, have with other Churches of the
Reformation, sufficiently renounced the Popish Notion of the seven Sacraments;
nor have they any Spiritual Courts for the Trial of Matrimonial Causes; yet the
Celebration of a MARRIAGE in them, is now generally performed by their Pastors.
For many Years after the first Settlement of these Colonies, a Marriage was
ever celebrated by the Civil Magistrate; who not only gave the Marriage
Covenant unto the Parties, but also made the Prayers proper for the Occasion:
However, if a Minister were present, he was desired usually, to make at least
one of the Prayers. And the Justices have by Law to this Day, the Power to do
it. But now the general Practice and Custom is for the Pastors to do it, though
their Power be limited by the Law unto the Towns in which they enjoy the
constant Exercise of their Ministry. Because the Prayers of Benediction on the
Marriage are most proper to be made by the Pastors, the People generally
request and expect their Pastors also to give the Covenant of their Marriage
unto them.

In former Times our People, in Conformity to the Usages in the Ancient Church
of Israel, and what have been continued in some Churches of the Reformation,
maintained a Solemnity, called a Contraction, a little before the Consummation
of a Marriage was allowed of. A Pastor was usually employed, and a Sermon also
preached on this Occasion. But these Ancient Sponsalia, are now wholly laid
aside.

The Weddings of New England are for the most part celebrated with less of
public Appearance than they are in some other Countries; by which it is thought
that many Inconveniences are avoided.

It has been a Case handled by Divines, An Nuptiarum Celebratio conveniat
Diebus Dominicis? The Celebration of Weddings on the Lord's Days was
represented unto the Renowned Synod of Dert, among the Grievances, which the
lesser Synods of Holland complained of. And such Divines as the famous Walaeus,
and Zepperus, and Voetius, and an Army more, have made just and strong
Remonstrances against them. The Churches of New England wholly decline them.
[However the Appearing of the Bridegroom and Bride, in the Condition of Persons
uewly Married, in the public Assembly on the next Lord's Day after their
Marriage, is a Thing usually looked for.] And a Wedding on a Day directed by
the Government for a FAST would be (from the Second Chapter of Jo^l and the
Sixteenth Verse) as much disallowed of.

When the Wedding Arrives, the Bridegroom with the Bride, having some
Attendents, present themselves before the Pastor, and give him the Certificate
of their Lawful Publication, with which the ^own-Clerk must furnish them.

The Pastor begins with a Prayer which turns upon such Articles as these.

The Glorious GOD is acknowledged as the Giver of every Good Gift; The Extent
of His Providence, and a Providence too under the Management of our Mediator
JESUS, is considered; --

In all the Good that is done for us the Sovereign Power, and Wisdom, and
Goodness of our GOD is confessed; And our SAVIOR by His Blood purchasing for
us the Blessings of Goodness, whereof our Sins have made a Forfeiture.

It is desired, That our Blessings may prove Blessings indeed unto us, and
assist us in the Service of GOD.

The Goodness of GOD in appointing the Married State is adored; -- and His
Providence in choosing the Relatives which He therein gives to each other, is
admired.

A Dependence on the Providence of GOD our SAVIOR, for our Welfare in the
Married (as well as in every other) State is expressed.

For the ensuring of such a Welfare there is an Eye had unto the Covenant of
Grace, wherein our Maker is our Husband, and our SAVIOR is willing to Espouse
us unto Himself in Faithfulness for ever. The mavelous Condescension of the
Glorious LORD in the Proposal of such an Espousal, is wondered at; The Enmity of
our Carnal Minds against this Blessedness is deprecated; And proper Expressions
of a Consent unto the Gracious Proposal, are then endeavored.

That Promise of the Covenant, for all Things to Work together for Good is now
laid hold upon; and it is asked, That as our Sorrows may make us Wiser and
Better, so our Comforts may quicken us to Glorify our GOD, in a Life of
Obedience unto Him.

It is more particularly asked, on the behalf of the Persons who are now
entering into the Covenant of the Married State, That they may now first give
themselves unto the Lord, and have the Pardon of all their Sins through the
Blood of the Great Sacrifice, and that so the Blessing of GOD may be upon them
in their now giving themselves to each other, according to His Institution.

The Prayer being finished, he now says to the Couple before him;

You are now to attend unto a Covenant of GOD; the Covenant of your Marriage
before Him. --

Give therefore your Hands, with your Hearts, unto one another. --

This being done, he addresses the Man, to this Effect: -- The Person whom you
now take by the Hand, you take to be your Wedded Wise; Depending on the Grace
of Heaven, you promise to Love her, to Honor her, to Support her; and to treat
her in that Relation, as it becomes a Professor of the Glorious Gospel of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, so long as you live both together in this World. This
Promise you make as in the Presence of GOD, and before these Witnesses --

And then, the Woman: -- The Person whom you now take by the Hand, you take to
be your Wedded Husband: With Dependence on the Grace of Heaven, you promise to
Love him, to Honor him, to Obey him, and to Treat him with a Behavior, that
may Answer and Adorn the Doctrine of GOD your SAVIOR, so long as you both live
together in this World. This Promise you make as in the Presence of the Great
GOD, and before these Witnesses.

A Consent unto this Covenant, being some way signified, he adds, --

I then declare you to be Married, according to the Laws of GOD, and of this
Province. And what GOD has joined, Man may not separate.

In former Ages there was, and still in other Places, there is, much Stress
laid upon the Wedding Ring. In the Roman Ritual, there is a Form of Benediction
used by the Priest upon it. The Religious Consecration of this Annulus
pronubus, is described by Pignorius. But passing by what Gorlaeus in his
Dactylotheca, and others have Remarked upon the Matter, we shall only say, that
in the Weddings of New England, the Ring makes none of the Ceremonies.

The Pastor now proceeds unto another Prayer; wherein, -- The Honor which GOD
has put upon Marriage by His Instituting of it in Paradise, and the Presence
and Favor of our Great SAVIOR once Working a Miracle at it, is considered. --
The Grace to carry it well in all Relations is asked for; and particularly for
the Persons now Married, -- That their Behavior toward each other may be full
of that Goodness, which may be a lively and lovely Emblem, of of what passes
between the Lord JESUS CHRIST and His Church; -- That they may be such
Blessings to each other, as that they may have Cause every Day to give Thanks
unto GOD for giving them to one another; That all the Blessings of the Married
State which are to be desired and expected, may be bestowed upon them; -- Above
all. That they may be blessed with Spiritual Blessings; and their Family may
prove a Religious Family; and an House wherein the Religion of GOD our SAVIOR
shall be carried on with Continual Sacrifices; That our Lord would help them to
p^ss the Time of their Sojourning here in the Fear of GOD, and prepare them for
their parting Time, and for all the Troubles of this present Evil World, and at
length give them a Portion in that better World, where they Ma^y not, nor are
given in Marriage, but are wholly for the Lord; -- That the Relatives of each,
may have Cause for much Satisfaction in what is now come to pass. And finally,
That the Period may be hastened, when the Espousal of the King of Glory unto
His Church may be brought unto a Blessed Consummation, and His Kingdom Come.

The Pastor after this returns to the Town Clerk, a Record of the Marriage --
et sic finitur.

. 4. In many Towns of New England the Ministers make agreeable Prayers with the
People come together at the House, to attend the FUNERAL of the Dead. And in
some, the Ministers make a short Speech at the Grave. But in other Places both
of these Things are wholly omitted. However, they are not forbidden, as they
are in the Discipline of the French Churches, where the Prohibition runs in
these Terms; There shall be no Prayer nor Sermon at Funerals; to shun
Superstition.

. 5. Behold the Work assigned unto the Pastors of the Churches. But many
Observers have thought that their Discipline might have this Complaint still
made of it, One Thing thou Lackest. Any well dispesed Young Men, of a Liberal
Education have been brought into the Pulpits by any of the Pastors, as soon as
they pleased, and if the People approved of them, they were at Liberty, without
any more ado, to proceed unto an Election of them for the Work of the Ministry,
and the Fastoral Charge in any Vacancy. But hearing this frequently complained
of, as too r^iss and unsafe a Conduct, a Convention of Ministers at Boston, did
about the beginning of the present Century publish the Ensuing Instrument.

PROPOSALS; for the Preservation of Religion in the Churches, by a due TRIAL of
them that stand CANDIDATES OF THE MINISTRY.
It is a thing of Great Consequence to the Safety and Welfare of our Churches,
and the Interests of our Holy Religion are not a little concerned in it, That
the Candidates of the Evangelical Ministry from time to time arising among us,
should still be offered unto the Acceptance of the Churches, under the
Advantage of their having undergone a due TRIAL of their Qualifications, for so
solemn, and sacred a Service. And it has long been the Wish of prudent Men,
who wish well to the Interests Religion, That none of our Christian
Congregations may countenance any, who shall set up for public Preachers of
the Gospel, until they can produce a Testimonial of their having been duly
proved and approved, as Qualified for so Weighty an Undertaking.

Therefore,

I. It is proposed, that every Candidate of the Ministry, be furnished with a
TESTIMONIAL, under the Hands of at least Four or Five settled Pastors in our
Churches, of his having been Tried upon the EXPECTED ARTICLES, and of his being
upon Trial found competently Qualified, for the Encouragements of a public
Preacher among the Congregations of GOD in the Land. And that none presume to
enter upon a Course of treating any of our Congregations, with their Sermons,
until they have applied themselves unto such a Number of our Pastors, for such
a Testimonial.

II. It is proposed, That the EXPECTED ARTICLES on which the Candidates of the
Ministry shall be Tried, shall be these:

1. He shall be one of a Blameless Life; and therefore one that has actually
joined unto a particular Church, for Communion in all special Ordinances.

2. He shall give the Triers an Account of the Principles, that act him, in his
Desire to Preach the Gospel; which may satisfy their Judicious Charity, that he
is acted by the Evangelical Principles of Love to CHRIST and Souls, in his
Intentions.

3. He shall be tried, how far he is acquainted with the Three learned
Languages, and with the Sciences commonly taught in the Academical Education:
And so much Acquaintance therewithal shall be required, as may be judged
absolutely needful for the Services whereto he he is designed.

4. Before Three of the Triers at least, he shall Preach a Probationary Sermon,
on a Text, at a Time, and in a Place, which they shall appoint; and they shall
upon Hearing pronounce his Abilities for Preaching and Praying to be such as
give them Satisfaction.

5. He shall be examined, What Authors in Theology he has read; and he shall
particularly make it evident, That he has considerately read, Ames his Medulla
Theologiae: [Or, some other generally allowed Body of Divinity.]

6. His Abilities to Refute Errors are to be tried, by putting such Instances
unto him, as the Triers may judge most convenient.

7. He shall declare to the Triers his Adherence unto, the Confession of Faith,
agreed by the Churches of New England, and the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster.

III. It is proposed, That if the Pastors of our Churches, are so unadvised, as
to employ in public Preaching any Candidate of the Ministry who has neglected
or contemned the Trial propounded for such Persons, it shall be counted an
Offense; and it shall be by the Pastors in the Neigbourhood, signified unto
such an one, that if he do not acknowledge his Offense, he shall be dealt
withal, as one that Walk disorderly.

IV. It is proposed, That if any Congregations be so unadvised, as to invite
unto public Preaching any Candidate of the Ministry, who has avoided the Trial
aforesaid, the Pastors of the Churches in the Neighborhood, shall not only
refuse to concur in the Ordination of a Person who has so shunned the Light,
but also write unto the said Congregations a suitable Admonition for the
Disder, by which they thus expose themselves to the Devices of Satan.

V. It is proposed, That when any Tried Candidate of the Ministry is to be
ordained unto the Pastoral Charge, he shall, unto the Elders and Messengers of
the Churches, who are invited unto his Ordination, make due answers unto such
Questions as their Moderator shall propound, relating to his present Capacities
and Inclinations, to serve the Kingdom of GOD, and unto the Flock unto which he
should now become related.

Several Associations of Pastors in the Country have begun to execute these
PROPOSALS. But they are not unto this Day fully Executed.

ARTICLE VII. The other Ecclesiastical OFFICERS for the Assistence of the
PASTORS.
. 1. IF the Pastors were to be considered, as originally entrusted, with the
whole Ca^e of the Churches, and their Interests, yet the Pity and Favor of our
SAVIOR has been expressed, in his joining of other Officers unto them, for
their Assistence in it.

There has been much thought about the Office of those called, RULING-ELDERS,
to assist the Pastors, in the Inspection and Government of the Churches.

We may not altogether give that Report about the New English, which Deacon
Hilary, a Writer of the IVth Century gives about the Primitive Churches.
Ecclesia, ut Synagoga, Seniores habuit, quorum sine Consilio, nihil agebatur in
Ecclesia, quod, qua Negligentia obsoleverit, nescio; nisi forte Doctorum
Desidia, aut magu Superbia, dum soli volunt aliquid videri. But this may be
reported, That because the Office has not been well understood, (and these
Elders have not been considered as given to the Pastors merely for Helps, as
the Levites were to the Priests of old) nor have those few Churches that have
maintained it, conformed unto what is practiced (of a Biennial, or Triennial
Choice, and this in a good Number too,) in the other Churches of the
Reformation; it is now generally laid aside. There are few Churches, but what
are, as many of the Primitive, at their first planting were, in the Condition
mentioned by Tertullian; Ubi Ecclesiastici Ordinis non est Consessus, Sacerdos
est ibi solus.

Our Platform asserts, an Office of Ruling Elders, distinct from the Office of
Pastor and Teacher; however, not so called, for to exclude the Pastor and
Teacher from Ruling. But then it assigns a Work unto these, which it has
happened sometimes, the Men whom the Churches have chosen, (and rarely have
above One or Two at a Time, and these for Life, been chosen in a Church) have
been incapable of managing, any otherwise than too clumsily, and so as hardly
to preserve the Dignity of the Administrations they have pretended to.

An Assembly of our Pastors, once published this as their Judgment; That Ruling
Elders are appointed for the Assistence of their Pastors, in the Government of
their Churches, and the Inspection of the Flocks. And though these Officers may
not be furnished with all those Seize which are necessary to a Pastor,
yet if they are so accomplished, as that they may be Helps to their Pastor, in
the Management of their Church Rule, they may be chosen thereunto with much
Benefit and Advantage to the People of GOD. But, Whereas it is the Business of a
Ruling Elder, to assist his Pastor, in Visiting the Distressed; Instructing the
Ignorant; Reducing of the Erroneous; Comforting the Afflicted; Rebuking the
Unruly; Discovering the State of the whole Flock; Exercising the Discipline of
the Gospel upon Offenders; and promoting the Desirable Growth of the Church;
it is necessa^y that he be a Person of a Wisdom, Courage, Leisure, and Exemplary
Holiness and Gravity, agreeable to such Employments.

One is at a Loss about certain Passages in Antiquity. If the Five or Six
Brethren, whom Clemens with his Church, sent with his Excellent Letter unto the
Church of Corinth, were not such Ruling Elders, yet Firmillian, Bishop of
Caesarea, in the Third Century, seems to join the Seniors (or, Elders) with the
Pastors, and says, That at certain times, they met for to settle and order
Matters committed unto their Care. And about fifty Years after, Mensurius,
Bishop of Carthage; having occasion to travel, committed some Treasures of the
Church unto certain Elders, who afterward proving Wicked Men. began the Schism
of the Donatists. And in the Acts of the Justification of Caecilian, which are
more Ancient than the Council of Nice, we read of Elders distinct from the
Bishops and Priests. Austin also several times makes mention of Elders distinct
from the Ministers of the Churches: Particularly he does it in the Inscription
of his CXXXVII. Epistle. Yea, in his XIX. Sermon on the Words of our Lord, [The
Third in the Appendix of Tom. 10] he declares the Duty of their Employments.
The Council of Carthage, A. C. 407. diverse times mentions these Elders, as
defending the Rights of the People against the Bishops. Yea, we find them not
Ex^inct in France and Italy, at the End of the Sixth Century.

That which has almost extinguished them in this Country within the half of One
Century, has been, the prevailing of such Sentiments as these, in very many of
the Pastors.

The only Scripture that seems plainly to assert that Office, is 1 Timothy V. 17.
Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of double Honor, especially
they who labor in Word and Doctrine. But perhaps upon mature Consideration, it
will be found, That in the Primitive Churches, there were Pastors in two
different Circumstances of Employment. First, there were Elders who in a more
constant Way carried on the Duties of the Evangelical Ministry, with the
gathered Churches of the full, and therein did preside Well. But at the same
time it was necessary to Labor for the Conversion of Infidels, of whom it
could not be expected, that many of them would come unto the Assemblies of the
Faithful. Wherefore to convert these, and spread the Nets of Salvation in the
most likely Places for them, which was then very much the Work of the Day,
there were those who did Labor with Traveling (which the Word here used may
import) for the Word and Dectrine, among the Infidels: And every ones sees why
such Laborers as these are judged to be Worthy of a peculiar Honor. As the
Bishops and Presbyters in the Scriptures, are evidently the same, so it appears
not, that there were any Presbyters known in the Scripture, who were not such
as both Preached the Gospel, and administered the Sacraments of it. The Ruling
Elders in the Churches of the Reformation, seem to be akin to a sort of Elders
among the Jews, who were not Ordained (they say) by laying on of Hands, but
only were Venerable for their Age, Discretion, and Gravity; and were called
Zikne Hashuk, that is to say, Elders of the Street, or Vulgar Elders. Great
Men, who yet are Zealous Maintainers of that Order which goes by the Name of
RULING ELDERS [or, Seniors,] in the Reformed Churches, are well aware of this.
And therefore still to preserve this Useful Order, they take the Method, which
One, who may justly be called an Eagle Eyed as well as an Excellent Writer in
the Church of Scotland, has at length pitched upon. The Cyprianus Isotimus of
that Mavelous Man, has these Passages. Those Elders are the Representatives
of the Sacra Plebs or the Church, as she is opposed to, or distinguished from
Church Officers properly so called; Bishops or Pastors and Deacons: And
therefore they are not in a strict Sense Church Officers. -- The Church
Privileges, and the necessary means to preserve them, must stand on the same
Foundation. And accordingly Blondel judges, it is most probable that in the Time
of the Apostles, not the whole Multitude, but their Seniors, did convene for
their Affairs. He believes, that the Protestant Churches of France, and
Scotland, and Holland, in their setting up of Ruling Elders, did introduce into
the Church, a Practice truly Apostolic. -- I cannot indeed, during the III first
Centuries, find express mention of these Seniors, or Ruling Elders. -- Yet I am
persuaded, that there were Lay-Seniors, that shared in the Management of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, represented the People, and preserved their Liberties.
The Writers of the 4th. and 5th. Ages, either expressly affirm it, or clearly
suppose it. Ambrose or Hilary particularly, and Optatus. -- My Hypothesis
disjoins these Elders from the Clergy, and makes them the Representatives of
the People, and Guardians of their Liberties. Accordingly in the Acts of
Purgation of Caecilian, which are Elder than the Council of Nice, -- we diverse
times read of the Clergy, and the Elders of the People. This is yielded by
Bishop Whitgift, who says, I know, that in the 'Primitive Church, they had in
every Church certain Seniors, to whom the Government of the Congregation was
committed. And Saravia, who assents to Hilary's Saying, That the Church had
Elders, or Seniors, without whose Council nothing was done; and adds,
Adjunguntur Pastoribus Ecclesiae tanquam Adsessores et Consiliari ut videant ne
forte Potestate Ecclesiastica Pastores abutantur. The English Church Wardens,
in Voetius's Mind, are the Vestiges and Rubbish of those Ruling Seniors. This
most necessary Ordinance, has in all well reformed Churches been carefully
observed; and on the other hand most eagerly impugned by the Papists; as
Schultingius and others cited by the most learned Voetius. Nor (they are the
Words of the same excellent Person) is this a Wonder, since nothing is more
opposite unto the Papal Monarchy, and Antichristian Tyranny, than is the
Institution of RULING ELDERS. Voetius make the Elders a kind of Ephori, that is
Preservers of the Churches Liberties, and Inspectors over the Pastors. I Will
shut up all (says Mr. Jameson) with the Words of the Learned and Venerable
Beza; It Is the Churches great Concern for the keeping out of Tyranny, that some
chosen out of the People, know what is done in the Consistories, and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. As Anciently at Rome it was provided for the
Restraining the Power of the Senate, that the Tribunes of the People should be
present at it, and have Power of withstanding by a Negative Voice, the Senates
Decrees.

Some of our Churches do yet continue to Elect, and (with Imposition of Hands)
to Ordain One or Two, or Three Ruling Elders, and apprehend they find their
Account in it, and good Services done to the Interests of Piety. And these we
will present with the Exhortation, which Polycarp gave to the Presbyters in the
Church at Philippi. Let the Elders be Tender and Merciful; Compassionate
toward all; Reducing those that are in Error; Visiting all that are Weak; not
Negligent of the Widow nor the Orphan, and him that is poor; but ever providing
what is honest in the sight of GOD and Men; Abstaining from all Wrath, Respect
of Persons, and Unrighteous Judgment; being far from Covetousness; not hastily
believing a Report of any Man; not rigid in Judgment; Knowing that we are all
Faulty and Obnoxious to Judgment.

They will also think of what Origin, in the third Century, declared then to be
used in the Churches; Persons established to take Notice of the Life and
Conversation of those, who embrace the Christian Religion, and when they
committed any Evil Actions, to expel them out of the Congregations; and receive
with great Affection, those that lived well, and make them better from Day to
Day.

. 2. The Office of DEACONS, to assist and relieve the Pastors, in all the
Temporal Affairs of the Church, is in the New English Churches retained, as was
in the Primitive; where we find them Serving Tables; being as Ignatius (if it
were he) expresses it. POATON KAI POTON DIAKONOI: The Deacons of Meats and
Cups; that is to say, Those who prepared the Bread and Wine for the Eucharist:
and the Dispensers, as Origin expresses it, of the TA TAS EKKLSIAS PATA,
Churches Money; (which ought to be) with the Advice of the Pastors.

These are they who in the New English Churches, as well as in the Primitive,
do as they did in Justin Martyr's Time, deliver the Sacramental Bread and Wine
unto the Communicants: (in which Action they sometimes call for Assistence from
some other Brethren.) Herewithal they stand engaged, what they can, to free the
Minister from all secular Disturbances and Avocations. For indeed, among the
Churches in this Country Sacerdos in Foro, undergoes the Scourge of the Tongue,
as being little better than Mercator in Templo. And yet it must be confessed
that secular Digressions from their Sacred Employments, have been too often
forced upon their Ministers, by the Ingratitude and Parsimony of the People,
who have not always done their Duty to put their Ministers in the Condition
mentioned by Cyprian, when he says, Qui in Ecclesia Domini Ordinatione Clerica
promoventur, in nullo, ab Administratione Divina avocentur, nec Molestiis et
Negotiis Secularibus alligentur. But our People should hear the Father and
Martyr speaking in plain English. Says he, Those who are promoted to Clerical
Ordinations should not be hindered in their Divine Administrations or encumbred
with secular Concerns and Affairs; but, as Levites, receiving Subscriptions
from the Brethren, depart not from the Altar and Sacrifices, but Night and Day
attend upon Spiritual and Heavenly Administrations.

We return to our Deacons. They are, as he that goes under the Name of Ignatius
calls them; EKKLSIAS THEOY YPEPTAI, The Servants of the Church of GOD; and they
are constituted as Eusebius terms it, for the YPEPSIA TOY KOINOY Service of the
Public. And if the ATHOS KALOS which we render a good Degree, assigned unto
faithful Deacons by the Apostle, mean, as it is by some Critics imagined, A Seat
of some Eminency in the Church Assemblies, the Churches of New England always
have such a Seat, still a little below the Pulpit, facing the Congregation.

But it is after this Manner that they are Introduced into it. The Pastor
desires the Brethren, to choose a fit Number of Persons, from among themselves,
for the Office of Deacons among them. And some little while after this Desire
has been signified, the Brethren bring in their Votes, by Papers, which have
written on them the Names of the Persons, which each Man would have to be
chosen, according to the Number first agreed upon.

The Pastor hereupon calls upon some of the chief Brethren to count the Votes;
and from the the Report which they give him, he then declares whom they find
the Major Vote fallen upon. If they be any of them (which rarely if ever
happens) Persons against whom he has an Objection that cannot easily be
removed, he advises them to another Choice. But if he has nothing to object,
he applies himself unto the Persons chosen, with this Request, That they would
so far accept the Call of the Church, as to do the Work expected from the
Deacons, until such Time, as the Church may proceed, unto the full Observation
of the Apostolical Direction, Let the Deacons first be proved; then let them
use the Office of a Deacon.

It has been observed, That because in our Translation, it is enumerated among
the Qualifications of a Deacon. [1 Timothy III. 2.] Even so must their Wives be
grave, not Slanderers, sober, faithful in all things: And the French Churches
therefore make it an Article of their Discipline, That as much as possible may
be avoided, there should not be elected Elders and Deacons of the Church, those
which had Wives contrary to the true Religion: When Deacons are chosen in the
Churches, it is often enquired, Whether their Wives are qualified as has been
directed? But this has been from a common Mistake about the Meaning of the
Text; which does not say a Word about the Deacons Wife, any more than the
Pastors, but only says, Let the Women [GYNAIKES] be Grave. -- Which Women are
the Deaconesses; Officers not hitherto employed in the Churches of New England.

The Deacons Elect, when they have in a Laudable Behavior, for some time given
Demonstration of their Ability, and Fidelity, do in some of the Churches become
Deacons Ordained with Imposition of Hands. Though in many of these Churches,
This Rite of their Confirmation, is fallen into such a Desuetude, as it is in
other Churches of the Reformation. One Reason for this Omission, has been
because in many of our Churches, the Deacons do little other Work, than provide
the Elements for the Eucharist; and a solemn Ordination to nothing but this,
appears hardly a Congruity. But when an Ordination is intended, some Lord's Day
(or Fast Day) being before signified by the Pastor for the Purpose, when the
Day arrives the Pastor makes the Consummation of this Affair, to be among the
other Exercises of the Day. He declares, that by the Churches Designation, such
and such Persons are now to be confirmed in the Office of Deacons, if there now
appear nothing to obstruct it. He therefore proposes unto the Brethren of the
Church, [suppose Two to be now concerned:] That if they do still maintain and
will now renew, their Choice of the Two Beloved Brethren, A. B. and C. D. to
the Office of Deacons in the Church, their uplifted Hands may signify it. This
being done, he addresses himself unto the Persons chosen; desiring them to
intimate their Acceptance of the Churches Choice; which they successively do,
with modest Expressions of their Willingness and Readiness, to do the Church
all possible Service, and their Sense of their own being unable as well as
unworthy to serve the Flock of our Glorious LORD, but requesting therefore the
Prayers of all the Faithful for them, that they may faithfully discharge every
Trust that shall be reposed in them.

So the Pastor, taking the most convenient Place that he can find in the
Assembly for it, calls them to him, and laying his Two Hands on the Heads of
the Two Persons (if there be so many, and when there is but one Pasio^, there
can be no more Ordained in One Action,) he first makes a short Prayer;
Acknowledging the Glory of a Great SAVIOR, and His Government and Interest in
His Churches, and His Favors to that particular Church; and petitioning for
His Countenance to the Present Action. He then with his Hands yet imposed,
applies himself to them with a Charge to this Purpose.

Whereas You, upon whom these Hands are now imposed, have been chosen to the
Office of Deacons in this Church of the Lord, I do now in the Name of that
Glorious Lord, and on the behalf of this People, solemnly set you apart unto
the Discharge of that Office; And before the Great GOD our SAVIOR, and before
His Elect Angels, I do solemnly charge you, to do all the Work of your Office,
with all good Integrity: In the Doing whereof, you are to be Grave, not
Double-tongue'd, not given to much Wine, not greedy of filthy Lucre: You are to
hold the Mystery of Faith in a Pure Conscience, and to be blameless in well
using the Office of a Deacon: You are to rule your own Houses well, and so to
behave your selves that you may have great Boldness in the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ; Unto whose Grace you are now to be recommended.

Whereupon in another short Prayer, with his Hands yet imposed, he recommends
them to the Grace of GOD, and Petitions, and Pronounces the Blessing of Heaven
upon them.

Thus it is that the Churches in New England are Organized.

ARTICLE VIII. The DISCIPLINE with which the Churches are kept in their Faith
and Order.
. 1. THE Question has been considered in the Churches of New England, Whether
the Pastor of a Church may not occasionally dispense the Seals of the Covenant
in another Church, upon the Peoples Desiring of it?

And it has been very publicly and practically answered, That they may.

As a Minister of the Gospel, or one solemnly set apart for Evangelical
Administrations, does retain his Character, when preaching in other
Congregations, besides that which is his immediate Charge: The Words of Dr.
Owen are certainly to be allowed of; Although we have no Concern in the Figment
of an Indelible Character accompanying Sacred Orders, yet we do not think, that
the Pastoral Office is such a Thing as a Man must leave behind him every time
he goes from Home: For my own part, if I did not think my self bound to preach
as a Minister Authorized in all Places, and on all Occasions, when I am called
thereunto, I think, I should never Preach any more in this World: -- So, it is
no where scrupled, that a Pastor of a Church, may administer the Special and
Sealing Ordinances, to the Members of another Church, coming to occasional
Communion with him in his own; and if they should All of them (even their whole
Church) so com to him, he will not refuse them. Certainly then, he may as well
go to that other Church, and administer the Sacred Ordinances to them in the
Place where they assemble, if it be desired from him: It appears not, why the
Presence of his own Flock should be necessary to Legitimate such an
Administration? Why, any more than the Presence of the whole Flock to which any
particular Member belongs, to whom he occasionally administers the Seals, when
he comes to him in a Transient Way for it? The Consent and Request of the
Persons concerned, Pro hac Vice, sufficiently enables him. The Churches of
New England herein differ from the Rigid Separatists, your Can and Company;
and it is expressly provided in their Platform, That Churches may lend a
Minister to supply the Place of an Absent or a Sick Minister of another Church
for a needful Season.

Some of the more famous Divines, at the first Settlement of these Churches,
publicly declared, themselves, for the Affirmative of the Question. And long
after them, Dr. Goodwin gave it under his Hand, with an, Ita sentio, ita sensi;
That every true Minister, actually such to his own Church, is Medium
Applicabile, an Instrument that may apply to any Ministerial Act out of his own
Church, in any other Church, if he be there unto called by them. Yea, when
Polycarp, a Scholar of the Apostle John, and one Ordained (as Jerome, and
Eusebius and others testify) by the Apostles themselves, came from Smyrna to
Rome, for the Composing of some Differences, Anicetus the Pastor of the Church
there, to express his Love and Honor for him, requested him to administer the
Eucharist unto the Church, where he now appeared but as a Traveller; and, he
did it. Now, Irenaeus assures us, Polycarp always taught the Churches to
Observe those things which he learned from the Apostles themselves, and nothing
else.

Accordingly, In these Churches, not only does a Pastor coming occasionally to
an Assembly, administer the Baptism of the Lord, unto any Infant of the Flock
that may be brought for it, if their own Pastor be out of the Way; But also,
upon the Desire of a Destitute Flock for it, it is allowed that a Neighboring
Pastor may go and administer the Supper of the Lord unto them. Only, the
Practice is the less frequent, because the Churches would not encourage a
Destitute Flock, in any thing that may abate their Sense of the Necessity lying
upon them, to make as much haste as they can, out of their Inorganic, and
Uncomfortable, Circumstances.

. 2. When the Communicants in these Churches have Occasion for to Travel, the
Pastors give them LETTERS OF RECOMMENDATION (perhaps not unlike the Pacific
Letters without which the Primitive Churches would not receive traveling
Strangers,) Or, Testimonials of this Importance? That -- the Bearer hereof
having been admitted into the Fellowship of the Church [in the Place mentioned]
and behaved himself inoffensively therein, is upon that Account recommended
unto Communion in special Ordinances, with any Churches of our LORD, walking in
the Faith and Order of the Gospel, wherefoever he may have Opportunity in the
Travels now before him, to desire it.

Indeed we find, it was a Decree of a Carthaginian Council, That no one should
communicate in another Church, without a Letter from the Bishop of his own
Church. The Churches of New England require it not, from such as are otherwise
known sufficiently, but where Persons cannot be well known without it.

They also admit unto Occasional Communion, those who have any living
Testimonies of their having been Communicants in Scotland, or Holland, or any
Reforming Churches in England, or Ireland, or elsewhere, though they should
happen to be not furnished with written Credentials.

But when a Brother in a Church alters and removes his Habitation, and intends
an Abode with the Church, whereto he would be Recommended; or, for weighty
Reasons finds it necessary to consult his own Edification, in changing a
Society; he applies himself unto his own Pastor for LETTERS OF DISMISSION, or
for some Authentic Signification of the Church, whereto he has hitherto
belonged, allowing a Translation of his more immediate Relation, unto the
Church he would more constantly sit down withal. The Literae Dimissoriae
mentioned by some old Councils, as peculiar to the Clergy, are directed for the
Brethren. Too many removing without some such Instrument, consigning the Church
Watch upon the Remover, from one Church to another; This Omission has been an
Occasion of some Disorders, and caused some Difficulty in the Execution of
their Discipline.

And hence it comes to pass that sometimes a Person does for many Years enjoy a
constant Communion with a Church at the Table of the Lord, and yet remains
incapable of Acting and Voting with the Church as a Member of it.

The Church Covenant being but the Covenant of Grace applied unto the special
Purposes of a Church State, and it being a Duty of that Covenant, for a Man to
join himself with some Christian Society, in observing the Laws of our SAVIOR,
where he does in his own private Judgment of Discretion think that he can best
pursue and attain the Ends of that Covenant; a Man joining to any one
particular Church, does in effect confess thus much, with a Choice thereupon of
that Christian Society, whereto he now becomes related, as answering that
Character.

Accordingly, when a Person judges that he can with more Edification, enjoy the
Blessings of the New Covenant in another Society, than that with which he has
hitherto walked, except the Society have any just Exception against his Judging
so, he does well to ask a Dismission, and they of whom he does ask it, ought
then to give it. If they Refuse it, a Council of Neighbor Churches applied
unto, may order it.

But now, the Pastor having first asked and gained the Consent of the Church
unto it, he writes to the other Church, something of this Importance; That
[such an One] having for allowable Reasons requested a Dismission from this
Church to that, it is hereby Testified on on his behalf, that he has been for
some time, a Communicant with them in all special Ordinances, and by a good
Conversation in CHRIST, approved himself worthy of it. But now in answer to his
Just Request, they Dismiss him to the more immediate Fellowship of them with
whom he is now to Reside; Entreating them to receive him into their Fellowship,
and extend that Love and Care unto him which is directed in the Rules of the
Gospel. So with Wishes and Prayers for their Prosperity, the Pastor Subscribes,
with the Consent of the Brethren.

The Churches of New England, are encouraged in such Usages, by the Discipline
of the French Protestants, whereof it was an Article, That when any one for his
necessary Affairs was forced to Travel, Recommendatory Letters to the next
Church, were to be Asked and Granted. And the Synod of Sardis, A. C. 347.
Established the the Use of such Letters in the Churches of those Early Days. In
the Primitive Churches they were called, Literae Communicatoriae. Tertullian
calls them, Literas Pacis: And the Greek Churches called them, Systatic
Epistles. That famous Dutchman, Hornbeck, does commend the Churches of
New England, for the Use of such Letters. And unto that Question, Whether such
Letters are not requisite in the Translation of Members from one Church unto
another? the Incomparable Voetius answers, Ita habet ordo Ecclesiasticus, et
laudabili more obtinet in Ecclesiis Belgicis. Church Order does require them;
and the Dutch Churches do observe them.

Inasmuch as many Church Members, when they have Removed unto other Churches,
without a Prospect of a Return, have been too Negligent in seeking for an
Explicit and Orderly Translation, it is a Practice taken up, That the Churches
Desire and Entrust their Pastors to send unto such Persons the Dismission which
they should have asked for, and oblige them therewith to join themselves in the
most regular Manner to the Churches, with which they have now a fixed Abode;
and let them know, it will be an Offense, if they do, without a very valid
Reason, delay to do it.

He that has these Letters of Dismission, is yet Actually a Member of the
Church that gives them, until he be actually joined unto another; capable of a
Voting with it, and liable to the Censures of it. But being thus furnished with
Letters, like those written of old, on the behalf of Apollos to the Disciples
of Achaia, Exhorting them to receive him; or like these written for Marcus to
the Colossians; or, like those for Ph^be to the Remans; he carries them to the
Pastor of the Church where he now resides; and the Pastor propounds to the
Church the Desire of this Person: Whereupon, if no Objection occur, he reads
unto the Church the Letters of Dismission, and puts them upon signifying their
Willingness to receive the Person thus dismissed unto their Communion, by
lifting up their Hands. This being done, he repeats unto the Person, the
Substance of the Church Covenant, and upon his Consent thereunto, he declares
the Promise of the Church to acknowledge him with all Christian Regards in
their Sacred Fellowship.

They that have gone yet no further than the Covenant of Baptism, for
themselves and theirs, upon a Removal are to carry some Certificate from their
Pastor unto him under whose Ministry they are now to reside; which qualifies
them to demand Baptism for their Children, which may be there born unto them:
and also entitles the Church there, to proceed with Rebukes upon them in Case
of their falling into any Scandalous Offenses.

. 3. In the Primitive Church there was a Godly Discipline, that such Persons as
were notorious Sinners, were put to open Penance in this World, that their
Souls may be saved in the Day of the Lord, and that others admonished by their
Exemple, might be more afraid to offend. Now as the Churches of New England,
were at first planted, partly on the Design of Obtaining and Maintaining the
Exercise of such a Discipline; A Design for which they apprehended, they had a
sufficient Warrant of our SAVIOR; So this Discipline has been hitherto more or
less exercised.

If one under the Covenant and Government of the Church, fall into a Scandalous
Transgressun against the Laws of our Holy Redeemer, and the Transgression be at
once, and at first a Matter of public Fame, the Pastor upon the Cry, reckons
it his Duty to Enquire into it, and bring it immediately under an
Ecclesiastical Cognizance.

In the Primitive Churches, we find not only Schism, Idolatry, Heresy,
Covetousness, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Fornication, and Adultery, expressly among
Censurable Evils, [Quaere, How did they convict any Man of Covetousness; a
Fault which ordinarily no Man ever thinks himself guilty of!] but also as
Origin writes, All other Sins whatsoever. Cyprian therefore tells us, That not
only, Gravissima et extrema Delicta, Grosser Offenses, but also, Minora
Delicta, lesser ones, were Censured among them. The Churches of New England
have no express and agreed Catalogue of the Crimes, that shall expose to
Censures, except what is in the Bible it self: But the Rule which they profess,
is, That an Ecclesiastical Animadversion belongs to such plain Trespasses
against the Rules of a Godly, and a Sober, and a Righteous Life, as we may
justly Judge, that a Person under our Measures of Illumination cannot
obstinately persist in, without forfeiting an Interest in the Kingdom of GOD.
Such Opinions, and such Practices, as it may be our Duty to believe Consistent
with true PIETY, the Censures of the Churches do not animadvert upon. The
Evangelical Church State, being in some sort the Kingdom of Heaven, the
Churches of New England endeavor to make theirs a Visible Sermon to the World,
upon the Requisites of Men's being received into Heaven at the last. As in their
Admissions they study Practically to declare, Who shall abide in the Tabernacle
of the Lord, and who shall dwell in his holy Hill; So in their Exclusions, it is
their study Practically to declare, What crooked Ways they are, which will
procure Men to be led forth with the Workers of Iniquity; to declare, Who are
those Workers of Deceit, which our Lord will not have to dwell in His House.
They have been willing to make Origen's Declaration, We use our utmost
Endeavor, that our Assemblies may be composed of Wise and Good Men.

Indeed, while no body questions, Whether profane Swearing and Cursing, evident
Sabbath-breaking, Drunkenness, Fighting, Fornication and all Scandalous
Unchastities, Cheating, Stealing, an Abandonment unto Idleness, Lying,
unrighteous Defamations, and such Heresies as manifestly overturn the
Foundations of the Christian Religion and of all PIETY, are Censurable Evils;
the Churches have sometimes had some Difficulties, about Precocious Nativites.
But if a Child evidently come to the Growth which Nine Months, are ordinarily
allowed for, be born within about Seven Months after Marriage, it is ordinarily
expected, that the Fault of an Unlawful Congress be publicly and penitently
acknowledged; except the suspected Persons offer a Purgation by an Oath, or a
Declaration that shall be equivalent, for their Innocence. But the Birth may be
so Premature, that no such Purgation may be admitted of.

But a scandalous Offense against Wisdom and Goodness arising, it is thus
proceeded with.

The Pastor sends for the Delinquent, and usually he desires a few of the chief
Brethren to be with him in the Action; and enquiring into the Merit of the
Cause, he finds one of these to be necessary. Either the Delinquent manifests
himself so sensible of his Miscarriage, that only a Public Acknowledgement
before the whole Church is to be expected from him; or else there is yet
manifest that hardness of Heart, that bespeaks for him a public Admonition.

When it is judged that a public ACKNOWLEDGEMENT, may make the Plaster for the
Wounds which the Transgressor has given to Religion as broad as the Sore, he is
put either upon Writing of his Acknowledgement, (which is most usual) or upon
speaking of it, as it is foreseen will be most for Edification. And then in some
Congregation of the Faithful, either the Church alone (which is thought most
Advisable where the Neighborhood is very Populous, and full of Strangers) or
the Rest of the Neighborhood staying with the Church (which is the Custom in
most Places;) the Pastor gives the Church a true Report of the Scandal, and
adds his Hope of the Man's having Repenced of it; who now appears before them,
to testify it with a Confession proper to the Occasion, which is then
exhibited. Thus, there was an Exomologesis enjoined on the Penitents in the
Primitive Churches; and there was that whereof Tertullian so expresses himself,
Satisfactio Confessione disponitur, Confessione Poenitentia nascitur. This
being done, the Pastor puts it unto the Vote of their uplisted Hands, Whether
they accept the Satisfaction which has been thus offered by the Repenting
Brother before them, and are willing to restore him to their Favor and
Fellowship? Which being signified, the Paster then makes a loving and faithful
Speech unto the Restored Person; magnifying the Mercy of GOD unto the Penitent,
and therewith directing and exciting of him to improve what has now occurred,
for his more circumspect Walk all the Remainder of his Pilgrimage; And then
unto the rest of the Assembly, to take notice what those Evils are which they
now see must be repented of, and Watch and Pray that they may not fall into
them.

Where it is judged that a public ADMONITION is needful, the Pastor warns the
Offender to give his Attendance upon the Church at the Time that he prefixes
unto him; and in some Congregation of the Faithful, as before, he lays before
the Church, a short, plain, full Narrative of the Offense, which the Brother
now before him has fallen into; with the Testimonies of it, and of the
Unsuccessfulness which has hitherto been upon the Means to bring him unto a
due Remorse for it; Wherefore he also now calls upon the Person, to offer any
further Tokens of Repentance, if there be with him any to be offered.

Thus, among these Churches, as well as among the Churches in Origen's Time,
the Delinquent must appear, Before the whole Church.

If the Person do out of Contempt refuse to make his Appearance, the Pastor
moves the Church to concur (after some further Exercise of Patience, if in
their Lenity they think it necessary) unto his Excommunication.

If he do now appear, and give such Expressions of Repentance, that the Pastor
with the Brethren conclude his Heart come to the Frame it should be in, and the
Honor of the Gospel sufficiently vindicated, they do then by a Vote signify
their Acceptance of him; Whereupon the Pastor makes a Speech unto him, and unto
the rest of the Assembly, proper for the Occasion.

But if his Repentance, upon its being weighed in the Balance, be found
Wanting, the Pastor propounds it unto the Brethren, that they may proceed unto
a more solemn Admonition.

In the sad Cases of Censures, it has been though it an Indecency, to ask for the
Vote of Uplifted Hands: But the Pastor chooses to tell the Brethren, that if no
Objection be made against the Proceeding, he shall take their Silence for a
loud Expression of their Concurrence.

Hereupon, either at this Time or at some other appointed by the Pastor, the
Offender stands forth in the Christian Assembly; and the Pastor distinctly sets
before him his Faults, with the several Rules in the Gospel, which have in his
Faults been violated, concluding with Terms of this Importance.

Wherefore in the Name of the most Glorious GOD our SAVIOR, (which Name you
have Dishonored by Sinning against him;) and with the Concurrence of this His
People (a People that long to see you recovered out of the Sinful Distemper now
upon you;) I ADMONISH you, to Repent of the Scandals which we have seen proved
against you, as well as of the more secret Faults, by which you may have
provoked the Holy One to leave you to what is more openly Scandalous. I
ADMONISH you, to repair unto the Blood of the Redeemer, that you may be
cleansed from all your Sins, in that Fountain set open for Sin and for
Uncleanness. I ADMONISH you, to cry mightily unto the Spirit of the Lord, for
that new and soft Heart, that shall incline you, not only to confess your Sin
with unfeigned Sorrow, but also to forsake it with Eternal Detestation. I
signify unto you, that as there is Grace enough in our Great SAVIOR for you,
if you return to him, so upon such a Return, this Flock of his will make you
some Representation of His Grace, by renewing the Marks of their Favor to you.
But I signify unto you, that until we see good Symptoms of a Penitent Heart
upon you, We SUSPEND you from the Privileges of our Sacred Fellowship; and if
you continue Impenitent, we must proceed unto a further Declaration of that
Censure, which will be a Terrible Representation of your Banishment from the
Kingdom of GOD. GOD forbid that it should come to this! That it may not come to
this, we will now pour out our most affectionate Supplications for you.

So the Pastor makes a pathetical Prayer for the recovering of the fallen
Sinner, and a Blessing upon the Censure now applied unto him, and upon the
Warning which the whole Assembly has therein Received.

Perhaps he thinks it also proper to make a short Speech unto the Assembly,
directing a Right Improvement of the whole Transaction.

If the Person by some late Removal reside at so considerable a Distance from
the Church, that he cannot well attend, then, upon a full Proof of the Scandal
against him, the Church agrees to send unto him an Admonition in a Letter,
which the Pastor forms and signs accordingly.

When a Person has thus received an Admonition for a Scandal, the Private
Christians who dwell near him, reckon it their Duty, by Visiting of him, and by
Discoursing with him, to prosecute the good Effects thereof upon him.

Where a Scandalous Transgression is known only to One or Two, the Proceedings
of the Persons that know it, are the same, that they are in the Case of a
Personal Injury: The Steps directed in the XVIII. Chapter of Matthew. He that knows
the Offense, first of all himself goes to the Offender, and seriously
endeavors to bring him to Repentance. If the Offender be Obstinate, he then
(having Proof to convict him) takes one or two Brethren with him, and renews
his Endeavors that the Man may come to Repentance. If this be ineffectual,
They carry the Complaint unto the Pastor, who pursues the Designs of
Humiliation on the Soul of the Offender. If the Man does now Relent, and the
Offense be still in a sure Way to be kept private, the Satisfaction thus
privately given, is taken up withal. But if either the Man continue Impenitent,
or the Matter have so taken Air, as to be a Matter of common Fame, and the Talk
of the People, then it falls into the Course, that such a Matter is to be
treated withal.

When the Repentance of a Person duly admonished has been a competent Measure
of Time waited for, and no Fruits of Repentance are found upon him, the Church
passes on to that HIGHEST CENSURE, which is by Dionysius of Alexandria called,
A Driving away from the Church; By Tertullian, An Abjection and a Depulsion
from the Church; By Cyprian, A Separation from the Church, and an Ejection out
of it.

Yea, in some Atrocious Crimes, wherein the most severe Testimonies against the
things, whereof the Holy Son of GOD has declared, I hate them, appear necessary
to rescue the Church from His Wrath, and from an evil Report in the World, and
to break the Heart of Stone in the Criminal, the Churches do sometimes proceed,
ipso Facto, to an Excommunication.

But in these Churches, the Difference between the Lesser Excommunication and
the Greater Excommunication, has appeared so very little, that the Suspension
laid upon an Offender, at his Admonition is often stopped at, without going any
further. The Order, Put away the wicked Person, is therein complied withal.

But there are Degrees of Solemnity in putting away such an one; and the
Sentence called, An EXCOMMUNICATION, is to be more formally pronounced upon the
just Occasions.

The Pastor never proceeds unto it, without the Concurrence of the Brethren;
And we know that in Cyprian's Age, the Offenders pleaded their Cause, Apud
universam Plebem; and an Excommunication was ordered, Secundum Plebis divina
Suffragia.

In parallelling this Way of New England, we will for Brevity, only take
Advantage of a Quotation from an Eminent Scotch Presbyterian, even the Pious
and the Learned Rutherford, whose Words are these. Grave Beza, Calvin, Bucer,
Bullinger, Melancthon, Bucan, Paraeus, Rivetus, Sibrandus, Junius, Trelcatius;
The Fathers, Cyprian, Jerome, Augustine, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Theodoret, Theophylact, require all things to be done Consentiente Plebe, with
the Peoples Consent.

The Pastor ordering the Offender to attend at the Time appointed, he then
gives him an Opportunity to express his Repentance: Which if the Pastor
perceives not now done unto Satisfaction, he does with a proper Zeal propose
unto the Brethren, Whether any one of them can Object against their proceeding
unto the Censure of an Excommunication upon the Incorrigible Offender; -- But
if they Concur thereunto, he shall take their Silence for a full Intimation of
their Consent unto so sad an Action. Hereupon the Pastor (either now goes on
unto the Action, or) signifies unto the Offender, that he must on such a Day
give his Attendence, and hear then what the Church has to say unto him. If he
refuse to attend on the Day specified, the Censure is pronounced upon him, for
his adding of such a Contumacy unto his former Iniquity. But if he do attend,
the Pastor having recited a summary Account of the Case, in the hearing of the
Congregation, once more gives the Offender a Liberty to speak what he can, for
the Prevention of that Sentence, which is else waiting for him. If what he says
be not a sufficient Arrest of the Judgment, then, as Tertullian elegantly
describes this awful Action, Judicatur magno cum pondere, ut apud certos de Dei
Conspectu, summumque futuri Judicii Praejudicium est. The Pastor once again,
takes the Concurrence of the Brethren, as he did before; and then proceeds with
all possible Seriousness, Gravity, Majesty, Compassion, and Solemnity, unto the
Censure.

In the Primitive Times, we find that he who passed the formal Sentence on the
Criminal, first begun with Exhortations; that is to say, He exhorted the
Faithful with all Diligent Fear and Care, to avoid the Sins which had brought
the Offender before them, into such a deplorable Condition. Then followed sharp
Reprehensions to the Offender himself, rebuking him for his foul Enormities; as
being provoking to GOD, provoking to good Men, and pernicious to his own Soul;
And in the close of all, the Divine Censure was pronounced. Much such is the
Method of Excommunication in the Churches of New England.

In the Churches formerly, There was little scruple made, of using in
Excommunications, the Form of, Delivering up the Offender to Satan, for the
Destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the Day of the Lord
Jesus: By which they meant, That the Offender, now being declared and censured,
as one visibly belonging to the Kingdom of Satan, 'twas hoped such a Conviction
of his miserable State would hence arise unto his Mind, That his Corruption
would be thereby mortifyed, and Salvation furthered.

But the Pastors in some of the Churches, have now espoused another Notion of
the Traditio Satanae mentioned by the Apostle to the Corinthiaus, as being a
Prerogative Apostolical and Extraordinary. The Sovereign GOD sometimes gave to
His Prophets the Power of inflicting Diseases, or Distresses, on the Bodies of
ungodly Men, and of pronouncing upon them those Bodily Mischiefs, whereof he
has made Satan or the Angel of Death, to be the Executioner; Of such a Power,
Moses and Elijah in the Old Testament, and Peter and Paul in the New, have
given us Tremendous Examples. And this Power may seem to have been that Virga
Apostolica whereof the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. IV. 21. Shall I come unto you
with a Rod? On which the Author of the Ancient Commentary falsely ascribed unto
Jerome has this true Gloss, Quali Virga? Quali Petrus venit ad Ananiam et
Sapphiram, et Paulus ad Magum; such a Rod as Peter used on Ananias and
Sapphira, and such as Paul used on Elymas the Sorcerer. And what Paul did on
Hymenaeus and Philetus may be a further Instance of it. When the Apostle
decreed the Destruction of the Flesh, unto the Offender whom he delivered unto
Satan, the Opposition of the Spirit in the next Clause makes it evident that
the Body is intended; He decreed then, that the Body of Offender should be left
unto Satanical Impressions and Afflictions, by the Terrors whereof his poor
Soul might be awakened unto a Saving Repentance. Chrysostom accordingly, who
understood Greek, expounds the OLETHPON SAPKOS as exemplified in the Vexations
of Job; and adds, That he may Scourge him with an evil Ulcer, or some other
Disease. Ambrose in like sort expounds it thus; Nempe sicut Dominus in Animam
Sancti Job Potestatem non dedit, sed in Carnem ejus permisit Licentiam, ita his
traditur Satanae. Jerome thus expounds it, Praecepit eum tradi Paenitentiae in
Interitum et Vexationem Carnis, per Jejunia et Egrotationes, ut Spiritus Salvus
fiat. Thus Pacianus also, in one of his Epistles to Sempronianus, by this
Destruction of the Flesh, understands, Carnis Angustias, et Detrimenta
Membrorum. There seems a plain Distinction to be made, [1 Cor. V. 5.13.] The
Censure upon the Incestuous Corinthian is directed by the Apostle in these
Words, Put away from your selves that wicked Person; The ordinary Ministry of
the Church was to do this, with the Consent of the Brethren. But now the
Apostle without staying for their Consent, by his own Authority says, I have
decreed in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to deliver such an one to Satan.
In which Decree of his, he demands of them to rest Satisfied, when they should
be gathered together. Hence the Primitive Churches did abstain from this Form
of Excommunication, when they darted the Thunderbolt with never so many other
terrible Circumstances. Nothing perhaps would be more terrible, than the
Excommunication, wherewith Andronicus, the Prefect of Ptolema^s, was
Anathematized by Synesius, for his Cruelties and Blasphemies. The Terms were;
Let no Temple of GOD be open unto Andronicus, and his Accomplices: Let every
Holy Place be shut upon them. We admonish every Person, whether public or
private, that they neither Lodge with them, nor Eat with them. And especially,
let the Ministers of GOD, neither speak to them while they Live, nor be at
their Funeral when they Dye. Of any Delivering to Satan, there was OYDE GPY.
And for this Cause, the renowned National Synod of the French Protestant
Churches met at Alez, forbad this Form of Excommunication, to be used among
them.

Wherefore the Pastor, when he comes to pass the Sentence of Excommunication,
does make as convincing a Speech as he can to the Offender, setting before him
the heinous Nature of his Offense, and of his Impenitency under it. And at the
same time, he calls upon all the People to take notice of the Holiness which
the Church must and will manifest, in their not bearing with those that are
Evil, and of the transcendent Holiness in the Glorious Head of the Church,
whereof he will have every Church to be sensible. He then concludes with
something of this Importance.

-- And now, In the Name of the Glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST, and with the
Concurrence of his faithful People now assembled, I do declare you to be CUT
OFF, (your Sin has procured such an Excision for you!) from the Privileges
and Expectations of such as are in Covenant with the Churches of GOD. I declare
you to belong visibly to the sinful and woeful Kingdom of Satan, the Ruler of
the Darkness of this World. I declare you to be a Person, from whom the
Followers of our Holy Lord are to withdraw, as from one that walks Disorderly.
And this just Sentence is now passed upon you, as a Representation of a
Sentence much more dreadful, to be passed upon you, in the Day when the Lord
JESUS CHRIST shall come to judge the World: -- Except it be prevented by a
seasonable Repentance; which may our Gracious GOD of his Infinite Mercy bestow
upon you! --

Brethren, Let us pour out our Prayers on this Mournful Occasion! -- Which the
Fastor proceeds to do accordingly.

If the Offender have refused his Attendence, the Excommunication yet goes on,
in Terms proper for one that is out of hearing, and will not hear.

Sometimes the Circumstances of the Offender are so difficult, that before the
Church proceeds to this Extremity, they send unto some of the Neighboring
Churches, that from their ^legates meeting in a Council for this Purpose, they
may receive that Advice, which may put their Proceedings beyond all
Contestation. And in this the Practice of New England, is not very far
different from that of the primitive Times, when it was a Custom, for the
Decision of more difficult Points, to desire the Bishops of the neighboring
Churches, to come over and assist with their Presence, to free the Censures
from the Imputation of Unrighteousness or Partiality. Thus when a nice Affair
was to be determined at Rome, on Cornelius's Desire, Adfuerunt Episcopi
Quinque, ut firmato Consilio, quid (...) Personam eorum observari deberet,
consensu ommium Statucre^ur;
five Bishops assisted, that so what they did might be Indisputable.

3. When a Person has been Excommunicated, the Faithful do continue unto him,
the general Offices of Humanity; nor does he suffer for it any civil Penalties:
Only this, that such an one is rarely chosen by the People to any public
Employments. But yet they withold from him, their Familiarity; and act
according to the Apostolical Rule of, Avoiding them; which in Cyprian's time,
was thus understood, Contumaces et Deum non timentes, et ab Ecclesia in totum
recedentes, nemo comitetur.

The Way to get a Censure taken off, is by an Exemplary REPENTANCE, and such as
may be Satisfactory to the Sentiments of Reasonable Piety.

In this Repentance, the Churches of New England require not all the Ceremonies
mentioned by Tertullian, A lying in Sackcloth and Ashes, having a squalid Body
and a dejected Soul; Fasting, Praying, Weeping, Groaning, and Roaring Night and
Day, and throwing themselves at the Feet of the Elders, and kneeling before the
Faithful, begging their Prayers and their Pardon; But yet they require the
Essence and Substance of what is mentioned in the Letters of the Ministers to
Cyprian; [ Pulsent sane fores sed non utique confringant: Castrorum Caelestium
excubent portis, sed armati Modestia, qua intelligant se desertores suisse.
Resumant precum suarum Tubam: Sed non q^ Bellicum clangant. Multum illis
proficiet Petitio Modesta, Postulatio verecunda, Humilitas necessaria,
Patientia non otiosa Mittant Legatos pro suis Doloribus, Lacrymas; Advocatione
fungantur ex intimo pectore prolati Gemitus, delorent probantes commiss^
Criminis, ^t (...);]
In Sum, Humility, Modesty, Patience, Petition, Tears, with Reformation, are
expected in the Penitent; and none of those Vanities or Levities which are
mentioned by Cyprian, in his Book, De Lapsu, as Confutations of a professed
Repentance, are to be indulged with them. There Is no such Complete and Legal
Time of Satisfaction limited in the Churches of New England, as the rigider
among the Ancients called, The Time of Penance, which with an arbitrary
Severity they sometimes imposed. But wherever there are seen Rational
Demonstrations of Repentance in an Excommunicate, the Pastor soon brings him to
the Church, [For the Repenting and the Absolving of the Fallen, is in these
Churches, as it was required in Austin's Time, [In Notiti^ Multorum, vel etiam
totius Plebis agere Penitentiam non recuset;]
Let him not refuse to express his Repentance, even before all the People: Or
as that of Natalius, mentioned by Eusebius, when he melted the whole Church
into the Tears of Compassion for him,] who upon the View thereof do Vote the
Restoration of the Penitent, (with an uplifted Hand;) and the Pastor pronounces
him restored; with solemn Charges unto him, to walk worthy of the Divine
Goodness; -- whereto he adds Prayers, and Praises, and Speeches that may suit
the Grateful Occasion. And thus the Person is as Jerome speaks, [ Episcopo et
omni Populo collacrymantibus, Receptus, sub oculis omnis Ecclesiae, ad
Communionem]
Restored in the Presence of the whole Church, with Pastor and People together
weeping over him.

Some in Danger (and Absence) by Sickness, have been released from their
Censure, upon the Report of the Pastor, and certain Brethren, made unto the
Church, of a Repentance well expressed in them.

ARTICLE IX. Of COUNCILS upon Emergencies.
. 1. THE Case may be so that a Person may be oppressed by unjust Passion and
Prejudice, and have a Censure unjustly passed upon him. In this Case, the
Churches of New England, have a Remedy for Oppression, that is to say, A
COUNCIL; the Methods whereof are now to be declared.

Though the Churches of New England have been called Independents, they have not
yet arrived unto the Degree of Independency, which was challenged in the Days
of Austin; Habet omnis Episcopus pro licentia Potestatis et Libertatis suae
Arbitrium proprium; Judicari ab alio non potest, quomodo nec ipse Judicure; sed
expectemus universi Judicium Christi, qui solus habet de actu nostro Judicandi
potestatem.

The Person aggrieved applies himself to the Pastor, and by him to the Church,
with humble Remonstrances of the Hardships which he apprehends used upon him;
desiring them to Review his Case: And if this don't obtain, then to accommodate
him in calling a Council of Neighbor Churches, (chosen with mutual
Satisfaction,) to judge of the Proceedings.

If they refuse to do it, he may do it without them: Only still informing them
what he does.

He writes Letters, to what Churches in the Neighborhood he pleases; briefly
declaring, That he apprehends himself to suffer by an Administration that needs
to be more thoroughly enquired into; and entreating the Pastors, with the
Delegates of the Churches to whom he now makes his Address, to come to the
Place, and at the Time, that are specified in the Letters, and consider the
Case, whereof a full Representation shall then and there be laid before them;
and give their Advice, which he hopes will be with all Sincerity and Humility
hearkened to.

If the Church think it advisable for them to have their Share in choosing and
calling the Council, the Letters then go in their Name, (signed by the Pastor)
and are of the like Importance.

The Pastors of the Churches (to whom an aggrieved Person has (under the
neglect of the Church to do any thing for the Relief of his Distress) made his
Complaints, do not rashly at once read his Letters to their Churches: But
having informed themselves as thoroughly as they can of the Case, they signify
unto the Pastor of the Church complained of, what they have received, and ask
him to let them know whether the Difficulty cannot be removed, without their
coming to them as a Council; or whether they have any just Objection to make
against their coming to them. For the management of these Preliminaries, the
Pastors either have an Interview, or else by Messengers hold such a
Communication with one another, as is needful to their Concurrence in the
Action.

If after all, the Pastors are apprehensive that their further Proceeding may
be necessary, they proceed then to read their Letters to the Churches; who
thereupon choose their Delegates for a Council.

In Choosing of the Delegates, the Pastor usually Nominates the Persons whom he
would commend unto the Choice of the Church, and then says unto the Church, If
there are any others, whom you will please to nominate on this Occasion, you
have and know your Liberty.

When it is only an Aggrieved Party, that has addressed for a Council, the
Pastors do by the Letters to the Pastor of the Church complained of, signify
Where and When their coming is to be looked for.

The Council coming or the Spot, first choose their Moderator, and use (...)
other necessary Praeliminaries; Whereupon ^hey proceed unto as public an
Hearing as they they can have, [namely in the Meeting House,] of the things
that are to come under their Examination; The Moderator ever beginning with
Solemn Supplications.

Retiring then to the Place of their more private Entertainment, they there
consider over again, all that has been laid before them. Every Member of the
Council may with leave of the Moderator declare their Sentiments.

The Result is drawn up in a proper Instrument; wherein they first Report what
they find, and then Advise what they would have to be done; usually fortifying
their Advice with pertinent Passages of the Sacred Scriptures, annexed unto
each of the Articles.

If they find, that the Person has not suffered such Injury as he pretends
unto, he comes off as unhappily as Faelicissimus did; who after he was
Excommunicated in his own Congregation, made as an Injured Person, his Appeal
to a Synod; but the Synod Ratified and Confirmed the S^tence of Excommunication
against him.

If they find the Person to have suffered Palpable Injury, they endeavor to
convince the Church of it, and advise them to restore the Injured Person unto
his former Station.

They Order that if the Church do refuse this, (or; do refuse to give the
Council an Account of the Matter; A thing that perhaps never happened!) the
Person be admitted into some other Church of the Neighborhood, and so unto
Communion with them all.

The Church persisting in their Irregularity, they run the hazard of a
Proceeding which never was ( above once!) come into; That is, that the Council
communicating the true State of the Case unto the Churches that sent them, and
obtaining from them a Ratification of their Judgment, they do by a Solemn Act,
Withdraw Communion from that Church, or from as many in it, as will go on to
abett and maintain the Unjust Censure which has been passed in it. But, Blessed
be the Glorious Head of the Church! The Interposition of His Holy SPIRIT
working on the Minds of His People, while they are in His Way thus waiting on
Him, still obtains the Ends which they aim at, and prevents any such dreadful
Extremities.

It Is no rare thing for a Temper to be found on these Occasions.

Oftentimes an aggrieved Party applying to One or Two, wiser Ministers in the
Neighborhood, they do by their private and prudent Methods, bring Matters to
such an Issue, as to supersede the necessity of a Council.

It has been thought, an aggrieved Party is allowed by the New-English
Platform, to apply unto one single Church in the Vicinity; who by their
Delegates may, after due Preliminaries, come to the Church complained of, and
ask for some Account of their Proceedings. And if they cannot put into Joint,
what was out of it, this Church which had been applied unto, may then pray a
competent Number of other Churches, to unite their Delegates with them, in a
larger Council, to use further Endeavors for the Rectifying of what is out of
Order. And then! -- Something of this Way has been sometimes practiced.

. 2. But what shall be done when the Pastor himself becomes an Offender? A
Deplorable Case this! And yet what sometimes has happened.

In the Days of Cyprian, there were Martialis and Basilides, two Spanish
Bishops, deposed by their Churches, for Apostasy and Idolatry; and Foelix and
Sabinus were chosen by their Churches in their Stead. After this Deposition,
the two Bishops claimed the Exercise of their Authority; But the People denied
it unto them: And when the Bishops of Africa hereupon A. C. 258. convened in a
Synod, whereof Cyprian was the President, the Action of the Churches was
approved and commended, and this Doctrine asserted, That they had not acted
irregularly since the People had the chief Power of choosing worthy Bishops, and
of refusing those that are Unworthy.

If the Reader will go somewhat higher into Antiquity, he may from the Archives
thereof take down that famous Epistle of Clemens Romanus to the Brethren of the
Church in Corinth, which in Eusebius is deservedly called, EGAL KAI THAYASIA,
and, IKANOTAT GPAPH, A great, a wonderful, a powerful Writing, and one which,
he says, was publicly read in some of the Churches: And which Irenaeus also
most justly calls, Potentissimas Literas. In all Antiquity, after the Writings
of their Apostles (which indeed make an Honorable Mention of this our Clemens,
Phil. IV. 3.) there is not so exact a Representation of the Order observed in
the first Christian Churches, as there is in this Epistle. Now this Epistle
being written to the Brethren of the Church at Corinth, from that at Rome, on
the Occasion of a Sinful Excess which they had committed in the Deposition of
their Elders, there is not one Word said, as if the Brethren had assumed a
Liberty to themselves, which they had no claim unto; but they are severely
reproved, because they had Abused their Liberty, in hearkening unto the
Suggestions of Two or Three discontented Persons, against Elders who had
presided Laudably among them, and who had never deserved thus to be dealt
withal.

Notwithstanding this, the Churches of New England consider, that as their
Pastors are not Ordained without a Council, so neither are they without a
Council to be deposed. Nor do they think, that ordinarily a Church-Meeting may
be regularly held, without the Consent of their Pastors. They are not
altogether ignorant, that in the Primitive Times, where Churches were
associated, and their Circumstances would allow of it, they did not by
themselves alone, exert those Powers, which in Cases of Necessity, they might
assert as belonging to them. The Churches to prevent the Mischiefs of Giddiness
and Faction, and render all their Actions unquestionable, would have their
Complaints against Scandalous Pastors heard by a Synod, without the Concurrence
whereof ordinarily such Pastors come not under a Deposition. Thus we find
Paulus Samosatenus, the Bishop of Antioch, was deposed by a Synod, held in that
Place. And we find Privatus the Bishop of Lambese, was Nonaginta Episcoporum
Sententia condemnatus.

Wherefore when a Pastor has fallen into Scandal, the Brethren that are
acquainted with it, proceed, as they would with another Brother in such Cases;
only with such special Terms of Respect (and Repetition of Address) as the
Relation of a Father may call for.

If the Scandal be gone so far that a public Satisfaction is become necessary,
the Dissatisfied Brethren apply themselves to him, and request him to appoint a
Church-Meeting, for the hearing and the healing of the Matter.

If he comply, and have his Heart at the Church-Meeting, touched with a due
Remorse; he offers them his Acknowledgement; which if they judge it necessary,
they demand that he Repeat it, yet more public^ly on a Lord's Day, in the
Congregation. And he then modestly puts it unto the Vote, Whether they have
received Satisfaction.

But if he be so self-willed, that he will not appoint a Church-Meeting, the
Dissatisfied Brethren, do set apart some time together to call upon the
Glorious GOD for His Direction and Compassion, in the Grievous Case now come
upon them, and privately advise with some of the Pastors in the Neighborhood;
Whereupon they write Letters unto some of the Neighboring Churches, wherein
they signify, that some unhappy Offenses have arisen among them, for the
managing and composing whereof, the help of a Council appears to be necessary;
for which Cause they humbly pray, that the Churches would express their Love
and Care for them and send their Pastors and other Delegates (at the Time and
Place intimated) effectually to advise them what may be their Duty on so sad an
Occasion.

Or, if at the Church-Meeting, he and they cannot agree; nay, though he should
hook in the Major part unto a Palliation of the Matters, and there be no more
than two or Three that remain still aggrieved; the Dissatisfied Brethren make a
Tender to join with him in calling of a Council: which if he refuse, then these
do it without him: Only they still give Notice unto him (and his Party if he
have any,) what they do.

When the Council arrives, they first more privately form themselves into
Order, by choosing a Moderator, and speaking with all Persons concerned so far
as they count it needful, by way of Preparation for their Business. Then they
pass to the Meeting House; where being first conveniently seated, all Persons
that will may see and hear all that is done. Prayers are made; the Offender is
called for; the Dissatisfied Brethren produce their Grievances, with their
Evidences; and all that can be said on both sides is considered.

The Council then retire to their more private Consultation; where they draw up
their final Judgment; Returning anon to the public Assembly, for the
Publication of it.

If the Offender do now come unto them with sufficient Expressions of
Repentance, they direct a Satisfactory Repetition thereof Now in the public
Assembly, (and if need be, on some following Lord's Day also;) and they advise
the Dissatisfied Brethren to restore their just Regards unto him.

If the Offender be obstinate, they then sharply rebuke him; and in a Written
Instrument, signed by the Moderator, and all the Council, (or by him, In the
Name of the Council --) they pronounce him Unworthy of the Sacred Ministry, and
advise the Church (after due Waiting) to supply his Place with a more worthy
Person; and also to proceed unto an Excommunication, if he continue in his
Impenitency.

The Council returning to the public Assembly, there, after seasonable Speeches
made by the Moderator, (and others of the Council, if they please) the Result
of the Council is read, and then delivered unto one of the Brethren, at whose
Invitation they are here together. And pertinent Prayers are added for the
Close of all.

If aster all, the Church must come unto that Extremity of an Excommunication
upon this Offender, they choose a Grave Pastor of Another Church, (unless they
have one of their own) to come on some Lord's Day among them, and go through
with it, according to the General Methods of such a Censure.

On the Mention of this, it may be added, That Churches remaining Vacant after
the Death of their Pastors, upon Difficulties and Emergencies arising among
themselves, and Affairs which need a greater Wisdom than their own to manage
them, they apply themselves unto some considerable Minister in their Vicinity:
Entreating him to afford his Presence at their Church-Meeting, and manage their
Votes, and regulate all their Proceedings.

. 3. The Translation of a PASTOR, is a Thing more seldom Occurring, and more
hardly Obtained, in the Churches of New England, than in many other of the
Reformed Churches. The Relation between a Pastor, and his People, is what the
Christians throughout the Country, appear generally to think not very easy to
be dissolved; and the Removal of a Minister is accomplished here, with more
Difficulty than it is in many other Places. More than Once or Twice there have
been published some Determinations, which express the General Apprehension in
the Churches upon the Matter, to this Purpose; A Pastor settled in the Service
of a People, is to be so sensible of his Designation by the SPIRIT and
Providence of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, for that Service, and of the Account that
he must give unto GOD, about his Behavior in it, that his Removal must not be
rashly attempted, but with much Consideration, Consultation, Supplication, and
sincere Desire to follow the Conduct of Heaven in it.

And, That the Will of our LORD about the Removal of any Pastor from his People
may be understood, it is requisite, that the Minister do not entirely Assume to
himself the Judgment of his own Call to Remove; but a great Regard must be had
unto the Direction of the Churches in the Neighborhood. And; If much of
Scandal, will certainly ensue upon the Removal of a a Pastor from his People,
That should weigh down against many Circumstances that would rather invite it.
Upon such Views, it has been judged requisite; First, That the Reasons of the
Removal be laid before Authentic Judges, and by these be pronounced such, that
the Removal thereupon may be justly and wisely proceeded in. And, Where it can
be obtained, a Council of Churches ought therefore to be convened; As there was
for the Ordaining. And, Then; That the Reasons be found such as are consistent
with the Solemn Vow, which the Person who takes the Charge of a Church, makes
unto our Glorious LORD, for the faithful Discharge of his Ministry; and the
Labor, and Patience, of one sensible that his Works are known unto the Lord;
and the servent Love that such an one should bear to his Flock; having them in
his Heart for to Live and to Die with them.

Sometimes, but Rarely, a Pastor and a People have with Mutual Agreement more
privately parted with one another; -- and no further Words have been made about
it!

It is very Edifying to see, That whereas many Congregations in the World,
would count it A Deliverance (And, It would be so!) to have their Ministers
taken from them, the Ministers of this Country have been, and still are,
generally so Esteemed and Beloved by their People, that if there were any
Motion toward the Calling one of them away, there would be a grievous
Commotion among the People upon it; -- even as if Robbers of Churches were
assaulting them.

Indeed, if there be but One Pastor in a Church, be He never so Great, and It
never so Small, no Body durst scarce whisper a Word of his Removal to another,
though it might carry with it never such an Enlargement of his Opportunities to
be Serviceable. And some have thought the public Benefit, and common Interest
of the Churches in general has not been so well consulted in this perpetual
Confinement of Grown and Bright Abilities.

When a Church has been enriched with Two Worthy Pastors, another Church that
has been as a City set upon an Hill, and a Seat of great Importance, has
applied unto them, to obtain one of their Pastors from them. And their Desire
has, though not without Difficulty, and Councils called and acting on the
Occasion, been accomplished.

In this Case, the Church whereto the Released Pastor is Invited, sends unto
the Neighboring Churches, to Visit them with their Pastors and other
Delegates, for his Instalment, as they do for an ordinary Ordination. The
Instalment is carried on, with a^ the Circumstances and Solemnities of an
Ordination; only that Ri^e, the Imposition of Hands, is now omitted; But a
Charge is given by the Moderator, for the faithful Discharge of his Ministry in
This Place; and suitable Prayers accompany it; Unto which is added, The Right
Hand of Fellowship, from the Churches.

When the Government of the Colleges has been Vacant, Pastors of Churches have
been chosen to it. But upon the Churches refusing to dismiss them, all Parties
have been so tender of the Claim which the Churches have to the Gifts which
their SAVIOR has bestowed upon them, that the Prosecution of the Matter has
been desisted from.

And yet, When the Necessity has been Great, and all due Preliminaries of
Councils have been observed, and all due Reparations unto the Flock have been
offered, and the Pastor has been Willing to answer the Call, but the People
have still denied his Dismission; it has been in such a Case declared, If a
Church addressed for the Grant of their Pastor for such a General Good, after
all due Means, do out of a Principle which does not honor the Gospel, refuse
to do their plain Duty, the Pastor who knows His, may do it; and with much
Peace of Mind, Obey the Call of GOD which he has received; and the Churches
throughout the Land will Own him, and Thank him, and Pray for the Blessing of
GOD upon him.

. 4. The Councils in the Churches of New England, rarely meet with
Contradictions from the Churches, whose Cases have been laid before them. One
Method of Prudence used for the Prevention of such Things has been this; That
the Councils having exhibited their Decisions, do not presently Dissolve, but
Adjourn themselves for some Time [certain or uncertain] to see, Whether their
Advice be attended or no. The New English Councils have been generally so
regularly composed, and in so good a Temper, that there has been in them very
little Occasion for the old Complaint, Omne Concilium parit Bellum; or for such
a Story as that of Curcellaeus, Experientiam docere nullas unquam Controversias
de Religione inter Christiancs exortas, Auctoritate Synodali foeliciter
terminatas fuisse.

Nevertheless, there have been formerly some Cases wherein it has been sound
necessary to call New Councils, for further Deliberations upon Things, which
the First had not sufficiently and successfully determined.

There are many Circumstantials in Church Order, wherein the Churches do leave
one another so Free, that the Councils never find it worth the while to
infringe that Freedom; and they see no Inconvenience in that Indulgence, which
the old Affricon Synod in their Letter to the more imposing Stephen pleaded
for; Scimus quosdam, quod semel imbiberint, nolle deponere, nec Propositum suum
facile mutant: Sed salvo inter Collegas Pacis et Concordiae Vincul^, quaedam
propris, quae apud se semel sunt usurpata, retinere; Qua in re, nec nos Vim
cuiquam sacimus, aut Legem damus; cum habear in Ecclesiae Administratione
Voluntatis suae Arbitrium Liberum, unusquisqve Praep^situs, Rationem Actus sai
Domino redditurus.
That Pastors may without Offense to their Neighbors, or any Breach upon
Concord, have some things proper to themselves; in which they shall owe no
Account of their Administration, but unto the Lord.

Nevertheless, it is Believed, and sometimes has been practiced, That when any
one Particular Church, commits a notorious Error in its Proceedings, the
Churches in the Neighborhood, upon the Noise and Proof of it may write Letters
of Admonition unto the Erring Church; not unlike those of old written from the
Church of Rome unto the Church of Corinth.

And though it has never yet been among the Practices, yet it is one of the
Principles in these Churches, That the Neighboring Churches, upon the Motion
of their Pastors, may without any Call from the Church, (or from any in the
Church) where gross Mischiefs do notoriously happen, upon the justly believed
Report of those Mischiefs, meet in a Council to take a Course about them.

They never had yet any General SYNODS of all the Churches in a Colony, but
such as were convened upon a Motion from the Civil Magistrate, upon Matters
wherein all the Churches were concerned; and this has been four Times done in
the Massachusett-Colony. Nevertheless, they suppose a Liberty to meet in
Synods, without the Direction of the Civil Magistrate. Why not, they say, as
well as the Primitive Churches before the Days of Constantine?

The Synods of New England know no Weapons, but what are purely Spiritual. They
pretend unto no Juridical Power; nor any significancy, but what is merely ^ive
and Suasory. They are nothing but some Wise and Good Men meeting together to
advise the Churches how to observe the Rules of the most Inoffensive Piety.
When they have done all, the Churches are at Liberty, to judge how far their
Advice is to be followed. They have no Secular Arm to enforce any Canons; They
ask none; They want none. And they cannot believe, that any Protestant Secular
Arm would upon a due Information any more Forbid their Meeting, than they would
any of the Religious Assemblies upheld in the Country. No body forbids the
General Synods [or, Conventions] of the Dissenters, in England and Ireland, [or
the other American Provinces.] Nay, The Quakers themselves hold their General
Meetings without any Commands of Governors for the Dispersing of them.

The Churches of New England cannot easily have their Sense better expressed,
than in the Terms, of the famous Festus Hommius, who though he pleads for the
Political Binding Power of Synodical Decrees, as far as a Protestant can do so,
yet after all shows himself a MAN, in these Reasonable Words. It Is pity but
this Manly Talk should be read in its Original. Decreta Conciliornm Ecclesiis
non debent proponi aut obtruai, tanquam dicta quaedam Fretoria. aut Decreta
Persica; sed mitti debent Acta habiti Concilii ad omnes Ecclesias, ut ab iisdem
a^ ^musiim Verbi Divini Examinentur, et si cum ea consentire fuerint comperta,
approbentur, at que ita tandem ab Ecclesiis approbantibus voluntary et
unanimiter, hand sane invite aut coacte, recipiantur. Ecclesiae enim
Conscientias suas Delegatorum suorum ad Synodum Judicio non alligarunt, nec eis
absolutissimam quidvis ipsorum Nomine statuendi Folestatem concesserunt: Sed
Conscientiae soli Verbo DEI semper manent al^ ga^: cui si Conformia compere^int
Delegatorum Acta ac Decreta, tum demum Ecclesiae ea rata (...) atque approbare
debent. F^st. Hem. Disp. 18. De Author. Council. These. 4.
The Decrees of Councils ought not to be propounded unto or obtruded upon, the
Churches, as Praetorian Sayings or Persian Decrees, but the Acts of the Council
ought to be sent unto all the Churches, that they may examine them by the Rule
of the Word of GOD; and that if they be found to agree with it, they may be
approved, and so at length may be willingly and unanimously, not unwillingly
and by Compulsion, received by the Churches approving them. For the Churches
have not bound their Consciences to the Judgment of those whom they send to the
Synod; nor have they given them an Absolute Power of Decreeing what they List,
in their Names: But their Consciences are always tied only to the Word of GOD;
whereto if they find the Acts and Decrees of their Messengers conformed, then
at length the Churches ought to establish and approve them.

To forbid the Synods of Churches, which never pretended unto any more than
This! -- Or, to declare, that the Meeting of such Synods, for nothing but the
Reviving and Preserving of Real PIETY, will not be for the Safety, of -- GOD knows
what! -- Unaccountable! However, Since the Provisions which the General Synods
of the Churches have already made for them are what they are, it is thought by
some, that the Publication of this RATIO DISCIPLINAE, may somewhat Supersede
all Occasion for any more General Synods: They may do well enough without them.

When a Council meets. their first Work is, to choose a Moderator; who, like
Cyprian the Moderator of the Council at Carthage; like Palmas the Prolocutor of
the Synod in France; counts it his Duty from his Chair, to see all things
calmly debated, and fairly concluded, and sum up all things, that have been
deliberated, and call for the Votes of the Assembly, and begin and finish all
with Supplications to Heaven. And sometimes like The^philus and Narcissus, in a
Synod of Pal^stine, there have been Two Moderators.

Though it has been strongly pleaded, that no Officers of the Churches have a
Right upon that Score, to appear as their Delegates, but that the Churches may
choose whom they please, for their Delegates, and the Delegates have all of them
an equal Power in the Synod for which they are chosen: Yet the Churches do in
Fact proceed no otherwise, than as if their Pastors were Ex Officio the Members
of the Councils for which their Churches were sent unto. And in the Choice of
Delegates for Councils, (as well as in the Call for them) still the Terms run,
For Elders and Messengers.

But then on the other hand, the Pastors of the Churches ordinarily go to no
proper Councils, without some other Delegates, chosen from among the Brethren,
to accompany them. And once, when in a General Synod of the Churches, there
were some Churches who thought it enough that they sent only their Pastors unto
it, the Synod asserted, that it was the Duty of the Churches, to have sent
other Messengers with them; and Letters were for that Purpose immediately
issued out unto these Churches. They knew that in the Primitive Times, in
Synods, there were present besides the Church Officers, AI EKKASIAI THEOY(as
Eusebius expresses it) the Churches of GOD, represented by Brethren belonging
to them; And Synods were then held, Consultis et ipsis Laicis (according to
Cyprian) and, The People were admitted unto a part in the Consultations. And in
allowing of Suffrages to such Members of their Synods, they judged that the
Primitive Pattern in the Acts of the Apostles countenanced them: For which
Cause also, the Interest of the People (or Laics) in such Conventions, is
maintained by our Juel, and Whitaker, and Parker, and others, against the
Romanists.

. 5. How often Provincial Synods were held in Firmilian's Time, is evident from
that Report of his, Per singulos Annos in unum convenient. The Churches of
New England can have no such thing reported of them. They have no Provincial
Synods; and their Occasional Synods, on special Emergencies, and of smaller
Dimensions, are but as the Occasions happen for them. The Thing among them that
is the nearest thereunto, is a General Convention of Ministers, (which perhaps
are not above half) belonging to the Province, at the Time of the Anniversary
Solemnity, when the General Assembly of the Province meets, on the last
Wednesday in the Month of May, to elect their Counselors for the Year ensuing.
Then the Ministers, choosing a Moderator, do propose Matters of public
Importance, referring to the Interest of Religion in the Churches; and though
they assume no Decisive Power, yet the Advice which they give to the People of
GOD, has proved of great Use unto the Country.

There is now taken up the Custom, for ( Concio ad Clerum,) a Sermon to be
Preached unto the Convention of Ministers, on the Day after the Election, by
one of their Number, chosen to it by their Votes, at their Meeting in the
preceding Year.

At this Convention, Every Pastor that meets with singular Difficulties, has
Opportunity to bring them under Consideration. But the Question most usually
now considered, is of this Importance, What may be further proposed, for the
preserving and promoting of true PIETY in the Land?

Excellent Things have been here Concerted and Concluded, for, The Propagation
of Religion; and Collections produced for that Purpose in all the Churches.

And Motions have been hence made unto the General Assembly for such Acts and
Laws as the Morals of the People have called for.

[The Governor of the Province, and such Counselors as dwell in the City of
Boston, together with the Representatives of the Town, and the Speaker of their
House; are invited also to dine with the Ministers, at the Table, which the
Deacons of the united Churches in Boston provide for them, the Day after the
Election: Some small Resemblance of what is called, The Feast of Moses and
Aaron, in the Netherlands.]

To Exemplify one Result of this Convention, may not only Explain the Custom
then used, but also Suggest some things worthy of a Perpetual and an Extensive
Consideration.

Boston, 1. d. IV. m. 1704.
To Serve the Great Intentions of Religion, which is lamentably decaying in the
Country: It is proposed,

I. That the Pastors of the Churches do personally Discourse with the Young
People in their Flocks, and with all possible Prudence and Goodness endeavor
to win their Consent unto the Covenant of Grace, in all the Glorious Articles
of it.

II. That unto this Purpose, the Pastors do take up that Laborious, but
engaging Practice, of making their Personal Visits unto all the Families that
belong unto their Congregations.

III. That the Pastors in this Way of Proceeding, bring on their People as far
as they can, publicly, and solemnly to Recognize the Covenant of GOD, and come
into such a Degree of the Church State, as they shall be willing to take their
Station in: But not to leave off, till they shall be qualified for, and
persuaded to, Communion with the Church in all special Ordinances.

IV. That for such as have submitted unto the Government of CHRIST in any of
His Churches, no Pastors of any other Churches, any way go to shelter them
under their Wing, from the Discipline of those, from whom they have not been
fairly recommended.

V. That they who have not actually Recognized their Subjection to the
Discipline of CHRIST it. His Church, yet should, either upon their obstinate
Refusal of such a Subjection, or their falling into other Scandals, be
faithfully treated with proper Admonitions: About the Method and Manner of
managing which Admonitions, the Pastors with their several Churches, will be
left unto the Exercise of their own Discretion.

VI. It is desired and intended, if the Lord please, That at the General
Convention of the Ministers, there may be given in by each of the Pastors
present, An Account of their Progress and Success in that holy Undertaking,
which has been proposed: That so, the Lord may have the Glory of His Grace, and
the Condition of Religion may be the better known and and served among us.

VII. As a Subserviency to those Good and Great Intentions, it is proposed,
That the Associations of the Ministers in the several Parts of Country may be
strengthened; And the several Associations may be Letters hold more free
Communications with one another.

. 6. It has been proposed, That the Ministers of the Country should form
themselves into ASSOCIATIONS that may meet at proper Times to consider such
things as may properly ly before them; relating to their own Faithfulness
toward each other, and the common Interests of the Churches; And that each of
the ASSOCIATIONS have a Moderator for a certain time, who shall continue till
another be chosen; and who may call them together upon Emergencies.

In these ASSOCIATIONS, it has been proposed, That, with due Supplications to
Heaven, Questions and Cases of Importanee, either provided by themselves, or by
others presented unto them, should be upon due Deliberation answered.

That Advice be taken by the Associated Pastors from time to time, e'r^ they
proceed unto any Actions in their Particular Churches which may be likely to
produce any Embroilments.

That the Associated Pastors do carefully and lovingly treat each other with
that Watchfulness, which may be of universal Advantage; And if any Minister be
accused unto the Association whereto he belongs, of any thing Scandalous, the
Matter shall be there examined; And if the Associated Pastors find just
Occasion for it, they shall direct the calling of a Council, who are to proceed
against the Offender.

That these Associated Pastors be together addressed unto and advised withal,
when bereaved Churches in their Vicinity need their Direction, for a present
Supply of a Vacancy, and to have Recommended unto them such Candidates as the
Churches may in due time come to make their Election from.

That the several Associations maintain a due Correspondence with one another,
that so the State of Religion may be the better known and served in the
Churches; Yea, if it can be accomplished, that they may by their Delegates meet
all together once in a Year, to concert Matters of a common Concern to all the
Churches.

And finally, That the Ministers disposed thus to Associate, endeavor in the
most Efficacious Manner they can, to prevail with such Ministers as
unreasonably neglect such Meetings with their Brethren in proper Associations;
that they would not expose themselves to the Inconveniences that such Neglects
cannot but be attended withal.

These Proposals have not yet been in all regards universally complied withal.
Nevertheless, the Country is full of Associations, formed by the Pastors in
their several Vicinities, for the Prosecution of Evangelical Purposes.

Various are the Methods used in the several Associations (according to their
own Discretion,) for the modelling of their Exercises, and the pursuing of
their Intentions.

They sometimes keep Days of Prayer together, and procure such Days to be kept
by the Flocks under their Charge.

They consider CASES that are laid before them; and sometimes their Answers to
Important Cases have been published unto the World.

At the Time of their Meeting when it is not very frequent, (which it cannot
well be when Towns are far distant from one another) sometimes the People of
the Town where they meet, are entertained with a Lecture from them.

It is to be hoped, It a confabulantur ut qui fciant Dominum audire. And the
Good Things done by them cannot be numbered.

. 7. In a Treatise entitled, The first Principles of New England, there is
published an Instrument of the famous Mr. John Cotton, pressing, That the
Elders and Brethren of the Churches, would meet together in convenient Numbers,
at Set Times, (which may be left unto the Wisdom of each Society of Churches,)
and thus to enjoy and practice Church Communion. And there are added many
Directions elaborated by him for the most edifying Management of such stated
Councils.

Dr. John Owen also in his Treatise of a Gospel Church, commends a constant
Actual Communion of the Churches within the Limits of the same Supreme Civil
Government, in Councils. And he adds, I cannot see how it can be any Abridgment
of the Liberty of particular Churches, or interfere with any other of their
Rights, which they hold by Divine Institution, if through more constant Lesser
Synods for Advice, there be a Communication of their mutual Concerns, unto
those that are Greater, until if Occasion require, and it be expedient, there
be a General Assembly of them all, to advise about any thing wherein they are,
all concerned.

Under the Influence of such Thoughts, it began to be proposed, That the
Associated Pastors of every Vicinity, with a proper Number of other Delegates
(chosen once a Year at least) from their several Churches, might be formed into
stated Councils; to consult and advise upon such Affairs as might be proper
Matter for the Consideration of an Ecclesiastical Council.

The Opinion of Mr. John Norton being much received, That SYNODS are so
necessary, ut Ecclesia salutari hoc Remedio non posset carere, sine insigni
Veritatis, Pietatis, et Concordiae Detrimento; It was esteemed a Dictate of
common Sense, that it would be for the Interest of Truth, and Peace, and Piety,
to have the Remedy always in Readiness; and put the Churches into such Order
that they may go most regularly and reasonably to work, in the Application
thereof.

It was also considered, That when Councils are called by Litigant Parties in
Churches, upon Emergencies, it had been hitherto in the Liberty of each Party,
to Choose and Call their own Council, where they pleased; which left Room for
much Partiality to operate, and One Council to succeed and oppose another, with
an Endless Confusion, more proper for a Babel, than a City of GOD. Through the
Gracious and Watchful Providence of GOD their SAVIOR, the Churches had not in
Fact seen much of this Confusion; and it may be the Prudent Servants of GOD had
it more in Fear than there was a Real need of. Nevertheless, 'twas thought that
Prudence called for a more effectual Provision.

Accordingly, Stated Councils being proposed, the Meeting whereof once in a
Year was judged little enough; it was now also further proposed, That the
Association whereto the Pastors of such a Council belonged, may direct when
there should be judged an Occasion for this Council, (or what Part of it they
should think enough) to convene upon an Emergency. And, that the Determinations
of the Councils thus provided for the Necessities of the Churches, were to be
looked upon as Decisive; except aggrieved Churches or Persons have Weighty
Reasons to the contrary. But, that in such Cases there should be a further
Hearing; And that the Council for that further Hearing should consist of
Pastors and Churches more for Number than the former; and such as might be
directed and convened by the Ministers of any Association, that should be near
to that, whereto those of the former Council belonged; unto which the Aggrieved
were accordingly to apply themselves, and in this Way to expect a final Issue.

Such Proposals as these found in one of the New-English Colonies a more
general Reception (and even a Countenance from the Civil Government) than in
the Rest. In the other, there were some very considerable Persons among the
Ministers, as well as of the Brethren, who thought the Liberties of particular
Churches to be in danger of being too much limited and infringed in them. And
in a Deference to these Good Men, the Proposals were never prosecuted, beyond
the Bounds of mere Proposals. Accordingly the Churches go on in the Methods of
which an Account was given, before the Introducing of these Proposals. And
Humane Prudence being obliged thus to keep the Stops where it is, the SPIRIT of
our SAVIOR, so descends with His Operations, that Councils rarely miss of
their desired Efficacy.

There was indeed a Satyr, Printed against these written Proposals, and against
the Servants of GOD that made them. Nevertheless, those Followers of the Lamb,
remembering the Maxim of, Not Answering, used the Conduct which the University
of Helmstadt lately prescribed under some Abuses put upon them; Visum est non
alio Remedio quam generoso Silentio et pio Contemptu, utendum nobis esse.

. 7. An Account of the more General Customs used in the Churches of
New England, has been thus Exhibited. But it must be said, they have also such
Varieties of lesser Circumstances, that one may with Pleasure say, what
Socrates reports about the Various Rites in the Primitive Churches; To reckon
them all up, would be Difficult, yea, Impossible.

It is possible, that in some Churches, the Tranfactions may be managed less
Beautifully than we have described; and in others when the Beauty of the
Proceeding may be more equal, yet they may a little vary from our Description.
However we have kept very near the Matter, and with all possible Veracity.

And indeed notable is the Demonstration, which their happy Experience gives
them, of the Folly and Madness, in those Ecclesiastical Politicians, who will
with a Phaetontic Fury set the World on Fire, to impose and enforce their
admired Uniformity, in little Ceremonies which the Worst People can conform to,
as well as the Best in the World. Their Experience proves what Gregory long
since confessed, In una Fide nihil officit Sanctae Ecclesiae diversa
Consuetudo; and what Irenaeus long before him observed; A Diversity [DIAPHONIA]
in lesser Matters, commends a Church preserving [OONOIAN] the Unity of the
Faith.

ARTICLE X. Special CUSTOMS.
. 1. BEsides the more General CUSTOMS of the Churches, there are a few more
Special CUSTOMS in the Churches, whereof a Brief Recitation may be expected.

We will begin with the DAYS observed among them.

He that shall read the judicious Discourse of Soerates (written above Twelve
Hundred Years ago) in the Twenty First Chapter of his Fifth Book, about HOLY
DAYS, will see very much of what is believed in the Churches of New England;
Namely (and briefly,) That the Apostles have set the Churches free from the
Yoke of Bondage thereunto. They are far from reviling that excellent Person as
an Heretic (which Bellarmine did) for Complaining there, That they who
contended for Holy Days, despised the Commandments of GOD. But they are content
themselves to be Hereticated, by the popishly affected, for holding, as the
Waldenses did, more than Five Hundred Years ago, That Constrained and Prefixed
Fasts, bound to Days, and all the Rabblement of Rites and Ceremonies, brought
in by Man, ought to be abolished. It was Luther's Desire near Two Hundred Years
ago, That there were no other Festival Days amongst Christians, but only the
LORD's DAY. And it was Calvin's Desire at the same Time, That inasmuch as
Christ our Judge, has released us from stated Festival Days, we may not obey
any Morsal, that shall go to oblige us thereunto. According to this Desire is
the Practice of these American Churches. And if King James once could boast of
the Purity in the Church of Scotland, That not so much as Easter or Christmas
was observed in it; Even such a Boast may be humbly made about the Churches of
New England. Nor do these Churches hitherto discover any Tendencies toward a
Compliance with that which was one of the earliest Apostacies and Superstitions
in the Primitive Times, (and as Dr. Ames calls it, The first Weapon wherewith
the Bishop of Rome, played his Prizes against other Churches) that is, an
imposed HOLY DAY. But they rather Censure it as a very unadvised Speech in Dr.
Hammond; That when the Festivals are turned out of the Church, it will not be
in the Power of Weekly Sermons, on the Heads of Religion, to keep up the
Knowledge of CHRIST in Men's Hearts.

The Churches make a Difference between Taking a Time to Do a Sacred Work; and
the Doing a Work to keep a Sacred Time. To esteem any Good Work the better for
its being done on such or such a Return of a Time, which GOD has not in His
Word set apart for it, is to make the Time itself a part of the Worship; and
they judge it an unwarrantable thing, for Men so to impose upon Heaven, with
their own Inventions.

The Churches look upon Solemn HUMILIATIONS and THANKSGIVINGS, as Moral Duties,
to be observed Pro Causis et Temporibus: And therefore they regard the
Directions of Divine Providence, in laying before them the fresh Occasiens
thereof; which could not so well be done, if they were made perpetual.

In the Beginning of the Year the GOVERNOR with the Advice of the Council,
(and sometimes also at the Motion of the Representatives) publishes a
Proclamation directing such a Day, as he with them thinks fit, for Solemn
Humiliations, with Prayer and Fasting, to obtain a Blessing on the Affairs of
the Year ensuing.

In the Conclusion, the GOVERNOR, upon the Advice and Motion aforesaid,
publishes a Proclamation, specifying a Day for Solemn Thanksgivings, on the
Account of Mercies received in the foregoing Year.

The Ministers read these Proclamations in their Congregations, on some LORD's
DAY before the Days thus called for; and often with agreeable Speeches prepare
their People for the Duties of them.

In these Proclamations there is inserted a Clause, Inhibiting all Servile
Labor on the Days appointed; and the Days are accordingly observed, with a
strict Application to the Proper Duties of them; yea, observed as Extraordinary
Sabbaths. Not only the Days of Humiliation are so, but the Days of Thanksgiving
also: It may be, there are no Days of Thanksgiving any where on the Face of the
Earth, kept in so Religious, and Sabbatizing a Manner, as they are in the
Churches of New England. There are no such Ringing of Bells, and making of
Bonfires, and other Frolicks, as there are on such Occasions in some of our
European Churches. And may they be forever preserved from such Profanations!

As other extraordinary Occasions do occur, at any other time of the Year, the
Civil Authority takes a like Notice of them.

And it is a very frequent thing, for particular Pastors with their Churches,
to keep Solemn Days in their own Congregations, as they see Occasions for them;
without any Direction from the Civil Authority. So Cyprian in a Time of
Calamity; Ad placandum atque exorandum Dominum, says he, Non Voce sola, sed et
Jejuniis et Lacrymis, et omni genere Deprecationis ingemiscamus.

Yea, Sometimes the Pastors in a Vicinity agree to keep the Wheel of their
Devotions in a continual Motion, by such Days kept successively in their
several Congregations; wherein they enjoy much Communion with and Assistence
from one another. Thus Tertullian tells, That in the Primitive Times, the
Bishops did ordain Fasts for the Churches, ex aliqua Solicitudinis
Ecclesiasticae Causa, according as the Troublesome Circumstances of the Church
called for it.

Sometimes one particular Church, and sometimes a Number of Consociated
Churches in a Neighborhood successively, have set apart whole Days of Prayer,
on this peculiar Intention; To pray for a Successful Ministry; and more
particularly, to obtain it, that the Spirit of Grace would infuse a Principle
of Piety, into the Hearts of the Rising Generation, and by a mighty Effect of
His Gospel upon them, render their Children a Pious Generation. A mavelous
Efficacy of the Gospel in a Conversion of Young People unto serious Religion,
and an Addition unto the Churches of them that shall be saved, have been
observed among the Consequences of such an Action.

When Beloved Pastors have been taken Sick, their Churches, Visited and
Affisted by the Neighboring Pastors, have kept their Days of Prayer for them:
And it has been rarely known, that such Pastors have not been remarkably
Recovered. Solemn and public Thanksgivings have sometimes followed.

Some Churches blessed with excellent Pastors, have kept their Days of
Thanksgiving for their Evangelical Enjoyments; [Assisted with Neighboring
Pastors, on these Occasions.] It has been very agreeable, to see with what
Ingenuity the Humble and Modest Pastors have behaved themselves, when such
Roses have been cast upon them. One by whom Cambridge was once illuminated, on
such a Day, Preached on, 2 Cor. XII. 11. I am Nothing.

When Days of Humiliation or of Thanksgiving have been observed, it has been a
frequent thing, for Collections of Money for Pious Uses to be made in the
Assemblies; That so it might be said, Thy Prayers and thy Alms are come up for
a Memorial before GOD.

A Zeal of GOD, and the Spirit of the Gospel, operating in the Churches, has
disposed them to make several noble Efforts, for the Propagation of (not Party,
but Pure and Undefiled) Religion, and the Gospellizing of Plantations which
have been the Unwatered Places of the Wicked One. Generous Collections have
been made in the Churches, to support the Expenses of sending Missionaries to
such Places, and building Meeting Houses in them. And the Gentlemen who Devise
Liberal Things, have also more privately advanced Sums of Money on such
Occasions and Intentions. Associated Pastors have been at the Head of these
Actions; And the Success has not been Contemptible; though the Invisible Rulers
of the Darkness of this World, have sensibly enough done their Part for the
Clogging of such Undertakings.

There has been offered unto the Churches, A Proposal, for an EVANGELICAL
TREASURY, to be Raised by Collections on the Days of Supplication, and of
Thanksgiving (which are kept every Year) in the Congregations of the Country;
and lodged in the Hands of Trustees, who are to lay it out still with the
Knowledge and Consent of the Churches to which it belongs. The Principal
Intention of it, The Propagation of Religion; especially when Good is to be
done in Ungospellized Places; But also, For any Pious Uses, which any
particular Church may see Cause to pursue, within their own Vicinity. The
Proposal, is in the United Churches of Boston begun to be Prosecuted and
Executed.

. 2. It Is usual among us, for Christians to uphold PRIVATE MEETINGS, wherein
they do with various Exercises Edify one another; and it is not easy to reckon
up the Varieties used in them. It Is observed, That the Power of Godliness
ordinarily prevails in a Place, as the PRIVATE MEETINGS are duly kept up and
carried on.

Sometimes a Dozen Families more or less, agree to meet in a Course, at one
another Houses, on a Day, and at an Hour, agreed on, once a Fortnight or once
a Month, as they shall please. And the Families unto whose Turn it falls to
entertain the Rest, sometimes takes that Opportunity, to invite others of their
Neighbors unto the Religious Entertainments of their Houses.

They sometimes have the Company of a Minister, who spends an Hour or Two in a
Prayer and a Sermon with them. And the Candidates of the Ministry sometimes do
at these Meetings perform some of their first Probationary Exercises.

Otherwise, One of the Brethren makes a Prayer; and one reads a Sermon, either
Printed in a Book, or taken by the Pen of a ready Writer in the public
Assemblies: And they close the Exercise with Singing of Psalms.

Bucer indeed affirms, that Lay Men were admitted sometimes to Interpret the
Holy Scriptures, in the Primitive Churches; though they performed it mostly when
the Rectors of the Churches were Present. There was a Custom of this Nature in
the Jewish Synagogues; And Grotius tells us, The Custom contiuned for a while
in the Christian Church, that unordained Persons were admitted sometimes to
Expound the Scriptures in public among them. Eus^bius proves by the Exemple of
Origin and others, That it was not Unusual for Lay Men to Preach. And in the
Constitutions, that go under the Name of Clemens, it is conceded, A Laick may be
a Teacher. At the Private Meetings in some former Years, the Private Brethren
would sometimes Preach themselves. But that Practice is now generally laid
aside, throughout all New England.

At some of these Meetings the Method has been for a Question of Practical
Divinity to be proposed unto the Company, for some certain Persons, prepared
for that Purpose, to give what Answer they please unto it.

The Ministers have o^en found a great Advantage unto their Labors, and unto
their Churches, by giving Encouragements unto RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES OF YOUNG
PEOPLE; which meet especially on the Lord's Day Evenings. It has been in many
Places, the Practice of Pious Young Men, to spend an Evening, Two Hours
together; when they repeat a Sermon, and they take their Turns to pray, one
before, another after, the Repetition. Psalms are sung. They promise to walk
orderly; and subscribe their Names to the Promise. If any of the Listed Company
do any Scandalous Thing, they first Admonish him, and upon Impenitency they
Blot him out of the List. All that join unto their Number, they carry unto
their Pastor, for him to Instruct, and Caution, and Approve the Person, before
they admit him. These Nurseries of Early Piety, have been attended with
Mavelous and Precious Consequences. The Ministers have sometimes Encouraged
them with their Visits, and Prayers, and Sermons.

Holy Women by themselves, both Elder and Younger, in smaller Numbers, with all
possible Privacy and Modesty, have here and there their Meetings for Social
Devotions.

Yea, the very Negro's in a Town, have their Constant Meetings, for Exercises
of Piety; wherein they pray by their Turns, and read a Sermon, and sing a
Psalm, and hear one another say the Catechism; and upon Miscarriages in any of
their Company, Employ severe and proper Censures. The Ministers do not think
much to Visit them once a Quarter, and Pray with them, and Preach to them.

The Private Meetings of the Faithful do upon Emergencies often spend whole
Days together, in Prayer with Fasting before the Lord; and sometimes in
Thanksgivings. And it is no little Service or Comfort unto their Faithful
Pastors to have such Flocks as will in this Way repair unto Heaven for them in
all their Difficulties.

. 3. Such Customs have these Churches of GOD. But still there are those
agreeable Varieties among the Churches in all such Modalities, that they find
not the least Inconvenience in following Austin's Counsel, who in diverse of
his Epistles permits, Any Church to differ from others in Ceremonies, and in
manner of Government, provided they agree with them, in the Unity of the Faith.
And it is with them as that great Lawyer God^frey reports of the Primitive
Churches; It was not one Discipline, but one Faith, which United them.

The People of GOD, whose Customs have this Relation given of them, have not
the Vanity to think, that their Works are perfect before GOD, or, that in their
Discipline they perfectly Answer the Rules for the ^vang^li^l Church State,
left unto us by our A^ended SAVIOR. And yet the Essentials and Substantials of
the Discipline in these Churches, doubtless are so Defensible by the Sacred
Scripture, and so conformable to the Primitive Pattern, and so evidently
subservient unto the Grand Intention of the Church State, even the PIETY
wherein all Good Men are United, that they do well to think, that it would be a
most foolish and ^ottish Thing to desert them. If the Churches have their
Deficiencies, in any Points, that want either to be Corrected, or to be
Improved, it is no more than what is to be Expected, until the Antichristian
Apostasy be expired. Nor must it be concealed, that the Churches of New England
are not without sad Instances of some, and some Tendencies to more, Apostasy.
It Is possible that some Good Men abroad, would upon the Sight of the Account
that has been given of the Discipline observed in these Churches, be ready to
say as Vergerius did when he read the Discipline observed in the Churches of
Bohemia; I would to GOD, I were among you! But he must not be called, A
Calumniator, who informs them, That they will not find New England a New
Jerusalem. Though the Body of the People are a Sober, Honest, Industrious, and
well disposed sort of Men; Unexceptionably Loyal to the British Scepter; and
Hospitable to Strangers (who yet often treat them with a strange Indignity and
Ingratitude, and such as would never be endured without the greatest
Resentments in any other Country!) and the common People are better acquainted
with Religion, than in any other Country upon the Face of the Earth; Yea, some
whole Towns have not so much as One Family in them, which does not maintain a
Religions Worship of GOD our SAVIOR, or so much as One Person that is known to
walk disorderly; Nevertheless there is found among them, too much Cause to
complain of a Gradual and a Growing Apostasy from the Religious Disposition
that signalized the first Planters of the New-English Colonies. The Spirit of
this World has too far brought a Death upon the Spirit and Power of Godliness;
and a Christian full of lively Piety, and Charity, and Self-Denial, and
universal Holiness and Fruitfulness, is not so frequent a Sight, or at least
not in so much Proportion to them that have only a Name to live, as once it was
among them. It Is feared by some wise Men, that the Natural Consequence of this
Degeneracy, will be this, That many of the Rising Generation will grow weary of
their Church State, (as they say it is in Scotland;) yea, some of their Seers
have not been without melancholy Apprehensions, lest New England have now done
the most that it was intended for; and least our Glorious Lord Come quickly, in
various Ways, to remove His Golden Candlesticks from a Place which has been in
a more than ordinary Measure illuminated with them. API PEIP TOY LOGOY! Let us
hope for better things! What the famous Rabbi in the Prike Avoth said, A Church
set up for GOD, shall be Established; it may be hoped, will be fulfilled in
these Churches, which were most certainly formed For GOD, and His CHRIST. It
may be hoped that this American Wilderness will not speedily be a Desert
forsaken of Good Men, which Dionysius of Alexandria tells us, was the Condition
of his unhappy Neighborhood.

. 4. But if the New English Churches may have any Deficiencies, they will not
be Easily or Presently convinced, that one of them is their want of a Diocesan
Episcopacy. The Domination of One Clergyman, as one in a Superior Order, above
those who should be the Pastors of particular Congregations, (but now become
his Curates,) Exercising an Authority over a Number of such Curates, and their
Congregations, who are thereby deprived of the Power to manage within
themselves the Discipline with which the House of GOD is to be regulated; This
is an Invention which the Churches of New England will probably continue
Strangers to. Since they find a Stillingfleet ventures to say, I believe on the
strictest Enquiry, Medina's Judgment with be found True; That Jerome, Austin,
Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, were all of Aerius's
Judgment, as to the Identity of both Name and Order, of Bishops and Presbyters,
in the Primitive Churches: They think, they have Company which they need not be
ashamed of. And they hope, that the Validity of their Ministry will not be
contested, for the want of what they call, Episcopal Ordination. And that much
less the Profane and Senseless Whimsey of an Uninterrupted Line of Succession
will be urged on their Ministry. And that this will be least of all urged by
them who pretend a Succession from Austin the Monk, of whom it has been proved
that what Ordination he had, was null and void by the Canons of all the First
General Councils. But, We cannot more agreeably express their Sentiments, than
in the Words of One who was well acquainted with them.

There are as Learned Men as any that ever appeared in Defense of the Diocesan
Episcopacy, who finding Bishops with Deacons in the Primitive Church at
Philippi, which they have heard was but a little Flock, they therefore think
that the Apostles knew of no Bishops, but only those P^j^^s, whereof there may
be several in a Parity, ^ee^ing one small Congregation. When they find the
first Epistle to Timothy passing from the Directions for the Good Conduct of
Bishops, immediately to those, for that of Deacons, without any mention of
Presbyters, distinct from them, they think it as plain as the Noon day Sun
could make any thing in the World, that there are only those two Ordinary
Officers, instituted by the Lord, for the Service of His Churches, and that
there is no Institution for any other Bishops, but the Pastors of particular
Congregations. And so when in the Church of Thessalonica, we read, that there
was a Plurality of Presidents, the Presid^n^y was not in one alone. This
Identity between Bishops of the Divine Appointment and such P^stors, appears in
the same Evidence unto them, from the Apostles Words unto Titus, where
mentioning the Qualifications of those whom he would have ordained for
Presbyters, he does it so; A Bishop must be blameless. That which renders it
yet more evident unto them, is, That the Apostle Paul calling together the
Presbyters of the Church of Ephesus, charges them, To take he^d unto the Flock,
unto which the Holy Spirit had made them Bishops; where our Translation
substituting the Word Overseers, is guilty of a shameful Prevarication, which
every one may see the Reason for: And the Apostle Peter exhorts the Presbyters
to exercise the Office of a Bishop, over the Flock, which we translate, The
taking the Oversight thereof. When Men that have looked in a Book, fi^d Aerius
brought into the List of Heretics by Epiphanius for bringing some of these
very Scriptures to establish his Nonconformist Sentiments, the Arguments with
which that Passionate Old Man attempted to confute Aerius, do but confi^m them
in the Aerian Heresy. The Truth is, The Remarkable Confusion among the Prelatic
Writers, who are not at all agreed among themselves, but perpetually opposing
one another, upon the Bottom whereon they would build the Darling Usurpation,
is a further Invitation unto impartial Inquirers to suspect, that they are
building of a Babel. Gentlemen who consult Antiquity, wonder how any Man alive
can read the Letters of Clemens Romanus to the Corinthians, and remain
Unconvinced, That there were no such Bishop^ in those Days as Lord it over the
Heritage of GOD in ours. They are sensible that Polycarp, in his most famous
Letters to the Philippians, mentions no other than Presbyters and Deacons, as
Officers in the Churches, when it was his Concern, if there had been any other,
not to have loft them Unmentioned; And, That if the Epistles of Ignatius, about
which there have been so many Learned Impertinencies, among the Modern Critics
upon them, had been genuine, yet they countenance no other than a
Congregational Episcopacy; which would soon End our Controversies. For Three
Centuries they can see no Footsteps of any more than a Moderator in
Church Assemblies, whose Powers were very sar short of those, which the
Prelates of later Ages have thence taken Occasion, according to the usual
Strain of Ecclesiastical Encroachments, to pretend unto. We know when the
Episcopal Superiority was confessed, A Novel Constitution. It shocks the
Usurpations of the Modern Prelacy, with Millions of considerate Christians, to
find Jerome confessing, That, apud veteres iidem Episcopi et Presbyteri fuerunt;
Bishops and Presbyters were of old the very same; and that the Superiority of
Bishops to Presbyters, was, Consuetudine magis quam Dominicae Dispositionis
Veritate; rather by Custom than by any Appointment from the Lord. And they find
an Authority as good as Ambrose, if it were not his, affirming that in the
Primitive Times, The Ordination of a Bishop and of a Presbyter was one and the
same; and relating how Men of Aspiring Spirits brought on a Gradual Alteration.
When our Whitaker has Occasion to produce the Confession of Jerome, That the
Difference between Bishops and Presbyters, was brought in by Men long after the
Apostles as a Remedy against Schism, he cannot forbear making this Remonstrance
upon it, That the Remedy has been worse than the Malady. And yet this Doctor
was a Champion of a Church, which now to a strange Degree values it self upon
its Diocesan Episcopacy. Dr. Bebelius, a Professor in the University of
Strasburgh, but a few Years ago, publishing a Book of Ecclesiastical
Antiquities, wherein he undertakes to prove, That there is no Distinction by a
Divine Right between a Bishop and a Presbyter, he quotes Jerome as countenancing
his Opinion: But then he adds, Torquent sese Pontificii et Hierarchici in
Anglia ut hunc virum nobis eripiunt, the Papists, and English Prelatists,
torture themselves in vain to take off this Man from us. Yea, our Juel delivers
not only his own private Opinion, but also the Sense of The Church of England,
in the Apology for it, when he recites the Opinion of Jerome, and adds, This is
the Thing that we Defend. At the same time he quotes Erasmus, who speaking of
Jerome's Time, says, Id temporis idem erat Episcopus, Sacerdos et Presbyter. And
unto this Testimony of Jerome, our Juel adds that of Austin; That the Office of
a Bishop is above the Office of a Presbyter, not by Authority of the Scripture,
but after the Names of Honor which the Custom of the Church has now obtained.
It gives a notable Strength to the Doubts raised in the Minds of Millions in
our Nation, concerning the Diocesan Episcopacy, when they find the Church of
England it self denying a Divine Right unto it; and they are certain that the
Divine Right thereof was never publicly owned, till King James came to be King
of England, who upon the Enchantments of a well known Prelate, first yielded
unto That, which his Predecessors would never have endured. And yet that very
Gentleman, with his Brethren, would not Reordain the Scottish Presbyters, when
they were to be made Prelates: His Conscience compelling him to give that
Reason for it; For to doubt of the Validity of Presbyterian Ordination, was to
doubt whether there was any Lawful Vocation in most of the Reformed Churches.
Without going back as far as the more early Days, of King Elfrick, when the
Church of England plainly denied Bishops and Presbyters to be distinct Orders,
they find, that in the Dawn of the Reformation, by such Witnesses of our Lord
as Tindal, and Lambert, and Barnes, and, how many more of our glorious Martyrs?
-- this Position was vigorously advanced, That the Apostles following the Rule
of CHRIST ordained in His Congregation only those Two Officers, A Bishop which
is the same with a Presbyter, and a Deacon. And it prevailed so far, that
Cranmer himself, the Primate of all England, Embraced it. Yea, ^it was not long
before it was owned by public Authority; and in, The necessary Erudition of a
Christian Man, a Book then published by Authority, as the Doctrine of the
Church of England, it is in Express Terms affirmed, That of these Two Orders
only [Presbyters and Deacons] the Scripture makes Express mention. The
Declaration about the Institution of Bishops and Priests, then also subscribed
by the Lord Cromwell, and the Archbishops of Canterbury, and York, and other
Bishops and Civilians, denied any Superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter to
be found in the New Testament, and allowed unto a Presbyter the Power of
Ordination and Excommunication. In the very first Year of K. Edward the VIth's
Reign, there was an Act of Parliament, which as Heylin complains, forced the
Episcopal Order from their strong hold of Divine Institution, and made them no
other than the Kings Ministers only. Poinet then writing against Gardener,
shows, that the Reformers in those Days were willing, even to lay aside the
Name of Bishop, and say Elder instead of it. And Cranmer in his Resolutions to
the King's Questions, approved by other Bishops, has these Words, The Bishops
and Priests were not two distinct Things, but both one Office in the Beginning
of Christ's Religion: And he further makes it Manifest, That the Great
Reformers owned not Episcopacy as a distinct Order from Presbytery, to be of
Divine Right; but only as a prudent Constitution of the Magistrate, for the
better Governing of the Church. Beaton also, a famous Refugee in Q. Mary's
Time, in his Catechism, dedicated unto both Archbishops, puts the Question,
What difference is there between a Bishop and a Presbyter? And answers, None at
all; Their Office is the same, their Authority and Power is one. It is most
certain, That upon the Revival of the Reformation, at Q. Elizabeth's coming to
the Crown, the most acknowledged and celebrated Writers of the Church of
England, still made the very same Concession. Yea, Archbishop Whitgift, himself
speaking of the Government of the Church of England by Bishops, in his Time,
says, It is well known, that the Manner and Form of Government, used in the
Apostles Time, and expressed in the Scripture, is not now observed. There are
those to be found, even among the Prelates themselves, who have told but a sad
Story, and yet given a just and fair Account, How and Why the Jus Divinum of
Prelacy came to be first asserted; which is almost unaccountably become the
Topping Doctrine of our Days. Be it how it will, certainly Men that are not far
gone with the Spirit of a Party, will not go beyond the Temper of Dr. Ward, who
in his Determinations, when he speaks of the Difference between the Few
Churches that have Prelates, and the many more Churches that have None, says,
It ought to be tolerated, Absque Fraternae Unitatis Laesione. Most certainly
they who consider, that even in the Popish Times, the English Parliaments took
upon them to create new Bishoprics; and that Giraldus Cambrensis assures us,
there were no less than Threescore Bishoprics in England, when the Island was
not yet wholly Christianized; would not think that an Act of Parliament would
Unchristianize the Island by making above Nine Thousand Bishoprics, where
there are now no more than Six and Twenty. -- All the World knows that all the
Churches of the Reformation, on the Continent of Europe, subsist upon a
Presbyterian Ordination. And the Superintendents in the Lutheran Churches, make
not the Pretensions of our Prelates. But when the Papists of late Years as well
as formerly, have been trying to make Disturbances among them, with Clamours
like what have been made elsewhere, That they have no True Ministers, and so
not Sacraments, because they want Episcopal Ordination, [As Osiander the
Chancellor of the University of Tubingen, particularly complains, in his
Treatises of Casuistical Divinity published A. C. 1680. The Popish Doctors
suppose that Presbyters cannot be Ordained but by a Bishop, and for this very
Reason, they deny the Truth of the Lutheran Ministry:] their most Learned
Historians and Advocates, in their Answers, confess that their Lutheran
Ministers have none but a Presbyterian Ordination: But then prove the Cavils of
the Papists on that Score to be Unreasonable. No longer ago than the beginning
of the present Century, Joachim Hildebrand, in his Treatise, concerning the
Hierarchy of the Church, has this Passage; The Great Question between us and
the Papists is, Whether in the Days of the Apostles, there was one Order of
Bishops and another of Presbyters? The Protestant Churches hold the Negative,
and the Papists the Affirmative. The Consequence upon the whole is, That
notwithstanding the Charge of Schism, so ignorantly and injuriously laid
elsewhere, there can be nothing more Schismatical, than to make a Diocesan
Episcopacy a Term of Communion in the Churches of GOD.

Having reported the Practices used in the Churches of New England, it might be
thought not amiss to add this Report of their Sentiments, upon an Article with
which the Interests of Religion in the World have been very much affected. They
do not ask to be under any Episcopal Jurisdiction, but that of Him who is the
Great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls. This they know, That there are many
Parishes in England, which by Law are Exempted from Episcopal Jurisdiction; And
as this is a very plain Demonstration, that the Parliament of England looks on
Diocesan Episcopacy as a mere Humane Constitution, so, the Churches of
New England, may certainly with as much Reason, as any in the Realm of England,
expect such an Exemption to be allowed and preserved unto them. 'Twill be
thought enough to them, if the Great Shepherd of the Sheep keep the Flocks in
the Wilderness under His gracious Inspection, and lead them in the Paths of
Righteousness.

No more is now called for.

In Exhibiting unto the Churches in the other Hemisphere, the Relation of what
is practiced in these Regions of America, that Article of our Creed, The
Communion of Saints, has been considered. But how far this Relation may
Recommend the Churches of New England unto the Affection and Fellowship of
those on the Eastern side of the Atlantic, it is what waits for the Experiment.
Certainly, The worst they can look for, is to be Charitably Pitied, and
Instructed in their Weaknesses!

It will doubtless Hearten them, when they are told, That an Illustrious
Minister of State, than whom, for Uncommon Erudition, as well as the other
Accomplishments that may brighten a Man of Honor, our Nation has not [and
perhaps never had!] a Greater; having had the State of this Country truly laid
before him, he condescended so far as to write in these ^bliging Terms unto One
of the New-English Divines^ upon it; The Account of the State of your Country
was very Acceptable to me; And wherein I can serve either It or You, I shall be
always Ready. It is great Matter of Joy, that the Christian Religion and
Learning, do make such considerable Advances in those Parts of the World; and
indeed, wherever the Christian Religion is proposed in its Native Plainness,
and Simplicity, it is most likely to succeed.

After so Important a Smile upon them, they cannot but persuade themselves,
that none but the Unreasonable Men that have no Faith, will go to disturb them,
in the Peaceable Enjoyment of that Evangelical Church State, for the sake of
which they made a Peaceable Secession into what was then, a Great and a
Terrible Wilderness. Yea, They Comfort themselves in some Expectation, that if
their Methods and Customs be not any where else presently Conformed unto, yet
so far as Reason comes to prevail and Govern, the Principles which they profess
to act upon, will be every were more and more espoused in the World. They are
Principles that will bear the Test, and the more they are Tried, the more they
will come forth as Gold.

And if none else be edifyed by it, yet this Publication of their Principles
and Practices will certainly prove their own Confirmation, in the Ways of
Scriptural Purity, wherein they have hitherto proceeded and prospered. The more
they Scan what they Do, the more they will Hold fast what they have, and let no
Man take away their Crown. When GOD has blessed the Ministry in these Churches
for several Generations, with a Success of the Gospel, that was hardly ever
exceeded on the Face of the Earth, it will be an intolerable thing unto them,
to hear Foolish and Romish Bigots tell them, They have no True Ministers and
Sacraments among them. And however a Few, on certain Temptations may now and
then Desert the Holy Ways wherein the Religion of the Second Commandment has
been maintained among them, it will be strange, if the Character of the
Deserters, and the Lights which lead them, should not prove a powerful
Antidote, against any great Accession to the Apostasy.

The Motto of the Churches will be, STANT RELIGIONE PARENTUM; And with a
perpetual and inviolate Adherence to their Glorious LORD, and the Directions of
His WORD, they will forever say, He is my GOD, and I will prepare Him an
Habitation, my Fathers GOD, and I will Exalt Him.

POSTSCRIPT.
THere may be little Need of Signifying that this Treatise has had a few Lines
added unto it, since the Writing of the Attestation at the Beginning of it;
though such as do not in the least affect or weaken the Attestation. But, because
it is Needful, that when an Historical Relation is published, the Name of the
Relator who must Support the Truth of it, should be Exposed; and when there may
be those disaffected Persons that may be willing to know whom they may more
particularly make the Object of their Anymadversions, it is proper that some
One should appear with a -- Me, Me, Adsum qui scripsi, in me Convertite; -- One
that could have been content otherwise to have lain buried in perpetual
Obscurity and Oblivion, does here, upon good Advice, own himself the Author of
the Book, and annex and subscribe his Name unto it; As willingly as Austin did
his, to his Book, De Moribus Ecclesiae.

Cotton Mather.

Erratulella Typographica.
PAge. 18. l. 27. r. Hominum. P. 72. l. ult add, the. P. 88. l penult. add,
the. P. 90. l. 11. r. to the. ibid. l. 26. r. Lutheranos. P. 100. l. 21. r. all
of you. P. 120. l. 22. r. Walks. P. 129. l. 2. r. TS. ibid. l. 30. f. Levites.
r. Tenths. P. 155. l. 27. f. 3. r. 4. P. 185. i. 4. f. 7. r. 8. P. 190. l. 6.
r. has. P. 192. l. 8. r. take.

A Table of the Contents.
I. AN Attestation by the late Rev. Increase Mather, D. D. II. An Introduction,
containing a brief Account of the Faith and Principles of the New-English
Churches. III. The Methods and Customs in the Churches of New England in 10
Articles. ARTICLE I. The Gathering of a Church. Page 1 Their Preparations for
it. Page 1 Their calling a Council. Page 3 Preparatory Acts and Exercises on
the Day of Incorporation. Page 4 Their Incorporation by Solemn Covenant Page 6
A Vindication of it. Page 10
ARTICLE II. The Ordaining of a Pastor. Page 14 The Church's Preparation for
it. Page 14 Their Choosing and Indowing their Ministers Page 15 Their calling a
Council for the Ordination Page 22 Preparatory Acts and Exercises on the Day of
Ordination. Page 24 The Imposition of Hands, and Charge given Page 29 The Right
Hand of Fellowship. Page 32 The Instalment of a Pastor formerly Ordained. Page
41
ARTICLE III. The usual Services of the Lord's Day Page 4^ The Congregation
Assembling Page 4^ Public Prayer. Page 4^ Singing Scriptural-Hymns. Page 52
The Minister Preaching. Page 55 Of Reading the Scriptures in Public. Page 63
ARTICLE IV. The Administration of the Sacred Baptism. Page 6^ Subjects of
Baptism. Page 68 The Baptisinal Covenant. Page 7^ Baptism performed in Public.
Page 72 Done by Sprinkling. Page 76
ARTICLE V. The Administration of the Holy Supper. Page 80 Qualifications (...)
Communicants. Page 80 Examination (...) the Pastor. Page 86 Manner of A^nission
to full Communion Page 90 A Covenant of such Admission. Page 91 The Celebration
of the Lord's Supper. Page 94
ARTICLE VI. The Pastoral Care in its more Private Services. Page 103
Catechizing. Page 103 Visitation of the Sick. Page 106 Celebration of
Marriages. Page 114 Service at Funerals. Page 117 Trial of Candidates for the
Ministry. Page 117
ARTICLE VII. Ecclesiastical Officers for the Assistance of the Pastors. Page
121 Of Ruling Elders, and their Office. Page 122 Deacons, and their Office.
Page 128 Their Choice, Ordination, and Charge. Page 130
ARTICLE VIII. The Discipline of the Churches. Page 134 Of Pastors dispensing
the Seals in other Churches. Page 134 Letters of Recommenda. and Dismission.
Page 136 Church Censures. Page 141 Restoration of Penitents. Page 155
ARTICLE IX. Councils upon Emergencies. Page 158 Upon Agrieved Members. Page
158 Upon Offending Pasters. Page 162 Upon Translation of Pastors. Page 167
Synods of Churches. Page 172 General and Annual Conventions of Ministers. Page
176 Particular and stated Associations of Ministers. Page 179 Of stated
Councils. Page 181
ARTICLE X. Special Customs. Page 186 Days of Public Fasting and Thanksgiving
Page 188 Private Meetings for Religious Exercises. Page 191 No Domination of
one Pastor over another. Page 196


FINIS.

