Ministers, Spiritual Parents, or Fathers in the Church of GOD. A SERMON
Preached At the ORDINATION OF The Rev. Mr. John Lowell, At Newbury, Jan. 19.
1725, 6.

By Thomas Foxcroft, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

N. B. Several Paragraphs, and many Sentences, omitted (for brevity) in the
Preaching, are here inserted.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green for Samuel Gerrish, in Cornhill. 1726.

Ministers, Spiritual Fathers, in the Church of GOD.
II. COR. XII. 14, 15. -- I will not be burdensome to you; for I seek not
yours, but you: for the Children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but the
Parents for the Children. And I will very gladly spend, and be spent for you --.


THESE are the Words (you are sensible) of blessed Paul, the great Doctor of
the Gentiles, and as one calls him, the great Pattern of the Clergy. They
breathe the true Spirit of a Minister of Jesus Christ; and are very agreeable,
I hope, to the Dispositions and Resolutions of our dear Brother, who is this
day to be solemnly separated to the Ministry of the Gospel. As they are very
fit to be his Ordination-Vow; so I Am persuaded, they enter into his Soul, and
tell us the secret Language of his Heart: and truly glad should I have been, if
(pursuant to the Custom, which has so long obtained among us) he could have
been prevailed on to take up the Book at this time, and preach to us his own
devout Thoughts and Purposes. Or otherwise, if he might justly be excused upon
the Plea's usually advanced in this case, against the common Custom, -- Why
could not some venerable Father or elder Brother in this Neighborhood, have
taken the desk? Which, as it must needs have been acceptable to the Audience,
so I Am sure exceedingly more pleasing to me, who am the unfittest among the
Multitude of my Brethren, to speak on so great an Occasion, and to such an
Assembly. But since this part of the Day's work has been devolved upon me, I
would ask your ready and grave Attention, while I endeavor, with all plainness
of Speech and in the most familiar and useful manner I can, to represent and
urge some of the Things which concern both Ministers and People. Men and
Brethren, I pretend not to any new Doctrine, neither stand here to inform or
dictate: but bear with me, while I stir up your Minds by way of Remembrance.
For so it becomes us to exhort and admonish one another, especially on these
Solemnities; and not be negligent to put each other always in mind of these
Things, although we know them, and are established in the present Truth.

The words I Have read to you, contain a rich Fund of useful and seasonable
Meditations. But should I attempt a just Discourse on the several parts of the
Text, I must needs transgress the usual Limits, and take up abundantly too much
of the Time, which on such a day particularly is very precious. If therefore I
wave the formality of dividing my Text, as well as pass over the Connection of
the words, and but hint at some of the Reflections they afford, (that I may not
be over tedious and burdensome) you will easily forgive me this wrong.

The Argument I have chiefly in view, and which seems a genuine and obvious
Inference from the inspired passage before us, is this, --

That Ministers are to be held a kind of FATHERS, in the Church of GOD. They
stand as in the Relation of Parents to the Ecclesiastical Families of God's
People, and should study to express a Fatherly Spirit in the whole of their
sacred Ministry. The Apostle hints the Relation, and breathes the Spirit, in
the words of our Text: and his constant Practice was full of bright and
instructive Comments upon it.

The Parental Relation is the second in human Nature; next to the Conjugal.
It Is a superior Relation, and carries Authority with it: a near Relation, and
bespeaks the tenderest Love, the greatest Care, and Complacence. It carries a
peculiar Affection and Endearment, to sweeten and regulate the Authority and
Power of it. And this may be the Reason why it is made a Pattern, and every
other Relation, in which there is Superiority, is in Scripture set forth under
the Parental Character. Hence the Supreme Lord of all is styled the Everlasting
Father; and when he would set out his own boundless Love and Pity to his
People, He compares it to the Bowels of a Mother, and the Compassion of a
Father, as the most lively and sensible Representations. -- Hence also Civil
Rulers are called Fathers. In several Nations, the Princes and Governors have
affected this Title, as the most splendid Badge of Honor. Among the
Philistines, their Princes assumed the appellative Name, Abimelech, i. e. My
Father the King. The Roman Senators of old though it it their brightest Character
to be Patriae Patres, Fathers of their Country; and the Orator constantly
salutes them with the Style of Patres conscripti. -- Job, that godly Arabian
Prince, glories in it, that he was a Father to his People. The Egyptians cried
after Joseph's Chariot, Abreck, i. e. (as many carry it) Tender Father! And in
the Prophet, it is promised the Church, that Kings should be Nursing Fathers,
and Queens Nursing Mothers to her. -- But then this is the style of Ministers,
as well as Magistrates. There are Fathers in the Church, as well as the State.
And indeed this Title of Father was in old time a very common Name for the
Ministers of Religion. Hence Elisha cried after the ascending Prophet, My
Father, my Father! -- And He had this Respect repaid him by the King of Israel,
who wept over the dying Prophet, saying, O my Father, my Father! -- And some
good Interpreters judge, that Solomon personates the Preacher, where he says,
Hear, ye Children, the Instruction of a Father, and attend to know
Understanding. A manner of Address much like that so often used by the Apostle
John, -- My little Children, these things write I unto you, that you sin not:
Little Children, let no man deceive you. He used this Compellation, as being a
Father to them by Office, as well as in Years. And to add no more, Micah
invited the wandering young Levite to his House, in those Terms, -- Dwell with
me, and be unto me a Father, and a Priest. And in the same Language was he
afterward invited away by the Children of Dan, -- Go with us, and be to us a
Father, and a Priest.

I come now to my Design, which mainly is to take a View of the Gospel Minister
under this notion of a Spiritual Father: A Character, which though it be very
naturally applicable to him, and is a Scripture-Title, and must needs be
equally pleasant and profitable to meditate upon, yet perhaps but seldom has
been allowed its due Consideration. It Is not an empty Title; but is full of
Duty, full of Dignity, Sweetness and Charm. This external Character, when found
in conjunction with those intrinsic Excellencies, Accomplishments, and
Virtues, which correspond to it, gives us the most Divine Idea of the
Gospel-Minister, and makes him appear in his truest Glory.

This Character, applied to Ministers, may import the following things more
especially

1. It carries in it an Idea of Power and Dignity, and speaks the Eminence of
their Station in the House of GOD.

2. It hints to us the noble End of their Institution; with the Importance and
Usefulness of such an Order of Men.

3. It points out the Nature and Business of their Office.

4. It suggests to us what their Qualifications and Accomplishments should be.

5 It tells us what Tempers and Deportments do become them.

Finally, It teaches us the Duty and Respect, which People owe to their
Ministers.

Nothing short of these Things can be intended in this Character of Parents or
Fathers; and all of them I think, are fairly included. They are comprehensive
Heads of Discourse: but I shall endeavor to sum up what is to be said upon
them, in as few words as is consistent with my double Design, respecting
Parents as well Natural, as Ecclesiastical.

I. Then, Ministers may be called Parents or Fathers, in regard of their
Station and Authority in the Church.

The Pastor stands as 'twere in the Father's place; a Post of Dignity and Power.

Every Father ordinarily has a Family and Household of his own: and all that
belong to it are Subordinate to Him, in their Domestic Capacity. He is the Head
of the House, by the Law of Nature and Reason of Things. As the Head is the
highest and most conspicuous Part of the Body; is placed at the Top, has a
governing Power ever all the rest of the Members, and is the Glory of the Man:
So the Parents are the principal and most eminent Members of the Family; but in
special, the Father. The Husband is the Head of the Wife: and besure then the
Father is Head over the Children.

Man is by the Capacity and Propensity of his Nature, a sociable Creature: well
styled by the Philosopher, A political Animal. We are formed for mutual
Fellowship and Commerce; without which many valuable purposes of Life cannot be
served. It Is necessary to the political Well-being of Mankind, that they
combine together in distinct Societies: and equally necessary it is, that in
every Society there be Government and Order. Now a Family is the first Society
in Nature; a kind of little Kingdom, where the Distinctions of Superior and
Inferior, Governor and Governed take place, by an inevitable Necessity, and the
force of natural Light. Had Mankind continued in their original State of
Innocence and Happiness, it is highly probable there would have been a
Distinction of Orders and Degrees among them. Doubtless at least there had been
distinct Families: and Nature has in these founded an immutable Difference of
Order, a Superiority and Inferiority between the Parents and the Children.
Levilism here besure is contrary to the unalterable Reason of Things, and bids
Defiance to the God of Nature. The Superiority and Power of Parents in their
own Houses, is established upon the justest and most inviolable Claims: and the
careful preservation of it makes much for the Harmony, Beauty and Strength of
these little Bodies politic.

Now, when Ministers are called Parents or Fathers, it may intimate that their
Station and Figure in the Church, carries a Shadow of this Paternal Eminence.
JESUS CHRIST is Supreme Head of the Church: but He has deputed Ministers to
preside over particular Flocks or Families of his People, as his Substitutes
and Agents. We read, 1 Cor. 12.27, 28. Ye are the Body of Christ, and Members
in particular: And GOD has set some in the Church, Teachers, -- Helps,
Governments. So Ephesians. 4.11. He gave -- some Pastors and Teachers, -- for the
work of the Ministry, till we all come, etc. -- The Church is compared to a
Household, (which is an orderly Society, implying a Variety of Members, in a
State of Inequality and Subordination) and Ministers are placed therein as
Fathers, to guide the House.

The many other exalted Titles and Names of Authority given them in the
Scriptures, make this appear with a glaring Evidence. Thus they are called
Angels; partly no doubt with an eye to the distinguishing Elevation and
Authority of those Heavenly Powers, as well as to their eminent Purity and
Zeal. So, the Lights of the World; in allusion to the glorious Luminaries over
our Heads; the Sun which was made to rule by Day, and the Moon and Stars, which
were made to rule by Night. They are called Stars; because they move in a
Superior Orb, as well as to "signify their diffusive Light and beneficial
Influences" -- They are called Overseers of the Church, and are said to be over
them in the Lord; to have the Rule over them. -- Not for that they have
Dominion over their Faith and Conscience, but are helpers of their Joy: Neither
as being Lords, to tyrannise over GODs Heritage; but as Parents, whose Yoke is
naturally of all others the most easy, and their Burden light. Yet neither do
We pretend to stretch the power of Ministers to the height of Parental
Authority, or make it altogether of the same kind; but only ascribe to them
some faint Resemblance and lower Degrees. We mean not to assume to our selves a
Civil or Temporal Superiority and Dominion: but only assert our Station in the
Church, and Right of Precedence and Rule in Ecclesiastical Affairs, according
to the Word of GOD, that unerring Directory. We would make This our grand Rule,
in the exercise of our Pastoral Authority. And (I will add) so far as we
appprehend that celebrated Summary of Church Discipline, commonly called the
Platform, is grounded on the Scriptures, we heartily concur with it, and desire
to guide our selves by it in our Pastoral Care. Agreeable to this Vid. Pla^f.
Chap. X. Sect. 7, 8, 9.
we claim a kind of Parental Power in the Church. -- Yet we confess, our
Authority is not Legislative, but Executive; not of a carnal, but spiritual
Nature: not coercive, but suasory and rational; not solitary, but social, to be
exercised (ordinarily at least) in the presence and with the Consent of the
Church.

Neither do we pretend to exercise Pastoral Government in any other than the
particular Churches, which we are called to the oversight of; even as the Heads
of Families extend not their parental Power beyond the Limits of their
particular Charges. -- Nor do we submit to any Foreign Jurisdiction, in Affairs
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical. We are for Communion of Pastors, and Communion of
Churches in all the Offices of Brotherly Love and Neighborly Care and
Assistance, for their mutual Good and Edification, according to Capacity and
Opportunity. Our venerable Synods have very much inculcated the careful
preserving of Church Communion. Nevertheless They hold that Every Church or
particular Congregation of visible Saints, in Gospel Order, has full Power
Ecclesiastical within it self, and is not under any other Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction whatsoever. From whence they think it follows, that Consociation
of Churches is not to hinder the exercise of this Power, but by Counsel from
the Word of GOD to direct and strengthen the same upon all just Occasions. Thus
the Synod in 62. -- So the Platform observes, Churches [which implies the
Pastors] are distinct, and therefore may not be confounded one with another:
and Equal, and therefore have not Dominion one over another. -- Indeed they
look upon particular Churches to be as distinct, equal and independent, as
particular Families: and think Pastors and Fathers agree in this, that as these
in their Domestic Capacity, so those in their Ecclesiastical Character, have
no Pre-eminence or Authority one over another. The Title of Father in God, they
look upon as the common and undistinguished Character of every Bishop and
Pastor; and the Divine Commission they act upon, as forever one and the same:
which necessarily sets them all on a Level, supersedes all pretenses of an
unequal Authority, and forbids any Strife among them which of them should be
Chief. -- Now, let the Sense of the Dignity and Authority of our Office, only
serve to inspire us with a just Solicitude, to secure the Reverence due to our
high Calling, by a suitable Conduct in it, and not expose it to the contempt of
the Profane, by doing things unworthy of it. And let the only Contention among
us of this Order be, who shall make the fullest proof of his Ministry, and in
the most real and noble Effects of Love, approve himself a Spiritual Father to
his People. We should be more Studious to deserve than to assert the Honor due
to our Sacred Calling; and should take Pleasure (with the Apostle) even in
Reproaches and Necessities for Christ's sake. -- I am become a Fool in glorying:
Ye have compelled me. Wherefore, though I should boast somewhat more of our
Authority (which the Lord has given us for Edification, and not for
Destruction) I should not at all be ashamed.

II. When Ministers are called Parents, it points us to the excellent End of
their Institution, and proclaims the Importance and Usefulness of this Order of
Men.

This Character leads us to the noble Design of their being set in the Church,
which is, that they may seek the Good of Jerusalem all their Days, and be
singular Blessings to their Generation. For such is the wise Parent in his
Family, and to the World. Vast are the Benefits, unknown the happy Fruits of
Parental Care and Love, under a due Regulation, and accompanied with the Divine
Benediction. A Parent has peculiar Opportunities to serve his Generation, by
training up his Children in Wisdom and Virtue. Parents (as such) generally move
in a Sphere very narrow; but yet of peculiar Importance to the Public: and
they often become diffusive Blessings, by the good Education of their Children,
and discreet Government of their private Charges. And both the Nature of their
Relation, and the Intention of the GOD of Nature, render it necessary, that
Parents study in this way to do signal Service to the World.

Hence this Title of Parents, given to Ministers, carries us back to the
Original Design of their Office, viz. the Good of Mankind, and more especially
of the People under their Charge. The Ministry surely was never instituted,
merely that some Men might have the advantage to get a Living by it, or obtain
a little Distinction and Power above others: But the primary Intention of it
was, to be a Ministry under Christ, to the good of Souls; that such as are of
this Order, might approve themselves Fathers to a People, in all Offices of
Love to their Souls; and by promoting Peace, Order, Virtue and Religion among
them, become great Benefactors to the Public. -- This Style of Parents tells
us what should be our main Inducement, in taking up this holy Calling; and what
the governing Aim of our Ministry ought to be, in all the Acts and Exercises of
it, whether referring to Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline. It tells us what
Blessings Ministers should Study to be, and what Blessings all faithful and
wise Ministers in fact are, to a People: as Lights, to guide them; as Pillars
and Foundations, to support them; as Fountains, to refresh them; as Shields, to
defend them. Those two Characters were very agreeably united in the Lamentation
of Joash, over the Prophet on his Death bed, O my Father, my Father, the
Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.! -- As to particular Families,
much of their Beauty and Safety is bound up in the wise and good Fathers at the
Head of them. Even so learned and faithful Ministers are very much the Strength
and Glory of a People. Hence the Apostle observes, that the Office of a Bishop
is a good Work, 1 Timothy 3.1.

III. This Title of Parents, give to Ministers, very much points out the Nature
and Business of their Office.

It Is not an airy Title of Honor, this of Parents; but is big with solid Duty,
and implies abundant Business, Care, and Labor. You that are Parents, and have
Families, are doubtless so sensible of the daily Returns of Duty, Toil, and
Fatigue, in the Parental Station, that you need not any Amplifications on this
head, to illustrate the matter to you.

Agreeably the work of the Ministry is a great Work, and in some Places almost
an immense Labor. Whatever many may think of it, it is no Idle or Easy
Profession; but full of Services, laborious, painful, and continually
revolving. To which add the Consideration of their own Infirmities, natural as
well as moral, being Men of like Passions with others; together with the
perverse Humors of many proud and obstinate Sinners they have to deal with;
and the various Temptations that attend this Employment, from Satan, the Flesh,
and World --. These Reflections conspire (agreeably to this Character of
Parents given Ministers) to proclaim the Difficulty of their Calling. And this
Character may serve to inform us very much in the Nature and Business of their
Office. Here let me say distinctly,

1. It Is the Business of Ministers to endeavor the Regeneration and Conversion
of Sinners.

They may be called Fathers, as they are instrumental to propagate the Divine
Nature, and promote the New Birth of Souls. It Is on this Account that the
Apostle styles himself a Father to the Christians at Corinth, and calls them
his beloved Sons; for (says he) in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
Gospel 1 Cor. 4 14, 15.
. So he says to Philemon, I beseech thee for my SON Onesimus, whom I have
begotten in my bonds. -- Hence the Gospel-Administration is called the
Regeneration Mat. 19.23.
. We are all by Nature Children of Wrath, Children of the Devil, a Seed of evil
Doers. But GOD in the Riches of his Grace, seeking to himself a godly Seed,
sent his only begotten Son into the World, that he should taste Death for every
Man, and thereby recover us unto Life, Liberty and Happiness. For it became
Him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many Sons
unto glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through Sufferings. And
now it pleases GOD by the Foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe.
We preach Christ crucified; and are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it
is the Power of GOD unto Salvation. It Is the grand means of begetting Souls to
a spiritual Life. Jam. 1.18. Of his own Will begat He us, with the Word of
Truth. So 1 Pet. 1.23. Being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of
incorruptible, by the word of God. There is a kind of propagatory Virtue in the
Gospel of Christ, which is applied by the Spirit of GOD for the production of a
spiritual offspring. The Word does not produce the new Creature merely by its
own natural Efficacy; but by the concurring Operation of Divine Grace on the
Heart. It Is therefore called the Ministry of the Spirit: and we are said to be
born of the Spirit; yet also to be born again by the Word, and Ministers are
said to beget us through the Gospel. -- Hence then (in a remote and low and
improper sense) the Character of Parents may be applied to Ministers, as they
are Instruments in the Conversion of Sinners: and the Converts of Sion may in a
subordinate sense be called their Sons and Daughters. "Aaron's Sons (as one
observes) are called the Generations of Moses, as well as Aaron (Numb. 3.1.)
tho none of his natural Sons are there mentioned -- Aaron's they were by
natural Generation; Moses's perhaps by a spiritual Regeneration and Instruction"

The Work of Ministers is to turn Sinners to GOD through the Gospel; and thereby
to raise up a spiritual Seed to Christ, their Elder Brother. -- Not indeed that
they can do this by any Principle or Power in themselves; nor may they attempt
it in their own solitary strength, but must have their absolute Dependence on
Christ, who said even to his Apostles (those eminent Fathers of the Church)
Without Me, Ye can do nothing. -- In this matter of the New Birth, verily a
Paul is nothing; an Apollo is nothing; but all our Sufficiency is of GOD. It Is
His sole Prerogative to give the Increase. -- Thus even as to natural Birth,
this is not in the power of Mortals: but its GOD that frames our Bodies in
secret, and forms the Spirit of Man within him. Hear what good Jacob said to
his discontented Wife, Genesis 30.2. Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel, and
he said, Am I in God's stead, who has withheld from thee the fruit of the
Womb! -- So afterward when his Brother Esau met him and his Flocks, and said,
Who are those with thee? He answered, The Children which GOD has graciously
given thy Servant. Parents are only the Instruments (in some sense) of their
Children's being: their Formation is of GOD the prime Efficient. -- So as to
the Renovation of Souls, this likewise is from GOD. The Saints are his
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus. Ministers are at best but mere
Instruments in the hand of GOD. Yet being such, they may be called Parents, in
regard of Those who through their Ministry are begotten and born to GOD. And to
be Parents in this sense, is what they should continually aspire after. It Is
one eminent part of their sacred Employment to labor the Conversion of
Sinners, that they may become the Children of GOD by Faith in Christ Jesus! and
so the Family of Christ be enlarged, by their being added to the Church.

2. Their business is to provide for, nourish and feed the Children of GOD

It Is one of the duties of Parents toward their Children, to make all needful
provision for their temporal Livelihood. Thus, while in their helpless Infancy,
the Parents must carefully nurse and cherish their tender bodies, and endeavor
to supply all their wants. And during their whole minority, they should take
care that they be well provided for, suitably to their age, quality, and the
like; should see 'em trained up in some good and profitable Business, by which
they may afterward be able (if need be) to provide for themselves; and should
study to lay up Something to leave as an agreeable Portion to them Hence the
Apostle tells us in our Text, "The Parents ought to lay up for the Children
This indeed is one of the fundamental dictates of Nature, as well as Religion.
So that (as he observes elsewhere) If any Man provide not for his own,
especially for those of his own house, he has denied the Faith and is worse
than an Infidel: -- yea is lost to all natural Affection, and become more vile
than the very Brutes that have no understanding; who from an Instinct of Nature
are very provident Caterers for their Young. Thus the Hen lovingly gathers
her Chickens under her Wings, and with greatest Care and Industry feeds and
cherishes her tender Brood, till able to provide for themselves. (Even the
Sea Monsters draw out the breast, and give suck to their Whelps.) Only the
Ostrich of the Wilderness is cruel, who leaves her eggs in the dust,
forgetting that the foot may crush them, and is hardened against her young ones
as though they were not hers. Unto which cruel Bird may he be liken'd, who
provides not for his own. Surely such an one is more brutish than any Man, and
has forfeited the name of Father. It Is one essential Property of a Parent to
provide as well as he can for the comfortable Subsistence of his Children. In
this respect Job calls himself a Father to the Poor, and Joseph was made a
Father to Pharaoh and his People. And this is alluded to, where the GOD of
Israel says, I have nourished and brought up children, etc.

Now in this respect Ministers are to act the part of Fathers toward their
People, by providing and dispensing spiritual Food to them, for the
strengthening and improving the Divine Life in their Souls. Their Duty is
suggested in that precious Promise, Jer. 3.15. I will give you Pastors
according to mine heart, which shall feed you with Knowledge and Understanding.
It was prophesied of Christ, Mic. 5.4. He shall stand and feed in the strength
of the Lord. -- Even so Ministers are charged to do: See Act. 20.28. and 1 Pet.
5.2.

They must be nursing Fathers to the newborn Babes (Young and feeble
Christians) and feed them with the sincere Milk of the Word (with easy plain
Truths, first Principles of the Oracles of GOD) that they may grow thereby: for
such have need of Milk, and not of strong Meat. In which we have the Apostle
for an Example, who says, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. And I Brethren, could not speak unto
you, as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ. I
have fed you with Milk, and not with Meat, for hitherto ye were not able to
bear it, neither yet now are ye able. But then there are Christians stronger in
the Faith, and more improved in Knowledge and Grace, who should have a different
Portion dealt out to them; as the same Apostle observes, Heb. 5.14. Strong Meat
belongs to them that are of full age, even those who by reason of use have
their Senses exercised to discern both Good and Evil.

Ministers are Stewards of the Mysteries of GOD, and should feed the Household
with Food convenient; rightly dividing the Word, and giving to every one his
proper portion, whether of Instruction, Reproof, Advice, or Comfort. And they
should endeavor that all who (in a Judgment of rational Charity) have a right
to the Children's bread, may be partakers of Baptism and the Lord's Supper: and
by the dispensation of these Ordinances, as well as of the Word, they are to
feed the Flock of GOD, and confirm the Souls of the Disciples.

They should continually be either distributing the Bread of Life to Souls, or
preparing the sacred Food. They must by daily Study and Prayer be laying up in
Head and Heart a Treasure of Knowledge, that they may be able with the good
Householder to bring forth things both new and old. They must look well to
their Preparations for the Pulpit; that they don't starve the Souls of their
People, with deceitful meat, and unprofitable Trash; but nourish them up with
substantial and agreeable Food (with sound Doctrine, with wholesome words) even
as a Father cherishes his Children -- Moreover, as Parents know how to give
good Gifts to their Children, and usually leave to them some special Tokens of
their Love, for a Memorial of 'em, when they are gone: so should Ministers be
ready to impart spiritual Gifts unto their People (to the end that they may be
established) by Spreading Books of Piety among them, as they are able, and
therein make provision for coming Generations, as well as for the present.
Agreeably thus says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.15. I will endeavor that you may be
able after my Decease, to have these things always in remembrance. Nature, as
well as Religion, teaches us to consult the Benefit of Posterity, and lay up in
Store for these that shall come after us. A good Man (its said) leaves an
Inheritance to his Children. The best Entail is Religion, which relates to the
Soul, the better Part. The Soul is the Man: and Provision for that is the most
excellent Provision, most worthy the Care of natural Parents, and in a peculiar
manner of Ecclesiastical Fathers, whose special Employment is to promote the
Welfair of Souls.

3. It Is their business to instruct, inspect, and govern the Family committed
to their Charge.

It Is the Duty of Parents to instruct their Household, both in the Things which
concern the Life that now is, and in those which relate to the Life that is to
come. They must see that their Children be taught some useful Art, Trade, or
Employment, and impart to 'em as much as is proper of the Knowledge of this
World. But above all, it is of indispensable obligation on Parents to teach
their Children the Fear of the Lord, and instruct them in the Knowledge of
Christ, whom to know is Life eternal. They must walk in their Houses according
to Knowledge; being themselves well acquainted with theit Bibles, and ready to
communicate their Knowledge to their Children, that every one of them may (with
Timothy) from a Child know the Scriptures, which are able to make them wise
unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. They should in a solemn
manner daily read the sacred Writings to their Families, as valuing the Word of
GOD more than their necessary Food. They should also frequently Catechize their
Children (instilling into them the Elements of Religion) so long as they are
such as have need of Milk. They should also by Familiar Discourse from time to
time (as they are able) open to them the Scriptures, while they walk by the
way, or sit in the House, when they lie down, and when they rise up, giving
them Line upon Line, here a little and there a little. -- And as they come to
riper Age, must proportion and adapt their Instructions to their growing
capacity.

Even so Ministers are set in the Church to be Teachers. And they must teach
their larger Families, in all the forementioned ways; giving attendence (with
Timothy to Reading, to Exhortation, and Doctrine. The Priests Lips should
preserve Knowledge, and dispense it. But this having been glanced at under a
former Head, I shall only observe here, that on this account Ministers may be
called Fathers, and their People their Children. We are apt to venerate them as
our Fathers, that have the Tuition and Instruction of us. The Term seems to be
applied in this sense, to the Young Levite, Be thou a Father (i. e. a Teacher)
and a Priest unto us. For 'twas the business of the Levites, to teach the good
Knowledge of the Lord. In Genesis 4.21.22. Father and Instructour are used as
equivalent Term. So Mat. 23.9. Call no man your Father upon Earth; Yield not an
implicit Faith to the most learned Do^^ur in the World; submit to no man as an
infallible Guide. Father seems there to be put for Master or Instructor. Hence
that phrase, The Sons of the Prophets, i. e. their Disciples or Scholars.

But further, Parents have also an Inspection and Government over their
Children, to keep peace and (...) to restrain, reprove, correct, advise and
charge: (...) must not only keep up Family Instruction* but likewise
Family-Government and Discipline must be duly maintained. It was utterly a
Fault in Eli, that when his Sons made themselves vile, he restrained them not.
And alike negligent was David, of his Son Adonijah, concerning whom we read,
His Father had not displeased him at any time, in saying, Why have thou done
so? -- No wonder then that he exalted himself in the manner he did, to
supersede and dethrone his indulgent Father. Most of the Confusions and
Miscarriages in Families are owing to the Parents faulty Negligence, and
Imprudence, and Unfaithfulness. No Society can well subsist without Government
and Order; and as the best way to maintain Authority in Families, is to advance
and keep up Religion in it: so Parents should apply their Authority to promote
Religion in their Houses by all possible methods of Wisdom. The Light of Nature
teaches us, that every Man should bear Rule in his own House: and Religion
teaches us, that there is no power but of God. They therefore who are Heads of
Families, should employ their Authority according to the will of God, and be a
Terror not to good works, but to evil. They should countenance Virtue, and
discourage Vice, as much as possible, in their Families; resolving every one
with Joshua, As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord. They should (with
Abraham) command their Household to keep the way of the Lord: and when
Correction may be needful, they must resolutely apply this wholesome Remedy, and
not spare the Rod Behold, this is to bring up their Children in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord. It Is but agreeable to the Conduct of God toward his
Children. 2 Samuel 7.14. I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son: if he
commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of Men, and with the stripes
of the Children of Men.

And even so Ministers, who are said to be Rulers over the Household, should
study to approve themselves Fathers to their People, by a due exercise of their
Pastoral Authority, in all proper acts of Government and Discipline, agreeable
to their Divine Commission.

Thus they must invite and admit into the visible Family of Christ, by Baptism,
and unto the Table of the Lord, such as are meet and proper Subjects of these
holy Ordinances, and only such; careful to keep out of his House ill Servants,
left the Children should learn their ways, and get a snare to their Souls.

They must watch over them that are committed to their Charge; take heed unto
themselves, and to all the Flock; watching for their Souls, as those that must
give an Account.

They must exercise their power and show all good fidelity in reproving Sin;
rebuking (where there is occasion for it) with all Authority, as a Father does
his Children, when he sees them do amiss.

They are also to warn and admonish. I Cor. 4.14. As my beloved sons, I warn
you. Private Christians may, yea, should (and I wish they did more faithfully)
reprove and warn one another: But then They do it merely in a war of Charity
and Brotherly Kindness. Whereas Ministers act herein as public Officers, and
their Reproofs and Admonitions carry something of a Paternal Authority with
them. These. 5.12. Which are over you in the Lord, and admonish you.

They are also to command and charge. So their Instructions run, -- These
Things command and teach; -- Charge them that are rich in this world; -- Put
them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord. Indeed when they command or
charge, it must be only in the Name and Cause of CHRIST, our common Head and
Master. They are to be obeyed only (as Children are required to obey their
Parents) in the Lord: and therefore they must keep close to the Word, as their
Directory, and take all their Charges and Injunctions out of that, and give
them forth as the Commands of Christ.

Moreover, They are to excommunicate impenitent scandalous Offenders. Them that
so sin, they are to rebuke before all, that others also may fear; and after the
first and second Admonition, reject. The Apostle directs the Church at Corinth
to put away from among themselves a wicked Person that had defiled their
Communion. They were to do it by their Elders; unto whom it belongs by Office
to exercise that Power, with the Concurrence of the Brethren. By their hand the
Keys are to be turned, both in opening and shutting the Doors of GOD's House.

Again, They are to restore him that is lapsed, upon his Repentance; take off
the Sentence and Punishment which was inflicted of many, and forgive and
comfort him, as tender Parents welcome home a returning Prodigal.

In a word, They are both to exhort and convince Gainsayers, and stop the
Mouths of unruly and vain Talkers and Deceivers, who resist the Truth, and
subvert Souls. Some they must rebuke sharply, that they may be sound in the
Faith, or at least may proceed no further: while on others they must have
Compassion, in Meekness instructing them. They must endeavor by sound doctrine
to recover such as are fallen into Error, to establish the wavering, to support
the feebleminded, and build them up on their most holy Faith. -- But I conclude
this head with that of the Apostle, 1 These. 2.11. You know how we exhoried and
comforted and charged every one of you, as a father does his Children.

4. Ministers are to bless their People, and to pray with and for them: and in
this perform the part of Parents toward them.

Parents, and in special the Fathers, are to go before their houses in Divine
Worship, and be their mouth to GOD in Family Prayer, as well as his Mouth to
them in Family-Instruction. These are Duties taught us by the Light of natural
Reason, and enforced by the Laws of revealed Religion. And in the order of
Nature it belongs to the Parents to lead in religious Exercises. They whose
province it is to guide the House, and preside in the secular Affairs of it,
should also go before the Family in the things of GOD. Every Master is as well
a Priest to his house, as a little King and Prophet. The Father in old time,
before the Institution of distinct Orders among Men, sustained this threefold
character, and offered Sacrifices, as well as bare Rule, and taught within his
own walls. And in Acts of natural Religion (such as Prayer) he so far still
remains a Priest unto GOD, that he must lead his family in the spiritual
Sacrifices of Prayer and Praise; which should, as the continual burnt offering,
be presented daily morning and evening. We find the Patriarch Abraham, wherever
he pitched his Tent, building an Altar (a Family-Altar) and serving at it, in
his own person. We read also of Job's sanctifying his Children, by
burnt-offerings according to the number of them all. Thus (its said) did Job
continually. -- It is spoken of David, as what was his Custom, after the
Translation of the Ark, that he returned to bless his Household. -- And it is
required of Masters, as they would give to their Servants that which is just
and equal, that (knowing they themselves also have a Master in heaven) they
continue in Prayer, praying TOGETHER Col. 4.3. i. e. (...) -- Compare 1 These. 4
17. and chap. 5.10. where the same word is translated Together.


In like manner, Churches being a kind of larger Households, in which Ministers
are spiritual Fathers, they are to bless these their Ecclesiastical Families in
the Name of the Lord; to pray for them in their Closets, and to pray with them
in private on special occasions as they are called (see Jam. 5.14.) but more
especially in the public Congregation. Of old the Lord separated the Tribe of
Levi to stand before him and to bless in his Name. And this makes a part of the
Office of Gospel Ministers also. Though we don't (that I at present remember)
expressly read any where of the Apostles or first Ministers of the Gospel
leading in the prayers of any public Assembly: yet doubtless it was their
Practice, and seems to be intimated in several places. -- The Apostles do
insert Benedictions, in their Letters to the Churches: and undoubtedly wherever
they preached a Sermon, they prayed with the Assembly, and pronounced a
Blessing on the Worthy. Even so should every Minister. They must lead in the
Devotions of GOD's House; solemnly bless their People upon all proper
Occasions, whether in public or private, as well as make mention of them
always in all their secret Prayers. They are obliged by their Office to give
themselves to Prayer, equally as to the Ministry of the Word. And this is but
what becomes the Character of Fathers, which they sustain. Thus the young
Levite was a Father and a Priest to the Tribe of Dan.

But to proceed,

5. Ministers are obliged to be Examples of Religion before their People.

Parents partake of the same Nature, which they propagate unto their Children:
So Ministers should see to it that they themselves be real Instances of that
viral Sanctity, which it is the grand business of their Office to promote and
spread in the World.

The Example of Parents carries a peculiar Force and Impression with it; which
Reflection should make them ever solicitous to be exemplary in all their
language and demeanor before their Househould. And of the like Influence is
the Example of Ministers. They therefore should study to teach Religion by
their Practice as well as Doctrine; that the former adding Weight and Efficacy
to the latter, such as have not been wrought on by their Word, may be won by
their good Conversation in Christ.

It is not only a moral duty of common obligation on Ministers with other
Christian Professors; but seems given them in charge even as a part of their
sacred Office, and an instituted Medium for the carrying on their Work to
better advantage, That they be careful to set a good Example; which is the most
Divine and excellent, the most familiar, compendious and engaging method of
Instruction -- Hence if Ministers set a bad Example they are doubly guilty
before GOD.

Ministers are (as Parents in the Family) in a somewhat elevated and
conspicuous Station; they are as a City set on a Hill, which cannot be hid. They
lie very open to Observation, and many Eyes are upon them. It is of no small
Consequence therefore, that they walk circumspectly, and be holy in all manner
of Conversation; So, they will shine as Lights in the World, and diffuse benign
Beams and Influences; will adorn their Doctrine, and make Religion appear with
an attractive beauty and luster. Whereas, on the contrary, if they are vicious
and dissolute, their ill Example has a direct Tendency to stain the honor of
the Gospel, to give a Reputation to Vice; to harden the Wicked, and wound the
Righteous Souls among their People. The wicked Lives of such will read loud
Lectures of Atheism and Irreligion, and spread a deadly Infection, which
wastes at noonday: while yet in their public Discourses they may talk like
Angels of light. If the Priests make themselves vile, the People will soon come
to abhor the Offerings of the Lord.

I shall only add here; Persons are sometimes denominated the Children of
others, from their Resemblance and Imitation of them. For this reason in part
are Believers called the Children of Abraham, because they walk in his steps:
and he is called the Father of us all, as being an eminent Example of Faith to
all Generations.

Hence then, Ministers are obliged by this character of Fathers, to show
themselves Patterns of good works. It is therefore expressly required of them,
in the Scriptures, -- That they be blameless, and of good behavior; Lovers of
hospitality; Lovers of good men; sober, just, holy, temperate; not given to
Wine; not greedy of filthy Lucre; no Brawlers, no Strikers, not soon angry, not
self-willed, neither carrying it as Lords, but being Ensamples to the Flock:
Ensamples in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity:
fleeing all youthful Lusts; from which if a Man purge himself, he shall be a
Vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the Master's use, and prepared
unto every good work. In particular no small stress is laid upon Ministers
being Patterns for Family-Government and Discipline: that they rule well their
own Houses, having their Children in subjection with all gravity; for (says
Paul to Timothy) if a Man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take
care of the Church of GOD?

These are Apostolic Canons, of a Divine Original, unquestionably authentic;
and do loudly bespeak entertainment with all that would approve themselves
genuine Ministers of Christ, and truly Fathers to their People.

Finally, For all these ends, they must personally reside among their People,
as Parents dwell with their Children and Family. The Apostle would have Mothers
to love their Children, to be discreet, keepers at home, guiding the House. And
Fathers are obliged to reside as constantly with their Families as possible. In
allusion to this the names of Father and Mother are sometimes made use of to
signify intimate Communion and Familiarity; as in Job 17.14 and 2 Cor. 6.16. --
18. Even so Ministers should live among their People, that they may get
acquainted with them, and know the state of their Flocks, in some measure as
Parents know the state of their Families, and have an intimate acquaintance
with their Children. In populous places indeed, and large Congregations, it is
difficult to attain a personal knowledge of every Individual. Yet the ends of
the Ministry require that a Pastor be at least acquainted with the general
state of his People* and he should seek after a particular Acquaintance, as far
as he can, by careful inquiries, by pastoral Visits, by asking and receiving
Visits from them, etc. that he may know their Soul-wants, and be able to suit
his spiritual Provisions to their various Appetites and Capacities. Ministers
must reside with their particular Charges; to the end they may watch for Souls;
may inspect the Conversations of their People; may shine before them by the
light of an holy Example, etc. For these ends (I say) personal Residence is
their duty; and seems necessary, as they would approve themselves worthy the
Title of Fathers. It looks unnatural, and a foul Incongruity in them, to be
long or often needlessly absent from their Charges; much more to dwell stately
at a remote distance; or finally leave them but upon the most justifiable and
important Reasons. The Reprimand may be applied in such Cases, that was given
the Prophet, when he was out of his place, What do thou here, Elijah?

But thus much for the third thing, The nature and business of their Office. I
come now to another general head.

IV. This title of Parents or Fathers, suggests to us some of the
Qualifications, Gifts and Accomplishments, that are requisite for the work of
the Ministry.

Men have sometimes this Title applied to them, in regard to their Age, their
Knowledge, their Wisdom, Experience, etc.

Seniority gives this Denomination. Hence the Apostle begins his Apology (Act.
22.1.) with those distinct Compellations, Men, Brethren, and Fathers. Now, in
this application of the word, Some in the Ministry are emphatically Fathers,
and have a distinguishing right to the Name, by reason of their venerable Hoary
Head. And though these are not the only Persons entitled to that Character, and
though advanced Age is not requisite to the Ministry; yet let me take occasion to
say here, It seems the highest Propriety, that Persons be able to write Man,
and be arrived to years of Maturity and Solidity, before they assume this
Office and Character.

Under the Levitical Dispensation, only middle-ag'd Men of the Tribe of Levi
were employed in the Service of the Tabernacle. The Limits were from 30 years
old to 50. -- I shall offer an Account of this matter, in the words of Mr
Henry, (in his Exposition upon Numb. 4.) Of the other Tribes, those that were
numbered to go forth to War, were from 20 years old and upward, but of the
Levites only from 30 to 50: for the Service of GOD requires the best of our
Strength, and the Prime of our Time, which cannot be better spent than to the
Honor of Him, who is the First and Best. And a Man may make a good Soldier
much sooner than a good Minister. They were not to be employed till they were
30 years old, because till then they were in danger of retaining something
childish and youthful, and had not Gravity enough to do the Service, and wear
the Honor of a Levite. At 25 years old they were entered as Probationers, Number.
8.24. and in David's time (when there was more work to be done) at 20. But they
must be 5 years learning, and waiting, and so sitting themselves for Service:
nay in David's time, they were 10 years (...) preparation, from 20 to 30. John
Baptist began his public Ministry, and Christ his, at 30 years old. -- It is
not in the Letter of it obliging to Gospel-Ministere now, as if they must not
begin their Work till 30 years old: but it gives us two good-Rules. (1) That
Ministers must not be Novices. It Is a work that requires Ripeness of Judgment,
and great Stayedness; and therefore those are very unfit for it, who are yet
but Babes in Knowledge, and have not put away childish things. (2) That they
must learn before they teach, serve before they rule, and must first be proved;
then let them use the Office, being found blameless.

The Ministry is an Office of Authority: and natural Decency requires, that
such as execute it, be Men both in years, and parts. Besides otherwise there
will be danger of two things: (1) of their being bloated with Self-Conceit,
with young Nadab and Abihu, to their Ruin. Hence the Apostle inserts it in his
Character of a Bishop. 1 Timothy 3.6. Not a Novice; lest being lifted up with
Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. And then (2) there will be
danger of their falling into Contempt, as being but of Yesterday, and knowing
nothing.

The Ministry is a hard and critical Work, and of a superior nature; and such
a work had need have a wise Head and dextrous Hand to manage it. Verily it
requires the best Furniture of Science, Prudence, Fortitude, and Resolution, to
supply all its occasions, and wade through its Difficulties. They had not need be
very young, and tender, and unexperienced, that undertake such a Work; which
will many times exercise all the Strength, Skill, and Courage of a Paul, a
Cephas and an Apollos united. Sure I am, the whole time of Youth is little
enough to be spent in preparatory Study, Prayer, and Observation. -- Let me
pause here a little, and having first laid my hand on my own breast, permit me
to say, -- Many of us have reason to reflect with Shame upon our Rushing into
the Pulpit so young, so undisciplined, and unfurnished: and all of us have too
sad occasion to lament our Ignorance, Inexpertness, and manifold Deficiencies.

I go on, --

Ministers had need be Men of good natural Powers; and these well cultivated by
a liberal Education. It is requisite they be acquainted with the Tongues, Arts
and Sciences; and have those measures of acquired Literature, which may advance
them above the common Level, and distinguish them from the Generality of their
People, as much as Parents usually excel their Children in Knowledge. They had
need be Men in Understanding; and especially should they be mighty in the
Scriptures; that they may be apt to teach, and able both to exhort and
convince. Else they little deserve the name of Fathers. For says the Apostle,
Every one that is unskilful in the Word, is a Babe. -- They should be ready
Scribes, well instructed to the Kingdom of GOD. They are called the Lights of
the World. A Star without light, is not a greater solecism than a Minister
without some good portion of Theological Learning.

Further, Another very important Requisite is Wisdom. -- Luke 12.42. Who then
is that faithful and wise Steward --! These Ecclesiastical Fathers had need be
persons of Wisdom as well as Fidelity: come to a virile Consistence and
Perfection in their Reason and Judgment; having a just Government of their
Thoughts, Appetites, and Passions; and well verst in the Art of Business;
knowing in Things as well as Words, and having read Men as well as Books;
equally skilled in Manners and Principles; acquainted with the variety of
critical and perplexed Cases that occur in the Ministry; and understanding in
the Times: that they may be able to manage their Affairs with Discretion; may
know how to behave themselves in the house of GOD and among his People; to
apply properly to Persons of all Characters, of all Tempers and Conditions, and
to speak a word in Season upon all occasions. In these things wisdom is
profitable to direct.

Moreover, (it deserves a special Remark) the Ministry is a holy and spiritual
Work, and therefore calls for gracious Qualifications; requires no little
Strength in Grace, and Experience in vital Christianity. [An unexperienced
Pilot is not a greater Absurdity than an unexperienced Minister.] Surely
Ministers ought to be such as deserve the Name of Fathers, (in the Sense
wherein it is used by the Apostle, 1 Job. 2.13.) in distinction from Young Men
and little Children, or more imperfect Beginners in Religion. -- The Minister
ought to be a Father, in regard of his manly Seize in Grace; at least of
full age, and among those who by reason of Use have their Senses exercised to
discern both Good and Evil: -- Not a Novice, a Weakling or Babe in Christ, of
short Standing and little Proficiency in the School of Heaven; much less a
Child of this World, an unsanctify'd Sinner, initiated only in the form of
Godliness Sure I am, such an one must often necessarily be very awkward in his
managements, and scarce know how to deal with Souls in many cases; must needs
be frequently put to a Stand* and sometimes to the Blush, from a consciousness
of his own Ignorance and Inexperience in Divine Things. -- If the Minister be
not an experienced Christian, certainly he must make but a poor Casuist; an
unsafe Guide, very incapable to lead the Blind; an unsafe Physician, incapable
to apply to the Wounded in Spirit, with that skill, and tenderness and
fidelity, which their condition requires. -- The Minister had need be strong in
Faith; rooted in Love; filled with spiritual Wisdom; under the governing power
of Divine Principles, and improved in all the Graces of the active and pasive
Life. -- Otherwise he will (...) Compassion, a natural Care for Souls.
Otherwise (...) never have a due Jealousy for the Name of Christ, or a just
Vigor in his Cause: Otherwise all his Zeal will be a false fire, at least a
weak blaze, of short duration and little service; and many times will prove a
smoaky and impure flame, full of noxious vapors, poison and malignity:
Otherwise he will be soon shaken in mind, apt to sink under difficulties, and
faint in his Work; or else be tempted to Unfaithfulness, and securely sit down
idle, doing the work of the Lord negligently, and handling the Word of GOD
deceitfully* -- Otherwise (in fine) he will know nothing as he ought to know
it; will think nothing, will speak nothing, will do nothing, in his Ministry,
as he ought. There will not be that Spirituality, that Humility, that Life and
Affection, in his Prayers, his Sermons, and other Performances, which becomes a
spiritual Father.

It is a Reflection, pertinent to our purpose, which we have from one Mr.
Paschal.
of the greatest Masters of Thought in the last age, -- That the Heart has its
Arguments and Motives, with which the Reason is not acquainted. We feel this
(says he) in a thousand instances. It is the Heart, and not the Reason, which
has properly the Perception of GOD --. The Judgment and Understanding have
their proper Method: which is by Principles and Demonstrations. The Heart and
Affections have a Method altogether different. A Man would expose himself very
remarkably, who should go about to engage our Love, by laying down, in a
Philosophical Order, the Springs and Causes of that Passion." (Thus he) And
agreeable is that Remark, from another Masterly Hand Dr. Bates.
"It is not composing a Sermon with exquisite Art, and the delivering of it
like an Orator, that makes a Minister accepted with GOD: and usually such
Sermons are without Profit to the Hearers. The sound of words only reaches the
Ear: it is the Mind convinces the Mind, and the Heart persuades the Heart. He
that is burning in his own breast, will inflame others: but if there be no
Celestial Fire in the Minister's breast, he speaks of Divine Truths without a
deep Concernment; and a Cold Preacher makes a cold Hearer: So the Sermon is
lost in the Air between the lips of the one and the ears of the other. --
Indeed (as we have the Remark from a like excellent Hand Bp. Hopkins.
) "GOD may feed his People, as He did Elijah, by a Raven; and make a cold
Breath kindle the sparks of Grace in the Hearts of others. But yet such an one
as speaks from the Heart, is most like to speak unto it. And it is commonly
observed, That they are the Labors of such, that GOD most usually owns and
crowns with Success."

Thus you see that Ministers had need be truly Men of God, endowed with
superior measures both of Gifts and Graces, and have that Wisdom, Weight, and
Experience* which may justly entitle them Spiritual Fathers.

I pass now to another general Head.

V. This title of Parents tells us what the Tempers and Deportments are which
do become Ministers; that they should express a Fatherly Spirit in their
Ministry, and imitate the Conduct of wise, tender, and religious Parents.

The Name inscribed upon them must give Law to all their Powers, and direct
their Tempers and Managements; that as they are Parents by Office and Title,
they may be such by Analogy and in Fact. Now a wide Prospect opens before me
here; and might I be permitted to expatiate, a great deal could be said to
profitable purpose. But I shall study to bring my Thoughts into a narrow
Compass; and the rather because I have somewhat prevented my self, by many
incidental Hints I Have mingled in the foregoing part of this Discourse. Yet I
should hardly be just to my Text, if I did not allow the head we are now upon,
a distinct Consideration. Suffer me then to say here.

(1) Ministers should bear all suitable Parental Affections toward their People.

They should be Fathers to their People in Affection. Love is the first and
most essential passion in a Parent. Our Children being so many parts of our
selves (without a figure) we love 'em by a natural and almost invincible
Instinct. And as it seems a property of Love to descend with the greatest
force; so the Love of Parents is perhaps of all others the strongest, and
usually flows down in a resistless Torrent of Benevolence, Zeal and Solicitude.
Hence if Ministers would show themselves in truth Fathers to their People,
their Breasts must be filled with Love, and flame with paternal Passions.

They must see to it that their Love be real and unfeigned, as that of Parents;
not a painted blaze, but a living Reality. For it is possible there may be
glittering Dissemblers (like Judas) who have not the least spark of sacred fire
in their bosoms; but their hearts cold and dead as a Stone, while yet sometimes
all without may be flame and heat.

Again, Their Love must be pure, and without the the mixture of corrupt Aims; a
free and generous Passion, like that in Parents,; and a spiritual Affection,
kindled by motives of a heavenly extract, and regulated by Divine Principles
and Designs. Not a general Philanthropy only, nor a Party-Friendship; not a
mercenary and sensitive Affection; a mere human Love, terminating in carnal
Considerations; such as theirs, Gal. 4.17. They zealously affect you, but not
well; that is, not sincerely, or upon true and genuine Views. All worldly
Considerations are heterogenous Springs. Where Self only or mainly is concerned
and intended, the Love is of a false Original. We must be animated by the same
Spirit with the holy Apostle, who says in our Text, I seek not yours but you:
and I will gladly spend and be spent for your Souls So it is in the Original.
though more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved. -- It must be a Love to
Souls, a Love to Christ in his People, and a Love to them for Christ's sake.
This is to love the Brethren with a pure heart.

Again, Their Love must be impartial* as the love of parents generally is or
should be. It must extend to all their People, without exception, and without
respect of Persons. Indeed it cannot be exercised toward all exactly in the same
manner and degree without any distinction: this is neither possible, nor a
duty. Yet it must be universal in its goodwill at least, and not limited by any
sinister Considerations. Suppose we have received Affronts and Abuses; or
suppose personal Defects in this and the other; Deformity of Body, or (which is
worse) a Crookedness of Temper; or Poverty, Meanness of Condition; or a
prevailing Unprofitableness under our Ministry, etc. Yet in none of these Cases
is Love to be dispensed with. It is a dangerous thing for Ministers or Parents
to want a hearty Affection to their Children or People, or to any of them.
Corrupt Partiality has been the Bane and Ruin of many Families and Churches
Unity and Peace.

Again, Their Love must he fervent, like that of tender Parents. We are to love
our Neighbors as our selves; and yet are allowed to love our Children in an
uncommon degree. So Ministers should love all Men; but the People of their
Charge, in a peculiar manner. Not contenting themselves with some little faint
spark of Affection, they should endeavor to get their Hearts inspired with a
burning Zeal, with Parental Ardours.

Moreover, It should be constant and persevering. The Love of Parents is a
natural Affection: and what is natural, is fixed and durable. So Ministers
should have a kind of natural Affection for their People; an habitual Love, an
unperishing flame, which many waters cannot quench.

In fine, It must be a very active Principle; reigning over all the Powers of
their Souls* and producing all agreeable inward Motions, Desires and
Resentments. What is it that a loving and gracious Parent feels within? O the
tender Sympathy and Concern that fills his breast! The ardency of Desire! The
vigor of active Pity! The painful Sensations, upon his Childrens Afflictions
or Miscarriages! His Heart aches, his Soul melts and bleeds out in Tears of
Grief for them. -- But O! the Joy and Ravishment, upon their Prosperity and
good Conduct! A wise Son makes a glad Father: but a foolish Son is the
Heaviness of his Mother.

Even thus should Ministers be affected toward their People. They should mourn
over carnal Sinners with parental bowels; anxious for them, as Kish for his son
Saul, when he left the Care of the Asses, and sorrowed for him, saying, What
shall I do for my Son? -- Where any appear obstinate and dead in Trespasses and
Sins; they should be grieved for the hardness of their Heart, and mourn for
them as David for his Absalom. Their Souls should weep in secret places for
them. -- And where any are under Awaknings and preparatory spiritual Dolours;
these spiritual Parents should groan earnestly for their Deliverance, and as
'twere travel in birth, until Christ be formed in them. They should be inflamed
with an holy impatient Thirst for the Convirsion of Souls; longing after them
all in the bowels of Jesus Christ; that of Zion it may be said, This and that
Man was born in her, under their Ministry. -- And they should rejoice in the
Conversion of Sinners. The News of this should be to them, as Tidings to a
Father, of the birth of a Child, filling his Heart with gladness. -- Moreover,
they should maintain a peculiar Esteem for the precious Sons of Zion, and
Daughters of Jerusalem, accounting them the Excellent in the Earth, and calling
them their own Bowels, as Paul speaks of his Son Onesimus. They should be full
of peculiar Benevolence to such. So the Apostle, to the Corinthians, Our Mouth
(says he) is open onto you; our Heart is enlarged. I speak as to my Children.
You are in our Heart, to die and live with you. It is one stroke in the
Character of Titus's Bishop, That he be a Lover of good Men. He should love
their Persons, value their Society, take a pleasure in their Gifts and Graces,
and Prosperity whether in Temporals or Spirituals. He should rejoice with them
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep; "adopting their Joys and Griefs."
As a Father pitieth his Children; so should the Minister put on bowels of
Compassion toward his People, be grieved for all their Trials, but especially
mourn their spiritual Distempers, Distresses, Fears and Temptations; bearing a
heavy pa^^ with them under their various Burdens. He should have a sharp sense
of the Injuries done them; as a Parent resents the Abuses his Children receive.
-- He should be jealous over them with godly Jealousy; as as pious Parent for
his dear Children: afraid left by any means their Minds should be corrupted. So
Lemuel's Mother; What my Son! And what the Son of my womb! And what the Son of
my Vows. -- Yet he should not nourish in himself a spirit of evil surmising,
and an unguarded Credulity, which are often in the unhappy fountains of
mischievous Prejudices and Alienations: but in every ease be disposed to hope
the best, as Parents of their Children, and turn away his eyes from the dark
side, as much as is consistent with rational Charity.

In a word, He should be ^^ssess'd with a Parental Care for his People. Can a
Woman forget her sucking Child! Or can the Tenderness and Vigilance of an
affectionate Father be equaled! He has his loved Children ever on his Mind, and
all his Powers upon the wing, to seek their Good. And when natural Affection is
sanctified by the grace of GOD, all the Springs of pious Concern are opened,
and he is solicitous for their Souls, Day and Night. Even thus should the
Spiritual Parent bear his People upon his Heart, and grave them upon the palms
of his Hands. Verily a careless Minister is a prodigious Solecism. The Apostle
tells Timothy, A Bishop must be vigilant, and take care of the Church of GOD.
And he gives that Charge to the Bishops of Ephesus, Take heed unto your selves,
and to all the Flock. -- Watch and remember that by the space of three years I
ceased not to warn every one night and day with Tears. -- The Bishop or
spiritual Father must watch in all things, as one that really has the Care of
Souls, at heart. There must be a Care to know the State of his Flock; a Care to
find out proper Methods for the promoting their spiritual Safety and
Prosperity; and a Care to make a wise and successful Application of the Means:
An earnest Care (such as GOD put into the heart of Titus for the Church at
Corinth) a Care to serve Christ and save Souls; this, this is the true Pastoral
Care: and must be found in all that would approve themselves indeed spiritual
Fathers to their People.

Thus we have been looking into the hidden Man of the Heart, and viewing the
inward Frames of Spirit, which agree to that sweet and instructive Title of
Parents, which Ministers are characterized by.

I go on now to say, --

(2) They must study to illustrate the Beauty and Propriety of their Name, by
all suitable Parental Conduct, and outward Management, in their Office, and
toward the People of their Charge.

Thus, they must assert their Character, by a diligent Discharge of their
Trust, in all the parts of it. Parental Love is a buisy restless Passion. What
is it that the affectionate Parent will not do for his Children! O the ardent
Zeal that flows in his breast! The Vigor of Endeavor! The unwearied Offices
of Benignity! He Will gladly sit up late, and rise early, to serve them, and think
nothing in his power too much to do for 'em. -- Now, even thus should Ministers
be active and diligent in their Work, to show before the Churches the proof of
their Love, and that their Care for 'em in the sight of GOD may appear to them.
They must labor to do their whole work, the duty of the day in its day,
according as every day requires. So far as the Ministerial Trust is neglected,
they put off the Character of Fathers. -- True Parental Love will (in
proportion to the degree of its strength) put Life and Activity into all their
executive Powers, and make them ready to every good work; hating Sloth;
impatient of Delays and Hindrances, and careful to redeem the Time. -- And
indeed their Work is such as calls for all their Vigor, Weight and
Application. They had need to study hard, to read much, and think more, and
stick close to Business, the proper Business of their Post; attending
continually on this very thing; giving themselves wholly to it, as was required
of Timothy. And suffer me to say here, For this end, they should endeavor the
greatest Abstraction from the World, and sit as loose to its concerns as may
be. Indeed the Apostles (we know) sometimes wrought with their own hands: but
then it was only to supply their present Wants, in a time of pressing
necessity; which perhaps is almost the only case, wherein it is lawful for
Ministers to employ themselves in worldly business; especially to that degree
as to take them off much from their divide Employment. This is elegantly and
very justly compared to a Warfare: And the Apostle remarks to his Son Timothy;
No Man that warreth, entangles himself with the Affairs of this Life, that he
may please his Captain, that is, may be at leisure to attend, and have skill
and will to execute his Orders, upon whatsoever Service he pleases to call him
out. Now, to this end, it much more behooves the Minister, to banish all
ensnaring Earthly Cares and Anxieties out of his Mind, as much as possible.
Hence the Apostles renounced the Deacons Office (a Ministration about
Temporals) That they might give themselves continually to Prayer, and the
Ministry of the Word: as finding by experience they must necessarily in too
great and unreasonable a measure leave the Word, if they continued to serve
Tables. (See, Act. 6.) -- Few in the World are Men of that Capacity,
Application, and Strength of Genius, as to be able to carry on a variety of
Callings together. The Ministry before is ordinarily enough for any Man, to
take up his whole Time, and exercise all his Powers. And then it being a
spiritual Work, that calls for the most heavenly and divine Tempers, it seems
(in its nature) to be not a little inconsistent with the tumultuous Cares of a
Secular or Civil Employment. There is danger of our drinking in a Demas-like
Spirit, the Spirit of the World; if we needlessly immerse our selves in the
Affairs of this present life. Ministers being Men subject to like Passions had
need as well as others to beware of Covetousness; left the love of money, which
is the root of all Evil, once insinuating it self into their breasts, this
should gradually extinguish every Spark of Love to Souls; and so the temporary
Suspensions of their Ministry (in pursuit of the World) unhappily lead to a
final Desertion of it; in Heart, if not in Practice. -- But enough upon this
particular.

Further, Ministers should endeavor to show themselves Fathers, -- by the
exercise of all fatherly and manly Gifts and Powers in the performing of their
Office. They should study to show themselves approved unto GOD, Workmen, that
need not to be ashamed. -- I have said before, what their Gifts should be: I am
now saying, they should sutably exercise them. Let no man despise thee: Neglect
not the Gift that is in thee; was part of the Charge given Timothy. Thus, they
should study to exhibit their Knowledge (sacred Knowledge) unto Edification, in
all their Ministerial Performances; showing themselves Men, and Men of GOD,
thoroly furnished: or at least managing so, that their Profiting may appear to
all. Again, They should study to exercise and manifest Prudence, Skill, and
spiritual Wisdom: showing themselves not only Men of Zeal, but Men of Thought,
directed by rational Views, and governed by wise Principles; not indeed by the
maxims of carnal policy, the wisdom of this world, but of the wisdom which is
from above. This must sit Chief, and choose out their way for them; otherwise
"Good Passions may sometimes carry them into bad Actions, or the best Actions
be spoiled by an irregular Management." Indiscreet luxuriant Fervor generally
begins in mistake, proceeds in confusion* and ends in mischief; or at best in
disappointment. They had need exercise all their Sagacity, Caution,
Penetration, and Judgment; to distinguish aright concerning Persons, Things,
and Times; to methodize their Affairs well; to improve the fittest Seasons; to
choose out the best Means, and apply them with dexterity. -- Thus, in their
PRAYERS, they should use their best prudence; that these may be adapted to the
common Edification; carry light, and heat, and order in them; be clothed with
humble easy language; be accommodated to the occasion, and the state of things,
whether in public or private; not in a doctrinal or historical Strain, but
devotional; and the Utterance duly proportioned and adjusted to the place,
matter of the prayer, etc. So, in their SERMONS, they should study for
seasonable Subjects; most frequently inculcate the first and great Truths of
the Gospel; not read Lectures of mere Ethics, or deal in Politics, or lay out
their Labors on jejune Speculations, in barren Controversy, or Arguments more
nice and subtle, than wise, or profitable, especially to popular Audiences.
It Is a just Remark of a celebrated Writer; "'It Is but a mean Character of a Man,
that he says a great many fine Things." If a Son should ask Food of any of you
that is a Father, will you feed him with Wind? If he ask Bread, will you give
him a Stone? or if he ask a Fish, will you give him a Serpent? -- If Ministers
would not deal as unkindly and unjustly with their People, they must preach the
Word, the Truth as it is in Jesus; and this in a manner adapted to the general
capacity and relish of their Audience, as much as may be. That Is the best
Preaching, which has in it most of the genius and spirit of the Christian
Religion; exhibiting it in its glorious principles, precepts, promises, etc.
Here Is the bread of Life, to nourish Souls. Lord, evermore give us this Bread!
-- But further, Ministers must use the greatest prudence in managing the
affairs of Discipline and Church Government; that all be done with gravity,
without affectation; with zeal and courage, without temerity; with authority,
without usurpation: with fidelity, without rigor; with renderness, without
indulgence; with a just distinction in differing cases, without a criminal
partiality. -- Finally, In Conversation, they should be prudent; to set an
unexceptionable Example, and avoid offense; should study for an agreeable
address, use all innocent arts to win and engage, to please and profit
together: endeavoring at once to act both the Christian and the Gentleman,
which will in many cases try all their Skill, and put them to no little pains.

But I must not prevent my self from saying in the next place, --

They must show themselves Fathers, by the conspicuous exercise of all those
Graces and Virtues, which may adorn their Character and Relation. These must
shine out, and display themselves, in their whole Ministry and Converse.

Thus, They must express a Spirit of Seriousness and Solidity. All kind of
Levity is childish; very unseemly in Parents (who should study to make their
presence venerable to their Children) but more so in Ministers. The Apostle
rejects the thought of it with abhorrence, 2 Cor. 1.17. Did I use Lightness!
They must be grave in the Pulpit, and out of it; in their Garb, Mein, and
Language; in Doctrine showing uncorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity; in
Conversation using sound Speech, which cannot be condemned; not indulging (...)
on Allusions, or frothy trifling Witticisms and foolish Jestings, which are not
convenient: and "in Manners, above the trivial puerile Customs and loose
Practices of a vain World"; not only keeping at the widest distance from
grosser Immoralities and Impurities, but also in some cases abridging
themselves even of lawful Freedoms, that the Ministry be not blamed, and that
they may set the brightest Example of a shining Gravity. -- I use this Epithet,
because true Gravity is a very distinct thing from cloudy sullen Reservedness,
and morose Dejection.

Again, There must be a spirit of Meekness, Patience, Humility and Self-denial,
appearing in their Conduct. It Is a Law upon Parents, Col. 3.21. Provoke not
your Children, lest they be discourages. Extravagant Rigours toward Children
are generally of pernicious Consequence; on the one band, breaking the hearts
of the meek and tender spirited and making them lie down in sullen despair and
neglect of duty: on the other hand, inflaming the more rough and passionate,
and tempting them to run into greater Outrages. Hence then Parents should see
to it that they temper their Government with the meekness of Wisdom. And indeed
it is the general Disposition of Parents to be indulgent, rather than severe.
Hence it is drawn into comparison, Mal. 3.17. I will spare them, as a Father
spares his own Son that serves him. So in those words of Moses, Numb. 11.12.
Have I conceived all this People? Have I begotten them? that Thou should say
unto, me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing Father bereath the sucking
Child! We that are Parents know what this means. Now Ministers should learn of
tender Parents, to maintain and express a Spirit of Candor and Forbearance
toward their People. Thus the Apostle, 1 These. 2.7. We were gentle among you,
even as a Nurse cherishes her Children. They should endeavor to show all
Patience under the Difficulties they meet with, from the Humors of Men, from
the Infirmities of the Weak, the troublesome Follies of the Froward, and the
base Requitals of the unthankful; putting the best Construction's, and making
all possible Allowances. They must be ready to deny themselves, and comply with
mean and hard things sometimes, like Parents for their Children sake: as the
Hebrew Servant, Exodus 21.5. I love my Children; I will not go out free. They
must labor to exercise the true Spirit of Peacemakers, studying to prevent and
compose all Differences among their People; as Parents among their Children.
They must endeavor to be clothed with Humility; easy of access, affable,
courteous, willing to condescend to men of low degree, and stoop to the meanest
Offices, proper for their Station; as Parents for their Children. They should
smile on and countenance good Beginnings, and not despise the day of small
things, or disdain to speak to Babes. Nor affect to command, where Entreaties
will suffice. Thus the Apostle to Philemon, says, Tho I might be much bold in
Christ, to enjoin thee that which is convenient: yet for Love's sake I rather
beseech thee. And in dispensing Rebukes, they should endeavor that their Zeal
may be regulated by Prudence, and be such as consists with the Spirit of
Meckness, considering themselves, lest they also be tempted. They should be
willing to see and own all that is good and commendable in every one; sometimes
discreetly mixing deserved Praises, with their Reproofs and Warning [See an
Instance of this in 1 Cor 1.4, -- 11.] I shall conclude this Head with a short
Extract out of the Character given of a late eminently good and useful Minister
The Aged Mr. James Noyes, of Stonington in Connecticut. See his Funeral Sermon
by the Rev. Mr. Adams of New London.
from whence we may form several wise Rules to our selves in the Conduct of our
Ministry. Of him its said; He had a happy way of engaging People to be good, by
supposing them to be so, and treating them as such: for then they would be very
much ashamed to disappoint his Expectations. -- And He would sometimes try to
disengage Men from a vicious Course, by laying himself under voluntary bonds of
Self-denial for a time in things indifferent; that they might be encouraged the
more to try to recover the government of their unruly Appetites, while he bare
them Company in their Abstemiousness, and traced out the way for them to a more
regular Life.

Again, They should labor for a fervent Spirit, and discover all the lively
passions of tender Fathers, in Prayer and Preaching, and private dealing with
Souls. Parental Love often puts all the Springs and Powers of Nature in motion,
and makes us even agonize sometimes in our Addresses to the Throne of Grace for
our dear Children: we don't always content our selves with a transient cold
Petition or two; we cannot rest in one perpetual lifeless Round of words; but,
Nature helping Grace, our hearts sometimes grow hot within us, and we pour out
many and very importunate Requests to GOD. Now in this, Ministers should strive
to imitate natural Parents. Like Elias they should Pray earnestly: Like
Epaphras, they should always labor fervently in Prayer, with a deep Solemnity,
Warmth and Vigor of Spirit -- So in Preaching, a Zeal for Souls should carry
them out in pathetic Strains, animate their Utterance, and inflame their
Language. Both in the Study and Pulpit, they should even strive for something
of Ezekiel's Heat of Spirit, when the hand of the Lord was strong upon him.
They should speak as those that feel in themselves the heart of a Father, and
the bowels of a Mother; which often give most affecting Accents to parental
Counsels and Instructions. It is requisite (as one Mr. Gay (my worthy Brother
and Class mate) in his Sermon at Mr. Green's Ordination. page 13.
gives us the excellent Remark) that their Hearts should be warm, and that they
should speak as those whose Lips are touched with a Coal from the Altar;
because in Preaching there is intended a Communion of Souls. Hence the Apostle
tells the Thessalonians, He was willing to have imparted to them, not the
Gospel of GOD only, but also his own Soul; -- was desirous to inspire into them
the same devout Passions that flamed in his own breast; to communicate to them
of the heavenly Spirit that rested on himself; that the same Mind and Heart
might be in them, that was in him. Ministers should in Preaching as 'twere
breathe out their Souls to their People in the most sincere and holy Fervours;
in order to set their Hearts on fire, by the grace of GOD, and bring them to be
like-minded; not only almost, but altogether such as they are, in regard of the
Christian Faith and Life.

Moreover, They should be of good Courage, faithful, resolute and indefatigable
in their Work. They must be faithful in personal Applications to Souls, and in
public Dispensations of the Word, deliver the whole Counsel of GOD, and keep
back nothing that is profitable. The Apostle observes to the Corinthians, --
Great is my boldness of Speech toward you --; I speak as to my Children.
Parents don't use to mince the matter, and balk duty, for fear of their
Children; but deal plainly, and speak home, and do what they apprehend is best
and most expedient, however their Children resent it: Though indeed to maintain
their Government, and restrain them from Disorders, they are sometimes obliged
to put on all their Resolution, and use the utmost Prudence. Knowing that the
Rod and Reproof give Wisdom, pious Parents will not easily suffer themselves to
be bribed by their own Affections, to forbear administering them upon just
occasions. Nor will they be soon weary of well doing, etc. Now even thus should
Ministers, being animated and governd by an unbias'd A^m at the Good of Souls,
preach the Word, reprove, and exhort with all Longsuffering and Doctrine;
warning every Man with all fidelity, whether they will hear, or whether they
will forbear. Though they dwell with Scorpions, impudent Children and rebellious;
yet must not be afraid of their Words, nor dismayed at their Looks. (Ezekiel. 2.4,
6.) Whatever Opposition they meet with in their Work; whatever Difficulties lie
in their way, they must still go on, with an unchill'd Zeal, masculine Vigor,
and incorruptible Integrity; above the Influence of worldly Fears or Hopes.
Frowns or Charms; steadfast and immovable, and always abounding in the work of
the Lord. True Zeal is of a sanguine Complexion, bold in the pursuit of duty,
and firm to it is point. It mocks at Fear, and smiles in the face of Terror, as
well as despises Flattery, and scorns all Discouragements. The Apostle speaks
in the Language of Heroic Zeal, Acts 20.24. None of these things move me,
neither count I my Life dear to my self, so that I may finish my Course with
Joy -- He could embrace Chains, endure Hardness, and enjoy Miseries Steel's
Christian Hero.
in prosecution of his Ministry. Opposition did not dispirit, but strengthen
his Resolution; and his great Heart, instead of fainting and subsiding, rose
and biggen'd, in proportion to any growing Danger which threatened him. Being
strong in Faith; this carried him through Seas of Difficulties, and kept him from
sinking: this nourished in him the Flame of Love to Souls, so that the Floods
could not quench it. -- And now, If Ministers would approve themselves
spiritual Fathers, they must set themselves to copy after this great Pattern,
in all faithful Zeal, unwearied Labors, and inflexible Resolution. To this
end, They must be concerned to obtain like precious Faith, and live by the
Faith of the Son of GOD, upon whom they entirely depend for Assistance,
Acceptance and Success. They must lay out Faith and Prayer for themselves and
their People, as godly Parents for Themselves and Children. The Parents ought
to lay up for the Children: and what better than a good Stock of Prayers,
Prayers of Faith! The Parent's Breast should be a living Temple, wherein are
daily offered up to GOD (on the Altar of CHRIST's Merits) spiritual Sacrifices
for his Children, according to the number of them all The Minister should go
and do likewise; being often on his Knees, and carrying his People to GOD in
the Arms of an importunate Faith; casting them upon Him who cares for them.

Thus we have seen something of the Duty of Ministers toward their People,
resulting from the Character of Fathers applied to them. I have been much
longer here than I designed. I shall hasten now to the last general Head of
Discourse; after I shall have added this one Hint, That these spiritual Fathers
should study to maintain Brotherly Love and Correspondence among themselves, by
mutually exchanging all the Offices of good Neighborhood.

It remains now to observe in the last place.

VI. The Apostle in our Text compares the People to Children; which is a very
natural Consideration of them, if Ministers bear the Character of Parents. And
from hence they may learn much of the Duty they owe to their Ministers.

But here I shall do little more than hint at things: for I perceive the Time
runs out faster than my Subject.

This tells People that they should honor their spiritual Fathers. A Son
honors his Father. And agreably it is required, that faithful Elders be
counted worthy of double honor (1 Timothy 5.17.) treated with a kind of filial
Respect, especially by the People of their Charge, who are commanded to obey
them in the Lord, ( Heb. 13.17.) in as express words as the fifth Commandment.
It Is an Apostolic Canon (at least applicable) in this Case -- Rebuke not, that
is (according to the notation of the original word) don't satyrically lash an
Elder, but entreat him as a Father. -- However mean their Persons and outward
Condition, yet it is a venerable Character and Commission they bear; and this
surely should screen them from all Insult, Contempt, -- Outrage. It was a
mournful Complaint, of old, The Son dishonors the Father, and a Man's
Enemies are the Men of his own House. -- But let it not be so in the House of
GOD. We have had Fathers of our Flesh, and we gave them Reverence: shall we not
also be in Subjection to those who under GOD are our spiritual Fathers! They
should be respected as such, whether they be younger or older. Let no Man
despise their Youth, especially if adorned with Wisdom and Gravity: Much less
throw Contempt on the Hoary Head, tho grown weak and infirm. Thou shall honor
the face of the old Man, and not despise thy Father, when he is old. -- During
the whole Time of their Continuance in the Pastoral Relation, their People
ought to honor them particularly by a just Requital of their Labors, in a
suitable Maintenance. It is required of Children (1 Timothy 5.4.) that they learn
to show Piety at home, and to requite their Parents: for this is good and
acceptable before GOD; and is due by all the Laws of Gratitude and Equity. Even
so has the Lord ordained, ( Gal. 6.6.) that they who are taught in the word
should communicate unto Him that teaches in all good things. Who planteth a
Vineyard (says the inspired Apostle 1 Cor. 9.7, -- 11.) and eats not of the
Fruit thereof? And if we have sown unto you spiritual Things, is it a great
matter if we shall reap of your carnal things? Besure if we reap but sparingly
(as 'twere the young Levite's Portion, which he had of Micah ( Judge. 17.10.)
who seems to have intended to make up in honorary Titles, what he fell short in
Wages) it ought not to be grudged to us. They that reap bountifully, receive
but a just Reward. And after all, give me leave to say, the best Salary is no
proportional and adequate Recompense for the Benefit received by a faithful
Ministry. Yet the Bounties and Kindnesses of our People to us, we would accept
always, (...) with all Thankfulness: Albeit we do not say how they owe unto us
even their OWN SELVES besides. ( Philem. 19.) But these are very tender Points;
therefore I pass to say, --

That People should bear a filial Benevolence, and express a suitable Affection
to their spiritual Fathers. And indeed we value a real Interest in your Hearts,
above all the external Honors you can do us We are ready to bespeak you, in
the words of the Apostle (2 Cor. 6.11, 12, 13.) O ye People, our Mouth is open
unto you, our Heart is enlarged. Ye are not straightened in us, but ye are
straightened in your own Bowels. Now for a Recompense in the same (I speak as to
my Children) Be ye also enlarged, and repay us the like Affection, it being but
reasonable for Children to recompense their Parents Love, with all possible
Returns of Love and Duty. He that is without natural Affection to his Parents,
has put off the Man, and is become more vile than the very Brutes that have no
Understanding. Alas! It is a most guilty Thing for Children to indulge
Disaffection and Prejudice against their Parents. So is it in People against
their spiritual Fathers: concerning whom it is required that you esteem them
very highly in Love for their Work's sake, 1 These. 5.12. And indeed as Love to
Parents is a first Principle deeply rooted in the Nature of Man; so where any
are truly begotten to GOD through the Gospel, they will by a kind of natural
Instinct value and love their spiritual Fathers. Their Love to Christ, to his
House and Sabbath and precious Institutions, yea, and to their own Souls, will
powerfully constrain them. And a principle of Gratitude will have no little
Influence upon every considering Christian. It is reported of Alexander the
Great, that he was wont to say, He was more beholden to his Master Aristotle,
than to his Father Philip, because he had his Being only from the latter; but
his Well-being from the former. And truly if Love be a Debt to our natural
Parents as under GOD the Authors and Preservers of our bodily and temporal
Life; we can owe no less to our spiritual Parents, who have begotten us by the
Gospel, to a better being, to a spiritual and eternal Life.

Now, if Christians would show their Love; Then,

In the first place, Let 'em prize the Society of their Ministers. Love is a
Social Passion. Be not shy of your spiritual Fathers. Receive them in the Lord.
So will they thank GOD, and take Courage.

Again, Let People learn to value and ask the Prayers and Blessings of their
spiritual Fathers. So Elisha begged Elijah's Blessing: and the same afterward
did King Joash of him. Even a profane Esau sought his Father's Blessing with
Tears. People should be ready upon all Occasions to ask the Prayers of their
Ministers. In particular it is directed, Jam. 5.14. Is any sick among you? Let
him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him. Truly
Brethren, we look upon it as a Slight and Coldness toward us, if you will not
send for us in such a Case.

Further, Show your Love by a due Care not to grieve them by Contentions or
other Scandals. Thus says the Apostle to his Galatians, My little Children, --
let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one
another. Let them have this Joy, to behold your stedfastness and Order; to see
you walkin the Truth, and dwelling together in Unity.

Further, Show your Love in faithfully asserting and defending their good Names
It is an express Command; Phil. 2.29. Hold such in Reputation. If they be
slandered, you must vindicate them with a prudent Zeal. If they be evil spoken
of, you must not receive the Accusation, but before two or three witnesses. So
the Rule is express, 1 Timothy 5.19. -- If you know them to be overtaken with a
Fault, think of the Duty you expect from your Children in such a Case: and this
will be a sufficient Directory. Or think of Shem and Japhet; and take care you
don't play an ungodly Ham's part, in exposing and laughing at involuntary
Stumbles, or accidental Falls. Love will teach you to cover such Things in
Silence: and where any appear to indulge grosser Follies, Love will also teach
you to observe it to them, with a respectful Sorrow, still entreating them as
Fathers. (1 Timothy 5.1.)

Moreover, Filial Love will teach you to follow their good Example. 1 Cor.
4.15, 16. In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel: Wherefore I
beseech you, be ye Followers of me.

Again, True Love will teach People a due Confidence in their spiritual Fathers
faithful Care and Conduct: and a Contentment with the wholesome Food with which
they entertain them in the House of GOD; although perhaps it be not dressed up in
all the forms and splendors that some others are treated with. True Love will
teach People to adhere to their Ministry, and not desert it, upon every little
Temptation.

Moreover, It will teach them to be constant and affectionate in Prayer for
them; generous in Requitals of them, etc.

Finally, love will teach People to mourn their Death, when GOD takes them from
their head. These spiritual Fathers are mortal as well as other Parents. Your
Fathers, where are they? and the Prophets do they live for ever? Christians
should often think of this, while they are living; get all the Benefit they can
by them, while they enjoy their Presence and Help; and get prepared for the
parting time: Honor 'em at their Death, by suitable Lamentations; and (may I
not say?) also by a decent Burial. Even a mocking Ishmael could join with his
Brother Isaac in burying their Father Abraham. We read of Jehoiada the Priest,
2 Chro. 24.16. They buried him in the City of David, among the Kings, because
he had done Good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his House --.In a
word, True Love will teach them to pay all becoming Respects to their Memory.
It is expressly required, Heb. 13.7. Remember them which have spoken unto you
the word of God. "It is ungrateful and unkind (as one The late Rev. Mr.
Stevens, in his Funeral Sermon for the Rev. Mr. Brattle; annexed to his last
Sermons.
observes) to forget any Friend or Benefactor: and much more so, to forget our
Fathers in the Church of GOD: -- Their Names ought to be remembered, -- often
spoke of, with Gratitude, Love and Honor, for their Works sake. The Children
(at least) of such spiritual Fathers should rise up and call them Blessed.

But I draw now to a Close:

Let us reflect on the whole, -- and then taking a View of our own Conduct, let
us compare Things: see whether we have been acting up to our respective
Characters; the People, as Children, and Ministers as Parents. And may we be
humble before GOD for all our Failings and Miscarriages toward each other! And
let us all be concerned to study the exactest Conformity to our several
Characters, in our Deportment toward each other, both Ministers and People, as
Remembering that we must give an Account unto GOD.

What has been said might be applied, by way of Caution and Direction to the
Candidates for the Ministry -- And also to the Churches, to regulate them in
the great Affair of choosing a Minister. Covet earnestly the best Gifts: And yet
I show unto you a more excellent way. Though one speak with the Tongues of Men
and Angels, and have not the Love of GOD in him, and a Love to Souls (the Heart
of a true spiritual Father) verily he is as a sounding Brass, or a tinkling
Cymbal.

But now to conclude in a short Hint to You, Brethren, who are the Occasion of
our Convening here at this Time. I need not apply my self particularly to my
Brother, who is this Day consecrating himself to the Ministry. The Things which
are presently to be given him in Charge by another and the proper Hand, will be
sufficient. As he will give a humble Entertainment to the Honors and Respects,
which I have been claiming for him in the name of Christ and from his holy
Oracles; So I hope, a kind Reception to the Words of Counsil and Admonition,
that have been delivered. May He ever bear in mind this Character of a
Spiritual Father! May he study to be indeed such an one in the Church of GOD!
And may he have a numerous spiritual Offspring for his Crown and Joy in the day
of the Lord!

And I hope you, my Friends, who having built this House to the Name of GOD,
have lately been incorporated into a distinct Family (as 'twere) and chosen
this Servant of GOD to be a Father unto you, will always remember the Character
of Children, which the Apostle in our Text puts upon you, and study to adorn it
by a becoming Reverence and Love to Him. Receive him (as we trust you do this
day) with all Gladness. See that he may be with you without Fear: for he
works the Work of the Lord. Entreat him always as a Father: let no Man
despise his Youth. The Pastoral Power (accompanied with a good Degree of
Knowledge, Prudence, Seriousness, and Zeal for Souls) gives Age and Seniority,
to such as are but young in Years. Submit to him therefore as it is fit in the
Lord. Do all you can to encourage his Heart, and strengthen his Hands in his
Work. Be at Peace among your selves. Strive together with him in Prayers to GOD
for him. And let your Profiting by his Ministry appear.

So will you make him a glad Father: and in the the great day he will give up
his Account with Joy; will have Confidence before the Son of Man at his
Appearing, and shall present you to GOD, in such Language as that, Lo! Here am
I, and the Children which Thou have given me!

AMEN.

