PROPOSALS FOR A Tobacco-LAW, In the Province of MARYLAND.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Legislature, and all Lovers of
their Country.

In a Letter from a Gentleman to William Parks, Printer in Annapolis.

Annapolis: Printed in the Year, 1726.

(Price One Shilling.)

The Necessity of a Tobacco-Law considered.
SIR,
MANY of the Conveniences which attend a Press in our Infant Country, as well
as in other Places, are obvious to all, both from the Nature of the Thing, and
from Experience: Yet, One seems hitherto either not thought of, or at least
neglected, though it might, perhaps, render your Press as useful to the Country,
as it is in any other Instance whatsoever; which is to make Public the
Thoughts of any Well-Wisher of his Country, where he endeavors to discover any
Thing that may be for a general Good, which is the only End the Author of this
following Piece aims at: And he persuades himself you will readily Publish
these his Thoughts, as well as those of any Others, whenever they will give
themselves the Trouble of Communicating them freely to you, upon such Occasions
as require every Ones best Endeavors to help themselves and their Country,
when the Whole seems in Danger of being involved in a general Calamity, as is
too manifestly our present Case; whilst our Tobacco Trade, which is our entire
Staple, is under the most deplorable and languishing Condition, and never to be
relieved but by our selves.

And though several Tobacco-Laws have been made for this Purpose; yet, by
Experience, they have been found rather to burden and oppresst he Country in
General, than afford it any Relief or Advantage as they were designed: And
although the late Sessions of our Assembly were Convened at the general Instance
of the Country, as the Governor declared in his Speech at the Opening thereof,
purely to consider of some Means that might relieve our sinking Trade and
Country, yet none could then be thought of, or agreed on, whereby that Meeting
was rendered Fruitless, and without any other Effect, than to increase the
Public Charge.

When this is considered, it may seem to be too great a Presumption for a
private Person to suggest, that there is a Possibility left to remedy this
Evil; and gives too much Discouragement to any Attempt of that kind: Yet, as
the Evil is of such a Nature, that inevitable Ruin to the Whole, seems to be
the infallible Consequence of omitting the Application of some Remedy, it is
such a cogent Motive to excite, not only the most melancholy Reflections and
Concern, in every individual Person, that is like to be involved in this
general Calamity, but also to induce each One to exert his utmost Endeavors to
find some Means to extricate our selves out of these most deplorable
Circumstances, that the Author persuades himself, the Public will easily
excuse the Trouble he gives them, and give this Attempt a favorable Reception,
since a general Good is his only View. And though it should not have the Effect
he hopes for, yet it will probably put others that are more capable, upon
something of the same Nature, wherein what is a-miss here may be rectified and
amended; and upon the Whole, something may be discovered, that may answer the
desired End.

In order to effect this, it will not be a-miss to consider where the
Difficulty lies in concurring in a Business of so much Consequence, and so
unanimously desired: The chiefest appears to be the Jealousy that is between
the Two Houses of our Legislature; for as the Upper House is chiefly
constituted of such Gentlemen who enjoy the most considerable Public Offices
in the Province, which are attended with large Revenues; And the Lower House,
who are the Representatives of the Country, have very few Advantages from those
Public Offices, and are sensible that those they represent do not enjoy any of
these beneficial Places, they are therefore apprehensive, that whatever is
suggested by any Member of the other House, is with some private View. And
further, that whatever Law can be made to raise the Price of Tobacco, only
serves to inhance the Income of the Public Officers, having by Experience
found, that the Tobacco-Laws which have been made, have had scarce any other
Effect, than Raising the Price of Tobacco in the Country, without affecting the
Markets in Europe. This is certainly a Consequence which ought to be avoided;
otherwise any Attempt to relieve the Province, which is attended with this
Circumstance, would but the more speedily and effectually accomplish its Ruin.

To obviate this, many Attempts have been made, to lessen the Officers Fees,
and all public Dues, in Proportion to the Quantity that was proposed to be
lessened, of what was usually made: This Attempt has always been without
Effect, for it is hard to find such a Medium as will be agreed on to be a just
Equivalent, but that either the Gentlemen who are in the Public Offices will
think it too much lessens their Service, or the Country, that they are too much
augmented. This is really a Difficulty hard to overcome; yet, if all Parties
are truly Patriots of their Country, as in Charity we ought to take them to be,
since all solemnly averr that the Public Good, is their first and chiefest
View: If so, I say, it will not be impossible or impracticable to get over it,
as shall be demonstrated hereafter.

Having first tried to find some such Law as may be a real Service to our
Country, and then well endeavored to find out that happy Expedient to
reconcile such a Law to each Ones Interest, Three Things seem absolutely
necessary to obtain this End. First, To ascertain a Time for Shipping off our
Tobacco. Secondly, To lessen the Quantity, and mend the Quality of what shall
be made in the Province. Thirdly, To oblige the Freighters to carry their
Tobacco to the Ships in which they send it.

The most effectual Way to accomplish these Ends would be, First, For our
Legislature to affix a certain Time, before which, and another after which,
none shall be Shipped. Secondly, To restrain every Taxable that works in Tobacco
throughout the Province, to a certain Number of Pounds. Thirdly, To oblige
every Freighter not only to roll or carry his Tobacco to his Landing, there to
be Weighed and Stamped by the proper Officer, but likewise to oblige him, after
that is done, to carry it to the Ship's Side in which he sends it; the Master
to pay him Five Shillings, or some certain Price, for every Hogshead so
delivered, and to be restrained from fetching any himself, or receiving any
without the proper Stamp, under very severe Penalties.

A Law of this Nature would be attended with many Advantages, how difficult and
surprising soever it may seem at first View. To demonstrate this, Let us
consider some of the necessary Consequences that will inevitably attend such a
Law, and the Conveniences and Advantages that will flow from thence; and then,
with the same Impartiality* We'll take a View of the Objections and
Difficulties, that may be made to it, or that it is liable to; whereby a
Judgment may be formed whether it would be for the Advantage of the Country, or
not: To proceed therefore in the Order proposed, some of the natural Effects
attending such a Law, seem evident.

First. The Merchants will know when to send their Ships, and be at a Certainty
how long they will stay; at least, they will be sure that they cannot be detained
longer than such a Time: The Advantage the Country will receive from hence is
very obvious, for as their Ships are sure to be dispatched, they may certainly
afford to carry our Tobacco at easier Freights than they now exact.

The Second Consequence attending this Part of the Law is, that our Tobacco
will arrive at the European Markets at a certain Time, after which the
Merchants will be sure no more can come that Season: From hence, this Advantage
is apparent, which will probably be a very considerable One, that they can then
keep up the Price to almost what they please, when none of them can have any
Advantage of another, in their Expectation of more, before the usual Time in
the ensuing Year; it will then be out of their Power to circumvent each other
in a clandestine Way of sending and having their Ships return at all Seasons of
the Year, and keeping off the Buyers with an Expectation of the Arrival of
another Vessel with a good Load of fresh Tobacco every Week or Fortnight; the
Choice whereof they are promised to have at an easy Rate. As it would prevent
all this, so it would be a Means to unite the Merchants, which if it could be
effected, they might then have almost what Price they would for our Tobacco.

These are some of the Advantages that would necessarily attend the First Part
of the Law: Let us now see the Consequences of the

Second. It Is unnecessary to repeat what every Body is sensible of, that the
great Quantity of Tobacco made, and the Badness of it is Quality, are the
Occasions of the Smallness of it is Value. This is allowed by all; if so, can
there be a more effectual Way to lessen the Quantity, and mend the Quality,
then by this Method of restraining the Taxables that work in that Trade, to a
certain Number of Pounds instead of Plants, which the Country once designed;
for by this, as well as that Method, the Quantity will be lessened; and it is
apparent that this is a much more effectual Way to mend the Quality: For when
the Planter is restrained to a Number of Pounds, he will be sure to make more
than that Quantity, in Order to make so much good; whereas by the other Method,
we might be assured every Leaf, though as bad as possible, would be put up, so
that thereby neither the Quantity would be much lessened, nor the Quality
amended, whereas this Method would effectually answer the End for which it is
designed, and then we may reasonably Hope for all the Advantages which can be
expected or desired from the Value that is always set on any Commodity that is
both scarce and good.

Another Advantage that will attend this Law, is, that when the Planter is so
restrained to a certain Quantity of Tobacco, he may have Leisure to employ some
of his People and his Time in making Enclosures, and raising good Stocks of all
kinds, Husbandry or some other Manufacture, so that his whole Attention will
not be upon making great Crops of Tobacco, which, when made, are good for
nothing* The benefit of this (...) manifested by our Neighbors of Pensilvania,
who go on all (...) of (...)* and some little Manufactures of Hemp (...) they
feed and cloth themselves comfortbly and (...) with their own Industry, which
we might (...) do as they, and lay up most of the Produce of our Tobacco, for a
Provision for our Posterity; nay more, be able to sell, and raise Money by our
Provisions, Grain, etc. Hence it follows That we should live much more
comfortably, and get more Money, which would be an effectual Accomplishment of
what we aim at.

There would be this further Advantage in it, That the Merchants by having an
Account of the Number of our Taxables that work in Tobacco, and by knowing how
much each such Taxable is allowed to make, would know what Quantity of Ships to
send, which would certainly be a great Ease to Trade. It would be a tedious
Work to enumerate all the lesser Advantages that would attend such a Law, we
will therefore content ourselves with these few Instances, that are most
apparent and most considerable, in the Two foregoing Parts of such a Law, and
proceed to consider those which evidently follow the Third.

The First of these, is the great Ease and Dispatch it will be to Ships,
whereby they may, and certainly will go at easier Freights than what we now
give 'em, when the Tobacco is thus brought to their Sides, and they are
dispatched in a very short Time.

The Second, is the Quantity of Money this will bring into the Province, when
the Captain of each Ship is obliged to pay so much as shall be thought proper,
for each Hogshead, that shall be carried on Board him.

The Third, is the Quantity of Sloops, Flats and other Craft that will then be
employed by, and belonging to our Province, which is an Advantage to a Country.

The Fourth, is the Number of those People that are now Idlers, if not worse,
that will then be employed and make it their Business to carry those Persons
Tobacco on Board, that have not Conveniences themselves of doing of it, for a
small Part of the Profit that is to be had for delivering it, as aforesaid;
whereby they will be taken off of their idle (and perhaps Roguish) Way of Living,
get a comfortable Subsistence, be brought up Watermen or Sailors, and be
rendered useful to their Country: These are the most considerable Advantages
that at present accur, which will necessarily attend such a Law; a little
Experience might perhaps discover more, but these are so manifest, and so very
considerable, that surely they can neither be denied nor slighted by any Lover
of his Country, when he makes serious Reflections hereon.

We'll now examine and consider the Objections, which may be made hereunto,
with the same Impartiality as we have done the Advantages, and try if we cannot
reconcile them, or at least discover whether they are of such a malignant
Nature, or so pernicious a Consequence as to overbalance the Good and
Benefits already demonstrated, as necessarily attending such a Law. In Order to
do this in the most regular and clear Manner we can, we'll proceed in the same
Order as we did in the foregoing Part, and consider the Objections which may be
made to, as we did the Advantages that may arise from the Three Parts of this
Law.

To the First Part, there cannot be any Manner of Objection when a convenient
Time for Shipping our off our Tobacco is affix^d, unless that should be too
long a Time; if so, the Ships would be scattering one after another almost all
the whole Year, round as they are at present, and be continually coming to the
Market with fresh Loads of Tobacco, whereby the Evil this Part is designed to
cure, would remain; therefore the Consideration of a proper Time, which will
neither too much streighten the Planter, nor give too much Latitude to him, or
the Ships, must be submitted to the Legislature, and is the only Thing to be
considered on this Part of such a Law.

But to the Second Part of this Law, whereby the Planter is to be restrained to
a certain Number of Pounds, many Objections may arise, which we'll put in the
strongest Light we are able, and consider their Force with the most sincere
Impartiality. To proceed,

Objection the First. If the Quantity of Tobacco be much lessened, his Lordship
will be cut off of a great Part of his Revenue, and it cannot be expected that
he will agree to any such Law, that will cause him to be so great a Sufferer.

Answer. The same Objection holds against a Number of Plants as to a Number of
Pounds, or against any other Method which lessens the Quantity; therefore
there is no Doubt but it is reasonable, that upon making any such Law, an
Equivalent to his Lordship ought to be considered, of which the Legislature are
the best Judges, nor will the Author presume to prescribe to them what would be
an Equivalent: But this is manifest, from his Lordship's public Spirit, and
great Regard that he has discovered in many Instances, for the Good of the
Country, even to the Prejudice of his Interest, that he will not be very exact
or hard to please in that Equivalent.

Objection the Second. This is not an equal Law, for Tobacco is much more
valuable in one Part of the Country than another, so that the same Number of
Pounds in those Parts are of double or perhaps treble the Value they are of in
others.

Answer. This appears to be one of the most forceable Objections that is, or
can be urged against this Law; yet when it is well considered, it has not that
Difficulty which may be apprehended, and will be found to proceed more from a
general ill-grounded Prepossession, than from any real Foundation; for the
Assertion is not true in Fact; and whatsoever Notions may be entertained of the
great Price which is generally given for Tobacco made in the Freshes of almost
all the Rivers of the Province on the light Lands, proceeds only from a very
few nice industrious Planters, who make a few Hogsheads in Proportion to their
Crop of this fine Kite-Foot, or Pale Yellow, Bright Tobacco, which fell high,
and is noised about the Country as the Price of their whole Crop; whereas it is
not perhaps the Fifth, or hardly the Tenth Part of what they make, and their
Neighbors have not more, or so much by the Pound, as those in other Parts of
the Country, who make good Leaf, which is always made in these Parts, where
Color is not aimed at, and is really much the more certain Kind of Tobacco,
and has for these Seven Years past, if the Accounts of any considerable
Quantity of both were to be compared, sold higher by the Pound, than that
light, ch^ffy Tobacco, which the Planter has endeavored to put up for Color;
and by some small Accident, (which cannot be foreseen or prevented) it loosees
that, and is then of no Value at all, having neither Color nor Substance, so
that in reallity the Leaf is the only certain valuable Tobacco: For, supposing
this light, chaffy Sort not to be of so precarious a Nature as it is, and that
a Quantity of it could be made, in that Case, the Author of this Piece affirms,
he has had it from some of the most eminent Merchants in our Trade, that Twelve
or Fifteen Hundred Hogsheads would quite over do and glut all the Markets in
Europe, where that Sort is in Demand, and make it a mere Drugg, of which he is
persuaded many of the Legislature are sensible; so that he may justly conclude
the Leaf Tobacco to be the most certain kind, and most to be esteemed: Besides
this, the strong Lands have unquestionably the Advantage of the light Soil in
the Produce of Grain, or any other Thing, which our Lands will be much employed
in, if such a Law be made. Upon the whole, when this is well considered, it
will appear to be as equal a Law as can be thought of, and much more so than
that which was designed to restrain the Taxables to a Number of Plants, which
would afford near double the Number of Pounds on the strong Land, that they
would yield on the light Soil, and each of those Pounds are already
demonstrated to be as valuable, as the same Number of those where so many less
in Quantity are made; so that by such a Law, those Parts of the Country would
make double the Profit by Tobacco, and have a better Soil to outdo them as
much in any other Commodity. Let it be further considered, that the Poor
generally live on the poorest Land, and if they were to be restrained to a
certain Number of Plants which would, on such Lands, yield but a few Pounds,
they would always be kept poor; whereas by this Method, they would be upon an
Equality with others, in a Prospect of amending their Condition by their
Industry.

Objection the Third. It will be very difficult and expensive to find out the
Number of Pounds, which are made by each Taxable

Answer. As to the Difficulty of doing this, it may easily be removed, by
appointing Two or Three Officers, (more or less) as shall be adjudg'd
convenient, in every Hundred, who shall be sworn Officers to Weigh and Stamp
each Freighters Tobacco, and keep an exact Account of the Number and Weight of
each Man's Hogshead, and every Freighter obliged on Oath, or under great
Penalties, to declare what, and how many Landings his Tobacco is Shipped off
at; at which Landing-Places, the proper Officer must Weigh and Stamp his
Tobacco, and the Master of the Ship be obliged not to take it on Board, under
very severe Penalties, without the proper Stamp.

By this Means, it is only knowing the several Landings, from which any
Freighter ships his Tobacco, (which should be Registered with the rest on a
public Record) examining the several Officers Accounts that are appointed for
those Landings, to see how much he has Shipped from thence, and comparing that
with the Constables List of the Number of his Taxables, to detect him if he has
Transgressed the Law, and in that case to destroy the Overplus, and fine him
considerably, if it appears to be a considerable or wilful Transgression.

But, as there will unavoidably be somethng over or under, which will be
occasioned by the Difference of Weights, a Regard therefore ought to be had to
that, and so much per Cent. as shall be thought reasonable, allowed for it: Not
that so much more be allowed to be made, but where it comes within that
Allowance it should not be destroyed, but the Planter charged with so much
Shipped off that Year more than his Number of Pounds, which must be deducted
out of his next Year's Crop; and so on the contrary, where he falls short of
his Quantity, to have Credit for the ensuing Year.

This is still to be understood, where it comes within so much per Cent. as may
be allowed, for if it exceeds that Allowance, it is to be presumed a wilful
Transgression, and it ought to be destroyed. All this will not be near so
troublesome, as the Method proposed in the Law, for ascertaining a Number of
Plants, where the Officers were to be obliged to go into every Man's Field, and
count the Number of his Plants, in which be would be often deceived and imposed
on: And as to the Expense, as the Trouble is not so much, the Charge cannot be
more, and here is a Reward for delivering our Tobacco will defray that Charge.

Objection the Fourth. Still there will be a Difficulty of discovering whether
those Persons comply with the Law, who lay out their Tobaco in the Country, and
do not ship it.

Answer. None at all, Let every Merchant who purchases Tobacco, or every
Sheriff who receives any from any Planter, either be obliged to give an Account
of what they received, and of whom, to the proper Officer; or let such Tobacco
come to the Landings before it is Shipped off, with both the Makers and present
Proprietors Mark on it, whereby the Officer may easily know who made it, and
charge him therewith accordingly.

Objection the Fifth. What can the Planter do who is indebted to the Merchants
and others, to comply with his Engagements, when he is restrained from making
enough to do it?

Answer. As to any Money-Engagements, it is intended to raise Money sooner by
this Method to comply therewith, than to go on in the old Manner; but as to
Tobacco Debts, in which the Force of this Objection lies, there is no greater
Objection against this Method, than that of a Number of Plants, or any other
Law, which can be thought of, that would lessen the Quantity; and though it may
be something hard on such, yet when a general Good is obtained, though some few
particular Persons should suffer a small Inconvenience, it must be submitted
to; and if it were to be considered, that these Debtors perhaps engaged
themselves thus to the Merchants several Years ago, at a Time when Tobacco was
very valuable, and he has lain a great while out of his Debt, it will not
appear any great Hardship, that the Debtor should be obliged to discharge his
just Debt, though with some Inconvenience to him, when a Law has again raised the
Value of Tobacco to what it was when he contracted the Debt; though, I confess,
there may be extraordinary Instances on this Occasion, which will unavoidably
attend any Tobacco-Law, which lessens the Quantity. When such particular
Instances appear, it will become the Wisdom of the Legislature to take those
particular Cases under their Consideration, and give such Relief therein as
Justice requires, rather than loose a beneficial Law, for some particular Cases
it may be injurous to; for there is scarce any advantageous Law, but some
private Persons are Sufferers by, yet a good Law for the General, ought not to
be lost on that Consideration.

Objection the Sixth. What will become of those Poor that have not any Slaves,
or other Taxables or Workers for them, than their Wives and Children, and are
obliged to lay out all the Tobacco they can make in Stores, to clothe
themselves with, which it will scarce do, when they are restrained to such a
Quantity.

Answer. It is intended by, and expected from such a Law, that the small
Quantity they will then be permitted to make, will be of more Value than the
Whole they now make, and they will have some spare Time, as well as others, to
do some other Thing for their Support; but if the Legislature are of Opinion,
that it will be hard on such, Let them be allowed to make more than others, or
even as much as they can, provided they make it good, which will prevent all
Clamor of oppressing the Poor.

Objection the Seventh. If we lessen the Quantity of Tobacco, and inhance its
Value, our Neighbors of Pensilvania will make it, and supply the Markets in
Europe, so that they will be as well stocked as ever, and it will be as great a
Drugg.

Answer. And must we go on in this Manner, and reduce our selves, and our
Posterity to Beggary and Misery, for fear our Neighbors should do so too* Are
we so fond of Engrossing these Blessings to our selves? But we need not be
under these Apprehensions; for those who are in a Way of subsisting themselves
comfortably, will not be so willing to exchange it for such a Prospect, as we
imagine; nor is it so easy for them to leave their old Way of Living to fall
into such a Trade as ours, which requires more Servants, Timber and Expense,
than they can well afford.

Objection the Eighth. Warehouses at so many Landings, to hold all People's
Tobacco, will be very burdensome, and a vast Expense.

Answer. A good, wholesome and advantageous Law, should not be lost for some
Expense: But to reduce That, as much as possible, reduce the Number of Landings
as much as may be, and a few large, rough Houses, at each of those Landings
will suffice to hold all the Tobacco that can be made: And if the Public will
not be at the Expense of building such* let them lay a small Duty on each
Hogshead, for the Benefit of the Proprietor of those Houses; and give any one
that will build, Liberty to do so at those Landings, let it be on whose Ground
it will, only the Proprietor of the Land to have the Preference of building
such himself: By this Method, these Houses will soon be erected, without any
Expense to the Public.

Objection the Ninth. How will the Planters comply with their Public Dues,
when the Quantity is so much lessened, the Remainder will very little more than
suffice to discharge them, so that scarce any thing will remain to subsist
themselves and Families upon?

Answer. The same may be said to this, as has been to sundry of the former
Objections, viz. That the same holds good against any Law that lessens the
Quantity of Tobacco; but to be more particular in the Answer to this, and the
following Objection will naturally lead us to comply with our Promise in the
Beginning. To reconcile this Law to the Interest of the Planter, and Country in
general, and to those who enjoy Public Offices, and have large Public
Revenues: By what has been already said, it seems evident, that such a Law
would be very advantageous to all concerned in Tobacco; but if this Objection
be not removed, the Planter will really be injured, for it is of no Advantage
to him to raise the Value of Tobacco to ever so great a Height, if he must make
but little and that little must go to discharge his Public Dues.

The Country has already clipped and lessened the Officers Fees so often, that
it is to be apprehended they will not agree, nor is it perhaps equitable to dock
them more: What remains then to be done? The First Thing that appears necessary
in this Case, is, To consider the Nature of these Fees, and the Services done
for them, in the several Public Offices in the Province; and where the Fee is
more valuable than the Service for that particular Fee requires, there it ought
to be reduced, so as to render it adequate to the Service: And although the
Officers would not agree to lessen their Fees promiseuously, one Third, one
Fourth, or any other Proportion, which has always hitherto been the Method,
whereby many Fees which are already too small for the Service for which they
are performed, are reduced so much less, and others, perhaps, not near enough
reduced by that Proportion; yet I believe, none of them would refuse this
Method of Entering into the Method of the Services they do the Country, and
consider the Rewards that justly attend such Services; and if on this Scrutiny,
it be apparent in particular Instances, that the Reward exceeds the Value of
the Service, they would readily agree to such a Reduction as might be
reasonable: By this Means a great Part of the public Dues would be lessened,
and that with the Officers Content. When this is adjusted, the next Thing to be
considered, is, What a Proportion of Tobacco usually made in the Province, may
be lessened by this Law: When that is agreed on, let the same proportionable
Part of all Public Dues, be paid in Grain of any sort, Hemp, Flax, etc. at
stated, fixed Prices; which would both be an Ease to the Planter, and an
Encouragement to go on those Sorts of Manufactures.

Objection the Tenth. Still the remaining Part of our public Dues will take
away great Part of that little, we are permitted to make, which we should be
very unwilling to part with, when it is the chiefest Thing we have to depend
on, to raise Money by; and if we would buy it of the Officers, they will hold
it up at such an exorbitant Rate, that it will take the Produce of what we
make, to pay for it, so that still we must either part with that little Tobacco
we make, or its full Value to the Officers.

Answer. It is to be hoped, when such a Reduction of the Officers Fees, as was
proposed in the foregoing Answer, is made, and such a Proportion of them that
are allowed, and all other public Dues, are to be paid in the Manner there
proposed, that the remaining Part will not be so burdensome to the Country:
However, if it appears to be so, the Legislature may settle all public Dues of
what Nature soever, at a certain fixed Rate in Money, to be paid to the Sheriff
of each County, by such a Day, if the Debtor pleases; so that it may be left to
his Choice to pay the Money or Tobacco. If this Method be agreed on, it solves
all the Objections I can think of, that can arise on the Second Part of this
Law, reconciles the Interest of the Officer and Planter together* and will
certainly render it very advantageous to the whole Province.

We will now take a View of the Objections that may be made against the Third
Part of such a Law (wherein the Freighter would be obliged to carry his Tobacco
to the Ship's Side in which he sends it) which are but Two, viz.

Objection the First. The Difficulty of rolling many Peoples Tobacco, and after
that is done, carrying it to the Ship's Side, is so great, that the poor,
middling, and even many of the better sort of Planters, that have not
Convenience for either, will be under great Hardships to comply with it.

Answer. As they are to be paid for every Hogshead so delivered, it will be a
sufficient Reward for the Trouble they are at, who undertake to do it
themselves: And, for such as will not undertake it, there will be enough, both
by Land and Water, who will then make it their Business to do it for Hire, who
may be employed to carry it on Board, for much less than the Reward which will
be received, for delivering it.

Objection the Second. The Merchants, Owners of the Ships, and Masters, will
not agree to give so much Money for each Hogshead brought on Board; and it will
be a Barthen on Trade.

Answer. It will be quite otherwise, it will be an Ease to Trade, and all that
are concerned, will willingly pay that Money, when they are to be at no further
Charge for Craft; when Rolling (a Work not fit for Men) is over, and when
they will meet with so great Dispatch it will manifestly be very advantageous to
them, and a great Ease to Trade in general.

Thus I have gone through, and considered the Consequences of such a Law; I have
shown several considerable Advantages, that will attend it, have also (as I
persuade my self) reconciled the Objections that may be made to it; have
likewise reconciled it (I hope) to the Interest both of the Officer, and
Planter, and demonstrated it to be an Ease to Trade: So that all Parties
concerned, will find their Advantage in it; Yet, I am not so fond of my own
Performance, as to think it incapable of Amendment; on the contrary, I am
sensible that few such Projections are perfect at first Attempt: It would
therefore be of Service to the Country, if any Gentleman discovers any Defect
herein, or can form a more advantageous Scheme, that he would with the same
Freedom communicate his Thoughts to the Public, and correct what may be a miss
here; which would be so far from giving any Resentment to the Author of this
Piece, that on the contrary, he desires it, and would be thankful to them, and
willingly submit to any real Amendment which can be proposed: And, as he does
not doubt your Readiness to Publish these Thoughts, so he is persuaded, you
will, with the same Readiness, make Public those of another, on the same
Occasion; whereby the Country may perhaps receive some Benefit, which is the
only View of a Well-Wisher to it, And

Your humble Servant, A Lover of his Country.
Nov. 19. 1726.
Advertisement.
There is now in the Press, and is proposed to be Published in March next,
A Complete Body of the Laws of Maryland, in Force, from its first Settlement
to the Year 1727, well Bound. All Persons who intend to have the said Books,
and have not yet Subscribed for them, are desired to be speedy in sending their
Names, and Places of Abode, to William Parks, Printer, in Annapolis. The Price
to Subscribers is Twenty Four Shillings Currency: But to those who do not
Subscribe, they will not be Sold so Cheap, if there should be any left after
the Subscribers are served.


