A Just and Plain VINDICATION OF Sir William Keith, Bart. Late Governor of
Pennsilvania, From the Untruths and Aspertions contained in a Paper, Printed at
London, and now Reprinting at Philadelphia, under the Title of The Case of the
Heir at Law and Executrix of the late Proprietor of Pennsilvania, etc.
THe Heir at Law and the Executrix, in their Application to the King for His
Majesty's Royal Approbation of Major Patrick Gordon to be Deputy Governor of
Pennsilvania, in the Room of Sir William Keith, are pleased to assign, in
general Terms, for the only Reason of their (...) that Change, viz. That Sir
William had, by his Conduct, greatly Dissatisfied: be Proprietor's Family; And
it is acknowledged on Sir William's part, That there was no need of more
particular Reasons, so long as it appears to be a Right inherent in the Family,
to change their Deputy at Pleasure; nor ever did Sir William, by any act of
his, attempt to deprive the Proprietor of that Right, but on the contrary, has
given his Sentiments publicly, under his Hand, That to have Removed him from
the Government about two years ago, would have been more Justifiable, as well
as more Decent, on the part of that Family, than to endeavor at Forcing Sir
William's Compliance with a set of Instructions which were contrary to Law, and
which two succeeding Assemblies have Unanimously Voted to be an Incroachment on
the Peoples Rights and Privileges.

It is, however, a particular Satisfaction to Sir William and his Friends, that
his Conduct, in that Government, during a Term of Nine years, was never found
fault with by the Crown, neither has the Family been able to lay hold of any
thing to be charged against Sir William, but what he is still ready to own and
justify in the face of the World.

Notwithstanding all this, some Persons, it seems, affecting to serve Mr.
Penn's Family in a very extraordinary manner, have thought fit to Print and
Publish a set of Most Notorious Untruths, full of Scurrility, which they are
pleased to call, The Case of the Heir at Law, etc.

Sir William Keith and his Friends are not capable of answering them in their
own way, neither have they the Inclination to cast the least Reflection upon
any Branch of Mr. Penn's Family, whom Sir William has faithfully served, to the
best of his Judgment. But because his Innocence and Character may possibly
suffer with Strangers, into whose hands the said Printed Case has fallen, it is
thought necessary to set the Facts therein, so grossly Misrepresented, in a true
Light, and to that end the Reader will find the Paragraphs here following,
answerable to those of the said Printed Case.

Paragraph I.
It is not True, that the Tract of Land here said to be granted in the year
1680 since called, The Province of Pennsilvania, was then only Inhabited by
Savages; for it cannot be denied but that Mr. Penn found great Numbers of
Swedes, settled there many years before that, most of which Settlements
continue unto this Day, and the People not only retain their Native Language,
but they are possessed of several Churches very handsomely built, and adorned,
with Brick and Stone, and Clergymen of very good Learning and Parts, are, from
time to time, sent over from the Government of Sweden, to take care of these
People.

II.
This Paragraph, for Reasons best known to the Writer, does not say what sort
of a Grant it was, that Mr. Penn had from James Duke of York; and although it is
true, that a Copy of some such Grant was put upon a certain Record in America,
about two years ago, yet there is no Date to it.

III.
It is True, that Mr. Penn always appointed his Deputies to be Governors of
the said Province and Counties, but with this Reserve in the Royal Approbation,
viz. We do Approve of -- to be Governor of the Province of Pennsilvania,
without any Limitation of Time; But of the three Lower Counties, during Our
Pleasure only.

IV.
Sir William, then Mr. Keith, did not make his Circumstances at that time known
to any Man in Pennsilvania, and he was so far from thinking of that Employment,
that he was actually gone upon his Journey toward Virginia as far as
New Castle, which is 36 Miles from Philadelphia, when he received a Letter from
two Members of the Council of Pennsilvania, in the Name of the rest, inviting
him back to hear some Proposal which they had to make to him: Mr. Keith, upon
that Letter, did return to Philadelphia, and after the Gentlemen had informed
him how Uneasy they were under that Administration, and of the Obstacles which
they found stood in the way of obtaining a Change, because of the Proprietor's
then Indisposition, they offered their Recommendations to the Family, in favor
of Mr. Keith, if he would please to undertake the Solicitation of the Matter at
Home; and after 24 hours time given Mr. Keith to consider of it, he accepted a
Letter of Recommendation, signed by seven of their Number, and undertook the
Business at their earnest Request.

V.
It is Inconceiveable to think how Mankind can prevail with themselves to forge
Lies, for which there is not the least Pretense or Foundation; for upon Sir
William's arrival in England, at that time, he found, it is true, no very great
difficulty in Mr. Penn's own Family, who treated him civilly, and like
themselves; but it was above three Months before he could Reconcile to his
Proposal a set of grave Politicians, that went under the Name of Mortgagees,
though in reality they were only plain Shopkeepers in the City of London, and
Creditors to Mr. Penn, who had pledged his Estate in Pennsilvania for securing
the Payment of his Debts to them. Now, some of these Gentlemen affecting much
Grandeur, by having it in their power to dispose of one of his Majesty's
Provinces abroad, it was not more trouble to find access to a first Minister of
State, and far less difficult to persuade him, than it was to find an
Opportunity of Reasoning with and Convincing some of these Gentlemen. However,
after a reasonable Time spent in good comfortable Eating and Drinking, after
the manner of the City, at Sir William's proper Cost and Charge, he found means
to sooth the Gentlemen into an unanimous Compliance with his Design; After
which he had the whole Fatigue and Charge of an Application at Court to go
through, wherein, it is well known to Persons or Honor about the Court, that
Sir William had no manner of Assistance from the Family, or from any that
belonged to it, not but that it is believed, if they had had any Interest at
that time, they would cheerfully have used it for their own, as well as Sir
William's Service in that Affair.

Had Mr. Penn's Circumstances been such as would have allowed him to lend Money
to Sir William Keith, or any body else, this bold Assertion might have carried
some Probability along with it, but it was so far otherwise, that one of the
most Principal Persons in the Family, at that time, borrowed Money frequently
out of Sir William's Pocket to defray his necessary Expense; and the Family
were so far from contributing one way or other to defray any part of Sir
William's Expense, on that business, that it can be instructed, that Sir
William was charged by their own Servant Nine Guineys and an half for writing
the Commission, Instructions, and other Family Papers, which Sir William
actually paid.

VI.
It will be difficult to define what sort of Peace and Tranquillity the Province
was in upon Sir William's arrival, when the World is informed that the Courts
of Judicature had refused to act, and the course of Justice had thereby been
Discontinued for six Months before.

That the first Application made to Sir William was a Petition from a poor
Woman, whose Son had been barbarously Murdered three years and a half before
that time, at a public Vendue, in the face of the Sun, and the Fact never
enquired into.

That these Proceedings were chiefly owing to the former Governor's having
declared, That no Quaker ought to sit upon the Bench, nor could they either be
Jurymen or Evidence on a Capital Trial. And how these Things were (...), and
the Rights and Privileges of the Quakers Maintained by Sir William, is well
known to the People of that Province, and fully acknowledged by many repeated
Addresses, and particularly in that of the 7th of December last, from the
Assembly to the Descendents of Mr. Penn's Family, a Copy whereof is hereunto
sub-joyn'd.

VII.
Although there was an Act of Assembly in the Province, such as is here narrated,
to continue the Powers of Government, yet it was by Sir William's care that an
Act of the same nature was procured in the Counties, else the Government there
had dropped upon the Proprietor's Death.

And as to the Private, but Untrue Representation of the State of the Province
and Counties, made to his Majesty by Sir William, on that Occasion, as is here
alleged, it is a base and groundless Calumny; for Sir William's Representation
at that time was sent in a Public manner to the Secretary of State, and by him
Transmitted to the Lords Commissioners of Trade, whose Report in favor of Sir
William's Conduct, was fully Approved by their Excellencies, the Lords
Justices, by whose Orders it was, that Sir William was directed to continue in
the Government until the Family Dispute about the Proprietary Right was
determined, or that his Majesty's Pleasure should be further known.

VIII.
No Man can justly say, that ever Sir William assumed the Title of Excellency
to himself, which will appear by the Minutes of the Council, and every other
Paper, whereof Sir William had the writing or direction, and wherein the
Governors Name or Title is expressed; and Sir William does not know from
whence the generality of the People took that Address, unless it was by
observing, That his Letters in the Post Office from Persons of the first Rank
in England, were directed in that Style; but if there be a mistake of Form in
giving that Honorary Title to any Commander in Chief, even of a Garrison, it is
an Error that many People in Europe fall into at this day.

Sir William never did cause to be surveyed any Lands in Pensilvania for his
own use, except such as he had first purchased with his own Money, and had
legal Authority to Possess, neither did he ever invite any Palatines, or other
Persons whatsoever, from the Government of New York to settle on the
Proprietors Lands, as is here falsely alleged.

Since the Proprietors Principal Officers, whom it is said Sir William has
displaced, are not named, nor the Circumstances related, it may weary well be
taken for granted, that Sir William has done nothing of that kind but what he
can warrant. And as to his attempting to invalidate the great Authority of
those Personages, called Commissioners of Property, but more properly Agents to
Mr. Penn's Creditors, let them prove the Misdemeanor, and Sir William is ready
on the Spot to answer it.

This Paragraph concludes with a very strange Innuendo, That the Proprietor
contracted a vast Debt, and spent a Paternal Estate, in settling and Improving
the said Province and Counties; But the first Settlers of Pensilvania, who in
great Numbers brought in large Estates into the Country along with the
Proprietor, or much about that time, do tell another Story, which out of a
decent Regard to the Memory of that Worthy Gentleman, shall not here be
rehearsed.

IX.
Sir William and his Friends, Thank the Author or Authors of the Case, here,
whoever they be, for doing him the Honor to give him a greater share than
perhaps he really had, in emitting the first Paper Currency in Pensilvania. But
they so far differ in Opinion with them, as to think, That instead of Opposing
the true Interest of his Majesty's Subjects, Sir William thereby most certainly
Supported that Interest, as appears by the general Sentiments of the Assembly,
Merchants and Trading People, as well as the flourishing Condition of the
Province, since that Date; But it is a Senseless Calumny to charge Sir William
with annimating the common People against the Council, because it does appear
upon the Minutes of that Board, that the Council unanimously advised Sir
William to pass that Bill.

X.
Although Sir William did fully advise the Board of Trade, both before and after
the striking of the Paper Money, yet he never received any Letter from their
Lordships, directing him not to pass any Act for that purpose, as this
Paragraph most falsely sets forth. On the contrary, Sir William and his Friends,
have great reason to believe, that the Lords of Trade were fully satisfied all
along with the Reasonableness and Success of Sir William's Conduct in that, as
well as other Matters in the Government of that Province. And as to the Persons
of Note, as they are here called, who Remonstrated to the Assembly, it is
evident from the Articles mentioned, to have been the Substance of their
Remonstrance, that they were essentially Incompatible with any Bill of that
Nature; nor can these weighty Gentlemen of Note (supposing their Estates to
exceed the value of One Thousand Pounds each) make up the number Seven, in the
whole Province, although, it seems, they took it in great Dudgeon, that they
could not be allowed to have a Negative upon the Legislature.

If the Conclusion of this Paragraph, in these words, viz. These Acts being
passed against the Opinion of all the Men of Substance, etc. has any meaning,
it would arrogantly infer, That there was not this year one Man of Sense or
Substance chosen upon the Assembly, which consists of Twenty Six in Number, and
that the Council were unanimously against the Bill. But the quite Contrary will
be found true; for, excepting three or four, the Assembly consisted of the very
same Men who had been chosen on that very Service for several years before,
being all of them Men both of Substance and Credit. And as to the Council, the
majority were not only for Passing the Bill, but when Sir William caused the
Bill to be Read and Voted, Paragraph by Paragraph in Council, even such of the
Remonstrators themselves, as were present at that Board, agreed to all the
material Enacting Clauses of the Bill; for though it is believed, at the same
time, that they did not like the Bill, on account of their own private Interest
and partial Views, yet like Men conscious of some Guilt, which they had not the
Resolution to own, they affected a sort of Po^^^^ty, by voting for the
Substance of the Bill, which in some Com^^^^ they valued themselves upon; and
with the same breath they would, (...) they could, have forced Sir William to
destroy the Bill, by his Negative on mere Trifling Forms and frivolous
Pretenses; for they well knew, that if by any means they could but once create
a Difference between Sir William and the Assembly, their Game was up.

XI.
This Paragraph is only a Copy of Mr. James Logan's words in another place, and
sets forth two very strange things. 1 st. That the Executrix being deputed or
allowed by the Family to act as an Administratrix of the Government of
Pennsilvania, she was pleased to send her Instructions to Sir William, for the
better Mannagement of the most Public Concerns, by way of private Letter,
Which if Sir William had very quietly and secretly Obeyed, he must have bore
the blame of breaking through the Peoples just Rights and Privileges himself;
and if he dares to refuse a blind Compliance with, or divulge these same Secret
and Peremptory Orders, he shall certainly loose his Government. 2 dly, We are
let to understand, That this Lady very well knew, that by the Constitution, the
Council was no part of the Legislature, Nevertheless since it was her Pleasure
that they should have a Negative, Sir William was not to presume so much as to
speak to the Assembly, but by no means to do any Legislative Act without their
Consent. But how these things cooperate together, and can be rendered
consistent with Honesty and common Sense, let every Reasonable and Indifferent
Man judge.

XII.
There is nothing Material here but what is fully answered in Sir William's
Printed Letter to James Logan, dated the 13th of December last, only he is in
the close, charged with Influencing the Assembly and the generality of the
People, by Speeches: But since the Instructions he had received, were such as
he could neither in Justice nor Honor obey, all the World must allow, it was
incumbent on Sir William, under these Circumstances, to justify his Conduct in
the most Open and Public Manner he could.

The next Five following Paragraphs seem to be chiefly levelled at Coll.
Spotswood, whose generous Friendship to Sir William, at a distance, upon the
score of old Acquaintance and material Justice, without any other Obligation or
Motive whatsoever, seems highly to Offend these Upstart Casuists for the honor
of the Penn Family; But that worthy Gentleman's established Character is
universally known to be above the reach of such Scriblers, and wants no
Vindication from the weak Efforts of their Malice.

The Conclusion of this Piece seems, in extravagance, to exceed all that is
gone before; For when the whole Circumstances of the Case is collected and
truly considered, Is it not very pretty to observe, The Creditors of Mr. Penn,
who had supported his extravagant Expense, finding fault, in the most indecent
Terms, with a few Persons of the best Rank in the City of London, for giving a
generous Credit to Sir William, upon the occasion of his having done Mr. Penn
the Honor to accept of being his Deputy in Pensilvania; For as to the Terms of
Favor and Compassion, which these Casuists very Impertinently make use of,
there is not the least room for such a thought; Sir William being tied up by
his Instructions, not to put the Family to any manner of Charge, but to take
his Chance of what, by his own prudent Conduct, he could prevail with the
People to give yearly for the Support of Government; and it is well known,
before Sir William's Time, the Profits of that Government would scarce have
afforded a Gentleman Shoes and Stockings, neither indeed before him was it
Considered or Treated by the Neighboring Provinces, as a Government; what
therefore, Sir William has accquired there, is wholly owing to himself, without
ever having received to the value of One Penny, in any sort of thing, from Mr.
Penn's Family. So that Sir Williams Gratitude and Thanks is most properly due
to the good People of that Province, who are in all respects as free Agents,
and as much his Majesty's Free Subjects as Mr. Penn, or any of his Family can
pretend to be.

Sir William's Friends cannot but Observe here, That this method of pretending
to Detract from a Gentleman's public Character, by finding fault only with some
little Neglects or Mismannagement in the Economy of his Private Affairs, will
be found very Impertinent, and not at all to the Purpose, amongst Men of any
Sense or Spirit who cannot resist putting an uncommon Value and Esteem upon a
Man in any Office of Public Trust, who throughout all the parts of his
Conduct, has evidently preferred his Princes Honor and the public Advantage
to his own private Gain on all Occasions.

And although Patterns of this Kind, are much more rare in these later Ages, than
they were in the most flourishing Times of the Greek and Roman States, yet
surely that most excellent Virtue of a Public Spirit, endued with Humanity,
and directed by the Interest of the Common Wealth only, is still the same; And
those Miserable Wretches, who, for lack both of Honesty and Sense, have the
Impudence openly to find fault with it, do but thereby take their proper Places
amongst the Scum or Dregs of Mankind.

But because these Gentlemen, to show their skill in Accounts and small
Reckonings, seem to have been at much pains in computing the Profits Sir
William has received, during his Nine years Administration in Pennsilvania, Sir
William's Friends, in order to gratify their Curiosity, are willing to compare
Notes with them, hoping that in return, they will give them some insight into
the Methods which they have thought fit to pursue for these Twenty years past,
in recovering that large Debt, which it is said, was contracted by the late
Proprietor, in his pursuit of generous Projects; for as the similitude of
Tempers and Capacities, for running in Debt, between the Principal and his
Deputy, seems to Trot upon all Four, if the Creditors of both can but jump in
Opinions about the manner of Recovering their Money, the little Annimosities
that have arisen amongst them, may cease, and things be compremised for the
future in a friendly way.

By the best Enquiry that Sir William's Friends can make, they find that his
Receipt, during the Nine years that he was Deputy Governor of Pennsilvania,
has been 1400 l. per annum, that currency, and no more, which brings the whole
Sum to 12,600 l. that is, about 9000 l. Sterling. Of this Sum, they find that Sir
William has laid out, at least 6000 l. in Lands and Improvements there, viz.
2000 l. in a Farm, which by Contract in Marriage, is settled as an Equivolent
upon his Lady, for Jointure, and 4000 l. in another place, where by erecting an
Iron-work, it is improved to near double the prime Cost; and this last Estate
Sir William all along designed as a Security to his Creditors, until they were
fully satisfied and paid.

Now, although it is certain, that, by frugal means, more Money might have been
saved out of that Revenue, yet having a due Regard to the extraordinary
Expenses Sir William was led into, for the Advantage, as well as the Honor of
that Province, such as the fitting out two Sloops against the Pyates, and doing
the decent Honors of the Government on the King's Birthday, and other
Festivals, all at his own proper Charge, without any allowance from the
Public, besides keeping a good House for the Entertaining the Neighboring
Governors, and all Strangers of Note, who constantly visited him, Sir
William's Friends cannot see wherein to find so much fault with his Economy,
as these same Casuists would charge upon him; nor can they be induced to think,
that Sir William, thro'-out his whole Conduct, has done any thing Unbecoming a
Man of Honor.

And as to the Security of the Debts due from Sir William, although, it is true,
he is not possessed of so large an Estate as the Proprietor had to Pledge, yet
by making use of honest Agents, Sir William's Creditors do reasonably hope,
that they will come at their Money in a Fourth part of the Time which Mr.
Penn's Mortgagees, as they are called, have taken to Recover theirs.

But let Mr. Penn's Family, and their Agents, value themselves as they will
upon their Success in the Removal of Sir William Keith at this Time, from the
Government of Pennsilvanis, It is to be hoped; they will never be able to make
it a Rule in the other Provinces, That so soon as an Governor, by a strict
Regard to the Interest of the Crown, together with a just and equal
Administration, in behalf of the Subject, has so Advanced the Trade and Riches
of a Colony, as thereby to gain the general good Will and Affections of the
People, He shall therefore be Removed.

The ADDRESS of the House of Representatives of the Province of Pennsilvania,
in General Assembly met, the 7th day of December, 1725.
To the Descendents of Our late Honorable Proprietor, William Penn, Esquire
SHOWS;
THat being met together, in Order to consider of our Provincial Affairs, we
find that the General Assembly last Year, addressed Hannah Penn, Relict of the
late Honorable William Penn, Esquire and the rest of the Worthy Family,
Remonstrating, That such part of her Private instructions as would subject the
Acts of Legislation, assented to by the Governor and Representators of the
People, to the NEGATIVE of a Council, was contrary to the Laws and Constitution
of this Government. Which Address, We hope is come to your Notice, and will
receive a Favorable Construction, and Procure us speedy Redress.

But understanding that our present Governor Sir WILLIAM KEITH, incurred the
Displeasure of the Family, and is like to be Removed for passing the Acts which
emitted a Paper Currency, and for not observing that Instruction, which the
last Assembly conceived (and so do we) to be incompatible with the late
Proprietor's Charter of Privileges to the People, founded upon King Charles
the second's Royal Grant.

If these be the Causes of our Governor's Removal, we think our selves highly
Obliged, in point of Justice to his Character, to signify, That what he did in
both these respects, was by the Advice and Concurrence of the Peoples Delegates
constituted by the said Royal Grant to act with him in Legislation. His Reasons
for not complying with the said Instruction, have been formerly sent to the
Widow Penn, and other concerned, to which we Refer.

And what he was pleased to do, in favor of the Currency, the great Necessity
and most pressing Importunities of the Inhabitants, moved him, and the
Assemblies of those Times (according to the Examples of Neighboring Provinces,
whose Cash and Product (as well as Ours) falling short to make immediate
Remittances to England for the Goods which they wanted) did think fit to fall
upon the Expedient of Paper Bills to pass among our selves, having not Cash
enough to carry on our Domestic Affairs and Commerce. And likewise, the Value
of Lands and Country (...) by the Scarcity of Money and Decay of Trade, (...)
likely to be ruined. Besides, (...) but by an Excise and Taxing the Importation
of Liquors, which cumbred our Ports and hindered Trade, and yet fell short of
answering the Public Exigencies.

These, and many more Inconveniences, are now Removed, the Administration of
Government well Supported, without Clogging the Importations, our Ports Clear,
Trade Revived, and the honest Debtors Rescued from the Oppression of their
Creditors: The Value of our Country Product advanced; and the Ship-Wrights,
(some of whom, before this Currency was struck, having left the Country for
Want of Work, and those that stayed, having little to do) are since Returned,
and come into full Employment at their Trades, so that many stately Vessels
have been Built, and more upon the Stocks, and several Iron-Works are carried
on. Which, with diverse other Instances of the Advantage of this Currency, has
been to the Public, as well as to those, who, both in City and Country, must
have been Ruined without it, We think, may abundantly Atone for this part of
the Governor's Conduct.

WE hope it will not displease the Family, or any others that are concerned for
the Welfare of this Province, if We give them a further Relation of the good
Offices our Governor has (in the course of his Administration) Performed to
this Colony in general, which loudly calls for Our Thankful Acknowledgments.
For before he became Our Governor, diverse Murderers and other Malefactors in
several parts of this Province, were like to escape with Impunity; but He, to
prevent a Failure of Justice, in that respect, was Pleased to Countenance and
Assist the Courts to bring those Evil Doers to Condign Punishment; and soon
after passed a Law, called, An Act for the (...) the Royal Sanction to it,
which entirely settled the Manner of Trying Capital Crimes, to the Terror of
those that then-to-fore made light of such Offenses.

Much more might be said in Favor of the Governor's Administration, which We
omit, lest We should Trespass too much upon your Patience, hoping these short
Hints may be sufficient to Obviate Objections, and Remove the Impressions that
some Persons have endeavored to make on the Minds of such as may be Strangers
to the Circumstances of our Affairs.

Signed by Order of the House, David Lloyd, Speaker.


