Mr. Allin's SERMON Preached on a Special Fast.

Thunder and Earthquake, A Loud and Awful Call to REFORMATION.

Considered in A SERMON Preached at Brooklyn, NOVEMBER the First; Upon a
Special FAST, OCCASIONED BY THE Earthquake, Which happened in the Evening after
the 29th Day of October 1727.

Now Published with ENLARGEMENTS.

By JAMES ALLIN, Minister of the GOSPEL there.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed by GAMALIEL ROGERS, for JOSEPH EDWARDS at the Corner
Shop on the North side of the Townhouse.

Thunder and Earthquake Loud and Awful Calls TO REFORMATION.
ISAIAH XXIX. 6. Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with Thunder, and
with Earthquake, and great Noise, with Storm and Tempest, and the flame of
devouring Eire.


UPON the reading of these words your Thoughts will doubtless have immediate
recourse to the awful Providence of GOD to this People in the last Summer, and
especially on the last Lord's Day Evening in the often repeated Shocks of an
Earthquake.

GOD that is mighty has done terrible things in Righteousness; and when He thus
displays His Greatness, it becomes us to take a very serious notice of it our
selves, and to speak to one another with a holy Fear and Reverence of His
mighty Acts, that cannot be paralleled by the united force of all Creatures.

TO let such Providence pass off carelessly and in Silence, is in a very high
degree to offend God, and thereby we become exposed to the destructive
Judgments which the Psalmist prophetically denounces against them that regard
not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, Psalm. 28.5. I hope
there is not a Soul here present to whom this Charge and Threatening belong, but
that we are all sensible of and deeply affected with this His Strange work
wherein he has been loudly speaking to us; and I pray God so to keep this for
ever in the Imagination of the thoughts of our Hearts as to prepare our Hearts
unto Him, and that the Impression which that Night of terror made upon us,
wherein we looked upon our selves as dead men, as Persons appointed to an
immediate Destruction, may never so wear off as that we shall return to our
former sinful Courses, and become the same People, or worse than we were before.

THE terrible Judgments which the Prophet Isaiah foretold were coming against
Ariel, have lately befallen this Land without a Metapher, and the design of all
is to awaken us to Repentance and Reformation; to humble us for past Sins, and
to prevent future Miscarriages; to bring us down from that height of wickedness
to which we are grown, that we may lie low before him, and speak to Him out of
the Dust: And it will be well for us if this may be the Consequence.

BUT if we are resolved to persist in Sin in defiance of the Almighty, and will
not take the repeated Warnings He has given us, instead of Distress, Heaviness
and Sorrow, he will make us small as Dust -- and as Chaff that passes away,
and it shall be at an instant suddenly, ver. 2, -- 5. Woe to Ariel -- Thou shall
be visited etc. Ariel is Jerusalem, the chief City of God's own People. Yet she
must be told that God was coming forth against her in his hot displeasure: From
whence we may learn that God will not bear with Sin in his professing People;
but that they as well as others shall suffer for it, and more than others, as
their Sins have been peculiarly aggravated. Ariel's Fidelity to her God was her
glory and safety, and they that invaded her were like a Wheel, and as stubble
before the Wind; but her Sin proved her ruin, as it deprived her of his Favor
and Protection, and opened a door for Calamities of all sorts. His Heart was
turned against Ariel when she was irreclaimable by all the wise and gracious
Methods he had used with her, and therefore He resolves to punish her; Thou
shall be visited -- The word is used both in a good and bad sense, carrying in
it the intention of God, either to display his Justice or his Mercy to a
People, according as they behave toward Him. In the latter sense David and
others implored a Visit from Him, and having obtained it, they bowed their
heads and worshipped in token of Gratitude. But it is a Judicial Visitation the
Text speaks of, Thou shall be visited with Thunder and Earthquake. This
Threatening has had a literal Accomplishment among us the last Summer. GOD in
his just Displeasure has spread over us his thick and black Cloud, deeply
charged with most awful Thunders, the effects whereof were sorrowful. The Earth
under us has been horribly convulsed. And the Stormy Wind fulfilling his Word,
has shaken our Houses etc.

IN discoursing on this Text I shall say

I. THAT Thunder and Earthquake are the dreadful Visitations of GOD to a
People. II. THEY are very evident Testimonies of His Displeasure against a
People. III. THAT a People by persisting in their Sins expose themselves to
such awful Visitations from GOD. IV. THEY are loud Calls to Repentance; and the
Reformation of this People is the only Method of Safety to be taken by us, when
we are thus visited.
I. THUNDER and Earthquake are the dreadful Visitations of GOD to a People.

THAT they are the Visitations of GOD none will deny, but the Atheist, who says
There is no God, and attributes all to Chance; or the wild herd of Epicurus who
will not allow Him to have any concern at all in the Government of this lower
World. I persuade my self that there are none in this Assembly under any manner
of doubt but that the late terrible Earthquake was the Work of GOD; and it is
upon that Principle of Faith, that we are now acting in our Joint Praises to
Him for our wonderful Preservation in that dangerous Hour, and in our united
Prayers for his continued Protection as the day and occasion shall require; so
that it might seem a needless expense of Time and Words, to prove that Thunder
and Earthquakes are the Operations of GOD which you believe already. What I
shall endeavor therefore from this particular shall be chiefly to impress your
Minds with a more warm and affecting sense of this Truth; or to assist your
Faith in the more vigorous exercise of it, which you are now called unto by the
late Occurrence of the Earthquake.

IN Order to this I shall say

1. THUNDER is the Work of GOD. And very much of his Majesty and Power is to be
seen in it; accordingly it is sometimes called, The Thunder of his Power, and
His Powerful Voice, from its mighty noise and terrible effects.

THE Heathen ascribed the Thunder to their great Idol Jupiter, and as a
distinguishing character of honor called him the Thunderer; but we have
learned from the infallible Oracles in our Bibles to say it is God that speaks
to us in the Thunder, and to invocate Him in our Dangers by it, and to praise
Him as our great Deliverer. Give unto the Lord O ye mighty, give unto the Lord
glory and strength. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name: worship the
Lord is the beauty of holiness. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the
GOD of glory thundereth, Psalm. 29. begin. Elihu attributes the first
Production, and the subsequent Motion and Effects of Thunder and Lightning to
GOD, all which are above the reach and influence of the most potent Creatures,
Job. 37. Hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the sound that goes out
of his mouth. He directs it under the whole heaven, and his lightning unto
the ends of the earth. After it a voice roareth: he thundreth with the voice of
his excellency -- GOD thundreth marvellously.

THERE are very probably natural Causes of Thunder and Lightning which
Philosophers undertake to account for, which brings to Mind the bold Saying of
an obdurate Sinner, viz. That to have the Awe and Impression of a Deity upon
our Minds when we see the Lightning and hear the Thunder is vain and childish,
because we can assign the natural Causes of them. But this is to pervert the
great Design of their glorious Author, which is to make us Fear Him, to rouse
up an unthinking World to the consideration of a GOD above us, that can in a
Moment destroy our lives. This was the happy influence of it upon a celebrated
Man who was reclaimed from Atheism by the terrors of Thunder and Lightning.

THE Lightning is very evidently a mixture of Sulphurous and Nitrous Particles
extracted from the Earth by the Sun, which meeting in the middle Region of the
Air, are put into a quick motion, or by an Antiperistasis are set on Fire;
which is also the true notion of the Stella cadens; the odds between them being
only this the Meteor which causes the Lightning being shut up in a thick Cloud,
and taking Fire there, and so bursting the Cloud, throws it self out with the
mighty and irresistible force we sometimes see: Whereas the other being under
no Confinement is more gradual in its motion, and usually spends its strength
in the Air. The perpendicular motion in the Lightning is from the Nitre, the
peculiar Quality of which is to burn downwards, and it is this renders it so
quick and penetrating.

THE Thunder follows the Lightning as the Effect the Cause, and is made either
by the Collision of the Clouds from the breaking out of the Lightning, or by
the divided Clouds falling together after it is Expulsion. The most lively
Emblem in nature of Thunder and Lightning is Gunpowder, both in respect of its
Noise from the mouth of a Cannon, and the Effects of it. Hence it is called
Artificial Thundering.

THUS according to our best Conception, Thunder and Lightning are made; but
then GOD is the Cause of this Cause; He forms the Cloud, prepares the matter
for the Lightning, and gives Fire to it. This Artillery of Heaven is discharged
by Him who is the GOD of Heaven; it is He that makes way for the Lightning of
the Thunder. And it is certain that Second Causes could produce no such Effect
without leave from Him; He gives them that Virtue or Power whereby they act,
and He can alter their Properties, or withhold their Influences when He will;
and this He oftentimes does when it best serves his own Honor, and the good of
his People: He appoints when and where it shall thunder, and what shall be the
Effect. He sends forth his Voice from the black Cloud either more low or less
terrible, or strong and loud to our greater Amazement. He commissions the fiery
Meteor sometimes to rend and tear in pieces or to dissolve the Objects it
strikes on according to their different Natures; sometimes to blast or scorch
them, and sometimes to burn them to Ashes, and there is nothing that can resist
the force of it; no Creature but is liable to be hurt by it; for it is a
ridiculous Fiction of the Poets that the Eagle carries Jupiter's Armor, scil.
the Lightning, meaning that it cannot strike upon the Eagle. And it is a notion
no less absurd that Persons or Things covered with the Skins of Seals, or
Sea-Calves are secure, from whence some have made use of them in Storms of
Thunder, as Tiberius did of the Lawrel-tree which he formed into a Crown, and
wore upon his head.

THE commanding Providence, as well as the creating Power of GOD extends to
every thing. Wisdom and Might are his, He changes the Times and Seasons, and
the Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor and the stormy Wind fulfill His Word. And His
Designs both of Mercy and Judgment to a People are many times served by the
Wind. GOD sometimes makes use of it to cleanse and purge the Air from noxious
Vapors, which would be of fatal Consequence to us. Sometimes to fan and cool
our Bodies in the heat of Summer: and by the Wind we are able to visit far
distant Countries, and commerce with all Nations, and to bring from them the
rarest and most useful Productions of their Soil, as well as carry to them the
best of our own. And then on the other hand by the Wind GOD sometimes blasts
our Fruit, brings mortal Distempers upon a People, overturns our Buildings,
throws down vast numbers of Trees of all sorts, and of the largest Size. A sad
Instance of this we had September 16th. which is fresh in your Memories. And
then as a yet more awful Instance, by this he shakes terribly the Earth, and
sometimes rends it in pieces, and in a moment causes it and it is Inhabitants to
sink as Lead in the mighty Waters.

AND so GOD orders every clap of Thunder and flash of Lightning, when and where
they shall be, how far they shall extend, and what Execution they shall do, and
no Man may presume to say, a Chance has befallen me, when the Thunder breaks
upon his House, or destroys his Cattle or any part of his Estate. GOD has often
punished the Wickedness of Men with hot Thunderbolts. The Cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah were destroyed by Thunder and Lightning. And it was one of the Plagues
of Egypt, Exodus 9.23. The Lord sent Thunder and Hail, and the Fire ran along
upon the ground. And so very surprising and terrible it was to Pharaoh as to
force the obstinate wretch into a Confession of his Sin, and a Prayer for
Mercy. And by awful Thunders GOD fought against the Philistines when they
invaded Israel: 1 Samuel 7.10. -- The Lord thundered with a great Thunder on that
day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them --. In a very lively and elegant
manner the dismal effects of Thunder are exhibited to us in the 29th Psalm,
which some think was composed by David upon the Occasion of some great
Thunder-storm, The voice of the Lord is Powerful -- The voice of the Lord
breaks the Cedars: yea, the Lord breaks the Cedars of Lebanon.

WHICH has been remarkably exemplified with us this last Summer. The
destructive Effects of Thunder having been many more than we have ever known in
any one, or in many Years. The long continued and excessive Heat has been
productive of abundance of Thunder, and there has seldom been a Thunder-storm,
but that some hurt has been done by it; and sometimes the same Storm has broke
in many Places; sometimes Trees have been rent and split to Pieces; sometimes
it struck upon our Houses; several Barns have been burnt to the ground, and
some of them richly stored with Grain: Sometimes it has killed foam of our
Cattle; but in all, GOD who is a Covert from the Storm, has wonderfully spared
his People; and though some of them have been wounded, yet none that I have
heard of have been destroyed. GOD might have commissioned his Thunder against
our Persons and not our Substance, and laid our fleshly Tabernacles in Ashes in
a Moment; but instead of this He said to it, Destroy them not. He turned the
point of his arrows another way, and only displayed his awful Power in our
Sight, to let us know how easy it was for him to destroy us.

THUS Thunder is the Work of GOD, his terrible Work, and one great design he
has in it is to make us fear Him. We should therefore improve the Thunder to a
more just apprehension of GOD, and resolve that we will no more expose our
selves to his fiery Indignation by breaking his Laws, lest he should presently
raise a Storm of Thunder and Lightning to avenge our Transgressions.

Oh the Days and Nights of Terror that have lately passed ever us! The dreadful
Thunderclaps we have heard, wherein an angry GOD has proclaimed War against his
Enemies, and threatened them with speedy Destruction by Fire from Heaven, if
they did not submit themselves and turn unto Him.

HOW very terrible was the Storm in the Month of July; the Thunder almost
continually roaring over our Heads for the space of an Hour or more, and the
deeply tinctured blue Lightning flashing in our Faces, and actually striking
one, and very near to another of our Houses. Who of us thought then of ever
living the Storm out, but GOD was better to us than our Fears.

AND the amazing Lightnings in the Night after the 1st Day of August will never
be forgotten by many, wherein there was hardly a Moments intermission for
several Hours between the most dismal Flames that ever our Eyes beheld: The
Darkness vanished as at the light of the Sun before them, and the smallest
Objects were visible to us, as at Noonday.

THIS was attended with some Thunder, and one Clap broke among us; but without
harm to Man or Beast. And now, from the whole, we see how very justly we
ascribe the Thunder to GOD as the Cause of it. We are taught by Example of wise
and good Men to call it His Voice, the Sound that goes out of His Mouth, the
Fire of GOD etc. As if it was the immediate Production of His Hand, and second
Causes had nothing to do in it. And in our Text GOD himself asserts his
Authority, and claims the Honor of being Lord of this Host. And accordingly we
are to apply to Him in all our Dangers by it, to spread over us the wing of His
Protection, and command the Thunder not to strike and destroy us, or our
Substance.

AND let our many Preservations in the Thunder excite our sincere and
affectionate Thanksgivings to him; for it must be entirely resolved into his
Mercy that we are not consumed.

LET the Children of GOD correct their undue Fears of the Thunder. Oh act Faith
in GOD then as yours. Consider it as the Voice of your best Friend, and
heavenly Father, who dearly loves you, is always thoughtful of you, and whose
Perfections are ever engaged for your Benefit. This will help to silence your
Complaints, allay your Fears, and create a Divine Calm in your Breasts.

AND let the Thunder and Lightning serve to put us all in Mind of that Great
and Terrible Day of the Lord, in which the Heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent, the earth also and the works
that are therein shall be burnt up: Yea, let it extend our thoughts farther, to
the devouring Fire and everlasting Burnings consequent upon the Judgment, to
every impenitent Sinner. Which Consideration has a natural tendency to awaken
us out of our dozing Frames, and excite us to flee from this Wrath by a timely
and deep Repentance, a thorough and effectual Reformation.

EVERY Thunderclap we hear has this instructive Voice in it, Agree with your
Adversary quickly, by an humble Confession of your many Sins, and by striving
no more against your Maker; but by practically acknowledging GOD for your
Sovereign, and by a most free and hearty Consent to all his Claims and Demands
upon you. Attend then to the Call of GOD. It Is at our utmost Peril if we
persist in Sin any longer in defiance of such awful Admonitions, and we can in
reason expect no other but that a provoked GOD in the very next Thunder-storm
will rain upon us Fire and Brimstone, and a Tempest of Horrors.

LET not the most stout and resolved Sinner among us dare to meet another
Thunder-storm in a state of Sin, not knowing what may be the Consequence, and
but that the Fire of Heaven may in a moment dispatch you to the Flames of Hell.
Your Sins and Lusts are proper fuel for the Fire of GOD's Lightning to strike
on, and it is impossible you can be safe with these about you. Betake your
selves then to CHRIST without delay to unload you of Guilt and the Curse, to
take off from you the Garment spotted with the Flesh, and to put on you the
Robe of Holiness, the only Amulet in that Evil Day.

ENDEAVOR to impress upon your Mind the lively and affecting Sense of the Evil
of sin, which you have sometimes had in a Thunder-storm, and let your whole
Life after be a practical Comment upon the pious Resolutions you have formed
then. Always dread the Divine Power as you do then, and let Sin be as far from
your Desire and Practice; and don't (with Caligula) tremble at GOD's Voice in a
Storm, and bid Defiance to Him in a Calm. He is the same GOD always, and should
be so apprehended by us, and have the same Respect and Reverence from us The
Thunder broke in the following Towns the present Year. Hampton, in
New Hampshire, April 10. Upon a Dwelling House. Wallingsford in Connecticut,
One Man killed in the Street, May 12th. Ipswich, June 23. Struck a
Dwelling House, wounded a Child, killed 3 Cows. Newtown A Cow killed, and a
Tree shivered. Reading, July 2d. The Meeting House much hurt, a Man in it
wounded. Brooklyn July 5. A House struck, an Ox killed, several Trees split.
Newtown, The same Day several Trees split. Roxbury, The same Day, A Well-Pole
shivered, the Iron Hoop of the Bucket in part melted. Dorchester, The same Day
several Creatures killed. Boston July 12. The North Windmill struck, the
Miller and Son struck down. Deerfield, July An Ox and two Cows killed, mary
Trees split. Middletown, August. Several Trees split. Durham, A Barn burnt.
Springfield, Several Houses and Persons struck, and I think Creatures killed
and Trees split. And over, A Barn burnt. Woburn, A Barn fired. Providence, Hurt
done. And in other Places.
It is remarkable that Thunder and Lightning have also been very terrible this
Summer in other Parts, particularly Great Britain.


.

2. GOD is the Primary Efficient Cause of Earthquakes.

AS Thunder is His Voice, and Lightning a Flame that goes out of His Mouth; so
Earthquakes are caused by His strong Hand: And how much soever it exceeds the
Strength of any Creature or all united, to shake the Earth, the Omnipotent
Author of it, can do it with greater Ease, than any of us can move a Finger or
wave a Feather. Job having asserted the Power of GOD in general, descends to
prove it by an Induction of particular Instances, Job 9.5*6. He is mighty in
Strength, -- removes the Mountains, and they know not, overturneth them in his
anger, shakes the Earth out of her place and the Pillars thereof tremble. What
is it that infinite Power exerted to the height cannot effect? As He gave
Existence to the whole Globe of Earth by a Word, so He can destroy it in a
Moment.

IT IS absurd and atheistical to assert that Earthquakes are the Effects of a
blind Chance; or to resolve them into natural Causes, exclusive of the Divine
Superimendency and Efficiency: We may affirm on equal grounds that GOD does
nothing in the World in respect to Government, that there is no such thing as
Reward and Punishment in any degree admiministred here; as deny Him this great
and most sensible and awful Instance of His Power and Justice.

OUR Blessed Savior would have us to acknowledge GOD and His Providence in the
most minute and common Occurrences of Life; certainly then we must attribute
this Prodigious Work to Him, and say when this Evil is in the City or Country,
it is the Lord has done it.

SOME Earthquakes are from GOD immediately, others by the agency of second
Causes, and both are ascribed to Him in Holy Scripture without Distinction. And
agreeably I shall here say,

1. EARTHQUAKES are sometimes the immediate Works of GOD, that is, they are
performed by Him either beyond the Course and above the Power of Nature, or
second Causes are by His immediate influence so disposed, and operate so as to
produce such Effects.

THUS the Earthquake at Sinai, when the SON of GOD, our King and Lawgiver came
down upon the Mount to publish His Law, was a Supernatural Operation. That was
a Day of Miracles, and every thing in it was extraordinary, suitable to the
Pomp and Solemnity of it. It Is of this awful Transaction that the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 114. When Israel went out of Egypt -- the Sea saw it and fled,
Jordan was driven back, the Mountains skipped like Rame, and the little Hills
like Lambs. What ailed thee, O thou Sea? By which Question he means to express
the Reality of the Miracle, and that it was not the Effect of any natural
Cause. So the Violent Earthquake that shook the Apostles Paul and Silas out of
their Chains, and converted the Jaylour was doubtless extraordinary, and sent
of GOD on purpose to accomplish these things. And I suppose none will deny but
that the repeated Earthquakes at our Savior's Death and Resurrection were
miraculous; as the Eclipse of the Sun was at that time, which according to
Nature was impossible; and designed for Tokens of GOD's Anger at the horrid
Fact, and for the Conviction of that stupid Nation that the Person they had so
basely treated was more than a Man.

THE Earthquake in Jerusalem which we read of Amos 1.1. Zech. 14. was an
immediate Judgment of GOD upon Uzziah for invading the Priest's Office.
Josephus says that it rent their Temple in the midst at the very time when he
was offering Incense, and that a great Light of the Sun broke in at the Chasm,
and reflected on the King's Face, and instantly overspread his whole Body with
a Leprosy; he adds, that half a Mountain was thrown down by it, and rolled upon
the Ground for the space of four Stadia or Furlongs, and then rested upon the
King's Gardens. And now from these Instances may we not reasonably think, that
GOD sometimes immediately and in way of Admonition or Punishment visits a
People with Earthquakes.

2. EARTHQUAKES are produced by the agency of second Causes.

THE great former of the Earth has undoubtedly so made it as to serve His
eternal Design in this awful Dispensation; and then he has endowed the
Celestial and Elementary World with such Virtues and Powers as to produce such
an Effect; and though He has not obliged himself always to act by the
established Laws of Nature, yet He ordinarily does. Thus He produces the Fruits
of the Earth by the Influences of the Sun and Moon; and thus He brings on the
successive Revolutions of Day and Night in a natural Way, and the quaternial
Seasons of the Year, by the Suns passing through such and such Signs of the
Zodiac.

BUT now what are the natural Causes of Earthquakes, Men of the greatest
Sagacity and deepest Penetration, can but guess. And hence arises the great
Diversity of Thought about them, one fixing upon this thing, another upon that,
which seems to them most probable.

THE Ancient Heathen supposed them to proceed from the Fluctuations of Waters
in the Subterraneous Caverns, and celebrated Neptune as the Cause of them; but
this has no Solid Foundation.

OTHERS tell us that a strong Windy Exhalation imprisoned in the Bowels of the
Earth and wanting Vent, makes an Earthquake; this also is liable to Exception,
it being altogether impossible in Nature that the Wind can have so swift a
Currency through the Earth as to shake it for five hundred Miles in length within
a few Minutes of time; for if we suppose a Cannon shot, which glides much
swifter through the Air then the strongest blast of Wind, flies after the rate of
a League in a minute; according to that Computation it must be near three Hours
and half in going 500 Miles, or if we double the Motion it must be one Hour and
half, which is above a full Hour more than the distance of time betwixt the
late Earthquake's being felt at Philadelphia, and at Arowsick.

THAT Opinion which to me carries in it the greatest Probability of Truth is
this; That Subterraneous Fires occasioned by the Fermentation of combustible
Minerals in the Earth, such as Sulpher, Saltpeter, Vitriol etc. are the cause
of this Prodigy. These Fires being made of the same Matter with Lightning, fly
as the Lightning does with an incredible Swiftness, and carry in them an
irresistible Force, and give the Earth those violent Shocks we have lately
felt; but whether this solves the Matter, I don't pretend to say, I shall leave
it to them whose Business it is more properly to search into it.

BUT let the natural Causes be what they will, this is most certain, that they
are all in the Hand, and entirely subject to the Will of GOD. We may not think
that He has thrown off the Government of them, and left them to effect what is
in their own Power! What wild Disorder and Confusion would this create in the
World? No verily! He guides and directs, restrains and limits them, or gives
them a Liberty according to the Design He is to accomplish by them; and from
hence it is that we are to attribute all to Him; both the good we enjoy, and
the Evils we suffer. What Foundation for Prayer to him would there be, either
to prevent Judgments or to confer Blessings: What Dependence could we have upon
him, to protect us in our Dangers, or do any thing at all for us, if he had not
the actual Command of all the springs of Nature? So that to resolve all Events
into natural Causes is derogatory to the Honor of GOD, and the direct Course
to banish all Religion out of the World, and will prove of fatal Consequence to
all who adhere to it. All his Promises are but mere Cheat and Delusion, and his
Threatenings ridiculous Terrors, and worthy of no Regard, if such a Persuasion
is true; and for Men under the influence of this Principle to apply to him to
make good his Promises, or not to execute his Threatenings, is the most
provoking Mockery, since according to them, He can accomplish neither.

GOD every where in His Word challenges the Honor of being the immediate
absolute Governor of the World, and this we must firmly believe He is; and as
his Perfections take their turns to act and display themselves, so we must
observe the Order of them, and give them the Honors which are respectively due
to them. I will sing of Mercy and Judgment, unto thee O Lord will I sing. And
thus in particular we must acknowledge that GOD is the Cause of Earthquakes. He
that supports and guides the Orbs of Light and Fire over our Heads, holds in
his Hand the rolling World under our Feet, and makes it tremble and shake when
he pleases; and without any strain of Power can disjoin the infinite Particles
whereof it consists, and cause them to disperse and wander in the Air, at a
wide distance from one another.

HE that in Strength has set fast the Mountains, can take them off from their
ancient Basis, and transplant them remote from where they stood. Or he can so
convulse the Earth as that it shall throw Mountains out of her Bowels upon the
level Ground, or in the Sea. He can cause the dry and solid Earth to swell and
rise like the Waves of the Sea under our Feet, and then to sink down again to
the Destruction of its Inhabitants.

AS to the distinct kinds of Earthquakes, and their Antecendentia or
Prognostics which Philosophers speak of, I shall say Excepting in one
Instance, the like having happened with us, It is one preceding Sign of an
Earthquake, says my Author, when the Water in deep Pits or Wells, is from an
invisible Cause put into Motion, or gives a disagreeable Taste or Smell. The
latter of these Signs, several of my Neighbors, three at least, have had in
their Wells: About 3 days before the Earthquake they perceived an ill stinking
Smell in the Water, and not thinking of the proper Cause, searched the Wells,
but finding nothing that might thus infect them, were at a Loss into what to
resolve it, till some Days since the Earthquake being informed that Earthquakes
sometimes had such an Influence upon Wells, judged it to be that. The Scent was
so strong and offensive that they could not suffer the Water in their Houses,
and for about 8 or 10 Days they entirely omitted the use of them. In the
deepest of these Wells which was 36 feet, the Water turned to a Brimstone
color, but had nothing of the Smell of it, and was thick like puddle Water. It
is now (and so are the others) perfectly recovered as to color and taste.
nothing, but proceed from the Cause to the Effects of this wonderful
Dispensation: And here I am entering upon a large Field, and might expatiate
almost endlesly; but it is not my present Design to write a History of
Earthquakes, but to exhibit to you something of the Terrors of the Lord in this
sort, that I may persuade Men.

THE World has been alarmed by Earthquakes, and the tragical Effects of them
have rendered them formidable to all Nations; especially of late they have been
numerous. A learned Writer has reckoned up near Forty, that have happened in
about Thirty Years; which as he says are more than the World has known for
several Centuries before; and since 1713, which is the date of his Account,
there have been several, as in Sicily, China, Jamaica, England, Paris, and now
in New England.

THE Design of GOD in Earthquakes is not always the same; and from hence it
follows that the Effects of them are different; sometimes they come in Mercy;
but for the most part in Judgment; sometimes they are sent to admonish a sinful
People, and often to destroy.

SOMETIMES the Terror of them has been comparatively little, the Roar and Shake
being both small, and they pass off without Harm; and then sometimes they are
terrible beyond Expression.

SOMETIMES they have raised up Islands in the Sea, and thrown out Fire, Sand
and Rocks almost as high as to the very Clouds, to the Astonishment of poor
Sailors.

SOMETIMES they have turned the Course of Rivers, and caused Rivers to break
out in new Places.

SOMETIMES they have divided Kingdoms and Countries, as Britain from France,
Africa from Spain, and Sicily from Italy.

SOMETIMES they have caused violent Eruptions of Fire out of the Earth, and
discovered new burning Mountains.

SOMETIMES they have shaken down many Thousands of Houses, Churches and Castles
etc. and made very flourishing Cities almost ruined Heaps.

SOMETIMES they have swallowed up many Cities and Towns without leaving any
Mark at all of them; they have sunk as Lead in the mighty Waters.

THUS it was in Sicily in the Year 1693, of which Prodigy my Author writes that
on Friday January 9. after a warm serene and calm Day, the Earth began to
tremble suddenly; the first shake was attended as is common, with a hollow
thundering noise, and succeeded by another early the next Morning; but on the
Day following viz. 11, happened a third which was stupendous beyond human
Imagination which almost totally destroyed 20 or more Cities and Towns, and
above one hundred Thousand Inhabitants, after which vast Destruction, the Earth
continued trembling at times for several Months.

THIS Earthquake was preceeded like ours with Southerly Winds, extreme heat and
terrible Storms of Thunder and Lightning, and after this, profuse Rains.

THE Earthquake at Port Royal in Jamaica the Year before this June 7. at noon
was very terrible, Rocks and Mountains were overturned, and all the Buildings
in the Town fell, whole Streets were swallowed up; both Houses and Inhabitants
went down together. Some were killed by the fall of Houses, some were wounded,
some were floted off to Sea upon pieces of Timber etc. and so perished. Others
that were falling to the Earth, by its closing together again on a sudden were
catched, some by the Legs, others by the Neck, etc. and some that were actually
fallen into it is Caverns were thrown out again by the violent Eruption of
Waters.

AND then, the late China Earthquake, was very awful: this fell out June 19.
1719. and was so violent as to remove Mountains two full Leagues over a Plain,
and to swallow up the Plain without leaving any Mark of Men, Houses or Animals.
In another Place the Earth opened, and a Mountain was rolled down upon the
Town, and in the twinkling of an Eye the Town was swallowed up, and the Plain
rose in Waves six fathom.

BUT above all that the World has known, was that at Antioch in the second
Century after CHRIST, and though of long standing yet it deserves to be
recognized, and spoken of to the Honor of GOD, and the terror of Men as long
as the Sun and Moon shall endure. The whole City was destroyed by this
Earthquake, not an House left; almost incredible Numbers were killed and
wounded; for it happened at such a time when they were met together from all
Parts of the Empire at the Command of Trajan their Emperor. All the Elements
conspired in their ruin. The Thunders roared from above, the Earth shaking
below, and an horrible Tempest of Wind, and as the Effect of these the Sea
raging, the Houses and City Walls falling; and all together made such a Noise
and thick Dust that they were not able to see the Faces, or hear the Voices of
one another. And when all was over, and the Survivors saw the Destruction of
their City, and the heaps of dead Bodies in all places, they were ready to wish
to have undergone the fate of their Brethren, rather than live to behold such
deplorable Ruins.

NEW ENGLAND has never felt any Concussions to be compared with these; not an
Hair of our Heads has ever perished by an Earthquake. And this last which has
in several respects exceeded any that have gone before it, and was indeed very
violent, yet has been so far restrained as that but little hurt has been done
by it.

I shall here insert a short Narrative of this awful Dispensation, and so
conclude this Proposition.

IT begun as I conceive in the South-East, about half an Hour after Ten in the
Lord's Day Evening after the 29th of October, 1727. All on a sudden our Houses
shook as if they were falling to pieces, and this was attended with a great
Noise, which lasted about one Minute, and then took it is Course Northward. In a
very short time it returned upon us, though with far less Strength, and the
Shocks were repeated seven Times in my hearing that Night; but they were many
more at Salem, Ipswich etc. Distant Rumbles were heard by us many times until
the next Friday-Evening: Since that we don't know that we have heard it; but it
has been heard at Newbury every Day since, and now for more than three Weeks.

THE Surprise and Terror of it were very great: some thought their Houses were
all on Fire about them, and made all possible haste to escape the Burning;
others who were free from this Fear, were seized with the Terrors of the Last
Day, and could think of nothing but the dissolving World, the sound of the last
Trumpet, and the sudden Appearance of CHRIST their Judge; others expected to
die by the falling of their Houses, or that the Earth under them would open,
and they should go down alive into the Pit. Words cannot express the Agonies
that our Souls were in; our Faces were pale as Ashes, our Lips quivered, our
Speech faultred, and our Knees smote together, and there was no strength left
in us; Our Flesh then trembled for fear of GOD, and we were afraid of his
Judgments. And we were ready, like the Men of Judah, to have fled, if we had
known where, because of the Earthquake. And thus I have considered the first
Particular that I propounded to speak to; viz. That Thunder and Earthquake are
the awful Visitations of GOD to a People And now proceed to the Second, namely
this

II. GOD's terrible Visits to a People by Thunder and Earthquake are evident
Testimonies of his Anger.

THE efficient Cause of Earthquakes is the Power of GOD, the final is the
Signification of his Anger moved by the execrable Crimes of a wicked People,
according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 18.7. Then the Earth shock and
trembled, the Foundations of the Hills moved and were shaken, because he was
Wroth. The very Heathen have accounted Earthquakes Tokens of GOD's Displeasure,
and accordingly they prayed and offered Sacrifice to avert his Wrath. The
Romans passed it into a Law that Prayers should be made to GOD in time of an
Earthquake: And verily so great Occasion there is for this, that it is strange
any one that has a Mouth to speak to Him, should be silent at such a Time.

WE read of some Earthquakes that have been sent in Mercy; but for the most
part they come in Wrath, and are the Threatenings or Executions of Divine
Justice. It Is no Hyperbole to say that Sin sets the Heavens on Fire over us,
and the Earth under our Feet. That Earthquakes are Evidences of GOD's Anger
appears from his Threatenings to visit a sinful People with them, and from the
fearful Desolations he has brought upon the World by them; for it is an
offended GOD that is a consuming Fire. Yea, they are not Marks of common Anger,
but of Wrath enflamed; for GOD observes a Proportion and Gradation in his
Judgments, as the Sins of a People rise and multiply; and Earthquakes are
justly reckoned among his most terrible Judgments, Matthew. 24. --

IT IS certain that GOD can be angry at nothing but Sin, and there had never
been the least spark of Indignation in Him toward Mankind, if Sin had not
occasioned it. It Is Sin that turns the Heart of GOD against us, converts his
Care into Neglect, his Blessings into Curses, and makes the Arrows of his
Vengeance go forth as Lightning, fly swift and far; scatter and destroy his
People.

WHEREVER we read in the History of the Jews, of their suffering State we are
told, That Sin was the Cause. GOD never would have drawn his Sword against
them, but to avenge the Quarrel of his Covenant. It is for the unrighteousness
of Men that the Wrath of GOD is revealed from Heaven. So that when He visits a
People with Earthquake, they must charge the Fault upon themselves, and set His
Throne guiltless, saying, Righteous art thou, O LORD, because thou have judged
thus.

THE Series of awful Providence the Lord of Hosts has visited this People with
of late are evident Tokens that His Anger is out against us. It has been an
extraordinary Year, not any that we have known like it in some respects; early
in the Spring we were surprised with several very sudden Deaths, Persons
falling down Dead as they walked the Streets, as Mr. Hirst, etc.

THE Summer was remarkable for extreme Heat, by which some also died suddenly;
and for most awful Thunder and Lightning. After this we had the violent Storm
of Wind which threatened us with the Destruction of our Houses, and made us
think our selves in the greatest Danger from those Places of common Safety. And
now the terrible Earthquake: Thus a provoked GOD has been repeating his awful
Visits, one in a short time after another. And what do all these speak, but his
hot Anger against us; and that Man is certainly under a judicial Blindness, and
his Heart like Pharaoh's is hardened under Judgments, who makes light of such
Dispensations.

THUS GOD's late visit to this People by Earthquake is a Testimony of his
Anger, and this I doubt not but we shall all readily acknowledge; but then the
difficulty lies in rightly stating the Matter, and saying who are the faulty
Causes; for some who have as deep a share it may be in the Offense as any, will
be very loath to own they have any Hand at all in it, and shift off the Blame to
others. They see as they imagine a Beam in their Neighbors Eye, but a Mote in
their own; when in reality the Beam is theirs, and the Mote their Neighbors:
But thus partial are Men in their own Case, and by thus misapplying the
Plaster, the Wound remains, corrupts and putrifies, and affords many a
threatening Symptom to the Body.

IN such an Evil Day as this we must every one look at home, examine his own
Heart, seriously propose the Question to himself, What have I done? And charge
himself in the Name of GOD to give a just and full Answer to it. And upon a
strict Review of his Actions, every one will find enough amiss in himself to
bring down the awful Judgments of Heaven upon his own Head. We are certainly
all faulty; there are none among us but have dealt wickedly; yea among the
faithful there is none that has not done amiss, and highly offended.

THERE is no Rank or Degree of Men to be acquitted.

IS there not too much of a selfish and contracted Spirit in too many that are
entrusted with the public Interests of this People? And is it not most evident
that there is too little Regard had to the Execution of the Laws of the
Province upon bold Offenders; and though Iniquity appears barefaced, yet it
goes unpunished. Some in Authority want Courage, others ('it is to be feared)
Conscience to prosecute the Actors of it; and by this Neglect a private
personal Offense becomes public, and the whole must suffer for it.

AND may not the Ministers of Religion charge themselves with too much Sloth
and Negligence in their great Work? Oh! Have they been enough concerned about
the Welfare and Happiness of the precious Souls of their People. I do most
freely own my self chargeable with many Defects, and fly to the great and
common Savior for Pardon and Mercy. Has not a worldly Spirit too much the
Ascendant over many of us? The hot and fierce Debates about Sallaries, may not,
I fear, be every where imputed to real Necessity.

BUT then this People would do well to inquire, Whether they are chargeable
with no Omissions as to their Ministers; but that they have in all Respects a
proper Notice taken of them.

HOW little Regard is paid to the Law of the Fourth Commandment. Worldly
Concerns too often crowd out the Business of Preparation for the Sabbath. Many
are late from Home on Saturday-Evenings, who should be with their Families,
Reading, Catechizing and Instructing their Children and Servants. And is there
not a scandalous Neglect of the public Worship upon the Lord's Day and
Lecture-Days, generally through the Land. And then Sabbath Day Evenings are
spent by very many in unnecessary Visits, vain Company etc. And has not the
jealous GOD, jealous of His Sabbath been dreadfully testifying His Abhorrence
of such Practices by the Storm and by the Earthquake on the Saturday and
Sabbath Evening?

LET Sabbath Breakers then take these awful Admonitions, let them hear and fear
and do no more so wickedly --

IS not the Table of CHRIST neglected, and thereby His plain Law violated by
very many; and is there a due Care taken by Church Members that they may
worthily receive the consecrated Elements?

AND then, are not Pride, Oppression, Profane Swearing, Drunkenness, Adultery
etc. crying Sins of this People?

AND now, seeing there are all these (and many more) evil Deeds and great
Trespasses to be found amongst all Orders of Men, we can be at no Loss for the
deserving Causes of GOD's Controversy with us. This People need not make that
Inquiry, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me? As if we were wholly in the
dark about the Matter, and the Sin like Achan's, was some great Secret; when
the Reasons of His Anger are as evident as the Sun at Noonday. And his Anger
will not be turned away, but His Hand will be stretched out still, unless these
Evils are reformed. Which brings me to the third Particular,

Namely this,

III. THE professing People of GOD may very justly expect His awful Visits by
Thunder and Earthquake, so long as they persist in Sin.

SEEING Sin is the Cause of GOD's Anger, we cannot rationally think that He will
be reconciled to us so long as that is unrepented of and persisted in, and then
what can be expected from an angry GOD but Thunder and Earthquake etc. His
Wrath cannot burn against a People, but they will be made sensible of it by some
terrible Judgment or other. Not to punish them, but to own and protect a People
that practically disown Him, would be to patronize their Sin, and take part
with His Enemies against Himself, which surely no Man in his Wits would do;
much less may we suppose it of GOD only wise, and His Throne holy.

IT IS a mighty Aggravation of Sin to continue in it after a great Variety of
Methods used by GOD to reclaim us, and what can we expect but that He will say
of us as He said of Ephraim, he is joined to Idols, let him alone. Since he is
irreclaimable both by Mercies and Judgments, I will leave him to sin himself
into final Ruin.

IT extremely provokes GOD when a People harden themselves in Sin after
Judgments, as it directly contradicts his Design in punishing them, and bids an
open Defiance to his Power and Justice, and is an implicit challenging the
Almighty to do his worst. The plain Language of such Obstinacy is that, I know
not the Lord, neither will I let my Sins go. There is not a more sad and
certain Presage of Ruin to a People than this, it looks as if GOD had utterly
rejected such a People, and had no further use to make of them but only to
punish them, this is plainly intimated by the Prophet Ezra's Confession and
Prayer, Ezra 9. After all that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and great
Trespass, after all the Judgments that are come upon us to reform us, and after
all the Mercies that are bestowed upon us to engage us to thee and Duty, should
we again break thy Commandments, -- would thou not be angry with us till
thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping. And
the Prophet Jeremiah threatened Judah with a total Overthrow, for their Contempt
of the Tokens of GOD's Anger, Jer. 44.10. Therefore thus says the Lord of
Hosts, I will set my Face against you for Evil, and out off all Judah. Which
Prediction was answered, and they are groaning under the Accomplishment of it
to this very Day.

AND indeed there seems to be a Necessity of such a Proceedure with a stubborn
People, for what else can be done with them. To let them alone in their Sins
after all, looks dishonorable to GOD, as if He wanted Wisdom or Power to
control their Exorbitances; or to bring them to a suitable Punishment, His
Mercy is the only Attribute he can think to glorify by such a Delay, and this
already suffers, His Pity and Patience are abused, and they are ready to
resolve the Suspension of his destructive Threats into something else than mere
Lenity and Goodness, and thus His Power is slighted, and the bright Character
of his Holiness is slurr'd, as if they were beyond the reach of His Arm, and He
could not punish them, or He was too much like what they are to have any
Disposition to it, so that it seems to be high time for GOD to pour His Wrath
to the uttermost upon such a People, and thereby manifest that He is a GOD
hating Iniquity, and both able and faithful to execute His Threatenings. We are
plainly told Lev. 26. from ver. 14. to ver. 40. what an incorrigible People may
expect from GOD.

LET not this People then, because they have outlived the Earthquake, think
their Danger is over; that Justice has no further Work and so return to their
Sins again. If we are not reformed by the Threatening, we have Reason to fear
being ruined by the Execution.

THE Fourth and last Particular is this

IV. THUNDER and Earthquake are loud Calls to Repentance; and the Reformation
of this People is the only Method of Safety to be taken by us under these awful
Tokens of GOD's Anger.

THE Lord of Hosts thus bespeaks the Body of this People by these Providence;
Return and seek thy GOD O Israel; both great and small are comprehended in it,
Rulers and ruled, Ministers and their People, Old and Young, Rich and Poor,
Bond and Free. O that he would speak it to all our Hearts, and give us the
Grace of Repentance, as well as the Command to repent, and then it shall be
well with us, both we and our Seed shall live.

HERE are two Articles I shall briefly speak to,

1. THUNDER and Earthquake are loud Calls to Repentance.

THE Design of GOD in the Earthquake was evidently not to destroy, but reclaim
us. So that how much so ever it carries in it the Face of Wrath, it may
eventually prove a great Mercy, if it is not our own Fault. The Fire of
Affliction is to consume our Lusts; By this shall the Iniquity of Jacob be
purged. We are chastned of the Lord for our Amendment. GOD who is rich in
Mercy, and does not afflict willingly, would not thus terrify and distress us,
if there was no need of it; if our Forgetfulness of Him, and Duty did not call
for it. It is to shake Sin out of it is Inhabitants, that the Lord shakes thus
terribly the Earth.

HE calls us to think sericusly of what we have done against Him, to own our
Injustice in it, and express our Penitence for it. And He expects that we come
before him this Day in the most humble and self-abasing Manner, mourning every
one for His own Sins, and for the Sins of this People.

OUR Consciences are called upon by the Earthquake to do their Office, to
charge Sin upon us wherein we have been guilty. That we may humble our selves
under the mighty Hand of GOD; that we may abhor our selves, and repent in Dust
and Ashes. The Exhortation from GOD is that, soel 2.13. Blow the Trumpet in
Zion, sanctify a Post, call a solemn Assembly, gather the Children and those
that suck the Breasts: let the Bridegroom go forth of his Chamber, and the
Bride out of her Closet. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep
between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy People. Turn ye
unto me with all your Heart, and with fasting add with weeping, and with
mourning, and rent your Heart, and not your Garments, and turn unto the Lord.
Let it not be said of us as of them, Isai. 22.12, 13. In that Day did the LORD
GOD of Hosts call to Weeping, and to Mourning, and to Baldness, and to girding
with Sackcloth. And behold Joy and Gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep,
eating Flesh, and drinking Wine; let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die.
This is to pervert the Intention of the Threatening, for it is sent for this
End, that we may see the Evil and taste the Bitterness of Sin; that our Hearts
may be rent both for Sin; and from it; that we may mortify our Lusts, purify
our selves from all our carnal and spiritual Pollutions.

GOD says to us in the Earthquake, Sin must be parted with, our Pride,
Covetousness, Worldlymindedness, Uncharitableness, Injustice, Intemperance,
Sensuality, etc. all Ungodliness.

AND then He calls us to devote our selves entirely to Him, to avouch Him for
our GOD, and firmly resolve that for the time to come, if He shall please in
His great Mercy to spare us, we will be obedient to Him in all Things,
renouncing all others who claim our Service.

AND then, He calls us thus to return to Him without Delay, NOW, this present
Time, and for ought we know, it may be His last Call. The Earthquake came upon
us suddenly and without a Minutes Warning, and it may return upon us as
suddenly, and with much greater Violence, so as to destroy us in a Moment.

IT highly concerns us then to hear the Rod, and who has appointed it, and
learn to submit our selves to His preceptive Will in all Things.

LET the wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and turn
unto the Lord. Let the Drunkard leave his Cups, the profane Swearer his Oaths,
the Wanton and Unclean his Adulteries, and every sort of Sinner bid an
everlasting Farewell and Defiance to his Sin whatever it is. If we do thus, we
have Reason to hope that GOD will stay the Progress of His Judgment, and turn
from His Anger that we perish not.

WHICH brings me to the other Article, viz.

2. THAT the Reformation of this People is the only Method to avert these awful
Tokens of GOD's Anger.

AS He has called us to repent by his Earthquake, so he has promised Mercy to
us by his Word upon this Condition, Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent, and turn your selves
from all your Transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. Our
Repentance has a powerful Influence upon GOD, so as that he has obliged himself
to forgive the Sins of a penitent People. Isai. 1.16 --. Hos. 14.1, 4. O Israel
return unto the Lord thy GOD, etc. I will heal their Backsliding --. But if ye
refuse and rebel ye shall be devoured, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
Which Promises are not to be looked upon as limited to the Jewish Nation, but
extend to all Nations under Heaven, that take Care to fulfill the Conditions
that support them. But yet, if any should object against these Promises, I
shall offer one that is liable to no Exception, Jerem. 18.7, 8. At what instant
I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and
to pull down, and to destroy it. If that Nation, against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will repent of the Evil that I thought to
do unto them. And then it follow, At what instant I shall speak concerning a
Nation and concerning a Kingdom, to build, and to plant it. If it do Evil in my
sight, that it obey not my Voice, then I will repent of the good wherewith I
said I would benefit them.

FROM all which appears the absolute Necessity of our Repentance and
Reformation, in order to prevent our Ruin, and the infallible Certainty of our
Prosperity and Happiness on this Condition. But without this we shall not
escape his righteous Judgments.

WE see then what our Business is with GOD this Day, and upon what Terms he
will hear our Prayers, and save this People. The Reply he makes to us now we
are spreading forth our Hands, and offering up fervent Prayers and strong Cries
for Mercy and Salvation, is this, Repent, Repent, Put away the Evil of your
Doings from before mine Eyes, cease to do Evil, and learn to do well, etc.
Which if we do, we may humbly hope that he will hear us, but otherwise we pray
in Vain, and our Returns will be in Wrath, and not in Mercy.

AND thus I have finished the Consideration of the Particulars laid down in the
beginning of this Discourse and shall endeavor a brief and suitable Improvement
of them.

LET us all learn then to Reverence the Great GOD.

THIS is the Design of the late display of his Power in the Earthquake, and we
are stupid indeed if so bright an Evidence of a boundless Strength, does not
produce this Effect. The Prophet Isaiah observes that when His Judgments are in
the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn righteousness, Isai. 26.9.
He has been uttering his mighty Voice not only by Thunder, but from the Earth
also to excite our Fears and reform our Lives, that we may renounce Sin as our
Plague and Misery; and choose him for our highest Lord and our only Happiness,
and make an entire and hearty surrender and Dedication of our selves to Him and
his Service, and if we do thus the Consequence will be happy, the thick and
black Cloud of his Anger will blow over, and he will ordain Peace for us.

THE contemplative and admiring Psalmist says, Psalm 92. O Lord how great are
thy Works, and thy Thoughts are very deep. A brutish Man knows not: neither
does a Fool understand this. They are Fools and brutish indeed, who don't take
notice of GOD's Hand in the Earthquake, but bid Defiance to this Threatening of
the ALMIGHTY. Some such hardened Wretches there are, as can let this tremendous
Dispensation of an angry GOD pass off, and not be affected with it, when the
very Brutes fear and tremble. Surely this is the Temper we should be in, and
the Language we should express at such a Time as this, My Flesh trembles for
Fear of Thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. Oh! Who is able to stand before
this GOD? With Him is terrible Majesty. There is no Creature that has an Arm
like Him, neither is there any that has ever hardened himself against Him, and
prospered. Fear the Lord all ye his Saints. Let all the Earth fear Him. Let all
the Inhabitants of the World stand in awe of Him, Psalm 33.8. and 34.9.

LET us all bless GOD for His great Mercy in sparing our Lives in the
Earthquake.

THIS is certainly a very important Article in the Matter of our Praises, and
the Grace of GOD to us herein we cannot sufficiently admire and celebrate. Let
us then deeply impress upon our Hearts this great Deliverance, often reflect
upon it our selves, and speak of it to others with Hearts full of affectionate
Gratitude. Let us with holy David, Call upon our Souls, and all that is within
us, to bless the Name of the Lord, who has redeemed our Lives from Destruction,
Psalm 103. begin.

LET us sing with Moses and Israel after their great Deliverance, Exodus 15.2.
The Lord is my Strength and Song, and He is become my Salvation. He is my GOD,
and I will praise Him.

WHAT Cause have the Unregenerate to bless GOD that they are alive, and have a
little longer Time given them for Repentance? What a miserable State did the
Earthquake find you in, and if you had died that Moment, what had become of
your Souls to all Eternity? Better had it been for you that you had never been
born. The immediate Consequence of Death had been Hell and Damnation to you.

LET us pray earnestly to GOD to sanctify the Earthquake to us, and accomplish
all the merciful Designs of it upon us.

GOD sent it doubtless for the Prevention and Cure of Sin. Let us pray that
this may be the Effect, and this being obtained, let us pray for the Removal of
it. It Is GOD only can give us help from this Trouble, and quiet the disturbed
Earth. He can say Peace, be still, to the natural Cause of the Earthquake, and
not a single Atom of Dust shall any more be disturbed by it. We hope in the
Mercy of GOD, together with his Power to do this for us.

WE learn by this Earthquake the great Uncertainty of all worldly Things, and
the great Folly of Men in placing their Happiness in them.

SINCE the Earth may sink, and fail us in a Moment which has the greatest
Stability of any Thing here, what Dependence can there be upon other Things
more liable to perish?

HOW happy are all those who in such a Time as this have Peace with GOD.

SUCH Persons are above all just Fears and Dangers from an Earthquake, and may
triumph with the Psalmist, Psalm 46.1, 2, 3. GOD is our Refuge and Strength: a
very present help in Trouble. Therefore will not we Fear, though the Earth be
removed: and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Though
the Waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with the
swelling thereof. No Calamity can hurt a good Man; his Faith and his Hope are
as an Anchor within the Vail, and he is secure in the midst of all Storms.

BUT what have Sinners to support them when GOD above them is in this terrible
Manner testifying his Anger against them, and the Earth under them is sinking
and leaving them? O deplorable State! A CHRIST in such an Hour is worth
infinite Worlds.

THIS Earthquake may serve to strengthen our Faith in the great and important
Doctrine of the Resurrection, so far as Concerns the Power of GOD.

FOR certainly it requires a much greater Degree of Power thus to shake the
Earth, than to call up a dead Body from the Grave. A Specimen of the general
Resurrection we have had by an Earthquake: Matthew. 27.51, 52. And behold, the
Vail of the Temple was rent in twain, from the Top to the Bottom, and the Earth
did quake, and the Rocks rent, And the Graves were opened, and many Bodies of
Saints which slept, arose.

LET the shaking Earth remind us of the Things that cannot be shaken. The World
above is a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. The Inhabitants there are
unchangeably happy.

THIS World's glory passes away. The Earth is nigh unto burning, and all the
admirable Works both of Nature and Art shall be destroyed, but the third Heaven
is an enduring Substance; a Treasure there we are in no danger of losing.

IT IS the Song of the Blessed, This GOD is our GOD for ever and ever; And that
it may be our Song, GOD of his infinite Mercy grant unto us for the sake of
JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 22. del. or, read and. p. 9. l. ult. after, by this, r. according
to some. p. 11. l. 17. after of, r. except one. p. 13. l. 3 from bottom, r.
fervent Heat. p. 17. l. 4 from bott. del. so. p. 20. l. 21. after, must be. r.
more than. p. 23. l. 14. after, has. r. often. p. 26. l. 4. r. into.

To be Sold by Joseph Edwards, at the Corner Shop on the North side of the
Townhouse in Boston,

THE Whole Concern of Man, Or what he ought to know and do in Order to Eternal
Salvation: Laid down in a plain and familiar Way for the use of all, but
especially the meanest Reader. Divided into 17 Chapters. Necessary for all
Families. By JOHN EDWARDS, D. D.

The Curiosities of Common Water, Or the Advantages thereof in preventing and
curing many Distempers, gathered from the Writings of several Eminent
Physicians, and also from more than 40 Years Experience. The Fifth Edition with
Additions. By JOHN SMITH, C.M.

Some Important Truths about Conversion, Delivered in sundry Sermons, By
INCREASE MATHER, D. D. With a Preface by Dr. JOHN OWEN. The Second Edition.

Sundry Books of Divinity, History, Physic; all sorts of Bibles, Testaments,
Psalters, Psalmbooks, Primers, Catechisms, Spelling-Books, School Books,
Inkhorns, Penknives, Sealing-Wax, Wafers, Pencils, Ink and Quills, by
Wholesale, or Retail.


