Mr. Colman's Sermon to the Pirates, July 10. 1726.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living GOD. A SERMON
Preached to some miserable PIRATES July 10. 1726. On the Lord's Day, before
their Execution.

By Benjamin Colman, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

To which is added some Account of said Pirates.

Deuteronomy. XVII.13. And all the People shall hear and fear, and do no more so
presumptuously.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed for John Phillip and Thomas Hancock, and Sold at their
Shops. 1726.

The Hands of the Living GOD.
HEBREWS X.31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living GOD.


HOW awful and awak'ning are these Words! Eno' to strike the heart of the
hardiest Sinner with the utmost fear! As the handwriting on the wall over
against Belshazzar changed his countenance, loosed the joints of his loins, and
his knees smote one against another.

THE words come in the close of an excellent Warning against wilful and
presumptuous disobedience to the Gospel, and apostasy from it. The Apostle
warns the presumptuous and apostate Sinner of the righteous and terrible
Vengeance of God: For we know him that has said, Vengeance bebelongeth unto
Me, I will recompense says the Lord: And again, The Lord shall judge his
people: It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God.

SEE here what GOD is: He is the Living GOD: That is his glorious and fearful
Name. And see what the tremendous Punishment of Sin is; it is to fall into the
hands of the Living God.

I need not seek for any Doctrine out of the words of the Text: No words of
mine can be like awful, instructive and awakning.

DOCT. IT is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living GOD. THE Text
may be opened and confirmed in the following Enquiries. 1. What is meant by
this Title, the living God? 2. What by the Hands of the living God? 2. What it
is to fall into the hands of the living God? 4. In what respects it is so
fearful a thing to fall into his hands?

1. WHAT is the Import and meaning of this Title, the living God?

IT is the glorious and proper Name of the true God, and many times given him
in his Word. Jer. 10.10. The Lord is the true God, he is the living God. Mat.
16.16. Thou art Christ, the son of the living God. Now

1. THE living God means the Eternal God. The Lord, the Everlasting God. He is
the living One who ever was, is and will be, without beginning or end. Jer.
10.10. The living God and the Everlasting King. Psalm. 90.2. From Everlasting to
Everlasting Thou art God.

2. THE living God speaks his Self existence. Eternal existence necessarily
implies this. John 5.26. The Father has life in himself. "God's life is his
own: It is originated in Himself Mr. Willard on the Catechism.
, and not derived from another". He is life essential and original.

3. THE living God speaks a life always the same. The immutability and
unchangeableness of God is plainly contained in this Title. Dan. 6.26. The
living God, and steadfast for ever.

GOD's Name is -- I am that I am. This is to live, and to be the living One. I
am the Lord, I change not. He who is the same yesterday, to day and for ever,
with whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning, He it is that lives.

4. THE living God means the Fountain of life to all Creatures. Psalm 36.9. For
with thee is the fountain of life. Angels are living Beings, and Man is a
living Soul, but God gives the Being and Life both to the one and other;
upholds them in life, and preserves the Spirits. In Him they live and move and
have their being; for they are his Offspring. He gives unto all life and
breath and all things.

ONLY the Eternal Son, the Only begotten, has life in himself, even as the
Father has life in himself. He therefore is no creature: He is the true God
and eternal life. Life natural and spiritual are of him and from him together
with the Father. He is the Everlasting Father and the living God. John 1.4. In
him was life, and the life was the light of men.

5. THE living God is in opposition to false Gods, Idols and Images, which are
dead things. The Stocks and the graven Images which stupid men have called
Gods, were lifeless things; and the Heroes whom the Nations have ignorantly
deified and worshipped were dying or dead men. The molten Image is falsehood,
because there is no breath in it. The portion of Jacob is not like it; He is
Jehovah, Him that lives. Life and death are just in that contradiction the one
to the other that the true God is to all false ones. Act. 14.15. We preach to
you that you should turn from these vanities to the living God. 1 These. 1 9. Ye
turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true GOD.

THE reproach of Idols and of Idolaters is that the living seek to the dead.
Isai. 8.19. And it should be hateful to a living Soul to worship the deaf, the
blind and the dumb. 2 Samuel 5.8. The hated of David's soul. He means the Idol,
the Palladium, of the Jebusites, in which they fottishly trusted.

6. THE living God may mean the activity of the life of God beyond that of all
Creatures. God is the most active life. His infinite wisdom, power and goodness
in everlasting activity, this is life. In Him is life, and the life is the
light of all worlds, of all creatures in them that have life.

HOW many vast Worlds, and millions of millions of living spirits, and moving
creatures that have life, has the living God produced, and continually
preserves? The life of Angels and Men, beasts and all cattle, creeping things
and flying fowl, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the Sea, is
communicated from him daily, and upheld by him. What an Active life is this?
which works hitherto, and yet works incessantly, in the most perfect ease,
through all worlds, through all time!

THIS Agency and activity is plainly intimated in my text, which speaks of the
hands of of the living God, and of falling into them. The Hand is for working,
and for striking if need be; for expedite and lively working, and for terrible
striking. In both respects it intimates a life the most active imaginable.

BUT I come to the Second Enquiry,

II. WHAT are the Hands of the living GOD?

TO be sure nothing like men's hands, and much less the lifeless carved hands of
an Image. God has no hands nor bodily parts, is not flesh and blood as we are;
but He is an Infinite Essence, the Immense Spirit, filling heaven and earth.
When he showed his Glory to the Elders of Israel, they saw no similitude. And
when he gave his Commandments from Sinai, the second of them was -- Thou shall
not make unto thee any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or on the
earth beneath. But in condescension to our weakness, and to help us in our
ideas and conceptions of God in his works of Providence and Grace, He has
pleased to speak to us of his eyes and hands and feet; to let us know that he
ever sees us and concerns himself for us, in ways both of mercy and of
judgment, as it seems good to his wisdom and holiness. And accordingly by the
hands of the living God we must understand,

1. His eternal Power, his " lively power and strength, together with his
active Providence and universal agency, upholding and governing all his
Creatures in all their motions and actions. In his hands are the deep places of
the earth, the strength of the hills is his also: He holds the waters in the
hollow of his hand, and in it is the soul of every living thing, and the breath
of all mankind. The same Almighty hand that formed and fashioned us, also
holds our soul in life* It is the good hand of the Lord our God upon us, and
out of it proceeds all the evil that befalls us. Job 2.10. Shall we receive
good at the hand of the Lord? and shall we not receive evil?

THERE is in the governing and all disposing Providence of God his protecting
hand which is safe and comfortable Mr. Henry in loc.
; his supplying hand which is full and open, munificent and liberal: And there
is also his " correcting hand which is necessary, good and beneficial; and his
wrathful hand which is fearful, dreadful and terrible.

2. BY the hands of the living God is meant in my text his Justice, power and
wrath, which are against all them that provoke him His wrathful anger takes
hold of them, Psalm 69.24. You read of these hands, Deuteronomy. 32.40, 41. I lift up
my hand to heaven and swear, I live for ever! (O see there the fearful hand of
the living God! the hand of him that lives for ever, lift up in swearing by
Himself) if I whet my glittering sword, and my hand take hold of judgment, I
will render vengeance to my enemies, and reward, them hate me. These are the
Hands that smite and wound, and tear and rend to pieces whatever stands in the
way of his Holiness. God's wrath in temporal Judgments is his fearful hand: 1 Samuel 5.6. The hand of the Lord was against them of Ashdod, and he smote them
with emerods and destroyed them. But how much more is there the fearful hand of
God in spiritual and eternal judgments?

3. BY the hands of the living God we may understand " his own immediate
punishing Mr. Henry.
, as the spiritual and eternal punishment of the wicked is. In temporal and
outward punishments God often uses the Hands of men; and these must be light
and small in comparison of his own wrath immediately impressed and inflicted
upon a poor Soul. Our Context points us to this immediate revenging hand of
God, -- For we know him that says, Vengeance is mine, I will recompense, says
the Lord: It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. The
immediate, infinite and eternal Vengeance of God is the thing here spoken of;
the vials of his wrath in the next life, not the few scalding drops of it in
this only. And O the hand, the power and force of this vindictive wrath! This
future and everlasting misery of apostate and impenitent sinners "comes from
God's own hand. "When he punishes by Creatures (as One has it) the Instrument
abates something of the force of the blow, but the weight of his own hand is
infinite Misery. This they shall have of God's hand, to ly down in sorrows for
ever; endless and insupportable. Their destruction shall come from the presence
of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.

BUT this for the meaning of God's hand in the Text.

III. WHAT is it to fall into the hands of the living God?

IT cannot mean or suppose that we are ever out of his hand. No, we are always
in it; both Saints and Sinners are so. All his Saints are in his hand, the hand
of his Mercy, power and grace; and all his enemies are in the strong hand of
his Justice. Whither can we go from his Spirit? and whither can we flee from
his presence? If we take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost
parts of the sea, even there shall his hand lead us, and his right hand shall
hold us.

THERE is indeed a falling into the hands of Divine wisdom and goodness, grace
and mercy; a casting our selves into them, and God's taking us into them. 1 Samuel 24.14. Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord, for his mercies are
great. We must look to the helping and saving hand of God, and say, Hold thou
me up and I shall be safe! Into thy hand I commit my Spirit!

BUT sinners fall into the hand of Divine justice, when it lays hold of them to
punish them for their iniquities; when it falls upon them as it were to slay
them. When God judges sinners in his righteous and terrible Providence, or when
his wrath falls upon their Consciences, or when Death arrests them to carry
them in their impenitence to the Judgment seat of Christ, and to the place of
everlasting torments; then, then do they fall into hand of the living God. When
God says to evil angels, or to death, or to the tormentors after death, as
David did to the young man, Go fall upon this Amalekite; And he smote him that
he died. It is as when one falls into the hand of a powerful Enemy; or rather
as when a Criminal falls into the hand of Justice, and it is arrested,
arraigned, convicted, condemned to die and executed. All impenitent sinners are
always in the hand of God's Justice, under his wrath and curse, under the
Sentence of eternal death. And not seldom they fall into the hand of his
Judgments here in this life, both as to soul and body. But it is especially at
Death and in the day of Judgment, that they fall into the hand of the living
God. Then it is laid upon them, lays hold of them, holds them fast, and falls
upon them. This is the Second death.

IV. WHY is it so fearful a thing to fall into the hand of the living God? I
answer, 1. Because the power and wrath of God is infinite and insupportable. 2.
Because it is eternal and everlasting.

1. BECAUSE the power and wrath of God is infinite, intolerable, and
insupportable. Psa. 90.11. Who knows the power of thine anger? even according
to thy fear so is thy wrath. It is infinitely beyond all that we can fear or
apprehend. Psalm 76.7. Thou, even Thou art to be feared, and who may stand in
thy sight when once thou art angry? Nahum 1.5, 6. The mountains quake at Him,
and the hills melt, and the earth is burnt up at his presence; yea the world
and all that dwell therein: Who can stand before his indignation? and who can
abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the
rocks are thrown down by him. Say now if it be not a fearful thing to fall into
the wrathful hand of this Infinite power! The wrath of an earthly King is as
the roaring of a lion; but to what can we compare the wrath of the Infinite
God? How terrible was the wrath of the King, which the three Worthies among the
Children of Israel feared not, though it raged against them? Dan. 3.19. Then was
Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage was changed against
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego; therefore he spoke and commanded that they
should heat the furnace one seven times more than it was wont to be heat; And
he commanded the most mighty men that were in his army to bind and cast them
into the burning fiery furnace. This is but a little image of the fierceness of
the wrath of God, which will cast sinners into the pit that burns with fire
and brimstone.

2. THE wrath and vengeance of the living God is Eternal and Everlasting; and
this it is that renders it so fearful a thing to fall into his hand. The living
God lives for ever to punish. He can and will inflict wrath for ever and ever.
He lives to uphold the Soul under everlasting Sufferings.

IT is true that he could annihilate the Soul, and bring it to nothing: But he
has made it immortal, made it for immortality, and it cannot die, it shall live
for ever, though in insupportable torments.

GOD is unchangeable Truth, and inflexible Holiness. He has sworn and will not
repent. He lives for ever and his hand takes hold of Judgment. -- Yea his life
and being is the most active imaginable, both as to punishing and rewarding.
The living God is not like indolent Idols. He has hands and uses them. And all
his power and anger is in everlasting activity against the wicked. Psalm 7.12.
He will what his sword, he has bent his bow and made it ready; he has also
prepared for him the instruments of death. Psalm 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall
rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the
portion of their cup. -- But the terribleness of this active vengeance is, that
it is Eternal; the vengeance of everlasting fire. Jude ver. 7.

THE living God inflicts eternal death on those whom he damns. The eternal
damnation of the wicked proceeds from eternal life in Him. The Sentence
therefore runs thus; Mat. 25.41. Depart from Me ye cursed into everlasting
fire. The living God passes this Sentence, and he lives for ever to see it
executing, through all the ages of Eternity. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power.

THE damned after the Day of Judgment will be as much in the wrathful hands of
the living God as they were before. The hand that casts them into hell will
hold them down therein. Hell is naked before him and destruction has no
covering. Once in those living hands and there for ever. O eternal horror! how
fearful a thing to think of!

For ever? fatal word! for ever? who
Can bear the doom of Everlasting woe Sir Richard Blackmore.
?
THIS destruction from the Almighty should be indeed a terror to us. It is
revealed to us for this end, in so many fearful and terrifying descriptions.
Mark 3.29. In danger of Eternal damnation. O what a danger, what a hazard is
that? what a fearful condition for a poor Soul to be in? Mat. 3.5. He will burn
up the chaff with unquenchable fire. The chaff is such dry stuff that though it
yield a vehement and fierce flame, yet it is presently over and out. But though
sinners are no better than chaff, and the fire in their Consciences will be a
most vehement flame, yet it will never abate and much less go out, but rage on
for ever and ever. There Is oil eno' in guilt, such as it is, to feed the flames
for ever. Mark 9.44. Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.
Here is misery in extremity, both in respect of the degree and of the duration
thereof. It is without intermission, diminution or end. O the fearfulness of
this state of misery! Well might our Lord say, Luke 12.5. I will forewarn you
whom you shall fear; fear him who after he has killed has power to cast into
hell; yea I say unto you fear him. The death of the Body is soon over, yea
though it were to be burnt to death; the flames soon suffocate it or bring it
to ashes: But the Soul can ly in flaming torments for ever and ever, and yet
exist and subsist: And the bodies of wicked souls will be raised in such power
and incorruption, as to endure the everlasting burnings of hell without a
second dissolution. Revel. 14.10, 11. The same shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his
indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence
of the holy Angels and in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of their
torment ascends for ever and ever. See also Chap. 20. the six last verses.

THUS fearful a thing it is to fall into the hand of the living God, which is
infinite power and everlasting wrath. Isai. 33.14. Who among us shall dwell
with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

THE USE is, Let Sinners fear: fear the living God, fear his power, fear his
anger; fear to fall into his hand, and under his wraths As Elihu speaks, Job
36.17, 18. Justice and judgment take hold on thee; because there is wrath
beware lest he take thee away with his stroke.

FEAR and repent: fear and flee from the wrath to come: fear and cry earnestly
to God that thou perish not* fear and make haste to the City of refuge for thy
poor Soul, to lay hold on the Hope set before thee; JESUS who delivers from
the wrath to come. Fearing and trembling go to Christ, believing in him as able
and willing to save thee. Get under his saving wings, put thy self into his
merciful hands; lay hold on his righteousness and strength, thy only security.
As Noah moved with fear prepared an Ark for the saving of his house; so Christ
is the Ark of Salvation for perishing Souls from the flood of Divine wrath.

LET Sinners realize the Great GOD in his eternal Being, Power, Providence and
Judgment; Justice and Holiness. Let them ever remember their own Immortality,
the eternal existence of their precious Souls. And let them never forget the
fearful and amazing threatenings of an everlasting punishment for all workers of
iniquity. And then let them stand in awe and not sin; but commune with their
own heart and be still; seriously considering with themselves,

1. WHAT a fearful state and condition, a state of sin is: a state of nature
which is a state of wrath, and a state of multiplied and aggravated guilts
which shall receive greater damnation.

2. THAT the state of Gospel sinners, and of some sinners under the Gospel, is
more fearful than that of others.

AND to such my text speaks, who have known the living God, his word and
judgment; how worthy of death they are beyond others, by reason of unbelief
presumptuous sins and impenitence. Read the Context from the 26. verse. For if
we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins; But a fearful looking for of judgment and
of fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries: He that despised
Moses law died without mercy under two or three witnesses; Of how much sorer
punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant wherewith he was
sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace? For
we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs to me, I will recompense says
the Lord: And again, the Lord shall judge his people. It is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God.

YOU that have heard the voice of the living God, as it were out of the midst
of the fire; Deuteronomy. 5.26. How ought you to quake and tremble at the thought of
falling into his revenging hands? You must defy the living God, if you do not
fear him, in the declarations and threatenings of his written word. And are you
this Goliath of hell, to face the terrors of the living God with words of
defiance in your mouth? Ah! how easily will you fall before the least
instrument of death in the hand of his Providence and Judgment! how easily will
his Curse sink into your forehead and triumph over the monster of iniquity!

YOU that have been ^ending the Name of the living God in horrid Oaths,
cursings and imprecations; Swearing vainly and falsely and ludicrously by it; in
your passions, or in your sports and jests; how fearful should it be to you to
think of falling into the hands of the living God? who has said (and made it
one of his ten Words, the ten Commandments) Thou shall not take the Name of the
Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his
Name in vain.

YOU that have lived upon rapine and robberies, the spoil of your innocent and
righteous Neighbors; how fearful should it be to you to think of falling into
the hands of the living God? who has said -- that he hates the robberies of the
wicked, and that the unrighteous and thieves shall not enter into the Kingdom
of God.

YOU that have passed your lives in drunkenness and intemperance, in unchastity
and uncleanness, in lasciviousness, lusts and exess of wine, in revellings and
riots; how should you fear to fall into the hand of the living God? who is of
purer eyes than to behold iniquity, and hates all the workers of it, and has
said -- Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers,
nor thieves, nor coveteous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall
inherit the Kingdom of God.

ONCE more, You that are Murderers, and have the stain of your Brothers blood
upon your guilty souls and hands; who like Cain have been of that wicked one
(the devil) that murderer from the beginning, and have slain your Brethren
because their deeds were righteous, and you knew they would not join with you
in your impieties; -- how can you dare to think of falling into the hands of
the living God? who has said -- The murderer shall surely be put to death: A
man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee to the pit, let
no man stay him. And again, Revel. 21.8. Murderers shall have their part in the
lake which burns with fire and brimstone.

GOD is the Author and giver of Life. Death is an odious thing in his eyes.
Therefore it is made the punishment of Sin. The living God cannot be more
affronted and provoked than by that contempt and wrong which living souls and
spirits do by sin pour on their own life, and therein on his Image and
Authority. For he is the Lord of Life, and the Father of Spirits. They are both
his Subjects and his Offspring. As a King he cannot bear the destruction of his
Subjects, and as a Father he cannot bear the murder of his children^ Apply all
this to men's shedding innocent blood, and infer the righteous vengeance of God
on them that shed it.

THUS there are some sinners whose flagrant crimes make it a more fearful thing
for them to fall into the hands of the living God. -- But

3. MOST of all fearful is a state of Security in sin, and hardness of heart.
The sins before named do strangely harden men's hearts, but the fearless sinner
is never secure, is least of all secure; is most in danger of God's terrible
wrath; and that because he is the living God, and sees his fearlessness and is
incensed by it. The secure fool says in his heart -- "The living God is not
present, nor sees nor knows, nor will bring me into judgment". When at the same
time the foolish sinner is within the dreadful hand of that God, whom he is
denying and daring by his Security. He therefore is above all men in danger of
Gods taking him presently and tearing him to pieces. The terrors of God should
now fall upon him, and fearfulness and horror should overwhelm him; a dreadful
sound should be in his ears of the destroyer coming on him: Trouble and anguish
shall make him afraid, they shall prevail upon him as a king ready to the
battle: For he stretches out his hands against God, he strengthens himself
against the Almighty; he runs upon him, even upon his neck, upon the thick
bosses of his buckler. But if he sleep on still in his security, yet

4. HOW fearful will the hands of the living God be in the hour of death and in
the day of judgment? When the king of terrors advances with his mortal dart in
his hand, and pointed at thy guilty heart; then fear and the pit and the snare
will together present themselves before thee. Thy heart will be then sore
pained within thee, and the horrors of death will fall upon thee; then fear
will come as desolation, and destruction as a whirlwind; distress and anguish
will come upon thee: Then terrors will pursue thy fluttering soul as the wind,
and thy welfare will pass away as a cloud, and thy soul shall be poured out
upon thee: Then comes the fearful looking for of judgment, and of fiery
indignation to devour thee. -- But the horrors of that dreadful day can by no
means be conceived of or represented. A little image or shadow of it you have,
Rev. 6.12 -- 17. And the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon
became as blood, and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, and the heaven
departed as a scrowl, and every mountain and island were moved out of their
places; And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and
the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bond man, and every free man
hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains; and said to the
mountains and rocks, fall on us and hide us from the face of Him that sits
on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: For the great day of his wrath
is come, and who shall be able to stand?

LET sinners therefore fear the living God, and consider

1. HOW soon, how suddenly they may fall into his hands. This night their souls
may be required, and in hell they may lift up their eyes in torments. When they
ly down to sleep, their eyes may be closed in eternal death. Psalm 58.9. He
shall take them away as in a whirlwind, both living and in his wrath.

2. YOU can never, never get out of those living hands, when you are once
fallen into them. No: while God lives he will hold you fast (in everlasting
chains) and none shall pluck you out of his righteous hands. Take therefore the
gracious warning and advice of Christ, Matthew. 5.25, 26. Agree with thine
Adversary quickly, while thou art in the way with him, lest at any time the
Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer,
and thou be cast into prison; Verily, I say unto thee, Thou shall by no means
come out thence, till thou have paid, the uttermost farthing.

AND thus, as I could, I have opened and applied this awful and awakning
Subject. May the living God (of his infinite mercies) set it home upon all our
hearts; and give us grace (every one) to be applying it to the case and state
of our own souls. More especially I hope that You the poor Prisoners under the
sentence of death for your crimes, have been very seriously applying the very
terrible things that you have heard, for your own awakning and humiliation; by
the will and grace and power of our God upon your souls. O that it may be so!
and that this last Sabbath you have to live, and this last time you have to
hear in a public Assembly, might be a time of God's love, and a day of his
power on your Souls. -- O may the fear and dread of God's excellent Majesty,
and amazing wrath, now fall on you! And the Spirit of God, whom you have so
often and greatly quenched, come down like fire upon your hearts and
consciences, and make his word as a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces.

O you greatly need this, and a far more awakning discourse that might bring
divine light with flame and burning into your hardened and insensible Souls. For
you have been sadly hardening your own hearts by profaneness and blasphemies, by
drunkenness and sottishness; by your piracies, robberies and murders; and by
your laughing at the very thunders of God. How did you harden your hearts, or
how were they hardened, against the cries and supplications of your poor
distressed brother (your Master and Commander) in the sad hour when he beso't
you only to spare his life, and not to send him down quick into hell, without a
minutes time wherein to repent and to cry to God for mercy. Ah, how much more
gracious and merciful has God and man been to you than you were to him! Witness
all the prayers that have been poured out over you and for you, by the
Ministers and People of God in public, in private and in secret; and witness
the solemn Calls and compassionate Invitations you have had to repent and seek
the tender mercies of God through Jesus Christ. -- O you are verily guilty
concerning your Brother, in that you saw the anguish of his soul when he beso't
you, and you would not hear. But you see Brethren the compassion and anguishes
of our souls for you, that you may repent and be saved. And the Lord deliver
you from hardness of heart, now you are fallen into his dreadful hands, and are
going within two days to appear before the living God, even before his judgment
seat, the bar of his Justice, to stand for an Eternal life or death. O that you
might find mercy of the Lord in that day, and that the Second and Eternal death
might have no power over you.

GOD's hand it is that has delivered you up to die. The hand of man, the hand
of justice, could have no power at all over you, had not the hand of God given
you into it. And now that you are falling into the invisible hand of the
Eternal God, in the day of your Execution, will you not yet fear and repent and
give glory to him? Fear him who after the destruction of the body, can cast the
soul down into hell, into everlasting burnings, where the worm dies not, and
the fire is not quenched; and who will most certainly do so unless you repent,
and cry to Christ, with the faith of the repenting thief, Lord remember me from
thy heavenly Kingdom.

AND if you look up to him that was pierced, in the anguish and bitterness of
your souls, and with a repenting faith, he will look down upon you in the
prison and on the gibbet, and remember you in his tender pity and infinite
compassion.

O beg of him therefore that of his free grace he would now strike you with
such fears and terrors as are necessary to your sincere repentance and sound
conversion. Beg of him to put his fear within you, to cause his dread to fall
upon you, to show you your sins in the infinite guilt and demerit of them, and
hell the punishment of sin in all its flames and horrors: But at the same time
to discover to you his own glory, ability and readiness to save unto the
uttermost, even such as you are: For such have some others been, and yet they
have obtained mercy; they have been washed, justified and sanctified through the
Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God; that in them Christ Jesus
might exhibit unto you patterns of what sovereign and boundless Grace can do.

IT is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save the chief of sinners. He says even to such, Look unto me
and be ye saved! Come to me, and I will not cast you out. Let the fear of
divine wrath drive you to him who delivers from the wrath to come.

LET me therefore tell you for your comfort and present direction, There are
the merciful and saving Hands of the living God, the saving hands of an
Ever-living Savior at the right hand of God; and into these blessed hands
shall every humbled, broken, contrite, trembling, believing soul be taken at
death. O how blessed and joyful to you, if you may be then taken into these
glorious hands! What a turn is this to my text! for as it is a fearful thing to
fall into the wrathful hands of the living God, so it is a joyful thing to fall
into the merciful hands of a sin pardoning God. But then this turn and change
of my text supposes a turn and change in your Souls, your state toward God. Of
his mercy he saves souls through the washing of regeneration. He will take away
the heart of stone and give you a soft and broken contrite Spirit, and so
prepare you for his mercy. And if he do this, the high and lofty One that
inhabiteth Eternity, will come down into your hearts, even in the dungeon, (
for the Lord despises not his prisoners) to revive the heart of the humble,
and the spirit of the contrite one. Then he will hold you up in the hands of
grace, now, at death, and through a blessed Eternity. The Eternal God is the only
refuge of living souls, and underneath a repenting sinner are the Everlasting
arms.

INTO these saving hands of grace, we would bring You, into them we would
commit you; our poor dying Brethren; lately the common Enemies of Mankind; but
now our Brethren in Christ Jesus, if with repenting souls you make your flight
to him. The prayer of all the Lord's people is for you, that his almighty arm
may be stretched out to convert you, and his gracious arms receive you for
ever. O let the Merits and Mercies of our Lord Jesus Christ soften and melt
you. You are in the hand of Sovereign, Infinite Holiness and Grace. May he who
was made a Curse for us, by suffering the accursed death, the Just for the
unjust, redeem your poor souls from the Eternal curse

THE Lord enable you to give glory to him and warning to men, when you come to
die. To this end you told me, you chose to come into the public Assembly,
rather than to be preached to in private, at this time. May the Lord make his
word saving to you and us*

AND may He sanctify the awful Spectacle and solemn Occasion to us all, and
particularly to the Men of the Sea; that all of them may hear and fear, and
never fall into the like wicked ways, and come to the like disastrous and
miserable End.

YOURS is the danger, more especially, ( my Friends and Neighbors, who do
business on the great waters) yours is the danger of falling into and by the
hands of such wicked and barbarous men: Thank God for all your preservations,
pray daily to him your great Preserver.

YOURS is the danger of joining with such wicked and bloody men when taken by
them. The Lord by his grace keep you in that dreadful case. To die is more
eligible. And it is mavelous to some of us to hear, how many threatenings and
hazards of instant death many of you have passed through, and yet gallantly (I
wish I could say, graciously) refused. To God be all the glory of such Virtue,
such constancy and courage, such piety and the fear of God. No, Brethren, be
not afraid to die; but afraid to sin. How many have hereby saved themselves
from the Gallows here, if not from Hell hereafter?

YOURS, our Seafaring friends, is the danger of turning robbers and murderers;
and so of a life of horror and terror here, and of wailing and anguish for
ever; because of those vices and lusts that reign among and over the men of the
Sea; Namely, profaness, cursing and bitterness, swearing and blasphemy,
drunkenness and revellings, contempt of religion and profanation of the Lord's
Day, whoredom and uncleanness. These quench conscience and the convictions of
God's Spirit, stupify and harden men's hearts; take away all fear of God and
sense of sin; or regard to men, their estates or lives. And so while you sail
on the waters, (beholding the wonders of God in the deep, but never thinking of
him, always defying and blaspheming him) you drown your Souls in destruction
and perdition; turning robbers and murderers till neither the Land or Waters
can bear you any longer.

I know that there are virtuous and worthy Persons that follow the Sea, as good
as those that stay ashore; and that there are as bad ashore as any that are on
the Sea. I only wish that the wicked might be no more on either Element; and
that the numbers of pious and religious people may increase greatly on the Sea
and on the dry Land; for both are God's. But I hold my self called at this time
to warn our seafaring friends, as my beloved Brethren, of their peculiar
temptations and hazard. And I hope they will take the warning kindly, against
those sins of the Sea which betray Mariners insensibly into the robberies of
the wicked which destroy them.

APPENDIX.
THE miserable Persons to whom, and at whose desire the forgoing Sermon was
preached, were Samuel Cole and Henry Greenvill. There was also present with
them George Condick.

THE Captain of the Pirates, William Fly, refused to come into public. I moved
the others for his sake, to let me preach to them in private: But they said, It
was the last Sabbath they had to live, and they earnestly desired to be in an
Assembly of Worshippers, that they might have the Prayers of many together over
them, and that others might take the more warning by them.

THE Story of these wretched men is short and tragical. They sailed from
Jamaica on board a Snoe, John Green Commander, bound to Guinea. They had not
been long at Sea before they conspired to seize the Captain and Mate, and then
go a pirating. On the 27th of May 1726. they put in execution their wicked
design, in a most cruel and barbarous manner. About one a clock in the morning,
William Fly then Boatswain of the Snoe Elizabeth, after he had been some time
forward with several of the Sailors, came aft with Alexander Mitchel and
others, and said to Morris Cunden (Gunner of the Ship) then at helm, D -- n
you, you dog, if you stir hand or foot, or speak a word, I Will blow your brains
out. And immediately thereupon he went into the Cabin where Captain Green was
in bed, and Alexander Mitchel followed him; and while they were there Morris
Cunden heard the Captain cry out, What Is the matter? But they soon hawl'd him
upon deck, and were about to throw him into the Sea; when the poor man begged
of them to spare his life, saying, For God's sake Boatswain don't throw me over
board, for if you do I shall go to hell. But though in the anguish and
amazement of his soul he thus pleaded with them, that they would not send him
down quick into hell, for that he was not fit to die; yet his plea made no
impression at all upon their hardened hearts. Fly bid him say after him these
words, Lord have mercy upon my soul; and away they hurried the poor surprised
and astonished man overboard. It is affirmed that he caught hold of a rope and
held for his life, which when one of the wretches saw he cut off his hand with
an ax; and so he dropped into Eternity.

AT the same time some others of this bloody crew surprised the Mate of the
Ship, Thomas Jenkins. And Thomas Streaton (the Carpenter of the Ship) deposed
that he heard Samuel Cole say to Jenkins, Come out of your Cabin, you dog! and
presently he was hawl'd out, and told that he should go overboard after his
Captain. When he was in the Sea he was heard calling earnestly to the Doctor to
hand him a rope. But the Doctor was by this time himself putting into Irons.

THUS bloodily these inhumane Creatures began their Piracy, but Vengeance
followed them and suffered them not to live.

William Fly, the chief and worst (we may suppose) of these barbarous rogues,
took on him the Command, and named the Snoe the Fames Revenge. They were well
stored with Powder, and Rum and Provisions, but wanted a better Vessel; and in
quest of this it is likely they bent their course first to Carolina and from
thence to New England. On the third of June they took a Sloop at Anchor off
North Carolina, on board of which was Mr. William Atkinson a Passenger; who was
afterward the happy Instrument in the hand of God for their destruction. They
very much needed one so well skilled as Atkinson was both as a Mariner and
Pilot, and Fly treated him well on that account, but kept a strict eye upon
him, forbidding him to have any conversation with the forced men; and lest he
should he had a hammock given him in the Cabin.

THEY commanded him to carry them to Martha's Vineyard in order to wood and
water there, and in hopes to meet with some Sloop sitting for their purpose
This is Mr. Atkinson's own Account of things.
: But he resolved to run the venture of carrying them past the Vineyard, and
run them up into or near the Bay before they were aware of it. When they
perceived it they began to look upon him with an evil eye, and spoke of
throwing him overboard. But as Fly was uttering his rage at him the next
morning on this account, and telling him what death he should die if any thing
ill befell them through his conduct, a Schooner came in sight which put an end to
Fly's rage, for the joy of a good Prize. They found it a Schooner of
Marblehead, George Girdler Master.

Mr. Atkinson had some time before this meditated the seizing on Fly and
Company, and found means secretly to communicate his mind to some on board,
whom he thought he might trust; particularly to Samuel Walker, and Thomas
Streaton; and Walker had spoken of it to James Benbrook; who all consented if a
fair opportunity should offer.

IT was very necessary to his design to ingratiate himself, as far as he
honestly and with a good conscience could, with Fly and his Pirates. Yet in
doing this he ran a risque both of his innocence and his life: Of his
Innocence, for with a furious man thou shall not go, lest thou learn his ways
and get a snare to thy soul; And of his Life, for as some of the Pirates, the
Captain especially, began to think friendly of him and to hearken to his
Advice; (they all depending on him to navigate the Ship) so if a Ship of War
had taken them it is to be feared that he had in vain pleaded his innocence and
good intentions. But the good God who preserved, has also pleaded his
innocence. And we ought to praise his virtue, conduct and courage, and give God
the glory of it.

Fly had no sooner taken the Schooner of Marblehead, but they discovered
another at a distance from them. Whereupon he put three men on board the
Schooner, and purposed to bear down on the new Sail with both his Vessels. But
Mr. Atkinson with a ready thought advised him to put six men into the Schooner
and send her down on the fishing Vessels, being her self one of their company
but a day before, and so there would be no likelihood of their flying from her:
but (said he) if the Snoe and the Schooner now bear down together they will take
you for what you are, and make away from you. Fly came into his advice and put
three men more into the Schooner, and parted with her, standing a course wide
from her.

NOW Atkinson's thoughts were hard at work how to draw Fly away from his Arms
on the quarter deck. For there he kept alone, nor would suffer Atkinson to step
up, so much as to set down the Bowl of punch after he had drank to him. And
probably a Message which he received from a chief Pirate on board the Schooner,
by the boat, To have a special care of his Friend, did increase his jealousy;
though he seemed only to laugh at it.

WITHIN a little while Atkinson spied a Sail a head to the Leward, and informed
Fly of it. And presently after he pretended to discover two or three more sail,
and told him he would have a fleet of prizes. But Fly with his glass could see
but one. Why said Atkinson, If you were but here, Sir, with your glass, ahead,
you would easily see them all. On a sudden Fly forgot his caution, and comes
off the quarter deck, where his arms lay, and sets him down ahead to spy the
Sails spoken of. Then Atkinson gave the sign to his friends, and Walker
followed by Benbrook came up, pretending at first to direct the Captain to look
a point or two on such a side, while Atkinson (a spare and slender man) passed
aft toward the Arms, and in the instant that Walker laid hold of Fly he took
the firearms, and returned pointing the gun to the Pirate's breast, and telling
him He was a dead man if he did not immediately submit himself his prisoner.
The wicked Fly earnestly begged for his life, and now found that mercy which he
had so barbarously denied to his innocent Captain.

IN the midst of this struggle the Pirate Greenvil put up his head from between
decks: for there as Providence ordered it He and Condick were at this instant;
and as for the pirate Cole he had been in Irons for two days before, by Fly's
order, for some mutiny he had made. This it was that rendered the subduing them
so easy to Atkinson and his three Companions: for now Streaton had fallen in,
and guarded one place, while Atkinson did the other, keeping the Pirates down.
The Action was so surprising to the other Forced Men, that for a time they
stood astonished and like Men amazed, not capable of acting for their own
deliverance; although vehemently called upon and threatened by Atkinson. But in a
little time they came to themselves and joyfully fell in with their Deliverers.

WHEN Fly found himself chained down and effectually secured, he fell at times
into the most desperate ragings, cursing himself and her that bare him, and the
Day wherein he was born; cursing the very heavens and in effect the God that
judged him; Cursing all rovers that should ever give quarter again to an
Englishman; and wishing all the devils of hell would come and fly away with the
Ship: The same Blasphemer now in his furious despair, or worse than he ever was
before in his jollity and pride; when he would sometimes even dare to ridicule
the noise of Gods Thunder, as it rattled over him, Saying, That they were
playing bowls in the Air, etc. and as the Lightnings sometimes flashed upon
them, he would say -- Who fires now? Stand by, etc. -- So he dared the dreadful
Vengeance, which persu'd him swift as the Lightnings and suddenly struck him.

BUT Capt. Atkinson and his brave Mates are much to be praised, that they dealt
so mercifully with these bloody Men; and neither blew their brains out (their
own phrase) nor threw them overboard. Blessed be God that kept them that day
from shedding blood, and from avenging themselves with their own hands. It was
much better to reserve the Murderers to the Judgment of the Law, in the proper
course of it. Hereby the guilty Miserables had a space granted them for
repentance, and were bro't under the happy means of it; Means happy we hope to
two of them, namely Greenvil and Cole.

Capt Atkinson and Company now made the best of their way for the Port of
Boston. The Pirate Schooner made after them till night parted, when they
altered their course and lost her. On the 29 of June they arrived at Boston,
and Surrendered themselves, their Prisoners and the Snoe into the hands of the
Government. On Monday the fourth of July a Special Court of Admiralty was held
at the Court house in Boston, where Mr. Atkinson and Eleven more passed their
Trial and were acquitted: Fly, Cole, Greenvil and Condick were found guilty,
and Sentenced to die.

Fly at his trial, as well as before and after it, behaved boldly and
impenitently. Cole and Greenvil more modestly, humbly, penitently; like Men
greatly concerned for their Souls, and distressed for their Sins. And this
continued to the day and hour of their death. As for George Condick he appeared
ignorant, stupid and insensible; was acquitted by the Court of the Murder, and
was afterward reprieved at the place of Execution.

ON Tuesday, July 12. their Execution came on, and Fly briskly and in a way of
bravery jumpt up into the Cart, with a nose gay in his hand, bowing with much
unconcern to the Spectators as he passed along, and at the Gallows he behaved
still obstinately and boldly till his face was covered for death; but Greenvill
and Cole behaved piously and penitently in a judgment of charity. -- Fly was
the greatest Instance of obduracy that has yet been seen among all the
Malefactors who have suffered in these parts.

THE Reverend Ministers of the Town visited them often, discoursed them
seriously and affectionately, prayed with them frequently and fervently, and
preached to 'em both in private and in public.

Samuel Cole in the morning before his Execution delivered a Paper, wherein he
confessed and bewailed his giving himself in his youth to the sin of drinking;
and that while a boy he learned and addicted himself unto the too common sin of
Swearing and blaspheming the great and fearful Name of God: Also his early
defrauding his Master by stealing Liquors for wicked men, who enticed and
encouraged him to do it: Also that when he arrived to Manhood he consulted
nothing but sinful pleasures, drinking, whoring, dancing, etc. He desired all
Seafaring men to take warning by his shameful and ignominious death; which he
was now come to by listening to the wicked words and actions of horrible men. He
confessed himself to be justly condemned, and gave abundance of thanks for the
assistance of many good Ministers, their kind Exhortations and good Doctrine to
him; He asked their continued prayers, and the prayers of all good people, for
his poor soul to the last hour of his life; and expressed his hope, through the
blood of his dear Redeemer Jesus Christ his Lord, of entering into the Kingdom
of heaven.

THIS paper he earnestly desired might be published to the world. The other
Prisoners said little, but warned all Masters and Commanders against severity
and barbarity to their Men, which (they said) they were persuaded is the reason
of so many turning Pirates.

AFTER the Execution, the three dead Bodies were carried to a small Island,
about two leagues from the Town; where the body of Fly is hung up in Irons, as
a Spectacle for warning to others; and the two other bodies were buried there.

FINIS.

