THE HISTORY OF THE Wars of New England, With the Eastern Indians.

OR, A NARRATIVE Of their continued Perfidy and Cruelty, from the 10th of
August, 1703. To the Peace renewed 13th of July, 1713. And from the 25th of
July, 1722. To their Submission 15th December, 1725. Which was Ratified August
5th 1726.

By Samuel Penhallow, Esqr.

Nescio tu quibus es, Lector, lecturus Ocellis,
Hoc scio, quod siccis, scribere non potui.
BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for S. Gerrish at the lower end of Cornhill, and
D. Henchman over against the Brick Meeting House in Cornhill, 1726.

The Preface.
IT is one part of our Honor and Happiness in this Country, among the many
difficulties and troubles which have attended the Settlements and growth of it
unto this day, that there have not been w^nting from time to time honest and
worthy Persons, and some learned, who have delivered down to Posterity a plain
and true account of the Wars which we have had with the Indian Natives in one
part of the Land and in another.

We owe much unto Those who have done us this Service from the beginning, and
they have herein served God, as well as obliged the World. For it always has
been, and ever is like to be a grateful thing to Mankind to be informed of the
rise and growth of Provinces, and of the sufferings of their feeble infant
state: And from the days of Moses, who wrote the first History, the beginning
of the World, and of Israel, the wise and pious among Men have scarce known a
more sacred Pleasure, nor found a more profitable Entertainment, than in
tracing the footsteps and windings of Divine Providence, in the planting of
Colonies and Churches, here and there, through the Earth.

Nor let it seem vain in me to say, that in the settlement of the New England
Churches and Provinces, there have been some Circumstances so like unto those
of Israel of old, (after their entrance into Canaan) that I am p^rswaded no
People of God under Heaven, can sing of his Merci^s and Iudgment^ in the
inspired Phrase 70 and 80 Psalms, and part of 105 106 and 107 Psalms.
with more direct and pertinent self Application, than we can do. The subject
of the following Book affords us the most special Instance hereof; Namely, that
although our Merciful and Gracious God did in a wonderful manner, cast out the
Heathen before our Fathers, and Planted them; prepared also a room before them,
and caused them to take deep root, and to fill the Land; So that the Vine has
sent out her Boughs unto the Sea, and her Branches upon the River; Yet to
humbly and prove us, and for our Sins to punish us, the Righteous God has left
^ sufficient Number of the fierce and barbarous Salvages on our borders, to be
pricks in our Eyes, and thorns in our sides, and they have been and are like
the Boar of the Woods to waste us, and the wild Beasts of the field to devour
us.

Wherefore, on Principles both humane and religious, I gladly introduce the
following Memoirs to the public view, with my hearty thanks to the Honorable
Author for the great pains he has taken (among other his public Services) to
transmit these Particulars of the two last Wars with the Indian Enemy down to
Posterity, That the Generation to come might know them, and set their hope in
God, and not forget his Works, but keep his Commandments.

The Reader must not expect much Entertainment or Curiosity in the story of a
barbarous War with cruel and perfidious Salvages: It is the benefit of
Posterity, in a religious Improvement of this dry and bloody Story, that we aim
at, in preserving some Remembrance thereof: And that in times to come, when we
are dead and forgotten, Materials may remain for a continued and entire History
of our Country: And we hope that they who come after us will take the like Care
in their Times for the Children which shall be born.

Let it suffice in praise of the Narrative, if the Facts related be true and
exact, and that the Style be familiar, plain and easy, as all Historical
Memoirs should be writ. As to the Truth of it, none (I suppose) will have any
doubt to whom the Author is known; and to whom among us is he not known? Or by
whom among the lovers of the Country is he not esteemed for his affectionate
regards unto the religious and civil Liberties of it?

The Reverend Dr. Mather wrote the Remarkables of the Eastern War before this,
from the year 1688. unto the year School. ten years, wherefore he called his
Book, Decennium Luctuosum. This Book may claim the like Title, for the first
War here related, from August the 10th 1703. to the 13th of July 1713. did also
continue just ten years.

To these ten years of Trouble and Distress the Author has added an Account of
another but shorter War of three years, from July 25. 1722. to December 15.
1725. When the Salvages by their Delegates renewed their Submission, and signed
Articles of Peace in the Council Chamger in Boston; for the lasting effects
whereof we are humbly waiting on a Gracious GOD with our earnest Prayers. And
we owe abundant Praises to his Holy Name for the great Successes, with which he
has been pleased to crown the Counsels and Arms of the Province in this last
short War; to the humbling the insolent Enemy and bringing them so soon to sue
for the Peace which they had broken. Not unto us, O LORD! not to us; but to thy
Name give Glory; for thy Mercy and for thy Truth sake!

In a special manner, the wonderful Victory obtained August 12. 1724. over the
bold and Bloody Tribe at Narridgwalk, and their sudden Destruction that
Memorable Day, was the singular Work of GOD; And the Officers and Soldiers
piously put far from themselves the Honor of it. The plain hand of Providence
and not their own Conduct facilitated and quickened their March. God sent 'em
timely Information where the Indians had placed their Guards upon the River,
that they might shun them, and so come upon the Town undiscovered. God brought
them on it in a right time, when the fighting Men were just come in from
abroad, and the next day (we are told) they were to have come down on our
Frontiers. They were surprised in the height of security, and so amazed that
they could not find their hands when they would have escaped. This Destruction
of the Enemy was with the loss of only one life, and two wounded, on our part.
And he who was the Father of the War, the Ghostly Father of those perfidious
Salvages, like Balaam the Son of Beor, was slain among the Enemy, after his
vain Endeavors to Curse us.

May those singular Favors of GOD have their saving Effects on us! and his
goodness to (...) in the present fruits of Peace which we are about to reap
lead us to Repentance, bind us to Obedience, raise us in Devotion, and endear
his blessed Name and Truths and Ways to us. Amen.

BENJAMIN COLMAN.
Boston, Ian. 28. 1725-6.
The Introduction.
THE keeping a Register of Memorable Occurrences, as it has been the practice
of former Ages, so it ought to be continued for the advantage of Posterity: And
in as much as the Divine Providence has placed me near the Seat of Action,
where I have had greater Opportunities than many others of remarking the
Cruelty and Perfidy of the Indian Enemy, I thought it my Duty to keep a Record
thereof. Not that at first I designed to make these Memoirs public but now am
persuaded to it by some whose Judgment I pay a deference unto. In the
collecting them, I have used all faithfulness; and have been assisted therein
not only from the Abstracts of Original Letters, but from Persons of the best
Credit and Reputation, and yet doubtless some small Occurences may have slipped
my knowledge.

I might with Orosius very justly entitle this History De miseria hominum,
being no other then a Narrative of Tragical Incursions perpetrated by Bloody
Pagans, who are Monsters of such Cruelty, that the words of Virgil may not
unaptly be applied to them.

Tristius haud illis monstrum, nec Savior ulla
Pestis et ira Deum.
Who are as implacable in their Revenge, as they are terrible in the Execution
of it; and will convey it down to the third and fourth Generation. No Courtesy
will ever oblige them to gratitude; for their greatest Benefactors have
frequently fallen as Victtims to their Fury.

The Roman Spectacles of old were very lively in them tepeated. God has made
them a terrible Scourge for the punishment of our Sins. And probably that very
Sin of ours in neglecting the welfare of their Souls. For we have not expressed
the like laudable Care for them, as has been done in the Southern and Western
parts of the Country. But indeed we have rather aimed to advance a private
Trade, then to instruct them in the Principles of true Religion. This brings to
my remembrance a remarkable saying of one of their Chief Sachems, whom (a
little before the War broke out) I asked, Wherefore it was they were so much
bigoted to the French? Considering their Traffic with them was not so
advantageous as with the English. He gravely replied, That the Friars taught
them to Pray, but the English never did.

And it is also remarkably observable that among all the Settlements and Towns
of Figure and Distinction, not one of them have been utterly destroyed where
ever a Church was gathered.

But if the Eastern parts have been remiss, this should no ways detract from
the praise of that incomparable zeal of the Venerable Mr. Elliot, and the
indesatigable Pains which the renown^d Mr. Mayhew, and others, have exercised
in the Instruction and Conversion of the Natives in their parts: wherein they
were so far Successful (through the Blessing of God) as to form many Churches of
Baptized Indians; and to gather many Assemblys of Catechumens, that profess the
Name of Christ; which remain to this day the Fruit and Reward of their Labors,
will bespeak their Praise to future Ages, and the Thanksgiving of many to GOD.

S. P.

THE HISTORY Of the Wars of New England, etc.
IT is storied of Tissaphernes, That so soon as he entered into a League with
Agesilaus King of Sparta, he studied means whereby to infringe and violate the
same: Upon which Agesilaus sent his Ambassadors unto him to return him Thanks,
that by so doing he had made the Gods his Enemies. Now considering the League
that has been solemnized with the Indians, together with their Cruelty and
Treachery so notoriously perpetrated, it is no wonder if in the sequel of this
History, we find them under some signal Remark of the Divine Displeasure.

NOT that I am unsensible that many have stigmatized the English as chiefly
culpable in causing the first Breach between them and us; by invading their
Properties, and defrauding them in their Dealings: But to censure the Public
for the sinister Actions of a few private Persons, is utterly repugnant to
Reason and Equity. Especially considering the great Care that the Legislative
Power had taken to protect the Natives, and their Interests.

WHAT has formerly occurred of this kind is none of my business to discant upon
here; but as to the Infraction which I am about to make mention of, I never yet
heard the least Word in their favor, but all sorts of Persons do condemn their
Perfidy.

AT the arrival of Governor Dudley in the Year 1702. the whole Body of Indians
was in a tolerable good Frame and Temper; but being animated by the French,
they soon began to threaten and insult the English: Upon which in the
succeeding Year June the 20th. a Congress was appointed at Casco, where the
Chiefs of the several Tribes met, viz. Mauxis, and Hopehood from Naridgewalk,
Wanungunt, and Wanadugunbuent from Penobscot, Wattanamunton, Adiawando and
Hegen from Pennecook, and Pigwacket.

Mesambomett, and Wexar, from Amasconty, with about 250 Men in 65 Canoos, well
armed, and mostly painted with variety of Colors, which seemingly were affable
and kind, and yet in some Instances gave cause of jealousy.

A Tent being fixed for entertaining the Governor and Gentlemen who accompanied
him, together with the Sagamores; His Excellency very kindly saluted them,
saying, That as he was Commissionated by the Great and Victorious Queen of
England, he came to visit them as his Friends and Brethren, and to reconcile
whatever Differences had happened since the last Treaty.

AT this they made a pause, but after a short Intermission Captain Simmo, who
was their Orator arose, and said, That they acknowledged his Favor in giving
them a Visit at such a juncture, with so many of the Council and Gentlemen of
both Provinces; assuring him, that they aimed at nothing more than Peace; and
that as high as the Sun was above the Earth, so far distant should their
Designs be of making the least breach between each other. And as a Testimony
thereof they presented him a Belt of Wampam, and invited him to the Two Pillars
of Stones, which at a former Treaty were erected, and called by the significant
Name of the TWO BROTHERS; unto which both Parties went, and added a greater
Number of Stones.

THIS Ceremony being performed, several Volleys were discharged on each side;
and the Indians added their usual dancing, singing, and loud acclamations of
Joy. Trading-houses in several places were hereupon engaged; and that the Price
of Commodities should be stated, and an Armourer fixed at the public Charge:
Many Presents were also made them, which they kindly received; so that every
thing looked with a promising Aspect of a settled Peace: And that which
afterward seemed to confirm it, was the coming in of Captain Bomas^en, and
Captain Samuel, who informed, that several Missionaries from the Friars were
lately come among them, who endeavored to break the Union, and seduce them
from their Allegiance to the Crown of England; but had made no Impression on
them, ^or that they were as firm as the Mountains, and should continue so, as
long as the Sun and Moon endured.

THE Eastern Inhabitants, who before had thoughts of removing, were now
encouraged to stand their Ground; several more were also preparing to settle
among them, partly from the fertility of the Soil, the plenty of Timber, the
advantage of Fishery, and several other Inducements. But I should have taken
notice of two Instances in the late Treaty, wherein the matchless Perfidy of
these bloody Infidels did notoriously appear. 1 st. As the Treaty was concluded
with Volleys on both sides, as I said before, the Indians desired the English
to fire first, which they readily did, concluding it no other but a Complement;
but so soon as the Indians fired, it was observed that their Guns were charged
with Bullets; having contrived (as was afterward confirmed) to make the
English the Victims of that Day. But Providence so ordered it, as to place
their chief Counselors and Sachems in the Tent where ours were seated, by
which means they could not destroy one without endangering the other* 2. As the
English waited some Days for Watanummon (the Pigwacket Sachem) to complete
their Council, it was afterward discovered* that they only tarried for a
Reinforcement of 200 French and Indians, who in three Days after we returned
came among them; having resolved to seize the Governor, Council and Gentlemen,
and then to Sacrifice the Inhabitants at pleasure; which probably they might
have done, had they not been prevented by an overuling Power.

But notwithstanding this Disappointment, they were still resolved on their
bloody Design: For within six Weeks after the whole Eastern Country was in a
Conflagration, no House standing, nor Garrison unattackt. August 10th at nine
in the Morning they began their bloody Tragedy, being about five hundred
Indians of all sorts, wi^h a number of French; who divided themselves into
several Companies, and made a Descent on the several Inhabitants from Casco to
Wells at one and the same time, sparing none of every Age or Sex.

AS the milk white Brows of the Grave and Ancient had no respect shown; so
neither had the mournful cries of tender Infants the least pity; for they
triumphed at their Misery, and applauded such as the skilfullest Artists, who
were most dexterous in contriving the greatest Tortures; which was enough to
turn the most Stoical Apathie into Streams of mournful Sympathy and Compassion.

THE Town of Wells, which valiantly stood its Ground both in the former and
latter War, suffered now great Spoil, nor could escape without the loss of 39
that were killed and taken.

Cape-Porposs being inhabited only by a few Fishermen, was wholly laid
desolate. But the Garrison at Winter-Harbour defended itself with much Bravery;
yet it was at last overpowered by Force, and then submitted on Terms

Saco-Fort was also attackt by the Enemy with great Fury; they killed eleven,
and carried twenty four Captive.

Spurwink, which was principally inhabited by the Iordans, had no less than
twenty two of that Family killed and taken.

THOSE at Scarborough were mostly in Garrison, whom the Indians not willing to
encounter, sent a Captive before with a Flag of Truce; but the Officer being
acquainted with their Intreagues, slighted the Message, secured the Captive,
and made a vigorous Defense. However, by a long Siege they were so reduced,
that had not Recruits been sent them, they had utterly been overthrown.

Perpooduck was of all places (for number) the greatest sufferers, being but
nine Families, and no Garrison to retire unto; neither any Men at home, where
they took eight, and inhumanly butchered twenty five; among whom was the Wife
of Michael Webber, who being big with Child, they knocked her on the head, and
ripped open her Womb, cutting one part of the Child out; a Spectacle of horrid
Barbarity.

Casco, which was the utmost Frontier, commanded by Major March, who was all
this while unsensible of the Spoil that the ^^dians had done, was saluted by
Mauxis, ^anungonet, and Assacombuit, three of their most valiant and puissant
Sachems. They gradually advanced with a Flag of Truce, and sent one before them
to signify that they had matter of moment to impart to him. At first he
slighted the Message, but on second Thoughts went out to meet them; they
seeming to him but few in number, and unarmed: However he ordered two or three
Sen^^^^^s to be ready in case of Danger. Their Voice to him at first seemed
like the Voice of Jacob, but their Hands were like the Hands of Esau: With
their Tongues they used deceit, and the Poison of Asps was under their Lips.
For no sooner had they saluted him, but with Hatchets under their Mantles they
violently assaulted him; having a number that lay in Ambush near them, who shot
down one of his Guards: But being a Person of uncommon Strength, as well as
Courage, he soon wrested a Hatchet from one of them, with which he did good
Execution: Yet if Sergeant Hook (with a file of Ten from the Fort) had not
speedily succored him, they would soon have overpowered him. Mr. Phippeny and
Mr. Kent, who accompanied him, were attackt by others, and soon fell by their
Fury; for being advanced in Years, they were so infirm, that I might say of
them as Iuvenal did of Priam, They had scarce Blood enough left to tinge the
Knife of the Sacrifice.

THE Enemy being defeated in this their Design, fell upon the several Cottages
which lay round, and destroyed all they could. But the Major on rallying his
Men together, seeing nothing but Fire and Smoke, divided them into three parts,
which were twelve in each, and interchanged them every two Hours, who thus
continued six Days an^ Nights without the least Intermission; by which time the
whole Bod^ of Indians came together, being upwards of five hundred, besides
French com^^nded by Monsieur B^^asser, who had ransackt and laid wast the
several Settlements beforementioned; and being flusht with Success, having
taken one Sloop, two Shallops, and much Plunder, attempted to undermine the
Fort from the Water side, in which they proceeded two Days and Nights, and
probably would have effected their Design, if they had not been prevented by
the arrival of Capt. Southack, who raised the siege, retook the Shallop, and
shattered their Navy, which was upward of 200 Cannoos.

ON Tuesday after Capt. Tom, with thirty Indians, mad^ a descent on Hampton
Village, where they ^lew four, besides the Widow Mussey, who was a remarkable
speaking Quaker, and much lamented by that Sect. They also rifled two Houses
near the Garrison, but fearing a pursuit, drew off; it being generally
observed, that they seldom annoy but by surprise.

BY this time Capt. ^ummersby was ordered with his Troop to Portsmouth, and
Capt. Wadley to Wells with the like Company of Dragoons; many concluding that
the Eastern parts would be the seat of Action; and yet a few Days after, Advice
was brought from Deerfield, (as a forerunner of some greater Evil) of two Men
taken and carried to Canada; which so alarmed the Country, to see the Frontiers
insulted two hundred Miles in length, that on September 26th. the Governor
ordered 360 Men to Pigwacket, one of their principal Headquarters: But through
the difficulty of the Passage, and unskilfulness of the Guides, they returned
without any Discovery.

Capt. Davis at the s^^e time had the like misfortune, who went to the Ponds,
but it seemed the Enemy went Eastward: For on the 6th of October, Capt.
Hunnuell with ni^eteen Men, as they were going to work in their Meadows at
Black-point, were waylaid by two hundred Indians, who at one stroke killed and
took the whole body Excepting one, who like Job's Messenger was preserved to
give the Melancholy Account thereof. Upon this they attack't the Fort, where
only Eight Men were left under the Command of Lieu. Wyat, who by the
encouragement of Capt. Willard, and Capt. Wells, that were there in two Sloops
stood their Ground some time, but being afterward dispirited they went on board
Capt. Wells, and the Enemy set the deserted Garrison on fire.

Another Company of Indians commanded by Sampson fell on York, where they slew
Arthur Brandon's Wife and five Children, carrying Captive with them the Widow
Parsons and her Daughter.

The former attempt on Pigwackett proving unsuccessful, Colonel March went a
second time with the like number of Men, where he killed six Indians and took
as many more with some plunder, which was the first Reprisal that we made; but
the Enemy dispersing into small parties, did much more mischief then in larger;
which put the Country into a far greater Confusion, in so much that there was no
safety to him that went out, nor unto him that came in, but dreadful Calamity
on every side.

-- Terror ubique tremor --
At Berwick they ambusht five, and as the store Ship was entering Casco, they
entertained them so unexpectedly with a Volley of Shot, that the Master with
three more were Slain, and two in the Boat wounded.

The General Assembly being sensibly affected with the state of matters, and
disposed to a Vigorous prosecution of the War, enacted, That Forty Pounds
should be given for every Indian Scalp, which prompted some, and animated
others to a noble Emulation. Capt. Ting was the first that embraced the tender,
who in the depth of Winter, went to their head quarters, and got five, for
which he received two hundred Pounds. Major Hilton also with five Companies
more made the like Essay, and so did Capt. Stephens, but returned with no other
Laurel than the safety of themselves and Company.

The Enemy went on daring and successful. They frequently followed the tracts
of o^r Men in their Marches: At Berwick they killed one, wounded another, and
burnt two Houses. After that they made a descent on Andrew Neals Garrison,
where they were vigorously repulsed by Capt. Brown, who killed nine on the spot
and wounded ^any more, which so enraged those Wretches, that at their return
they executed their revenge on Joseph Ring who was then a Captive among them,
whom they fastened to a Stake and burnt alive; barbarously shouting and
rejoicing at his cries.

February 8th. Joseph Bradleys Garrison of Haverhil was unhappily surpised* by
a small Scout, who sculking at a distance, and seeing the Gates open and none
on the Sentry, rushed in and became Masters thereof. The Housewife perceiving
the Misery that was attending her, and having boiling Soap on the Fire, scalded
one of them to Death. The Sentinel within was slain, and she with several
others were taken; which was the second time of her Captivity. But that which
heightened her Affliction was being with Child, and yet obliged to travel in a
deep Snow, under a heavy Burden, and many Days together without Subsistence,
excepting a few bits of Skin, Ground-nuts, Bark of Trees, wild Onions, and
Lilly Roots. Nevertheless she was wonderfully supported, and at last safely
delivered; but the Babe soon perished for want of Nourishmen^, and by the
Cruelty of the Indians, who as it cried, threw hot Embers in its Mouth. After a
Years Bondage she was sold to the French for eighty Livers, and then redeemed
by her Husband.

THE Use of Snow-shoes appearing very requisite for marching in the Winter
Season, occasioned an Act in both Provinces for supplying the Frontiers
therewith: And this Season, which before was dreaded as most hazardous, was now
the time of greatest safety, and of less difficulty in traveling.

BUT the Southern Parts not thinking themselves in so much Danger, did in a
little time become secure, which the Enemy taking notice of, fell on Deerfield,
of which the Reverend Mr. Stoddard gave me the following Account. That Colonel
Schuyler, who was always a kind and faithful Intelligencer, gave timely warning
thereof, which awakened some, but was slighted by others: However, Mr.
Williams, the worthy Pastor of that Place, was strongly possessed that the Town
would in a little time be destroyed; signifying as much in his public
Ministry, and private Conference; and could not be satisfied till he had got
twenty Soldiers to be posted there. A few Nights before the Assault was, they
were strangely amused, by a trampling Noise round the Fort, as if it were beset
by Indians. Toward Morning, being February 29th. the Enemy sent Scouts to
discover the posture of the Town, who observing the Watch walking in the
Streets, returned and put them to a stand: A while after they sent again, and
were advised, that all was then still and quiet: Upon which, two hours before
Day, they attackt the Fort, and by the advantage of some drifts of Snow, got
over the Walls. The whole Body was above two hundred and fifty, under the
Command of Monsieur Arteil, who found the People fast asleep and easily secured
them. The most considerable part of the Town thus fell into their Hands. They
left no Garrison unattackt, excepting that of Capt. Wells; But at Benoni
Stebbins's they met with some repulse, and lost several. Sixty of the English
fell, whereof many were stifled in a Celler; and a hundred were taken Captive,
who with a melancholy Countenance condoled each other's Misery, yet durst not
express the Anguish of their Souls. That Day and Night were spent in
plundering, burning and destroying. The next Morning they withdrew into the
Woods, car^ying with them their Plunder and Capti^es; among whom was ^he
Reverend Mr. William^, (before mentioned) whose Sufferings, with his
Neighbors, through a deep Snow, over mountainous Deserts, were exceeding
great; besides many Trials and Fears which they labored under.

The Country being alarmed, several hastened to their Relief; about thirty of
those which first came, charged the Enemy in the rear, and being strengthened
with a further Supply, pursued them with good Success; but the Enemy returning,
and being much superior in Number, killed nine of ours in the Skirmish.

The Day after there was a considerable Confluence from the lower Towns, as
well as from the County of Hartford, but for want of Snow-shoes, were unable to
pursue them. Some of our Captives then in Canada, knowing the Enterprise that
was on Foot, sent several Letters unto their Friends, which the Enemy did
carefully put into a Bag, and hung it upon the limb of a Tree in the highway;
which Letters were afterward found, and gave Satisfaction of those that were
then alive among them.

While the Indians by Land were every way distressing of us, the French by Sea
were as industrious to impoverish us.

April 7th. 1704. they fitted out a Privateer Shallop with twenty seven Men, to
intercept our Southern Trade as they came laden with Provisions; which if they
had succeeded in, would not only have supplied their own indigent Forces, but
the Indians also; (who were then forming a desperate Design against us) But
through the favor of God to us, they were cast away on Plymouth Shore. A like
signal Favor to us was the taking a Store-Ship of theirs (by our Virginia
Fleet) of Forty Guns, bound to Canada, in which were twenty Officers, two
thousand small Arms, with Ammunition answerable; besides a vast number of
Crucifixes, and Presents of a greater value for encouraging the Indians in acts
of Hostility against the English. In the Engagement their General was slain,
the only Man that fell in Battle, by whose Interest those Stores were procured;
which loss was so affecting, that (as some of our Captives afterward reported)
it caused a deep Humiliation throughout Canada a considerable time after.

As the Spring advanced, it was thought necessary to guard the Frontiers with
fresh Troops, upon which Major Mason with (...) five of the Pequod, and Mo^egan
(...) a^ Berwick, who (...) first were very terrifying to the Enemy: Yet
frequent assaults were afterward made at a little Distance, as on April 25th.
Nathaniel Meador was shot while at work in his Field. They mangled his dead
Corpse after a barbarous manner. Next day they killed Edward Tailor near
Lampreel River, and after that took his Wife and Son whom they carried to
Canada, and she was afterward redeemed. From thence they went to Cochecho,
expecting to have made Mr. Waldron the Victim of that Day; but being happily
from home, they miss't their aim. However they surpised a Servant of his, as
she went to the Well for Water, whom (after they had examined concerning her
Master, the State of the Garrison, and other Affairs) they knocked on the head,
but the Stroke not proving fatal, she afterward recovered.

After this several were assaulted in the Road to Wells, whereof two were
killed, one taken, and another made his Escape.

May 13th. an Express came from North Hampton, advising, that about break of
Day a Company of French and Indians, fell on a fortified House at Pascomuck,
where no watch being kept, the People were alarmed in their beds by the noise
of the Enemy's rushing on the house; and before the Inhabitants could rise, the
Indians had got their Guns through the Port-holes, and shot those that first
appeared, killing some and wounding others. The surprised People made what
resistance they could, firing briskly on the Enemy; but the house being soon
set on fire, they were forced to yield them^^^^^^ P^^soners. The Enemy soon
drew off, but fearing a pursuit, dismissed one of the wounded, with this Caution,
that if the English followed them they would Slay the Prisoners, but the
unfortunate Messenger in returning back was Slain by another Indian. On the
same Morning another Party attacked a Farm house two Miles off, but the fury of
the Dogs so alarmed the Inhabitants, that they instantly got up and fired
several Guns to very good advantage, which prevented any further attempt. As
for those at Pascomuck they were immediately pursued, three made an Escape,
eight were rescued, nineteen slain, and three carried to Canada. Next day Major
Whiteing, pursued them with a number of Horses, and came upon their Track, but
the Ways were so impassible, that they sent their Horses back with a resolve to
follow them on Foot, but some proving lame, and others tyring, caused the rest
to desist. I would here remark, that a little before the Troubles at Pascomuck,
and the Farm house before mentioned* the People at Springfield heard a great
shooting; Unto some it seemed to be at Westfield, to others at a Village, and
to some again in the Woods; so that many hastened to their assistance; but when
they came all was still and quiet, the reason whereof is hard to assign, and
yet we have repeated instances in History of the like nature.

Under all those Sufferings from a cruel Enemy little or no impression could
ever be made by us upon them, by reason of their retiring into unaccessable
Swamps, and Mountains. Wherefore it was determined, that Major Church, who was
so eminently Serviceable in the former War, should visit their head quarters,
according to a Scheme which he had projected.

No sooner was his Commission granted, but he raised a considerable number of
Volunteers out of Plymouth Colony both of English and friend Indians, and
marched to Nantaskett for furt^er Instructions; where the following Gentlemen
were appointed Officers under him. viz Colonel Goreham, Maj^r Hilton, Capt.
John Brown, Constant, and Edward Church, Cole, Dyer, Lamb, Cook, Harreden,
Williamson, and M^rick, with five hundred and fifty Men in fourteen Transports,
and with thirty six Whaleboats, which were guarded by Capt. Smith, Rogers, and
S^ut^^ck, in three ships of War. After the^ were eq^ipt, they sailed to
Piscataqua, to make up their Compliment from thence. May 15th. they sailed
Eastward, visiting all parts as they went along, till they came to the Green
Islands, where they took Monsieur Lafebure, and his two Sons with a Canada
Indian, whom they examined apart: The Father at first seemed Surly and Crooked,
and the young Men were much of the like Temper, but being told what they must
trust unto in case they did not confess, were afterward Submissive, and
promised to Pilot them where ever they were directed. Upon this the Transports
and Whaleboats were ordered to be in a readiness, and every Man to have a weeks
Provision; From hence they paddled to Penobscot, and with the assistance of one
D' Young, whom they bro't out of Boston Goal on purpose for a Pilot, killed and
took a considerable number both of French and Indians, among whom was St.
Casteen's Daughter. From thence they went to Passamaquada, and M^unt Desert,
where they met the thr^e Ships of War according to Appointment. Their Custom
was to rest in the Day, and row in the Night; and never to fire at an I^dian i^
they could reach him with a Hatchet, for fe^r of allarming them. Here they
siez'd the Old Lotriell and his Family, after that Mounsier Guorden, and
Sharkee, who a little before came with a Commission from Canada to form an
Expedition against the English. No sooner had our Forces arrived here, but
Orders were sent them from Boston, forthwi^h to Sail to Port-Royall, expecting
some store Ships from France, which was welcome News for Officers and Soldiers.
But they missed of their Expectations: However the Ships stood off the Harbor
while the Land Porces went to Meni^, where a Council of War was held, and
Lievt. Giles was sent to the Town with a Flag of Truce and Summons to
Surrender; Their Answer was, That If our forces would not hurt their Estates
they would Surrender, otherwise were resolved to stand their ground. Upon which
a descent was made upon them that Night, but little effected until the Morning,
and then the Forces drew up and drove all before them.

There was at this time a considerable plenty of Brandy, and Clarret in their
Houses, which rather proved a snare than service to our Men; Especially the
Indians, who naturally affect strong Drink, but this was soon prevented, by
breaking in the heads of the Casks. Lieutenant Baker and one more were killed
in this Attack, and not above six died in the whole Expedition. Most of their
Houses were burnt, and much Plunder taken, but with as little Effusion of Blood
as possibly could be. The General ordered their Damms to be dug down, and their
Fortifications to be laid in Ashes. Having as great success as reasonably could
be expected, through out all the Territorys of L' Accadia, and Nova Scotia, where
he took a hundred Prisoners, burnt and laid wast all the French Settlements,
(except the Town of Port Royal) a great many Cattle were also killed, and the
Indians driven into such Confusion, that they left their Wigwams and retired
into private Cells.

ON July 4th. a Council of War was called to concert what next to do, who
resolved, that as the Fort was alarmed, the Enemy was more numerous than at
first; and that as many of our Men were tired and defective, it would be best
to return; which was also consented unto by our Sea-Officers. But
notwithstanding the Fatigue that this worthy Gentleman had undergone, and the
Dangers he had run; the Spoil he had done, and the Victories he wan, yet he
could not escape the Censures of many. Some indeed extolled his Valor and
Conduct even to an Hyperbole, while others endeavored to lessen it with as
much Disgrace and Infamy. Some thought he did too much, others too little: But
after one and another had passed their Sentiments, the General Assembly (which
was then sitting) voted him Thanks for the good Services he did both to the
Queen and Country.

The Governor of Port Royal being in fear of a new Enterprise, sent Lewis
Allein as a Spy, under the Color of a Flag of Truce, with six Prisoners,
(whereof Mr. Hoddy of Piscataqua was one) to observe and know the Motion of the
English. But being suspected, he was apprehended and searched, and in his
Pocketbook was found this Direction; That if any Enterprise was on foot, he
should (in his Advice-book) join L. A. the two first Letters of his Name, close
together; if it was only in Agitation, to place them at some Distance; but if
nothing was in Motion, then to sign a Cross.

While our Forces were engaged in visiting the Enemy abroad, great care was
taken of covering the Frontiers at home; and yet very daring Assaults were
frequently made by small numbers. At Oyster-River they wounded William Tasket,
and at Dover they waylaid the Inhabitants as they returned from public
Worship: After that they killed a Lad near Casco Fort. About the same time some
of the Enemy were Fishing up Connecticut River, and being trackt by a small
Scout of our Volunteers, one Englishman and five Mohegen Indians, they pursued
them to such advantage, that they slew the whole Company, save one, which were
nine in number. Mr. Caleb Lyman, (now Elder of a Church in Boston) was Leader
in this hardy Action, and has favored us with the following Account of it.

Mr. Caleb Lyman's Account of Eight Enemy Indians killed by himself, and five
Friend Indians,
SOme time in the Month o^ May, 1704. there came Intelligence from Albany, of a
number of Enemy Indians up Connecticut River, who had built a Fort, and planted
Corn, at a place called Cowassuck. On the fifth of June following, we set out
(by order of Authority) from Northampton, and went nine Days Journey into the
Wilderness, (through much Difficulty, by reason of the Enemy's Hunting and
Scouting in the Woods, as we perceived by their Tracks and Firing) and then
came across some fresh Tracks, which we followed till we came in sight of the
abovesaid River: Supposing there might be a Number of Indians at hand; we being
not far from the place where the Fort was said to be built. Here we made a
Halt, to consult what Methods to take; and soon concluded to send out a Spy,
with Green Leaves for a Cap and V^ste, to prevent his own Discovery, and to
find out the Enemy. But before our Spy was gone out of sight, we saw two
Indians, at a considerable distance from us, in a Cannoo, and so immediately
recalled him: And soon after we heard the firing of a Gun up the River. Upon
which we concluded to keep close till Sunset; and then if we could make any
further Discovery of the Enemy, to attack them, if possib^e, in the Night. And
accordingly, when the Evening came on, we moved toward the River, and soon
perceived a Smoke, at about half a Miles distance, as we though it, where we
(afterward) found they had taken up their Lodging. But so great was the
Difficulty, that (though we used our utmost Care and Diligence in it) we were not
able to make the approach till about Two a Clock in the Morning, when we came
within Twelve Rods of the Wigwam, where they lay. But here we met with a new
Difficulty, which we feared would have ruined the whole Design: For the Ground
was so covered over with dry Sticks and Brush, for the space of five Rods, that
we could not pass, without making such a Crackling, as we though it would alarm the
Enemy, and give them Time to escape. But while we were contri^ing to compass
our Design, God in his good Providence so ordered, that a very small Cloud
arose, which gave a smart Clap of Thunder, and a s^dden Shower of Rain. And
this Opportunity w^ ^mbraced, to run through the Thicket; and (...) me
undiscovered within sight of the Wigwam; and ^erceived by their Noise, that the
Enemy (...) awake. But however, being unwilling to lose any Time, we crept on
our Hand^ and (...) till we were within three or f^ur Rods ^f them. Then we
arose, and ran to the side of the Wigwam, and fired in upon them: And flinging
down our Guns, we surrounded them with our Clubs and Hatchets, and knocked down
several we met with. But after all our Diligence, Two of their Number made
their escape from us: One mortally wounded, and the other not hurt; as we
afterward heard.

When we came to look over the slain, we found seven dead upon the spo^: Si^ of
whom we scalpt, and left the other unscalpt. (Our Indians saying, They would
give one to the Country, since we had each of us one; and so concluded we
should all be rich eno') When the Action was thus over, we took our Scalps and
Plunder; such as Guns, Skins, etc. and the Enemies Canoos; in which we came
down the River about twelve Miles, by break of Day; and then though it it Prudence
to dismiss and break the Canoos; knowing there were some of the Enemy betwixt
us and Home.

And now all our Care being, how to make a safe and comfortable Return, we
first looked over our Provision, and found we had not more than eno' for one
small Refreshment: and being above one hundred Miles from any E^glish
Settlement, we were very tho'tful how we should subsist by the way. For having
trackt about Thirty of the Enemy a little before us, we could not hunt for our
Subsi^tance, for fear of Discovery: And so were obliged to eat Buds of Trees,
Grass, and Strawberry Leaves, for the space of four or five Days, til, through
the goodness of God, we safely arrived at N^rthampton, on the ^9th or 20th of
the aforesaid June. And some time after (upon our humble Petition to the Great
and General Court, to consider the Service we had done) we received Thirty one
Pounds Reward. And I have only this to observe, that in Consequence of this
Action, the Enemy were generally alarmed, and immediately forsook their Fort
and Corn at Cowassuck, and never returned to this Day, that we could hear of,
to renew their Settlement in that place.

I beg the Country's leave to observe, How poorly this bold Action, and great
Service was rewarded: No doubt they looked for, and well deserved, eight times
as much; and now the Province would readily pay eight hundred pounds in the
like Case: But a gracious God has ^ec^mpenced to the Elder, I trust, both in
the Blessings of his Providence and Grace.

The French in Canada were ^ow forming another design on North Hampton, of
which we had Seasonable Advice; Yet two Men were killed going to Deerfield.
After th^^ came in a French deserter, who informed of the State of the Army
that was then coming: Upon this, Expresses and Scouts were every way sent to
observe their Motion; Major Whiting with a considerable Number went to the
Ponds, where he expected to give them Battle, but they were gone from thence,
leaving their Cannoos behind, which he burnt. Their whole Body were seven
hundred, wi^h two Friars, under the Command of Mounsieur Boocore, who in their
March began to Muting about the Plu^der, which they had in View and expected to
be master off: Forgetting the Proverb about dividing the Skin before the Bear
was killed. Their Dissension at last was so great, that upwards of two hundred
returned in discontent. However the rest came on, and sent Scouts before to
observe the Posture of the English, who reported, that they were as thick as
the Trees in the Woods. Upon which their Spirits failed, and more of their
number deserted. They then called a Council of War, who resolved to desist from
the Enterprise Yet some staid, and afterward fell on Lancaster, and Groaton,
where they did some Spoil, but not what they expected, for that these Towns
were seasonably strengthened.

Capt. Ting and Capt. How entertained a warm dispu^e with them for some time,
but being much inferior in Number, were forced to retreat with some loss; yet
those that were Slain of the Enemy, were more then those of ours. One of them
was an Officer of some Distinction, which so Exasperated their Spirits, that in
revenge they fired the Meeting House, killed several Cattle, and burnt many
Outhouses. About the same time Capt. Allen from Westfield discovered a small
Party with whom he had a Skirmish, and lost one Man, but killed three, and
rescued a Captive. After this, between Hadley and Quabaug, we had one wounded
and another Slain. By this time came Major Tailor with his Troop, (who always
distinguished himself of an active Spirit to serve his Country) Capt. Prescot,
Buckley, and Willard with their Companies, who were so vigorous and intense in
pursuing the Enemy, that they put them all to flight. And yet a little while
after they fell on Groaton, and Nashaway, where they killed Lieut. Wyler, and
several more. It was not then known how many of the Enemy were slain, it being
customary among them to carry off their Dead: However it was afterward
affirmed, that they lost sixteen besides several that were wounded. After this
they divided into smaller Parties, and did much Mischief, as at Aimsbury,
Haverhil, and Exeter. August 11th. they wounded Mark Giles of Dover, (with his
Son) who through anguish of Pain, and much effusion of Blood, expired a few days
after. At the same time another Party fell on York, where they slew Matthew
Austin nea^ the Garrison, and then went to Oyster kiver, where they killed
several while at Work in their Field.

The five Nations of Indians which are called by the Name of the Oneydes,
Onnondages, Cayonges, Senneches, and Macquaus, all this while stood Neuter: But
being like to be influenced by the French Missionaries who came among them,
Colonel Townsend and Mr. Leverett from the Massachusetts, Capt. Gold and Capt.
Levinston from Connecticut, were Commissionated to give them a Visit, and
strengthen the Alliance with them; which they did to so good Effect, that they
promised to take up the Hatchet, whenever the Governor of New York should
desire it. But why so fair an Opportunity was lost, when the Interest of
New England lay bleeding, was matter of Surprise and Admiration to some, of
Censures and Reflections to others. The only Account we can give of it is, the
vast Trade between the Dutch and Indians; for the sake of which, that
Government have ^l^^ys chosen to restrain their Indians from joining with us in
our Wars. In the midst of War, there seems a secret League between them and the
Governor of Canada, not to suffer the least breach to be made on one another
by any of their Indians.

But although my Design was only to remark the barbarous Insults of those
bloody Pagans on the Territories of New England; yet I think it not improper to
take a short view of their Descent on Newfoundland, considering the nearness of
its Situation, and that several of our Eastward Indians were confederate with
them.

On the 18th of August, one hundred and forty French and Indians, in two
Sloops, early in the Morning, from Placentia, arrived at Bonovist, and
surprised the Pembrook Galley, the Society of Pool, and a lesser Vessel, in
which was thirty Ton of Oil: Capt* Gill of Charlestown was there at the same
time, in a Ship of fourteen. Guns, with twenty four Men. He was furiously
attackt, but defended himself with great Courage and good Conduct, from diverse
bold and desperate Attempts which they made upon him. When he had beat 'em at
small Arms, they then brought the Galley to bear upon him with her great Guns,
which he returned in the like Language. They then set Fire to the Society, with
an expectation of burning him alive; but the Wind proving contrary, drove her
ashore on a Rock, where she soon consumed. They then set the lesser Ship on
Fire, which burnt to such a degree, by reason of the Oil, that it would soon
have devoured him, had not the Buoy-rope of the Anchor got beteen the Rudder
and the Stern, and kept off the blazing War from him. The situation of the
Fort was such, as that it was not able to protect the Town of St. John's; upon
which it was wholly laid in Ashes, the Inhabitants being mostly fled into the
Woods. The loss that Capt. Gill sustained in the whole Encounter, was but one
Man slain and two wounded.

I now return to the Westward, where on the 25th of October, the Enemy did some
Mischief. Lancaster was alarmed, and the Alarm was a means of the untimely
Death of the Reverend Mr. Gardener, their worthy Pastor. Several of the
Inhabitants, who belonged to the Garrison, were wearied by hard Traveling the
Day before, in pursuit of the Enemy. This caused this good Man out of Pity and
Compassion, to Watch that Night himself; accordingly he went into the Box,
which lay over the Flanker, where he staid till late in the Night: But being
cold, (as was supposed) he was coming down to warm himself; when one between
Sleeping and Waking, or surpised through excess of Fear, fired upon him, as he
was coming out of the Watch-house; where no Man could rationally expect the
coming of an Enemy.

Mr. Gardener, although he was shot through the Back, came to the Door and bid
them open it, for he was wounded. No sooner did he enter, but he fainted away:
As he came to himself, he asked who it was that shot him? and when they told
him, he prayed God to forgive him, and forgave him himself, believing that he
did it not on purpose; and with a composed frame of Spirit, desired them that
bewailed him not to weep, but pray for him, and his Flock. He comforted his
sorrowful Spouse, and expired within an hour.

The Indian Harvest being now gathered, and the Winter approaching, the Enemy
like Beasts of Prey, retired to their private Cells: But concluding it
necessary to discover their Head quarters, it was resolved, that Col. Hilton,
with two hundred and seventy Men, should go to Naridgwalk with twenty Days
Provision: At which time the Country appeared like a frozen Lake, the Snow four
foot deep; yet neither Officers nor Soldiers were in the least discouraged; but
when they came unto the Fort, could not discover the least step of an Indian,
only a few deserted Wigwams, and a large Chapel, with a Vestry at the end of
it, which they set on fire.

The Winter Season requiring Snow-shoes, an Express was sent Col. Patrick to
supply the Frontiers therewith, which he no sooner forwarded, but the Express
was intercepted, by a Mount-Real Scout, who robbed him of Fifty Pounds that he
had in his Pocket, which at their return they presented to the Governor, who
converted it into a Bowl, and called it by the Name of the New England Gift.

Early in the Spring, Capt. Larraby was ordered to Cruise on the Shore of L'
Accadia, and defeat the French from their Fishery, having Whale-Boats to attend
him: Capt. Fowl was also dispatched in a Sloop of War, who on the Northward of
Cape-Sables took a small Vessel formerly belonging to the English, which had
Cattle and Sheep on Board her. Soon after he took five Prisoners at Port Rosu^,
and three at L' Have, burnt a few Houses, and killed some Cattle; but the
Inhabitants were so miserably poor, and their Circumstances so desperate, that
they rather chose to be Prisoners among the English, than at Liberty among the
French.

May the 4th. 1705. Capt. Hill, who was formerly taken at Wells, and carried ^o
Canada, was from thence sent by Mounsieur Vaudriell, to concert the exchange of
Prisoners, who advised of one hundred and seventeen that were then with him,
and about seventy more with the Indians; which unexpected News was very
reviving to the dejected Spirits of their mournful Friends; considering the
many Deaths they escaped in their Captivity.

Upon the advice hereof, Capt. Levinston was sent to Canada to capitulate about
the matter, and after him Capt. Appleton, and Mr. Sheldon (with seventy
Prisoners of theirs) who went by Water, having ordered a Scout before of ten
Men by Land to advise of their coming, that so our Prisoners might be in
readiness. But the Jesuits and Friars had by this time so influenced the
Governor, as to cause him to break his Word of Honor, pretending, that as ^he
Indians were independent and a free born People, that he had no power to demand
any Captives of them; when at the same time they were so mu^^ in Subjection,
and Vassalage unto him, that ^h^y never formed an Enterprise without him,
neither did they dare to attempt it without his knowledge.

Now although the Expense and Industry of our Commissioners in this Affair was
very great; ye^ notwithstanding they could not obtain above sixty Captives out
of one hundred and eighty seven; which was scandalously base and dishonorable
in that Government.

The descent that the Enemy again made on New foundland, was more terrible and
surprising than the former; for on January 21st. at break of day, Mounsieur
Supercass, Governor of Placentia, came with five hundred and fifty French from
Canada, Port Royal, and other places adjacent, and a company of Salvages, of
whom Assacombuit was Chief; who ransacked and laid waste all the Southern
Settlements in a few Days, and then fell on St. John's, where in the space of
two hours all were become Prisoners of War, excepting those in the Castle and
Fort. The Night before the Enterprise they were obliged to lie on a Bed of
Snow, six foot deep, for fear of being discovered, which caused such cold and
numbness in the Joints of several, that the General vowed revenge, and
accordingly Executed his Resentment, for that he destroyed all before him, and
gave no Quarter for some time; till Mounsieur Boocore, who was a Gentleman of
more Humanity, did interpose and abate his Fury: The Number that they took
alive was one hundred and forty, whom they sent unto the Garrison, not out of
pity to the Prisoners, but with a design to Starve the whole. After that the^
laid close seige to the Garrison, and Fort, which continued thirty Day^ without
relief. (Excepting three who made their Escape to the former and seventeen to
the latter) In the Fort were only forty Men under the command of Capt. Moody,
and twelve in the Castle, under Capt. Lot^am; w^o behaved themselves with such
bravery, that they slighted all manner of tenders that were made them of
Surrendering, with the highest Contempt immaginable.

Upon this the Enemy committed many Barbarities, and sent several threatenings;
but they had no Influence either on Officers or Soldiers, for they pl^'d their
Bombs and Mortarpieces to so good Effect, that they killed several, and lost
but three in the whole Engagem^nt.

After this they Stee^'d to Consumption-Bay, having first demolish't all the
English Settlements in Trinity and Bonivist, where they burnt their Stages and
Boats, and laid a Contribution besides upon the Inhabitant^. From thence they
went to Carboneer, where they met with some repulse, and finding their
Provision fall short, they sent a further number unto the Fort, reserving the
most skilful and able Fishermen for themselves until the succeeding Spring.

During this time our Frontiers at home were greatly infested. At Spruce-Creek
in Kittery they killed five and took as many more; among the Slain was Mrs.
Hoel, a Gentlewoman of good Extract, and Education; but the greatest Sufferer
was Enoch Hutchins in the loss of his Wife and Children. Three weeks after John
Rogers was dangerously wounded, and at a little distance James Toby was shot by
another Party. From thence they went Westward, and took a Shallop which
belonged to Piscataqua. Our Sea coast at the same time was disrested by
Privateers, particularly by Capt. Crepoa, who notwithstanding our Cruisers that
were then out, took seven Vessels, besides a Sloop, and carried them all to
Port Royal, excepting the latter, which was retaken by Capt. Harris at
Richmond's Island.

About the same time Michael ^oyal, a Fisherman belonging to Marblehead, as he
went ashore for wood off of Cape Sables, wa^ Barbarou^ly cut in pieces; On the
15th. of O^^^ber following, eighteen Indians fell on Cape N^ddick, where they
took four Children of Mr. St^vers at a little distance from the Garrison. The
youngest not able to travel was knocked on the head, the other three were
carried Captive; but being attack't by Lieut. March, and loosing one of their
Company, they ki^l'd a second Child in way of revenge.

During the Winter little or no Spoil was done on any of our Frontiers; the
Enemy being so terrified by reason of Snow-shoes (which most of our Men were
skilful in) that they never attempted coming at such a season after.

But as the Spring came on, April 27the 1706. a small Body fell on an Out-house
in Oyster-River, where they killed eight, and wounded two; The Garrison which
stood near, had not a Man in it, ^t that time; but the Women, who assumed an
^mazoni^^ Courage seeing nothing but Death before them, advanced the Watch-box,
and made an Alarm. They put on Hatts, with their Hair han^ing down, and fired
so briskly that they struc^ a terror in the Enemy, and they withdrew, without
firing the house, or carrying away much Plunder. The principal Sufferer at this
time was John Wheeler, who thinking them to be friend Indians, unhappily fell
under their Fury. Two days after Mr. Shapleigh and his Son, as they were
traveling through Kittery, were ambusht by another Party, who killing the
Father, took the Son, and carried him to Canada. In their March they were so
inhumanely Cruel, that they bit off the tops of his Fingers, and to stagnate
the Blood, seared them with hot Tobacco Pipes.

June the 1st Mr. Walker, being laden with Provisions from C^nnecticut, was
chased by a French Priva^eer, which to avoid he ran ashore in his Boat, and as
he hastened to Ro^d-Is^^nd, made an Alarm all round: The Government there was so
expeditious, that in a few Hours (by beat of Drum) one hundred Men well equipped
voluntarily entered on board of two Sloops, u^d^r the command of Major Wanton
and Captain Pain, who next Day became Masters of the Prize, wherein were
thirty seven Men, under the command of Capt. Ferrel, bound for Port-R^yal, but
in his way was obliged to cruise on the N^w-England Coast.

The Year after they did another brave Exploit, in taking a Sloop from
Placentia, with four Guns, four Patteraroes, and forty nine Men, which
undoubtedly prevented great Mischief that otherwise would have befallen us.

Upon the Advice of many English Captives that were now at Port Royal, Captain
Rouse of Charl^stown was sent with a Flag of Truce; who after an unusual stay,
returned but with seventeen, saying, that the French detained them. He fell
under a severe suspicion of carrying on a secret Trade with the Enemy; which
grew upon his second going, when he bro^ght but seven back with him.

The General Assembly which was then sitting, with the Country throughout, were
thrown hereby, into a great Ferment; considering the vast Charge and Effusion
of Blood. He was Indicted for Traiterous Correspondence with the Enemy. Others
at the same time, like Snakes in the Grass, or Moles under Ground, were as
industrious to evade it, and to put a different Gloss on all his Actions.

-- Quid non Mortalia pectora Cogis
Auri Sacra fames? --
And yet it has been generally remarked from the beginning of Time here, that
those who have been Indian-Traders, and seemingly got much, have sensibly
decayed, and many of them become Victims to their bloody Cruelty. A
Proclamatian was issued forth to apprehend all such as were Suspected; Several
hereupon were seized, and others vehemently Suspected, who did what they could
to extenuate the Crime, and to get the Indictment altered from that of Treason,
unto High Misdemeanour. At last a Court of Oyer and Terminer was called, and
Fines were imposed, besides the Prison Fees.

How far these unhappy Measures tended to increase our Troubles, is Obvious to
an impartial Eye, if we consider how they supplied the Enemy with Powder, Shot,
Iron, Nails, and other Materials of War.

The Advice of Colonel Schuyler from time to time was of eminent Service unto
the Country, who advised of two hundred and seventy Men that were coming upon
us. Their first descent wa^ on Dunstable, the third of July, where they fell on
a Garrison that had twenty Troopers posted in it, who by their Negligence and
Folly, keeping no Watch suffered them to enter, which tended to the destruction
of one half of their Number^ After that a small Party attack't Daniel Galeucias
House, who held them play for some time, till the old Man's Courage failed; when
on surrendering himself, he informed them of the state of the Garrison; how that
one Man was killed and only two Men and a Boy left; which caused them to rally
a new, and with greater Courage th^n before. Upon which one with the Boy got
out on the back side, leaving only Jacob to fight the Battle, who for some time
defended himself with much bravery; but over power'd with Force, and finding
none to assist him, was obliged to quit it, and make his escape as well as he
could; but before he got far, the Enemy laid hold of him once and again, and
yet by much struggling he rescused himself: Upon this they burnt the House, and
next Day about forty more fell on Amesbury, where they killed eight; two, at
the same time, who were at work in a Field, hearing an Outcry, hastened to
their Relief; but being pursued* ran to a deserted House, in which were two
Flankers, where each of them found an old Gun, but neither of them fit for
Service; and if they were, (...) neither Powder nor Shot to load with: However,
each took a Flanker, and made the best appearance they could, by thrusting the
Muzzles of their Guns outside the Port-holes, crying aloud, Here they are, but
do not fire till they come nea^er; which put the Enemy into such a ^^ight, that
they instantly drew off.

From thence they went to Kingstown, where they killed and wounded several
Cattle. About the same time Joseph English, who was a Friend Indian, going from
Dunstable to Ch^lmsford, with a Man and his Wife on Horeback, was shot dead,
the Woman taken, but the Man made his escape. On the 8th of July, five Indians
a little before Night, fell on an Out-house in Reading, where they surpised a
Woman with eight Children; the former with the three youngest were instantly
dispatched, and the other they carried Captive; but one of the Children unable
to travel, they knocked on the head, and left in the Swamp, concluding it was
dead, but a while after it was found alive. The Neighborhood being alarmed,
got ready by the Morning, and coming on their Track, pursued them so near, that
they recovered three of the Children, and put the Enemy into such a Terror,
that they not only quitted their Plunder and Blankets, but the other Cap^ive
also. Several Strokes were afterward made on Ch^lmsford, Sudbury and Groton,
where three Soldiers as they were going to public Worship, were waylaid by a
small Party, who killed two, and made the other a Prisoner.

At Exe^er a Company of French Mohauks, who some time kept lurking about Capt.
Hilton's Garrison, took a view of all that went in and out; and observing some
to go with their Scythes to mow, lay in ambush till they laid by their Arms,
and while at Work, rushed on at once, and by intercepting them from their Arms,
killed four, wounded one, and carried three Captive: So that ^ut of ten, two
only escaped. A while after, two of those that were taken, viz. Mr. Edward
Hall, and Samuel Myals, made their escape; but the Fatigue and Difficulty that
they went through, (besides the terror and fear they were under of being taken)
was almost incredible; for in three weeks together they had nothing to subsist
on, excepting a few Lilly roots, and the Rhines of Trees.

Several of our Captives still remaining among the French and Indians,
occasioned Mr. Sh^ldon's going a second time to Canada with a Flag of Truce,
who at his return brought forty five, and had a prospect of many more, but was
prevented by the Jesuits.

As to the Treatment of our Captives with the French, it was as different and
various as their Tempers and Constitutions: Some were mild and pleasant, while
others were morose and sordid; but the Indians might as well alter their
Complexions as their Constitutions; for scarce a Day past without some act of
Cruelty, insomuch that a^l were under a constant Martyrdom between fear of Life
and terror of Death.

It would be an endless task to enumerate the various Sufferings that many
g^oaned under, by long Marching with heavy Burdens, through heat and cold; and
when ready to faint for want of Food, they were frequently knocked on the head:
Teeming Women, in cold Blood, have been ripped open; others fastened to Stakes,
and burnt alive; and yet the Finger of God did eminently appear in several
Instances, of which I shall mention a few. As

First. Of Rebeka^ Tailor, who after her return from Captivity, gave me the
following Account. viz.

That when she was going to Canada, on the back of Mount-RealRiver, she was
violently insulted by Sampson her bloody Master, who without any Provocation
was resolved to hang her; and for want of a Rope, made use of his Girdle, which
when he had fastened about her Neck, attempted to hoise her up on the limb of a
Tree, (that hung in the nature of a Gibbit) but in hoising her, the Weight of
her Body broke it asunder; which so exasperated the cruel Tyrant, that he made
a second attempt, resolving that if he failed in that, to knock her on the
head: But before he had power to effect it, Bomaseen came along, who seeing the
Tragedy on foot, prevented the fatal stroke.

A second was a Child of Mrs. Hanna^ Parsons, of Wells, whom the Indians for
want of Food, had determined to Roast alive, but while the fire was kindling,
and the Sacrifice preparing, a Company of French Mohauks came down the River in
a Canoo, with three Dogs, which somewhat revived these hungry Monsters,
expecting to make a Feast upon one of them* So soon as they got ashore, the
Child was off^r'd in Exchange; but despising the offer, they tendered a G^n,
which they readily accepted, and by that means the Child was preserved.

A third was of Samuel Butterfield, who being sent to Groton as a Soldier, was
with others attackt, as they were gathering in the Harvest; his bravery was
such, that he killed one and wounded another, but being overpowered by
strength, was forced to submit; and it happened that the slain Ind^an was a
Sagamore, and of great dexterity in War, which caused matter of Lamentation,
and enraged them to such degree that they vowed the utmost revenge; Some were
for whipping him to Death; others for burning him alive; but differing in their
Sentiments, they submitted the Issue to the Squaw Widow, concluding she would
determine something very dreadful, but when the matter was opened, and the Fact
considered, her Spirits were so moderate as to make no other reply, than, "
Fortune L' guare. Upon which some were uneasy; to whom she answered, If by
kiling him, you can bring my Husband to life again, I beg you to study what
Death you please; but if not let him be my Servant; which he accordingly was,
during his Captivity, and had favor shown him.

The Stare of Affairs still looking with a Melancholy Aspect, it was resolved
for a more vigorous Prosecution of the War, to grant the following
Encouragement. viz. l. To Regular Forces under pay 10 0 0 per ^calp. To
Volunteers in Service 20 0 0 To Volunteers without pay 50 0 0 To any Troop or
Company that go for the Relief of any Town or Garrison 30 0 0

Over and above was granted the benefit of Plunder, and Captives of Women and
Children under twelve Years of age, which at first seemed a great
Encouragement, but it did not answer what we expected. The Charge of the War
was by this time so great, that every Indian we had killed or taken, cost the
Country at least a Thousand Pounds.

But while they continued in great Bodies, they did not commit the like Spoil
and Rapine (in proportion) as they did in smaller. August the 10th. they slew
William Pearl of Dover, and a little after Took Nathanael Tibbits. But of all
the Indians that was ever known since King Phillip, never any appeared so Cruel
and Inhumane as Assacambuit, that insulting Monster, who by the Encouragement
of the French went over to Paris, and being introduced to the King, lifted up
his Hand in the most arrogant manner imaginable, saying, This Hand of mine has
Slain one hundred and fifty of your Majesty's Enemies, within the Territorys of
New England etc. Which bold and impudent Speech was so pleasing to that Bloody*
Monarch, that he forthwith Knighted him, and ordered eight Livers a day to be
paid him during Life; which so exalted the Wretch (having his Hands so long
imbrued in innocent Blood) as at his return, to exert a Sovereignty over the
rest of his Brethren, by Murdering one, and Stabing another, which so
exasperated those of their Relations, that they sought Revenge, and would
instantly have Executed it, but that he fled his Country, and never returned
after.

January 21st. Colonel Hilton with two hundred and twenty Men, visited the
Frontiers anew; but the mildness of the Winter prevent^d his going s^ ^^r as he
expected; However in his return, near Black-Point, he came on an Indian track
which he pursued, and killed four; at the some Time he took a Squaw alive with
a Papoose at her breast, which he preserved, and she was of singular service in
conducting him to a Body of eighteen, who lodged on a neck of Land; About break
of day he Surpised them as they lay asleep, and slew all but one, whom they
kept a Prisoner; But it is strange to think by what winged Mercury reports are
often carried. Plutarch I remember, and other Writers, have given surprising
Instances of things transacted at such a distance, as have been inconsistant
with any humane Conveyance. Witness that of Domitian, two thousand five hundred
Miles in the space of twenty four Hours; And of William the Conqueror, the
news of whose Death was conveyed from Roan to Rome the day he dyed, which as
Historians mention, was -- prius pene quam nunciari possit. And to my certain
knowledge, on the very Morning that Colonel Hilton did this Exploit, i^ ^as
publicly talked of at Portsmouth in every Article, and with little or no
Variation, although ninety Miles distance.

But all this while we were only cutting off the Branches; the French in
Canada, and Nova Scotia, who supply the Indians with all necessary^ for the
War, were the Root of all our Woe.

Wherefore it was resolved to make an Enterprise on Nova Scotia, under the
Command of Colonel March with two Regiments. viz. Col. Wainright of the Red
Lt. Col. Appleton of the Red Major Walton of the Red Commanders of the Red Col.
Hilton of the Blew Lt. Col. Wanton of the Blew Major Spencer of the Blew
Commanders of the Blew


In three Transport Ships, five Briganteens, and fifteen Sloops, with
Whaleboats answerable, having her Majesty's Ship the Debtford, and the Province
Gally to cover them.

March 13th. 1707 they sailed from Nanta^sket, and in a fortnight after,
arrived at Port Royal Gut, where they landed on both sides the River, which the
Enemy observing, made an alarm and retired to the Fort, with what Substance
they could get.

Monsieur Supercass, who was the Governor, upon rallying his Forces together,
held a short Skirmish bu^ finding too warm a Reception, (his Horse being shot
under him) was obliged to retreat. A Council of War being called, it was
resolved that the Artillery should be landed, and their Lines forced: But through
the Unfaithfulness of some, and cowardly Pretentions of others, little was done
in annoying the Enemy, save killing their Cattle, burning their Mills and
Outhouses: Whereas if the Officers on board her Majesty's Ship had been true
and faithful, matters had succeeded to good advantage. But instead of pressing
on, they did rather clog and hinder the Affair: For by crafty Insinuations they
afterward obtained a second Council, which the General not so well weighing as
he ought, proved the overthrow of the whole Design. They voted to return;
whereas if they had only kep^ their Ground, and not fired a Gun, the Enemy must
of necessity have surrendered or have starved. This was so surprising, that the
whole Country was under an amazing Ferment, and the Commander so grossly
reflected on, that his Spirits sunk, and he became of little Service ever
after: Yet to give him his Character, he was a Man of good Courage, and a true
lover of his Country. But the Business that he undertook, was too weighty for
his Shoulders to bear. So soon as his Excellency was apprized hereof, (who had
the Honor and Interest of his Country much at Heart) he sent strict Orders to
stay them; and another Ship of War, with two Companies of fresh Men to
reinforce them; Col. Hutchinson, Col. Townsend, and Mr. Leverett were appointed
Commissioners, to give the greater Vigor: But the number of Deserters, and
disaffected Officers overthrew the whole Affair. However a second Attempt was
made, which the Enemy perceiving, called in their Auxiliaries both of French
and Indians from Meni^, Sachenecto, and all other pla^es adjacent. A Privateer
and some other Ve^^^ls had also arrived since the withdraw of our Forces. By
their Assistance the Enemy had not only strengthened the Fort, but secured their
Lines; so that nothing could be well attempted but by a few Encounters; in
which Major Walton behaved himself with much Bravery, being the only
Field-Officer then ashore; who engaged them some time, and at last put them to
flight, killing and wounding several, among whom was the Field-Major. Those
that fell on our side were sixteen, and as many more wounded. Our Frontiers at
home were as much disrested as ever: May 22d they took two at Oyster-R^ver, and
on June 12th killed one at Groton; After that they slew William Carpenter of
Kittery, with his whole Family. July 8th they waylaid a Cart with two Men, as
they were going from Dover to Oyster-River, whom they shot dead. Capt.
Sumersby, who was there with his Tro^p, regained the most of the Plunder that
they took. About the same time Stephen Gilman and Jacob his Brother, as they
were riding from Exeter to Kingstown, were ambush'd by another Party. The first
had his Horse shot under him, and was in danger of being scalpt before he could
get clear: The other Brother had several Shot through his Clothes, and one that
grazed his Belly; his Horse also was wounded; yet he defended himself on Foot,
and got into the Garrison.

At Casco the Indians intercepted a Fishing-boat as she was sailing between the
Islands, in which were five Men, three of whom they killed, and took the other
two. August the 10th they waylaid the Road between York and Wells, and as four
Horsemen were riding in Company with Mrs. Littlefield, who had the value of
Sixty Pounds with her, were all slain except one, who made his escape. Another
Company falling on Marlborough, encompassed two as they were at work in the
Field; one of which got clear, and the Neighborhood meeting together, engaged
them so smartly, that the En^my gave way, leaving twenty four Packs behind;
which so exasperated their Spirits, with the loss they sustained, that they
slew the Captive which they had taken. On our side two were slain, and two
wounded.

At Exeter one was killed near the Meeting House; and two days after another at
Kingstown, but the most afflicting stroke that befell us this season was at
Oyster River, where thirty French Mohauks, who appeared like so many Fu^ys with
their naked Bodies painted like Blood, and observing some at work in hewing of
Timber, and others driving the Team, they violently f^ll upon them with such
hideous Noise and Yelling, as made the very Woods to echo. At the first shot
they kil^'d seven and mortally wounded another, upon which Capt. Chesly (who
had signally behaved himself in many Encounters) with the few that were left,
fired on them with great vigor and resolution; and for some time gave a check
to their Triumphing; but the Enemy being too powerful, soon overcame him, to
the great lamentation of all that knew him.

It being now the height of Indian Harvest, they dispersed themselves, into all
parts, and did considerable Mischief; but having something more then ordinary in
view, they beset Winter-Harbour, and on September 21 st. with one hundred and
fifty Men in fifty Canoos, Attempted the taking two Shallops as they lay at
Anchor, in which were Capt. Austin, Mr. Harmon, Sergeant Cole, and five Men
more, with a Boy; who perceiving their Intention, suffered them to paddle till
they had got near, and then fired, which put them into great Confusion. But
they soon recovered themselves and fired on our Men with such resolution, as
made t^^m to quit one of their Boat^, by cutting their ro^ds and lashings; and
no s^^ner had they taken possession thereof, but they got their Mainsail atrip,
before that our Men could get up theirs half Mast high, and then put out their
Oars, which they joined with Paddles on each side; but having no fargood, and
their Boat a dull sailor, ours gained on them so much, that they got twelve or
thirteen Canoos a head, with Fishinglines to tow them. But a breeze springing
up, and the Enemy making too near the Wind, (for want of a fargood) came to
stays several times, in so much that they fell a quarter of a Mile a stern.
(...) the rest of the Canoos kept on firing, and ou^ Men on them for a
considerable time together. The only Man we lost was Benjamin Daniel, who was
shot through the Bowels soon after they came to sail; At his fall he said, I am a
dead Man! yet recovering himself a littie added, Let me kill one before I dye!
but he had not strength to fire.

The Engagement held about three hours, in which the English spent five pounds
of Powder, and when the Enemy ceased their chase, they had not above one
quarter of a pound left. The Indians were so bold and daring, as to attempt to
take hold of the blades of their Oars, as they were rowing. The number of them
that fell was then unknown, because of a continued Cloud of Smoke; but it was
affirmed, that nine were Slain, and twice as many wounded. -- After this a
sma^l Scout appeared at Barwick, where they killed two as they returned from
worship; Upon which some of the Inhabitants who were acquainted with their
walk, lay in wait, and making the first discovery fired to good advantage;
which put them into so great a Consternation, that they dropped their Packs, in
which were three Scalps, supposed to be some of those which a little before
were taken at Oyster River. The Winter Season afforded a little respite: But on
April 22. 1708. Lieut. Littlefield of Wells, with Joseph Winn, as they were
traveling to York, were surrounded by a small Body; the latter made his
escape, but the other was carried to Quebe^k, who being a skilful Engineer,
especially in Water works, did them great Service.

About this time eight hundred French and Indians were forming a desperate
design against us, but on a division among themselves fell short of the
Mischief they designed us. However one hundred and fifty on August 29th at
break of day, fell on Haverhill, and passing by the Garrisons got into the very
Center of the Town before they were discovered. They attempted to fire the
Meeting House, and after that did burn several Houses near it. Major Turner,
Capt. Price, and Capt. Gardner, were happily there at that time, and rallied
together what Forces they could; but most of their Men being posted in remote
Garrisons, were unable to assist them. However with such as they could get
together, they faced the Enemy with much bravery, and in less than an hour put
them all to flight, leaving nine of their dead, and carrying off several that
were wounded. But the Slain on our side were thrice as many, by reason of the
surprise that they at first were in; among whom was the Reverend Mr* Rolph the
worthy Minister of that Town, with Capt. Wainright.

A while after James Hays of Amesbury was taken, and one at Brookfield; they
also killed Robert Reed and David Hutchins of Kittery.

Colonel Hilton again marched toward their Head quarters with one hundred and
seventy Men at Amassaconty, Pigwacket, and other places adjacent; but after a
long and tedious March could make no discovery.

On April 12th. 1709. a Scout fell on Deerfield, and took Mehamen Hinsdel, as
h^ was driving a Cart, which was the second time of his Captivity. And on May
6th. another Party within three Miles of Exeter, surpised several as they were
going to a Saw-mill, among whom were Mr. William Moody, Samuel Stephins, and
two of Mr. Jeremiah Gilman's Sons, whom they carried Captive. A few Days after
Capt. Wright of Northampton, with several English, and two Natic^ Indians,
adventuring to the Lake, within forty miles of Fort La' Motte, killed and
wounded two or three of the French Mahauks; and on their return up
French-River, met with another Body of the Enemy in Canoos, on whom they fired,
and overset, killed and wounded several of them. In this Company was William
Moody before mentioned, who being now alone with but one Indian in a Canoo, was
encouraged by the English to kill said Indian, and make his escape. Which h^
attempted, but overset the Canoo in the struggle, and then Moody swam toward
the English for Relief. Whereupon Lieut. John Wells, with one or two more, ran
down the Bank and helped him ashore. In the mean time a number of the Enemy came
to the Bank, and wounded John Strong, and killed the Lieutenant, who had been a
Man of very good Courage, and well spirited to serve his Country, and so the
loss of him was much lamented. Hereupon Moody unhappily resigned himself again
into the Enemies hands; who most inhumanly tortured him, by fastening him unto a
Stake, and roasting him alive; whose Flesh they afterward devoured. Our Men
considering they were so far in the Indians Country, and like to be
encompassed, were forced to make a running Fight. So scattering in the Woods,
lost John Burt who was supposed to perish with hunger.

The Town of Deerfield, which had suffered so much Spoil before by Monsieur
Artell, was on June 23d obliged to a new Encounter, by Mon^^eur Ravell his
Son-in Law, who with one hundred and eighty French and Indians, expected to l^y
all desolate: But the Town being alarmed, they valiantly resisted, with the
loss only of one Man, and another wounded. After that the Enemy killed two at
Brookfield, one at Wells, and took another Captive.

Col. Vetch who was now in England, and well ^cquainted with the Continent of
America, was very sensible that the reduction of Canada was of absolute
necessity, for subduing the Indians; upon which he laid a Plan of the whole
Country before some of the chief Ministers of State, representing every thing
in its true Light. General Nicholson added all his Interest to the Motion made
by Col. Vetch, and between them they obtained a promise for sufficient Forces
both by Se^ and Land, for the Conquest of Canada. They ^^rived early in the
Spring, with her Majesty's Royal Commands and Instructions to the Governors of
the several Provinces, to furnish their respective Quota's. To such as should
offer volunteers, they presented a good Firelock, Cartouchbox, Flints,
Ammunition, a Coat, Hat and Shirt; with an assurance of her Majesty's Princely
Favor unto all such as should distinguish themselves.

Upon this the several Governors contributed their utmost Assistance; and
considering that New York (with the adjacent places) lay nearest the Lake, it
was resolved that Col. Nicholso^ should command the several Troops from thence,
for the attacking of Mount-Real, while Col. Vetch was preparing to head the
Forces by Sea.

But it often happens in the course of Divine Providence, that when our
Expectations are at the highest, things come to nothing. For while our Forces
were ready, and after a vast Expense by long waiting, there was a stop at home
from any further proceeding for that time; which occosioned Col. Nicholson to
imbarque again for England, to revive the Expedition, if possible. But such was
the importance of Affairs then on foot, that notwithstanding his indefatigable
Care and Pains, he could not effect it. However he obtained a sufficient Force
for the reduction of Port Royal and Nova Scotia, which was so prejudicial to
our Fishery and Merchandise.

Its Situation is from 43 to 51 degrees of North Lanitude, and is part of the
Terra Canadensis, whose Bounds are, the Atlantic Ocean on the North, Briton
Island and the Bay of Saint Laurence to the East, Canada to the West, and
Ne^-England to the South; whose first seizure was by Sir Sebastian Cobbet for
the Crown of Great Britain, in the Reign of King Henry the seventh; but lay
dormant till the Year 1621. In which time, Sr. William Alexander, who was then
one of the Secretaries of State for Scotland, and afterward Earl of Sterling,
had a Patent for it from King James, where he settled a Colony and possess't it
some Years. Af-that Sr. David Kirk was Proprietor as well as Governor, but did
not enjoy it long; for to the surprise of all thinking Men, it was given up
unto the French; but Oliver who had a forseeing Eye of the danger that would
ensue unto the British Interest, from its being in the hands of so potent an
Enemy, retook it in the Year 1654. and in no after Treaties would be persuaded
to surrender it: Yet in 1662. it was again given up, unto the Shame and Scandal
of the English.

Monsieur Maneval was then made Governor, who built a small Fort at Port
Royal, which lies on the edge of a Basin one League broad, and two long, about
sixteen foot of Water on one side, and six or seven on the other, where the
Inhabitants drove a considerable Trade, and increased much in the adjacent
Parts, till Sr. William Phips ih the Year 1690, took possession of it in the
Name of King William and Queen Mary, and administered the Oaths of Allegiance to
the Inhabitants; but in a little time they revolted. Col. Nicholson arrived at
Boston july the first, 1710. in her Majesty's Ship Dragon, attended by the
Falmoth and a Bombship, with several Transports, British Officers, a Regiment
of Marines, Provisions and Stores of War; bringing with him her Majesty's Royal
Command to the several Governors of the Massachusetts, Newha^pshire,
Connecticut and Rhode Island, to be assisting in the said Expedition; who very
readily obeyed, and supplied their respective Quota's of good effective Men,
with Transports, Provision, Stores of War, Pilots, Chaplains, Surgeons, and
all Necessaries for the Service.

Col. Nicholson was appointed General and Commander in chief, who Embarked
September 18th. from Nantasket having with him --

Her Majestys Ship the Dragon, Commadore Martyn, The Falmouth Capt. Riddle The
Lowstaff Capt. Gordon The Feversham Capt. Pastor The Province Galley Capt.
Southack The Star Bomb Capt. Rochfort.


Besides Tend^rs, Transports, Hospitals, Store-ships, and twenty five lesser
Vessels, with open Floats for carrying Boards and necessaries for the Cannon.
The Land Forces consisted of five Regiments of Foot, whereof Col. Vetch was
Adjutant-General, Sir Charles Hobby, Col. Walton, Col. Tailer, Col. Whiting,
and Col. Reading, had Commissions sent them from the Queen. The Wind proving
fair, they all safe arrived in six Days, excepting Capt. Taye, who at his
entering into the Gut was lost with twenty five Men. Next Day a Council of War
was held, and several Detachments ordered to go ashore, and view the Ground for
the better landing and ^itching their Camp. Col. R^ading and Col. Red^ap, with
a Company of Marines, were appointed on the South side of the River where the
Fort stood, and supported with one hundred and fifty Men more under the command
of Major Mulli^s: At the same time Col. Vetch, Col. Walton, Major Brown, Capt.
Southack, and Engineer For^es, landed on the North side with a Company of
Gr^nadeers, commanded by Capt. Mascareen. After this Orders were given to land
the whole Army, which was done by four a Clock in the Afternoon. The Fort fired
on them, but did no Damage. In the Evening the Bomb-Ship came up, and saluted
them with seven Shells, which number the Fort returned, but without Execution.
On Thursday the twenty sixth at break of Day, the General matched with the Army
on the South side, the Marines in the Front, Col. Re^ding at their head, Col.
Whiting's Regiment in the Center, Sir Charles Hobby in the Rear, and Major
Levingston with a Party of Indians flanking the Body in their March. Toward
Evening the Fort fired very smartly, and so did the French and Indians with
their small Arms, as they lay behind the Fences, who killed three of our Men.
Upon landing ^he Stores, which were brought up in the Night, the Enemy
discharged several times from the Fort. Next Day we mo^nted some of our Guns,
and made preparations to bring up the flat bottom Boats with the Artillery and
Ammunition. In the Evening our Bomb-Ship came up again, and threw thirty six
Shells into the Fort, which put them into such an amazing Terror, as brought to
my Mind the saying of the Poet, -- The slaughter-breathing Brass grew hot and
spoke,
In flames of Lightning, and in clouds of Smoke.


After that Lieut. Col. Bal^antine with his Company from the Fleet, and Lieut.
Col. Goff from Col. Vetch on the North, with four Companies more, came to the
General's Camp: Every Regiment was now preparing for further Engagements, the
Cannon being all landed; Lieut. Col. Johnson with three hundred was ord^ed to
cut Fascines, the Boats being constantly employed in going and coming with
Provisions and all sorts of Warlike Stores. On Friday the twenty ninth two
French Officers, a Fort Major Sergeant and Drummer, came out of the Fort with a
Flag of Truce, and a Letter from Monsieur Supercass, unto the General,
respecting some Gentlewomen that were terrified at the Noise of Bombs, praying
his Protection, and that no Incivility or Abuse might be done them, which was
granted. Next Day the Sentinels of our advanced Guards discovered some of the
Enemy near the Woods, whom they pursued, and took Capt. Allein a Prisoner.
October 1st. the great Guns were placed on three Batteries; the Mortars were
also planted, and twenty four Cohorns at a little distance from the outward
Barrier of the Fort. These all played upon the Fort with good Effect; the
French ^t the same time firing their great Guns and Mortars upon us. The
General sent Col. Tailer and Capt. Abbercromy with a Summons to Monsieur
Sup^rcass the Governor, to deliver up the Fort f^r the Queen of Great Britain,
as her undoubted Right. The Answer which he returned was soft, only desiring a
Capitulation with some of the principal Officers on each side, which was
granted; and thereupon a Cessation of Arms. Next Day the Articles of
Capitulation were drawn up and signed by General Nicholson and the Governor.
Upon this several Compliments passed on each side, which were sent by Major
Hand^ the Aid-de-Camp: And on October 5th the Fort was delivered up. Upon which
Major Abbercromby, with two hundred Men, five Captains, and eight Subalterns,
were ordered to take possession thereof. Capt. Davison marched first at the
head of fifty Granadeers; Major Abbercromby, Capt. Mascareen, Capt. Bartlett,
Capt. Adams, and Capt. Lion, followed in their proper Stations; the General,
with Col. Vetch on his right Hand, and Sir Charles Hobby on the left; with
Monsieur Bonaventure and D' Gouten who were Hostages; and then the
Field-Officers, with a great many others advanced to the Fort; where the French
Governor met them half way on the Bridge, with Col. Reading and Capt.
Matthews, who were Hostages on our side, and complimented him in these Words.

Sir, I am very sorry for the King my Master, in loosing so brave a Fort, and
the Territories adjo^ning; but count my self happy in falling into the Hands of
one ^o Noble and Generous, and now deliver up the Keys of the Fort, and all the
Magazine into your Hands, hoping to give you a Visit next Spring. Which Keys
the General immediately delivered to Col. Vetch, ^s Governor of the Fort, by
virtue of her Majesty's Instructions: Whereupon Mo^sieur Super^^ss with his
Officers and Troops marched out with Drums beating, Colors flying, and Guns
shouldered; each paying their Respects to the General as they passed by; and
then our Army entered the Fort, hoisted the Union-Flag, and drank the Queen's
Health, firing all the Guns round the Fort; as likewise did the Men of War, and
other Vessels in the River.

On the Success of these her Majesty's Arms, ^ Day of Thanksgiving was
solemnized; and agreeable to the Articles of Capitulation, three Vessels were
appointed to transport the Soldiers unto France,, being two hundred and fifty
eight; who besides the common Allowance, had a considerable stock of Wine,
Brandy, Sugar, Spice, and other things, with a plentiful supply for the late
Governor. After this a Council of War was called, who resolved, that Major
Levinston, with St. Casteen, and three Indian Guides, should go to the
Governor of Canada, about the Exchange of Captives, and inform him how Matters
were here. Their first arrival was at Peno^scot, at St. Casteen's House, who
courteously entertained him* From thence they went to the Island of Let, where
they met with fifty Canoos and twice as many Indians, besides ^omen and
Children* where were two English ^risoners, taken a little before at
Winter-Harbour. Two Days after one of the Prisoners made his escape from an
Island where he was hunting with his Master, carrying with him both his Canoo
and Gun, and left him behind; which so exasperated the Wretch, that when he got
from thence, and came where Major Levinston was, he took him by the Throat with
his Hatchet in his Hand, ready to give him the fatal stroke, had not St.
Casteen interposed; He was however kept Prisoner some time; but by the prudent
management and mediation of that Gentleman was released. November the 4th. they
took their departure, and next day the Majors Canoo oversate, drowning one
Indian, where he also lost his Gun and all he had; after that coming among the
Ice, their Canoo was cut to pieces, which obliged them to travel the rest of
the way by Land, through horrible Deserts and Mountains, being often forced to
head Rivers and Lakes, and some times Knee deep in Snow; scarce passing a day
without fording some River or other, which in some places were very rapid and
dangerous; and for nineteen days together never saw the Sun, the Weather being
very stormy and f^ll of Fogs, and the Trees so prodigious thick, that in many
places it was with difficulty they got through: being mostly Spruce, and Cedar,
and the way under foot so extreme rocky, that it was almost next to an
impossibility. At last their Provisions were wholly spent, so that for six days
together they had not one morsel to eat but what they scraped off the frozen
Earth, or off the bark of Trees. After these unspeakable Difficulties they
arrived at Quebeck December the sixteenth, where they were handsomely
entertained, and after some time of Refreshment, discoursed about the
Prisoners. The Governor at their return, sent two Gentlemen with them to
Boston, to treat on the same head. Six Days homeward his Man fell sick, whom he
left in a Hospital at Troy River. From thence they came to Shamblee, and
brought with them three birch Canoos, being thirteen in number; which Canoos
they carried seventy Miles by Land, through the Woods and Ice, and then passed in
them sixty Miles by Water, crossing the Lake. They did not arrive at Albany
till February 23d.

Early in the Spring the Enemy appeared a^ insulting as ever: The first that
fell under their Cruelty was Benjamin Prebble of York; but the most affecting
and surprising Stroke was on Col. Hilton of Exeter, who being deeply engaged in
the Ma^ting Affair, and having several Trees of value that were felled fourteen
miles up the Country, went out with seventeen Men to peel off the Bark for fear
of Worms: But not being so careful and watchful as they ought to be, on July
the twenty second they were ambush'd by a Body of Indians that were making a
descent upon us. They took two and killed three, whereof the Colonel was one;
which so surpised the rest, (their Guns being wet) that they all ran without
firing one shot. or making the least Reprisal. This caused the Enemy to
triumph, and the more because they slew a superior Officer, whom they soon
scalpt, and with utmost revenge struck their Hatchets in his Brains, leaving a
Lance at his Heart. Next day about a hundred Men went in pursuit of them, but
could not discover any. One of the slain was buried on the spot, the other two
brought home, where the Colonel was decently interred, the several Troops in
great Solemnity attending his Corpse. He was a Gentleman of good Temper, Courage
and Conduct, respected and lamented by all that knew him.

After this the Enemy appeared very bold and insolent in the Town, in open
Streets; where they carried Captive four Children as they were at play. They
then took John Wedgwood, whom they carried to Canada, and after that killed
John Magoon, of whom one thing is remarkable; that three Nights before he
dreamt he should be slain by the Indians, at a certain place near his Brother's
Barn; which place he frequently visited with a m^lancholly Countenance, telling
several of the Neighborhood, that within a little while he should be killed,
and pointed to the very spot, which fell out accordingly.

After this they bent their fury Westward, where at Water-bury they killed
three, and one at Simsbury. About the same time they fell on Brookfield, and
then at Marlborough, where they shot the Post as he was riding to Hadly. From
thence they went to Chelmsford, where they wounded Major Tyng, who soon after
expired; he was a true lover of his Country, and had very often distinguished
himself a Gentleman of good Valor and Conduct.

August the 2d. between forty and fifty French and Indians fell on
Winter-Harbour, where they killed a Woman and took two Men, one whereof was Mr.
Pendleton Fletcher, which was the fourth time of his Captivity; but he was soon
redeemed by the Garrison. The week after they came with a far superior Number,
killed three, and carried away six, one of the slain they barbarously Skinned,
and made themselves Girdles of his Skin. The last that fell this Season was
Jacob Garland of Cochecho, in his returning from public Worship.

As the Winter approached, Colonel Walton was again preparing to traverse the
Eastern Shore with an hundred and seventy Men, being the usual Season of
visiting their Clam-banks, where one of the Enemy very happily f^ll into his
Hands as they were encamping on an Island; for by the smoke that the English
made, they came near, concluding them to be some of their own Tribe, but
finding themselves deceived, they attempted to escape, which our Men prevented.
The Principal Indian among them was Arrubawikwabemt, chief Sachem of
Naridgwalk, an active bold Fellow, and one of an undaunted Spirit; for when
they ask't several Questions he made them no Reply, and when they threatened him
with Death, he laughed at it with contempt; upon which they delivered him up
unto our friend Indians, who soon became his Executioners; but when the Squaw
saw the destiny of her Husband, she became more flexible, and freely discovered
where each of them encampt. Upon this they went further East, and took three
more; after that a certain Indian (through discontent) surrendered himself, and
informed of Mauxis and several others that were at Penobscot, which our Forces
had regard unto; and as they returned went up Saco River, where they took two,
and killed five more. Now although the Number that we destroyed of them seems
inconsiderable to what they did of ours, yet by Cold, Hunger, and Sickness, at
least a third of them was wasted since the War begun. For as their number at
first (among the several Tribes) were computed four hundred and fifty fighting
Men from Penobscot, Westward, they were now reduced to about three hundred,
which made the Old Men weary of the War, and to covet Peace. At Winter-Harbour
they took Corporal Ayers, but soon released him, without offering him the least
Injury, and then went unto the Fort with a Flag of Truce professing their
desire of a Pacification. Yet in a few Days after some came in an Hostile
manner at Cochecho, where they slew Thomas Downs and three more while at Work
in the Field. After that, they went to York, where they killed one and wounded
another, who afterward got to the Garrison and reported, that as they were
fishing in the Pond they were waylaid by five Indians, one of which ran
furiously at him, and knocked him on the head; after this they Scalp'd him, and
cut him deep in the Neck. He perfectly retained his Senses* but made not the
least motion or struggle, and by this means saved his Life. April the twenty
ninth the like number appeared at Wells, where they killed two Men as they were
planting of Corn. After that they slew John Church of Cochecho,; and then
waylaid the People as they returned from public Worship; where they wounded
one, and laid violent Hands on another, but upon firing their Guns, some who
were before, returned and rescued the Prisoner. Upon this Col. Walton went with
two Companies of Men to Ossipe and Winnepisseocay Ponds, being places of
general Resort for Fishing, Fowling and Hunting; but saw none, only a few
deserted Wigwams; for being so closely pursued from one place to another, they
removed to other Nations* leaving only a few Cutthroats behind, which kept the
Country in a constant Alarm.

Col. Nicholson by the Reduction of Port Royal, (which from that time bears the
Name of Ann^polis Royal) was but the more inflamed with the desire of the
Conquest of Canada. Wherefore upon his return to England, he so effectually
represented to the Queen and Ministry, the great Advantage that would accrue
unto the Crow^ thereby, that he obtained Orders for a sufficient Force both by
Sea and Land, with the assistance of the several Colonies. And for the better
expediting the same, he set sail the latter end of April, some time before the
Fleet, with express Orders uato the several Governors of New England,
New York, the Ierseys, and Philadelphia, to get their Quota's of Men in
readiness. He arrived at B^ston on June the eighth, 1711. to the great Joy and
Satisfaction of the Country. A Congress hereupon was appointed at New London,
being nearest the Center, where the several Governors met, with a fi^m
Resolution of carrying on the important Affairs. On the 25th the Castle gave a
Signal of Ships in the Bay, which proved to be the Fleet: Upon which the Troops
of Guards, and Regiment of Foot were under Arms to receive them: And as his
Excellency was not yet returned, the Gentlemen of the Council and others of
Distinction, went to congratulate them.

Brigadier Hill was Commander in Chief of these her Majestties Troops, and Sr.
Hovende^ Walker Admiral of the Fleet; which consisted of fi^teen Men of War,
forty Transports, a Battalion of M^rines and seven Regiments under Colonel
Kirk, Colonel Segmore, Brigadier Hill, Colonel Disnee, Colonel Windress,
Colonel Clayton and Colonel Kaine, with upwards of five thousand Men, who
arrived safe in Health, and encamped on Noddles Island, where the General
invited the Governor to view them under Arms. They made the finest appearance
that was ever yet seen or known in America. Her Majesty out of her Royal Favor
was also pleased to send six Ships with all manner of Warlike Stores, and a
fine Train of Artillery with forty Horses to draw the same.

It Is surprising to think how vigorously this Expedition was forwarded, while
at Boston, although a Town but of Eighty Years standing, out of a howling
Wilderness; yet scarce an^ Town in the Kingdom (but where Stores are laid up
before) could have effected the same in so short a time. For in less than a
Month the whole Army was supplied with ten weeks Provision, and all other
Necessaries that were wanted; Besides two Regiments of our New England Forces,
under the Command of Colonel Vetch and Colonel Walton; who embarq'd at the
same time in Transports of our own. On the day that the Fleet Sailed, Colonel
Nicholson set out for New York, and from thence for Albany, having ordered
Battoes before, and every thing else on the Inland Frontiers, to be in
readiness for passing the Lake with utmost Application. The Assembly of
New York raised ten thousand Pounds, besides their Proportion of Men, the
Ierseys five, and although Pensilvania was not so free of their Persons because
of their Persuasion, yet were as Generous in their Purse, as any of the other
Colonys in carrying on the Expedition.

Every thing now looked with a Smiling Aspect of Success considering the
powerful Strength by Land and Sea, the former being as fine Regimental Troops
as any that belonged to the Duke of Marlborough's Army; and the latter as
Serviceable Ships as any in the whole Navy, which for better Satisfaction I
have here inserted.

The Swiftzure to lead with Starboard,

The Monmouth with the Larboard Tack aboard.

Ships Names. Captains. Men. Guns: Swiftzure -- Ios^ph ^oans 444 70 Sunderland
Gore 365 60 Enterprise Smith 190 40 Sapphire Cockburn 190 40 Windsor Artiss 365
60 Kingstown Winder 365 60 Montague Walton 365 60 Devonshire Co^per 520 80
Edgar, Sr. H. Walker Admiral 470 70 Humber Colliford 520 80 Dunkirk Rouse 365
60 Feve^sham Paston 196 36 Leopard Cook 280 50 Chester Mathews 280 54 Monmouth
Mitchel 440 70 15 15 5351 890

The first Harbor they made after they sailed from Nantasket, was Cape Gaspey,
from thence they sailed u^ St. Laurence's River, until they got up off the
Virgin-Mountains; the Weather then proving foggy, and the Wind freshning, the
Admiral asked the Pilots what was best to do? who advised that as the Fleet was
on the North Shore, it would be best to bring too, with their heads unto the
Southward: but he obstinately refusing, acted the reverse, and ordered their
heads unto the North, which was so astonishing unto the Pilots, that one and
another foretold their Fear (unto the Officers) and the Destiny that would
attend them before the Morning; which accordingly fell out. For at one of the
Clock nine Ships with 1500. Men were all cast ashore, and most of the rest in
as eminent danger; but so soon as the former struck, they fired their Guns,
which gave Caution to the rest: Some of which wore, and stood off; others were
so encompassed by the Breakers that they were obliged to bring too their
Anchors, which was their last Refuge; but before the day approached, the Wind
happily shifted to W. N. W. upon which they cut their Cables and came to sail.
Soon after a Council of War was called, but the result not known until the
Evening, and then the Flag bore away to Spanish River, without giving the usual
Signal: On which many of the windward Ships were left behind; but a small Man
of War was ordered to Cruise the next day for those that were left, and to take
up such as might be alive among the dead, who were about six hundred. After
this they made toward the Fleet, but were eight days in getting down; during
which time the Wind was Eastwardly, and had our Fleet proceeded, (as it were to
be wished they had) might easily have got unto Quebeck in forty eight Hours.

Upon this disaster the whole Country (and indeed the Nation) was alarmed, and
many Censures and Jelousies arose; some imputing it to Cowardice, but most to
Treachery, and the secret Influence of some Malcontents then at Helm;
otherwise why would a matter of such vast Importance to the British Kingdom, be
hush't up in silence, and the Principal Officers not Summoned to appear. If the
Admiral was in fault wherefore was he not called to an Account? Or why did not
the General to vindicate himself, lay a Remonstrance before the Council Board?
And the Pilots, (who were ordered from hence at so great a Charge to the
Country to represent matters in a true light) been examined? But instead
thereof, dismissed without being asked one Question. However one thing is
remarkable, that among those that were shipwrack'd and lost their lives, there
was but one single Person that belonged to New England among them.

Colonel Nicholson at this juncture was industriously engaged in getting the
Battoes ready for passing the Lake with a considerable Number of Friend
Indians, as well as English, for the attacking of Mount Real, which next to
Quebeck was the place of greatest Importance in all the French Territories. But
just as he was ready to embarque an Express came and gave an Account of the
miserable Disaster that befell the Fleet: Whereas, if he had proceeded, his
whole Army would probably have been cut off; For upon advice of our Fleets
misfortune, the French drew off all their Auxiliaries and most of their Militia
to reinforce Mount Real, being advised of the descent that was making on them.
So great was our loss in this Enterprise, that it Affected the whole Country
seven Years after; as the Advance and Expense of so much Money and Provisions
might well do. And it as much flusht the Enemy; for out of the ruins of our
Vessels they not only got much Plunder, but fortified their Castle and out
Batteries with a considerable Number of Cannon. They moreover stirred up the
French and Indians about Annapolis Royal to revolt from their Allegiance to the
Crown. Capt Pigeon being ordered up the River for Timber to repair the Fort,
was violently attackt by no less than one hundred and fifty, who killed the
whole Boats Crew, wounded the Fort Major, and afterward very barbarously
Murdered him: They also slew Capt. Forbis the Engineer, besides several others,
and took thirty four of them Prisoners. Soon after this, we were informed of
the Arrival of our British Forces in England, on the 9th. of October at
Portsmouth, where on the 15th. following, the Admirals Ship the Edgar was
accidentally blown up, with 400 Seamen and several other People on board, all
the Officers being on shore.

The reduction of Canada was a matter of great Consequence, not only to the
Interest of New England and the adjacent Colonies; but also to the whole
British Empire. Not that in it self it is of such intrinsic Value; for that
the Cold is so great, and the Ice so rigid, as to imbargo it more than half the
Year: But as the ingenious Mr. Dummer observes in a Letter of his to a Noble
Lord in the Year 1712, the Consequence would be very valuable; for as it
extends above one thousand Leagues toward the Messisippi, it would require a
vast consumption yearly of the English Manufactury to support it; there being
so great a number of several Nations that live behind, which bring down vast
quantities of Furs of all sorts, as amount to an incredible Sum. But her
Majesty's Royal Aim, as he notes, was not so immediately to advance a Trade, as
the Security and Peace of her good Subjects in North America; being thoroughly
apprized that so long as the French inhabit there, so long the English would be
in hazard.

The Hudson's Bay Company, as well as Newfoundland, have given a melancholy
Account of the many Ravages that have been committed there by the powerful
Assistance of those Salvages. I Am not insensible that many have blamed
New England, and cast the Odium wholly on them for not succeeding in this
Enterprise; but why New England should be branded with such Infamy, I never
could yet hear the Grounds, or any Reason assigned, but what sprung from some
capricious Brains, who were no well wishers either to the Cause or Country, and
would stigmatize us if possibe, as Enemies to the Church, and Disloyal to our
Sovereign. But why Enemies to the Church? or wherein is it that we differ from
them? save only in the Ceremonies, which none of them will allow to be
Essential. We indeed are called Dissenters; but many of those that are of the
Church, dissent more from one another than we do: For what we dissent from, is,
(as they themselves term it) only in matters of Indifferency; but many of them
are Dissenters from their own Articles of Faith. Is not our Doctrine the same?
the Sabbath as strictly solemnized? and our Mode of Worship as agreeable to the
primitive Constitution, as any other Church in the World? Not but that we have
degenerated from the pious Steps of our Forefathers; yet I am bold to say,
that as to number, there are as many sincere and good People in New England, as
in any one part of the World. But I beg pardon for this Digression, which is
only to wipe off the Calumny that is too often cast upon us. Now as to our
Loyalty, such pregnant Instances may be given thereof, as will be surprising to
Posterity. Witness our generous and no^^e Undertaking in the reduction of Port
Royal under Sir William Phips; and after that in the Year 1690. in our descent
on Canad^, where we lost many hundred brave Men, and at our own Cost expended
upwards of one hundred and forty thousand Pounds in Money, without any
Allow^nce or Assistance from the Crown. After this ^ new descent on Port Royal,
which although we miscarried in that also, yet as Mr. Dummer observes, we were
not dispirited in raising another Body of Troops under the Command of Colonel
Nicholson. And all this under the oppression of twenty Years War before by the
French and Indians. Yet in the last fatal Expedition, we supplied more than our
Quota which the Queen assigned; Besides great Sums were advanced to furnish the
British Forces, which but few Towns in the Kingdom of England were able to
effect; and none could do it with greater Alacrity and cheerfulness of Spirit
then we did.

In the History of Sr. Sebastian Cobbet, which I before hinted, we were
informed tha^ he took the great River of St. Laurence for the Crown of Great
Britain in the Reign of King Henry the seventh, which according to the French
H^storians, contains almost 2000 Miles in length and 840 in breadth, Situate
between the 39^h and 64th Degrees of North La^itude, which takes in Acadia,
Newfoundland and Terra De Laborador. This great Territory in ^he beginning of
the last Century, by the Contrivance of some then at Helm, was taken possession
off by the French, who since that have made many fine Settlements, more
especially at Mount Real and Queeb^ck. The latter is called a City commanded by
a Castle, which stands on an Eminence* in which are five Churches, a Cathedral,
a Bishop and 12 Prebendaries. Our unhappy Disappointment against Canada gave
great uneasiness to the Country, and was matter of fear least new Reprisals
would be made on the out skirts; wherefore it was determined that Colonel
Walton with one hundred and eighty Men should go to Penobscot and the adjacent
Territories, where he burnt two Fishing Vessels (that were preparing to come
upon us early in the Spring) and took several Captives, with some Plunder.

But New England at this time was not alone insulted. The Jesuits were every
way endeavoring to stir up the Indians, and at last did influence them to make
a descent on the Borders of Virginia, where they murdered a great many of the
Palatines: Upon which a considerable Number was raised, who went in quest of
them, and destroyed four Towns, besides a great many whom ^hey took Prisoners.
Some of them were supposed to be the Senakees, who are a Branch of the Five
Nations. Another Tribe called the Shacktaus, made many Incursions on Carolina;
upon which Col. Gibs the Governor commissionated Capt. Hastings and B -- the
Indian Emperor, who was in League with the English; as also Capt. Welsh, with
the Assistance of the Chicksha Indians, to fall on them in several parts, and
in a little time got to their Headquarters, where the Enemy in three Divisions
endeavored to surround them, but after a smart Engagement, received a perfect
Overthrow; which was followed with the burning and destroying four hundred
Houses or Wigwams. The Friend Indians appeared bold and active, but for want of
Discipline and a good Regulation, did not the Service that otherwise they
might^ After this Col. Barnwell went in pursuit of another Nation called the
Tuskarorahs, and entirely ro^ted them.

I now return to our Fronties, where at Exeter, April 16th. 1712. they killed
Mr. Cuningham as he was traveling ^he Road from Mr. Hilton's to Exeter: After
that they shot Samuel Webber, between Y^^k and Cape Neddick: Others sell on
several Teams in Wells, where they slew three and wounded as many more. One of
the slain was Lieut. Li^tlefield, who a little before was redeemed out of
Captivity, and a Person very much lamented. Soon after they appeared in the
middle of the Town, and carried away two from thence. They went to Spruce
Creek, where they killed a Boy and took another, and then went to York, but
being pursued made their escape. Another Party fell on the upper branch of
Oyster-River, where they shot Ieremi^^ Cromett, and three Miles higher burnt a
S^w-mill with a great many thousand of Boards. Next day they ^lew Ensign T^ttle
at Tole-End, and wounded a Son of Lieut. Her^'s as he stood Sentinel. May 14th
about thirty French and Indians who had a design on York, surpised ^ Scout of
ours as they were marching to Cape-Neddick, where they slew Sergant Nalt^n, and
took seven besides: the remainder fought on a retreat till they ^^t to a Rock,
which for some time proved ^ good Barrier to them, and there continued until
they were releived, by the Vigilant Care of Capt. Willard. About this time
fifty of our English who went up Merrimack-River returned, with the good
Account of eight Indians that they had slain, and of considerable Plunder
besides which they had taken, without the loss of one Man.

I^ne 1st they again came to Spruce-Creek, where they shot John Pickernell as
he was locking his door, and going to the Garrison; they also wounded his Wife
and knocked a Child on the head, which they Scalpt, yet afterward it recovered.
Two days after they were seen at A^sbury, then at Kingstown, where they wounded
Ebenezer Stephens, and Stephen Gilman, the latter of which they took alive and
inhumanely Murdered. After this they killed one at Newchawanick, and on July
18th. fell on a Company at Wells, where they slew another and took a Negro
Captive, who afterward made his Escape. The Sabbath after they endeavored to
intercept the People at Dover as they came from Worship; upon which a Scout was
sent in persuit, but made no discovery. Yet in the intermitting time they took
two Children from Lieut. He^d's Garrison, and not having time to Scalp them,
cut off both their Heads, and carried them away. There was not a Man at that
time at home; however one E^ster Jones supplied the place of several; for she
courageously advanced the Watch-box, crying ^loud, Here they are, come on, come
on; which so terrified them as to make them draw off, without doing any further
Mischief. The Enemy at this time were thought to be very numerous, for they
appeared in many Parties, which occasioned an additional number to be left to
cover the Frontiers, under the Command of Capt. Davis, those vigi^ant Care
(through the blessing of God on it) kept them from doing any further Mischief*
September 1st they killed John Spencer, and wounded Dependence Stover. At this
time a Sloop from Placen^ia, with forty five French and Indians was ^^uising on
our Coast, which Capt. Carver obser^ing, gave her chase, and took her: But our
Fishery at Cape Sables, through the defect of the Guard-Ship, were great
Sufferers; where no less ^han twenty fell into their Hands.

The last Action that happened (of any moment) this War, was at Mr. Plaisted's
Marriage with Capt. Wheelwright's Daughter of We^ls, where happened a great
concourse of P^^^le, who as they were p^eparing to mount in ord^^ (...) their
return, found two of their Ho^ses (...); upon which Mr. D^wning with (...) and
others went out to seek them; bu^ (...) had go^^ many Rods, the two former
(...) killed and (...) others taken. The Noise of the Guns soon alarmed the
Guests, and Capt* Lane, Capt. Robi^son and Capt. Herd, with several others
mounted their Horses, ordering twelve Soldiers in the mean time to run over the
Field, being the nearer way: But before the Horsemen got far, they were
ambush'd by another Party, who killed Capt. Robinson, and dismounted the rest;
and yet they all escaped excepting the Bridegroom, who in a few days after was
redeemed by the prudent Care of his Father, at the Expense of more than three
hundred Pounds. Capt. Lane and Capt. Harmon mustered what Strength they could,
and held a dispute with them some time, but there was little or no Execution
done on either side.

Not long after this we had advice of a Suspension of Arms between the two
Crowns, which the Indians being apprized of, came in with a Flag of Truce and
desired a Treaty. Their first Application was to Capt. Moodey at Casco,
desiring that the Conferance might be there; but the Governor not willing so
far to condesend, ordered it to be at Portsmouth, where they accordingly met
July 11th. 1713. three Deligates from St. John's, three from Kenebeck,
including the other Settlements from Penecook, Amasecontee, Naridwalk, Saco,
and all other Adjacent Places; where Articles of Pacification were drawn up,
which I have hereunto annexed. viz.

WHereas for some Years last past we have made a breach of our Fidelity and
Loyalty to the Crown of Great Britain, and have made open Rebellion against her
Majesty's Subjects, the English Inhabiting the Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and
other her Majesty's Territories in New England; and being now sensible of the
Miseries which we and our People are reduced unto thereby; We whose names are
hereunto subscribed, being Delegates of all the Indians belonging to
Naridgwalk, Narahamegock, Amasecontee, Pigwacket; Penecock, Rivers of S^.
John's and Merimack, parts of her Majesty's Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay,
and New Hampshire, within her Majesty's Sovereignty, having made Application to
his Excellency Joseph Dudley, Esquire* Captain General and Governor in Chief in
and over the said Provinces, that the Troubles which we have unhappily raised
or occasioned against her Majesty's Subjects the English and our selves may
cease and have an end; and that we may again enjoy her Majesty's Grace and
Favor: And each of us respectivly for our selves, and in the Names and with
the free Consent of all the Indians belonging to the several Places and Rivers
aforesaid, and all other Indians within the said Provinces of the
Massachusets-Bay, and New Hampshire, hereby acknowledging our selves the Lawful
Subjects of our Sovereign Lad^ Queen Anne, and promising our hearty Submission
and Obedience to the Crown of Great Britain, do solemnly Covenant Promise and
Agree with the said Joseph Dudley, Governor, and all such as shall be
hereafter in the place of Captain General and Governor in Chief of the said
Provinces and Territories on her Majesty's behalf in form following; That is to
say, That at all times forever from and after the date of these Presents, we
will cease and forbear all acts of Hostility toward all the Subjects of Great
Britain, and not offer the least Hurt o^ Violence to them or any of them in
their Persons and Estates; but will henceforth hold and mainiain a fi^m and
constant Amity and Friendship with all the English, and will never entertain
any Treasonable Conspirasy with any other Nation to their disturbance: That her
Majesty's Subjects the English shall and may quietly and peaceably enter upon,
improve and forever enjoy all and singular the Rights of Land and former
Settlements, Properties and Possessions within the the Eastern parts of said
Provinces of the Massachusets-Ba^ and New Hampshire, together with the Islands
Inlets, Shores, Beaches and Fishery within the same, without any Molestation or
Claim b^ us or any other Indians; and be in no wise Molested or disturbed
therein; Saving unto the Indians their own Ground, and free liberty of Hunting,
Fishing, Fowling, and all other Lawful Liberties and Privileges, as on the
eleventh day of August in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and
ninety three: That for Mutual Safety and Benefit, all Trade and Comerce which
hereafter may be allowed betwixt the English and the Indians, shall be only in
such Places, and under such Management and Regulation, as shall be stated by
her Majesty's Government of the said Provinces respectively.

And to prevent Mischiefs and Inconveniences, the Indians shall not be allowed
for the present, o^ until they have liberty from the respective Goverments to
come near unto any English Plantations or Settlements on this side of Saco
River.

That if any Controversy or Difference happen hereafter, to and betwixt any of
the English and the Indians for any real or supposed Wrong or Injury done on
the one side or the other, no private Revenge shall be taken by the Indians for
the same, but proprr Application shall be made to her Majesty's Goverments upon
the place for remedy thereof in due course of Justice; we hereby submiting our
selves to be ruled and governed by her Majesty's Laws, and desire to have the
Protection and Benefit of the same.

We confess that we have contrary to all Faith and Justice broken our Articles
with Sir William Phips, Governor in the year of our Lo^d God 1693. and with
the Earl of Bellamont in the year 1699.

And the assurance we gave to his Excellency Joseph Dudley Esquire* in the ^ear of
our Lord God, 1702. in the Month of August, and 1703. in the Month of July,
notwithstanding we have been well treated by the said Governors. But we
resolve for the future not to be drawn into any perfidious Treaty or
Correspondance to the hurt of any of her Majesty's Subjects of the Crown of
Great Britain; and if we know any such, w^ will seasonably reveal it to the
English.

Wherefore we whose Names are hereunto subscribed, Delegates for the several
Tribes of Indians belonging to the River of Kenebeck, Amerasacoggin, St.
John's, Saco, Merimack, and the parts adjacent, being sensibe of our great
Offense and Folly in not complying with the aforesaid Submision and Agreements,
and also the Sufferings and Mischiefs that we have thereby exposed our selves
unto, do in all humble and submissive manner, cast our selves upon her Majesty
for Mercy, and Pardon for all our past Rebellions, Hostilities and violations,
of our Promises; praying to be received unto her Majesty's Grace and Favor.

And for and on behalf of our selves, and all other the Indians belonging to
the several Rivers and Places aforesaid, within the Sovereignty of her Majesty
of Great Britain, do again acknowledge, and confess our hearty and sincere
Obedience unto the Crown of Great Britain, and do solemnly renew, and confirm
all and every of the Articles and Agreements contained in the former and
present Submission.

This Treaty to be humbly laid before her Majesty for her Ratification and
further Order. IN WITTNESS wereof we the Delegates aforesaid, by Name
Kizebenuit, Iteansis, and Iackoid for Penobscot, Joseph and Aeneas, for St.
John's, Warrueensit, Wadacanaquin, and Bomazeen for Kenebeck, have hereunto set
our hands and Seals this 13th. day of July, 1713.

Signed Sealed and delivered in the presence of us, Edmund Quinsey Spencer
Phip^ Will. Dudley Shad. Walton Josiah Will^rd etc.
Signum Kirebenuit Signum Warraeensitt Signum Bomaseen Signum Wadacanaquin
Signum Aeneas Signum Itea^sis Signum Iackoid Signum Iosep^


Province of New Hampshire.
THe Submission and Pacification of the Eastern Indians was made and done the
thirteenth Day of July, 1713. Annoque Regni Reginae nunc Magnae Britaniae
Duodecimo.

Present, his Excellency Joseph Dudley, Esquire Captain General and Governor in
Chief, in and over her Majesty's Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay and
New Hampshire in New England, and Vice Admiral of the same.

Councillors of the Massachusetts.
Samuel Sewall, Esqr. Jonathan Corwin, Esqr. Penn Townsend, Esqr. John
Appleton, Esqr. John Higginson, Esqr. Andrew Belcher, Esqr. Thomas Noyes, Esqr.
Samuel Appleton, Esqr. Ichabod ^laisted, Esqr. John Wheelwright, Esqr. Benjamin
Lynde* Esqr.
And of New Hampshire.
Will. Vaughan, Esqr. Peter Coffin, Esqr. Robert Elliot, Esqr. Rich. Waldron,
Esqr. Nathan. Wear, Esqr. Sam. Penhallow, Esqr. John Plaisted, Esqr. Mark
Hunking, Esqr. John Wentworth. Esqr.
For a further Ratific^^ion of this Treaty, several Gentlemen of both
Governments went from Portsmouth to Casco, where a great Body of Indians we^e
assembled, to know the Result of matters: It being a Custom among them on all
such Occasions, to have the whole of their Tribes present; having no other
Record of conveying to Posterity, but what they communicate from Father to Son,
and so to the Son's Son. When the several Articles were read and explained, by
Interpreters upon Oath, (the Delegates being present) they signified an
unanimous Consent and Satisfaction, by loud Huzza's and Acclamations of Joy:
Many Presents were then made them, which were thankfully received, and every
Tribe had their proportion given out; but they were so disorderly, that Mauxis
(although he was the chief Sagamore in all the Eastern parts) was robbed by the
Morning of all he had; upon which he made a miserable Complaint unto the
English next Day, of the unruliness of his young Men, who had stolen away all
he had, therefore begged a new Supply. But although their Government is so
Anarchical, and their Chiefs have so little Respect and Honor shown them, yet
in their Council they observe a very excellent Decorum; not suffering any to
speak but one at a time; which is delivered with such a remarkable Pathos, and
surprising Gravity, that there is neither Smile nor Whisper to be observed,
until he that speaks has finished his Discourse, who then sits down, and after
that another rises up.

The Peace thus concluded and so firmly ratified, gave matter of Encouragment
to the Eastern Inhabitants for re-settling their former Habitations; who were
also countenanced and assisted by the Government, even from Cape-Porpas to
Ke^ebeck River, where several Gentlemen who had l^rge tracts of Land, granted a
hundred Acres to every one for Encouragment that would go and Settle;
supporting a Ministe^ besides (for so^e time) and employed a Sloop at their own
Charge for carrying and re-carrying the Inhabitants, with their Stock; which
gave so great Encouragment, that several Towns began to be settled, as
Bromswick, Topsham, Augusta, George Town, etc. In which a great many fine
Buildings were erected, with several Saw-mills, etc.

A Fishery was also undertaken by the ingenious Doct^r Noyes, where twenty
Vessels were employed at a time. He afterwares built a stone Garrison at
Augusta at his own Charge, which was judged to be the best in the Eastern
Country; and for a while was kept at the public Cost, but afterward slighted;
which occasioned the Inhabitants to with draw, and then the Indians burnt it
with several other Houses;

In Kene^eck River the S^urgeon Fis^ery was also begun and carried on with so
great Success, that many thousand Caggs were made in a Season; and ^steemed as
good as any that ever came from Hamb^ough or Norway; Besides vast quantities of
Pipe ^^aves, Hogshead and Barrel, Pine Boards, Plank, and Timber of all sorts,
which were not only tra^sported to Boston, but to ^^reign places; Husban^ry
also began to thrive, and great stocks of Catte^ ^ere raised.

The F^^nch Missionaries perceiving the Growth of these Pl^ntations, soon
^nimated the Indians to disrest the^, by insinuating that the Land was theirs,
and that the English invaded their Properties; which was a vile and wrong
Suggestion, ^or that their Conveyance were from the Ancient Sagamores, at least
seventy Years before; and the Proprietors did not settle so high up by several
Miles as was formerly possessed b^ their Predecessors.

However the Indians could not be sa^i^fied, but so threatened the Inhabitants,
that many withdrew, and others were discouraged from going to Settle. Soon
after they killed many of their Cattle, and committed many other O^trages.

No sooner was this Advice brought unto his Excellency, Samuel S^ute Esquire. who
was ^ow Captain General and Governor in Chi^f, in and over the Provinces of
the Massachusets-B^y, and N^w-Hampshire, etc. (and one zealously affected for
the Interest of the Country) but he appointed a Congress at Ar^wsick in
Kenebeck River, in August 1717. where a great number of In^i^ns, with the
Chiefs of every Tribe accordingly met. And some of the Principal Gentlemen of
both Provinces accompanied his Excellency to the place appointed. The
Complaints on each side being impartially heard and debated* the Original Deeds
from the Ancient Sagamores were produced and explained; having interpreters on
Oath. The Articles drawn up and signed in the year 1^13. were again read and
ratified, to the seeming Satisfaction of the Principal Sachems, who inclined to
P^^ce; and imputed the late Miscarriages unto the young Men, but were now
resolved on a firm Harmony, and would in no respect violate the former
Treaties. Upon this his Exc^^^enc^ made them several Presents, which they
thank^ully received, and in acknowledgment thereof, r^turned him a Belt of
Wampam, with some Beavo^r Skins: After this they drank the Kings Health, and
promised Allegience to the Crown of Great Britain; so that every thing had now
the promising Aspect of a lasting Peace. One thing I cannot here omit; three
days after our departure, a number of Indians went a Duck-hunting, which was a
season of the year that the old ones generally shed their Feathers in, and the
young are not so well flusht as to be able to fly; they drove them like a flock
of Sheep before them into the Creeks, where without either Powder or Shot they
killed at one time four thousand and six hundred; for they followed them so
close that they knocked them down with Billets and Paddles, and sold a great
number of them to the English for a Penny a d^zen, which is their practice
yearly, though they seldom make so great a Slaughter at once. But before two
years were expired, they again began to insult the Inhabitants, being spurred on
by the Jesuits, which occasioned a Scout of fifty or sixty Men to be sent out,
who kept them in some awe. But in the year 1720* they began to be more
insolent, and appeared in greater Bodies; upon which Colonel Walton was
ordered with about two hundred Men to guard the Frontiers, and wa^ after that
appointed with Cap^. Moody, Harman Penhallow, and Wainright to send to their
Chiefs for Satisfaction for the late Hostilitys which they had done in killing
the Cattle, etc. The Indians fearing the event promised to pay two hundred
Skins, and for their fidelity to deliver up f^ur of their young Men as
Hostages. After this they became tolerably quiet, but in the Spring grew as
insolent as before; especially in Kenebeck, where some time in July they came
with ninety Canoos on Padishals Island, which lies opposite to Arowsick, and
sent to speak with Capt. Penhallow, who fearing an intreague, refused. Upon
which one hundred and fifty of them went over to him, with whom he held a
Conference; especially with Mounsieur Delachase, and Sabastian Ralle who were
Jesuits; Mounsieur Croizen from Canada, and St Casteen from Penobscot came also
along with them, who brought a Letter for Governor Shute in behalf of the
several Tribes, importing, That if the English did not remove and quit their
Land in three weeks, they would burn their Hou^es and kill them as also their
Cattle. Upon this an additional Number of Soldiers were sent under the command
of Colonel Thaxter and Lieut. Col. Goff; and several Gentlemen of the Council
were also appointed to enquire into the ground of these Tumults, and if
possible to renew the Pacification; who accordingly went and sent Scouts to
call the Indians in, but they slighted the Message with derision. Hereupon the
Soldiers were ordered to continue, and reinforce the Garrisons that Winter. But
in the Summer they renewed their insults, and on the thirteenth of June 1722
about sixty of them in twenty Canoos, came and ^ook nine Families in
Merry-m^eting-Bay, most of which they afterward set at liberty, but sent Mr.
Hamilton, Love, Handson, Trescot and Edgar to Canada; who with great difficulty
and expense afterward got clear. They then made a descent on St. Georges,
where they burnt a Sloop, took several Prisoners, and sought the Garrison some
time; and in a Month after came a greater Body from Penobscot, who killed five
and engaged the Fort twelve Days; being very much encouraged by the influence
of the Friar that was with them. But finding they could make no great
impression, endeavored to undermine it, and had made a cons^derable progress
therein, till upon the falling of much Rain, the Trenches caved in, which
caused the seige to break up, with the loss of twenty of them in the Engagment,
as we were afterward informed. About the same time Capt. Samuel with five
others boarded Lieut. Tilton, as he lay at Anchor a fishing near Damaris Cov^:
They pinioned him and his Brother, and beat them very sorely: But at last one
got clear and released the other; who then fell with great Fury upon the
Indians, threw one overboard, and mortally wounded two more.

Capt. Savage, Capt. Blin, and Mr. Newton, who at this time were coming from
Annapolis, and knew nothing of their Ravages, went into Passamaquady for Water.
They were no sooner ashore, but found themselves ^em'd in by a Body of Indians,
the French basely standing by and suffering it. They wanted to divide the Cargo
of the S^^op among them, and at last sent Capt. Savage on board to procure some
Ransom. But the Wind rising, he was forced ^ff* and made the best of his wa^
to Boston: Those that he left (after some Difficulty and Expense) were released.

Capt. Harmon who was now in Kenebeck, went up the River with a Detachment of
thirty four Men, and seeing some Fire^, went ashore in the Night, where he came
on eleven Canooos: The Indians were lying round the Fire, and so wearied, by
much Dancing the day before upon the Success they had, that they stumbled over
them as they lay asleep. Reports were various as to the number of Indians that
were then slain; some say eighteen, others not so many: However they brought
away fifteen Guns; and at a little distance found the Hand of an Englishman
laid on the stump of a Tree, and his Body mangled after a barbarous manner;
having his Tongue, Nose and private parts cut off: They brought away the Body,
and gave it a decent Burial. It was found to be the Body of Moses Eaton of
Salisbury.

In this brave attempt of Capt. Harmon, which was effected in ten minutes, we
lost not one Man, yet at the same time a great Body of Indians lay near, who
being startled at the Noise that was made, arose and fired several Guns, but
did no Damage.

The Country at this time was in a surprising Ferment, and generally disposed
to a War; but the Governor and Council could not readily come into it,
considering the vast Expense and Effusion of Blood that would unavoidably
follow: Besides some were not satisfied with the Lawfulness of it at this time:
For al^ho' they believed the Indians to be very criminal in many respects, yet
were of Opinion that the English had not so punctually observed the Promises
made to them of Trading-houses for the benefit of Commerce and Traffic, and
for the preventing of Frauds and Extor^^ons, too common in the private dealings
of the English with them. But the grand abuse to them is the selling of strong
Drink to them, which has occasioned much quarreling and Sin and the loss of
many Lives, to the great Scandal of Religion, and reproach of the Country. His
Excellency was sensible of the Promises that he made them at the Treaty of
Pacification; which he failed not to lay before the General Assembly; but he
met with so much opposition that nothing could be effected. The firing an
Armourer at the Public Charge, was also engaged, but nothing done therein; So
that the Indians were full of resentments, and thought themselves wronged. Yet
all this time they made no application unto the Government for redress, which
they ought to have done by the Articles of Agreement, but broke forth into
Horrid and cruel Outrages, by burning killing and destroying. At last the
G^vernour by repeated Addresses from the People, was obliged to call the
Council together to concert what was proper to be done, who advised, to the
proclaiming an open War. But their not cosulting beforehand with the other
Governments was certainly a great oversight, who probably would have come into
it, and thereby have helped to support the Charge, which now lay wholly on the
Massachusetts and Newhampshire.

Proclamation.
WHereas the Indians inhabiting the Eastern parts of this Province,
notwithstanding their repeated Submissions to his Majesty's Crown and
Government, their public and solemn Treatys and engagments* entered into with
the Government here established, to demean themselves peaceably and amicably
toward his Majesty's good Subjects of this Province; and notwithstanding the
kind and good Treatment they have received from the Government, have for some
Years last past appeared in considerable Numbers in an hostile manner, and
given disturbance to his Majesty's Subjects, in the Eastern parts of this
Province, killing their Cattle and threatening destruction to their Persons and
Estates; and in abuse of the Lenity and Forbearance of the Government, have
lately with the utmost Injustice and Treachery proceeded to plunder, despoil,
and take Captive many of his Majesty's good Subjects, to assault, take, burn,
and destroy Vessels upon the Seacoasts, and Houses and Mills upon the Land; to
wound some, and in a most barbarous, and cruel manner to Murder others, of the
Inhabitants of this Province; and in a way of open Rebellion and Ho^tility to
make an Audacious and furious ass^ult upon one of his Majesty's Forts when the
King's Colors were flying.

I do therefore by and with the advice of his Majesty's Council, hereby declare
and proclaim the said Eastern Indians, with their Confederates, to be Robbers,
Traitors and Enemies to his Majesty King George, his Crown and Dignity; and
that they be henceforth proceeded against as such: Willing and Requiring ^ll
his Majesty's good Subjects, as they shall have Opportunity, to do and exec^te
all acts of Hostility against them; Hereby also forbidding all his Majesty's
good Subjects to hold any Correspondence with the said Indians, or to give Aid,
Comfort, Succor or Relief unto them, on penalty of the Laws in that case made
and provided. And whereas there be some of the said Indians who have not been
concerned in the perfidious and barbarous Acts beforementioned, and many may be
desirous to put themselves under the Protection of this Government:

To the intent therefore that utmost Clemency may be shown to such, I do hereby
grant and allow them to come in and render themselves to the commanding Officer
of the Forces, or to the respective Officer of any Party or Parties in the
Service; provided it may be within forty Days from this Time. And to the intent
that none of our Friend Indians may be exposed, or any Rebels or Enemy Indians
may escape on pretense of being Friends; I do hereby strictly forbid any of the
said Indians to move out of their respective Plantations, or such other places
whereto they shall be assigned, or to come into any English Town or District,
within the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay or the County of York, without being
attended with such Men as I shall appoint to oversee them, at their peril, and
as they tender their own safety. And further, I forbid all the Friend Indians
to hold Communion with, harbor or conceal any of the said Rebels, or Enemy
Indians; requiring them to seize and secure all such that may come among them,
and to deliver them up to Justice.

And all Military Commission-Officers are hereby authorized and commanded to
put this Declaration and Order in Execution.

Given at the Council Chamger in Boston, the twenty fifth of July, 1722. SAMVEL
SHVTE.
Josiah Willard, Secr.
GOD Save the King.
The abovesaid Declaration (for substance) was also given out the Week after,
at the Council Chamger at Portsmouth, in the Province of Newhampshire.

Now although the Settlements in Kenebeck were the first that were molested, yet
it is not to be supposed that the bent of the Enemies Fury was on them alone, as
some would insinuate; for at the same time they interrupted the Fishery
throughout all Nova Scotia; many have reflected on the Government for suffering
a Fort to be at St. Georges, as if that did irritate the Indians; but why the
Proprietors might not make an improvement thereof, as well as any others on
their right of Purchase I know not; considering that it was granted from the
Crown, and no exemption made at the Treaty of Peace. Yet at the same time I
must be free to say, that there was too great indulgence at first in the
Government in s^ffering so many Townships at so great a distance to be laid out
at once, unless they were more peopled; which has since been the occasion not
only of a vast Expense, but a great effusion of Blood.

The number of Vessels were about sixteen which the Enemy took at Canso, as
they went into the Harbors for their Necessity; which so soon as Governor
Philipps was apprised of, he summoned the several Masters ashore with the
Sailors, and proposed the fitting out of two Sloops well Manned for recov^ring
the Vessels and Captives, which being approved of, he forthwith ordered the
Drums to beat for Volunteers, and in less then half a day fixed them out with
about twenty Men in each, under the command of Capt. Eliot and Capt. Robinson,
who freely offered their services; but as Capt. Eliot out sailed the other, he
got first to a Harbor called Winpague, where he discovered some Vessels, and
bore directly down upon them, 'till he came pretty near. The Indians being
flush't with Success, and having thirty nine on board one of the Vessels which
they had took, and seeing no more Men on board the English then what was usual,
commanded them to strike ^or that they were their Prize. Unto whom Capt. Eliot
replied that he was hastening to them; and in an instant called his Men on Deck,
who fired on them with a loud Huzza, and clapped them on board; which was so
surprising a Salutation, that they made a most dreadful yelling. However they
resisted so well as they could for about half an hour, in which time Capt.
Eliot received three Wounds, when Mr. Broadstreet, who commanded the Soldiers,
entered with Hand- Granado's, most of the Indians jumpt overboard, who were
shot in the Water. Those that ran down in the hold, were tore in pieces by the
Shells, so that only five escaped, who were wounded. One of our Men was killed,
and seveveral ^urt, particularly the Corporal of the Troops, who had five
Swan-shot in his Body. Capt. Eliot being ill of his Wounds, was obliged to
return, carrying with him seven Vessels into Canso, which he retook with
fifteen Captives, six hundred Quintals of Fish, and two heads of the Chiefs of
those Indians that were among them. Upon this the Governor ordered the same
Sloop back with a fresh supply of Men to reinforce Capt. Robinson, who in a
Week after brought in two Indian Scalps, a Scooner and a Sloop which they took
at Mallegash.

After that he met with a French Man and an English Captive, who informed of a
Body of Indians and five Vessels that lay at a little distance, which he
immediately went in pursuit of; but fearing the event, was not willing at first
to engage them, but kept at some distance, and then three Canoos with three
Indians in each double armed drew near, one of which came on board, as the rest
lay on their Paddles, whom they treated friendly in expectation of a greater
Prize. But the Indian growing jealous attempted to escape, and presented his
Gun to Lieut. Iephson's breast, which he putting by, shot him dead. Upon this
they fired upon those in the Canoos, and killed three. The Enemy was so
numerous ashore, that he thought it not safe to encounter them; however he took
one Vessel. At this time they had twenty of our English Captives, but could not
come to a fair Capitulation about their Redemption. However the Captain warned
them to use them well, for as we had thirty of theirs at Annapolis, twenty at
Boston, and as many more at Canso, as they treated ours, so we would theirs.
Mr. Broadstreet now steered to the Westward of the Harbor where Capt. Eliot
had the dispute before mentioned, where he retook three Vessels more, but could
see neither Captive nor Indians. The Day after Capt. Blin very happily arrived
with a Flag of Truce, and redeemed seven Vessels and twenty four Captives, who
otherwise would have been put to Death. From thence he sailed to the Cape, and
in his returning back, took three or four Indians, which he carried to Boston.
Capt. Southack being informed of a small Body that was then at Astagenash in
the Gulf of St. Lawrence, where Monsieur Golden the famous Friar did reside,
had an intent to visit him; but in his passage through the Gutt was happily
diverted, where meeting with two Canoos, in which were six Indians he killed
one, and took the other five.

The General Assembly not finding the former Bounty sufficiently encouraging to
Volunteers, now passed an Act of one hundred pounds a Scalp to all such as
supported themselves, and whoever was subsisted by the Public, should have
sixty pounds for the like: That any Company or Troop issuing forth upon an
Alarm, should over and above the Establishment have thirty pounds, and an
encouraging Reward besides, for all Prisoners that they took; and whatever
Plunder might be taken should be shared among them: And if any Volunteers or
detached Soldiers should happen to be wounded or maimed in the Service, that
during the continuance of such Wound or Maim, he shall be allowed such a
Stipend or Pension as the General Court should think fit to order.

September the 10th we had a surprising Account from Arowsick of four or five
hundred, Canada and Cape S^ble Indians, that fell upon them early in the
Morning, who probably would have said all desolate, had they not been
seasonably discovered by a small Guard which Capt. Penhallow was sending out
for assisting the Neighborhood to gather in the Corn; who killed one and
wounded three more of the Company: The report of which Guns did so alarm the
Inhabitants, that they with most of their Substance got seasonably into the
Garrison. Their first appearance seemed terrible, considering their Number,
with the fewness of those that were to defend; who fought the Garrison some
time, and shot Samuel Brooking through a Port-hole, after that they had killed
fifty head of Cattle, and burnt twenty six dwelling Houses. The same Day in the
Evening came Col. Walton and Capt. Harmon, with about thirty Men in two
Whale-boats, who with those of Capt. Temple and Penhallow's Men, (that could be
spared out of the Garrisons) made about seventy, and gave them Battle some
time: But the Enemy were so numerous, that they were like to have hemmed them
in, had they not fought upon a retreat.

In the Night they drew off, without much cause of Triumph, and went up the
River, where they attackt Mr. Stratton, as he was turning dow^ in his Sloop,
whom they mortally wounded; then went to Richmond, where some time they held a
dispute with the Garrison, and afterward drew off. The last that fell this
Season w^^ a Man at Berwick.

His Excellency's Affairs now calling him to Great Britain, the Government of
the Massachusetts was wholly devolved on the Honorable William Dummer, Esquire.
Lieut. Governor; during whose Administration, there were as many remarkable
Turns of Divine Providence, (respecting the Enemy) as have happened since the
War commenced; whose Prudence and good Conduct have made him acceptable unto
all.

The first Alteration that he made, was in Commissionating Col. Westbrook as
Chief in the Eastern Affairs; who on the 10th of February marched to Penobscot,
and Capt. Harmon at the same time up Amanascoggin River, but neither of them
had any Success, save burning their Chapel and some Wigwams. Capt. Sayward
with a Company of Volunteers went as far as the White Hills, near one hundred
miles into the Enemies Country, but met with the like misfortune.

So soon as the Spring advanced, they began to appear as furious as ever. At
Scarborough they killed Thomas Laribie and his Son; after that Mrs* Dering and
two Soldiers, where they also took Mary ^ca^^nd, John Hunuel and Robert Jordan.
Another Party came to Cochecha, where they slew Tristram Head, Joseph Ham, and
carried three Children Captive: From thence they went to Lamper-Ele River,
where they killed Aaron Rawlins with one of his Children, carrying away his
Wife and three more with them* At Northfield they shot two, and meeting with
the Reverend Mr. Willard of Rutland, they laid violent Hands upon him; but he
being a Person of C^urage agreeable to his Strength, he slew one and wounded
another, till at last they gave him the fatal stroke* Two of Ensign Stephens's
Sons were also killed, and two more carried Captive.

Capt. Wa^kins, who at this time was engaged on a Fishing Voyage at Canso, was
surprised by a small Body in the Night while abed. The Day before he was at
Church, and it happened that two Ministers in two different Congregations
preached on one and the same Subject; namely, preparing for sudden Death; not
knowing how soon or in what manner Death would attack them* His Lodging was on
an Island at a little distance from the Fort; and although he was so strongly
importuned by several of his Friends to stay with them that Night, as if they
had a secret impulse of some impending Evil; yet all the Arguments they could
use, could no ways prevail nor influence him. He was a Gentleman of singular
good Temper, respected and lamented by all that knew him. John Drew of
Portsmouth (a pretty Youth) was slain with him, at the same time.

The Delegates of the six Nations of Iroquoise, with the Mohegan and Scatacook
Indians, being disposed to come to Boston, were kindly entertained there. And
at a Conference with the General Assembly, signified a great concern for the
Blood that was so often shed by their Kinsmen and Brethren; That from the
Original they were Friends to the English, and as a Testimony of their
continuing so, presented a belt of Wampam; which according to their Custom, is
the renewing the Covenant. His Honor the Lieut. Gover^our, as an
acknowledgement, gave each of them a piece of Plate, with Figures engraven
thereon, as a Turtle, a Bear, a Hatchet, a Wolf, etc. which were the
Escutcheons of their several Tribes. And the more to oblige them to our
Interest, they had a promise made of one hundred pounds a Scalp for every
Indian that they killed or took; which seemed so pleasing to them, that they
manifested a readiness of taking up the Hatchet in favor of the English,
whenever any Hostility was made against them. After this they were entertained
with the curious sight of a Gun that was made by the ingenious Mr. Pim of
Boston; which although laden but once, yet was discharged eleven times following
with Bullets in the space of two minutes; each of which went through a double
Door at fifty yards distance. They were then presented with an Ox, which with
Bows and Arrows they killed and dressed according to their own Custom; where
thousands of Spectators were present to behold and hear their barbarous Singing
and Dancing. But notwithstanding this free and generous Entertainment, with the
firm promises they made of falling on our Enemies, (whenever they made any
Insults on us) all proved of little or no Significancy; which was principally
owing to the powerful influence of the Dutch, for the sake of Trade and Comerce
with them, as was observed on the like Occasion.

October the thirteenth we had an account from Northfield, of a Body of Indian^
that fell on the Town-Fort, where they wounded two and killed as many more.
Soon after they surprised Mr. Cogshel and his Boats Company as they were going
ashore at Mount Desert.

December 25th about sixty laid siege to St. Georges Garrison, where they
continued thirty Days, and were not a little flusht with the expectation of
Success; for at their first coming they took two Soldiers, who gave an account
of the state of Matters: But Mr. Canady the commanding Officer being one of
uncommon Courage and Resolution, stood his Ground till Col. Westbrook arrived,
who soon put them to a rout. After this some came to Berwick, where they took a
Soldier as he was carelessly wandering from the Garrison.

The favourableness of the Winter prevented our marching to any of their Head
quarters this Season, excepting to Narridgwalk, where Capt. Moulton found a
vile and pernicious Letter from the Governor of Quebeck, directed unto the
Friar, exhorting him to push on the Indians with all imaginable Zeal against
the English, whose Advice he as industriously pursued.

April 17th 1724. they shot William Mitchel of Scarborough, as he was plowing
in the Field, and took two of his Sons, who afterward we^^ ^eleased at the
taking of Narridgwalk. They then fell on a Sloop at K^n^bunk, which belonged to
Lyn, and killed the whole Company: But the greatest stroke was on Capt.
Winslow, who with sixteen Men in two Whale-boats, went from St. George's to the
^reen-Islands, where the ^nemy usually ^requen^ on ^he a^co^nt of Fowl^ng. But
on their return they were ambuscaded by two or three Companies of them that lay
on each side the River. The first that fell was Sergeant Harvey, who commanded
the other Boat; for by keeping too near the Shore, he gave the Enemy the
greater Advantage: However he returned the Shot with as much bravery as could
be expected, till overpowered by a multitude. Capt. Winslow, who was
considerably ahead and out of danger, perceiving the Engagement, courageously
returned back to their Assistance. But before he could give them any relief,
was surrouned with about thirty Canoos, who made a hideous yelling; but he gave
them no answer but from the muzzles of his Guns. A smart Engagement followed,
which held till Night: When finding his Thigh broken, and most of his Men
slain, was obliged to hasten ashore; but there also he found himself unhappily
waylaid: They fell on him with utmost fury, yet his Courage continued until
the last; for (as one of those that escaped has since reported) he rested
himself on his other Knee, and killed an Indian before they had power to slay
him. Thus died that worthy young Gentleman, for the Cause of his Country. He
was one of liberal Education and good Extract, being the Grand Son of Governor
Winslow of Plymauth; and if he had survived, might have been of good Service in
his Generation. Sylvanus Nock, a worthy Elder of the Church of Oyster-River,
soon after this was slain as he was on Horseback. Miles Thomson of Berwick was
the same day also killed by another Party, and his Son was carried Captive. A
few Days after they again beset Capt. Penhallow's Garrison, where they took
three as they were driving their Cows to Pasture, and at their drawing off
killed a great many Cattle. Another Company fell on Kingstown, where they took
Peter Colcard, Ephraim Severns, and two of Mr. Stephens's Children, whom they
carried to Canada; but by the unwearied Pains and Expense of Mr. Stephens, he
in a little time purchased his Children. Colcard about six Months after made
his escape and got unto his Friends, but did not survive long. May 24th they
shot George Chesley as he was returning from public Worship, with whom was
Elizabeth Burnum, who was mortally wounded. Three Days after they went to
Perpooduck, where they killed one and wounded another, and then marched to
Sac^, where they slew David Hill a Friend Indian. On the same Day another Party
went to Chester, where they took Thomas Smith, with another whom they pinioned,
but soon after they made their escape.

The Frontiers being thus alarmed, two Companies of Volunteers went from
Newhampshire on the Bounty Act one hundred pounds a Scalp, and it happened that
Moses Davis, as he was weeding his Corn, went unto a Brook to drink, where he
saw three Indian Packs, upon which he informed the Troops that were then coming
out. He with his Son went before as guides, but by an Ambushment were both shot
dead. The English then fired on them, who killed one, and wounded two more, but
could not find either of the latter, although they track't them by their Blood
some way. The Assembly of New Hampshire then sitting, ordered the aforesaid Sum
of one hundred pounds to be paid.

The next damage they did, was at Groton, but were so closely pursued, that
they left several of their Packs behind. About which time News came to
Deerfield of a Body of Indians discovered up Connecticut River. Capt. Thomas
Wells Rallied a Company of Men, and went in quest of them, but made no further
Discovery, till, upon their return home, about four Miles from Deerfield, three
of the Company (supposing themselves out of Danger) Rode at some distance
before the rest, and unhappily fell into an Ambushment of the Enemy near a
Swamp, and were all three killed by them. But the Company behind, hearing the
Guns, rode up with all speed, and came upon the Enemy while they were scalping
the slain; and firing upon them wounded several. Upon which the Enemy ^led into
the Swamp, and the English dismounting their Horses, ran in after them, and
trackt them a considerable way by the Blood of the wounded, but found none.
However they recovered ten Packs, and heard afterward that two died of their
Wounds, and a third lost the use of his Arm. Another Company fell on Spurwink,
where they mortally wounded Solomon Jordan, as he was coming out of the
Garrison. Next day being July the 18th. Lieut. Bean went in quest of them, and
came up with a Scout of thirty whom he engaged and put to flight, leaving
twenty five Packs, twelve Blankets, a Gun, a Hatchet, and sundry other things
behind them.

The Enemy not finding so great encouragment in attacking our Frontiers as they
expected, were now resolved to turn Pirates, and accordingly intercepted
several of our Fishery as they went in and out the Harbors for Wood, Water, or
in case of Storms, and accordingly made up a Fleet of fifty Canoos, who
designed at first for Monhegen, but going through, the Fox Islands, and seeing
several Vessels at Anchor, surprised eight with little or no Opposition; in
which were forty Men, twenty of whom they put to Death, reserving the Skippers
and best Sailors to Navigate for them. After this they took fourteen more; and
with the assistance of the Cape Sable Indians, became so powerful and
desperate, that at first they terrified ^ll Vessels that sailed along the
Eastern Shore. They then went to St. Georges with a design to burn that
Garrison; in order whereto, they filled a couple of Shallops with cumbustible
matter, which they set on fire* but it was happily extinguished. They then
offered terms on s^rrendering which were reject^d. And finding that neither
Force nor Insinuation would prevail they withdrew, and sailed to Annapolis,
expecting to surprise the Fort; but firing at a Soldier in their March, gave an
Alarm; and a detac^m^nt issued forth; who after a smart dispute gave them a
perfect rout, but not without loss on ^ur side.

The Fishery being thus invaded, two Shallops with about forty Men well fixed
went from N^w-hampshire, who fairly came up with one of them, but through
Cowardice and Folly were afraid to engage them: However Doctor I^cks^n from
Kittery, and Sylvanus Lakeman from Ipswich, wi^h a lesser number gave them
Chase, and fired very smartly with their small Arms, although the Enemy had two
great Guns and four Pateraroes, which cut their Shrouds and hindered their
pursuit for some time: But being fixed again, they followed them with greater
Resolution, and drove them into Penobscot, where a greater Body being ready to
cover tuem, he was forced to desist. The Doctor and Mr. Cut were dangerously
wounded in this Engagement, but some time after recovered. This Storm of the
Enemy by Sea produced no Calm ashore.

At Rutland they killed three Men, wounded one, and took another; and at Oxford
beset a House that lay under a Hill, but as one of the Enemy attempted to break
through the Roof, he was shot by a Woman of the House. The Sabbath now became a
Day of Danger in which they often did Mischief, as at Dover, Oyster-River and
Berwick, where they killed one, wounded a second, and carried away a third.

Capt. Harmon, Moulton, Brown and Been, were now preparing for Naridgwalk with
two hundred Men in seventeen Whale-boats. After they landed at Triconnick, they
met with Bomazeen at Bromswick, (who had slain an Englishman some days before)
whom they shot in the River, as he attempted to make an ascape. They afterward
killed his Daughter, and took his Wife Captive; who gave an account of the
state of the Enemy, which encouraged them to march on briskly; and on August
12th they got within two miles of the place: Capt. Harmon drew off with about
sixty Men to range their Cornfieldsd, in hopes of finding some there, imagining
they saw some Smokes; while Capt. Moulton with about an hundred Men moved
forward, and when he came within, view of the Town, artfully divided them into
three Squadrons, of thirty in each; having ordered ten to guard their Baggage,
and a Squadron on each Wing to lie in Ambush, while he with the like number
encountered them in the Front. He went on with such Resolution, that he got
within Pistol shot before he was discovered. The Indians were under amazing
Terror; yet in their surprise some of them snatched up their Guns and fired:
but their hands shook and they did no Execution. They immediately betook
themselves to flight, and in running fell on the very muzzles of our Guns that
lay in Ambush. Our Men pursued them so warmly, that several were slain on the
spot; more got into their Canoos, and others ran into the River; which was so
rapid and the falls in some places so great, that many of them were drowned. By
this time Capt. Harmon came up, who was not so happy as to discover any of the
Enemy where he expected. The number of the dead which we scalpt, were twenty
six, besides Mounsieur Ralle the Jesuit, who was a Bloody Incendiary, and
Instrumental to most of the Mischiefs that were done us, by preaching up the
Doctrine of meriting Salvation by the destruction of Heretics. Some say that
Quarter was offered him, which he refused and would neither give nor take any.
After this they burnt and destroyed the Chapel, Canoos, and all the Cottages
that lay round, they also took four Indians alive, and recovered three Captives.

The number in all that were killed and drowned were supposed to be eighty, but
some say more; The greatest Victory we have obtained in the three or four last
Wars; and it may be as noble an Exploit (all things considered) as ever happened
in the time of King Phillip. About seventy French Mohawks were now making a
descent on our Frontiers, who divided into several Parties and killed a great
number of Cattle. Some of them fell on the House of John Hanson of Dover, who
being a stiff Quaker, full of Enthusiasm, and ridiculing the Military Power,
would on no account be influenced to come into Garrison; by which means his
whole Family (then at home,) being eight in number, were all killed and taken.
But some time after his Wife and two or three of his Children were redeemed
with considerable Pains and Expense.

September 4th. they fell on Dunstable, and took two in the Evening, next
morning Lieut. French with fourteen Men went in quest of them; but being
waylaid, both he and one half of his Company were destroyed. After that as
many more of a fresh Company engaged them, but the Enemy being much superior in
number overpowered them, with the loss of one Man and four wounded.

On the Monday after they killed Iabez Coleman of Kingstown, with his Son, as
they were gathering Corn-stalks. About the same time Nathaniel Edwards of
Northampton was killed. And the next day the same Company of Indians went to
Westfield, and fell on several People as they were coming out of the Meadows
with their Carts laden, and wounding one Man, had certainly taken him, but
some of our Men bravely faced about, and attempted a shot upon them. But their
Guns all missing fire except Mr. Noah Ashley's, his went off, and shot down one
of the Enemy; which put a stop to their further pursuit of the English*
Hereupon a Company Rallyed, and went after the Enemy, and quickly found the
Indian whom Ashley had slain. And taking his Scalp, said Ashley brought it to
Boston, and received one hundred Pounds Reward for it. And now a Regiment of
fresh Men under the Command of Col. Westbrook were preparing for Penobscot, one
of their chief places of randevous for Planting and Fishing; but by the
unskilfulness of his Guides, were led into a labyrinth of Difficulties, and
after a long Fategue returned without any discovery.

Capt. Lovewell from Dunstable with thirty Volunteers, at the same time went
Northward, who marching several Miles up the Country came on a Wigwam wherein
were two Indians, one of which they killed and the other took, for which they
received the promised bounty of one hundred pounds a Scalp, and two Shillings
and six pence a day besides.

Other Companys were disposed to go out on the like encouragment, but did not
see the track of an Indian; being under such amazing Terror, by reason of their
late overthrow at Naridgwalk, that they deserted their former Habitation; for
when Capt. Heath went to Penobscot, he made no other discovery than a few empty
Wigwams.

The Government (being thoroughly appriz'd of the perfidy of the French at
Canada, in supplying the Indians with all necessary stores of War,
notwithstanding the Peace at Utrecht, so firmly ratified between the two
Crowns) sent Col. Thaxter and Col. Dudley from the Massachusetts, with Mr.
Atkinson from New Hamshire, as Commissioners to represent the many Grievances
that arose thereby; As also to demand the several Captives which they had of
ours, and that hence forward they would withdraw all manner of assistance from
the Enemy; for as they were Indians bordering between both Governments, they
belonged either to the Dominion of Great Britain, or unto the French King; if
to the French King, then consequently they were his Subjects, and the
encouraging or supplying them with warlike Stores against the English, was a
flagrant violation of the Peace between the two Crowns; if they belonged to the
King of Great Britain, then the exciting them to War was as great a breach, and
a stiring them up to Rebellion, contrary unto their Allegiance and Submission
in the year 1693. which was afterward renewed in the year 1713. and 1717.

Our Gentlemen in their Journey to Quebeck, met the Governor at Mount Real
unto whom they delivered this Message: Upon which the Governor seemed to
extenuate his supplying or countenancing them in any act of Hostility; till
they made it evident from Letters under his Hand unto Mounsieur Rallee the
Jesuit and Father Confessor. But to palliate the Matter he replied, They were
an Independent Nation, and that as the Captives were out of his reach he would
not engage therein. But as to those among the French he would order them to be
released upon paying the first Cost that they had given the Indians. This we
were obliged to do, after an exorbitant manner; and in the whole got but
sixteen with the promise of ten more. Notwithstanding this he would often
reflect on the English for invading the Properties of the Indians, till our
Commissioners demonstrated that we possessed no more than what we purchased,
and had formerly inhabited; and in as much as the Boundaries between the Two
Crowns were firmly fixed, that all the Indians inhabiting this side L' Accadia,
must of consequence belong to the Crown of Great Britain. After this our
Gentlemen departed, acknowledging the kind Entertainment which his Excellency
had given them; who ordered a Guard to attend them part of their way home.

But the difficulties and hazards that they met with in their Journey were
great and terrible. It took them full four Months. The Lake they passed over
was a hundred and fifty miles long, and thirty wide, which was ^overed with
Water four inches on the surface of the Ice. The first place they came to was
Shamblee, where is a strong Fortification 200 foot square, and 30 foot high,
with four Bastions, in which are four teer of Guns one above another. From
thence they traveled to Mount Real, which is an Island of 30 miles long and 12
wide, lying in the middle of the River commonly called St. Lawrence's River;
about 180 miles up from Quebeck, navigable for Vessels of about 100 Tons. This
City (of Mount Real) lies near the middle, walled round with Stone and Lime 16
foot high and 3 thick; but no Battery or Fortification; in which are three
Churches, two Chapels, two Nunneries, and two Streets of three quarters of a
mile in length; containing about 400 Houses. Their Trade is mostly in Furs,
which they transport to Quebeck, and from thence to France.

Capt. Lovewell, who was endowed with a generous Spirit and Resolution of
serving his Country, and well acquainted with hunting the Woods, raised a new
Company of Volunteers, and marched some miles beyond their common
Headquarters: On the Easterly side of Winnepissocay Ponds he crossed an Indian
Track, and soon after espied two of them, whose Motions he watched all the Day,
and at Night silently came upon them as they lay asleep round their Fire. At
his first firing he killed seven, after that two more, and wounded another,
which was their whole Company: Who being within a Day and halfs march of our
Frontiers, would probably have done Mischief, had they not been so seasonably
prevented. Their Arms were so new and good, that most of them were sold for
seven pounds apiece, and each of tham had two Blankets, with a great many spare
Moggasons, which were supposed for the supplying of Captives that they expected
to have taken. The Plunder was but a few Skins; but during the March our Men
were well entertained with Moose, Bear, and Deer; together with Salmon Trout,
some of which were three foot long, and weighed twelve pounds apiece.

April 13th. 1725. there came two Indians to Macquoit, and took one Cockram, a
Soldier of about eighteen years of Age, whom they carried thirty Miles into the
Woods. The first night they pinioned him, but left him loose the second. He
took an opportunity (as they were asleep,) to knock them both on the head,
Scalpt 'em and brought their Scalps away with him, and their Guns. But in his
return he was so unhappy as to loose a Gun, and one of the Scalps, in fording
over a River.^ When he came to the Garrison and gave an account of the whole
affair, there went out a Party the next Morning and found the Indians both dead
according to the information that he had given. He was not only rewarded
according to the Act, but was advanced in his Post, for his brave Action, and
for the encouragment of others.

On the Monday after came another Party to Yarmouth, where they slew William
and Matthew Scales, which was a great weakening to that Garrison, being very
active and industrious Men, and the principal supporters thereof.

After this they went to Cape-Porpos and waylaid Lieut. Trescott with some
others, as they were passing along the Road, whom they fired on, and wounded
the said Trescott in several place^*

A Vessel from Canso about this time arriving, brought an account of seventy
Indians that fell on an Out-house in view of the Garrison, where they killed
seven Men, one Woman and a Child, and from thence went to Capt. Durell's
Island, where they beset a fortified House in which were only four, who engaged
them several Hours; one of which was in a little time shot through a loop-hole,
but the remaining three held out and defended themselves with such bravery,
that the Enemy was obliged to draw off with considerable loss.

Capt. Lovewell being still animated with an uncommon zeal of doing what
Service he could, made another attempt on Pigw^cke^t with forty four Men; who
in his going built a small Fort near Ossipy, to have recourse un^o in case of
danger, as also for the relief of any that might be sick or wounded; and having
one of his Men at this time sick, he left the Doctor with eight Men more to
guard him: With the rest of his Company he proceeded in quest of the Enemy, who
on May the 8th about 10 in the Morning, forty miles from said Fort, near Saco
Pond, he saw an Indian on a point of Land: Upon which they immediately put off
their Blankets and Snapsacks, and made toward him; concluding that the Enemy
were a head and not in the rear. Yet they were not without some Apprehensions
of their being discovered two days before, and that the appearing of one Indian
in so bold a manner, was on purpose to ensnare them. Wherefore the Captain
calling his Men together, proposed whether it was best to engage them or not;
who boldly replied, That as they came out on purpose to meet the Enemy, they
would rather trust Providence with their Lives and die for their Country, than
return without seeing them. Upon this they proceeded and mortally wounded the
Indian, who notwithstanding returned the Fire, and wounded Capt. Lovewell in
the Belly: Upon which Mr. Wyman fired and killed him. But their dismantling
themselves at this juncture proved an unhappy snare; for the Enemy taking their
Baggage, knew their strength by the number of their Packs, where they lay in
ambush till they returned, and made the first shot; which our Men answered with
much bravery, and advancing within twice the length of their Guns, s^ew nine:
The Encounter was smart and desperate, and the Victory seemed to be in our
favor, till Capt. Lovewell with several more were slain and wounded, to the
number of twelve: Upon which our Men were forced to retreat unto a Pond,
between which and the Enemy was a ridge of Ground that proved a Barrier unto
us. The Engagement continued ten hours, but although the shouts of the Enemy were
at first loud and terrible, yet after some time they became sensibly low and
weak, and their appearance to lessen: Now whether it was through want of
Ammunition, or on the account of those that were slain and wounded, that the
Enemy retreated; certain it is they first dr^w off and left the Ground: And
although many of our Men were much enfeebled by reason of their Wounds, yet none
of the Enemy pursued them in their return. Their number was uncertain, but by
the advice which we afterward received, they were seventy in the whole,
whereof forty were said to be killed upon the spot, eighteen more died of their
Wounds, and that twelve only returned. An unhappy instance at this time fell
out respecting one of our Men, who when the Fight began was so dreadfully
terrified, that he ran away unto the Fort, telling those who were there, that
^^pt. Lovewell was killed with most of his Men; which put them into so great a
Consternation, that they all drew off, leaving a bag of Bread and Pork behind,
in case any of their Company might return and be in distress.

The whole that we lost in the Engagement were fifteen, besides those that were
wounded. Eleazer Davis of Concord was the last that got in, who first came to
Berwick and then to Portsmouth, where he was carefully provided for, and had a
skilful Surgeon to attend him. The Report he gave me was, That after Capt.
Lovewell was killed, and Lieut. Farewell and Mr. Robbins wounded, that Ensign
Wyman took upon him the command of the shattered Company, who behaved himself
with great Prudence and Courage, by animating the Men and telling them, That
the Day would yet be their own, if their Spirits did not flag; which enlivened
them anew, and caused them to fire so briskly, that several discharged between
twenty and thirty times apiece. He further added, that Lieut. Farewell, with
Mr. Fry their Chaplain, Josiah Jones, and himself, who were all wounded,
marched toward the Fort; but Jones steered another way, and after a long
fategue and hardship got safe into Saco. Mr. Fry three days after, through the
extremity of his Wounds, began to faint and languish, and died. He was a very
worthy and promising young Gentleman, the bud of whose Youth was but just
opening into a Flower.

Mr. Jacob Fullam, who was an Officer and an only Son, distinguished himself
with much bravery. One of the first that was killed was by his hand; and when
ready to encounter a second, it is said, that he and his Adversary fell at the
very instant by each others Shot^ Mr^ Farewell held out in his return till the
eleventh day; during which time he had nothing to eat but Water and a few Roots
which he chewed; and by this time the Wounds through his Body were so mortified,
that the Worms made a through Passage. The same day this Davis caught a Fish
which he broiled, and was greatly refreshed therewith; but the Lieut. was so
much spent, that he could not taste a bit. Davis being now alone in a
melancholy desolate state, still made toward the Fort, and next day came to it,
where he found some Pork and Bread, by which he was enabled to return as
beforementioned.

Just as I had finished this Account, I saw the Historical Memoirs of the
ingenious Mr. Symmes, wherein I find two things remarkable, which I had no
account of before: One was of Lieut. Robins, who being sensible of his dying
state, desired one of the Company to charge his Gun and leave it with him,
being persuaded that the Indians by the Morning would come and scalp him, but
was desirous of killing one more before he died. The other was of Solomon Kies*
who being wounded in three places, lost so much Blood as disabled him to stand
any longer; but in the heat of the Battle, calling to Mr. Wyman said, he was a
dead Man; however said that if it was possible he would endeavor to creep into
some obscure hole, rather than be insulted by these bloody Indians: But by a
strange Providence, as he was creeping away, he saw a Canoo in the Pond, which
he rolled himself into, and by a favorable Wind (without any assistance of his
own) was driven so many miles on, that he got safe unto the Fort.

In 1 Samuel 31.11, 12, 13. it is recorded to the immortal Honor of the Men of
Iabesh Gilead, that when some of their renowned Heroes fell by the hand of the
Philistines, that they prepared a decent Burial for their Bodies.

Now so soon as the Report came of Capt. L^vewell's defeat, about fifty Men
from New Hampshire well equipt, marched unto Pigwackett for the like end, but
were not so happy as to find them: But Col. Tyng from Dunstable, with Capt.
White who went afterward, buried twelve; where at a little distance they found
three Indians, among whom was Paugus, a vile and bloody Wretch. Now the reason
why no more of the Enemy could be found, was because it is customary among them
to conceal their dead, and bury them in some places of obscurity.

Give me leave here again to relate (as I did before respecting Col. Hilton)
that six or eight Days before Capt. Lovewell was defeated, we had a current
Report several miles round of his being so, with little or no variation both as
to Time and Circumstances.

Our encountering the Enemy at such a distance was so terrible and surprising,
that they never found any body after. And though our Actions in this War can bear
no comparison with those of our British Forces, (which have caused the World to
wonder) yet not to mention the bravery of these Worthies, who died in the Bed
of Honor, and for the interest of their Country, would be a denying them the
Honor that is due unto their Memory, and a burying them in Oblivion.

The mourning Drum, the Lance and Ensigns trail,
The Robes of Honor all in Sable vail.
Mr. Wyman, who distinguished himself in such a signal manner, was at his
return presented with a Silver hilted Sword and a Captains Commission. Edward
Lingfield was also made an Ensign, and the General Assembly (to show a grateful
Acknowledgment to the Soldiers, and a compassionate Sympathy unto the Widows
and Orphans,) ordered the Sum of fifteen hundred pounds to be given them, under
a certain regulation. And for a further encouragment of Volunteers, ordered
four Shillings a day out of the Public to be paid every one that would enlist,
besides the bounty of one hundred pounds a Scalp. Upon which a great many brave
Men under the Command of Capt. White, Capt. Wyman, and others went out, but the
Extremity of the Heat prevented their Marching far. Many of them sickned of the
Bloody Flux, and some dyed after their return; particularly Capt. White and
Capt. Wyman, whose Deaths were very much lamented.

Saquarexis, and Nebine, one a Hostage and the other a Prisoner belonging to
the English, being desirous of visiting their old Acquaintance, had liberty
granted them on their Parole; who after some time returned and gave an Account,
that the Indians were generally disposed to a Peace, for that the losses they
met with, and the daily Terror they were under made their lives miserable*
After this they went out again, and meeting with several others, they
represented their ready desires of having a Treaty of Pacification with the
English. Upon which Col. Walton, from New Hampshire, Col. Stoddard and Mr.
Wainwright, from the Massachusetts, were appointed Commissioners to go unto St.
Georges to hear and report what they had to offer. They arrived there July the
second, and sent the said two Indians with a Letter unto their Chiefs, letting
them know that they were come; who in six days after appeared under a Flag of
Truce.

Capt. Bean the Interpreter was sent to meet them. They brought a Letter from
Winnenimmit their Chief Sagamore, which was wrote in French. The import of
which was to congratulate the Gentlemen's Arrival on a design of Peace, which
they earnestly desired to treat about, provided they might do it safely; being
under some fear and jealously. And indeed they had Cause of being so, for that
about ten days before under a Flag of Truce, some of the English Treacherously
attempted to lay violent Hands upon them, but lost one in the Skirmish, and had
another wounded, which was the occasion of the like unhappy disaster that
afterward happened unto Capt. Saunders in Penobscot Bay. They then moved, that
in as much as many of their Men were scattered, (being out a hunting) that our
Gentlemen would stay a little, which they consented to. And five days after,
Seven came in under a Flag of Truce, making the usual signal; and informing the
Commissioners they would wait on them to Morrow; who after a friendly
Entertainment were dismissed. The next day their whole Body came within a quarter
of a Mile of the Garrison desiring the English to come to them; which they
refused, saving, that they were sent from the several Governments to hear what
they had to offer; but assured them that if they came to them no injury should
be offered. After a short consultation they complied, provided that the English
would engage it in the Name of God. And then the^ sent in thirteen of their
Chiefs, expecting the like number of English to be sent them. So soon as they
met, the Commissioners demanded what they had to offer, who complimented them
with the great satisfaction they had in seeing them in so peaceable a
disposition, and that it was also the intent and desire of their hearts. It was
then asked wherefore they made War upon the English? Who replied, because of
their Encroachments upon their Lands so far Westward as Cape-Nawagen, where two
of their Men as they said were beaten to Death. Unto which 'twas answered, That
that very Land was bought by the English, and that the Deeds from their
Predecessors were ready to be shown; And admitting it was true what they said,
that the English did so inhumanly beat two of their Indians, yet it was not
justifiable in them (according to the Articles of Peace) to commence a War at
once, without first making Application to the Go^ernment, who at all times were
ready to do them justice.

This Conference being over, they proposed a further Treaty; which after some
debate was resolved to be at Boston. They then moved for a Cessation of Arms,
but our Commissioners, having no power, replied, that if they went to Boston it
might probably be granted. But in the mean time moved that each Party should be
on their Guard, for that it was the Custom of Nations to carry on the War on
both sides till matters were fully concluded. The Indians replied that as they
desired Peace, they were resolved on calling in their young Men, promising for
themselves and those also of their Tribe, that no Hostility should be formed
against us.

The Treaty being over, Capt Loran and Ahanquid, who were two of their Chiefs,
accompanied our Gentlemen to Boston, where they were friendly Entertained, and
after a Capitulation of matters, returned in a Vessel prepared on purpose, with
a promise of bringing more of their Chiefs with them in forty days after their
arrival, for a final Issue of all differences.

Several Constructions and Censures were passed on this Treaty; some thinking
the English were more forward for a Peace than the Indians, and that as we now
knew their head quarters, might easily destroy their Corn, and disrest them in
their Fishery, which would bring them to a ready composition. Although the
Penobscot Indians seemed Guarantee for the other Tribes, yet as we knew them
Treacherous, we could put no confidence in them, but rather lay our selves open
unto a Snare, and become the more secure! Something like this accordingly fell
out; for on September 15th a Party of them fell on some of Cochecha while at
work in the Field, where they slew one, Scalpt another, cut off the Head of a
third, and carried a fourth Captive; all which belonged to the Family of the
Evans's.

A few days after another Party attacked a Garrison at North Yarmouth, but were
so stoutly repulsed that they made no impression; but at their drawing off,
killed several Cattle. Two days after some appeared at Mowsum and then at
Damaris Cove, which lies Eastward of Kennebeck, and is two Leagues within the
line agreed upon; where they took and burnt two Shallops which belonged to
Stephen Hunuel, and Alexander Soaper, whom with five Men and a Boy, they
carried to the Winniganse, and knocked him on the head. Some conjectured these
Indians came from Canada, others that they belonged to the Eastward, for that
an English Iacket was afterward seen on one of them; but the Eastern Indians
laid it on the other.

At the same time the English had several Companies out, as at Amarascoggin,
Rockamagug, Naridgwalk, etc. Where Col. Harmon and others went, but made no
discovery. Some thought that We hereby infringed on the Articles made between
rhem and us, unto which it may be replied, that these places were not within
the Penobscot Line; and although they promised to do what they could in
restraining others from falling on the English, yet as several Scouts from
other Places were then out, they could not absolutely engage for them;
Wherefore it was now requisite for us to secure our Frontiers.

About the 28th September 1725 Capt Dwight of Fort Dummer sen^ out a Scout of
six Men West, who being upon their return sat down to Refresh themselves; and
hearing a noise like Running, looked up, and saw fourteen Indians just upon
them. Our Men fired at the Enemy, but were soon over powered by the Indians, who
killed two, took three and one escaped.

The forty days before mentioned for coming in of the Penobscot Indians, with
those of the other Tribes being near twice expired, gave great uneasiness for
fear of some Mischief that was designed. But in the beginning of November, the
several Captains hereafter mentioned came in, viz. Sauguaaram, alias Sorun,
Arexus, Francois Xavier, Megannumba, where the following Submission and
Agreement was concluded on.

The Submission and Agreement Of the Delegates of the Eastern Indians.
WHEREAS the several Tribes of Eastern Indians, viz. The Penobscot, Naridgwalk,
St. John's, Cape Sables, and other Tribes inhabiting within his Majesty's
Territories of New England, and Nova Scotia, who have been engaged in the
present War, from whom we Sauguaaram, alias Sorun, Arexis, Francois-Xavier and
Meganumbe, are delegated and fully empowered to enter into Articles of
Pacification with his Majesty's Governments of the M^ss^chusets-Bay,
New Hampshire and N^va-Scotia; HAVE contrary to the several Treaties they have
solemnly entered into with the said Governments, made an open Rupture, and have
continued some years in Acts of Hostility against the Subjects of his Majesty
KING GEORGE within the said Governments; they being now sensible of the
Miseries and Troubles they have involved themselves in, and being desirous to
be restored to his Majesty's Grace and Favor, and to live in Peace with all
his Majesty's Subjects of the said three Governments and the Province of
N^w-Y^rk and Colon^'s of C^nnecticut and R^^de ^^^nd, and that all former Acts
of Injury be forgotten: HAVE concluded to make AND W^ DO by these presents in
the Name and Behalf of the said Tribes, MAKE our Submissi^n unto His most
Excellent Majesty GEORGE by the Grace of God of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, King Defender of the Faith, etc. in as full and ample manner as any of
our Predecessors have heretofore done.

AND WE DO hereby Promise and engage with the Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER Esquire. As
he is Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Province of the
Massachusets-Bay, and with the Governors or Commanders in Chief of the said
Province for the time being; That is to say,

WE the said Delegates for and in behalf of the several Tribes aforesaid, do
promise and engage, That at all times for ever from and after the Date of these
Presents, we and they will cease and forbear all Acts of H^stility, Injuries
and Discord, toward all the Subjects of the Crown of Great Britain, and not
offer the least Hurt, Violenc^, or Molestation to them or any of them in their
Persons or Estates, but will henceforward hold and maintain ^ fir^ and constant
Amity and Friendship with al^ the English, and will never confederate or
combine with any other Nation to their Prejudice.

THAT all the Captives taken in this present War shall at or before the time of
the further Ratification of this Treaty be restored, without any Ransom or
Payment to be made for them or any of them.

THAT his Majesty's Subjects the English shall and may peaceably and quietly,
enter upon, improve and for ever enjoy all and singular their Rights of Land
and former Settlements, Properties and Possessions, within the Eastern parts of
the said Province of the Massachusets-Bay; TOGETHER with all Islands, Inlets,
Shores, Beaches and Fishery within the same, without any Molestation or Claims
by us or any other Indians, and be in no ways Molested, interrupted or
disturbed therein.

SAVING unto the Penobscot, Naridgwalk, and other Tribes within his Majesty's
Province aforesaid, and their natural Descendants respectively, all their
Lands, Liberties and Properties not by them conveyed or sold to or possessed by
any of the English Subjects as aforesaid; As also the Privilege of Fishing,
Hunting and Fowling as formerly.

THAT all Trade and Commerce which may hereafter be allowed betwixt the English
and the Indians, shall be under such management and Regulation, as the
Government of the Massachusetts Province shall direct.

IF any Controversy or Difference at any time hereafter happen to arise between
any of the English and Indians, ^or any real or supposed wrong or injury done
on either side, no private Revenge shall be taken for the same, but proper
Application shall be made to his Majesty's Government upon the place for Remedy
or Redr^ss thereof, in a due Course of Justice: We submiting ou^ selves to be
Ruled and Governed by his Majesty's Laws, and desiring to have the Benefit of
the same.

WE also the said Delegates in behalf of the Tribes of Indians inhabiting
within the French Teritories, (who have assisted us in this War) for whom we
are fully empowered to Act in this present Treaty, Do hereby Promise and
engage, that they and every of them shall henceforth cease and forbear all Acts
of Hostility, Force, and Violence toward all and every, the Subjects of his
Majesty the King of Great Britain.

WE do further in the behalf of the Penobscot Indians Promise and engage, that
if any of the other Tribes intended to be included in this Treaty, shall
notwithstanding refuse to confirm and Ratify this present Treaty entered into
on their behalf, and continue or renew Acts of Hostility against the English,
in such Case the said Penobscot Tribe, shall join their Young Men with the
English in reducing them to Reason.

IN the next place We the before named Delegates Do Promise and engage with the
Honorable John Wentworth Esquire. as he is Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief
of his Majesty's Province of New Hampshire, and with the Governors and
Commanders in Chief of the said Province for the time being, That we and the
Tribes we are deputed from, will henceforth cease and forbear all Acts of
Hostility, Injuries and Discords toward all the Subjects of his Majesty King
G^^^ge within the said Province; and we do understand and take it that the said
Government of N^w-Hampshi^e, is also included and comprehended in all and every
of the Articles aforegoing, exc^pting that A^ticle respecting the regulating
the Trade with us.

AND f^^ther, We the aforenamed Delegates Do P^om^se and engage with the
Honorable Laur^n^^ Arm^tr^ng Esquire Lieut. Governor and Command^r in Chief of
his Majesty's Province of Nov^-S^^^i^ or Acc^di^* to live in Pea^e with his
Maj^sty's good Subjects and their Dependants in that Go^e^nment, according to
the Articles agreed on with Major Paul M^sc^rene, Commissioned for that
purpose; And further to be Ratified as mentioned in the said Articles.

That this present Treat^ shall be Accepted, Ra^ified and Confirmed, in a
public and solemn manner, by the Chiefs of the several Eastern Tribes of
Indians included therein at Falm^uth in Casco-Ba^, some tim^ in the Month of
May next. In Testimon^ whereof we have Signed these Presents, and affixed our
Seals.

Dated at the Council Chamger in Boston in New England, this fifteenth Day of
December, Anno Dom. One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty Five. Anno Regni
Regis Georgii Magnae Britaniae, etc. (...). Sauguaaram alias Loron. Arexus
Francois Xavier. Meganumoa

A True Copy taken from the Original, execucuted by the Indian Delegates before
the General Assembly, December 15. 1725.

Attest I. Willard, Secr.



Thus we have seen the Events of twenty three Years, in most of which we have
heard nothing but the sound of the Trumpet, and the alarm of War. And in the
time of the intervening Peace, we met with many Interruptions and Acts of
Hostility, which prevented the growth of our Eastern Settlements.

It Is surprising to think that so small a number of Indians should be able to
distress a Country so large and populous, to the degree we have related. The
Charge of the War in the last three Years was no less than One hundred and
seventy thousand pounds; besides the constant Charge of watching, warding,
scouting, making and repairing of Garrisons, etc. which may modestly be
computed at upwards of seventy thousand pounds more. Yet after all, the Enemy
have but little cause of Triumph; for that one third of them (at least) have
been destroyed, and one of their Tribes so shattered (at Naridgwalk) that they
are never more like to make any formidable head.

Now as Peace seems once more to be concluded by the Treaty beforementioned,
the greatest Difficulty will be to support and maintain it. If Trading Houses,
which are now resolved on, (by the Wisdom of the Government) be well regulated,
it may (under God) be a means of our Tranquillity: Especially if the Government
can also prevail with them to receive the Ministry for their instruction in the
Principles of the true Religion.

But although it was agreed on with the several Delegates that the Treaty should
be ratified and confirmed in a public and solemn manner by the Chi^fs of the
several Tribes of the Eastern Indi^ns at F^lmouth in Casco-Bay, some time in
the Month of May; yet when that time came they were not ready for it, but
seemed for some time uncertain and dilatory. Nevertheless the Government from
time to time received Advices of their continued desires of Peace; and
resolving that the failure should not be on our part, His Hon^ur the Lieutenant
Governor with a Quorum of Hi^ Majesty's Council, and a number of Gentlemen of
the House of Representatives; attended with a good Guard, and a fine train of
Y^ung Gentlemen, set out from B^st^n on July 14* and arrived at Falm^uth the
16th.

On the 21 st. His H^n^ur received a Letter from Wen^m^v^t, Sagamore and chief
S^ch^m of the Pen^b^c^t Tribe, dated at St. Ge^rg^s J^ly 19. Praying him to
meet the Indians at Pem^quid; which his Honor absolutely refused, requiring
him to come to C^sco, and promising him s^f^ conduct.

On the 29th Wenemovet arrived, with a number of his Principal Men and others,
about f^rty, and on the thirtieth the Conference for the Ratificati^n of the
late Treaty was entered on; and on the sixth of August it was concluded.

The Penobscot Tribe only appeared, but in behalf of all the other Tribes. The
Canada Tribes had been sent to by them, and had sent a Letter (as they said)
with two W^mp^m B^lts; the one for their Brethren of Penob^^ot, in Token I
suppose of their being concluded by them in the present Treaty, the other to be
presented to our Governor upon the Ratification of the Treaty; which was
accordingly presented.

The Lieut. Governor demanded of them, Why the Narridgwalks were not there?
W^nem^v^t answered, that they had full power to act for them, and for the
Wowenocks and the Arr^ragunie^^cks, and the St. Francois.

The Governments had many and large Conferences with the Indians; worthy to be
communicated to the Public, and which would be an Entertainment to the
Curious. In these Conf^^^nces the Discretion and Prudence of the Salvages was
observable, as well as the Wisdom, Justice, Equity and Tenderness of the
Governors on our part.

One of the first things that the Indians desired of our Governors was, That
they would give order that the Vessels in the Harbor as well as the Taverns
ashore might be restrained from selling any Liquors to their Young Men. The
Governor told them, that he very much approved of that, and would give order
accordingly.

On Saturday, July 30th when the Conference for the day was over, the Lieut.
Governor told them, "To Morrow is the Lord's Day, on which we do no Business.
Loron, their Speaker, answered readily, "To Morrow is our Sabbath Day; we also
keep the Day.

It may be a pleasure to the Reader to have the Words of the Ratification of
the Treaty, both on our part and also on the part of the Indians.

On the Indians part it ran in the following Words.

WE the underwritten Wenemovet, chief Sachem and Sagamore of the Penobscot
Tribe, and other the Chiefs with the rest of the said Tribe now convented,
having had the within Articles of Peace distinctly and deliberately read over
and interpreted to us; Do by these Presents in a p^blick and solemn manner, as
well for ourselves as for all the within mentioned Tribes, from whom we are
delegated and fully empowered, Ratify, Affirm and Confirm all and singular the
within Articles of Peace, To His most Sacred Majesty King GEORGE: And that the
same and each of them be, and shall continue and remain in full force, efficacy
and power, to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever.

Done and Concluded at Falmouth in Casco-Bay before his Honor William Dummer
Esquire. Lieut. Governor and Commander in chief of his Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, and his Majesty's Council of said Province:
The Honorable John Wentworth Esquire. Lieut. Governnour of his Majesty's Province
of New Hampshire, and several of his Majesty's Council of said Province: And
Major Paul Mascarene, delegated from his Majesty's Province of Nova Scotia or
L' Accadia; and the several Gentlemen that subscribe hereto.

Witness our hands and Seals the fifth day of August in the thirteenth year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE, by the Grace of God of Great Britain
France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoq. Dom. 1726.
On our part the Ratification of the Treaty ran thus.

By the Honorable William Dummer Esquire. Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief
of his Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.

Whereas Wenemovet the chief Sachem of Penobscot, with others his Chiefs and
the rest of said Tribe, Convented at Casco-Bay the 5th day of August 1726.
Having solemnly and publicly Ratified the Treaty of Submis^ion made at Boston
the 15th day of December last, and delivered the same to me, which I have
acco^ding accepted;

I do hereby Ratify and Confirm all the Articles in the within mentioned
Instrument.

Given under my Hand and Seal at Arms at Falmouth in Casco-Bay, the sixth day
of August, in the thirteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King
GEORGE, by the Grace of God of Great Britain, etc. Annoq. Dom. 1726. WILLIAM
DUMMER.
By the Command of his Honor the Lieut. Governor, John Wainwright, Clerk of
the Council.

After the Ratification was over the Lieut. Governor among other things,
desired them to say, what Measures they purposed to take, whereby the
Inhabitants on our Frontiers may be made easy and safe, notwithstanding the
Narridgw^lks etc. who d^d not personally appear to Ratify the Articles of the
present Treat^?

They a^swered, That they would have the Inhabitants of the Frontiers to be
very careful; and that a^ so^n as they returned home it should be their (...)
c^^e to send to all the Tri^es, an^ let (...) know that th^re is a Peace ma^^.

The Lie^t. Governo^r asked them, Will you lay your Comm^nds and Injunctions on
the other Tribes for that purpose, as far as you are able? L^r^^ answered, We
will do our utmost to oblige 'em to live peaceably toward us.

The Lie^t. Gover^our replied, Do you s^y you will resent it, if any hostile
Acts or Injuries should be committed against our People?

L^ro^. We will resent such Actions, and join our young Men with yours in such
a case, and oblige them to be quiet and sit-down. We me^n in case any of the
Tribes should rise against us, or resist us, we will take effectual means to
set 'em down by force. As to the first Tre^ty we reckoned our selves obliged to
this, but we account we are under much more and stronger Obligations to it now;
since the Engagements our whole Tribe have taken upon them, in ratifying the
Articles of the Treaty. We shall take effectual care therefore that any such
Persons be obliged to sit down.

We have given our Words, and repeated our Promises and Engagements; and our
Words ar^ written down, and they will appear afterward against us.

When the whole Conference was transcribed, it was on August 11. (may the Day
be memorable and happy to us and ours after us) distinctly read over and
interpreted to Wenemovet and the Indians with him; and the Lieut. Governor
asked them if they understood it, and whether it was rightly taken down? They
answered, That the Con^erence was rightly taken down, and not a word missing in
it.

His Honor then for their more full Satisfaction subscribed his Name to it,
and then delivered it to Wenemovet, chief Sachem, who with his principal Men
subscribed to it, and delivered it back to his Honor.

And thus we hope, by the Will of God, that a happy Foundation is laid for a
lasting Peace. And we cannot conclude without a thankful Acknowlegement of the
great favor and mercy of God to us, in the wise Conduct given unto (...)
Honor the Lieut. Governor, both in the management of the War, and also of the
Treaty of Peace. May the Comforts and Rewards of a faithful Administration
remain to Him ^or ever* and the happy Fruits of Peace unto these Provinces.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
IN Page 102. there is a great omission, which the Reader is desired to
correct, viz. In the Article relating to Lieut. Bean and Company, at the bottom
of the Page, it should have been added, One of their principal Indians was
killed, and his Scalp brought to Boston, for which said Bean and Company
received an hundred pounds.


