AN EXPERIMENTAL COURSE OF Mechanical Philosophy.

WHEREBY such a competent Skill in Natural Knowledge may be attained (...) (by
means of various Instruments, and Machines, with which there are above Three
Hundred curious, and useful Experiments performed) that such Persons as are
desirous thereof, may, in a few Weeks Time, make Themselves better acquainted
with the Principles of NATURE, and the wonderful Discoveries of the
incomparable Sir ISAAC NEWTON, than by a Years Application to Books, and
Schemes.

By ISAAC GREENWOOD, A. M.

BOSTON: Printed in the Year, 1726.

Advertisement.
SINCE Course of Experiments have not as yet been introduced into NEW ENGLAND,
howsoever ambitious, and successful this Country has hitherto been in following
the Politer Nations of Europe in other Things, I have thought it might not be
amiss to take Notice of the following General Description.

EXPERIMENTAL Philosophy is the manner of representing to the Eye the Laws, and
Principles upon which NATURE proceeds in the Construction of Things, in an
orderly Collection of Experiments relating to the most remarkable Phenomenon;
proceeding in such a manner, as that the foregoing may serve all along to
illustrate, and confirm the subsequent, without assuming any other Principles,
or supposing any previous Knowledge in the Mathematics, or Philosophy. By which
means, the Senses are made the Judges of the Solutions that are given to
Natural Effects, and all fanciful Supperstitions, and Hypotheses (however
plausible they may seem) exploded; it being the Excellency of this way of
Teaching to take nothing for granted but what is shown to be really in Nature,
(...): a Method of all other, the most satisfactory, where (...)

AN EXPERIMENTAL COURSE OF Mechanical Philosophy.
LECTURE I.
CONTAINING a general Introduction concerning the Methods used by Philosophers;
and the Use, and Importance of Sir ISAAC NEWTON's celebrated Rules in judging
of Natural Experiments. Also, the Definitions of such Terms as are of more
common Use; and the Explanation of the Essential Properties of Matter, which
are contained by several curious Experiments.

PARTICULARLY, in this Lecture is shown, by proper Machines, that there are do
facto interspersed Vacuities in Nature; and that the Solid Parts of the World
heat but a very little proportion to Void; that Quantity is Infinitely
Divisible, and in Natural Bodies the parts are so prodigiously minute as to
exceed all Imagination; several Instances of which are given, both in Art and
Nature; and an Experiment made whereby a Cubic Inch of Water is actually
divided into several Millions of Parts, visible to the naked Eye: that all
Matter is the same, and capable of any Form, or Appearance, as is shown in
several Instances of the Changes of the same particles in the Constitution of
different Bodies.

LECTURE II.
CONCERNING the General Laws of Nature* Sc. the Attraction of Gravity, the
Attraction of Cohesion, and Repulsion; with an Enumeration of the particular
Properties, and Circumstances of Each; all which are confirmed by a great
variety of Experiments, and applied to the Explanation of several intricate
Phoenomena in Nature.

IN this Lecture the ATTENDANT will see, that Sir ISAAC NEWTON's Philosophy is
no imaginary Scheme, or Hypothesis, as is perpetually objected by some
Philosophers; but that his Principles are founded upon Fact, and Experience,
and no other than what Nature herself has made Use of in the Fabric of the
World.

LECTURE III.
OF such Special Laws of Nature as obtain in some particular Cases. Being a
Collection of various Experiments concerning Electrical Attraction, and
Repulsion; wherein the chief Circumstances, and Properties of that remarkable
Phoenomenon are shown; Experiments relating to the Electrical Phosphorus, the
Vitreous Phosphorus, the Mercurial Phosphorus, the Solid, and Liquid
Phosphorus; with the Application of Electrical Light to the Discovery of the
true Cause of several Uncommon Lights, and especially such as are produced upon
the Attrition of the Parts.

ALSO, Experiments relating to the Loadstone, whereby the Law of Magnetical
Attraction is discovered, and such properties of that wonderful Stone shown, as
have hitherto been applied to the Uses of Civil Life.

LECTURE IV.
OF the General Principles of Mechanics: consisting of Definitions relating to
the Velocity, Momentum etc. of Moving Bodies; Experiments to distinguish
Velocity from Motion; the Method of estimating, augmenting, or diminishing the
Quantity of Motion in Bodies; with a Comparison between the warlike Engines of
the Ancients, and the Forces of Gunpowder; Experiments showing, that the
Momenta of Bodies are in a compound Ratio, of the Velocities, and Quantities of
Matter, which is the fundamental proposition of Mechanics; a familiar
Explanation of various Mechanical Terms, particularly, of the Center of Motion,
the Center of Magnitude, and Center of Gravity, which are illustrated by
several Machines; with the manner of finding those Centres in Natural Bodies:
Experiments about the Falling, Sliding, and Rolling of Heavy Bodies; of the
Rolling-Lamp; with the Application of the whole to Astronomical Affairs, and
several important Uses in Life; as well as the Solution of several entertaining
Problems.

LECTURE V.
CONTAINING some General Things concerning the Mechanical Powers. Experiments
upon the Balance, whereby the several Properties thereof are demonstrated; of
the Statera Romana; of the Deceitful Balance; of the difference between Fixed,
and Moveable Weights on the Balance; with a curious Case relating to the
Increase of a Weight on the Balance without any new Addition, or Alteration of
the Line of Direction; Experiments on the Lever; of the Three sorts of common
Levers; of the Lever that is used in carrying of Burdens; with Experiments to
show how Men, or Horses of unequal Strength may be made to carry, or draw
Burden in Proportion to their Strength; of Bent-Lever; Experiments on Compound
Levers; with an Explanation of Such Instruments, and Machines in common Life,
as are of the Lever-Kind; Experiments on Pulley; the Action of Single Pulleys
considered in several different ways; of various Systems, or Combinations of
Pulleys.

LECTURE VI.
EXPERIMENTS on the Axis in Peritrochio; an Explanation of several common
Instruments of that kind; of Wheels, with Teeth or Cogs; and the Endless Screw;
a general Method of computing the Forces in any Train of Wheelwork; Experiments
on the Single, and Double Wedge; of the Nature of Screws; of some Miscellaneous
Mechanical Principles as the Inclined Plane, the Single Wheel etc; of Compound
Machines, or Engines, with a particular Explanation of such as are used in the
Affairs of Life, and the Method of computing the Ratio of their Forces.

LECTURE VII.
CONCERNING Relative Motion, and the Phenomenon that depend thereon; with Rules
and Experiments to distinguish Relative, and Absolute Motion; of the Motion of
the Earth, with Satisfactory Answers to the chiefest Objections against it. Of
Sir ISAAC NEWTON's First Law of Motion, Viz. 'That all Bodies continue in their
State of Motion, or Rest uniformly in a Right Line, except so much as they are
forced to change that State by Forces impres'd; with various Examples, and
Experiments to illustrate and confirm the same; as well as to show the Use, and
Importance thereof in Philosophical Affairs.

LECTURE VIII.
CONCERNING Sir ISAAC NEWTON'S Second Law of Motion, Viz 'That the Change of
Motion is always proportional to the Moving Force impres'd: and is always made
in the Right Line in which that Force is impres'd; of Accelerated and Retarded
Motion, which the Explanation of several Instances thereof in Civil Life;
Experiments to show that Forces acting in the Direction of the Sides of a
Parallelogram, produce a new Direction in the Diagonal; of the Composition, and
Resolution of Lines, and Forces, with the Use thereof in Mechanical Machines
etc, of Oblique Powers, with the Application thereof to the Action of Flying,
Swimming etc. the Method of Computing the Force of the Air on the Sails of
Windmills, Ships etc; Gallileus's Demonstrations concerning the Strength of the
Bones, reduced to Experiment, from which the whole Mystery of Sampson's, or
Strong Men is derived.

LECTURE IX.
CONCERNING Oblique Descents. Gallileus's Method to determine the Space that
Bodies describe in a given part of Time by Falling freely; of the Comparison of
Inclined Planes; of Oscillatory Motion, with various Experiments on Pendulums;
of Compound Pendulums; of the Description, and chief Properties of the Cycloid,
and M. Hugens Method of Cycloidal Cheeks for regulating the Vibrations of
Pendulums; of the use of Pendulums; An Experiment to show the Analogy between
the Swings of a Peudulum, and the Waves of the Sea; of the Length of Pendulums
in different Latitudes, and the Alteration thereof by Heat, and Cold; with some
curious Experiments relating to the Expansion of Metals by Heat.

LECTURE X.
CONCERNING Projectile Motion. Experiments to prove, that all Moving Bodies
within the Sphere of the Earth's Attraction describe the Parabola. Of the
Theory of Gunnery; several curious Experiments relating to the most remarkable
Cases in Gunnery; being a sort of Praxis upon the chiefest Propositions of Sir
ISAAC NEWTON concerning Projectile Motion. The Nature of Fortification
explained upon a large Plan.

LECTURE XI.
CONCERNING Circular Motion. The chief Circumstances, and Conditions of
Circular Motion shown by Experiments; various entertaining Experiments relating
to the Centripetal, and Centrifugal Forces of Revolving Bodies; the chief
Propositions in Sir ISSAAC NEWTON'S Principia concerning Central Forces reduced
to Experiment, on the Whirling Tables; a curious Experiment lately contrived by
Dr. DISAGULIERS relating to the Figure of the Earth, with an Application
thereof to the Figures of the rest of the Planets. Of Motion in the Conic
Sections.

LECTURE XII.
CONCERNING Sir ISAAC NEWTON's Third Law of Motion, Viz. That the Actions, and
Reactions of Bodies upon one another are always equal, and in contrary
Directions. Several Instances, and Experiments to illustrate, and confirm that
Law; of the Congress of Common Bodies, with Experiments on the several Cases
thereof; of the Congress of Elastic Bodies, with a variety of Experiments
relating thereto; some extraordinary Cases in the Collision of Elastic Bodies;
and an Experiment proving that a Small Elastic Ball will communicate more
Motion to a Greater in impinging upon it, than it really has it self: Of
Oblique Congress, with Machines to show the several Cases thereof
Experimentally.

LECTURE XIII.
CONCERNING Elasticity. That the Elasticity of Bodies depends upon the
Attraction, or Repulsion of their Parts; Experiments on Strings, and Metalline
Fibers; of Elastic Plates, and Solids; Experiments showing that Elastic Bodies
are a Congeries of Elastic Plates, with some curious Experiments, and
Observations on the Instruments* of Sound, as Bells, etc. of Elastic Fluids; of
the Organ of Hearing; of the Theory of Music; several entertaining Experiments
relating to the Trembling of Consonant Strings; with a Philosophical Account of
the strange Effect of Music on Natural Bodies: of the Division of the
Monochord, with Experiments showing the respective Lengths thereof in Musical
Notes; of the Echo.

LECTURE XIV.
OF the System of the World: with Spheres, and Tables to explain the Motions of
the Planets. Of the Primary Planets, their Order, the Figure, and Inclination,
of their Orbs* Distances, Eccentricities, Periods, Magnitudes, Densities,
Degrees of Heat, and Light, etc. with an Explanation of all such Astronomical
Terms as relate thereunto; of the Astronomy of the Moon, and the other
Satellites; of the Ring of Saturn; of Jupiter's Belts; and some general
Observations concerning the Surfaces of the Planets; of the Astronomy of
Comets, with an Account of such as are expected by Astronomers in the present
Century, with the Grounds, and Reason of such Expectations; of the Sun; of the
Fixed Stars.

OF the Revolutions of the Planets upon their Axes, with an Account of such
Phenomenon as are derived therefrom; where will be particularly shown upon
Globes the reason of the different Seasons of the Year, the different Length of
Day, and Night, and the Ill-conveniencies attending any other Situation of the
Axis of the Earth's Rotation; with a particular Explanation of various
Geographical Terms, and Problems.

LECTURE XV.
CONTAINING an Explanation of the most remarkable Astronomical Phenomenon, on
the Copernicus, or a Machine representing the Motions etc. of the Planets
according to the Copernican, or True System of the World. Of the Phases of the
Planets; of the Aspects of the Planets; of the Appulses of the Moon to the Fixed
Stars; of the Transits of Mercury, and Venus over the Sun's Disk; of the
Eclipses of Jupiter's, and Saturn's Satellites; of the Eclipses of the Moon,
and Sun, with a particular Apparatus to explain those remarkable Phenomenon to
the meanest Capacities; of the Method of determining the Longitude of Places
both at Sea, and on Land, with the manner of composing the Map of a Country
etc. by Celestial Observations: of Comparative Astronomy, with a particular
Account of the different Appearances of the System to an Observer placed
Successively, on the Sun, Mercury, Venus, and the rest of the Planets.

LECTURE XVI.
CONTAINING the Physical Causes of the Planetary Motions etc. in the Solar
System. An Account of some celebrated Observations made by KEPLER, with some
General Remarks upon Elliptical Motion, of Universal Gravity, with a particular
Explanation of the Absolute, Accelerating, and Moving Forces in Central Bodies;
of the Method which Sir ISAAC NEWTON used in discovering the true Cause of the
Centrietal Force of the Moon, with an Account of the Manner of Calculating the
Sun's Attractive Force upon the several Planets in the System, and of the
Primary Planets upon their Satellites: The Physical Explanation of several
Irregularities in the Planetary Motions, especially in the Moon; the Physical
Explanation of the Motion of the Earth's Axis etc. with the Method of
determining the Densities, and the Figures of the Planets; concerning the True
Cause of the Tides, with several Machines, and Schemes to explain the most
noted and remarkable Phanomena thereof; together with an Historical Account of
several Particulars, relating thereunto, that are very Remarkable, with the
Philosophical Solution thereof.

A General Conclusion, concerning Judicial Astrology; whereas is shown, how
contrary the Principles of that pretended Science are, to the Established Laws
of Nature, and how vain and absurd all such Conclusions, and Calculations are,
that are made from them.

N. B. THE foregoing Lectures, with the Experiments, are of such a Length as to
be an Evening's Entertainment: But at the Desire of the ATTENDANTS this Course
may be divided into a greater Number of Lectures, by which means each may be
contracted within the Limits of an Hour.

EVERY SUBSCRIBER is to pay Three Pounds; Twenty Shillings at the Time of
Subscription, and the Remainder on the Third Day of the Course. Upon suitable
Encouragement there will be several Courses, and such as are desirous, may go
over the same again for Forty Shillings; and afterward as often as they please
gratis.

ALSO, if this New Method of Teaching, (which is justly esteemed, beyond all
Comparison the most expeditious, and satisfactory of all others whatsoever)
meets with Success as it has done amongst the Politer Nations in Europe, there
will be performed Experimental Courses in Optics, Astronomy, Hydrostaticks,
and Pneumaticks; to which, this of Mechanical Philosophy is a necessary
Introduction, being the Foundation of all Physical Knowledge.

This Course will begin, if there be a sufficient Number of Subscriptions, on
(...) the (...) Day of (...) at (...) in the (...) and is to be continued on
every following (...) successively, till the whole be performed.

THE Place will be Advertised in the Weekly Prints.


