Samuel Moodey's ACCOUNT of the Indian Executed at York, June 29. 1726.

Summary Account of the LIFE and DEATH OF Joseph Quasson, Indian; Who on the
28. Day of August 1725. at Arundel in the County of York, and Province of Main,
in New England, Shot his Fellow-Soldier and Kinsman, John Peter: So that he
died of the Wound in a few Days. For which Murder being Apprehended, Tried, and
after Conviction, condemned at York in the Province aforesaid, on the 12th of
May following; he was there Executed on the 29th of June, 1726.

By Samuel Moodey, M. A. Pastor to the Church in York.

BOSTON, Printed for S. Gerrish, the lower End of Cornhill. 1726.

An Account of the Life and Death of Joseph Quasson, Indian, etc.
WE begin with the Account which the Prisoner gave of himself, not many Days
before his Execution, which Relation was taken from his Mouth by a faithful and
careful Scribe; after the Relator had expressed Reluctance in such Terms as
these -- To tell the World, said he, what a stupid hardened Creature I have
been! What will they say? There Is a wicked Wretch gone to Hell! -- But being
told God might yet do more for him, to be added to the Account afterward; and
that the Communication of these Things, to be published, might be for the Glory
of God and good of Souls; he consented, and in Answer to various and suitable
Questions propounded to him, as there was found Occasion. He said --

I was born at a Place called Monamoy, March 28. School. Lived with my Parents
six Years; Then my Father died five Pounds in Debt to Mr. Samuel Sturges of
Yarmouth. I was bound out to him by my Mother on that Account; where I was, as
soon as possible, instructed in Reading and in my Catechism. My Mistress used
to tell me, I must never Sin, for, Hell was a dreadful Place, where the Workers
of Iniquity must go. I had then great Fear of Sin. I thought it was a dreadful
Thing to tell a wilful Lie, and I don't remember that I then allowed my self in
any external Way of Wickedness; such as Lying, Swearing, Stealing, etc. which
was from the Restraints of God upon me. When I have heard the Lord's Name taken
in vain by Children, I have reproved them for it; and told them it was a Sin.
When I was about thirteen Years old, I had the Care of my Master's Warehouse: I
was tempted by some young 'Prentices to steal Powder for them; but I refused,
yet I remember I suffered some of them to do it, which troubled me afterward.

I never drank to Excess, till I eighteen Years old, when I was once overtaken;
but I had not got an Habit of it, till my Time was out with my Master: I was
always under such a strict and regular Government Night and Day, that I had no
Opportunity for it. -- I used in the Time of my Service, oftentimes to have
thought of another World; and used to be concerned about getting ready for
Death. I used to Read and think of Praying to God; but thought I could I could
not do that, nor did I ever pray by my self, till I came into this Prison. I
was obliged constantly to hear the Word preached, whilst with my Master; and
was often much affected. I loved to hear the Word, and continued to do so 'till
I gave way to Company and Drinking; which was soon after I had my Freedom. I
went from my Master very well clothed, and had, among other Things, a new Bible
given me. I worked a little, at first; but grew Idle, and took to Spending, and
sold my Clothes and other Things; and even my Bible, to maintain my Lusts. My
Drunkenness hurt my Conscience very much at first; but after a while all was
quiet: I could sin without remorse; and when I had brought my self into a poor
and ragged Condition, I left the English Meeting through Shame, where I always
used to appear well clothed: I went to the Indian Meeting (where I understood
nothing) only to save my Fine.

Thus I went on in my Wickedness 'till the Spring of the Year 1725. without any
serious Reflection; Then I had Thoughts running in my Mind, especially after I
had been overtaken with Drink, as if one had spoken to me; if I did not leave
off this Practice, it would quickly bring me to Ruin. It was a Warning, I
suppose: but it had little Effect. I could not (because I would not) cease from
Sin, (This was after I came out to the Eastward, a Soldier) I was more and more
settled, hardened and so, quiet in my sinful Courses 'till the Fact was
committed, for which I must die. About three Weeks before I killed the Man, I
had, one Day, a Thought come into my Mind, That I had been guilty of all manner
of Sin, I could then think of none that I was free from, but the Sin against
the Holy Ghost, and I did not know but I had committed that too: But then I
thought of the Sin of Murder, which I had not, outwardly, committed. Now I have
committed that Sin too.

I was at Work with a Man at Cape Porpus, about a Fort'ni't before I killed
John Peter, and in Discourse, he asked me, what I though it of my self -- and if
the Indians should kill me, whither I thought I should go. I answered him, That
I should go to Hell, besure. He asked me, Why? I replied, Because I should have
no Time to consider and Repent. And I remember I then thought, if I had but
Time, I should find it no hard Matter to Repent. And so after I was
apprehended, and began to think I must Die; I though it and said, I hoped God would
give me Time to Repent, but I had no Sense that God must also give me an Heart
to Repent. I was about six Days in Prison before I heard of the Death of the
Indian. I spent my Time in reading the Bible and other good Books (and indeed I
was wont often to read before this) but never Prayed before my Imprisonment,
nor after, 'till the dreadful News that John Peter was dead of his Wounds, came
to my Ears --. Then I was greatly terrified and amazed with the Apprehensions
of Death, which I thought was coming on me, and I did not know how soon. My
Thoughts were much disturbed: I then prayed as well as read; but I knew not
what I said, I was so confused. These Terrors I thought did me more Hurt than
Good; and I strived, what I could, to get them out of my Mind; so that, after a
while, I was more easy, yet not unconcerned, besure, -- and the more concerned
because I thought, being a poor Indian and in a strange Place, especially in a
Time of War; People would be little concerned about me. However, I thought
there was a Minister in the Town, and if he were a good Man he would have
Compassion on my Soul: I sent for him; he told me, among other Things, That I
must aggravate and not extenuate my Sin: I thought if I did so, I should run
distracted: But after the Confusion was a little off my Mind, I could read and
pray more calmly; and I found many Places of Scripture that encouraged me to be
seeking: However, I found my Heart continued so hard, that I could not repent.
When I first went to Meeting, which was within a Sabbath or two after my first
Confinement, I was mightily affected and my Heart seemed to relent: I though it I
got a great deal of Good: This continued every Sabbath, for more than two
Months, Afterward my Heart seemed hard and senseless; but not always alike;
sometimes it seemed as if I got some Good, and sometimes none. However, I was
very diligent, reading and praying, not without great Affection at Times, --
till the last of February; from which Time I had a Fellow Prisoner for many
Weeks together; which was a great Hindrance to me: He was continually, whilst
awake, either singing or full of vain or profane Talk. I then left off Prayer,
which I had constantly practiced four or five Months before; and commonly seven
or eight Times in a Day. At last, I had no Desire to pray, and neglected going
to Meeting; though still I read more or less, every Day, the whole Time of my
Confinement; and for the most part several Hours in a Day. When I had again the
Advantage of being alone, I thought I must betake my self to Prayer, as before,
but found my self much at a Loss: it seemed dreadful to come before God again,
after I had, for so long a Time, left off Prayer! I went to Meeting, but found
my Heart harder, than at the worst, before; I could not think that I got any
manner of Good, for the most part: Sometimes I should seem a little affected,
but nothing as at first. I should sometimes have hard Thoughts why should God
leave me to be guilty of Murder, -- but then I thought, he left David to fall
into the same Sin.

After I was condemned, I was more concerned: I have continued, ever since,
seeking to God and waiting on him in the Use of all Means, public and private.
I find my Heart is very bad: I have no Good in me. Some Time ago, I was
thinking, though I had no true Love to Christ, yet I did not hate him: but, on
Examination, I discovered plainly that I had Hatred in my Heart against Christ;
which was very terrifying to me. I am thoroughly convinced, now, though I
thought otherwise at first, that I am so far from having any Power to change my
Heart, that I have no Will to any thing that is Good; nor can I raise up one
good Desire in my Heart. I am very stupid and unaffected! I have been sometimes
almost ready to despair: but I have still some Hope that God may be gracious to
me: I am resolved by his Grace to seek to the last; and if I perish, after all,
I think I am thoroughly convinced that God is righteous; for he owes me
nothing. All the Encouragement I have is from the Death and Righteousness of
Christ Jesus, which is sufficient to save me; and from the powerful Grace of
God which can change my Heart in a Moment,

Thus having quitted his vain Confidence, and conceived an humble, evangelical
Hope in the Mercy of God, the Merits of Christ and the al-conquering Power of
the Spirit of Grace; his Hope sensibly to himself, and apparently to others,
increased more and more to the last.

He had been, at Times, on the very brink of Despair, and spoken desperate
Words: He would sometimes speak with an Air of Disdain, That such a Sinner as
he should be saved! And as though 'twere unreasonable that he should cherish the
least Hope of it. Yet was he constrained to hope in the Divine Alsufficiency;
having a very distinct Understanding of the way of Salvation, by learning the
Catechism in his Childhood and early Youth; by his constant Attendance on the
Ministry for many Years together; by his natural Love to Reading, from first to
last, and by his great Diligence therein whilst a Prisoner; together with
personal Instructions by a good number of Visitants; who also furnished him
with Variety of the most suitable Books, lesser and larger; all or most of
which he deliberately read over; and some of them not once only nor twice; Fox
of Time and the End of Time, and Mr. Stoddard's Guide to Christ; with Char nock
of Man's Enmity against God; and God's Mercy to the worst of Men. were
peculiarly blessed to him for his Awakening, Conviction, Humiliation, Direction
and Encouragement. -- Examples also, peculiarly that of Esther Rogers, her
signally mavelous Conversion and triumphant Death, after repeated Murders
dreadfully aggravated, were of special Use to him. Whilst Thousands of Prayers
were going up for him, in hundreds of Families and many scores of
Congregations: For there was (in the seven Weeks which his merciful Judges
allowed him after his Sentence) Opportunity, at the condemned Man's desire, by
Word or Writing to bespeak a public Remembrance for him of more than an
hundred Ministers of four Provinces and Colonies. And there seemed to be much
of the Spirit of Prayer in a good number, moving them to strive together and
apart for his Conversion: And the poor Soul had a sort of unaccountable, but
unconquerable Expectation that the Lord might convert him at last; and was for
the most part, fixed in his resolved Purpose to be seeking and waiting to the
last Day, Hour, and Minute of his Time: But yet very sensible, that unless the
Lord gave him an Heart thus to seek and wait, he could do neither, as the
following Discourse had betwixt the Prisoner and one that visited him, about
ten Days before his Execution, may serve to show; as also to confirm what was
before declared, viz. That though for the most part he was a Prisoner of Hope
(and Zech. 9. 11, 12. was one Prop to his Hope) yet was he sometimes almost
ready to Despair.

Visitant. How is it with you now Joseph?


Prisoner. In a miserable Condition! Hastening out of the World, and I fear
going to Hell -- But it is no matter how soon I die; for then I shall commit no
more Sin.


Vis. If you go to Hell you will blaspheme God.


Pris. The longer I live, the greater measure of Sin and Wrath is filling up --
I Am weary of living to sin so --.


Vis. I Am afraid Joseph, you don't know or consider what it is to go to Hell.


Pris. Yes, I have a Sense of it now, and am willing to receive my Deserts.


Vis. God does not require it of his Creatures that they should be willing to
be miserable for ever.


Pris. What shall I do? Christ has said, Except ye repent, ye shall perish. I
find I cannot repent, I can do nothing but sin: And I had better die --.
Ministers say, There Is great Hope of me: I cannot imagine what Grounds they have
to hope for me.


Vis. As long as there is Life, there, is Hope; and you must be found in the
Use of Means: The Lord indeed is at his Liberty whether he will save you or
not: He is not bound to give you Grace: But remember what Christ said to the
Woman of Samaria; If thou knew the Gift of God, -- thou would have asked
of him, and he would have given thee living Water. You cannot expect to receive
without Asking.


Pris. I have had many Books, and have read much, -- but I don't see that I Am a
Jot the better.


Vis. O, you must not leave off by all Means: The Life of your Soul depends on
it. -- I hope you have not left off Prayer.


Pris. No, I hav'n't left off -- but what will such Prayers avail? -- It Is
said, They shall loath themselves in their own sight for all their
Abominations: I don't loath my self for my Sins. The Promise is to them that
hunger and thirst after Righteousness: but it is not so with me --.


Vis. But God can work all this in you when he pleases, -- you must wait on
him.


Pris. I am not willing to be saved in God's Way.


Vis. God can make you willing in the Day of his Power: -- Christ is exalted to
give Repentance and Remission of Sins, both. Don't you desire that he would do
it for you?


Pris. I have no right Desires.


Vis. Christ that raised Lazarus from the Grave; and God that raised Christ
from the Dead, can raise your Dead Soul. -- But the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
Violence, and the Violent take it by Force. You must stir up yourself to do all
that possibly may or can be done -- You read and pray, -- Cannot you pray and
cry more earnestly for Mercy for your perishing Soul? And do it as sincerely as
you can.


Pris. I have no such Thing as Sincerity in me.


Vis. -- Whilst you are waiting on God in the Ways of his Appointment, he can
make you sincere.


-- Then the Prisoner took his Bible, that he had from the beginning of his
Imprisonment read much in, and wherein he had scores of Leaves turned down. He
opened it and showed the Woman that was now talking with him, several places in
the Prophets, and in the Psalms, etc. that he had been trying to take
Encouragement from. One of them was, Psalm. 119. 18, 19. Open thou mine Eyes,
that I may see the wondrous things out of thy Law. I am a stranger in the
Earth, hide not thy Commandments from me.

This Talk was before he gave his Relation, although that was first inserted,
because it begins with his Birth and Education, His Talk had been much in this
strain to others that had visited him. Some few Days before his Death, One that
had himself been much exercised with Atheistical Thoughts, asked the Prisoner,
Whether he believed that there is a God? He answered. Yes, but I don't know
him, have no Acquaintance with him, am an utter Stranger to him. The same
Person asked him at another Time, Whether he repented. He said he could not
repent. You will not repent said the good Man. He consented and owned that he
had no Will to repent.

He was asked by another, How he knew that he was in an unconverted Estate: His
Answer was, That he had no Faith in Christ. Query, How do you know that? Answ.
Because Faith works by Love, and I have no Love to that which is good. Q. What
do you think would convert you? A. Besure not all the means in the World: It
must be God alone. Q. But what will God do, or what must be done by him in
order to your Conversion? A. I never had the gloriousness of Christ discovered
to me, yet: If ever I be converted I shall have Christ revealed to my Soul, and
that will convert me at once.

Once he thus expressed his Sense of the Greatness and Difficulty of the work
of Conversion, or a thorough turning from the Evil of their way that Sinners
have been accustomed to, says he, such an one (naming one of his own Nation)
came to me the other Day, and desired me to give him Warning, I did warn him from
my Example to beware of the Sin of Drunkenness. He went away, seemingly,
resolved to take Warning: But 'twas not long before he came again to the Jayle,
and was in Drink when he came. So that (says Joseph) when I am hanged, and if
twenty more should, by their Drunkenness, bring themselves to the same woeful
End, yet the rest will not take Warning. He was asked what Advantage, then it
would have been to him, might he have been acquitted and set at Liberty on his
Trial, or to have a Pardon, if that were attainable. He acknowledged 'twould
most probably, have been his Ruin, yea, he expressed his Fears lest, after
all, Iniquity would be his Ruin. But said, he had much more Hope of being
brought to Repentance by his Confinement and certain Expectation of Death, than
he could otherwise have. Nay, he spoke as if he could have no Hope at all that
he should have any Heart to improve his Liberty unto a Reformation of his
former Life, though his Life might be given him on that Condition. And
therefore would often be ready to say, in Answer to Questionings and
Expostulations about these things, -- That it was better for him to die, than
to live. The Death of the Body, said he, is nothing, were it not for the second
Death.

He was, both before, and after his Condemnation, full of his Complaints about
his Darkness, Deadness and hardness of Heart: He would say he had an Heart like
a Devil; and was free to acknowledge that having hardened his own Heart, by
neglecting the means of Grace for so many Years together, after his Time was
out with his Master, and going on wilfully in Sin, particularly the Sin of
Drunkenness, for more than seven Years together. God might justly, now, give
him up to blindness of Mind; and hardness of Heart, to his eternal Ruin. And
thus by a full Discovery of his utter Inability to help himself, and extreme
Unworthiness to obtain help from the LORD, he was brought by a mighty work of
the Spirit, discovering also to him the Sovereign Right of Dominion God had
over him, as to Body and Soul, for Time and Eternity, he was constrained to
surrender himself up into the LORD's Hands, to be disposed of according to his
Will and Pleasure: Justifying God however he should please to deal with him.

He had justified God and Man in the Verdict and Sentence: had acknowledged and
admired the Mercy, as well as Equity of his Judges, in the fair Trial he had.
He said to one of the Ministers, that if one of the Judges, himself, should
have been Tried for his Life, he could not have had a fairer Trial. And how
express and ready was he in his Answer to the usual Question before the
pronouncing of Sentence, Have you any thing to say why Sentence of Death should
not be pronounced upon you, I have nothing against it, were the Words of his
Answer, and he continued to acquiesce in the Righteousness of his Sentence,
even to the last. To One that talked with him, upon this Head, he said, I
prayed just before my Trial came on, that Justice might take place; and I am
satisfied that I am Guilty, and have Justice done.

And now, as was said, he was brought to justify God, though He should Sentence
him to suffer the Pains of the second Death. And to a good Woman that visited
him some considerable Time before his Execution, he expressed it as his Wish,
that he might never have hard Thoughts of God, though he should throw him into
Hell.

He had, in the mean time, as has been once and again before observed, a
secret Hope rooted in him (though the actings of it, in Times of extraordinary
Temptation, were suspended) that there might be Mercy in Reserve for him at
last, and Forgiveness with God, so that his Purpose of Seeking and Waiting to
the End, was never quite broken off. That Word in 1 Pet. 1. 13. was a singular
Support to him, Wherefore gird up the loins of your Mind; be sober and hope to
the End, for the Grace that is to be brought unto you at the Revelation of
Jesus Christ. There was no Text of Scripture that did more sensibly relieve
him, the last Week of his Time, than this: He would be speaking of it, over and
over; so that one of the Ministers, that in the absence of the Minister
belonging to the Place, was most conversant with him, prepared a Discourse upon
it; and not having Opportunity before the Prisoners Death to preach it in
public, he read or preached it to him, privately in the Prison, for his
further Encouragement.

When his last Sabbath came, his Spirit, through the Violence of Temptation
(the Adversary having but a short Time) seemed to be under very extraordinary
Agitations: One thing that discovered it, was an Expression of this Import,
that dropped from him; If I have not Comfort or Relief this Sabbath, I fear I
shall be utterly discouraged. The Subject of the public Discourses, that Day,
was Isaiah 55. 6. Seek ye the Lord while be may be found, call ye upon him
while he is near. Let the wicked for sake his way and the unrighteous Man his
thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, for he will have Mercy upon him,
and to our God for he will abundantly pardon. For my thoughts are not your
thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord. But it pleased
sovereign Grace to maintain his Hope, and renew his Encouragement, to wait unto
the End.

Aftet this, a very remarkable Alteration was observed in him; he was carried
above the amazing Fear of Death. He expressed much more of a Spirit of
Thankfulness for what was done for the promoting of his Conversion and
Preparation for what was, now, just before him. Repeated and reiterated Prayers
were made with him, as well as for him, and he seemed much more affected, and
even melted. He had clearer Discoveries of the Fullness and suitableness of
Christ; expressing his humble Desires of believing on him. As for any thing in
him, or done by him, in the least, to recommend him to the Divine Acceptance,
-- he utterly disclaimed any such thing. The Knowledge he had acquired (though
mavelous to others,) the Duties he had performed, the Pains he had taken, the
Abstinence he had exercised, etc. was all nothing, and less than nothing, in
his own Account, yea worse than nothing, in point of Justification. He could
look back and remember with Grief and Shame, how much he had, aforetime, and
after his Confinement, been under the power of a self-righteous Spirit.
Particularly, he observed, how that when one told him, as at his first coming
into Prison, that he had eight or nine Months time to repent in. His secret
thoughts were that he should accomplish the Work in a quarter of that time: But
now he expressed, to a certain Visitant, his Wonder that any graceless Soul
should hope to do any thing, before Conversion, that might, in the least,
recommend such an one to the Favor of God: So that (we trust) he was
thoroughly humbled out of himself, and brought unreservedly to justify God, and
submit unto his uncontrollable and righteous sovereign Dominion, which
preparatory Work, as Mr. Stoddard observes, if it be clear, the Souls closing
with Christ is unquestionable. Indeed, It is not known that he expressed
himself as having a sense of the Love of Christ to any, but one gracious Woman;
who was very inquisitive into his Experiences; and among other things she asked
him whether he had not found, at some times, a sensible Love to Christ: He said
he had; but, said he, I found by reading one of the little Books I have by me,
I was mistaken; and reached the Book and showed her the Place that had, as he
called it, shown him how he was mistaken; and that his Love to Christ was not
such as true Believers or converted Persons have. The good Woman cannot remember
the Title of the Book, nor distinctly relate what she read or heard him read
out of it; but only a Passage to this Purpose, There Is no Grace of the Spirit,
or true Grace, which we would have, or think we have, -- but the false Spirit
can fit us, to an Hair, with a Counterfeit. He spoke of it, with great Concern,
that the Devil should have such Power in counterfeiting, etc. ten Times
expressing his distressing Fear that his Faith and Love and all was but
counterfeit Grace. To another good Woman, that visited him, the Night before
his Death, he expressed great Concern, and some Fear. Here I am to Night, said
he, but where shall I be to morrow Night: Yet being asked whether he was
willing to die, he readily answered that he was; and said he had rather die
than live; and mentioned again that of Peter, 1 Epistle 1 Chap. 13. Ver. --
Hope to the End, for the Grace that is to be brought unto you, etc.

On the last Morning of his Life, his Faith and Hope was found to continue, and
still to be increasing more and more. The Minister that preached the Lecture,
prayed with him in the Prison, -- God was wonderfully present, the Prisoner
much affected and melted.

The Text from which he heard a most seasonable Discourse, and therein heard
his last, was Luke 23. 42, 43. And be said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when
thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, Verily, I say unto thee,
To day shall thou be with me Paradise. After the Lecture poor Joseph was asked
which of the Ministers he desired might, pray at the Place of Execution: He
readily signified his Desire, that the Minister that preached (and had prayed
with him in the Morning) might pray with and for him at his Death.

At the Time appointed for the Man of Death to take his last steps, most of the
Ministers of the County, and several others, accompanied him on his way, -- The
Mile's Walk was improved in directing, encouraging and cautioning the Prisoner
of Hope; who, again and again expressed his Hope, but very modestly: As for
Instance; He was asked, Do you believe that the Lord is willing as well as able
to save you? He answered, Yes, I desire to believe. On the first sight of the
Sea, on the shore of which was the Place of Execution, He was asked, whether he
could venture upon the Ocean of Eternity in the Ark Christ? He said, Yes. He
was told, that was Faith: He returned, I am not sure I have Faith, whereas he
had all along, 'till a little before this Day, confidently denied that he had
any saving Faith. At first sight of the Gallows, he was asked, whether the
Sight were not not terrifying to him? He answered, No; not at all. And indeed,
his Countenance, his Words; for Matter and Manner; and his whole Behavior in
the Way to and at the Place of Execution, showed plain eno' that he was very
much above the Prevalency of any such thing as slavish Fear.

The Gallows was fixed in a Valley, with Hills on the one side, and on the
other, so that the numerous Spectators (they were by Conjecture about three
Thousand: there having been no such Example in the County for more than seventy
Years) had an advantageous Prospect. After one of the Ministers had prayed,
etc. the humble Penitent cheerfully ascended the Ladder, and gave Warning to
the People, in the following Words, I would have you all take Warning by me, I
am come here to die a shameful Death; and I acknowledge the Justice of God in
it, it is Drunkenness that has brought me to it. I would have you all to leave
off your Drunkenness; for if you don't leave it off, it will certainly bring
you to some dreadful End. Then he prayed so freely, so distinctly, and so
pertinently, that it was to the Admiration of the Wisest and Best; the most
impartial and judicious that heard him: But for want of the seasonable Penning
it down, the Reader cannot have so full and exact an Account of the Prayer, as
of the shorter Warning.

In his Prayer he addressed God as most holy and glorious; He acknowledged that
himself was a great Sinner, and that his Sins were attended with very
extraordinary Aggravations, for he confessed that he had sinned against great
Light and Knowledge, that he had sinned away blessed seasons of Grace; in
crying to God for Mercy notwithstanding his many and great Sins, he pleaded the
discovery God had made of his merciful Nature, That he delighted not in the
Death of a Sinner, etc. He pleaded the Merit and Virtue of the Blood of Christ
(which he called the Blood of Sprinkling) as sufficient to cleanse from all
Sin, how heinous soever! begging Pardon and Cleansing, alone, for Christ's
sake. He acknowledged his Inability to do any thing, and unworthiness to
receive any thing. Begging that God would make him such as He would have him to
be; and that he might be sprinkled with the Blood of Christ. And expressly
committing his Spirit into the Hands of his Savior, he concluded with a proper
Doxology: and having once more, in answer to a proper Question put to him by
one of the Ministers, very modestly expressed his Hope, as often before; he
showed (some thought even unto Excess) a readiness to die.

It was observed that the great Assembly of Spectators, were generally much
affected, perhaps almost beyond Example.

Several Things in the All-disposing, very mysterious and super-abundantly
gracious Providence of God our Savior, relating to the Subject of the
preceding Account, seem worthy of Observation and special Remark.

1. That being left Fatherless, he should be cast into a Family where he was
made acquainted with the holy Scriptures, and the first Principles of the
Oracles of God from his Childhood: so that by the Blessing of God upon the
public, together with these more than ordinary private Means and Pains that
were, by his good Master and Mistress, used and taken with and for him, he
attained to more than a barely sufficient measure of Doctrinal Knowledge, to
lay the Foundation of his after-Conversion.

2. That the bloody Fact for which he was to die should be so timed in the
Commission of it, as that he had almost three quarters of a Year's space of
Repentance, before his Trial could come on, according to the fixed Course and
Circuit of public Justice.

3. That his Judges, after they had showed a wise Zeal, becoming the Robe and
Diadem of Righteousness and Judgment, with which they are always clothed and
adorned; should, at the humble and earnest suit of this Man of Death,
mercifully grant him seven Weeks farther space, after his Condemnation, before
this Execution! -- Yet was the Matter so ordered in the good Providence of God,
for the more effectual engaging of him to improve every Inch of his Time, that
for a Month together, he never knew that he had two Days to live!

4. That there had been stirred up for him a Spirit of fervent and effectual
Prayer, solitary and social; in a Course of Family Meetings and in smaller
Numbers more reservedly meeting together -- That there should be Opportunity,
at the Anniversary Convention of Ministers, and otherwise by Word and Writing,
to impart the condemned Man's Desires of Prayer to more than an hundred -- the
Ministers of four Colonies -- and great many Thousands had opportunity to join
with their Ministers in praying down the Spirit of Grace on a Soul that desired
it more than Life! -- Thus when the Lord has a singular and signal Work of
mavelous Grace in Hand, -- He delights to oblige many -- by interesting them
in it. And if a Soul be, thus, saved from Death, and a multitude of Sins
covered; the abundant Grace, through the Thanksgiving of many, will redound to
the Glory of God.

5. That one of the greatest Hindrances that he met with; or that, indeed,
could have fell in his Way to obstruct him in his great Work, should be over
ruled to forward it! For his being, after almost half a Year's Abstinence from
strong Drink, entangled again by a Drunken Companion; and diverted, for whole
Weeks, from his daily Course of Meditation, Reading and Prayer, was made
wonderfully subservient to a more thorough Conviction; as to the Power of Sin
in him, his Impotency to deliver himself, and wretched Unworthiness to obtain
Help from the Lord: So that the Work of Humiliation seemed to be much advanced
in him by this irresistible Temptation!

Two Things might something confirm this Supposition.

1. That he plainly and with Indignation, told one of us, after his Delivery
from the Society, naturally so pleasing to him, That he had as lieve have the
Devil with him, as such a drunken and ranting Companion.

2. After this Trial and Relapse, he once and again declared (yea seemed to be
fixed in the same Mind to the last) that he had rather die than be set at
Liberty, as despairing of ever conquering, but by being out of the Way of
Temptation!

And now what are the Lessons of Instruction, Admonition, etc. that we are
taught by such an Example as this?

1. O the mighty Power of Sin and Custom therein! No Cords, no Chains so
strong! How easily did Sampson snap in sunder the seven green Withs and new
Ropes, setting himself at Liberty from such kind of Bonds, -- yet was held with
the Cords of Sin, Judges 16. Much more the wicked, Prove. 5. 22. The Devil, in
the Man among the Tombs, could pluck Chains asunder, and break Fetters of Iron
in pieces; but the Chains of Sin and Guilt, they can never break. -- Our guilty
Joseph in Irons, after so many Months Abstinence from his beloved Lust of
Drunkenness, is again, taken in the Expectation, of a speedy and violent Death,
overtaken and carried Captive, in Time of Temptation; and could not be
recovered 'till the Occasion was removed. Nor may we expect to conquer our own
Iniquity, but by avoiding the Temptations leading to it, as much as possible.
Particularly, the Sin of Drunkenness is seldom if ever subdued, unless it be
famished by a total Abstinence; at least for a considerable number of Months,
if not Years, -- 'till the inordinacy of this unnatural Thirst, expire for want
of Oil to maintain the Flame. --

2. We see, in this Example, the extreme Hazard of present Delays, in Hope of a
more convenient Season, Acts 25. 24. Deluded Souls venture on a little further
in Sin, not doubting but they shall be able and willing to set about the Work
of Repentance, and go thorough with it, at their Leisure. Poor Joseph, once,
though it so too --. But hear what, being Dead, he now speaks, -- I was convinced
by three quarters of a Year's Experience how utterly impossible it was for me,
even under great Advantages, all Means and Helps, public and private, and in
the amazing Prospect of Eternity, even at the very brink of it, to raise up in
my self so much as one good Desire. O therefore take Warning by me, and improve
your present Seasons of Grace: For Delays are dangerous; exceeding dangerous!

3. Awakened Sinners may learn two Things farther from this Example: First, Not
to be discouraged; not to sink under Discouragement in the Use of Means, though
the LORD may, for their Trial and greater Humiliation, seem long to defer, --
'Twas the last Week of poor Joseph's Life, before he had any comfortable
Discovery to his inward Man, the hidden Part, Psalm 51. 6. (Though he knew it
Doctrinally from his Childhood, and that with much distinctness, especially
after his Confinement) how that Jesus was willing as well as able to save from
Sin and Wrath. Matthew. 1. 21. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. With John 6. 37. Yet (excepting
the Diversion and Pullback for too long a Time) he held on in the Use of Means,
public and private -- He read many Hours in a Day; especially in his Bible --
He prayed seven Times in a Day, -- And was glad to have all Occasions of, and
Temptations to his beloved Sin removed. -- Nor did he thus wait for nothing, or
seek in Vain. This -- for the Encouragement of awakened Sinners! But then for
our Caution and Direction, -- O the inexpressible Difficulty, and yet absolute
Necessity of renouncing all our Painstaking in the Use of Means, or Performance
of Duty, -- Self-denial, etc. together with whatsoever may be attained by the
most sollicitous, diligent and patient waiting, were it even unto the
Understanding of all Mysteries and all Knowledge, etc. (1 Cor. 13. 2.) Yet must
all, in our Esteem, be no better than Dung and Dross in Point of Justification
before God, and Acceptance with him. Herein Christ and the Knowledge of him, --
Union to him, and Access to the Father through him, is all in all. And here
this believing Penitent found Rest to his Soul, when he could find it no where
else: Rest and Peace he found, though sovereign Wisdom did not see it good and
safe, either for himself or others, that he should have the superior Joy of
Faith; which all, but the Ignorant, know is not essential to it.

4. Learn hence a Lesson of Thankfulness to the God of Love for the Restraints
of his Grace and Providence. It Is possible, Reader, thou have been held back
from the grosser out-breaking of Sin, even from thy Childhood up, -- A few
Names were found in Sardis, that had not defiled their Garments. -- Yet know,
if thou would not have thy Offering rejected as the proud Pharisee's was thy
Soul must be humbled within thee, for the Murder and Blasphemy of thy Heart.
Mark. 7. 21. And thou would have been as bad as the worst, in Life and
Practice, -- but for restraining Grace. -- In particular, Have thou been kept
from, or recovered (...) out of the Sin of Drunkenness; that worse than
brutish, I was going to say, worse than devilish Sin; for though the Devil
tempts others to it, he cannot himself commit it. -- A Sin leading to the worst
of Sins, and almost to all Kinds and Degrees of Sin. -- A Sin that has,
already, drowned so many Millions in Eternal Perdition, and is still (let
Magistrates and Ministers do what they will or can to prevent it) sweeping away
like a mighty Torrent, hundreds of Thousands in the Kingdom, -- and no small
Part of the Country, as to Name and Estate; Body and Soul. -- A Sin, by which
many shorten their Days not only meritoriously, but efficiently; and if they
escape Punishment from Men, yet the Lord may, possibly find them guilty of
their own Blood, with respect to Soul and Body, both, before his impartial
Tribunal. As there is Poison that will lie in a Man's Body many Years -- wasting
him 'till it kill him at last, as surely as the strongest and largest Potion of
what will have the quickest and most deadly Operation. Now, if I take the slow
and sure-killing Poison after I am informed of it is Nature and Tendency to
destroy me, and after I have observed it is deadly Effect on others, -- I am as
truly a Self-Murderer, as if I should take a Dose of Rats-Bane that would kill
me the same Day or Hour. The Application is easy, -- but it is not easy to bring
the Guilty to make Application to themselves. God alone can do it. And he can
make such thankful, as have been the happy Subjects of Restraining Grace;
without which they, also, would long enough ago have brought themselves to
public Shame -- to the Gallows, to Hell! -- That the worst Outrages and bloody
Murders -- yea and worse Facts than these; even such as it is a Shame to speak
of, are not commonly committed -- to bring about Sodom's Day again, is owing to
Variety of Restraints, that God lays upon Man: And not to us, not to us; but to
his Name be Glory!

5. Let us all be cautioned against rash Anger, furious Passions, malicious and
revengeful Thoughts, Words and Actions, -- fixed Hatred of our Neighbor, and
the like Tendencies unto, and the Beginnings of the crying Sin of Murder.
Matthew. 5. 21, 22. 1 John 3. 15. -- And if he that hates his Brother, be a
Murderer, how many Murderers be there that go about our Streets, and join in
the public Worship, -- Soul-Murderers too -- such as Imprecate Damnation on
themselves and others -- horrid Impiety! Monstrous Iniquity! The very Devils
are not so hardy as to pray for the hastening of their complete Damnation --
They rather make suit that it may be deferred, Matthew. 8. 29.

6. But since it was Drinking to excess that betrayed poor Joseph into the
bloody Fact, rather than any rooted Malice -- Let his Example be for our
Admonition. Therefore, he says in his Warning on the Gallows, -- It is
Drunkenness that has brought me to this shameful End, -- I would have you all
take Warning by me, -- Nor was he the first, by Scores, that have been brought
to the same End in this Land, by Drunkenness; besides Thousands and Thousands
in other parts of the World, -- Yet as this poor Man had lamented in the Prison
and said (we wish to God it may not prove too true, as a Prediction) when I am
hanged -- and if twenty more, should by their Drunkenness, be brought to the
like woeful End, the rest will not take Warning. -- Remember, it is God that
warns us by Man, by dying Malefactors; by living Ministers, and by his lively
Oracles. How awful and pungent, -- how amazingly dreadful is that Commination
in Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20, -- If Men were not more unbelieving than Devils, they
could not but tremble at it, And it come to pass, when he hears the words of
this Curse, that he bless himself in his Heart, saying, I shall have Peace,
though I walk in the Imagination of my Heart, to add Drunkenness to (...): The
Lord will not spare him; but then the Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall
smoke against that Man; and all the Curses that are written in this Book shall
lie upon him; and the Lord shall blot out his Name from under Heaven.

7. Yet let not the worst of Sinners despair of Mercy, -- seeking it in Season,
and in Earnest; -- This poor Soul, before he committed Murder, (in the sight of
Man) had (by his own Acknowledgement) been guilty of all manner of Sin, --
sinned against great Light and Knowledge, -- abused singular and very
distinguishing Mercies and Favors: And in all, had done Violence to his better
informed, awakened Conscience. -- Yet (it is hopeful) found Mercy at last, --
after much Pains-taking and long Waiting, -- after sore Conflicts and deep
Humiliations, -- Mark. 3. 28. Verily I say unto you, all Sins shall be forgiven
unto the Sons of Men, and Blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme.
Isai. 1. 18. Though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow;
though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. For the Blood of Jesus
Christ the Son of God cleanses from all Sin, 1 John 1. 7. And the Word of God
is quick and powerful -- it is as a Sword, an Hammer, a Fire, in the Hand of the
Almighty Spirit of Grace, to pierce, and melt, and break the hardest Heart!
Christ has Eye Salve, also, that will clear your sight, and show you both your
Misery, and your Remedy if you will but hearken to his Counsel, Rev. 3. latter
end of the Chapter. And when you complain that you have neither Power, nor Will
to follow good Advice when it is given you, it is very relieving to remember,
that the Lord works to will and to do of his own good Pleasure; And his People
shall be Willing in the Day of his Power, -- that where Sin has abounded, Grace
may much more abound, -- But it is the blackest Brand on any to abuse such
Grace, -- For there are certain Men -- who were before of old ordained unto
this Condemnation, ungodly Men turning the Grace of God into Lasciviousness,
Jude ver. 4.

Finally; If thou, good Reader, art one of the many that remembered the
Afflictions of our Joseph, and poured out their Souls for the Conversion of
his. A Soul! (though of a poor Indian and Malefactor) more worth than a World;
and in his Book, who for our sakes was hanged on a Tree, rates as high as the
Soul of a King or Prophet --. Then will that Spirit of Grace and Supplication
which, before, moved thee to pray, and helped thee in Prayer, now excite thy
Praises. But let us all join in further and renewed fervent, effectual Prayers,
that this Example may serve to the Glory of God, and good of Souls.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Published, and to be sold by Samuel Gerrish, in Cornhill, Boston.
PRactical Discourses on the Holiness of HEAVEN. By Nehemiah Walter, A. M.
Pastor of a Church in Roxbury. Price bound, 3 s. 6 d.

THE History of the Wars of New England, with the Fastern Indians. From the 10.
of August, 1703. to the 5. of August 1726. By Samuel Penhallow Esqr. Price
bound, 3 s.

THE Service of GOD recommended, is in a Sermon from Joshua, XXIV. 15. On
Occasion of the Death of Mr. John Coney who deceased Aug. 20. 1726. AEtat. 25.
With some Account of his extraordinary Life and Death. To which is added an
Appendix, in which the Account of Him is enlarged from His private Writings,
and also the Example further improved for the Benefit of others By the Rev. Mr.
Cooper. Price bound 3 s. Or 2 s. stich'd.

A Serious Address to those who unnecessarily frequent the Tavern.


