Seasonable Advice CONCERNING THE TAVERN.

A Serious Address To those Who unnecessarily frequent THE TAVERN, AND Often
spend the Evening IN Public Houses.

By several MINISTERS.

To which is added, A private Letter on the Subject, by the late Rev. Dr.
increase Mather.

Luke 14.35. He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

BOSTON, N E. Printed for S Gerrish, at the lower end of Cornhill. 1726.

The Preface.
IT is matter of sorrowful, Observation, That New-England's primitive Ways are
not now seen among us in their former Glory and Beauty; but we have too sadly
left our first Love: and Customs, of ill fame, very inconsistent with that
Profession we make of the purest Reformation, are visibly spreading in the
midst of us.

IN particular, it is for a Lamentation, that many Persons do unnecessarily
frequent Taverns and Public Houses; even to a Scandal, and to the manifest
Prejudice and Hindrance of all Godliness and Honesty.

WE do therefore hold our selves obliged, in faithfulness to our great Lord and
Master, the Credit of the Gospel, and the Welfare of precious Souls, to join in
the following Serious Address to our Neighbors. Which, some of us having had
the Composing, and others the Perusal of, we all concur to the Scope and
Substance; as apprehending it to be a seasonable and needful Testimony: And do
earnestly (in the Meekness of CHRIST, and yet with his Authority) exhort all
into whose hands it may come, Those particularly who are under our more
immediate Inspection and Charge, (for whose Souls we would watch as they that
must give Account; that we may do it with Joy, and not with Grief; for that is
unprofitable for them) to take what is here offered, into their most serious
Consideration, and to submit their Consciences unto the Mind and Will of GOD,
as it is herein presented to them.

THE Address is made in this most public manner; Partly because if there be
any so secret in their practice of the Evil witnessed against, as to escape our
Notice and personal Applications, we hope this Admonition by the way of the
Press, may find them out: Partly also that those upon whom a transient oral
Discourse is apt to make but little Impression, may by having a printed one in
their hands, have opportunity more deliberately to weigh our Advice: And partly
that we might in this way reach those whom we cannot speak to from the Pulpit.

THIS Admonition is primarily intended for Christian Professors, of whom we
would hope that some are among the Faithful in CHRIST; who will be disposed to
say with the Royal Psalmist, Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a Kindness
--. And as Brethren, we would restore such in the spirit of meekness,
considering our selves as Men subject to like passions with others. Yet it must
be observed, that in the course of this Address, here and there are mingled
some occasional Hints, more especially pointed at the grossly Scandalous, who
deserve to be sharply rebuked, and often have been.

WE would not be understood to involve all that are faulty, in one common
Charge of Guilt, without distinction: or to impute every ill property and
effect of the Tavern-meetings, in the same degree, to every one. Nor is it
designed to cast Reproach on any particular Persons; but We sincerely aim (by
the Grace of GOD) at the Reforming of such as are fallen into so unhappy a
Practice, and the Warning of others who are like to be ensnared.

WE beseech all concerned, solemnly to examine themselves, to ponder the path
of their feet, and prove their own ways; and make particular application of the
Reproofs and Warnings here given, as an informed Conscience shall direct:
Awfully remembering this matter will quickly be judged according to the Gospel,
at the enlightened Tribunal of CHRIST, Whose We are, and whom we serve.

Cotton Mather Benjamin Wadsworth Peter Thacher John Danforth Nehemiah Walter
Eliphalet Adams Peter Thacher Israel Loring John Avery Joseph Sewall Thomas
Prince Ebenezer Thayer John Webb John Cotton Nathanael Appleton William Cooper
Thomas Foxcroft Samuel Checkley William Cook William Waldron Nathanael Cotton
Joshua Gee John Greenwood.

Sept. 29. 1726.
A serious Address To those who needlessly frequent Taverns and Public Houses.
BRETHREN,
IT is an apprehension of Duty, with a Love to your Souls, which engages us in
the present Testimony against an evil Practice growing among us, -- The
needless resorting to Taverns, and spending much precious Time (particularly
the Evening) in Public Houses: A Practice, which we cannot but think is of
dangerous Tendency, of a criminal Aspect, and of too bad Report for Professors
of Religion to indulge themselves in; and therefore we cannot but in
faithfulness warn you against it. Brethren, We are jealous over you with a
godly Jealousy; and are afraid lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve
by his Subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the Simplicity that is
in CHRIST; as the Apostle spoke to his Friends at Corinth, not in the Language
of Prejudice and Disaffection, but of his abundant Love and good Will to them.
We fear what Mischiefs and Ruins such a Practice may bring on many, whose best
Interests we are very much concerned for; if there be not a seasonable stop put
unto it.

Therefore we beseech you, Friends, suffer the Exhortation, which we now bring
you, in the name and fear of GOD* with no other Aim but at his Glory, and your
everlasting Good. O that our Counsel may be acceptable to you! We would speak
the words of Truth and Soberness. GOD by his Blessing make them words of Power;
and make us wise Reprovers upon obedient Ears!

Come then and let us reason together. Hear now and consider, while we plead
with you. It is an important case we are upon, and we entreat you to allow it
an impartial and serious Trial. Will you give us leave to expostulate the
matter with a just freedom, and with all plainness of Speech, under the
following particulars.

First, Are you not chargeable with a very faulty Mispence of TIME, while you
go so often, and tarry so long at the Tavern, or other public Houses!

Do you not very often spend your long Hours there, without dispatching any
Business at all; without doing or getting any real Good, whether as to Estate,
Body, or Soul; without serving any of the valuable Ends of the Rational Life,
much less of the Christian! Hence, Is it not a sort of more solemn Idleness you
are guilty of! And then, Is it nor an Aggravation, that you spend so many Hours
in your Tavern-Interviews! The Frequency and Length adds not a little to the
Guilt and Mischief of them, by a dreadful Consumption of precious Time; which
is a Talent we must all Account for, and being but of short Continuance, we
had not need be prodigal of it. Brethren, the Time is short, and much of it runs
off in Sleep, and in necessary Refreshments, and unavoidable Avocations from
Business. Instead therefore of contriving Methods to pass away the Time which
remains, you had need study all possible ways to redeem it, by doing with Might
what your hands find to do Eccl. 9.10.
. O then do not lavish away any more of your swift and uncertain and
irretrievable Hours in Amusement and Impertinence. Carefully gather up the
fragments of Time, that nothing be lost. Talk not of spare-Hours, -- that you
can afford the Time, or that you take only the Evenning to refresh your selves
after the Labors of a weary Day, etc. -- Behold ye trust in words that cannot
profit. They of old imagined a vain thing, who said Jer. 7.10
, We are delivered to do these things. Think not to pass such Accounts with
your righteous Judge in the great Day. Is it nothing to squander away whole
Evenings, almost every Day, in mere Sloth and Diversion! Will not the Reckoning
swell high at the Year's end! If all your lost Hours were put together, how
great a Sum would they amount to! Surely too great to obtain the Divine
Allowance. -- And do you consider (Sirs) that you have much weighty Business
(besides your secular Affairs) lying upon your hands, which bespeaks the most
diligent, the most vigorous Application of all your Powers; being eno' of it
self (had you no other Concern) to fill up the narrow space of this short Life!
Cannot you think of many things you have to do, which you would not have Death
come and find undone? And don't those things therefore loudly call for the
precious Hours that you let slide away as a Tale that is told? -- O Friends,
consider the noble and superior Ends of human Life. Consider how swiftly your
important Minutes fly away, and none of them can be recovered: One single
Moment, when past, cannot be recal'd; cannot be purchased. What shall a Man give
in Exchange? It cannot begotten for Gold, neither shall Silver be weighed for
the price thereof. Verily the Price of it is above Rubies. -- So damned Ghosts
think; who doubtless would give all the World (were it theirs) for those
probational Opportunities, which we are now in the happy Possession of, but
(alas!) do too foolishly idle away. -- O let us learn to value our Day of
Grace, hitherto prolonged, more than we have done: and let the very Though It of
Pass-time be as abhorred, as it is absurd, and let it not be once named among
us, as becomes Saints. Let us look on ourselves as Pilgrims and Strangers upon
Earth, and pass the time of our sojourning here in Fear; looking for and
hasting unto the coming of the Day of GOD I Pet. 1.17 -- II 3.12.
.

BUT to proceed,

Secondly, The MONEY that usually goes to support the Expenses of these
Interviews at the Tavern, Can there any good Account be given of it?

Remember, Sirs, You are but Stewards, and ar accountable for all the Bounties
of Divine Providence to you; and the Time is hastening on, when it will be said
to each of you, Give an Account of thy Stewardship; for thou shall be no longer
Steward Luke 16.2.
. And how dreadful will it be then to be found to have wasted your Lord's
Goods! -- Think not to say within your selves, We have Money enough and to
spare; can allow our selves these Pocket-Expences, without any Injury to our
Estates or Families --. Be it so: Yet consider, since you are but Stewards, it
behooves you to see to it that you don't pervert your Estates, the Gains of your
Callings, or any part of them, to wrong Uses; as you will answer it another
Day. Surely you are grossly deceived, if you imagine you have such Superfluities
to employ upon unnecessary and idle Diversions. Make a Computation (we pray
you) of your Tavern-Expences, at the most moderate and lowest Rate; and we are
persuaded it will, by the Year's End, rise to no inconsiderable Sum: and then
think with your selves whether it might not be applied to purposes more
excellent and desirable! Remember, the Poor you have always with you Mat. 26.11.
, and these Gleanings should be left for the Poor and the Stranger, for the
Fatherless and the Widow Deuteronomy. 24 21.
. Have you Bread to the full? It Is pity any thing should be thrown away, when
there is many a poor hungry Lazarus, that would willingly accept the Crumbs
which fall from your Tables. Does your Cup run over? It Is pity it should run
waste, when there are so many thirsty Souls would be glad of the Overplus --.
But then besides this of Charity, there are other pious Uses, to which the
Filings of your Gold might be consecrated; and become Sacrifices Heb. 13.16.
which GOD is well-pleased with, and be found unto Praise and Honor and Glory,
when the Books of GOD come to be opened, and you be judged from the things
found written there.

After all, It may be many of you that spend too much at these Interviews, have
but little to spare, without actually injuring your Families, or defrauding the
Poor, or robbing GOD's Altar. Now therefore there is utterly a Fault among you
--. We write not these things to shame you (unless it be to shame you out of
your evil Custom) but as Brethren we warn you 1 Cor. 4, 14.
. And above all we warn you against throwing away your Money and Time in sinful
Gaming.

Thirdly, Is there not often a faulty Waste of WORDS, and much vain
Conversation, at these Tavern-Interviews?

Judge within your selves. Did you set such a Watch before your Mouths, and
keep the Door of your Lips, as you ought; would they not be employed in more
profitable and reputable Discourse, than is commonly heard at the Tavern? Is
the talk there such, that if our glorious LORD, who verily stands at the Door
Jam 5.9.
, and hearkens and hears, should appear to you, as he did once to two of his
Disciples, while they were Communing together, and audibly demand, Luke 24.17.
What manner of Communications are these that ye have one with another, as ye
sit and are merry? -- Or if one should with his Pen unobserved minute down what
passes among you, and then repeat all to you; Are your Conferences upon such
valuable Subjects, and under that wise Management, that upon a serious
Reflection, you would not find Cause to say with Ezra Ezra 9.6.
O my God, I blush and am ashamed --!

Have you such Discourse ordinarily among you, as has a Tendency, in any
measure, to improve you in vital Piety, or in solid useful Knowledge? Is any of
your Time taken up in forming Projections to advance the Kingdom of CHRIST, and
to serve your Generation according to the Will of GOD? Or rather, are not the
Company often so disposed, that such kind of Discourse is banished out of the
Conversation, as a disagreable mixture, and a sort of Profanity!

Alas! What are the Discourses that swallow up your Tavern-Hours! How seldom
after a long Evenings Talk, can you upon Recollection find many Words passed,
that you come away the wiser or the better for? Cannot you condemn your selves
many times for taking too great a Liberty of Speech, and not converting
together as becomes Saints! While some have affected to appear gay and
facetious, have they not many times bewrayed much Vanity and indecent
Lightness! When sometimes vain Persons have dropped into the Company, Tatlers,
Busy-bodies, who bridle not their Tongues, but open wide their Mouths, of
deceitful Matters, speaking things which they ought not, against their
Neighbors; or when Men of corrupt Principles, unruly and vain Talkers, that
speak Evil of the way of Truth, and are ready to turn all Religion into Banter;
or Men of unclean Lips, addicted to Filthiness, and foolish Talking and Jesting
which is not convenient; when such (we say) have fallen into your Company, have
you not too often given an approving Laugh or Smile upon their evil Chat, and
many times been insensibly drawn in, to bear a part, and keep up the vain
Conversation?

How apt is empty, impertinent, trifling Discourse to insinuate into such
Meetings: and how natural, how easy the Transition from light and airy, to
vicious and evil Communication; of an uncharitable Strain, of a factious
Tendency, of an obscene Tincture, or a profane Aspect, and the like!

But think ye this to be right? Or consider ye, that a Book of Remembrance is
written Mal 3.16.
, out of which you must one Day be Judged of the Lord? Verily there is not a
Word in Your Tongue, but Lo! He knows it altogether Psalm. 139.4
. O remember the Admonition of your Judge and Savior; Matthew. 12.35, etc.
A good Man out of the good Treasure of his heart, brings forth good Things;
and an evil Man our of his evil Treasure, brings forth evil Things. But I say
unto you, That every idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall give Account
thereof in the Day of Judgment. For by thy words thou shall be Justified, and
by thy words thou shall be condemned.

Fourthly, Do you not by this unhappy Practice put your selves in the way of
Temptation, and become exposed to many Dangers?

It is written 1 Cor. 10.9, 12.
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall: neither let us tempt
christ -- We should beware of Sin, and of every thing that looks like it, or
leads to it; should guard against all the Occasions and Incentives of Sin;
should watch and pray that we enter not into Temptation: and besure then we
should be cautious that we don't at any time voluntarily or unnecessarily put
our selves in the way of Temptations. This is to lay our selves open to the
power of Satan, and forfeit the Divine Protection.

Now, Brethren, judge ye, whether Taverns and such like Houses are not
generally Places of Temptation, much Temptation. We appeal to your own
Consciences and impartial Reflections and Experience.

Do you not find your selves there in hazard of falling into the Company of ill
Persons; and so of contracting a dangerous Acquaintance, of learning their
pernicious ways, or at least of suffering Sin upon them!

Are you not also in danger of making too near Approaches to the Sin of
Intemperance, while you sit surrounded with Temptations to it? Don't you run
the hazard of being drawn on, before you are aware, from a more transient Chat
over the Glass, to a Tarrying long at the Wine; from taking a Sip, to
swallowing down a Draught; and from one Draught to another, until at the last,
it bite like a Serpent and sting like an Adder!

If any one say, I have long been of a Club, and used the Tavern for many
Years, and found no such snare in it: -- To such we reply, If so in fact, You
have abundant Reason to adore and magnify the Grace of GOD, by which you have
hitherto been withheld; but then remember, you may trespass too far, you may
presume too long, and by grieving the Divine Spirit, may provoke Him to leave
you, and so you will become an easy Prey to your subtle and powerful Tempter. O be
not high-minded, but fear. And take heed Heb. 3.13.
lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin. Again, How harmless
soever your Discourses may have been hitherto, yet are you not in danger of
running into bad Discourse? Is not the Tongue said James 3.8.
to be an unruly Evil? And do you not many times find it to be so by unhappy
Experience and Observation? Had you not need therefore keep up a very careful
Watch over it; and fly all Provocations to ill Language; and by consequence not
unnecessarily go into those Places and Companies, where you will be peculiarly
exposed to Temptation?

Moreover, While you attend this free Conversation at the Tavern, where Men use
to put themselves pretty much off their Guard, and allow themselves a Latitude;
Are you not in danger of being imposed upon by designing Persons, and unwarily
carried into false Notions of Men and Things? Or of leading others into them,
by making wrong Representations yourselves?

In fine, Are you not in danger of contracting an incurable Habit? Custom
breeds Delight; it is a kind of second Nature: and what is natural, we are easily
^^d to upon every recurring occasion, and are apt to ma^^ other things stoop,
and give way to it. Here then is your danger, very much, lest by accustoming
your selves to these Tavern-Conferences, your Mind and Heart become too closely
engaged, so that you will be almost irresistibly driven along to them, even when
important Business calls you elsewhere, and will not be able (it may be) ever
to break off the delightful Haunt! A captivating Diversion surely must needs be
very dangerous to a Christian: And a Prudent Man foreseeing the Evil, hides
himself Prove. 22.3.
. Wherefore be ye not unwise, neither give place to the Devil Ephesians 4.^7
. Break off before you are too far engaged. Remember that wise Conclusion and
Resolve of the Apostle's, "All things that are lawful for me, are not
expedient; and I will not be brought under the power of any ^ Cor. 6 11.
. Shun the Place where you find so many Snares of the Enemy laid for you. Peter
got his Fall by Presumption Mark 14.66.
. You have to do with an Adversary that is too vigilant to lose an Opportunity,
or forego any Advantage put into his hands. Be not ignorant of his Devices 2
Cor. 2.11.
, lest he get an Advantage against you. Endeavor, we beseech you, to prevent
all these Evils, which so compass you round, by a speedy and resolute Flight
from the Tavern.

Fifthly, Have you not already felt the ill Effects of this unhappy Custom,
with regard to your spiritual and best Interests; and known others ruined by
it? O Christians, Don't you sensibly find it warring against your Souls, and
hindering you from a close Walk with GOD? The mispense of precious Time, vain
Discourse, presumptuous venturing among the Occasions of Sin, etc. are they not
such Faults as grieve the holy Spirit of GOD Ephesians. 4.30.
? And Oh! How many have by such things sinned away divine Restraints; been at
last given over to their own Lusts, and left off to be wise and to do Good!

These things indeed have a natural Tendency to corrupt good Manners, to
inspire the Mind with Vanity, and unfit Men for Communion with GOD. Carnal
Diversions too often repeated have a pernicious Influence, to sensualise the
Soul, to dissolve and weaken it is Powers, to bring a fatal Damp on virtuous
Inclinations, and indispose us to all that is solemn and serious. The Duties of
the Closet are like then to be but very poorly performed, after an Evening
misspent in idle Chatt, of worse, at a Tavern. By this means you not only leave
but little space for Religious Exercises, and so are tempted to crowd them up
in haste for want of Time; but also take a Method to render your selves averse
to them; and by consequence very perfunctory in them, to the dishonor of GOD,
and the wronging of your own Souls; which will never thrive and flourish, but
must needs be lean from day to day, so long as secret Devotions are either
neglected, or but trifled in. Closet-Duties (Prayer, Reading the Scriptures,
Meditation, etc.) attended as they ought to be, are some of the most excellent
Means of growth in Grace. And they that are so wise for their Souls, as all
should be, will give themselves to these things in their Season, and study to
redeem as much Time as they can for them. And judge ye, whether the Time you
spend at the Tavern, and in particular the Evening, which is one of the
peculiar Seasons of Devotion, would not be spent to much better purpose, and
turn to far better Account in the Day of Reckoning, if devoted (in part, at
least) to sacred Retirements! Or, if it were employed in religious
Associations, in reforming Societies, and the like; would not this be
abundantly more for your Satisfaction both at present and hereafter? Nay, if
you employed the Time (part of it) in reading of History, or studying any
pleasant and useful Science, to cultivate your Knowledge, and furnish you to do
greater Services for your Generation: or in friendly Visits among sober and
good Neighbors, under a wise and christian Management, and seasonably
concluded; would not this be much more for your present Edification, and future
Peace and Comfort!

Men and Brethren, We would not be misunderstood, as if we meant to insinuate,
that a due Pursuit of Religion is inconsistent with all manner of Diversion:
No, We suppose there are Diversions undoubtedly innocent, yea profitable and of
use, to fit us for Service, by enlivening and fortifying our frail Nature,
invigorating the Animal Spirits, and brightning the Mind, when tired with a
close Application to Business. -- But then consider, the most harmless
Recreations may become very culpable, and hurtful, for want of observing propel
Rules, with regard to the Time, Place, Company, Manner, etc. These are weighty
Circumstances, and call for a more careful Observation, than is commonly found
among Men, in the ordering of their Diversions. Multitudes take such lawless
Liberties in this case, as if they were left to the uncertain Conduct of mere
Humor and Fancy. But alas! Sirs, GOD expects that in every thing you show your
selves Men, and act under the Government of Reason and Virtue; and accordingly
that you make Choice of such Diversions as are most convenient; that you be
always sparing of them; that you time them well; regulate them prudently, make
them give place to Business, make them subserve Religion, and so minister to
the great Ends of human Life, the Glory of GOD, and the Good of Men. Happy the
Man that has this wise Art of sanctifying his Recreations, and doing these
common Actions after a godly sort! But alas! We fear this is a very rare
Attainment. Few have the Skill to avoid, or Strength to resist the Temptations
that mingle themselves with their Diversions. They drink down Poison in their
pleasant Cups, and perceive it not. They take Fire into their Bosoms, and hug
it there, until at the last they mourn, when their Flesh is consumed, and their
Souls destroyed! Carnal Pleasures have proved some of the most fatal
Impediments to Religion; have carried many down headlong to Hell, and
exceedingly retarded others in their Progress to Heaven. In particular, the
Diversions of the Tavern have been very mischievous. Multitudes who had begun
in the Spirit, and made a fair show, have lost their Religion there, and ended
in the Flesh. Have you not seen in your day, amazing Instances hereof? And have
you not known others, that perhaps have not totally fallen away, who yet from
their first listing into a Club, have visibly declined in their Zeal and
Watchfulness, and become less disposed for such religious Exercises and
Societies as once they bore a figure in! -- We beseech you, make a stand, and
suffer Conscience to enter into these Inquiries, and give a faithful Report.
Let every Man prove his own Work; and be not deceived. Fear, lest any of you
should seem to come short. Fly the Places of Temptation, where so many have,
'ere they were aware, been betrayed into Sin and Ruin; considering thy self,
lest thou also be not only tempted and entangled, but even overcome, and the
latter End be worse with thee than the Beginning!

Sixthly, Is not Family Order and Religion much obstructed and hurt, by these
Evening-Interviews at Public Houses?

What good Order is there like to be in that Family, where the Master or Father
is usually all the Evening abroad at the Tavern, and sometimes tarries late?
Are not the Children and Servants likely to wander from home too, and will not
they be tempted to tarry out late, at least sometimes, if the Heads of the
Family do it? And if one Head does it, will not the other be apt to do it also?
But what Confusion must there needs be in such a House! And how must Disorders
grow in a Town, where there are many such Houses, as 'twere left desolate! How
much more, if it were the universal Practice, and almost every Family were
usually at Evening in such a Case! The Heads abroad! And the Young People
abroad! Some here, others there; and all upon their Diversions! What a
melancholy Gloom would this cast upon the Town! How doleful the Appearance! Can
you bear the Though It of it! But now why may not all run into the Practice, if it
be justifiable in to many and such Persons as do allow themselves in it? And
who knows how extensive the Infection of your ill Example may be? (of which we
shall speak more particularly under the next Article.) Surely then a Regard to
the Welfare and Reputation of the Town, a Reverence for Order, as well as a
serious View to the Benefit of your Children and Servants should constrain you
to leave off the evil Custom. And indeed a just Respect for your Consorts,
should influence you to spend your Evenings at home as much as necessary
Business will allow. May we not in this case apply that Admonition of the
Apostle Peter? 1 Pet. 3 7.
Ye Husbands, dwell with your Wives, according to Knowledge, giving Honor unto
the Wife as unto the weaker Vessel, and as being Heirs together of the Grace of
Life, that your Prayers be not hindered.

The Apostle Paul exhorts Parents and Masters, to love their Wives and
Children, and give unto their Servants that which is just and equal; and
(therefore) to continue in Prayer, and watch in the same with Thanksgiving;
withal Praying Col. 3.3.
, praying together, or jointly, as the word in the Original might be rendered.
It is a Precept for Joint Prayer in the Family. And they are Prayers in the
Family, Prayers of the Husband with his Wife and Household, that the Apostle
Peter was desirous should not be hindered; and therefore exhorts Men to dwell
with their Wives according to Knowledge, giving Honor to them.

But do not you, our Friends, fail of a due Respect to your Consorts, while you
so constantly prefer the Entertainments of Tavern-Conversation, before the
Pleasure of their Company? -- And then do you not take an unhappy Method to
hinder your Family-Prayers by this Custom? If it don't breed Contention, yet it
should seem, it must needs too often infer Disorder, and hurt the Devotions of
the Household; especially if you tarry out late in the Evening, as we fear the
manner of some is. Do you not hereby lose one special Opportunity for the
Instruction of your Households? And do you not take a Course to disfit your
selves too much for the Duties of GOD's Worship? When the Evenning has been
consumed in Vanity, and the best Season in it for Family Worship passed away,
are not the Duties of it like to be (in part, at least) jostled out or hurried
over in a slighty drowsy manner; be but lean Sacrifices, and of little Account
with the Holy GOD, who has said, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh
me. When the the Strength and Spirits of the Mind have been laid out on the
World, in the Day, and wasted on trifling Diversions in the Evening, what
remains but Indifference and Luke warmness, for Objects of a religious Concern!
As you may observe, those Trees that run out into abundance of grosser Shoots,
seldom bear much valuable Fruit, because all the best Juices go to maintain
those useless Luxuriances.

To conclude this Head, We pray you seriously to reflect on what you read of
David, that Man of GOD, and of the People of Israel: -- After the Labors of
the Day, in removing the Ark 2 Samuel 6.19, 20.
, All the People departed every one to his House: Then David returned to bless
his Household. And would it not be well for you, O our Friends, if you would go
and do likewise? Instead of going from the Warehouse, the Shop (or Field) to
the Tavern; from Business, to insnaring Diversions; had you not better return
(with David) to bless your Households; even to bless them with your Prayers,
and Counsils, and good Conversation in CHRIST! It is written Deuteronomy. 6.7.
, The Commandments of the Lord, Thou shall teach them diligently unto thy
Children, and shall talk of them, when thou fittest in thy House; when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up. Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to
do it. O that there were such an Heart in every Householder, that there might
in it is Season be more of a Sitting in the House; that they would keep their
Foot, and look better to the ways of their Household; that it might be well
with them, and with their Children for ever!

Seventhly, May Not the Example you set, be of ill Influence, and hurtful to
Others?

Example is a very attractive thing; especially bad Example: This is a Root of
Bitterness, which wherever it springs up, is generally fruitful of pernicious
Effects, and thereby many are defiled; many destroyed. It is like Leven, which
works secretly, insinuates it self insensibly, and spreads very swiftly. It Is
like the noisome Pestilence, which silently assaults Men, and yet with a mighty
Power, and mortally wounds, almost before we suspect any Danger. Especially bad
Examples set by Persons of Note and in superior Rank, or making a peculiar
Profession of Religion, or pretending to be Men of higher Knowledge, etc. do
carry with them an extraordinary Contagion. By ill Examples, whole Communities
have sometimes been endangered, and Cities bro't into a Snare. By this means
often one Offender destroys much Good. And the Example of Professors and
Superiors, particularly in this matter of needless frequenting the Tavern, and
spending the Evening there, we fear will be and has been of mischievous
Consequence.

Has it not a Tendency to harden the Wicked, who are apt to justify themselves
by the Example of others, especially of their Betters, against the known Laws
of Virtue and Wisdom! Do you not in a sort herd your selves with the debaucht
Crew, while you so constantly go to the Place of their Resort? Do you not too
much conform to this Worlds, and in a sense sit with vain Persons, by
frequenting the same Houses that they haunt; by sitting so often on the
Drunkards Bench and in the Seat of the Scorner? And though you run not with them
to the same Excess of Riot; yet is there not exceeding hazard, that your so far
Symbolizing with them, will embolden them in their Wickedness? And are you not
like to become (in another and worse sense, than that in which it was said of
David) the Song of Drunkards, their Joy and Laughter, though the Grief of your
sober thinking Friends! Moreover, Is there not Danger of Others being seduced
by your Example, into the paths of the Destroyer; particularly Young Persons,
Children, Apprentices and Servants? Will not such be apt to (nay do they not
already) follow you to the Tavern? And if you tarry late, will not they too?
And if you have your free Conversation, will not they have their foolish
Jesting, and corrupt Communication? And if you take your Glass freely, though
perhaps never to scandalous Besotment; will not they be in danger of drinking
to a vile Excess? And still call it but good Fellowship, and color all over
with your Example, imagining they have your Patronage! O how shocking the
Though It! Dwell upon it, we pray you, till you feel the force of it; and let it be
an abiding powerful Restraint upon you.

Suppose you are either strong to drink Wine; or are really abstemious, do
always keep within the bounds of Temperance, and are able to stand in the Hour
of Temptation: yet by your Example you may draw others into a Snare, who
perhaps think they may with Security follow you; but alas! the Temptation
proves too hard for 'em, and often miserably foils them. -- Again, Suppose You
have your Conversation chiefly with fober Friends, and by that means are not so
much in danger; yet others that are seduced by your Example, may fall into bad
Company; of which there is generally no great Scarcity any where, but in places
of Diversion almost always a Plenty. And some have, it may be, the first time
they went to a Tavern, met there the Instruments of their Ruin.

In a word, Admit your Tavern-meetings to be in themselves lawful and innocent;
yet if they become an occasion of Sin unto others, and you thereby cast a
stumbling Block before the Weak, you must certainly allow, you ought to
forbear. In matters of strict and absolute Duty indeed, we know of no
Obligation upon Men to forbear, left others should take Offense, and makes an
ill Improvement of our Example. Yet in Cases of Indifference, in matters of
Liberty, the Rule will hold. Take heed then lest by any means this Liberty of
yours become a stumbling Block to others. For if any see Thee which have
Knowledge, customarily fitting at meat or taking your Glass in the Tavern;
shall not the Conscience of him that is weak, be emboldened to take the like
Liberty, and being too weak to encounter the Temptation, fall into Sin? But
when ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak Conscience, ye sin
against CHRIST. Wherefore (faith the Apostle 1 Cor. 8.9, etc. Romans 14.14, etc.
, whole words, you are sensible, we apply in this Case) If Meat make my Brother
to offend, I will eat no Flesh while the world stands, lest I make my Brother
to offend. I know (says he) and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is
nothing Unclean of it self: -- Yet it is forbidden Fruit, and evil to that Man
who eats with Offense. It is good neither to eat Flesh, nor to drink Wine,
nor so much as fit in a Tavern, if thereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is
offended, or is made weak. In this Abuse of our Liberty we shall sin against
the Lord CHRIST, their Lord and ours: hereby we shall gratify and serve the
Devil, and expose our selves to the Displeasure of Heaven. Hereby we shall
become Partakers of other Men's Sins; which (unless Repentance prevent) will be
so many dreadful Items to inflame our future Reckoning, and carry up our last
Account to an amazing height. WOE to that Man by whom Offenses come! O let us
dread a share in that Woe Mat. 18.7, 8.
. Wherefore if thy Right Hand cause thee to offend, Cut it off, and cast it
from thee; and abstain from the Appearance of Evil 1 These. 5.22.
; that ye may be blameless and harmless, the Sons of GOD, unrebukable in the
midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, and shining as Lights in the World
Phil. 2.15.
, that others seeing your good Works, and beholding your chaste Conversation
coupled with Fear, may glorify your Father which is in Heaven Matthew. 5.16.
, may be ashamed of their own evil Deeds, and by your Example be put upon
Reformation, and provoked to a virtuous, wise, and circumspect Behavior.

Eighthly, Should it not be a moving Consideration with you, That this
customary going to the Tavern is matter of Grief to your Ministers, who watch
for your Souls, and to many serious Christian Neighbors about you?

They are not a few precise and humorous Persons, that disapprove of this
Custom; but many of the more sober and watchful and wise Christians among us,
behold you and are grieved. Now as Charity requires that we mourn the Sins of
others; so it requires that we bear on another's burdens Gal. 6.2.
. Hence then, if any of your Christian Neighbors (and especially if many of
them) are burdened with Grief and Shame, for your (supposed) Sin, in needless
sitting at a Tavern --, Verily Christian Charity obliges you to forbear the
taking such a Liberty. Allow that really, and abstracting from Circumstances,
it is not a Sin in you: yet there is not in every Man that Knowledge. And the
Apostle has expressly determined, If thy Brother be grieved with thy Liberty,
now walk thou not charitably Romans 14.15.
.

One very justly observes, It is to be considered that in judging of the
Lawfulness of a Diversion, I ought not to be concluded by my single Opinion,
contrary to the sense of other pious and good People. Though my Judgment is not
to be determined by theirs, but by the Evidence of the Thing; yet I humbly
conceive (says our Author) it is but fit their Judgment should have some
Influence on my Practice. Charity obliges me to show to much Regard to the
Peace of a Fellow-Christian, as not to grieve him by doing an Action he thinks
dipleasing to GOD, and which might be as well omitted. -- And then (he goes on)
I would propose it to your further Tho'ts, whether it be not a Duty to stand
more upon your Reputation, than to part with any portion of it, for the sake of
a Diversion; and whether we ought not to value more the Esteem of good
Christians, than to forfeit it rather than forego the Use of our lawful Liberty
in a matter of Recreation only. -- With all this remember Paul's Exhortation,
Phil. 4.8. where among other marks and characters of those things that he
recommends to our practice, this is one, That they be of good Report --. Though I
defer not so much to Opinion and Custom, as to think they can alter the
intrinsic Nature of Actions; so that Virtue shall become Vice, or Vice Virtue:
yet I cannot forbear being of the mind, That an Action in it self indifferent,
may become by Accident sinful, when stamped with an ill Name by general
Suffrage or by a number of Conscientious Christians.

We pray you now apply this to the Case we are upon. And we beseech you, for
others sake (if you cannot be persuaded for your own) immediately to desist from
the culpable Practice, which is an occasion of so much Grief unto many of your
serious Friends and Neighbors. GOD is our Record, how greatly we long after you
all in the Bowels of CHRIST, and that we have heaviness in our Hearts on your
Account. If therefore there be any Bowels and Mercies in you, Fulfill ye our
Joy, and relieve us from our Burden, by a speedy Reformation. Thus by the love
you bear to us, we persuade you.

But to proceed, --

In the next place, The Practice we are reproving, is not it what your pious
Forefathers were very much Strangers to? Your selves know how ye ought to be
followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit he Promises; to follow
them in the Things that are pure and lovely! But now Judge within your selves:
Do you not think, in this unhappy Practice, you have widely departed from the
Example of New-England's Primitive Times? Do you not show a Spirit very
different from that which possessed the first Generations of GOD's People in
this Land? Did They (think you) so frequent Drinking-Houses, and customarily
trifle away their Evenings there, as many now adays do? Alas! Are we thus
quickly turning out of the good Way, which our Fathers walked in! Do we thus
early rise, and corrupt our Doings! Some of you that give into this Custom,
have perhaps had eminently pious Ancestors, in whose Lives no such Vanity was
to be seen. And may you not well blush to think how their Example reproaches
you, and what a different Figure (in this regard,) you make from them! Return,
we beseech you, and see and ask for the Old Paths, the good way, and walk
therein, and ye shall find rest for your Souls.

Indeed, (to go on,) We cannot but suppose that your own Minds have secretly
twitch'd and upbraided you at times before now, for your misconduct in this;
matter. We appeal to you; Has not Conscience, in some moments of serious
Reflection, and particularly when you have sometimes heard this Custom borne
Testimony against, by your faithful Reprovers, begun to finite you! And have
you not under such Convictions entertained some thought of leaving off the evil
Practice; yea and perhaps forborne for a Season? Yet have you not returned to
the old Wont? But why have ye done this? Were those inward* Rebukes (think ye)
from above, Fruits of the Holy Spirit, or not? Surely you cannot imagine them to
be from beneath, Productions of an Evil Spirit. The Devil is unquestionably
more a Friend to the sinful Custom (in which so many are like to be ensnared)
than to be the Author of those good Dispositions -- And if they were (as they
must needs be) Motions of the Holy Spirit; then consider, You must give an
Account to GOD, of the Slights and Affronts you have put upon Him, by quenching
His Spirit, and resisting the Checks and Warnings of Conscience. Oh! Why will
you thus struggle with your faithful Monitor, withstand your blessed
Sanctifier, and grieve the Comforter, whereby you are sealed to the Day of
Redemption! Beloved, if there be any Fellowship of the Spirit, we beseech you
hearken to his Voice, even to Day, while it is called to day; fall in with his
holy suggestions; suffer not your selves to continue in that which your own
solid Thoughts do and cannot but disallow, left happily ye be found even to fight
against GOD. We entreat you, do not shut your Eyes against the Light. Don't
resist Conviction, nor shift it off by trifling Pretenses. It has been well
observed, There is no Sin so heinous, so odious, but a resolved Custom in it
will do much toward the reconciling of the Judgment to it; so as that either
it is though it no Sin at all, or but a little one. And thus if it be not
justified, yet it is palliated and excused; and Conscience, which should be of
Council for the Government to detect and prosecute the Sin, is retained on the
other side, and becomes an Advocate for the Sin. We entreat you Don't set your
selves to study Excuses, as the manner of some is. For verily all the
Fig Leaves you can sew together, will not make a Covering broad or thick enough
to hide the Shame. -- Some of you may perhaps urge the Power of Custom; that
it is what you have long used your selves to, and cannot tell how to leave it off
-- But alas! That only argues you the more guilty, and that you have the more
need to hasten your Repentance, and resolutely strive to break off the evil
Habit. Remember this, and show your selves Men.

Some it may be will urge Example and Fashion; that it is the Custom of the
Place, and they would not affect Singularity -- To which we reply. Though it be
indeed growing too much the Mode, yet Thanks be to GOD, there are many sober
and watchful Christians among us still that eschew the Evil; a number
sufficient to rescue you from the dreaded Imputation of Singularity. But
suppose the Case were otherwise, the Commonness of the Practice, if it be a
Sin, will not excuse you in it. It Is too great a Complement to any Fashion, to
follow it at the expense of a good Conscience and the Credit of your
Profession. Better be singular than sin. It Is the Word of GOD that is our Rule;
not the Example of Men, however great or good. And that expressly says, Exodus
23.2.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil --.

Again, Some it may be will plead, They are led away by enticing Company --.
But alas! This will never justify you. Are you not solemnly cautioned and
charged in the Word of GOD Prove. 22 24, 25. Chap. 1.10. -- 9.6. 2 These. 3.6.
, Make no friendship with a vicious Man, lest thou learn his ways, and get a
Snare to thy Soul. -- My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not. Forsake
the Foolish and live. Withdraw your selves from every Brother, that walks
disorderly. Note that Man, and have no Company with him, that he may be
ashamed. -- These are the Warnings of GOD. And if thou obeyest them, thou shall
be wise for thy self; but if thou scornest, thou alone shall bear it. The Sins
you are drawn into by others, are your own Though Sinners entice, they cannot
compel you; but if overcome when tempted, you are really drawn aside of your
own Lusts Jam. 1.14.
; and every man shall finally bear his own Burden Gal. 6.5.
. It Is a vain Plea then, and carrys in it not the least Color of an Excuse, to
say, That you are drawn in by Company. -- What though they may be your kind
Benefactors? Their Gifts should not blind your Eyes, and allure you to have
fellowship with them in any unfruitful Works of Darkness. What though they are
your generous Employers, and your Dependence may be very much upon them for
Business and a Livelihood, and they will be displeased if you don't humor 'em in
such matters; yet be not ye Partakers with them Ephesians. 5.7, 11.
. For the Eyes of the LORD are over the Righteous; -- and who is he that will
harm you, if ye be Followers of that which is Good? But and if ye suffer for
Righteousness sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid of their Terror, neither be
troubled 1 Pet. 3.12, etc.
. What though they think it strange that you run not with them --, speaking Evil
of you, and frowning upon you, and perhaps doing you some Diskindness: Yet if
any Man suffer as a Christian 1 Pet. 4.16.
let him not be ashamed nor afraid. The Fear of Man is too often in this Case
undoubtedly, as well as in others, a Snare, especially to young Beginners in
the World. But my Son, fear thou GOD: for he that fears GOD, shall come forth
of them all. Ye are bought with a Price: be ye not the Servants of Men 1 Cor.
7.23.
.

In a word, Some it may be will plead Necessity, or at least great Convenience
in the Case, with regard to the Ends of their Calling and Business: -- Upon
which we shall observe to you, That there are Others among us, Merchants,
Shopkeepers, Tradesmen, etc. that have perhaps as much Business and as good
Success as you; who yet don't attend your Evening Conversations at the Tavern,
and do but seldom, if ever, transact any Business there Now these are Witnesses
against you, and must stop your Mouths, as to the Plea of Necessity, or any
great Expediency in the matter. -- Indeed all will allow Public Houses to be
necessary or at least convenient, for Travelers and Strangers. But we think
the Case is vastly different, as to Town-Inhabitants, who are at home, and have
Houses of their own, which are sufficient in ordinary Cases --. However, we
will readily allow, that Town-Dwellers may sometimes find a Convenience in
having a public House at hand to step into upon Occasion. Nevertheless, it
does not follow, that you may go thither, when Necessity do'sn't compel, nor
any great and manifest Accommodation or Advantage invite you. For what may be
innocent and lawful, when done occasionally and transiently, upon some
particular and extraordinary Emergence; which becomes criminal and scandalous,
when it grows to a Custom, and is done unnecessarily --. But then we fear
concerning many, It is not Business, that carries 'em to the Tavern, especially
in the Evenings which they so often spend there; but they go for the sake of
free Conversation and Pastime, as they call it; if not driven by more sordid
Appetites. Alas! How egregiously are public Houses generally perverted from the
true Design of them! For, as we fear, Taverns are multiplied among us, beyond
the bounds of real Necessity, and even to a Fault, if not a Scandal; so
likewise that too many of them prove Nurseries of Vice, being prostituted by
Multitudes to an ill use, even the serving of diverse Lusts and Pleasures, which
war against the Soul, or at best the wasting away of many precious Hours in
unprofitable Amusements!

However, Let what Good or Advantage you will, be pretended, by these
Evening-Interviews at Public Houses, we apprehend if matters be duly weighed,
that the Evils and Inconveniences and Temptations that attend them, will vastly
preponderate and more than countervail. And let us tell you, If you will
immediately Reform, we are persuaded This will be no Grief nor Offense of Heart
unto you, as Abigail in another case said to David. And O that we may have the
same Success that she had in her Reproof! We hope that some of you at least,
will give an affectionate and thankful Reception to us, as David to his
Reprover, saying, "Blessed be the Lord GOD of Israel, which sent thee this Day
to meet me: and blessed be thy Advice, and blessed be thou which have kept me
back from sinning!

But, to conclude, Whatever your Apprehensions are now, or have been, we are
persuaded that a Dying Hour will bring with it very melancholy Reflections upon
your Conduct in this matter, if you don't seasonably recover your selves.

O for the Tho'ts of dying Men, in this important Case!

Realise it, Sirs, that you are hastening to the Grave, and stand upon the
amazing Brink of ETERNITY. Consider the Uncertainty of Life; and think
seriously with your selves, What if Death should lay it is awful Arrests upon
you the next Time you are at a Tavern-Interview! Is the Tavern a Place you
would be willing to meet Death in? How dare you run the Risque, that That shall
be the last place you will be at, before the dreadful Summons be served upon you,
to set your House in order and DIE! -- What is the Language of your evil
Custom? Is it not that, Soul! take thine Ease; eat, drink, and be merry! But O
Man, what if one Evening or other GOD should say to you, This Night shall thy
Soul be required of thee! Luke 12.20.
Oh! How would your Thoughts (like Belshazzar's Dan 5.6.
, when he saw the handwriting on the Wall) trouble you, and your Knees smite
one against another!

We beseech you think what are like to be your Reflections upon misspent Time,
and particularly on your Tavern-Hours, when you are got into the near View of a
future State, and have the King of Terrors staring you in the face; when your
Lives are hovering over the Mouth of the Pit, and your Souls are just upon
taking wing to make their appearance before the dread Tribunal of a Righteous
GOD; whose all-seeing Eye is now continually upon you; compassing your Path and
your Lying down Psalm. 139.3.
--, and who will bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret thing,
whether good or evil Eccl. 12.14.
-- When Death and Judgment are come near, and seem to have taken hold of you;
Do you think you shall retain the Relish of your Tavern-Conversation, or have a
pleasing Memory of the Time devoured by it? Verily we believe this evil Custom
will then appear to your enlightened eyes in it is true and base Colors, and in
dreadful Shapes: and the Remembrance of it will be as a piercing Arrow to your
guilty Breasts.

You may perhaps baffle Conscience for the present with one Excuse and another;
(and it may be some will pass off this our Address with a vain Laugh, and treat
it with Neglect or vent their angry Resentments:) but when you come to lie upon
a Death bed, if Conscience be awake, we are persuaded this will read loud
Lessons of Reproof and Terror to you, silence all the frivolous Pleas you now
indulge to, and make you wish you had inclined your Ear to the voice of your
Teachers Prove. 5.13.
. Then the Sin you now make light of, will sit heavy upon your Tho'ts, and be a
grievous Burden to you. Though now it be sweet to your Mouths, and rolled under
your Tongues as a pleasant Morsel, yet 'twill be Bitterness in the latter end,
even as the Gall of Asps, yea more bitter than Death And when your Hearts are
pricked within you, will not the Psalmist's Reflection Psalm. 73, 22.
be yours, -- So foolish was I and ignorant, yea even as a Beast before God!
With you not be ready to confess with Saul 1 Samuel 26.21.
-- I have played the Fool and erred exceedingly! -- Have you not heard of some
that have gone out of the World in the midst of those bitter Exclamations, Ale
houses are Hell-houses! Alehouses are Hell-houses! And of others that have
made that doleful Outcry, -- Call back Time, Oh! Call back Time: but alas!
found it too late to redeem the precious Hours they had so profusely thrown
away!

O think, we beseech you, think what will be the Fruit of this Course you are
in. Verily the Best Issue you can expect is that you will sooner or later
Repent of it. And will you act so foolish a part as wilfully to make your
selves work for Repentance! Do but consider the Nature of Repentance; what
Anxiety, and Shame, and Grief, and Fear it implies: and it should seem you
cannot be willing to purchase a little Pleasure at so dear a rate. -- Knowing
the Terror of the Lord, we persuade you --. O be wise in time: Seeing the Error
of your way, instantly resolve upon Reformation.

Now take up those wise and good Purposes, which you cannot but think you will be
ready to make on a Sick Bed. Be peremptory and solemn in your Resolutions: and
immediately put them in practice. Be steadfast and immovable. Watch and Pray,
that ye enter not into Temptation. Carefully guard against every thing that
will tend to ensnare you: and in particular, take heed that a false Modesty, an
easy Humor, and Complaisance to Company don't betray you. Fortify your selves
against all Inticements, by carrying proper serious Tho'ts about with you
continually; by frequently renewing your solemn Vows, and daily committing your
selves to the Keeping of Divine Grace.

Thus we have showed our Opinion, and given you our faithful Advice. We now
commend you to GOD who has all Hearts in his Hand; and beseech Him to crown
this our Endeavor with the desired Success, by his effectual Blessing.

However, we humbly trust it will turn to us for a Testimony. AMEN!

APPENDIX. THERE has fallen into our hands a private Letter of the late
Reverend Dr. Increase Mather's, upon the Subject of the foregoing Pages,
written to one of his Neighbors: A Copy of which we think fit to annex; and by
it, He being dead, yet speaks. It Is as follows:
Brother --
ALTHOUGH I am fuller of Business than I have been (to my knowledge) ever since
my coming to Boston, yet out of respect to my Word, and my Love to You, I send
you the following short Answer, to the Question, upon which you desired my
Apprehensions.

QUESTION,

WHETHER it be Lawful for a Churchmember among us, to be frequently in Taverns?

ANSWER,

In the following PROPOSITIONS,

I. It is not Lawful for a Churchmember to be in Taverns oftener than Necessity
calls for it.

And this is evident,

1. Because we are to Abstain from all Appearance of Evil, 1 These. V. 22. Jude
23. Now, This has an Appearance of Evil. It looks something like being a
Pot-Companion.

2. Because we must avoid all Temptations to Sin. Where any Evil is forbidden,
it is required that the Temptations leading to that Evil, should be shunned.
Therefore the Rule that forbids Drunkenness, does also prohibit being
unnecessarily where there is much Drink a going, that may be a Temptation to
Excess. Genesis XXXIX. 10. Prove. V. 8.

3. Because we must, as much as may be, avoid the giving of Occasion unto
others to Sin. Yea, a Christian should abridge himself of his lawful Liberty,
if it prove an Occasion for others to Sin against GOD. And therefore the
Apostle forbids Eating in an Idols Temple: Not but that it was in it self
Lawful to Eat there, or in any other Place; because no Places under the Gospel
are either Holy or Profane, as under the Law: but because some would by that
means be occasioned to commit Idolatry, and be hardened in Sin, 1 Cor. VIII. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13.

II. For Church Members to Choose to transact their Civil, Affairs in the
Tavern* when they might as well do it at their own Houses, is an Evil in the
Sight of GOD.

For,

1. They occasion others to Sin against GOD. The more Carnal sort of People
will say, Such and such are often in Taverns, for all they make a Profession of
Religion, and are Members of Church. Thus the way of Truth is evil spoken of.
And though Godly Persons may go into the Tavern for lawful Ends, to dispatch
their lawful Affairs, yet the Ungodly will from thence take Advantage to follow
Taverns for unlawful Ends, even to Drink and be Drunken there. Now, a Christian
should be very Tender of (...) so much as an Occasion of Dishonor to (...) of
wrong to the Souls of any. 2 Samuel (...) XXII. 22. Romans XIV. 13. Gal. (...) 14.
1 John II. 10.

Yea, (...) (...)uld endeavor to walk so as to cut off all (...), of
Evil-speaking, or Evil-thinking, or Evil-doing, from them that are so Wicked as
to seek Occasion. 2 Cor. XI. 12.

2. When Men do thus unnecessarily frequent Taverns, it (...) be Just with GOD,
to leave them to fall into (...) If a Man wilfully forsake GOD in never so
small (...) (...)tter, he may well fear that GOD will forsake him. 2 Chronicles. XV.
2. Psalm. LXXXI. 11, 12.

3. III IT is not unlawful for a Churchmember to go into the Tavern, when the
Business of his Civil Calling does necessarily Call him thereunto.

And this is evident,

1. Because a Tavern is not in it self an unlawful Place. We read of Inns in
the Scripture; and of Good Men that when called thereunto, have gone into them.
Genesis XLII. 27. Exodus IV. 24. Luke II. 7.

2. Because the Duties of a Man's General, and of his Particular Calling, may
stand well together. A Man's General Calling, as he is a Christian, does not
Nullify, but rather Confirm his Particular Calling, and makes it sanctified
unto him. *** 1 Cor. VII. 20. -- V. 10.

IV. If a Churchmember be Necessitated to be in the Tavern, he ought to carry
himself Circumspectly there.

The Reason is,

1. Because he is in more danger of sinning there, than at other times; by
means of diverse Temptations that are before him.

2. Because by a Circumspect a(...) (...) (...)arriage, others may be drawn to
glorify (...) (...)ewise. Matthew. V. 16. 1 Pet. II. 12. -- I(...) (...)

Thus I have given you a (...) to your Enquiry. The Lord be wit(...) (...)
(...)nd guide you into all ways of well-pleasing before Him! I am,

Your loving Fri(...) Increase Mather.


