THE TRIALS OF Five Persons For Piracy, Felony and Robbery, Who were found
Guilty and Condemned, at a Court of Admiralty for the Trial of Piracies,
Felonies and Robberies, committed on the High Seas, Held at the Courthouse in
Boston, within His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
on Tuesday the Fourth Day of October, Anno Domini, 1726. Pursuant to His
Majesty's Royal Commission, founded on an Act of Parliament made in the
Eleventh and Twelfth Years of the Reign of King William the Third, Entitled,
An Act for the more effectual Suppression of Piracy; And made Perpetual by an
Act of the Sixth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King GEORGE.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for S. Gerrish, at the lower End of Cornhill.
1726.

Anno Regni Regis GEORGIJ, Magnae Britaniae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Decimo
Tertio.
At a Court of Admiralty for the Trial of Piracies, Felonies and Robberies upon
the High Seas, Held at the Courthouse in Boston, within the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, on Tuesday the Fourth Day of October, Annoque
Domini, 1726.
PRESENT,

THE Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER Esquire Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief in
and over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid, President
of the said Court, and the other Honorable Commissioners following, viz.

William Tailer Esquire Of the Council of His Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. Penn Townsend Esquire Of the Council of His Majesty's
Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. Nathaniel Byfield Esquire Of the
Council of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. Thomas
Hutchinson Esquire Of the Council of His Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. John Clark Esquire Of the Council of His Majesty's
Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. Thomas Fitch Esquire Of the Council of
His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. Adam Winthrop Esquire Of
the Council of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid.
Elisha Cook Esquire Of the Council of His Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. Jonathan Belcher Esquire Of the Council of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. Jonathan Dowse Esquire Of
the Council of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid.
Samuel Thaxter Esquire Of the Council of His Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. John Turner Esquire Of the Council of His Majesty's
Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. Daniel Oliver Esquire Of the Council
of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. Thomas Palmer Esquire
Of the Council of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid.
Edward Hutchinson Esquire Of the Council of His Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay aforesaid. John Frost Esquire one of His Majesty's Council for
the Province New Hampshire. John Menzies Esquire Judge of the Court of Vice
Admiralty. Josiah Willard Esquire Secretary of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay aforesaid.
Proclamation was made by the Crier of the Court, Commanding all Persons to
keep Silence, upon pain of Imprisonment, whilst His Majesty's Commission for
the Trial of Piracies, Felonies and Robberies, was in Reading.

Then His Majesty's Royal Commission, Founded upon the Statute or Act of
Parliament made in the Eleventh and Twelfth Years of the Reign of King William
the Third, Entitled, An Act for the more effectual Suppression of Piracy; and
made perpetual by an Act of the Sixth Year of King GEORGE, was openly Read, and
the Court solemnly and publicly Called and Proclaimed.

After Reading the said Commission, His Honor the President of the Court, took
the Oath appointed by the aforesaid Statute, and then Administered the same Oath
to the other Commissioners before-named.

And in Regard the aforementioned Statute directs, that a Notary Public shall
be Register of this Court, the Honorable Commissioners were pleased to choose
Mr. Samuel Tyley, a Notary Public, to be Register of the said Court, who was
Sworn to the true and faithful Discharge of the said Office of Register.

Afterward Proclamation was made by the Crier, for all Persons that could
Inform this Court, or the Advocate General, of any Piracies, Felonies or
Robberies committed upon the High Seas, within the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty of Great Britain, to come forth and declare it, and they should be
heard.

Then Capt. Samuel Doty, Nathaniel Sprague, John Roberts, Silas Cook and
Phillip Sachimus were Called, they being bound over by Recognizance to appear
at this Court, to give Evidence on His Majesty's behalf, concerning Acts of
Piracy, Felony and Robbery committed on board the Sloop Trial, by John Baptist
Jedre, alias Laverdure, John Baptist Junior, James Mews, Philip Mews and John
Missel; And the said Witnesses being all present, the Court, at the Motion of
Robert Auchmuty Esqr. His Majesty's Advocate General, directed the Register to
issue out a Warrant to Arthur Savage Esqr. Marshal of the Admiralty, Requiring
him forthwith to bring into Court the said John Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure,
and John Baptist Junior from His Majesty's Goal in Boston, where they were
Committed for the aforesaid Crimes, upon the Accusation of the Kings Witnesses
before named.

The Marshal of the Admiralty, pursuant to the Warrant directed and delivered
to him by the Register, brought the aforesaid two Prisoners into Court; who
were Arraigned at the Bar upon Articles of Piracy, Felony, and Robbery,
Exhibited against them by the Advocate General, which were read, and are as
follows, viz.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay, Suffolk, ss. At a Court of Admiralty for
the Trial of Piracies, Felonies and Robberies on the High Seas, within the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of Great Britain, Held at Boston, within the
County of Suffolk, on the fourth Day of October, in the Thirteenth Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King,
Defendder of the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini, 1726.
ARTICLES of Piracy, Felony and Robbery, exhibited by Robert Auchmuty Esquire His
Majesty's Advocate General, against John Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure, and
John Baptist Junior.

First, For that the said John Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure, and John Baptist
Junior, Not having the Fear of GOD before their Eyes, but being Instigated by
the Devil, on the Twenty Fifth Day of August last, about the Hour of Two in the
Afternoon of the said Day, together with James Mews, Philip Mews, John Missel,
Indians, and others, in or near Mallegash Harbor, about Thirty Leagues
Eastward to the Head of Cape Sables, on the High Seas, and within the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty-Court of Great Britain; with Force and Arms,
Piratically and Feloniously, did Surprise, Seize, Take and possess themselves
of a Sloop named the Trial, Samuel Doty Master, Burden about Twenty Five Tons,
and of the Value of Five Hundred Pounds, being the Property of His said
Majesty's good Subjects; and then and there, with Force as aforesaid, the said
Master, Nathaniel Sprague, John Roberts and Philip Sachimus, Mariners on Board
the said Vessel, and all His said Majesty's good Subjects, and in the Peace of
our said Lord the KING being, did Piratically, and Feloniously, make, hold and
detain as their Prisoners on board the said Vessel, for the space of Twenty
Hours, or thereabouts.

Secondly, For that said John Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure, and John Baptist
Junior, with others, as aforesaid, and with the like Force as aforesaid, then
and there within the Jurisdicton aforesaid, Feloniously and Piratically did
Rob, Plunder, and Consume all or the greatest part of the Stores and Provisions
belonging to said Vessel, of the Value of One Hundred Pounds; and did Rob,
Seize, Take and possess themselves of Clothes, Gold Rings, and Silver Buckles,
all of the Value of Fifty Pounds, and the Property of His Majesty's said
Subjects.

Thirdly, For that the said John Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure, and John
Baptist Junior, with others as aforesaid, on board the said Vessel as
aforesaid, and within the said Jurisdiction, with Force and Arms as aforesaid,
and immediately after the taking the said Vessel as aforesaid, Piratically and
Feloniously sailed in quest of other Vessels, in order them Piratically and
Feloniously to Seize, Take and Plunder.

All which said several Acts of Piracies, Felonies and Robberies, were by the
said John Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure, and John Baptist Junior, Done and
Committed in Manner as aforesaid, contrary to the Statutes and Laws in such
Cases Made and Provided, and to the Peace of our said Lord the King, His Crown
and Dignity.

R. Auchmuty, Advoc. Genesis

Upon reading the aforesaid Articles, John Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure,
desired that the same might be interpreted to him and his Son John Baptist
Junior in the French Language, for that he the said John Baptist (the Father)
did not understand English very well; and his Son was wholly Ignorant of the
English Language.

Whereupon Messieurs Peter Lucy and Peter Frazier, both of Boston, Merchants,
were Sworn Interpreters between the Court and the Prisoners; and then
Interpreted the said Articles to the Prisoners, Article by Article; to which
they severally pleaded not Guilty.

Then the Court were pleased to Appoint George Hughes, Gentleman, Attorney at
Law, to be Advocate for the Prisoners, who accepted that Trust, and prayed for
a Copy of the Articles Exhibited against them, and for a further time to
prepare for their Trials; And the Court thereupon was Adjourned to three a
Clock in the Afternoon.

Tuesday, October 4th. 1726. At three a Clock post Meridiem. The Court met
according to the said Adjournment.
PRESENT, The Honorable WILLIAM DUMMER Esquire Lieut. Governor and Commander in
Chief of the said Province, President; and all the other Commissioners
before-named.

Then the Prisoners were brought to the Bar, and their Advocate having been
served with a Copy of the Articles exhibited against them, and prepared for
their Trial, the said Articles were read again.

After reading thereof, His Majesty's Advocate made a Speech to the Court as
followed, viz.

MAY it please Your Honor Mr. President, and the Honorable the Commissioners,
John Baptist Senior, and John Baptist Junior, the Prisoners at the Bar, stand
Articled against for Acts of Piracy, Robbery and Felony, Committed upon the
High Seas, within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of Great Britain, contrary
to the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity, and the
Statutes in such Cases Made and Provided: To which upon Arraignment, they have
severally pleaded Not Guilty.

The Word Pirate, with inconsiderable Variation, is taken from the Greek
Substantive Peirates, Praedo Marinus, and therefore a Pirate in a Legal Sense
is called a Robber on the High Seas: And under this Consideration I Am humbly of
Opinion, the Prisoners at the Bar will evidently appear to your Honors, in the
Series of this their Trial: Persons whom the Law with the greatest Propriety
justly Terms Pirates. And however others may pride themselves in accurately
handling abstruse and knotty Cases; I esteem it my Felicity, that the Articles
now exhibited to your Honors, are grounded upon plain and clear Matters of
Fact; Facts which proceed from the Rancour and Virulency of their evil Hearts,
from a craving Appetite, and an insatiable Thirst after inordinate Gain. And
finally, Facts if not now timely Corrected by Your Honors experienced Justice,
will most certainly terminate in the breaking up of our Fishery, the most
valuable Branch of our New England Trade. But for as much as I Am sensible
Glosses with your Honors pass not for Arguments, or Varnish for Evidence; So
I Am well assured, when positive and direct Proofs appear before You in their
full Proportion, they will have their Usual and Legal Weight in Your Honors
Determination: And therefore upon the Evidences I shall produce on the part of
the King, I may reasonably expect in Justice to His Majesty, in Compliance with
the Laws of our Land, and in a due and tender Regard to this His Majesty's
Province, and the Safety and Preservation of the Lives and Properties of His
Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects in this Government, Your Honor and
the Honorable the Commissioners will adjudge the Prisoners at the Bar
respectively Guilty of all and every the Articles exhibited against them, etc.

Then the Crier of said Court was directed by Mr. Advocate to call the King's
Evidences.

Afterward the Witnesses for our Sovereign Lord the King, Namely, Captain
Samuel Doty, Nathaniel Sprague, John Roberts, Silas Cook, and Philip Sachimus,
were Called and Sworn, and severally Deposed as follows, viz.

SAmuel Doty of Plymouth in New England Mariner, and Master of the Sloop Trial,
Deposes and Says, That on Wednesday the 25th Day of August last past, (with
the consent of his Men) he put into Malegash Harbor, to Water, and from thence
designed to Prosecute their Fishing-Voyage near the Isle of Sables; And seeing
John Baptist, the Father, on Shore, the Deponent haled him, and asked him to
come on board. And soon after the Prisoners at the Bar, came on board the Sloop
in a Canno, when the Deponent asked what News? The said John Baptist Jedre,
alias Laverdure, answered there was Peace between the English and Indians, and
particularly at Boston, Annapolis, and Causo; And thereupon the said Baptist
and the Deponent went into the Cabin, and left the said John Baptist Junior
upon Deck; After the Deponent, and John Baptist had drank together, the
Deponent went upon Deck with intent to go ashore in the Canno, but Baptist's
Son was gone ashore in it, then the Deponent with the Mate and three more Men,
took the Sloops Canno, and went ashore, leaving the said Baptist on board, with
Philip Sachimus, the said Baptist declining to go a Shore with them when asked,
saying he would Call his Son, and he should carry him on Shore. That some short
time after the Deponent and his Men had left the Sloop, the said Baptist called
to his Son on Shore, and spoke to him in a Language unknown to the Deponent,
and presently John Baptist Junior, with two Indians, namely, James Mews and
Philip Mews, went into the said Baptist's Canno, and after they had got about a
Gun shot from the Shore, one of the Indians held up his Gun and Fired it, and
called to the Deponent and Company as they stood on the Shore, saying, You
English Men, ask for Quarter; and after the Indians had got on board the Sloop,
they took down the English Ensign then flying, which the Deponent perceiving,
he then went to the House of Mrs. Giddery, Mother to the said John Baptist, and
desired her, with her Son Augustine to go on board the Sloop with him, and
intercede with the said Baptist that the Deponent might have his Sloop again.
And after some Considerable Time, Mrs. Giddery and her Son went on board with
the Deponent, when he the Deponent saw the Ensign girded round Baptist's
middle, and a Pistol tuckt in it, which belonged to one of the Deponents Men,
namely John Roberts. At which time there were several more Indians on board the
Sloop, who pusht the Deponent about the Vessel, and Evilly treated him; and one
of them Attempted to strike him with his Hatchet, but was prevented by another
Indian. The Deponent further says, That toward the Evening, the said John
Baptist Jedre ordered him to come to Sail, and to Steer the Sloop Eastward; And
the next day early in the Morning, they discovered a Vessel, which they though it
was an English Vessel, when the said John Baptist and the Indians gave out,
that they would go and Kill all the English Men on board, and then the Deponent
should have his Sloop again; but she proved to be a French Scooner belonging to
Cape Breton, which had been at Malegash the day before the Deponents Sloop
arrived there. That when the Scooner appeared in sight, the Prisoners with the
Indians, divided the Powder and Shot which belonged to the Sloop, put new
Flints into their Guns, cut up the Fishing Leads to make Sluggs for their small
Arms, and loaded them with design (as they said) to take the said Scooner, if
she had been an English Vessel.

And further the Deponent says, That afterward he Steered the Sloop for
Mahoon Bay, to the Eastward of Ashpetauget, by Order of the said Baptist, who
sometimes Steered himself; And when she was about seven Leagues Eastward of
Malegash, the Deponent and his Company having agreed to rise upon the French
and Indians, took their Opportunity to do it, soon after they had been at
Breakfast, on the 26th. of August, when Baptist and three Indian Men with an
Indian Woman and two Children were in the Cabin; And the Deponent shut the
Cabbin-Door upon them; but Baptist hearing the English scuffling with the
Indians upon Deck, soon came out of the Cabin, having burst open the
Cabbin-Door, and the Mate struck him down with a Club, and Phillip Sachimus
threw him overboard; Soon after the English fired into the Cabin, and the
three Indian Men got out of the Cabbin-Windows into the Sea, in order to Swim
on Shore; and Young Baptist and the other Indians were thrown into the Hold;
And after the Prisoners and Indians were subdued, Baptist was taken on board
the Sloop again from out of a Canno, which lay astern.

NAthaniel Sprague, Mate of the Sloop Trial says, That on the 25th. of August
last, he went on Shore at Malegash with Mr. Doty and others, and left John
Baptist and Phillip Sachimus on board the Sloop. That soon after the Deponent
got on Shore, Baptist called to his Son to come on board, as the Deponent
believes, (though he spoke in Language to him unknown) and thereupon the said
Baptist's Son, with two Indians Armed, put off from the Land in a Canno, and
when the Canno was some distance from the Shore, one of them fired a Gun, and
said to the English on Shore, you English Men call for Quarter, and then the
said John Baptist Junior, and the two Indians, viz. James and Philip Mews, went
on board the said Sloop. And the Deponent, as he stood on Shore, saw some of
them with Baptist take the Sloop's Ensign down, and then they fired several
small Arms into the Air.

The Deponent further says. That he tarried on Shore till Mr. Doty called to
him from the Sloop* and told him he believed the French and Indians would give
him good Quarter if he came on board; So the Deponent and Silas Cook ventured
to go on board, and as they came along side the Sloop, several of the People on
board presented their Guns at them; Some of them had their Hatchets, and others
their Knives, and they haul'd him along the Vessel, and Barbarously treated
him; And two Indians afterward held the Mazzles of their Guns at him with
intent, as he thought) to Shoot him, so to escape the danger, he jumpt into the
Hold. Soon after the said Baptist called to him, and bid him come out of the
Hold, or else he would be killed; So the Deponent came upon Deck, and the said
Baptist and others bound him with Lines. That Baptist called himself Skipper of
the Sloop, and James Mews an Indian, called himself the Captain of her. The
Deponent farther says, that the next day, viz. the 26th. of August, looking
out of the Hold, he saw the said Baptist with his Pistol tuckt through the
Sloops Ensign, which was round his Waste, and heard him order Mr. Doty to take
the Helm. That young Baptist walked the Deck with his Gun. That the French and
Indians eat the Sloops Bread, Butter, Pork, and Sugar, and Drank the Rum and
other Liquors which belonged to the English. That after Breakfast, one of the
English Men called to the Deponent in the Hold, and told him that there was a
good Opportunity to rise upon the French and Indians, there being but three or
four of them upon Deck; Whereupon the Deponent came upon the Deck and saw Mr.
Doty put to the Cabbin-Door, and then he took hold of one of the Indians, who
was too strong for the said Doty, and threw him down. By this time John Baptist
Junior, who before was lying down on his Gun, got up with it, but the Deponent
struck him down, and Baptist (the Father) hearing the Noise, burst open the
half Door of the Cabin, and came out with the Sloops Ensign round his middle,
and a Pistol tuckt in it, and got hold of the Deponent, but he flung the said
Baptist across the Gunnel, and Philip Sachimus, (who stood to keep the
Cabbin-Door fast) took the said Baptist and threw him overboard: About this
time John Baptist Junior cried for Quarter, yet afterward got a Fisherman's
Pew, and struck at the Deponent with all his might, but mist his Blow, and only
tore the Deponents Shirt; Who then knocked the said Baptist down, and he was
thrown into the Sloops Hold, together with Philip and James Mews, and the
Hatches were shut down upon them; And three Indians who were in the Cabin, got
out of the Cabbin-Windows in order to Swim on Shore.

That after the Prisoners were subdued, the Deponent saw Baptist the Father,
with two Rings and a pair of Stockings taken from John Roberts; And John
Baptist Junior had on Mr. Doty's Cap.

JOhn Roberts deposes and says, That he heard John Baptist when he first came
on board the Sloop say, there was Peace. That the Deponent went ashore with Mr.
Doty and his Mate, and soon after saw Philip Mews strike the Colors, that the
Deponent tarried on Shore till the Evening when the Sloop came to Sail.

That when he came on board, the Sloops Colors were round Baptist's middle,
with the Deponents Pistol tuckt through the same, and he saw a Gold Ring
belonging to him the Deponent upon the said Baptists Finger. That young Baptist
stood over the Scattle with a Musket in his Hand. That he loaded a Pistol, and
his Father then took it from him. That Baptist called the Deponent Son of a
Bitch, hauled him out of his Hammock upon the Floor, and bid him come up and
Steer. The next Morning early they discovered a Scooner, when Baptist consulted
with the Indians, and supposing she was an English Vessel, they put new Flints
in their Guns, and loaded them, and told the Deponent, that if they took the
Scooner, they would Kill the English and keep the Scooner, and then the said
Doty and Company should have their Sloop again But the Vessel proved to be a
French Scooner, which as the said Baptist said, had been lately at Malegash;
Baptist then Ordered the Deponent to Steer for Mahoon Bay: But soon after the
Deponent assisted the said Doty and Company in subduing the French and Indians
as before is Deposed by him the said Doty and his Mate.

SIlas Cook Deposes and says, That he saw John Baptist Junior with a Gun,
which was taken from him, and afterward one of the English Men fired it into
the Cabin, whereupon three Indian Men got out of the Cabin Window into the
Sea. The Deponent further says, That he saw the Sloop's Colors round
Baptist's Waste, with a Pistol tuckt into it, and several times he had another
Gun in his Hands. That he Ordered the Deponent to Steer for Mahoon-Bay. That
the said Baptist took the Vessel's Biscake, Butter and Cheese, and made use of
the Sugar, Tobacco and Pipes, and divided the Powder, and Young Baptist made
Sluggs for the Small Arms, with the Leads of the Fishing Lines belonging to the
Sloop.

PHilip Sachimus being Called Deposes and says, That he heard John Baptist
when he first came on board the Sloop, say there was a very good Peace. And
afterward Capt. Doty and his Men went ashore, and left him the Deponent and
Baptist on board. That Mr. Doty asked him to go a Shore, but the said Baptist
answered he would Cast his Son. After the English Men got a Shore Baptist
Called to his Son John Baptist, who together with James and Phillip Mews, two
Indians, came aboard in a Canno. That Phillip Mews and Baptist (the Father)
talked together, and James Mews took out his Knife and run after the Deponent
and struck at him. That young Baptist pointed a Gun at him, but he cannot tell
whether he snapt it or no. That the two Indian afterward tied the Deponent
under the Windless, so he could not see who struck the Colors, but afterward
he saw them round Baptist's middle. That he saw them take the English Men's
Guns. This Deponent saw John Baptist Junior had a Pistol and make Sluggs with
the Fishing Leads; he also saw John Roberts his Rings upon Baptist's Finger,
and the French and Indians had the Command of the Sloop the Capt. Do^^ and his
Company overcame them the next day.

After the Evidences for the King were heard, Mr. George Hughes, Advocate to
the Prisoners at the Bar pleaded in their Behalf, in Manuer following, viz.

May it please Your Honor, Mr. President, and the rest of the Honorable
Commissioners of this Court:
IT is not without Regret that I appear before this Honorable Court in behalf
of the Prisoners at the Bar: But the Sense of my Duty, and my real Desire that
the World, and more especially their Country men, should be convinced of the
fair and impartial Trial they will receive, weigh down all Objections to my
appearing for them. And although they may labor under some Inconveniences on
Account of their not understanding the English Tongue, yet I take that to be
sufficiently made up to them, by the great Candor and Impartiality your
Honors have shown in granting them Interpreters and otherwise.

As it is my Province to speak only to Matters of Law, I shall endeavor to
perform it as well as the very little time I have had will allow; and waving
any Observations upon the Evidences that have been Sworn, humbly beg your
Honors Consideration of two Matters, which I conceive worthy thereof. The
first of which relates equally to both the Prisoners, the last to John Baptist
Junior only.

I am well persuaded there has been a great piece of Villainy lately acted in
the Harbor of Malagash, by the seizing and taking of Capt. Doty and his Men
and Vessel, in which the Prisoners may have borne their part, but your Honor,
and the rest of the Honorable Court, will well distinguish Crimes of different
Natures, and not Condemn Persons for Piracy because they may be Guilty of
Notorious Robberies or other Crimes, and I submit it to your Honors whether
the Prisoners can be adjudged Guilty of Piracy. My Lord Chief Justice Hale in
his Plac. Coron. treating of Piracy says, It extends not to Offenses in Creeks
or Ports within the Body of a County, because punishable by the Common Law.
Page 77. Jacob's Edition. And says another Book, If a Pirate enter a Port or
Haven, and Assaults and Robs a Merchant-Ship at Anchor there, this is no
Piracy, because it is not done Super Altum Mare, but it is a downright Robbery
at the Common Law, the Act being infra Corpus Comitatus, Jacob 's Lex Market.
Page 183. Medio, both which agree with the Definition of Piracy given by my
Lord Coke in his Comments upon Littleton, Page 291. a. If then it appears to
your Honors, (as I think it must by the Evidence) that the Facts charged upon
the Prisoners were Committed in an Harbor within the Body of a County: And
supposing they were the real Actors thereof, they are not guilty of Piracy, but
ought to be tried at the Common Law, as Robbers, by a Jury, and your Honors
will acquit them of the Articles now exhibited against them by the Advocate
General on His Majesty's behalf.

But, May it please your Honors, The Case of the young Lad at the Bar, John
Baptist Junior, is distinguished from that of his Father, on account of his
tender Years; being (as his Father informs me) not fourteen Years of Age; an
Age which renders a Person incapable in the Law, of committing any Crime so as
to be punished with Death, he being set upon the same Foot with a Madman by my
Lord Coke upon Litt Page 247. b. who says, That in Criminal Causes, as Felony,
etc. the Act and Wrong of a Madman shall not be imputed to him, for that in
those Causes, Actus non facit reum, nisi Men's fit rea: And he is Amens (id est)
sine mente, without his Mind and Discretion, and Furiosus solo furore punitur,
A Mad man is only punished by his Madness. And so it is of an Infant, until he
be of the Age of Fourteen, which in Law is accounted the Age of Discretion.

It cannot be expected I should produce any Evidence of the Age of this Lad,
who was born and educated in the Woods among the Wild and Salvage Indians,
where no Register of Births or Burials is kept; he knows not his own Age, but
by the Information of his Father, who here declares in public Court, his Son
is but Fourteen this Fall; there is no Evidence to disprove him in this
Assertion, and where the Scale is but even, Your Honors will give the Balance
in favor of Life.

Your Honors will likewise be pleased to consider the great Influences a
Father has upon his Son, not only in his Example but Precepts, as corrupt
Nature is prone enough to evil; the Persuasions of a Father, or the fear of his
Frowns and severe Corrections, backed with his Example, are strong and powerful
Instigators to do Evil.

Upon the whole, I submit the Case of the Prisoners to Your Honors wise
Consideration, not in the least doubting of your just and impartial Judgment.

Then the said John Baptist in his own Defense alleged, That the People
belonging to the aforesaid French Scooner (who he said had been at Malegash
lately to buy Cattle to carry to Cape Breton) prevailed with him to do what he
had done; telling him, that it would be the best way in order to get his Son
Paul from the English, to take and keep one of their Vessels till they got him
out of their Hands. -- And further he added, That he had no design to kill any
of the English, but hindered the Indians from hurting them with their Knives.

John Baptist Junior pleaded for his Excuse, That what he did was by his
Father's Order, and that the Indians advised him to assist in taking the said
Vessel.

Afterward John Baptist (the Father's) Examination, taken before Samuel
Checkley and Habijah Savage Esqrs. two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
was Read, and is as follows, viz.

The Examination of John Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure.
THIS Examinant says, That he lived at Malegash, and that on Wednesday the
25th Day of August last past, a Sloop with English Colors flying, came into
the Harbor of Malegash, one Doty Master, and the Examinant and his Son went on
board in a Canno; and his Son presently went on Shore in the Canno. Soon after
Mr. Doty and all his Men (except one) went on Shore in the Sloop's Canno, to
drink some Punch (as they said) at the Examinant's Mother's House, and he was
asked by Captain Doty to go on Shore with him, but he saw so many in the Canno,
he told the said Doty he would call his Son to fetch him ashore in his the said
Baptist's Canno, which he went ashore in: So the Examinant, with an Indian Man
called Philip, were left on board the Sloop. -- After some time the Examinant
called to his Son, who with two Indians came on board the Sloop in a Canno; and
after them two Indians more, namely one Jerman and his Son Lewis, came on board
in another Canno. -- The Examinant says, That his Brother-in-Law Philip Mews,
one of the Indians, struck the Sloop's Colors, and gave 'em to him, and he
tied 'em round his middle. -- That he told the English there was Peace with the
Indians; Afterward another Canno came on board with two Indian Men, a Squaw
and two Children. And further the Examinant says, That the Indian Philip, who
was left on board, was tied soon after the Indians came on board, least he
should do them some Mischief, but afterward they sent him ashore to tell the
Master to come on board. He says that he saw the Cabbin-Door open, but cannot
tell whether it was broke open or no. -- That his Son had John Roberts's Pistol
but fell a sleep with it, and so the Examinant took it, and fastened it through
his Girdle, that he never fired it, his Hands being weak he had not strength to
fire; The Examinant says his Mother came on board the Sloop, but did not ask
the Indians on board, the Reason why they took the Sloop from the English in
time of Peace, because she understood some time before, they designed to take
what English Vessels they could, notwithstanding the Peace, by way of
Reprizals, by Reason the Examinant's Son Paul, and his Brother-in-Law Francis
Mews were detained by the English.

The Examinant further says, That the French at Louisbourg told the Indians
the Peace which was made with the English would not continue long. -- The
Examinant also says, That the Indians intended to carry the Sloop to his
Plantation; and accordingly James Mews the Indian Captain, ordered the Skipper
Doty to weigh Anchor toward the Evening, and set sail for Mohune Bay. -- That
that Night they dressed some Victuals, that the next Morning early they saw a
Scooner, which they supposed at first to be an English Vessel, but when they
came near they discovered she was a French Scooner which they had traded with
some Days before at Malegash. -- That when they first espied her, they Cut up
the English Fishing Leads, and beat them into Sluggs, divided among them the
English Men's small Arms, and loaded them with the Sluggs, and the Indians took
the English Men's Clothes and other things, and particularly the Examinant took
from the Indians two Gold Rings and a pair of Silver Buckles, which they said
they found in the Cabin in a Handkerchief. -- And after Breakfast on the 26th.
day of August in the Morning, the English took their Opportunity to rise upon
the Indians, when there was but a few of them upon Deck, and the Examinant with
three Indian Men, an Indian Woman and her two Children were then in the Cabin,
when the Skipper Doty came from the Helm, and shut the Cabin Door, but the
Examinant opened it, and was no sooner come upon Deck but the Mate knocked him
down and threw him overboard, but he took hold of the Sloops Canno which lay
astern, and the English took him on board again. The Examinant says, That one
of the Indians, who jumpt out of the Cabin Window into the Sea, had on the
Master's Jacket; And when the Examinant came on board again, the Indian Woman
informed him that her Husband and two more Indian Men being in the Cabin, the
English fired two Guns into the Cabin, and they three got out of the Cabin
Windows, but the Examinant believes they were Drowned, the Sloop then being
about four Miles from the Shore, and the French Scooner bearing away from them,
as the Indian Woman told him.

Signum John X Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, September. 3. 1726. Taken and Signed before us, Samuel
Checkley, Habijah Savage, Just. Pacis. Stephen Boutineau, Interpreter. Attest.
Samuel Tyley, Not. Pub.


Which Examination was then Interpreted by Messieurs Lucy and Frazier, to to
the said Baptist, who owned the same to be true.

Then the King's Advocate. Recapitulated the Evidences, and Replied upon the
Prisoner's Advocate in the following manner.

May it please your Honors,

THE Prisoners at the Bar having nothing further to offer, nor their Advocate
for them, I shall therefore with all possible Brevity, discharge the remaining
part of my Duty, in closing this Trial, that has thus long exexcised your
Honors great Patience; and in order to this, I shall in the first Place
recount the several principal Facts proved upon the Prisoners, and as I humbly
conceive, unquestionably maintain my Charge against them, and lastly consider
the Defense made by their Advocate for them. The Matters of Fact appear so Full
and Irresistible, that neither the Prisoners themselves attempt to falsify
them, or even to suggest any colorable Argument for their Extenuation: And are
such, that were they committed upon the High Sea, their Advocate concedes would
clearly amount to Piracy.

And therefore I shall only summarily Mention to your Honors, that besides the
general Evidence against the Prisoners, of their Aiding, Assisting, Concurring
and Assenting with others in the Taking, Robbing and Plundering the Sloop
Trial, mentioned in the Articles, it is proved particularly upon the Prisoners,
they were the first that entered the said Vessel: That Baptist the Father,
under a pretense of going ashore in his Son's Canno, prevailed on the Master to
leave him aboard; and to give the greater Terror to His Majesty's Subjects, and
Aggrandize himself, he made a Sash of the Ensign, and therein tuckt Roberts's
Pistol, assuming the Name of Skipper, ordered Mr. Doty to come to sail, and to
steer the Sloop Eastward; and when a Scooner appeared in sight, he and his Son,
with others, divided the Powder and Shot belonging to the Vessel, new flinted
their Guns, converted the Fishing-Leads into Sluggs, and therewith loaded their
Small-Arms: That he helped with others to bind the Mate of said Vessel, and
also piratically robbed Roberts of two Rings and a pair of Stockings, and was
active in consuming and destroying the Vessel's Provisions and Stores.

The Facts proved upon John Baptist Junior, the other Prisoner, are for the
most the same in Substance; more especially that he was originally let into the
Secret, for when the Canno was but not half way in her return to the Sloop,
then it was that a Gun was fired into the Air, and the English were required to
cry for Quarters. That he was not only the Person confided in for bringing
about their wicked Designs, but that he had so well executed that part that was
judged the most Trusty, that he was left to stand Gentry over the Arms: That he
charged his Father's Pistol; was Armed with a Gun; had on him a Cap, the
Property of one of the Men belonging to the Sloop; And finally, with a
Fisherman's Pew made several attempts to destroy Sprague, even after he had
Quarters given. All which in the Law amount to several Acts of Piracy.

From whence it evidently appears, that the Articles in respect to Matters of
Fact, are fully proved upon the Prisoners; but whether such Facts amount to
Piracy at Sea, or Robbery at Land, in Point of Law, remains a Question; which
naturally leads me to the Consideration of those Points in Law offered by the
Prisoner's Advocate in their Defense.

And First, he argues, that the Vessel when seized and taken by the Prisoners
and others, was at an Anchor in the Port of Malegash, near the Land, and Infra
Corpus Comitatus, and therefore is only Robbery at the Common Law.

If a Pirate enters a Port or Haven, and Assaults and Robs a Merchant-Ship at
Anchor there, this is no Piracy, March. Com. p. 183.
because it is not done Super Altum Mare, but a down right Robbery at the Common
Law, and the Anonimous Author for this quotes Moor, 756.

In Answer, the Case is not truly given us by that Author, as reported by Sir
Francis Moor; neither is the Author in putting said Case consistent with
himself; for his following Words are, And if the Crime be committed either
Super Altum Mare, or in great Rivers within the Realm, which are looked upon as
Common Highways, then it is Piracy. Which plainly militates with what the
Author immediately before asserted for Law. But to return to the Case in Moor's
Reports; the first Question there put by the Lord Chancellor to all the Judges
was, If the Clergy extended to Piracy, upon an Arraignment on the Stat. 28. H.
8. And Resolved, It did not, unless the Piracy was done in a Creek or other
River, in which the Common Law before the Stat. had Jurisdiction; and not if it
was done in Alto Mari, and out of the Body of the County. And these Words, In
which the Common Law before the Stat. had Jurisdiction, fully imply, since the
Stat. the Common Law has not Jurisdiction. And the Words of the Stat. are, All
Treasons, Felonies, Robberies, etc. Committed in or upon the Sea, or in any
other Haven, River, Creek or Place where the Admiral has, or pretends to have
Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction, etc.

My Lord Coke thereupon Comments thus; These Words, 3 Inst. 113. q.
says he, ( Or pretends to have, etc.) are thus to be understood: Between the
High Water Mark and Low Water Mark: For though the Land be Infra Corpus
Commitatus at the Re-flow; yet when the Sea is full, the Admiral has
Jurisdiction super aquam, as long as the Sea flows. Now the Place where the
Seizing and piratically Taking the Vessel in the Articles, was in the Port of
Malegash, where the Sea is always full, and consequently within the Admiral's
Jurisdiction. But the Books make a further distinction between Creeks, Ports
and Havens, actually challenged as part of the Bodies of Counties, 4 Inst. 140,
141. x.
and from whence a Jury may come. And Ports, Creeks and Havens, that are out of
every County, from whence no Jury can come, the former appertains (as is said)
to the Jurisdiction of the Common Law Courts, the latter confessedly to the
Admiralty. But if all Ports, Creeks and Harbors are generally and without this
Distinction, out of the Admiralty's Jurisdiction, then these Words of the Stat.
28. H. 8. Upon the Sea, or in any other Haven, Creek, or other Place where the
Admiral has, or pretends to have Power, etc. would be Vain and Idle, as also
the Words of the Stat. of the 12, 13. W. 3. Chapter 7 which say, All Piracies. etc.
Committed upon the Sea, or in any Haven, Creek or Place where the Admiral has
Jurisdiction, etc.

All which clearly shows, that there are such Havens, Rivers and Creeks where
the Legislature supposes the Admiral to have Jurisdiction; and which most
indisputably are such Havens, Rivers and Creeks, that (in my Lord Coke's Words)
are out of every County, and from whence no Jury can come; which is the
Circumstance of the Port where this Vessel was piratically taken by the
Prisoners. But what silences all Arguments of this Nature, in respect to the
Admiralty's Jurisdiction in Ports, Creeks and Havens, touching Acts of Piracy,
and removes all Pleas of this sort, are the Words of the Stat. 8. K. G. Chapter 24.
Sect. 1. And if any Person belonging to any Ship or Vessel whatsoever, upon
meeting any Merchant-Ship upon the High Seas, or in any Port, Haven or Creek
whatsoever, shall forcibly Board and Enter into such Ship, and though they do not
seize and carry her off, shall throw overboard or destroy any part of the
Goods or Merchandises belonging to such Ship, the Persons guilty thereof, shall
be deemed and punished as Pirates: And therefore I shall rest this part of the
Prisoner's Defense, and proceed to the Consideration of the other Point of Law
offered by their Advocate, and Calculated for John Baptist Junior, namely, That
he was at the time of the taking the said Vessel, an Infant under the Age of
Fourteen, not sui juris, and by Law no Act of Piracy or Felony can be imputed
to him.

To which I answer, The Gentleman is wrong in his Hypothesis, as by Evidentia
Personae; neither did the Father or any other pretend to say the Prisoner was
under the Age of Fourteen. And for as much as such a Special Defense is to
exempt the Party from the Punishment of a General Statute, it is incumbent upon
the Gentleman to make Legal Evidence of the Fact relied upon. But my Lord Hale,
under Murder, says, An Infant within the Age of Discretion, Hale's Pleas of
the Crown, p. 43.
kills a Man, no Felony; as if he be Nine or Ten Years old: But if by
Circumstances it appears he could distinguish between Good and Evil, it is
Felony; as if he hide the Dead, make Excuses, etc. That the Pirates looked upon
this John Baptist Junior as a Person capable of distinguishing, is evident by
committing the greatest Trust and Charge unto him, namely, the Guard over the
Arms; and that he could distinguish between Good and Evil, is plain, when he
cried for Quarters, and afterward when he thought himself sufficiently armed
with a Fisherman's Pew, attempted the Destruction of Sprague, thereby as far as
in him lay, preventing the regaining of the Vessel: By all which, and by many
more incident Matters of Fact that turned out in the Evidence, it clearly
appears he was a free Agent, and capable of making Legal Distinctions. And for
as much as there is no Discrimination in respect to the Crimes charged upon the
Prisoners, as Your Honor values the preservation of the Laws of the Land, the
Lives and Properties of His Majesty's Subjects, and would studiously avoid any
fatal Consequence that may attend an illegal Acquittal; I hope there will be as
little distinction in respect to their Sentence, but that Your Honor will
justly pronounce them equally Guilty.

The Advocate General having Concluded, the Court was cleared; and after mature
and deliberate Consideration of what the King's Witnesses Deposed, the
Prisoners Defense made by themselves and their Advocate, together with the
Replication of the Advocate General, the Court voted Unanimously, that the said
John Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure, and John Baptist Junior, are severally
Guilty of Piracy, Felony and Robbery, according to the Articles Exhibited
against them.

Then they were brought to the Bar again, and the President pronounced the said
John Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure, and John Baptist junior severally Guilty.
-- Whereupon the Advocate on Behalf of His Majesty moved, that Sentence might
be given against them according to Law. Then they were severally asked if they
had any thing further to say why Sentence of Death should not be pronounced
against them, and they Alleging nothing but what was offered before in their
behalf on their Trial, the President pronounced Sentence against them severally
in the words following, viz. You -- are to go from hence to the place from
whence you came, and thence to the place of Execution, there to be hanged up by
the Neck until you are Dead, and the Lord have Mercy upon your Soul.

After Sentence was given against the Prisoners, the Marshal of the Admiralty
was Ordered to remand and keep them in safe Custody within His Majesty's Goal
in Boston.

Then the Court was Adjourned to Wednesday, the fifth day of October Current,
at ten a Clock in the Forenoon.

Wednesday October the fifth 1726. ten a Clock Ante Meridiem.
PRESENT, All the Commissioners before-named.

THe Court being opened by Proclamation, the King's Advocate moved, That James
Mews, Philip Mews and John Missel, three Indians, who were imprisoned for Acts
of Piracy, Felony and Robbery, might be brought to the Bar, to Answer to
Articles exhibited against them for those Crimes. And accordingly the Marshal
of the Admiralty in Obedience to a Warrant to him directed, brought them into
Court, and they were Arraigned at the Bar, upon the said Articles, which were
read, and are as followed, viz.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay, Suffolk, ss. At a Court of Admiralty for
the Trial of Piracies, Felonies and Robberies on the High Seas, within the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of Great Britain, Held at Boston, within the
County of Suffolk, on the fourth Day of October, in the Thirteenth Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord GEORGE, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini, 1726.
ARTICLES of Piracy, Felony and Robbery, exhibited by Robert Auchmuty Esquire His
said Majesty's Advocate General, against Philip Mews, James Mews and John
Missel, Indians.

First, For that the said Philip Mews, James Mews, and John Missel, not having
the Fear of GOD before their Eyes, but being Instigated by the Devil, on the
Twenty Fifth Day of August, last, about the Hour of Two in the Afternoon of the
said Day, together with John Baptist Jedre, alias Laverdure, John Baptist
Junior, and others, in or near Malegash Harbor, about Thirty Leagues Eastward
to the Head of Cape Sables, on the High Seas, and within the Jurisdiction of
the Admiralty-Court of Great Britain; with Force and Arms, Piratically and
Feloniously, did Surprise, Seize, Take and possess themselves of a Sloop named
the Trial, Samuel Doty Master, Burden about Twenty Five Tons, and of the Value
of Five Hundred Pounds, being the Property of His said Majesty's good Subjects;
and then and there, with Force as aforesaid, the said Master, Nathaniel
Sprague, John Roberts and Philip Sachimus, Mariners on Board the said Vessel,
and all His said Majesty's good Subjects, and in the Peace of our said Lord the
KING being; did Piratically, and Feloniously, Make, Hold and Detain as their
Prisoners on board the said Vessel, for the space of Twenty Hours, or
thereabouts.

Secondly, For that the said Philip Mews, James Mews, and John Missel, with
others as aforesaid, and with the like Force as aforesaid, then and there,
within the Jurisdiction aforesaid, Feloniously and Piratically did Rob, Plunder
and Consume all, or the greatest part of the Stores and Provisions belonging to
said Vessel, and of the Value of One Hundred Pounds; and did Rob, Seize, Take
and possess themselves of Clothes, Gold Rings, and Silver Buckles, all of the
Value of Fifty Pounds, and the Property of His Majesty's said Subjects.

Thirdly, For that the said Philip Mews, James Mews, and John Missel, with
others as aforesaid, on board the said Vessel as aforesaid, and within the said
Jurisdiction, with Force and Arms as aforesaid, and immediately after the
taking the said Vessel as aforesaid, Piratically and Feloniously sailed in
quest of other Vessels, in order them Piratically and Feloniously to Seize,
Take and Plunder.

All which said Acts of Piracies, Felonies and Robberies, were by the said
Philip Mews, James Mews, and John Missel, Done and Committed in Manner as
aforesaid, contrary to the Laws and Statutes in such Cases Made and Provided,
and to the Peace of our said Lord the KING, His Crown and Dignity.

R. Auchmuty, Advoc. Genesis

Then Captain John Gyles was Sworn Interpreter, between the Court and the
Prisoners at the Bar, and Interpreted the said Articles to them in the Indian
Language, Paragraph by Paragraph, to which they pleaded severally, not Guilty.

And Mr. George Hughes, who was appointed by the Court to be Advocate for the
Prisoners, prayed that he might have a Copy of the Articles Exhibited against
them, and time allowed to prepare for their Defense, and that the said Captain
Gyles the Interpreter might be with them. To which the Court consented, and
Ordered that their Trial should come on in the Afternoon at three a Clock, to
which time the Court was Adjourned.

October the fifth, three a Clock Post Meridiem.
The Court met according to the said Adjournment.

PRESENT, All the Commissioners aforementioned.

The Prisoners, viz. James Mews, Philip Mews, and John Missel, were brought to
the Bar, and the Articles exhibited against them (which their Advocate was
served with a Copy of) were read again.

Then the Witnesses for our Sovereign Lord the King, Namely, Samuel Doty,
Nathaniel Sprague, John Roberts, Silas Cook and Philip Sachimus were called
and Sworn, and severally Deposed as follows, viz.

SAmuel Doty says, That on the 25th. day of August last, two of the Prisoners,
viz. Philip Mews and James Mews, together with John Baptist Junior, went on
board the Deponent's Sloop in Baptist's Canno Armed, and about a Gun shot from
the Shore, one of them held up his Gun and fired, and said to the said Deponent
and his Company, then standing on the Bank, Now you English Men call for
Quarter: And soon after they got on board the Sloop, they took down her Ensign,
and fired a volley with their small Arms. That about a Quarter of an Hour
afterward, John Missel with three more Indians went aboard.

That sometime afterward, when the Deponent went on board, James Mews, one of
the Prisoners took the Deponents Hat from him, and spoke to him in English
saying, Now I am Captain of the Vessel, do you call your Men a board, or I Will
send ashore presently and kill them all.

That James Mews told the Deponent there was Peace Proclaimed between the
English and Indians; but the said Mews said he never would make Peace with the
English, for the Governor of Boston kept his Brother, and he would Burn the
Sloop and keep the Goods till his Brother was sent home.

That afterward when the Deponent's Mate came on board, two of the Prisoners,
viz. James Mews and Philip Mews, took hold of him and dragged him upon the
Deck, threatening to kill him; and also told the Deponent that he would go on
Shore, and kill the rest of his Men that were there, unless he called them an
board; and soon after they got on board, the Vessel came to sail by Baptist's
Order, and the said Philip and James Mews hoisted up the Anchor. -- That the
said Philip Mews searched the Deponent's Pockets afterward, and tools
seventeen Shillings from him. -- That John Baptist for the most part Ordered
the Deponent what Course to Steer; Captain James Mews, as he called himself,
having got Drunk.

That all the Prisoners in their turns, draw'd the Rum which belonged to the
English Men; Drank plentifully, and eat of the Sloop's Cheese, Butter and other
Provisions. -- And lighted a great Number of Candles, which were burning all
Night -- That the next Morning they saw a Scooner which was supposed to be an
English Vessel, and all the Prisoners (except James Mews who was then in Drink)
divided the English Men's Arms, Powder and Shot, put new Flints into their Guns,
and made ready to fight the English on board the said Vessel; John Missel in
particular charged his Gun, but when they came up with her, they discovered she
was a French Scooner belonging to Cape Breton, that had lately been at Malegash
for Cattle, as the Deponent understood. Then John Baptist Ordered the Deponent
to Steer for Mahoon-Bay, near his Plantation -- But soon after the English
perceiving that Baptist, and three Indian Men were in the Cabin, that James
Mews and John Baptist Junior were asleep upon Deck, and that John Missel was a
Fishing, and Philip Mews only was walking on the Deck, who with the said
Baptist were Ordered to stand as a Guard over the English, they took this
Opportunity to rise, and made themselves Masters of the Vessel, three of the
Indians having jumpt over board out of the Cabin Windows, and others being
thrown from the Deck into the Hold.

That John Missel helped to seize the Mate when he first went on board, and was
as Active afterward as the rest of the Indians upon all Occasions. -- That the
Indians struck the Mate several blows, hauled him by the Head and Shoulders,
and threatened to kill him with their Hatchets and Knives which they held in
their Hands.

NAthaniel Sprague Deposes and says, That on the 25th. of August last, when
he got on Shore it Malegash, he saw the three Prisoners now at the Bar, with
other Indians on Shore, and asked them what News, the said James and Philip
Mews answered there was a very good Peace. The Deponent asked the Indians how
they knew 'twas Peace? Philip Mews answered that the Penobscut and Cape Sable
Indians had lately been at Annapolis with the Governor, who informed them he
had made Peace with the Indians. -- That the Deponent heard John Baptist on
board the Sloop call to his Son on Shore, who soon after with James and Philip
Mews went Armed in a Canno toward the Sloop. That one of them fired a Gun, and
said to the English on Shore: You English Men call for Quarter, and then went
on board the Sloop, and he saw one of them take up an Ax and break open the
Cabin Door; then two of them went into the Cabin; afterward they struck the
Colors, and discharged their small Arms. -- That afterward the Deponent saw
two Cannos with Indians in them go on board the Sloop. -- And some time after
they sent on Shore an Indian belonging to the Sloop, namely Philip Sachimus, to
tell the English to come on board and they would give 'em good Quarter; but if
they would not come on board, to inform them they should all be killed.
Whereupon the said Mr. Doty went on board. -- And afterward the said Doty
called to the Deponent and Silas Cook, and told them there were two Indians on
Shore would kill 'em, if they did not come on board; so they went on board, and
some of the Indians stamped on the Deponent, others hauled him about, and held
their Hatchets over his Head, threatening to kill him; but others came to his
help -- And particularly James Mews (one of the Prisoners at the Bar) threatened
to kill him, and would have taken away his Life, (as this Deponent believes)
had not another Indian Interposed. Afterward the Deponent got into the Hold,
where he had not been long, before some of the Company bid him come upon Deck,
and threatened if he did not they would cut him all to pieces, so he went upon
Deck, when James Mews and other Indians kicked him, and struck him several
blows. -- That Philip Mews stood by when Baptist bound him. And James Mews held
a Knife to his* Throat, and told him he would be the Death of him; And once
Swore at him, saying, God Dam your Blood, you shall not live a Minute longer,
and struck at him with his Knife, but another Indian Interposed, and while they
were striving together the Deponent got from them.

The Deponent further says. That he saw the said James Mews have a Gold Ring,
a pair of Silver Shoe-Buckles, and a Neckcloth belonging to John Roberts, and
Philip Mews had a pair of Trowzers belonging to another of Mr. Doty's Men.

That when the English rose upon the French and Indians, James Mews was on the
Windless, Philip was near him, and John Baptist Junior was lying upon or near
his Gun. -- Missel was on the Deck with a Gun in one Hand, and a Fishing line
in the other, a Fishing.

That the Deponent saw Mr. Doty leave the Helm, and put to the Cabin Door, and
he took hold of Philip Mews Gun, but he flung Mr. Doty on the Floor, then
Roberts and Cook went to the said Doty's Assistance; John Missel in the
Interim went to the Cabin Door, and endeavored to open it, but was hindered by
an Indian belonging to Mr. Doty, viz. Philip Sachimus, who stood by the Door;
But Baptist got out at the Cabin Door, and was soon thrown over board -- The
Deponent further says, That John Missel, with a Gauft struck the Deponent, and
tried to haul him into the Hold with it, but the Deponent having a Fisherman's
Pew in his Hand, struck at the said Missel, who fell backward, and so escaped
the blow.

JOhn Roberts Deposes and says, That when he went ashore at Malegash, he saw
the three Prisoners, with three other Indians and two French Men, and the
Deponent shook Hands with Philip Mews, and asked him whether there was Peace?
He answered (in the hearing of other Indians) there was a good Peace, and that
now the English and Indians were all one Brothers. That afterward the said
James and Philip Mews and Young Baptist put off from the Shore in a Canno, and
some distance from the Shore one of them fired a Gun, and bid the English call
for Quarter. That the Deponent afterward saw them go aboard the Sloop, and
James Mews with an Ax cut open the Cabin Door, and Philip Mews and John
Baptist struck the Colors. -- That the Deponent with Philip Sachimus, and
another Indian belonging to the Sloop, returned on board the Sloop when she was
under Sail going out of the Harbor, about eight a Clock at Night. -- That when
he got on board, Philip Mews and John Missel, two of the Prisoners, took hold
of him, and thrust him into the Fore-castle.

That afterward James Mews called him Son of a Bitch, struck him several
blows, and threatened to kill him. -- That Philip Mews stood Century with the
Deponent's Gun. -- That James Mews had the Deponent's Ring, a pair of Buckles
and a Handkerchief. -- That John Missel, in his turn, stood Century with his
Gun. -- That Philip Mews took a Plush pair of Breeches, and a pair of Trowzers
from him.

That Baptist ordered the Deponent to go to James Mews for Bread, who took up a
Bag with the Biscuit in it, and beat him round the Cabin, calling him Son of a
Bitch, etc.

That Philip Mews told the Deponent, when they saw the Scooner which they took
for an English Vessel, that they would kill the English and give Mr. Doty and
his Men their Sloop again.

SIlas Cook Deposes and says, That the Shot and Powder belonging to the
English was divided by Missel and others; And afterward when they went in
quest of another Vessel, he showed his Satisfaction at it.

PHilip Sachimus Deposes and says, That Philip and James Mews came by him
with a Knife when they first came on board the Sloop, and tied him, and threw
him before the Windless. And broke open the Sloop's Cabin Door, and afterward
assisted in carrying the said Sloop away. -- -- And that John Missel stood
Century upon Deck with a Gun.

Then the Examination of the Prisoners taken upon their first Arrival at
Boston, before Samuel Checkley and Habijah Savage Esqrs. two of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, were read to the Prisoners in the words following, viz.

The Examination of James Mews.
JAmes Mews, Indian, Examined says, That he lived at Malegash, that about
twelve or thirteen days agone, he with five more Indians bought of the French
there a Bottle of Rum, and were going over a carrying place when John Baptist
and others called to them, and told them there was an English Vessel coming
into the Harbor of Malegash, and the said Baptist and his Son John, his
Brothers Paul and Gold, and his Son in Law Augustine, all living at Malegash,
gave the Examinant and the other five Indians a Bottle of Rum, and over
persuaded them to turn back and go on board the Sloop, and told them, now was
their time to get Provisions. -- The Examinant further says, That the said
John Baptist and his Son went first aboard the Sloop, which had English
Colors, and struck the Color or Ensign, and tied it round his middle: That
afterward the Examinant with Salmon and Lewn went aboard in one Canno; and
three more Indians, viz. Missel, Philip and Marsel, went aboard in another
Canno; and sometime after Marsel went on Shore again, and brought his Squaw and
two Children on board the Sloop; and after them a French Woman with the English
Master of the Sloop, and a French Man went aboard the Sloop: That the Indians
told the English that no Harm should come to them after they got on board. --
The Examinant says, that when he first went on board the Sloop, there was an
Indian belonging to the Sloop, tied, but he was soon set at liberty; that two
of the three Indians that got out at the Cabin Windows helped to weigh the
Anchor, and gave Orders to carry the Sloop round the Point to the Indian
Wigwams. -- That the next Morning after the Sloop was taken, he went to
Breakfast, and Drank so much that he knows not how the English overcame the
French and Indians on board; but when he came to be sober, he found himself
bound in the Hold of the Sloop, and he was kept tied till he came to Boston in
the Sloop. The Examinant further says, That about a Month ago he was at Menis,
where there were near two hundred Indians with the French Friar, who came
together to say Prayers, and then they scattered themselves about the Country;
the French told the Indians that there was no Peace then, and bid the Indians,
if they met any English Men, to take them. Since which time he has been at
Menis twice from Malegash, where he had been, at times, about thirteen days,
and most of the French at Menis, when he was there last, told him there was no
Peace, and that the Indians might take the English Vessels as they did
formerly. -- But at the same time some few of the French there, told him that
there was Peace. -- He heard the Friar say there was no Peace, and the Indians
said be must be gone, if there be a Peace, because he has been very much for
War. -- He knows of no Feast or Consultation at Malegash, between the French
and Indians, to take any English Vessels there by way of Reprizals.

James Mews,his X Mark.
Suffolk, ss. Boston, September. 5th. 1726. Taken and Signed before us, Samuel
Checkley, Habijah Savage, Just. Pacis. John Gyles, Interpreter. Attest. Samuel
Tyley, Not. Pub.


The Examination of Philip Mews.
PHilip Mews being Examined, says, That he lived at Malegash, and came from
thence about fourteen Days agone. -- That he was at Malegash when Captain
Doty's Sloop arrived there. That he went on board in a Canno with two Persons,
viz. his Brother James Mews, and Baptist's Son, John Baptist Junior, and found
Baptist (the Father) on board, and one Indian Man, belonging to the Sloop. --
He says the Indians were persuaded by the French to go on board the first
Vessel they saw, and take one half the Company of English and keep them
Prisoners, and send 'tother half with the Vessel to Boston; for otherwise if
they did not, the French at Menis, and also Indians that came from Cape Breton,
told the Examinant, that the English would not deliver up the Indian Prisoners.
That two of the Indians who jumpt over board, Advised the Examinant when they
saw the Sloop to go on board, and Baptist called to him and the other Indians,
to make haste and come on board. -- The Indians before they went aboard, had
Rum of Mr. Gold, and drank it near his House, and three of them got Drunk; and
as they were going to their Wigwams, they saw Mr. Doty's Sloop coming into the
Harbor of Malegash, and then the French at Malegash, viz. Baptist, and two of
the Indians that jumpt over board, persuaded the Indians to go on board the
Sloop, which then had Red Colors, such as English Men wear. -- That Salmon
when he come on board, said he would cut the Colors to pieces, but Baptist and
the Examinant took 'em down, and Baptist tied 'em round his middle. That James
Mews was present, and bid 'em take care that the Indians did not cut 'em to
pieces. -- Old Salmon's Son tied Philip the Indian belonging to the Sloop. That
the Drunken Indians fired several Guns up into the Air, though the Examinant
desired them not to fire -- That he went down the Hold and loosed the Mate in
the Hold, and also loosed the Indian that belonged to the Sloop who was bound,
which made the Drunken Indians angry with him, and they struck him for doing
so. -- That he assisted in hauling up the Anchor with another Indian now in
Prison, called John, alias Attaw^n, (and one English Man) and Sailed round a
great Neck in order to go to their Wigwams, where they intended to keep three
of the English Men, and send the rest away to Boston in the Sloop. The next
Morning they saw a Scooner, which proved to be the French Vessel they had been
on board some days before* The Indians prepared to meet 'em, and loaded their
Arms; and the Drunken Indians said, if she had been an English Vessel, they
would have taken her, but the sober Indians said one Vessel was eno' to take.
-- That the Examinant had none of the Ammunition, and was careful that so the
English might loose nothing. -- That James had a Gold Ring, and afterward
returned it to the English. That Lewis had the Silver Buckles, and they were
returned to the English after they took their Vessel again; The Examinant saw
Baptist have a pair of the English Men's Stockings; Salmon had a Wastcoat, and
Marsel had a pair of Breeches. -- That when the English rose up against the
Indians, the Examinant was on Deck, and Baptist's Son and the Examinants
Brother were asleep. That there were three Indian Men, a Woman and two Children
in the Cabin, besides Baptist, who was coming out, and an English Man knocked
him down and threw him over board: That the Examinant had several blows. That
three Indians went out of the Cabin Window about a Mile from the Shore, and
the French Scooner was near, and two Cannos astern were a drift, so he believes
they were not Drowned. -- That Baptist said one Vessel was enough to take.

Signum Philip ^ Mews.
Suffolk, ss. Boston September. 5th. 1726. Taken and Signed before us, Samuel
Checkley, Habijah Savage, Just. Pacis. John Gyles, Interpreter. Attest. Samuel
Tyley. Not. Pub.


The Examination of John Missel.
JOhn Missel Examined says, That he formerly lived at Seckenecto, that two
Years agone he lived at Menis, and this Summer, viz. about a Month ago he came
from Menis to Malegash, where he was when Mr. Doty's Sloop arrived in that
Harbor. As the Indians sat on the Bank, they saw the Sloop come in. Mr.
Baptist and his Son first went on board the Sloop. -- Baptist's Son came on
Shore, and talked with the Indians as they were going over a carrying place,
but he was at some distance, so don't know what was said. -- Then James Mews
and his Brother Philip were on board with Baptist's Son; before which time the
English were come on Shore in their Canno. -- That he and Salmon, with a Squaw
and two Children went on board in a Canno, being first called upon by Baptist
to come on board. -- That James Mews or Baptist hailed the Indians on Shore,
and told 'em they had taken the Vessel, and bid 'em come on board; When they
called, Baptist and Philip took the Colors down; and when he came on board,
Baptist tied 'em round his middle. He knows not who tied the Indian belonging
to the Sloop. -- That when it was Evening, the English came on board. -- That
the French made a Prisoner of the Master Doty, at an Old Woman's House, and she
with her Son and the Master went on board together. That James Mews said, lets
come to Sail, and gave orders to hoist the Anchor, and Marsel and Lewis helped
to weight it with Salmon. They were to go to Baptist's Plantation round the
Point. The next day in the Morning early they saw a Vessel, which proved to be
a Vessel which the French said they saw some days before. -- Some of the
Indians fitted their Arms, saying, that if it was an English Vessel they
believed she would fight 'em, seeing the Indians had taken the Sloop. -- --
That Baptist persuaded them to carry the Sloop round toward his Plantation,
but soon after Breakfast was over, some of them were Drunk, and he and Philip
were Fishing, and three Indian Men and the Squaw and two Children, with John
Baptist, were in the Cabin, and the Skipper shut the Cabin Door upon 'em;
that the English were all upon Deck, and struck him down, that James and
Baptist's Son were asleep forward. -- That the said Baptist came out of the
Cabin, and was knocked down and thrown over board, the English fired into the
Cabin, and three Indians thereupon got out of the Cabin Windows; there was
one Canno adrift, which the Indians tried to get into, but the Canno oversat;
'twas not far from the French Vessel, but he believes the People on board did
not see the Indians; 'twas about a Mile from the Shore, and he believes they
were Drowned -- He had his share of the English's Powder and Shot, but he had
no Gun. -- He heard the Indians had been at Port Royal, and heard some of them
say that there was Peace with the English and Indians. But he heard some of the
Indians say they wondered that if there was Peace, they did not bring the Indian
Prisoners from Boston.

Signum John ^ Missel.
Suffolk ss. Boston September. 5th. 1726. Taken and Signed before us, Samuel
Checkley, Habijah Savage, Just. Pacis. John Gyles, Interpreter. Attest. Samuel
Tyley, Not. Pub


After Reading the above Examinations, the Prisoners were severally Asked
whether the same were true? And although their Advocate advised them, that they
were not obliged to own in Court, what they owned before the Justices
aforesaid; Yet they severally acknowledged that their Examinations were true.

Then was Read the Ratification made the fourth day of June last, at His
Majesty's Fort of Annapolis-Royal, of the Articles of Peace stipulated by the
Delegates at Boston, the fifteenth day of December foregoing, (which Articles
were also Read) in behalf of the Penobscot, Narridgwalk, Saint John's, Cape
Sables, and other Indian Tribes belonging to, and Inhabiting within His
Majesty's Territories of Nova Scotia, etc. And by Major Paul Mascarene,
Commissioner for the Province of Nova Scotia, in behalf of His Majesty.

Afterward the Prisoners being asked whether they had seen any of the Indians
that were at the Ratification of the Peace at Annapolis? They answered, they
had been in Company with several of the Indians, whose Names were subscribed to
the said Ratification; And particularly James Mews owned, that about twenty
days before the said Doty's Sloop was taken, he was in Company with Antoin, one
of the Chiefs of the Indians at Menis, and about eight or ten days afterward,
he saw Indian Simon, who used to carry Letters from Menis, etc. to
Annapolis-Royal, and was present, as he understood, at the Negotiation of the
Peace; and the said James and Philip Mews, both signified to the Court their
belief that Antoin was at Annapolis treating of the Peace; and they also owned,
that they lately saw Captain Walker, alias Piere, one of the Chiefs of the
Indians at or near Malegash and Sabuckatook, who was at Annapolis at the
Treaty; and that his Brother Catouse was returned from thence, since the
Ratification of the Peace.

Then the Prisoners Advocate made his Pleas in their Defense, in the following
manner, viz.

I Now a second Time appear before Your Honor, Mr. President, and the rest of
the Honorable Commissioners of this Court, in behalf of some Persons accused
of Piracy: Who though they be Indians, have and will experience so much Candor
and Indulgence from this Court, as must convince even the barbarous and Salvage
Tribes to which they belong, of Your great Justice and Impartiality. Your
Honors, I doubt not, are sensible I am not send of this Office: But my Duty to
Your Honor, and the Honorable Court, and desire that nothing may be
neglected, which in Justice to the Prisoners ought to be declared, engage me in
this Affair.

I humbly submit it to Your Honors, Whether at the Time the Facts they are
accused of, are laid to be committed, they were not Enemies, or in a State of
War with us: It Is true it appears, that the Ratification of the Peace between
His Majesty's Government of Annapolis-Royal, and the Cape Sable Indians, was
made at Annapolis on the fourth of June last; but that regards that Government
only; and the Covenant on the part of the Indians, that they not commit
Hostilities, etc. extends to the Inhabitants of that Province only. The Vessel
seized at Malegash, in which the Evidences for the King were, belongs to His
Majesty's Subjects of this Province: And the Prisoners declare, that at the
Time of the taking Capt. Doty and his Vessel, they neither knew or heard of the
Ratification of the Peace between this Province and the Indians at Cas^^; but
on the contrary, were informed even by English men, as well as French, among
the latter of which, were (as they inform me) Monsieur St. A^^^e of Me^^, and
his Son John Baptist, and by two eminent Cape Sable Indians, S^^^^age and
A^^^^^age, that there was no Peace made, but only talked of; and that but a Day
or two before the Facts are charged in the Articles to be committed.

The Ratification indeed at Cases, was on the fifth of August, but that does
not argue that the Prisoners were acquainted with it, they living in a far,
remote and distant Place of another Government: And being but an inconsiderable
Number of People, the Law will not, with Submission, presume a Person to be
knowing of a thing, unless there appear some Circumstances by which it may be
reasonably concluded, he cannot but know it. If therefore the Prisoners were in
a State of War with us, what they have done, they may well justify, by the Laws
of GOD, Nature, Nations and Arms: And their declaring to Doty and his Men, that
it was Peace, may be reasonably accounted a Stratagem of War, to draw and
ensnare them in their Churches; which fort of Stratagems are very frequently
made use of in War.

Your Honors may well remember what I urged yesterday in favor of the two
Frenchmen, which therefore I shall not spend Your Time in insisting on, since
the Sentence You have passed upon them, manifests it to be overruled; I mean,
that the Fact charged being committed within the Body of a County, amounts only
to a Notorious Robbery, which is triable at the Common Law by a Jury, and not
to Piracy: And herewith agrees the Definition of Piracy, given by Mr. Advocate
General. I shall only beg leave to add to what I then said, That as the Fact
was certainly begun when the Vessel was at Anchor in the Harbor; so it being
but one continued Act, ought to be tried where it was begun, i. e. within the
Body of the County.

The Carriage of the Prisoners to the Men, was very Unjustifiable in their
beating of them, etc. But this I attribute partly to their barbarous Natures
and Customs, and partly to their Drink. John Missel seems to have had the least
share in the Affair, he not coming on board till after the Colors were struck:
But I shall leave their Cases to Your Honor's wise Consideration, and doubt
not of a Judgment equal to the Merit and Justice thereof.

Afterward the Prisoners being asked, if they had any thing to say for
themselves, more than their Advocate had observed on their behalf? -- James
Mews said, he was in Liquor; and they all excused themselves by alleging, that
it was the first Offense of that Nature they had been Guilty of, etc.

Afterward the King's Advocate Replied upon the Prisoners Advocate, as
follows, viz.

May it please Your Honor, Mr. President, and the Honorable Commissioners,

I Shall not now Trespass upon Your Patience, in reiterating the several
Matters of Fact proved upon the Prisoners: And more especially when I consider
they turn out as strong, if not stronger against them, than against those two
that justly received their Sentence Yesterday. -- And of this their Advocate is
perfectly convinced, and therefore industriously waves any Advantage that
otherwise may be taken to the weakness of the Evidence; and rests their Defense
on an Allegation, That at the Time of Committing these Facts, they were in a
State of Enmity with us, ignorant of the Ratification of the Peace, and
therefore not guilty of Piracy, by the Law of Arms, etc.

To which I Answer: -- That the Gentleman is the second Time mistaken in Fact.
For on the Fifteenth Day of December, 1725. the several Tribes of the Eastern
Indians, St. John's and Cape Sables, etc. by their Delegates, did enter into
Articles of Pacification at Boston, with the Governments of the
Massachusetts Bay, New Hampshire and Nova Scotia, whereby among other things,
they promised in behalf of their respective Tribes, That they will cease all
Acts of Hostility, Injuries and Discords, toward all the Subjects of the Crown
of Great Britain, and not offer the least Hurt, Violence or Molestation to
them, or any of them, in their Persons or Estates; but will henceforward Hold
and Maintain a firm, constant Amity and Friendship with all the English, and
will never Confederate or Combine with any other Nation to their Prejudice. And
further, there are also inserted in the said Articles of Pacification these
Words, viz. We (meaning the said Delegates, in behalf of themselves and their
respective Tribes) Submitting our selves to be Ruled and Governed by His
Majesty's Laws, and desiring to have the Benefit of the same. And on the fourth
Day of June following, at Annapolis-Royal, the Chiefs and Representatives of
the said Indians, in Compliance with the said Articles, stipulated as
aforesaid, by their Delegates, and in Obedience thereunto, Solemnly Confirmed
and Ratified the same. By all which it most evidently appears, that the Indians
were not, as pretended, at the Time of executing the several Acts of Piracy
charged upon them, in a State of War with the Crown of Great Britain, but in
firm Amity with His Sacred Majesty, and to be Governed by His Majesty's Laws,
and Entitled to the Benefit of them.

And if any Foreigner, Subject to any Prince or State in Amity with the Crown
of England, commit Piracies on the Ships or Goods of the English, the same is
Piracy, within the Stat. 28. H. 8. Sea-Laws, p. 478. q. Having thus
unanswerably acquitted this Prosecution from the Exception, I beg leave to give
a shot Answer to what further was offered by the Advocate for the Prisoners,
under this Head, namely, that they were ignorant of these Negotiations, and
therefore the Crime of Piracy ought not to be imputed to them.

I must observe to Your Honors, It Is a settled Maxim in respect to the
Breaches of Penal-Laws, Ignorantia non excusat Legem. And was the Fact truly
so, who is chargeable with the Omission? The Chiefs and Delegates in Duty ought
to apprize (as doubtless they did) their respective Tribes, of the said
Articles of Pacification and Confirmation, and not the Government that
stipulated with them. But from their own Words, and Words spoke in their
hearing, as appeared in the Evidence, and also from the Circumstances in the
Case, it must be collected they were fully sensible of all these Solemn
Treaties and Proceedings; for ashore one of them saluted the English as the
French did aboard, by saying, It Is Peace; the English are now all one as
Brothers: And by their own Acknowledgement, they had seen and conversed with
some of their Chiefs, that had at Annapolis Confirmed the said Articles of
Pacification since such Confirmation, and once in particular, but a very
inconsiderable Time before their perpetrating this their wicked Act; so that
there is neither Color or Shadow to suppose them Ignorant; or according to Law
would such Ignorance exempt them from the Punishment justly due to their
Demerits.

Therefore I doubt not but Your Honors will in like manner declare them
Guilty, as You lately have the other Accomplices in these their wicked Actions.

The Advocate General having Concluded, the Court was cleared; Then the
Commissioners fully and deliberately weighed and considered the Evidences
against the Prisoners, and also the Defense made by them and their Advocate,
together with Mr. Advocate General's Replication, etc. And Voted Unanimously,
That the said James Mews, Philip Mews, and John Missel, were severally Guilty.

Then the Prisoners were brought to the Bar again, when the President
Pronounced them severally Guilty of Piracy, Felony and Robbery, according to
the Articles Exhibited against them.

Whereupon the Advocate General on His Majesty's behalf, demanded Sentence
against them.

And the Prisoners when asked what they had further to say, why Sentence of
Death should not be Pronounced against them, alleging, they had nothing to say
more than had been offered upon their Trial; The President of the Court
accordingly Pronounced Sentence against them severally, in the Words following,
viz. You -- are to go from hence to the place from whence you came, and from
thence to the place of Execution, and there to be hanged up by the Neck, until
you are Dead; and the Lord have Mercy upon your Soul.

FINIS.

