A Sacramental Discourse February 3. 1727.

Parents and grown Children should be together at the Lord's Table.

A SERMON Before the SACRAMENT, at the Friday Lecture in Brattle-Street, Boston.

By Benjamin Colman.

Deuteronomy. VI. 6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thy
heart; and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children; and shall talk
of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

BOSTON, Printed for S. GERRISH, at the lower end of Cornhill. 1727.

Parents and Children at the Table of CHRIST.
LUKE II. 41, 42. Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of
the passover; and when He was twelve years old they went up to Jerusalem after
the custom of the feast.


IT is a sweet and pleasant Chapter before us, filled with a grateful variety
respecting the birth and circumcision of our Lord Jesus, and his presentation
in the Temple; how the multitudes of the heavenly Hosts praised God on the one
occasion, and how Simeon and Anna spoke of him on the other.

IN the verse before my text we have a short account of the infancy and
childhood of our Lord, ver. 40. And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit,
filled with wisdom and the grace of God was upon him. This was indeed as became
the Son of God: Mr. Henry on the place.
"That whereas other children are weak in understanding and resolution He was
strong in spirit; whereas other children have foolishness bound up in their
hearts, which appears in all they say and do, He was filled with wisdom; and
whereas the corruption of nature early and strongly appears in other children,
nothing but the grace of God appeared in him".

"MY text begins the only passage of story recorded concerning our blessed
Lord, from his infancy to the day of his showing to Israel, at 29 years of
age". The parents of our Lord Jesus are the persons here spoken of; Joseph so
reputed and called, and Mary his holy mother. The thing related of them is very
worthy and honorable; namely, their constant annual journey to Jerusalem at
the feast of the passover. This was required of the males by the law of Moses,
but the women were excused. Yet they that would attended, and the Mother of
Christ was too devout not to do it. She was strong in body, as well as in
spirit, by the favor of God, and was as constant at the feast as her gracious
husband. (A feast which had most of Gospel in it, and to which she was more
related than she knew of; her holy Son being the lamb of God, the great
Antitype of all the paschal lambs.) Such (says Mr. Burkit) as will go no
further than they are forced in religious exercises, are strangers to the
Virgins piety and devotion.

BUT here is one particular year specified when Jesus went up with them to the
feast. It was when he was twelve years old. It is not said that he had not gone
up with them any year before that: it may be this was not the first time; as
doubtless it was not the last, though it be the only time we read of.

"THE Jews tell us that at thirteen year old a child was reputed with them a
Son of the commandment: that is to say, obliged to the duties of adult Church
membership; having been from his infancy and circumcision a Son of the
covenant." Now Jesus in his childhood being so much in wisdom and spirit above
his years, we may well suppose that 'ere this time he had been at the passover.
But this time is recorded and not the rest, for the sake of that wonderful
conference which he now had with the Doctors in the Temple.

I might offer many profitable Notes and Observations from the text, but shall
select four only to speak to.

1. THAT the constant devout observation of the feast of the Passover, was
strictly required of the Jews. 2. THAT the religious among them were very
strict in the observation of it, and of the other religious feasts, statutes
and ordinances of that dispensation. 3. THAT parents should take care to go
before their children in the observation of Divine institutions. 4. THAT
children should be early in the worship of God; and in their preparation for an
approach to the table of Christ.
I. THAT the constant and devout observation of the passover was strictly
required of the Jews.

THREE times in a year they were to keep a feast unto the Lord; when all their
males were to appear before him. Exodus 23.14, 17. This was a statute for Israel
and a law of the God of Jacob. The feast of unleavened bread, which was the
passover, was the first and chief of these three great festivals. It was
instituted to the children of Israel upon the day of their coming out of Egypt,
to be a standing memorial to them throughout their generations of that their
deliverance and redemption. Exodus 12.14. This day shall be unto you for a
memorial, and ye shall keep it a feast unto the Lord throughout your generations;
you shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever. Deuteronomy. 16.3. That thou
may remember the day wherein thou came forth out of the land of Egypt all
the days of thy life.

THE omission or neglect of this institution was very severely threatened by
God. Number. 9.13. But the man that is clean and not in a Journey, and forbeareth
to keep the passover, even the same soul shall be cut off from his people:
because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his appointed season, that
man shall bear his sin. Nothing could excuse a jew from this appointed service,
but his being under some legal uncleanness which rendered him unfit for it; or
his being sick or in a journey which made it impracticable for him to be at the
Lord's place: And in this case it was provided, that such a person should keep
the passover a month after the appointed time. So carefully did the law provide
against the omission of the duty required. Numb. 9.10, 11. If any man of you,
or of your posterity shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be in a
journey afar off, yet he shall keep the passover unto the Lord; the fourteenth
day of the second month, at even, shall they keep it. And the ordinance was the
same for the stranger, a proselyte of the jewish religion, as for him that was
born in the land. Number. 9.14. Only the profanation or careless performance of
this holy service was also as strictly forbidden and severely condemned: Levit.
7.20. The soul that eats of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings
that pertain unto the Lord, having his uncleanness upon him, even that soul
shall be cut off from his people. And yet where there was a preparation of
heart, and something unavoidable hindered the exact ceremonial purifications
which the law prescribed, and which the worshipper would have complied with if
he could; in such a case (upon extraordinary occasions) the gracious God
sometimes excused the want of legal purification, and accepted the worshipper
and his service: As it was the case of many of the people in Hezekiah's great
passover. 2 Chronicles. 30.18. A multitude of the people out of Ephraim, Issachar
and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves; yet did they cat the passover
otherwise than it was written: but Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The good
Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his
fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
sanctuary: And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah and healed the people.

THUS strictly has God always required of his people obedience to his positive
laws, and the careful observation of his statutes and ordinances.

I will not now go into the reasons of this severity of the Law in these
injunctions. It might be said, 1. SUCH positive laws, statutes and ordinances
are the high declarations of God's dominion and sovereighty, his absolute will
and authority; and He will be obeyed and ought to be so. It is indignity and
rebellion for us to hesitate or delay when we know his will. 2. THEY are the
instances of that open honor and public acknowledgement, which as a church
and people of God we render to him; whereby he is confessed in solemn and
stated manner, glorified before others, and all are provoked to glorify him. 3.
THEY are standing memorials of his grace favor and mercy to a people, of his
presence among them and of his covenant with them.


AND to the people of God they are the ordained signs and appointed means of
their sacred covenanting with God, and special communion with Him.

BUT there needs no more to be said than this, What if God will? and who shall
say to him, what do thou? He never asked his creature what law he should
give him. And whatever it be, it is to be sure holy and just. And the penalty in
case of disobedience can be no less than excision from God; which is to say
everlasting infinite misery.

NOW that which remains is to bring home this matter to our selves, and argue
from the Lord's passover under the law, unto his holy supper under the gospel.
For certainly these two sacramental rites or actions do bear a great affinity
likeness and relation one to the other; and what the one was to the church
under the law, such the other is to it under the gospel. And it is very
manifest in the institution of the Lord's Supper, as from the nature of the
thing, so from the time and circumstances of it, that it comes in the place and
room of the possover; by the will of Him who is the Lord our passover
sacrificed for us. And our Lord Jesus has positively and absolutely required of
us both the observation and sanctification of this ordinance of the Supper, as
he did enjoin that of the passover under the law. It is his special law to us
now, as much as that was to them by the hand of Moses. He has said to us, This
do ye in remembrance of me: And his Apostle has said to us, I received of the
Lord, that which I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night in
which he was betrayed took bread etc. It is therefore called the Lord's table
and the Lord's supper. His authority has appointed it, and it is a standing
memorial of his love, a public and perpetual honor to his name; and to us the
stated sign and means of our covenanting and communion with him.

AND if these things be so, then what can we think or say, in excuse of the
easy neglect and careless observation of this ordinance among Christians? Will
not the Lord Christ as much enquire after and require for this thing among us,
as he did of old among his people about the passover? Certainly he will. And
the Apostle therefore says all those awful words on this occasion, 1 Corin. 11.
ult. Let a man examine himself and so let him eat of this bread and drink of
this cup: for he that eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks
judgment to himself: for this cause many are weak and sickly among you and many
sleep: for if we would judge our selves we should not be judged.

THE sum then is, That people should not dare to live in the neglect of the
Lord's table, as they commonly do; and that they should be very devout and
spiritual, very careful and serious in the observation of it: as the Jews of
old were obliged to be very constant and careful in their attendance on the
passover feast.

2. MY next note is, That the Religious among the Jews were very strict and
exact in the observation of the passover, and other positive ordinances of the
law of Moses.

MY text informs us that the parents of Christ were so: Every year they went up
at the feast of the passover, and they fulfilled the days, and performed all
things according to the law of the Lord.

"NO difficulties hindered their attendance; they came up early to it, and
staid all the time of it. Neither Joseph's calling, nor the blessed Virgins
household business could keep them at home, nor hasten 'em home, before the
service was entirely over. All worldly business must give place to divine
offices, and we must attend God's service to the end of it, if we would carry
away the blessing. Mr. Bu^kitt in loc.


IT is indeed no evidence of the truth of grace to frequent the public
assemblies; yet it is an infallible sign of the want of grace customarily to
neglect them. We read of the holy parents of John the Baptist, namely Zecharias
and Elizabeth, that they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord, blameless. This is a high and happy
account of husband and wife, and it should be said of every married couple: If
they would be righteous before God they should be walking together in all the
ordinances of the Lord blameless; and if they are righteous before God they
will do so. Such a happy pair were Elkanah and Hannah; they went up yearly to
worship and to sacrifice unto the Lord of Hosts in Shiloh: so they did year by
year, 1 Samuel 1.3, 7. Indeed multitudes did thus attend the yearly feasts in
Israel who were not pious people, and some who were irreligious did no doubt
neglect them, but all that were pious went up to the solemn feasts. David sings
of their doing so in some of his most pleasant psalms: Psalm. 42. and 122. I was
glad when they said to me, let us go into the house of the Lord: our feet shall
stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem! whither the tribes go up, the tribes of
the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the
Lord: For I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God,
with the voice of joy and praise; with a multitude that kept holy day.

THE reflections which now naturally occur to us are such as these. How comes
it to pass that we Christians are not as careful and exact, as constant and
conscientious in attending on the ordinance of the Lord's supper; as the Jews
were in the observation of the passover and other ordinances of the law? Should
not a People professing the name of Christ show their reverend and religious
regard to the memorial of his death? and should not people of gravity and
seriousness in the christian Church hold themselves bound and tied up by the
command of their dying Savior? For if the Law given by Moses was reverend and
awful, is it not yet more so when the Son of God himself is come, and has
spoken to us? And are not his last will and words, just before he died,
memorable indeed and sacred? When God told Moses of a Prophet like to him, but
greater, whom he would raise up to his people, and put his word in his mouth;
he added -- And whosoever will not hearken to my words which he shall speak in
my name, I will require it of him. Now make the application in this particular
instance. The great Prophet of the church has come and spoken to us in the name
of God, and one of his last words was this, Do this in remembrance of me: and
if we do not hearken to these words which He has spoken to us, God says he will
require it: and when he requires an account of us, why we did it not, what
shall we answer? we must be speechless.

HEAR what the Apostle says on this head through his epistle to the Hebrews:
Therefore Heb. 2. 1, 2, 3.
we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest
at any time we should let them slip: For if the word spoken by angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward; how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation; which at first
began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard
it. Wherefore holy brethren, Heb. 3.1, 2, 3, etc.
partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and high priest of our
profession Christ Jesus, who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also
Moses was faithful in all his house. For this Man was counted worthy of more
glory than Mose, -- who verily was faithful as a servant, -- but Christ as a
Son over his own house: -- wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, To day if you
will hear his voice. Let us therefore fear Chap. 4.1.
lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem
to come short of it. Take heed, brethren, lest Chap. 3 12, 13.
there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living
God: But exhort one another daily while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Having therefore, Chap. 10, 19, 20, etc.
brethren, boldness to enter in-the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and
living way which he has consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say his
flesh; and having an high priest over the house of God; let us draw near with a
true heart, in full assurance of faith; having our hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, and our bodies washed as with pure water. Let us hold fast the
profession of our faith without wavering, -- not forsaking the assembling of
our selves together as the manner of some is; -- for if we sin wilfully after
we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice
for sins. He that despised Moses law died without mercy; of how much sorer
punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy who has trodden under foot
the Son of God --? See then that ye refuse not Him that speaks, Heb. 12.25,
26 etc.
for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall
not we escape if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven. But as we
receive a kingdom which cannot be moved (the gospel dispensation which is to
remain for ever) let us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably, with
reverence and godly fear; for our God is a consuming fire. Let us go forth unto
Him, which suffered without the gate, Chap, 13 13, 14.
bearing his reproach: by Him let us offer the sacrifice of praise unto God
continually, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name.

THIS is the strain of that excellent Epistle to the Hebrews. It calls upon the
Christian church to be as observant of the Institutions of Christ, as the
Jewish ever were of the law of Moses: It shows that our obligations rise higher
than theirs, and that it will be worse in us and for us to be inobservant than
it ever was in them, or will be for them in the day of judgment.

I will only add two more reflections here, 1. THAT we be cautioned not to rest
our selves in the mere outward observation of God's ordinances, as the Jews
generally did: and as the generality of christians do through Christendom at this
day: But let us remember that as he was not a Jew that was one outwardy in the
flesh, so he only is a Christian that is one inwardly, and baptism is that of
the heart, in the spirit and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but
of God, Romans 2.29. And again, let us remember the same Apostle's words, Phil. 3
3. We are the circumcision that worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. 2. REMEMBER that instead of
doing less than what the law of God requires of us in outward observations, we
should rather do more. I mean not by inventions of our own, or in way of
addition to the commandments of God; but in the devour observation of those
which God has appointed. As in the text; although Mary was not obliged by the law
to go up yearly to the passover with her husband; yet the law permitting her to
go she gladly went, as Hannah and other holy women were wont to do before her.


AND thus the first Christians having received the (...) Christ about his
Supper (the breaking of bread in remembrance of his broken body) they not only
steadfastly continued in this doctrine and fellowship of the Apostles, but they
did it daily, from house to house, with a single and joyful heart, Acts 2.42,
46. As often as they came together it seems to have been to break bread; the
Lord's day and the Lord's supper met together: Acts 20.7. Upon the first day of
the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached.

GOD has not tied us up to so many precise times, just how often to pray, and
hear and communicate: We should be sure then rather to go beyond the law, than
to come short of its injunctions, in the discharging of these duties. And if
so, then when the gospel says, As often as ye eat this bread, (which supposes
we do it often) what will they say to themselves, who have never once done it?

BUT this for the second Note, That the religious among the Jews were constant
and devout in the strict observation of the passover: Every year they went up
at the feast, and took care to do every thing after the custom of the feast.
The next Note that I would offer is this,

III. THAT parents should go before their children in the observation of the
holy Institutions of God in his worship. So did the gracious Parents in the
text; and if they had had a family of children and servants to have learned of
them, their landable example would have well instituted them in the observation
of the passover. And truly so ought Christian parents to lead their houshoulds
to the table of Christ, and in the reverend sanctification of the Sabbath, and
a religious observation of all the Ordinances of God's house.

THE word of God requires parents diligently to teach their children the will
and ways of God, as well as to have the same always in their own hearts, Deuteronomy.
6.6, 7. And when the passover was first appointed to the Children of Israel, it
was accompanied with this precept to them, Exodus 13.8, 14. And thou shall show
thy son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the Lord did
unto me when I came forth out of Egypt: And it shall be for a sign unto thee
upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thy eyes; that the Lord's law may
be in thy mouth; for with a strong hand has the Lord brought thee out of Egypt.

CHILDREN naturally enquire and learn of their parents; but more of their
examples as they grow up than they do of their precepts. If then it be the duty
of parents to teach by words, it is more their duty to teach by their practice
and good example. If they should take pains to instruct them in the reasons of
God's laws, and in the meaning of his ordinances, and require them to observe
the same, much more should they teach and lead 'em by their own example. For
with what face or with what efficacy can a parent tell his son, that Christ has
required such a duty and service, and as he grows up he must be sure to observe
it; and yet let his child see that he lives in the neglect of that duty
himself. It is incumbent therefore on parents, that they teach and lead their
children in the worship of God by their own example; that they go before them
in the reverend observation of his holy institutions.

SO did Abraham: He first circumcised himself, and then his son, and his
household: And this is the honor done him by God; Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham
that he will command his children and household after him, and they shall keep
the way of the Lord. He could command them with authority and efficacy when he
first obeyed himself: his words had not else come with power and been received
with reverence.

DAVID could with authority instruct his son in the ordinances of God, because
he himself was so great a lover of them, so devout an observer of them. His
being a King did not give so much power to his words as his being a Saint.
Prove. 4.3. I was my fathers son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my
mother; he taught me also and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words,
keep my commandments and live.

SO the Apostle taught the Churches effectually; Phil. 4.9. Those things which
ye have both learned and received, and heard and seen in me do: and the God of
peace shall be with you.

SO Christ taught his family, and all that are his ought so to teach theirs.
John 13.15. I have given you an example.

WHEREFORE let parents first take heed to themselves, and then take care of
their children. For if they require their children to reverence the
Institutions of God and do not observe the same themselves, perhaps their
children will soon lose all reverence both to God and them. Or if parents say
nothing to their children about the matter, as it is likely they will not, then
the honor their children do naturally bear them will tempt them to make light
of the dishonor done to God in the neglect of his ordinances.

LET those parents consider this who live in the neglect of the Lord's supper
in the sight of their children. Think you, that they do not observe and mind
it? Yes, and will be ready to take any license which your example gives them.
It ought therefore to be a tender argument with parents to be religious for the
sake of their children: for next to their own Souls are these. But if men will
not be prevailed on for the sake of their own souls, how should they by being
pleaded with for the children of their bowels? It is to be feared that parents
who do not come to the Lord's table, do not speak at all to their children
about preparing for it: or if they do it can be with little force.

BUT the injury is greater to God, who gives us our children with this charge,
to bring them up for Him; and intrusts us with them as so many living souls
which are more His than ours. And if we fondly love their little bodies, but
are negligent of their precious souls, as it is a brutal and irreligious thing
in us, so he will require it of us; as he did of his people of old: Ezekiel.
16.20. Thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou have born unto Me,
and those have thou sacrificed to thine idols, to be devoured: thou have slain
my children.

THE most unnatural wrong we can do to our children is to neglect and hurt
their souls: And this is one of the greatest wrongs we can do to God, who
challenges a special property in our children; and therefore he has appointed
us that as soon as they are born we do give them up to him, and bind our selves
to educate them for him. O the pitiless as well as profane hearts of those
parents that neglect their own and their childrens souls! they in effect
sacrifice 'em to devils after they have devoted them to God! they rob God of
his children, and rob them of their title to God and his covenant blessings.

Finally, WHAT an unnatural precept and direction must be given to the children
of such parents, who live in the open neglect of the ordinances of Christ? How
hard is it to be forced to say to your children, -- and yet we must say it --
Do not learn of your parents in this thing! do not imitate 'em; they do wrong,
very wrong, and you must not follow them. This would be harsh kind of doctrine,
and must needs sound so in the ears both of parents and children. Yet if
parents will live in the neglect of the Lord's ordinances, we must speak thus
to their children. "Do not think to excuse your selves by your parents example,
how much so ever you love and honor them: It will not do in the day of Christ:
the soul that sins shall die; the soul of the father and the soul of the son:
Ezekiel. 18.4. You must mourn for your parents in the case supposed and pray for
them; and you may reverently ask of them the cause and reason of their neglect,
and beseech them to lead you to all the ordinances of Christ; but if you
prevail not on them be not discouraged your self, and restrained from doing
your duty.

BUT this for the third Note: Parents should go before their children in the
observation of the institutions of Divine worship.

IV. CHILDREN ought to be early in the Worship of God, and preparing for the
Table of Christ.

THIS is taught us by our Lord's example in the text: the Child Jesus when he
was twelve years old, went up with Joseph and Mary to the feast of the
passover. And we read that he tarried behind in Jerusalem, and when they found
him it was in the Temple, and when they reasoned with him upon his staying
there his answer was, Wast ye not that I must be about my Fathers business?

CERTAINLY the holy Child Jesus is here exhibited as an example to children and
young people; to teach and require them to give God an early possession of
their souls, and in their youth to keep close to his worship and service.
"Especially such children as are forward in other things, should be put forward
in religion". It is the pleasure of Christ and much for his honor, that
children should be betimes in the temple, and that young people should be at
his table.

IN the 22. verse of the chapter we read how the parents of our Lord Jesus
brought him in his early infancy to present him in the temple, and to offer as
the law required: And now in the text we find him coming in his early youth to
the temple, to dedicate himself to the Lord in his appointed way. So those of
our children that are in their infancy dedicated to God in baptism, should be
called upon as they grow up to come to the Gospel passover, the Lord's supper,
and join themselves to the Lord and his Church by their own act and deed. But
let them take care to do it with knowledge and seriousness.

SOME children may much sooner be admitted to the table of Christ than others.
Do thou child desire to be among the first; the most ripe, the most ready.
Therefore learn diligently, and seek to God earnestly: get forward in Christ's
School: be not the least and last there: enter thy self betimes, and learn now
in thy learning age.

A great part of the duty of baptized children is to look forward to the Lord's
table, and to keep their eye upon it; saying often to themselves, "I have been
given up to Christ in baptism, and I must be preparing to give my self up to
him at his table.

AND a great part of the duty of parents lies in this, to instill this
consideration into the tender hearts of their children, and so bring them on to
the recognition of their covenant engagements at the table of Christ. But not
to do it lightly, cursorily and as a thing of form; but intelli ently,
deliberately and awfully: as David taught and charged his son, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a
perfect heart and with a willing mind; for the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him he will be
found of thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast thee off for ever.

THIS is a point of great care, and calls for much concern and labor; and most
parents are great strangers to this religious watch over their children: It is
evident by their not coming themselves to the table of Christ, and by the
neglect of their households: and yet they know this to be the least they owe
unto Christ, to their own souls, and to the souls of their family.

BUT if this be the duty of parents, then children owe it as much unto Christ,
unto their parents and to their own souls, to learn God's will betimes, to get
knowledge and understanding in the holy ways of God, and to live unto Him who
made them, who also has bought and bound them to be his. And you, children,
that are consecrated to God in baptism, who are instructed in the word and law
of God, and your obligations to him, by parents and ministers; be you exhorted
and warned to be early in your choice of God and of his ways.

AND now to close all, Let parents and grown children be together exhorted, to
be sound together at the Lord's table. What is there more sit, and what could
be more pleasant than this? Parents, go your selves to the Lord's passover, as
the parents of Christ did: And children come with your parents: or if they
neglect themselves come you before them; don't stay for 'em. Or if they do not
put you upon this duty as they should, remember that your Ministers put you in
mind of it, and that you are now admonished thereof.

MAY the Lord Jesus teach and incline you by his holy Spirit. May you be such
as he was in his childhood and youth; such to God, such to your parents, and
such to his church. That if you die young you may like Abel and Enoch be taken
up to God: or if you live in the world you may be examples to others, fruitful
Christians, full of goodness, full of good works, to the honor of Christ, and
the edification of others: Like good Obadiah, fearing the Lord from your youth;
and like gracious Timothy, betimes knowing in the scriptures and wise to
salvation.

I will urge what has been said both to elder and younger persons, only with
one motive.

WE are all dying and going to judgment, we know not which first, whether the
parent or the child. The graves are ready for us, and are not we ready, should
we not be ready for the table of Christ? We are dropping into the grave every
week, some elder people and many younger; and should we not be quickened to be
getting into Christ, that we may be found in him, let death come as soon and as
suddenly to us, as it has done to others.

PARENTS and children are both dying, and are alike concerned to be getting
ready for a dying hour; let them take the table of Christ in their way, there
to set their souls in order for their going to him, and for their being found
of their Judge in peace.

LOOK into the Congregation of the dead and see how they ly mixed, here a parent
and there his children; here an aged person, and there diverse in their youth,
and more in their childhood: read the inscriptions on the grave-stones and see
how many under twenty and thirty to one above fifty or sixty ly interred there;
their spirits gone to God that gave them, and into a most blessed or miserable
Eternity. And shall it not be thus in the Congregation of the living and at the
Lord's table? which has so particular an aspect on the second appearance of
Christ, and on our preparation for a solemn appearance before Him, to give an
account to him, and to hear our sentence from the mouth of the Lamb? Are not
the funerals of every week, month and year so mixed? parents following their
children to the grave, the house appointed for all the living, and children
following their parents? and while they live together in this dying world,
shall they not come together into one place to eat the Lord's Supper? How
strangely then must we suppose that they both forget that they are dying away,
they know not which first, and that after death is the judgment?

LET parents and children both consider, that their souls are alike precious,
and eternity is before them: that all souls are Christ's, the soul of the
Father and the soul of the son: that Christ has given his life a ransom for
both, has shed his blood for both, and has extended his covenant unto both;
commanding his ministers to feed both, his sheep and his lambs; that in the
spirit of Elias they should labor to turn the hearts of fathers and children
together to himself, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord; lest he come
and smite the earth with a curse. See Mal. 4.6. and Luke 1.17.

I scruple not to say, that in the last and most dreadful sense Death is that
curse, which devours the earth; the bodies of all, old and young; and the souls
of all that will not be a people made ready for the Lord: for his glory service
and worship here, and for his table kingdom and glory for ever.

O Parent! look on thy self and thine as mortal, and going to an eternal
judgment, and so govern thy self toward them. You are your self hastening to the
Tribunal of Christ; but have you taken care of a never dying soul for which
Christ has died? And what care of the precious souls of an immortal offspring?
You expect to die before your children, and naturally desire to leave them
behind you; or to be sure you must soon follow 'em to the bar of God: But what
account do you think of rendering to God of them?

WILL not the two first enquiries put to thee by God the Father of Spirits be
these, What care thou have taken of thy own soul, and what of the souls of the
children which he has given thee? how then can you think of dying your selves,
or of your childrens dying, without being able to give an account with joy and
not with grief?

AND you know not whether God will continue you another week or day to yours,
or them to you; what therefore your hand finds to do, do it with all thy
might, for there is no wisdom or working in the grave whither thou art going.
It may be you are cumbring your selves about many things for yours that are to
live after you, but one thing is needful, your own soul and theirs: choose the
good part that can never be taken from you, nor you from that. Remember the
care of the good mother for her two sons: Mat. 20.21. and dropping the
infirmity, let us improve her piety and imitate her wisdom: Lord, that my two
sons may sit, the one on thy right hand and the other on thy left in thy
kingdom. Had she lived in our days her desire and care would have been to have
seen them both, with her, at the Table of Christ, in the way to his Kingdom.

AND what should our Children now say unto themselves, or unto us, upon the
present discourse? Should they not take up the answer of our Lord Jesus (in our
context) to his parents, when they had sought him sorrowing, and at last found
him in the Temple, among the Doctors, Wist you not that I should be about my
Fathers business? Yes, you should be early about the great business of your
souls, the working out your salvation, the making your calling and election
sure. And therefore you must be early in the temple of God, waiting daily at
wisdoms' gates, and coming to the special ordinances of the gospel. And the
younger you come, if it be intelligently and affectionately, with understanding
and grace, in the fear of God and from love to him; you will be the more
welcome and the more beloved of Christ: like John the youngest disciple, and
him whom Jesus loved, who leaned on his bosom at his last passover supper.

AND now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which
are sanctified. That both parents and children may happily meet at the Table of
Christ here, and in his Kingdom hereafter: That in the day of Christ, we may be
able to say to Him, and He may say of us and ours unto his Father, Behold I and
the children which thou have given me.

FINIS.

