John Hammett's VINDICATION AND RELATION: Giving an Account, I. Wherein he was
misrepresented in a Letter lately printed in his Name. II. Of his withdrawing
from the Baptist's Communion. III. Of his uniting to them again. IV. Of his
separating himself wholly from the Baptists, and joining himself in Unity with
the People called Quakers.


Gal. 6.4. Let every Man prove his own Work and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself.

1 These. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this World, but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good and acceptable and
perfect Will of God.

NEW PORT, Rhode Island: Printed and Sold by JAMES FRANKLIN. 1727.

The INTRODUCTION.
Friendly READER,
ON viewing the following Relation, the Goodness of a merciful God appeared to
have waited on the said John Hammett from time to time, and the Voice of Christ
is plainly discerned to have drawn him from one Step to another, which for some
Time he neither knew nor steadfastly believed to be divine: But as Samuel
mistook when God called him in the Temple, supposing the Voice he heard was
Eli's, he repaired to him, but was sent back, being in part informed of his
mistake. The Voice he heard again and again, and Samuel makes his second and
third Attempt to know Eli's Will. The old Man now perceiving that it was the
Lord's Voice, gave him Instruction how to answer; and if John Hammett had met
with such happy Advice from his Brethren the baptists, he had not been
reinstated amongst them as a Minister after that religious Scruple, which was
of the Lord's begetting, though they in a mistake took it to be a delusion of
Satan. And it cannot be otherwise looked upon in them than a mistake, who no
doubt imagine themselves to be in the Purity of Religion though it is to be feared
too many content themselves in the Symbols thereof, refusing, it is doubted, to
come to the Word of Faith and Spirit of Christ in their Hearts, that they might
have Life; that Life which is the Light of Men.

To conclude, We request all to take John Hammett's Example, on the like
Uneasiness and religious Scruple, when they find it on their minds to bring
their Principles and Practices to the Trial on this Touchstone of the Gospel,
the Word of Faith in their Hearts, as John Hammett has done. Thus will they be
able rightly to understand the holy Scriptures, and apply them to their own
Experience; and will infallibly see whether they are in a State of Salvation or
Reprobation, concerning the Faith of Christ. And that this may be their
Practice and Experience, even to the Salvation of their Souls, and not only
theirs, but Thousands and tens of Thousands, is our fervent Desire and Prayer,
who in much Sincerity are Lovers of, and Well-wishers to the Souls of all Men.

Jacob Mott. Samuel Bownas. John Wanton.


John Hammett's VINDICATION AND RELATION.
Friendly READER,
WHEREAS the Baptists had a Letter of mine in their Hands, which some Years
past I sent to one John Wright, which has been lately printed and cried about
the Streets; and the Publisher of the said Letter has taken the Liberty at the
Time of printing it to add the following Lines of his own in the Front of it,
Viz.

A Letter from John Hammett to John Wright, giving an Account why John John
Hammett turned from the Baptists to the Quakers; also why he turned back again:
Wherein are discovered the Devices and Temptations of the Devil. Published from
his own Hand Writing, for a Caution and Information to all unsteady Professors.

Though I don't determine what Designs the publisher of the said Letter had, in
inventing and publishing this Addition, but rather choose to submit the
Consideration of it to others; yet I shall venture to say, that the Addition it
self is in several Respects very unfair, and in Fact an absolute Falsehood; for
the Letter to which the above mentioned Addition refers, gives not the least
Account why I turned from the Baptists to the Quakers, and why I turned back
again, as the Publisher in his Addition so possitively affirms it to do:
Neither was there any such thing in Reality; for I had not turned to, or joined
with the Quakers till some Years after the writing of the said Letter: Neither
did I ever turn back again to the Baptists, or had any Inclination so to do,
since I turned to, or joined with the People called Quakers.

And though the said Letter is now published almost Six Years since the Date of
it, as may be seen by the Letter it self, yet those who read the said Addition
(who are not acquainted with my present Station) will readily conclude, from
the Manner of it, that at the Time of its publication I was with the Baptists,
(as when the said Letter was written;) and if so, the Conclusion must be, that
I published the said Letter and Addition my self; whenas at the time of the
Publication of the said Letter, and some Years before, I was separated from the
Baptists, and joined to the People called Quakers.

And though I am not angry with the Baptists upon Account of the said Letters
being published, nor upon any other Account whatsoever, but sincerely desire
their Salvation, and have always behaved my self like a peaceable Christian
toward them; yet I think a modest Defense of my self, when I apprehend my self
so much obliged to it, cannot but be excusable: And therefore I shall farther
endeavor so to do, by publishing the Relation following; wherein I intend in a
brief Manner, to set forth how I came to withdraw from the Baptists Communion:
and how I was prevailed upon to join with them again; also how I came to
separate my self from them, and join my self to the People called Quakers.

After I had been in Communion with the Baptists for almost twenty Years, and
my self with the rest of my Brethren being as zealous for supporting and
maintaining the outward Figures now commonly practiced, as the Jews were for
the Ceremonies of Moses, and also as censorious against all those who conformed
not exactly to us, as they were against their Fellow Christians who conformed
not to them, at length it pleased God to put it into my Mind to enquire into my
spiritual State; and an Eye was opened in me to see, that notwithstanding my
zealously pleading for, and diligently performing those outward Symbols, yet
according, to their proper Nature, they brought forth only an outward, lifeless
Religion, and proved far from being the Means of inward spiritual Grace, as
they are generally called and esteemed to be: Also I came to apprehend, that
the Spirit of Christ is the only Means of inward and spiritual Grace. And when
I came thus far to my self, and to the Exercise of my Spiritual Senses, I
clearly discerned, that for a long Time I had been feeding on the barren
Mountains of a formal, lifeless Religion, and upon the Prodigal's Husks, that
could not fill his Belly nor mine; the Apprehension whereof brought a great
Concern and Exercise upon my Spirit, greatly desiring to attain to a more
inward spiritual Religion, whereby I might be made a true and experimental
Witness of the saving Work of Grace, and of the Offices and Performances of
Christ which I had read of in the Scriptures; and that my Soul might be brought
into Union and Communion with God, and be daily fed and nourished with the
Bread and Water of Life, and to enjoy the Manifestation of the Life giving
Presence of Jesus Christ, etc. Then I enquired into the outward Institutions,
(that is,) whether they were substantial Things in themselves, and of a durable
Nature, or whether they were originally intended figuratively to guide the
Minds of People to the more inward spiritual Dispensation of the Gospel, and
then to expire in Point of Obligation, like the legal Ceremonies; and I came to
this Conclusion, that the latter was intended: And this I well remember, that
as I grew less outward and formal, I grew more inward and spiritual, and
experienced a more near Acquaintance with God; whereby I began to be weaned
from these outward Performances. And not enjoying that spiritual Life and
Satisfaction among the Baptists which I desired and longed for, I was
constrained to withdraw from them. And some Time after, as I was considering
where I might find a People amongst whom I might enjoy what I wanted, it
pleased God to incline my Mind toward the Quakers, and accordingly I went two
or three Times to their Meeting: And when the Baptists understood that I was
enclining toward the Quakers, they came often to visit me, and some of them, I
must confess, treated me with a tender Spirit; but the Generality of them
carried themselves far otherwise; for they were almost continually filling my
Ears with the Sound of my being led away by Satan, and that those inward
Workings were nothing but diabolical Delusions; also often repeating and
applying to me abundance of the most dreadful Denunciations in the Scriptures,
and representing the Quakers in several Respects to be a delusive, erroneous
People. By this Means I was brought into great Confusion; for when I looked
toward the Quakers, who I was sensible made a more religious and spiritual
Appearance than any others, my Mind and Affections inclined toward them; but
the many Prejudices which I was filled with against them, together with the
heavy Cross that I must unavoidably take up, and the frightful mountainous
Difficulties that lay in my Way, greatly discouraged me from going forward;
whereupon I was afraid to go to their Meetings, or much to enquire into their
Principles: And when I looked back on the Baptists, I considered that I had
been in Unity with them almost twenty Years, and during all that time there
arose no Difference betweeen them and me; which I found had begotten a great
Affection toward them: And on the other Hand I dreaded to make them my
Enemies, who had so long been my Friends; whereupon I found a great Difficulty
to separate my self wholly from them, and join my self to the Quakers, with
whom I never had any religious Acquaintance; whereupon I drew to this
Conclusion, neither to go to the Meetings of the Baptists or Quakers, and knew
not but that I should spend the Remainder of my Days in this lonesome separate
State: And being brought into many Difficulties in several Respects, I began to
be weary of my Life, and especially when I found my Mind inclining toward the
Quakers; insomuch that those divine Drawings became more terrible than Death it
self. Sometimes I feared I should lose my natural Understanding; for I could
neither eat, drink, or sleep but very little for several Days and Nights
together, whereby I was in Time reduced almost to a Consumption, and thrown
into a very great Inflammation; and in my Distress sometimes petitioned the Lord
rather to take my Life from me than to incline me toward the Quakers; at other
Times the Enemy would tempt me to put an End to my temporal Life, to get rid of
my spiritual Troubles; and sometimes I was very near being overcome by him, but
it pleased the Lord in great Mercy to restrain me; and in time I was quite
tired out with this miserable Condition, and began to look back and confer with
the Flesh and the World, and often strove against those divine Convictions,
until it pleased God to withdraw those Influences from me; and then in that
dark and bewildered State I looked back with the Eyes of my carnal Reason,
which cannot comprehend the Things of the Spirit of God, and to which the
Wisdom of God seems Foolishness, and began to imagine those divine Visitations
and Workings to be the Delusions of Satan; being thereunto greatly forwarded
and assisted by the Baptists, who were my only Companions, and almost
continually filling my Ears and Thoughts with Abundance of Discourse of that
Nature; so that by this Means I began to be in an easy quiet Frame again, in
respect of my latter Difficulties; and the Baptists being now sensible what
their diligent Endeavors had effected, they were under Encouragement of my
returning to their Communion, and altered their Manner of Treatment, carrying
themselves very loving and courteous toward me; which begat Thoughts in me of
joining with them again: And as this Inclination prevailed, my Affection
toward the outward Performances increased likewise, which caused me to speak
favorably of them again, whereby I soon recovered respect again, not only from
the Baptists, but also from others of other Denominations, some of whom also
used their zealous Endeavors to disencline me from the Quakers; and being
therewith greatly pleased, I endeavored strongly to oppose all Thoughts that
would come into my Mind against the outward Figures, and also to cherish and
strengthen all Inclinations toward them; till at length I had got a great
Esteem of them again; and being thereunto often persuaded, I was again united
to the Baptists Communion, and not long after I writ the Letter before
mentioned: And when I had spent some Time in Unity with the Baptists, I was by
the unanimous Approbation of the Meeting restored to my former Station of a
Minister, and so continued for a considerable Time; till at length I began to
observe, that ever since I was reunited to the Baptists Communion, I had sat
down contented and easy under formal, lifeless Principles and Performances, and
had not enjoyed that inward Spiritual Life which some Time before I had a Taste
of, and that my Understanding and Apprehension grew more dark and carnal, the
Lord having some Time before withdrawn his divine Light, by which my spiritual
Eye discerned, and left me to the Exercise of my humane Reason; so that my
Apprehensions of spiritual Things were formed and determined accordingly.

At length it pleased God to begin to open my Understanding in some spiritual
Doctrines; and as I saw further, I spoke plainer, at which they were offended,
and said, I preached up Quaker Doctrine, and if I went on, I would bring in
Quakerism among them: I told them, I knew the Lord was inspiring my Mind with
divine Understanding, and the more I searched the Scriptures, the more I was
consumed therein, and therefore could not be confined to such Doctrines as
pleased them, but must perform my Duty according as the Lord would be pleased
to open my Understanding.

And now I was brought into a great Difficulty again, and considered what I had
best to do; whereupon (though it may be my Weakness) I drew to this Conclusion,
rather to be wholly silent than raise a Disturbance, and so continued for some
Time: Then it was brought to my Consideration again what a dull, lifeless Frame
I was in, notwithstanding my zealous and diligent Performance of the outward
Observations; and in this contemplative Frame the Lord was pleased to incline
my Mind again toward the Quakers, very contrary to my Expectation or Desire,
the Apprehension whereof greatly surprised me; for the many Difficulties that
lay in my Way came into my Mind like an overflowing Inundation. The Baptists
observing my melancholy distressed Condition, enquired the Reason of it, which
I was free to inform them; then they came often to visit me again, some
treating me smoothly, and some roughly. I told them, I had now wholly committed
my self to God for his Directions, and had a Faith and Hope raised in me, that
he would make me sensible what his Pleasure was concerning me; that I had
resolved to have no Regard to any mortal Creature, and intended not to be led
by fair Means, nor driven by foul, and designed not to be confused as I had
been, and therefore desired them to be wholly silent, and let me alone. Then I
kept several Days of Fasting and Prayer to God for his Direction, that he would
be pleased to discover to me, whether those Drawings proceeded from him or from
Satan, the which I could not now distinguish to my Satisfaction; so that I was
in great Fear and Trembling: I thought if this Inclination proceeded from
Satan, I should be undone, If I went forward in Obedience to him; and if it was
from God, I also trembled at the Thoughts of keeping back and being disobedient
to him; therefore I concluded to keep my Mind in a still, quiet, passive Frame,
resolving to stand still, and neither step forward nor backward, but resign my
self up to God, patiently to wait for his Appearance and Direction.

At length it pleased God to shine into my Heart by his divine, resplendent
Light, to my great Joy and Satisfaction; and at the same Time renewed my
Inclination toward the Quakers: And finding my Mind growing very uneasy and
disatisfied again amongst the Baptists, I had Thoughts of going to the Quaker's
Meeting; but calling to Remembrance my former Mismanagement, I thought I would
now be more deliberate, and make no Alteration but on a more solid and thorough
Examination.

Then I set my self again to examine into the Baptists Principles and
Performances; and the more I searched the more Cause of Disatisfaction I
discovered; for I plainly discerned, that the Tendency thereof was to lay the
Soul down, and lull it asleep on lifeless Principles and Performances, and many
of them were such as I could not stand by or maintain. Then I thought I would
enquire into the Quakers Principles; but I soon found that the Prejudices which
I had received from the Representations of Keith, Bugg, Hox, Fal^^, and others,
greatly unqualified me for an Impartial Enquiry. Then I considered that these
were all their professed Adversarys, and it may be they may misrepresent them;
and I was the rather inclined to think so, because I had then by me a Book of
Keith's, writ against the Quakers wherein I found he plainly owns in one part
what he denies in another, affirms, and then contradicts himself; and from this
Piece of absolute Confusion and Self-contradiction I was instructed to lay by
all Prepossessions and Prejudices, and enquire of themselves, whom I thought
best know their own Principles* I got some of their Books, which contained a
Declaration of their Principles, and in my impartial Enquiry I found them
grossly misrepresented; for their Principles were all substantially proved by
the Scriptures, and that the proper Tendency of them was to promote a
spiritual, pure, and holy Life, and to bring the Souls that are led by them
into Unity and Communion with God, and to set forth the Power and Glory of the
Gospel Dispensation. And though I once thought this People to be the most weak
and ignorant of all, I found them in spiritual Understanding and Experience to
be the wisest of all; and admired my own former Ignorance, in Comparison of
that admirable Understanding I found amongst them. Then I set my self to
enquire into their Constitution, Orders and Discipline, and found the
Conclusion far beyond my Expectation; for though I have read the Constitution,
Orders and Discipline, of most of the reformed Churches in Europe, yet I can
truly declare, that I believe this People in all Respects to be the most
harmonious, religious, and perfect, of any religious Body of People on the Face
of the Earth: So that the more I saw the more I admired, and said in my Heart,
Is this the People that are so despised by all, that all Denominations of
Christians, though greatly opposing one another, yet all combine against this
People? The Reason I apprehend to be in part, that their Principles and
Constitution are built on the Wisdom of God revealed unto them by his Spirit,
that searches the deep things of God; and others beholding them with the Eye
of humane Reason, which cannot understand the Things of the Spirit of God, and
to which the Wisdom of God seems Foolishness they cannnot be comprehended until
a spiritual Eye is opened in them that behold them; and also their Principles
and Constitution tending above all others to exalt the Kingdom of Christ, and
to destroy the Kingdom of Satan, he fills the World with Prejudices against
them; and because they are not of the World, but are chosen by Christ out of
the World, to testify that the Works thereof are evil, therefore the World
hates them. Then I could behold them and say, How goodly are thy Tents, O
Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel! And yet the many great Difficulties that
lay in my Way, detained me among the Baptists. At length, one Morning as I was
in the Baptists Meeting, I found an exceeding powerful Visitation of God,
strongly enclining my Mind, and the inshining Light of Christ directing me
toward the Quakers; so that I could hardly sit out the Meeting. This
Visitation conquered all carnal reasoning and fleshly Conference, and raised in
me a fixed Resolution, in the Strength of the Lord, to bear the Cross and
despise the Shame, and come what would, I would no longer delay, but give up to
the Divine Influence; and in the Afternoon I went to the Quakers Meeting, where
I observed the solid grave Composedness, and humble Deportment of the People,
who plainly discovered their Minds were given up to the Business their
Ministers declared they were met for, (that is,) to worship God in Spirit and
Sincerity.

I had not come long to their Meetings, being emptied of Partiality and
Prejudice, but found what I longed to enjoy, to my great Joy and Satisfaction,
which was the Crown and Glory of all, that God was manifestly among them,
making their Meetings and Worship refreshing and strengthening to the Soul;
whereby I was prevailed upon to join my self in spiritual Unity with them, and
can truly declare, for the Encouragement of all other religious Enquirers, that
the Lord upon a spiritual Account, has fully satisfied me for all the Troubles
and Difficulties I have passed through: To whom, for all his Blessings and
merciful Dealings toward me, be rendered as His Due, and my Duty, Thanksgiving,
Glory and Praise, for ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

