Mr. Foxcroft's SERMON Before the GENERAL COURT After the EARTHQUAKE.

THE Voice of the LORD, FROM The Deep Places of the EARTH.

A SERMON Preached on the Thursday-LECTURE in BOSTON, in the Audience of the
GENERAL COURT, at the opening of the Sessions, Nov. 23. 1727. Three Weeks after
the EARTHQUAKE.

By Thomas Foxcroft.

Amos iii. 8. The Lion has rored: who will not Fear? The Lord GOD has spoken,
who can but Prophesy?

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed for S. GERRISH, at the lower end of Cornhill.
MDCCXXVII.

In the House of Representatives, Nov. 23. 1727.
ORdered, That Mr. Thomas Cushing, Mr. Samuel Wells and Mr. John Foster wait
on the Rev. Mr. Thomas Foxcroft, with the Thanks of the House for his Sermon
Preached before them at the Public Lecture this Day, and desire a Copy of the
same for the Press.

Wm. Dudley, Speaker.

THE Voice of the LORD, FROM The deep Places of the Earth.
PSALM XCV. 4, 7, and 8th Verses. IN his Hand are the deep Places of the Earth
-- To day, if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, as in the
Provocation, and in the day of Temptation in the Wilderness.


REASON or Thought is that excellent Power in Man, by which he is nearly allied
to the Angelick World, and advanced above the Level of sensitive Beings here
below. It Is one essential Character of the Divine Image instamp'd on Man at his
Creation: and as the regular Exercise of this noble Power is one of the
brightest Ornaments of Humanity, so the highest and best Object of our Knowledge
and Contemplation is the Blessed GOD, whom to know is Life eternal. But then as
the Glory of GOD is very conspicuously displayed in the things which his Hand
has formed; so his Creatures and Works, with the greatest Justice, challenge a
Room in our Thoughts, and demand our deliberate Attention to them.

AS the Works of Nature and Grace, so the Works of Providence, are to be
seriously considered by us, if we would show our selves Men. Who is wise, and
he will observe these Things: Prudent, and he shall know them? The Works of the
Lord are great; sought out of all Them that have Pleasure therein. Remember
then that thou magnify his Works which Men behold. To consider them indeed in
their Essence and natural Causes and Properties, is not so much the Business of
the Christian, as the Philosopher. But the same things which are the Subjects
of Philosophy, do under different Respects, as they are referred to their
Efficient, and Final Cause, also come into Consideration in Divinity. -- Hence
the Scriptures do every where lead us into Contemplations on the Works of
Nature, and various Phenomenon or Events that come to pass in the World, as the
Works of GOD; whose Efficiency runs through and influences all Second Causes, and
enters into every Effect; preserves the Being and Powers of all the Creatures,
and directs all their motions through all and above all their next inferior
Ends, to GOD himself as the last End of all. Of Him, and through Him, and to
Him, are all Things; to Whom be Glory for ever.

THE Doctrine of a Divine Providence, whereby the vast Variety of Creatures and
Things in the Universe, are powerfully upheld in their Existence, Operation,
and beautiful Order, and wisely directed to the several Ends and Uses they were
made for; is one of the first Dictates of Reason, and abundantly confirmed by
Revelation, which teaches us the unlimited Extent of almighty Providence,
unfolds many Mysteries in the Divine Conduct, and shows us infinite Perfections
and Beauties shining in the Works of GOD: -- Calls us to Adoration and Praise,
and teaches us to acknowledge GOD in every Appearance and Event, and to consider
the Operations of his Hand, with a suitable Application to our selves, and
Improvement to the Ends of Devotion; so as not only to see the Name of GOD
written upon every Dispensation of Providence, but also to hear his Voice,
comport with his wise Designs, and engage our Hearts in the Love, Fear, and
Service of Him, who is over all GOD blessed for evermore.

THIS Observation is but agreeable to the Scope of the Psalm before us; where
the devout Psalmist stirs up himself and others to praise GOD, with a holy Joy
and humble Awe, from an affecting Sense of his infinite Greatness and Goodness,
and of their special Obligations, and Relation to him as a peculiar People: And
he calls upon his Nation to live as well as speak the Praises of GOD, to lend
an obedient Ear to his Voice, without which all their Songs of Praise would be
but an Abomination to Him, an empty Sound yea lothesome Flattery. And he
presses them to an instant Compliance: To day if ye will hear his Voice. --
Some take it as a wish, O that you would hear his Voice, and be obedient,
without delay! And no longer harden your hearts, as they of old in the
Provocation and day of Temptation, lest you provoke GOD to destroy you by awful
Judgments, even as He did them, whose Carcases fell in the Wilderness, and to
whom He swear, they should not enter into his Rest: So they could not enter in
because of Unbelief. They were a rebellious and stiffnecked Generation; full of
Infidelity, Murmuring, and Disobedience. They saw the Works of GOD, both his
Miracles of Mercy and of Judgment; and yet they were not to be wrought upon by
these things. Neither the Goodness of GOD in the most eminent Deliverances, nor
his Severity in tremendous Judgments, whether on their Enemies, or on some
among themselves, would prevail to lead them to Repentance. Particularly when
Korah and his Company were for their Murmurings destroyed suddenly by an
Earthquake, and devouring Fire, though the Remnant of the People were
affrighted for the present, and fled at the Shrieks of their sinking Friends,
saying, Lest the Earth swallow us up also: Nevertheless after Peace was spoken
to them, we find them the very next day returned unto Folly, and acting over
the same Perverseness and Unbelief, which their Companions had so awfully
perished for. Numb. 16.41. But on the Morrow all the Congregation of the
Children of Israel murmured again. Though they had seen so many fall before them,
yet they would not take warning: Though GOD had signalised his Goodness and
Patience in reprieving them from deserved Perdition, yet they repented not to
give Him Glory; but turned his Grace into Wantonness, and after their Hardness
and impenitent Hearts treasured up unto themselves Wrath; so that the Plague
brake in upon them, and GOD would have consumed them all as in a Moment, had
not Moses and Aaron fallen on their Faces, and quickly made an Atonement for
them.

NOW these Things were written for our Admonition. Hence the Apostle writing to
the Christian Hebrews, makes use of the awful Example of Israel's Fall in the
Wilderness, as a loud Caution to them. Heb. 3.7, etc. Wherefore as the Holy
Ghost says, To Day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, as in
the Provocation. -- Take Heed, Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil
Heart of Unbelief,. in departing from the living God. And in the 15th Verse, he
resumes the Quotation he had made (which you observe is from our Text) and he
brings home the Words of the Psalmist, by a particular Application, to the
Christians he was writing to; as if that Scripture was of equal Concern to the
present Generation, as to former Ages. And in the 4th Chapter he repeats the
Words again, and warns the Christian Hebrews to labor lest any Man fall after
the same Example of Unbelief. GOD'S Wrath will as soon flame out against
impenitent Christians, as against Unbelieving Jews; against the present, as
well as against any former Generation of his People; against his People in
Canaan, as well as against his People in the Wilderness.

HENCE then the Admonition in the Text belongs to Us in these Days, as much as
to those of the Psalmist's or the Apostle's Times. And O that the Counsel here
given may be acceptable to this People of GOD! That we may be prevailed with to
give a speedy Attention to the Call of our GOD, whose Voice has been crying to
the City and Land in a Variety of awful Providence; and particularly in the
late surprising Earthquake, which spread a sudden and universal Terror among
us! -- In a most calm serene Night, just as we were composing our selves to
Rest, a dreadful Sound struck our Ears, the Earth trembled and our Houses shook
in a fearful manner. It was on the Night after the Lord's Day ( October. 29.) a
little more than half an hour past Ten, that the first and great Shake was
felt: -- when the Heavens were most serene, the Atmosphere in a perfect Calm,
and there had been no generally observed Presages of any such Event.

Some say, Before they were sensible of the Shock, they saw Flashes of Light
glance by their Windows, and others observed their Dogs give a sudden bark, as
when affrighted. But before any could look about them, to know the meaning of
these things, they heard first a gentle Murmur, like a small ruffling Wind, and
then a more noisy Rumbling, as of Thunder at some Distance: which seemed to
approach nigher, and grew louder, till it roared terribly; and then we felt our
Houses totter and reel, with the tremulous Motion and Heaving of the Earth, as
if they would tumble down into Ruins.

It Is though it the greatest Earthquake this Country ever knew. Had the first
Concussion lasted a few Minutes longer, or been repeated often with equal
Force, it is probable much Damage had been done: But by the Mercy of GOD, the
Violence was soon over (I believe it scarce exceeded a Minute and half) and
they were but feebler Shakings, that followed, the same Night; or that have in
some Places since been perceived: For several Towns to the Northward have, for
some Weeks now, been scarce a Day free from the rumbling Noise, and fainter
Shocks.

As to the Extent of the Earthquake, it is beyond what has been common. We are
already informed, it reached Five Hundred Miles. And the Time of the first
Shock seems to have been in all parts with little or no observable Variation --
So that the inflamed Damp, or subterraneous Fermentation, which was the
Principle of this great Earthquake, must needs be emphatically in the deep
Places of the Earth; and there appears a mavelous Hand of the ALMIGHTY in it.


Verily it is a Night to be much observed and remembered, for the uncommon
Terror, and the great Deliverance. And surely it cannot be forgotten, at least
while the Repetition of the doleful Murmurs and Shakes is continued, as we hear
it is yet in diverse Places. Last Lord's Day Evening it is said several Towns
were surprised with the roaring Noise.

UPON this extraordinary Occasion you have doubtless all of you already heard
proper Lessons and Admonitions from the Pulpit. Yet I think it meet to stir you
up, by putting you in Remembrance; and hope it will be a word in Season,
especially since it is as it were an Address to the whole Province together, in
our honorable Rulers, and Representatives met at this time in a new Assembly.

AND I beseech you, Brethren, suffer the Word of Exhortation, which speaks to
you in the Psalmist's Language; The LORD is a great GOD, and a great King above
all Gods: In his Hand are the deep Places of the Earth, -- To day if ye will
hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts as in the Provocation, and in the Day of
Temptation in the Wilderness.

IN the Words we have first a Proposition laid down, In his Hand are the deep
Places of the Earth. And then an Exhortation leading us into a proper
Improvement of that general Truth, To day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not
your Hearts. Which is enforced by the awful Consideration of the Fall and
Destruction of the unbelieving Israelites in the Wilderness, who tempted and
provoked the most high GOD, so that He was wroth with his Inheritance, and
abhorred his People.

IN discoursing on the Text, I shall proceed in the Order and Method of the
Psalmist: First, I shall say something to illustrate the Truth he asserts here:
Secondly, I shall inculcate the Duty he exhorts to. And finally press the
Motive taken from the Example of the Israelites that sinned and fell in the
Wilderness.

I shall begin with the Psalmist's Pro position, which you may take for the
Doctrine or Ground of my Discourse,

IN the LORD'S Hand are the deep Places of the Earth.

THE Meaning is, That the whole Earth is the LORD'S, and even from it is Center,
and in all it is Parts, is supported and governed by a Divine Power and
Influence. GOD has the Propriety, and the Disposal of all.

(1.) HE has a Propriety every where, and even the deep Places of the Earth are
his Possession.

THIS appears the Meaning in part from what follows; The Strength of the Hills
is HIS also; The Sea is HIS, and He made it; and his Hands formed the dry Land.

IT was GOD that originally gave Being to the Earth; 'Twas the Product of his
mighty Power, the Contrivance of his Wisdom, and Efflux of his Goodness. The
holy Scriptures every where ascribe the Creation of the Earth to GOD, and
mention it in many elegant and lofty Descriptions of the great Creator and
Sovereign of all Things, as a mavelous Display of his adorable Perfections; a
glorious Piece of divine Workmanship Psalm. 102 35 and 104.5. Isa. 51.13. Jer.
51 15.
. Yea we find the Almighty challenging it as his peculiar Glory Isa 44 24. Isa.
48 12, 13. Job 38 4,-7.
.

NOW therefore, if GOD created the Earth, He must needs have an indisputable
Right of Propriety in it. Hence the Scriptures do frequently assert his Title.
Thus, Deuteronomy. 10.14. Behold, the Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens is the Lord's
thy God, the Earth also with all that therein is. Psalm. 24.1. The Earth is the
Lord's, and the fullness thereof; the World, and they that dwell therein. And so
our Text, In his hand are the deep Places of the Earth: the subterraneous
Springs and Mines; the abundance of the Sea, and the Treasures hid in the Sand.
Yea He tells us, Job 41.11. Whatsoever is under the whole Heaven is mine.

INDEED it is said, GOD has given the Earth to the Children of Men: but it
means only, That he has lent or let it out to them: Given it them for a
Possession to occupy for the present. We are but Tenants: He is the Landlord,
and has reserved to Himself the whole Property. Even our very Houses, with all
their Furniture, and our Lands, with all the Improvements upon them; all the
Produce upon the Surface, and all the Riches within the Bowels of the Earth,
are the LORD'S. All the Ends of the Earth, and all the secret Places of it;
even the Regions that are out of all human Sight and Reach, They and their rich
Contents are His: Not only under his Eye, but in his Hand, possessed by him as
much as any other parts of the World.

THIS shows the unsearchable Riches and Greatness of GOD. Agreably the Psalmist
says, Great is the Lord: In his Hand are the deep Places of the Earth. Surely
none of the great Men of the Earth, that trust in their Wealth, and boast
themselves in the Multitude of their Riches, can vie with GOD. However large
their Possessions, though they have added House to House, and Field to Field, and
extended their Purchases or Conquests so far that they seem to be placed almost
alone in the Earth; yet they cannot compate with GOD: for He is Lord of the
whole Earth; the utmost parts of the Earth, and the deep places of it, are his
Possession; while the Richest of Men possess only some small spots of the upper
Strata. Let this Reflection teach Men Humility. -- And let it teach us to
admire the Condescension of GOD in accepting the Alms and Devotions of his
People. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be
able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and of
thine own have we given thee. Surely He is not ministered to by Men's Hands, as
though He needed any thing, seeing that He is Lord of Heaven and Earth. Hence He
put a slight upon the legal Sacrifices, in those Terms, Psalm. 50.12. If I were
hungry, I would not tell thee: for the World is mine, and the fullness thereof.

Further, THIS teaches us the Blessedness of Them that have an Interest in the
LORD as their GOD! Behold, Happy is the Man whose Hope is in the Lord. They
that have Him for their Portion may be said to possess all Things: Things
present and Things to come, all are theirs, 1 Cor. 3.22. Hence Psalm. 89.11, 12,
15. The Heavens are thine, the Earth also is thine: as for the World, and the
fullness thereof, thou have founded them. The North and the South thou have
created them: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy name. Blessed are the
People that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O Lord in the light of thy
Countenance.

In a word, THIS Reflection affords a Motive to Obedience; because GOD is able
out of his rich Stores abundantly to reward us. Exodus 19.5. Now therefore, If
ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar
Treasure unto me above all People: for all the Earth is mine. Particularly it
is a strong Incentive to Charity and Bounty, in all those Instances which GOD
requires of us. For all the Store that we have prepared comes of his Hand, and
is all his own. He justly therefore expects that we honor Him with our
Substance: and in special by willingly expending upon pious and charitable
Uses, the Proportions which he has out of our Estates and Incomes separated to
such Ends. We are solemnly charged to give, every Man as he is able, according
as GOD has prospered him Deuteronomy. 16.17. 1 Cor. 16.2
. And if we withhold more than is meet, He charges us with Stealth and
Injustice. Mal. 3.8. Will a Man rob God? yet ye have robbed me: but ye say,
Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Wherefore as we would not
incur the Guilt of Injustice, as well as Ingratitude, let us see to it that we
be ready to distribute, willing to communicate. To do Good and to communicate,
forget not: for with such Sacrifices GOD is well pleased. Render to all their
dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Honor to whom Honor, Charity to whom
Charity. Bring ye all the Tithes into GOD'S Storehouse, and prove me now
herewith, says the Lord, if I will not pour you out a Blessing, so that your
Barns shall be filled with Plenty, and ye shall dwell in a delightsome Land,
says the Lord of Hosts, the most High GOD, Possessor of Heaven and Earth.

I pass now to say,

(2.) ANOTHER Thing implied may be, That GOD Upholds the Earth in it is Being,
and continues it is several Virtues, Riches and Ornaments.

THE Earth, and all it is deep Places, He holds in his Hand, and keeps from
Desolation. Should He withdraw His sustaining Influence but for a moment, the
Earth would immediately return to it is primitive Chaos, or relapse into
Nothing. By his Almighty Fiat the Earth, with it is immense Stores and
Treasures, started into Being; and He upholds all Things by the same Word of
his Strength. No Creature has a Power of Self-preservation; nor can one
preserve another: but all depend upon the First Cause, and equal is the
Efficiency of the Almighty, in the Sustentation of the Earth, as in it is
original Creation.

THE upholding and preserving of this visible World is every where in holy
Scripture declared the Work of his omnipotent Arm, and celebrated as one of the
high Glories of infinite Majesty. Jer. 51.15. He has made the Earth by his
Power; He has established the World by his Wisdom. -- When He had created the
Earth, He fixed this vast Globe on it is Center, and settled the Orders and Uses
of all Things therein. Hence we read, Psalm, 104.5. Who laid the Foundations of
the Earth, or as it is in the Margin, Has founded the Earth upon her Bases.
This vast Terraqueous Globe has no visible Foundations to support it, no
Pillars to rest upon, nor Axletree on which it hangs; but is suspended in the
Air, poised with it is own weight, we know not how. A Mystery this is,
celebrated by all Philosophers as one of the inscrutable Arcana of Nature, and
the Result of Divine Power and Wisdom. Job mentions it with wonder, Chap. 26.7.
He stretches out the North over the empty Place, and hangs the Earth upon
Nothing. When GOD spoke to Job out of the Whirlwind, among other Challenges, He
made that, Chap. 38.5, 6. Who has laid the measures thereof, if thou know?
or who has stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the Foundations thereof
fastened? or who has laid the Cornerstone thereof? "The vast Bulk of the Earth
is modeled as regularly as if it had been done by Line and Measure": And
retains to this Day the same Figure and Dimensions that it had at first;
continued by the Power of GOD, who laid the Cornerstone thereof, which
preserves the Parts of it in a just Consistence, and saves them from crumbling
into Confusion. And He also fastened the Foundations, so that this prodigious
Weight has kept through many Ages it is primitive Situation, which gives it still
the Advantage of the Atmosphere, and the heavenly Orbs round about it. This is
the Work of GOD. His strength sets fast the Mountains, and He is the
Confidence of all the Ends of the Earth. He comprehends the Dust of the
Ground in a measure, and weighs the Hills in a Balance. He visits the dark
Caverns of the Earth, and preserves it is Bowels from gushing out. He guards the
Earth from the Violence of the Sea, and continues the ancient Division of the
Waters from the dry Land. He sets Bars to the Ocean, and holds the mighty Abyss
in the Hollow of his Hand. He poises this terraqueous Globe so equally on every
side; maintains a just Proportion of the Elements, and the convenient
Distribution of solid and fluid Bodies.

HE also preserves the different Natures of Things, their essential Qualities,
and original Instincts, or Tendencies to the various Ends and Uses they were
adapted and designed for. The Laws of Gravitation and Magnetism, and the Law of
Instinct, those mysterious Contrivances of His infinite Wisdom, are established
in the Word by his Almighty Hand; by which Means the several Parts of the Earth
afford their various Productions for the Support and Service of it is
Inhabitants, in their innumerable Species, and with a most surprising Harmony
all Things conspire to serve the particular Purposes they were made for, which
terminate in the Benefit of the Universe and Glory of the Creator. Well may we
make those Reflections, with the devout Psalmist Psalm. 104.24. -- 119.90, 91.
-- 74.16.17.
, O Lord, how manifold are thy Works! In Wisdom have Thou made them all: The
Earth is full of thy Riches; so is the great and wide Sea: wherein are
Creatures innumerable. These wait all upon Thee. Thou preservest Man and Beast.
Thy Faithfulness is unto all Generations: Thou have established the Earth, and
it abides. They continue this Day according to thine Ordinances: for all are
thy Servants. The Day is thine; the Night also is thine. -- Thou have set all
the Borders of the Earth: Thou have made Summer and Winter.

O let us stand up and bless the Lord our GOD for ever and ever; whose glorious
Name is exalted above all Blessing and Praise. And let all the Earth fear the
Lord: let all the Inhabitants of the World stand in Awe of Him: for He spoke,
and it was made: He commanded, and it stood fast Psalm 33.8.
.

In a word, LET the People of GOD improve this Consideration to confirm their
Faith, and invigorate their Hope in the Covenant of Grace, that it shall stand
fast for ever, even as the Covenant of Nature. So GOD himself has taught his
People to reflect and argue, Jer. 31.35, 36, 37. Thus says the Lord, which
gives the Sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the Moon and of the
Stars for a light by night; which divides the Sea when the Waves thereof rore;
the Lord of hosts is his name. If those ordinances depart from before me, says
the Lord, then the seed of Israel also shall depart from being a Nation before
me forever. Thus says the Lord, If Heaven above can be measured, and the
Foundations of the Earth searched, out beneath, I will also cast off all the
seed of Israel, for all that they have done, says the Lord. So Chap. 33.20,
21, 25, 26.

IT may be added now in the last place,

(3.) GOD not only preserves, but also governs the Earth, and all Things that
are therein.

THIS Act is implied in the former, and the Right of Dominion is justly founded
thereon. Neh. 9.6. Thou, even Thou art Lord alone: Thou have made the Heaven,
Earth and Seas, and all that is therein; and Thou preservest them all. -- So
the Psalmist, The Lord is a great God, a great King above all gods* In his Hand
are the deep Places of the Earth.

THE Government is in his Hand; His right Hand, and his holy Arm governs the
Wheels of universal Nature. In his Hand is Power and Might, and He reigns
over all. Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth his Footstool.

HE governs the Rational World; does what He pleases among the Armies of
Heaven above, and amongst the Inhabitants of the Earth below. The Kingdom is
the Lord's, and He is the Governor among the Nations. In his Hand it is to make
great, or bring low; to make rich, or poor. The Lord is the Judge: He puts
down one, and sets up another. For the Pillars of the Earth are the Lord's,
and He has set the World upon them. He governs in all Societies, and rules
over all Individuals; restraining, guiding, punishing, or blessing, as He
pleases. He rules by his Power for ever: His Eyes behold the Nations: let not
the Rebellious exalt themselves. But rejoice in the Lord ye Righteous. The Lord
reigns: GOD is my King of old, working Salvation in the midst of the Earth.

HE also presides over the Natural World. He extends his Care and Influence to
all his Creatures, both small and great. None are so little as to escape his
Notice: Nor any too big for Him to manage. Whatsoever the Lord pleases, that
does He in Heaven and in Earth, in the Seas and all deep Places, Psalm. 135.6.
Nature is not left to govern it self; is not resigned to the wild Steerage of
blind Chance: But GOD sits upon the Circle of the Earth, as a wise and
powerful Director, influencing all natural Causes, and disposing all Effects
and Accidents, Periods, Revolutions, and Successions of Things.

THE glorious Orbs of Light, that roll over our Heads, are preserved by Him in
their Beauty and Order, and directed by Him in all their Motions and Effects.
The Earth also under our Feet, and the Air we breathe in, are under his
absolute Dominion.

HE made the Elements, and He governs them: directs their natural Powers, and
orders all their Influences and Operations; suspending, or enlarging, as He
will. Men are indeed sometimes apt to imagine, that the Elementary World is
under no Direction, that a wild Loose is given to natural Causes, and that they
act with an unbounded Liberty. But verily in the midst of all the Confusion and
Impetuosity that is seen at any time, GOD inspects, restrains, and overrules,
to make every thing subserve his own blessed Purposes. Hence that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 148.7, 8. Praise the Lord from the Earth, ye Dragons and all
Deeps, Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, and stormy Wind, fulfilling his Word.

IN the Depths as well as Heights, GOD shows his Power and Dominion. He sends
forth his Commandment upon Earth; His Word runs very swiftly Psalm. 147.15.
: and none can resist his Will, countermand his Orders, or retard their
Execution.

THIS earthly Globe is continually passing under Changes and Revolutions. There
are perpetual Removes and Alterations, Increases and Decays, visible on the
Face of the Earth; and doubtless the like in it is interior Parts. There is a
kind of Circulation among natural Principles; a Revolution of the Elements.
Thus the terrestial Matter washed off the Earth by Floods, is a great part of
it exhaled up into the Atmosphere with the daily ascending Vapors, and
restored to the Ground by Rain, Snow and Hail. Again, The Waters which by
various methods of Conveyance are sent forth upon the Earth, are returned back
to the Seas. And so the Elements of Fire and Air mutually lose and gain, by
frequent Condensations and Rarefactions. Insomuch that all these sublunary
Things are in a perpetual Flux and Change: even the most consistent Parts not
exempted. The Earth feels terrible Convulsions in it is very Bosom many times,
so that it groans and trembles: and were it not for the Spiracles or Vulcanoes,
those awful, yet merciful Contrivances of Divine Wisdom, which serve to extract
and evaporate the subterraneous Fumes; innumerable Mischiefs, greater and
oftener than is now known, would befall the World, by Earthquakes, Damps, etc.

NOW, in the midst of all these Vicissitudes of Nature, GOD presides; directing
the most secret and distant Causes, and ordering all their Effects, by his
Power and Wisdom. -- Indeed in all the Revolutions of the World, we may suppose
there would be no proper Tumult or Confusion, were it not for the Permission of
Divine Providence. For the GOD of Nature has so equally poised the Earth on
every side, and formed all Things in Number, Weight and Measure, in such Order
and Harmony, with those Instincts which fit and dispose them to the particular
Uses and Designs they were made for, and so to be subservient to one another,
that we may reasonably conclude our Globe would be free from all those
Violences it sometimes feels, were it not for the Will and Power of Divine
Providence.

THE Almighty Hand of GOD reaches the very Center of our vast Globe, and
equally governs in the inward Parts, and the superficial: So that it is liable
to no Accidents whatever, without his active Concurrence, who works all
things according to the Counsel of his own Will.

IN his Hand are the deep Places of the Earth, says my Text. And therefore all
Events in the habitable World must be the Result of his Efficiency: For the
subterranean Kingdom gives Law to the World we dwell in. The upper Stratum of
the Earth yields us no other Comforts, but what depend upon the Regularity and
Influence of the deep Places beneath, which are the common Magazines of all
Riches.

THE small Fissures and wider Cavities in the low Places of the Earth, as well
as the high Hills and rocky Mountains, appear the Work of Counsel, and are of
indispensable Use to the World. We have not only our Treasures of useful
Minerals and Metals, and Salts from below: but from hence also we have our
Supply of Springs and Rivers. From hence ascend the Vapors, the watery and
fiery Steams, which exhaled by the Sun, form our Clouds, and distill in Rain,
Snow and Dew, that refresh the Earth, and make it Fruitful. From hence likewise
arise the Winds, which fan our Air, and purify the Atmosphere that surrounds
us, from those noxious mineral Exhalations, that tend to breed pestilential
Fevers, and threaten the Health and Lives of Men.

IN a word, All the Seasons of the Year, and the several Circumstances of them,
are very much governed by the subterraneous Regions. Our Wealth and the
valuable Comforts of Life, are mostly of a subterraneanean Extract. Job
observes not only that Iron is taken out of the Earth, and there are the Veins
of Silver and Gold: But he adds, As for the Earth, Out of it comes BREAD. The
vegetable Productions of Nature, the orderly Returns of Seed-time and Harvest,
Cold and Heat, in their due Season, and in a just Proportion, depend very much
upon a regular State of Things in the Mineral Kingdom, and dark Retreats of the
Earth below us.

WHAT follows then, if in GOD'S Hand be the deep Places of the Earth, but that
He must be the supreme Moderator and Disposer of this universal Globe! And
consequently we learn from our Text these two important Lessons:

First, THAT GOD must have the Praise of all the beneficial and beautiful
Appearances in the Kingdom of Nature.

AND then,

Secondly, THAT in all terrible and evil Events, we must see his Hand, and
acknowledge his Providence.

AGREABLY the Scriptures every where teach us to consider GOD as the Author of
all those Benefits and Salvations, which the Earth and it is Inhabitants do
experience. They tell us that He is the Father of Lights and Fountain of Living
Waters. He gives unto all Life and Breath and all Things. He feeds the Fowls
of Heaven, which neither sow nor reap, and he gives the Beast his Food. And He
provideth Bread for Man. It is He that prospers a People in their Trade abroad
and Business at home: makes Zebulun to rejoice in his goings forth, and
Issachar in his Tents: and gives them Power to get Wealth; to suck of the
abundance of the Sea, and the Treasures of the dry Land. He causes his Sun to
rise, and gives the Rain in it is Season; making the Ground to yield it is
Increase, and the Trees their Fruits; and He reserveth to us the appointed
Weeks of the Harvest. When he utters his Voice, there is a multitude of
Waters in the Heavens, and He causes the Vapors to ascend from the Ends of
the Earth: He makes Lightnings with Rain, and brings forth the Wind out of
his Treasures, by which he preserves our Air from stagnating, and prevents the
innumerable Mischiefs that otherwise would be done by poisonous Steams out of
the Earth; and by which also He carries our Ships to the desired Haven. By his
Skill and Power the Depths are broken up, and the Dew and Clouds formed, which
gently distill to refresh the thirsty Ground. He causes the Bud of the tender
Herb to spring forth; makes the Grass to grow, fills the Trees with Sap, and
prepares the Corn; so that the Mountains rejoice, and the little Hills on
every side; the Valleys break forth into Singing, and all the Fields and
Orchards clap their hands for joy. He also preserves the Fruits of the Faith;
gives a suitable Time for Ingathering, and crowns the Year with his Goodness.
Thus He governs the Spring, and Summer, and Autumn.

HE makes also the Winter, and governs all the Affairs and Circumstances of
it. He says to the Snow, Be thou on the Earth, and brings the Cold out of
the North. By the Breath of GOD, Frost is given, and the Breadth of the Waters
is straightened. He casts forth his Ice like Morsels; scatters the Hoar-frost
like Ashes, and gives Snow like Wool: So He covers the Earth as with a
Garment, to cherish the Soil, that it may give Seed to the Sower, and Bread to
the Eater. Moreover, He provides our Fuel; furnishes our Table, preserves our
Health, and makes our Garments warm upon us, in this difficult Season of the
Year: Else who could stand before his Cold? In a word, He returns the Heats and
Thaws of the Spring. He sends out his Commandment, and the frozen Surface of
the Ground melts and softens. He quieteth the Earth by the South Wind: and by
the gradual Increases of the Day and Advances of the Sun, He revives universal
Nature, and strips it of it is Winter-Complexion. He sends forth his Spirit (his
warm and animating Breath) and renews the Face of the Earth.

HENCE then let us give all the Glory to GOD, and celebrate his Wisdom and
Power, his Goodness and Mercy to us from Year to Year, with Thanksgiving and
Praise. O how unworthy are we of the least of his Mercies! Yet He crowns the
Year with a Variety and Plenty of Blessings. What but infinite Goodness could
so triumph over the Unworthiness of sinful Creatures; and be kind to the Evil
and Unthankful! Verily the Earth is satisfied with the Fruit of his Works, and
is full of his Riches. All our Senses present us with numerous Instances of
Divine Goodness. We taste and see that the Lord is gracious: Our Ears also have
heard the Fame thereof. O let us awake up our Glory, to sing and give Praise!
Let the Heaven and Earth praise the Name of GOD; the Seas also, and every thing
therein. O come let us sing unto the Lord (says the Psalmist in the Context)
let us make a joyful Noise to the Rock of our Salvation. Let us come before his
Presence with Thanksgiving, and make a joyful Noise unto Him with Psalms. For
the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods: In his Hand are the
deep Places of the Earth. He is our God, and we are the People of his Pasture.

BUT yet the Lord has not left us altogether unpunished. He has been correcting
us with Stripes from Year to Year: and this Year in a particular manner, He
has been alarming us by a Variety of awful Dispensations, which call for our
solemn Observation and Remembrance. Our Text teaches us to look above natural
Causes, and ascribe to a Divine Hand all the evil Accidents which happen in the
Earth. The sovereign GOD controuls and commands all Things here below, so as to
make them even forget their particular Instinct, act contrary to their native
Tendency, and desert their proper Place, according to his absolute Will and
Pleasure. Who is a strong Lord, like unto HIM, whom Fire, and Wind, and Seas
obey; who looks upon the Hills and they tremble! All Meteors and Elements are
obsequious to Him, who gave Nature it is Laws, and directs it is Motions as He
pleases. His Way is in the Whirlwind, and in the Storm, in the Thunder and
Lightning, in the Flame of Fire, in the stifling Damp, and tremendous
Earthquake* -- All which, and other Judgments, we have this Year been visited
with. O let us see the Hand of GOD lifted up, and tremble at his repeated loud
Reproofs.

IN this Town particularly, how has GOD been calling to contend by Fire once
and again! Though in his great Mercy He has set Bounds to this wild Element, and
soon extinguished the threatening Flames.

IN the Beginning of the Year what uncommon Colds and Sicknesses (occasioned by
noxious Vapors out of the Earth) prevailed every where: And what a Mortality
since in several Towns! Though, blessed be GOD! It has been in general a healthy
Year.

WHAT repeated awful Instances have we seen of very sudden Death! And one GREAT
Instance, which has put the whole British Dominions into universal Mourning, by
the Bereavement of our late glorious KING; of happy Memory! Though blessed be GOD
the Judge, who in as sudden a manner filled the Throne with another Protestant
King, and is incircling Him with Glory and Happiness, in a fruitful VINE by the
sides of his House and flourishing Olive-Plants around his Royal Table.

IT has been a Year filled with a Variety of strange Accidents, and surprising
Mortalities, whereby we have been alarmed from time to time. In particular,
because of it is obvious Reference to my present Subject, I would mention the
awful Instance of the fatal Damp, by which two Men perished almost in the same
Moment in one Well In Boston, July 19. this surprising Accident happened. The
Well had not been opened for many Years before: and in going down to examine it,
the Master and Servant successively were both smothered; by some mineral
Exhalation, or other suffocating Vapor, they were immersed in. And a Third
essaying to follow them, with a Rope lashed about him, had not descended two
Yards before he felt his Breath expiring: but being instantly drawn up, he soon
recovered. -- Surely every Man at his best Estate is Vanity. LORD, make me to
know how frail I am!
.

WHAT an uncommon Summer have we had, for Heat, the most extreme, and of long
Continuance! By which GOD appointed over us Terror, and seemed to intimate his
fiery Indignation. Yet notwithstanding the extraordinary Drought, which
threatened us, He has in his great Goodness allowed us a plentiful Harvest of
many Fruits of the Earth.

MOREOVER, How has the LORD of Hosts been frequently uttering his Voice from
the Skies in very dreadful Accents of amazing Thunder, and shooting out his
incensed Arrows from above: Whereby several received Damage in their Substance
One and another had their Buildings hurt, and their Beasts killed. And some
Persons were struck, but I think none given over to Death.
; though through the sparing Mercy of GOD, no human Life has been lost. -- Once in
particular how did He set the Heavens over our Heads on a Blaze, in a most
unusual and surprising manner; bright Streams of Fire darting incessantly in
every part: So that we though it we saw some Resemblance of the Day of GOD, when
the Lord JESUS shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming Fire; and many were
sore afraid! His Lightnings illuminated the World; the Earth saw and trembled.

Again, HE prepared the Stormy Wind, and blew upon us with an horrible Tempest.
He sent forth the Blast of his Mouth, and caused the Rain of his Strength to
come down. So that universal Nature seemed to be out of Course; the Foundations
of the World breaking up, and the Pillars of Heaven falling down. It was a very
distressing Season, both on the Sea and Land. And all the People (as they in
Ezra's Time) sat trembling for the great Rain. This Storm was on Sept. 16. "By
it great Damage was done to our Wharves and Shipping; as also to the Fruits of
the Earth, and to many Buildings. Great Numbers of Trees were torn up by the
roots, and several Chimneys blown down. A Kitchen-Chimney falling, beat in the
Roof; killed a Child, and very much wounded several. -- The Storm lasted till
Midnight: And it was very awful the next Morning to see the Desolations that
were made in the Earth. Yet the Prospect was brightened by a very fair Rainbow
in the Heavens; a Sign of the Covenant of GOD, that the Waters should no more
become a Flood to destroy all Flesh.


AND in a few Weeks after, GOD has been pleased to visit us in another and more
unusual Form, by EARTHQUAKE, and great Noise, which may be called Subterranean
Thunder; a Thunder-Storm under ground, in the deep Places of the Earth. This I
shall take Notice of with a little more of Enlargement.

PHILOSOPHY teaches us to suppose that the Earth is not a perfectly solid Body,
but has mighty Caverns within it, and innumerable lesser Veins and hollow
Spaces; where are Fountains of Water, or Treasures of Winds and Vapors. And
the whole Globe is filled with vast Stores of Fire and combustible Materials.
These appear to be the Provisions in Nature for those terrible Convulsions the
Earth is sometimes thrown into.

BUT the Lord of Hosts is the grand EFFICIENT. All the Power and Skill of Men
cannot produce an Earthquake. It must be said of it, This is the Finger of GOD.
There have been some Instances, wherein it is thought physical Reasons have been
wanting, and the Commotion of the Earth entirely miraculous, the immediate
Effect of a supernatural and divine Influence, without any Preparations in
Nature: as that at the giving of the Law, when the Lord descended upon Sinai,
and the whole Mount quaked greatly. So those at the Death and Resurrection of
CHRIST; and others mentioned in Scripture.

HOWEVER, doubtless in ordinary Cases at least, there are natural Causes of
this Phenomenon. But yet the most critical Inquirers into Nature are at a loss
how to account for the generating of the Earthquake, and the Operations of it,
without ascribing a great deal to the more immediate Influence of some
supernatural Power. Naturalists agree in this general Concession, That the
Earthquake is not any regular Motion of Nature, but a Violence to it, and
throws the Earth into a praeternatural State. They confess it is contrary to
the established Laws of the Creation, and results from some mighty Obstruction
to the stated Order and Course of Things. -- But what that Obstruction is, or
what the particular Principle and Ground of it, remains yet an Inquiry that the
most penetrating Philosophers are to this Day perplexed and divided about. Some
derive it is Origin from this natural Cause, and others from that. One ascribes
it chiefly to that Element, and another to this. They mutually oppose one
another's Sentiments: And the most that is said upon this mysterious Appearance
is but Conjectural.

IT seems truly to be a more immediate Act of Providence, than most other
Events. It must be looked upon as a more special Work of GOD; visibly out of
the Course of Nature: produced and governed by the great Creator, who has all
the Wheels of the Universe under his arbitrary Command. He gathers the Wind
in his Fists; binds the Abyss in a Garment; restrains the subterraneous
Fires; and establishes all the Ends of the Earth. His Eye and Hand reach the
profoundest Caverns; and his Footsteps are not known. If the Lord our GOD did
not govern the Elements in our Favor, how would they persecute a guilty World,
by Fire, and Tempest, Plague, and Famine! How soon would the Heavens dissolve
and fall upon us in Cataracts of Vengeance: And the Earth and Sea combine to
destroy all their Inhabitants! Why does not the Earth sink into the mighty
Deep, on the face of which it is stretched out Psalm. 136.6.
? Or what Hand confines and rules the flaming Fires in it is spacious Cavities?
What power visits one City or Country with the desolating Earthquake, and not
another? Verily the same DIVINE Power, which in the Days of Korah created that
new Thing, when the Earth opened, and Multitudes together went down alive into
the Pit.

WHEN the Order of Nature is subverted, the Rule of natural Causes violated,
and praeternatural Commotions happen, all must be ultimately resolved into an
higher Principle, than any second Causes, even the Providence of GOD. When
Things move and act either against or above their own Nature, a superior Power
is to be acknowleg'd: And in some Instances especially, the Earthquake
considered in it is extraornary Circumstances and Effects, must be ascribed to
the more immediate Hand of GOD, as in a sense his alone Work. -- Whatever
subordinate Means and Instruments GOD may see fit to make use of in this
stupendous Event; yet his terrible Majesty appears imprinted upon it in very
peculiar Characters. It has a bright Stamp of Divinity on it is Face; Men behold
in it those clear Impresses of Divine Power, Sovereignty and Greatness, as
irresistibly carry up their Eyes to the First Cause; and they cannot but
apprehend the Invisible GOD therein displaying his Perfections to the World.
The Lord as it were comes down, and at his Presence the Earth shakes and rores.
That is the Language of this Providence, Give Ear, O Heavens; and hear, O
Earth! I will publish the Name of the Lord: Ascribe ye Greatness unto God.
These awful Shocks and Rumblings are designed (as the Thunder and Shakings of
the Heavens Deuteronomy. 4 35, 36. and Exodus 9 29
are) to let us know that the Universe is the LORD'S, and to magnify Him in the
Eyes of his intelligent Creatures. Thus it is said Ezekiel. 38.19 -- 23
, In that day there shall be a great SHAKING in the Land of Israel; So that the
Fishes of the Sea, and the Fowls of the Heaven, and the Beasts of the Field,
and all the Men that are upon the face of the Earth, shall shake at my
Presence, and the Mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep Places shall
fall, and every Wall shall fall to the Ground; etc. Thus will I magnify my
self, -- and I will be known in the Eyes of many Nations, and they shall know
that I am the LORD. -- The Earthquake that Elijah 1 Kin. 19.11.
saw, was to show him the Glory and Majesty of GOD.

WE may further observe,

AS the Earthquake is an eminent Demonstration of the Divine Power and
Presence: So it is usually a Token of Wrath kindled against a Place for the
Wickedness of them that dwell therein.

SOMETIMES indeed it has been a Testimony of the gracious Presence of GOD with
his People, and his Approbation of them. An Instance you have, Acts 4.31. And
when they had prayed, the Place was shaken where they were assembled together;
and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and they spoke the word of God
with boldness. So the Earthquake that destroyed Korah and his rebel Crew, was a
Divine Testimony to Moses and Aaron the Servants of GOD. And that at the
Resurrection of CHRIST was designed, not only as a Signal to give Notice of
that great Event, but also as a Testimony from Heaven to the Majesty and Glory
of his Divine Person. -- Sometimes Earthquakes have been sent to work Salvation
for the Servants of GOD, by destroying their Enemies. The Skies have poured
down Righteousness; the Earth also has opened, and brought forth Salvation.
When Joshua compassed Jericho, we are told, at the Sound of the Trumpet, and
the Shout of the People, the Walls suddenly fell down flat Josh. 6.20.
, and so the City given up into the Hand of Israel. It Is thought it was by an
Earthquake. -- We read, when Jonathan and his Armor-bearer assaulted the
Philistines Garrison, there was a Trembling in the Host; the Garrison trembled,
and the Earth quaked; which struck a Terror upon all the People, and threw them
into the utmost Confusion; so that the Multitude melted away; for they went on
beating down one another 1 Samuel 14.15, 16.
. All imagining each other to be Enemies. I might mention also the Earthquake,
which was the Means of the Apostles Deliverance out of Prison, and a Testimony
from GOD to their Innocence and Divine Mission. Acts 16.25, 26. At Midnight
Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God: and the Prisoners heard them.
And suddenly there was a great Earthquake, so that the foundations of the
Prison were shaken: and immediately all the doors were opened, and every one's
bands were loosed, etc. Thus sometimes the Earthquake is in Token of the Divine
Favor to GOD'S People.

BUT usually it is a Visitation in Displeasure: a Sign of Wrath gone out from
the Lord. Hence it is made the Subject of a Divine Threatening. As you may see,
if you consult the Texts in the Margin Isa. 13.13. So Chap. 24.17, etc. Amos
1.2.
. -- And hence the dreadful Effects of Earthquakes are declared in Scripture
the Tokens of GOD'S Wrath. Isa. 5.24, 25. Because they have cast away the Law
of the Lord of Hosts, therefore the Anger of the Lord is kindled against his
People; and He has stretched forth his Hand and smitten them; and the Hills
did tremble, and their Carcasses were torn in the midst of the Streets. This
might be the Earthquake that Zechary speaks of, in the days of Uzziah King of
Judah Zech. 14 5.
. Which though the Scriptures give no particular Account of; yet it is probable it
was a very awful and destructive one. Hence this Prophet says, Ye shall flee
like as ye fled from before the Earthquake in the Days of Uzziah. Amos dates
his Prophecy two Years before the Earthquake, which in all probability was the
same: And he said, The Lord will roar from Zion; the Habitations of the
Shepherds shall mourn, and the Top of Carmel shall wither. Hear ye, says the
Lord; In the day that I shall visit the Transgressions of Israel upon him, I
will also visit the Altars of Bethel, and I will smite the Winter-house with
the Summer House, and the Houses of Ivory shall perish. I saw the Lord standing
upon the Altar, and He said, Smite the Lintel of the Door, that the Posts may
shake, etc. This was the Threatening and Burden of the Lord by the Prophet Amos.
Now Isaiah and Zechariah, who were younger Prophets, may hint to us the woeful
Accomplishment of it in the forequoted Passages Josephus, the celebrated Jewish
Historian, informs us of some awful Circumstances of this Earthquake in the
Days of Uzziah. It happened upon Occasion of the King's going into the Temple
to burn Incense upon the Golden Altar. Azariah and the Priests opposed him,
saying, It appertains not to thee, Uzziah, but to the Priests. This kindled
the King's Wrath, and he bid them be quiet upon the Peril of their Lives.
Immediately on this Menace there followed a terrible Earthquake, which rent the
Roof the Temple; and tore down great part of a Mountain at some small distance
from the Town, which rolling along choked up the highways, and covered the
King's Gardens all over with Rubbish. [L' Estrange's Josephus, p. 570.] Very
probably it was then GOD smote the Winter-house and Summer House, and the
Bodies of Men were torn to pieces in the midst of the Streets, while they fled
from the falling Mountain. -- So we are told, in the Earthquake in Sicily,
(which happened in the Year 1693,) Great Rocks were thrown down from the
Mountains every where, and great Numbers of People perished in the Houses,
which were beaten down by them in their way, as they rolled along. And in the
terrible Earthquake at Jamaica, which is fresh in the Memory of many among us,
we are told, The Mountains were so thrown in Heaps, as to destroy the Roads;
and one of them splitting, and falling down into level Land, drove all the
Trees before it, entirely ruined a Plantation, and buried the Inhabitants. --
Lowthorp's Philosoph Transact. Vol. 2. p. 407,.413.
.

IT is a surprising Account we have of the Execution done among the Israelites
in the Wilderness by an Earthquake. Numb. 16.31, 32, 33. And it came to pass as
he had made an end of speaking these words, that the ground clave asunder that
was under them: And the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and
their Houses, and all the Men that appertained unto Korah, and all their Goods.
They and all that appertained unto them; went down alive into the Pit, and the
Earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the Congregation. Awful
Instances there have since been of the like Destruction. The Earth has cleav'd
and swallowed Men up, and closed it is Bars upon them In the Jamaica-Earthquake,
it is reported, That in many places the Ground would crack, and open and shut
quick and fast Of these small Openings, several Report, they have seen 2 or 3
hundred at a time; in some whereof many People were swallowed up: Some the
Earth caught by the middle, and squeezed to Death: others had their Heads only
appearing above-ground, many of which the Dogs made their Food. -- Lowthorp p.
415. Doolittle of Earthq. p. 50.
.

SOMETIMES Earthquakes have shook down Men's Houses over them, and buried
Multitudes of Persons in the Ruins Josephus speaks of a terrible Earthquake in
Judea, in the Reign of Herod (but a few Years before the Birth of Christ) which
shook the whole Land in a more grievous manner than had been ever before known,
and destroyed about Thirty Thousand of the Inhabitants in the Ruins of the
Houses, which it overthrew. -- Prideaux Connect. Part II. p. 577.
.

SOMETIMES the Earth has opened, and spued forth vast Quantities of Sand or
Ashes, in which many Houses have been overwhelmed. In the Lucrine Lake near the
City of Puteoli, in Italy, (Anno 1538.) there was an astonishing Eruption of a
new Mountain; which with a hideous roaring Noise vomited such Store of Earth
and Cinders, as overwhelmed all the Buildings thereabout, smothered many
Cattle, and did a great deal of Mischief. -- Genesis Hist. of Earthq. p. 59.

Some Idea of that terrible Eruption we may form, by those which we have seen
in the late Earthquake among our selves. At Newbury, in 5 or 6 Places, were
small Openings of the Earth, at which have been thrown up considerable Heaps of
Cinereous Matter (upwards of an Hundred Cart-loads) by the force of the
subterraneal Ferment.




SOMETIMES there have been Eruptions of Fire, like melted Glass, or burning
Brimstone: which has spread its Flames abroad, and devoured all before it. In
the late dreadful Earthquake at Palermo, we are told, Great Desolations were
made by fiery Torrents, which broke out with great Fury. Many Buildings took
Fire, and were consumed; besides innumerable others that were thrown down by
the violent Shocks of the Earth, and reduced to Heaps of Rubbish. Many Hundreds
of the Inhabitants perished in the Ruins. -- And other parts of Sicily, have
frequently felt amazing Effects of these fiery Eruptions. Many fruitful Villages
have been destroyed, and populous Cities laid in the Dust. In particular
Catania, one of the most ancient and magnificent Cities of the whole Kingdom,
was entirely demolished and lost in an Earthquake; that there hardly remains
any Footsteps of it to be seen. A vast Destruction there was of the numerous
Inhabitants. In the Ruins were heard nothing but Cries, Shrieks, and dying
Groans. Eighteen or Twenty Thousand are said to have perished in that amazing
Tragedy; which happened in the Year 1693. And in other parts of the Island a
vast Number more. [ Lowthorp, Vol II. p 402 Dr. I. Mather, of Earthquakes, p
26] -- So the Country round about the City of Naples in Italy has sustained
great Damages by frequent Eruptions. About the Year 1631. there was a dreadful
Eruption, when Floods of Fire ran in astonishing Streams from the burning
Mountain into the Sea, many Villages were destroyed, and above Thirty Thousand
Persons, with an infinite number of Cattle, perished. -- [ Mill Geograph. p
248.] -- One reports, the Mountain burnt so violently, that by the best of his
Observation, it cast up the Rocks three Miles into the Air. -- Lowth II. p 400.


SOMETIMES the Earth has sunk down, and been overwhelmed with a Flood of Water.
The Mountains have as it were been carried into the midst of the Sea, and the
mighty Waters have filled the Valleys. Houses and Inhabitants have gone down
together, and been covered with the prevailing Inundation. Whole Cities, yea
Countries have been laid under an universal Devastation by this Means. The
Scriptures inform us, That this entire Globe was once drowned with a Flood,
when there was probably (if ever) an universal Earthquake, and all the old
World were destroyed; save eight Souls preserved by a Miracle in Noah's Ark.
But after the Earth's Recovery, it pleased GOD to make a Covenant, that He
would never again let the Waters return to destroy all Flesh. Yet he has
singled out some particular Countries, and made them Instances of the like
destructive Vengeance. Sodom and the adjacent Towns for nigh fourscore Miles
were destroyed in one day by Thunder and Earthquake, by Storm and the Flame of
devouring Fire; and it became one mighty sulphurous Lake: to which perhaps the
Scriptures allude, when they speak of impenitent Sinners being cast into the
Lake of Fire and Brimstone. O what Innumerable Multitudes perished in that
dreadful Overthrow! -- And other Parts of the World since have experienced the
same terrible Effects of Earthquakes A few Miles from Naples is Puteoli, once
the most famous Port in all that Coast, and the delightful Retreat of the Roman
Emperors, but now an inconsiderable Place: Earthquakes and Insults of the Sea
having almost reduced it to Nothing. When the Sea is turbulent, it throws out
several Marks of the Magnificence of the ancient City, among which are
oftentimes very precious Stones, Agats, Amethysts, etc. [ Atlas Geogr. Vol. II.
page 1595.] The Country about it has been miserably torn in pieces by
Earthquakes. The Sea has overwhelmed a Multitude of Palaces; which may be seen
at the bottom of the Water in a calm Day. -- Hudson's Travels, p. 16^

In the terrible Earthquake at Jamaica, some Parts of the Island sunk as Lead
into the mighty Waters, which in a minute or two drowned several hundred
Families. The Streets rose up in Waves, like the Sea, and immediately dropped
down into Pits: Then Floods of Water broke in. Many of the Houses were
swallowed up in an Instant: Multitudes of Corpses were presently seen floating
on the Water over the Tops of Buildings. A large high Mountain was quite
swallowed up; and where it stood, there is a Lake of 4 or 5 Leagues over, etc.
-- [ Atlas Geograph Vol. V. page 561.] -- Mr. Gordon observes of Jamaica, That
Hurricanes and Earthquakes (so frequent in the Caribees) are seldom heard of
there. And he makes this religious Reflection; "Whereupon we may justly impute
that terrible Earthquake ( Anno 1692.) rather to a Moral than a Natural Cause,
viz the many and horrid Abominations abounding amongst the Inhabitants, which
did loudly call for Judgments from Heaven. Geograph Gram p. 393.


.

IN a word, Sometimes Earthquakes have occasioned great Sicknesses, and
pestilential Distempers, by spreading abroad those poisonous Vapors which
infect the Air, and by innumerable Accidents, which often fall out at such
Times. A very great Mortality followed the Earthquake at Jamaica. Vast Numbers
that escaped that, soon after died of a malignant Fever; from Change of Air*
Want of dry Houses, of warm Lodgings, proper Medicines, and other Conveniences:
They died miserably in Heaps. Indeed there was a general Sickness (supposed to
proceed from the hurtful Vapors belched out at the many Openings of the Earth,
which filled the Air with ill Stenches, and made the Sky, that was clear and
blue, now appear dull and reddish, like a red-hot Oven) all over the Island; so
general, that few escaped being Sick. And it is thought it swept away Three
Thousand Lives, Lowthorp, p. 411, 419] After our late Earthquake, I have been
informed, the Atmosphere was observed in one of our Towns to appear in an
universal Flame, without any Thunder or Lightning, which might be the Effect of
some extraordinary Steams out of the Earth. Though I hear not of any prevailing
Sickness upon it.
.

THUS I have enumerated some of the principal Effects of Earthquakes. And now
they must needs appear to us very terrible Judgments, being so fatal many
times, and so extensive in their injurious Influences. Surely these, if any
Events at all, are manifest Indications of GOD'S holy Displeasure. In the Case
of the Israelites that perished in the Gainsaying of Kore, the Earthquake was
expressly declared to be the Vengeance of GOD upon them. By this all Israel
should know that those Men had provoked the Lord, (Numb. 16.30.)

I shall only add here, That Earthquakes may be Tokens of Divine Anger, when
yet no Execution is done, no Injury received. It is not to be doubted but that
was so, which attended the Crucifixion of our blessed LORD. The Scripture-Story
informs us not of any Death or Damage occasioned by it to any Person among all
the Multitude that surrounded the Cross of CHRIST. Some Ecclesiastical Writers
indeed say, That Earthquake destroyed several Towns in other Lands Near the
City of Naples, some few Years ago, they dug up a great Piece of Marble, with
several Figures and Letters engraven round it: which all Antiquaries agree is
the Pedestal of a Statue erected to Tiberius, by the fourteen Cities of Asia,
which were flung down (according to the Opinion of many Learned Men) by the
Earthquake that happened at our Savior's Crucifixion. They have found in the
Letters which are still legible, the Names of the several Cities, and discover
in each Figure something particular to the City, of which it represents the
Genius. -- Addis. Trav.
, but none in the Land of Judea. Nevertheless it came as a Sign of Divine Anger
kindled against the Jews, for their crucifying the Son of GOD; and it presaged
the Destruction hastening upon Jerusalem. The Earth trembled, and the Rocks
rent, at the accursed Fact, to proclaim the Indignation of GOD. The Mountains
quaked, because He was wroth, and He threw down the Rocks in his Anger. He as
it were smote his Hands at the wicked Deed, and rent his Garments at the
detestable Blasphemies that accompanied it. He exhibited Himself in the most
lively Emblems of Horror and Displeasure. The Sun hid it is head, and the
Heavens put on Mourning: the Earth also was horribly afraid, and the very
Stones cried out, as being burst with Anguish, and flaming with Indignation.

IT is the current Opinion of Expositors, that King David personated the
Messiah in several of his Psalms: And some learned Men think he spoke
prophetically in Psalm. 18. Particularly in Ver. 6, 7. where he says, In my
Distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: He heard my voice out
of his Temple, and my Cry came before Him, even into his Ears. Then the Earth
shook and trembled; the Foundations also of the Hills moved, and were shaken,
because He was wroth. It seems to be a prophetical Passage, pointing at the
terrible Earthquakes that attended the Death and Resurrection of CHRIST; and
may comprehend the many Earthquakes that happened afterward, by which GOD
poured out his Vengeance upon the wicked Jews for murdering the Messiah. Though
in the Verses read, the Earthquake attending the Crucifixion of CHRIST, it is
probable, may be more particularly referred to: and if you compare the History
with the Prophecy, you will find an admirable Harmony.

HAD our Savior died a natural Death, we might have expected such a Miracle
would accompany the Fall of so great a Person History informs us, that
Dionysius the Areopagite, in Egypt, seeing the Eclipse which then happened
(and perhaps feeling the mighty Earthquake) cried out with a loud Voice,
"Either the World is dissolving, or the GOD of Nature suffering.
: and there might have been nothing of the Wrath of GOD expressed in it. But
yet seeing they were wicked Hands by which JESUS CHRIST was crucified and
slain, we must needs conclude, their Sin procured this terrible Appearance, as
a Display of the Anger of GOD at their Wickedness, by which the Earth was so
defiled under it is Inhabitants, as it never was before. 'Twas a wonder the
Earth did not instantly open and swallow them up. But GOD in his infinite
Patience only warned and threatened them, without any present Execution. Yet we
may well think Fury came up into his Face, when his Beloved SON was thus
despised and rejected of Men: His Lips were full of Indignation, and he made
his glorious Voice to be heard; though as yet He showed not the lighting down of
his holy Arm to destroy.

THIS then may serve to interpret to us the Language of Providence in the late
awful Dispensation among our selves, and may convince us that GOD has been in
his Anger marching through our Land, crying to the City and Country, Alas for
all the Abominations of the House of Israel! By which they are crucifying to
themselves the Son of GOD afresh, and putting Him to an open Shame!

WHEN we heard the Lord of Hosts roaring out of the Deep, In some of our Towns,
it is said, Once after they had felt a shock of the Earthquake, they saw the
Sea rise in furious Billows, and heard so hideous and uncommon a Roar of the
mighty Waves, as made them afraid of a sudden Destruction.
, and felt Him shaking the Earth and our Habitations upon it; was the Lord
displeased with the Sea? Was his Anger against the Land? Was his Wrath against
our Houses, when they saw Him, and trembled? No, but against the guilty
Inhabitants. We may take up the Psalmist's words, Psalm. 60.1, 2. O God! Thou
have been displeased: Thou have made the Earth to tremble. He not only
overturns the Mountains in his Anger, and kindles a Fire, or brings an
Inundation, in his Wrath: But when there is merely a great Noise and Trembling,
without any desolating Effects, even such an Earthquake is usually the
Visitation of an angry Providence, and carries in it a loud Reproof of the Sins
of a Land. It is a Sign it is a Land laden with Iniquity. Its Transgressions are
heavy upon it; a Burden too heavy to bear. Therefore it groans, it quakes and
reels, and is ready to sink under the oppressive Weight. Places have trembled
often, before they fell. Repeated smaller Earthquakes have gone before to warn
the Inhabitants; but these being disregarded, more calamitous ones have in time
come upon them, wherein GOD has poured out his Fury like Fire; and it has
overwhelmed them as a Flood Jerusalem is an Instance, which was visited with
Earthquake and great Noise once and again without any considerable Desolations:
but they repented not, until at the last a Destruction to the uttermost came,
which was partly accomplished by terrible Earthquakes* as the Jewish Historian
informs us. Jamaica is another Instance. They had Warning by a smaller
Earthquake (like those we have seen) 4 or 5 Years before that great Shock,
which threw down all their Houses, and sunk so much of the Island.
.

HENCE then how severely are they to be reproved, who are nothing affected with
the awful Dispensation this Land is under! -- We can scarce believe what is
reported; That some are so hardened as to treat this Providence with no serious
Regard at all, but rather make light of it, and laugh at the superstitious
Weakness of Those who entertain it with any thing of Surprise, and a trembling
posture of Spirit. -- O amazing Stupidity! The very heathen Soldiers and
Crucifiers of our Lord, shall rise up in Judgment with these pretended
Christians, and shall condemn them: for They, when they saw the Earthquake, and
the terrible Appearances that accompanied the Death of CHRIST, are said to fear
greatly, and to glorify GOD. Yet these Christians are not afraid! O their
Stupidity! It Is worse than heathenish, even brutish, yea worse than brutish:
for the very Beasts tremble at an Earthquake We are told, In the time of the
great Shock of our Earthquake, Some who were then abroad, observed that the
Brute Creatures ran roaring about the Fields in the greatest Fright and Agony.
. But these Men (if they may be allowed the Name, who have so shamefully
forfeited it) are insensible, as if they had transformed themselves into very
Stocks or Images. Give Ear, O Heavens! Hear, O Earth! And be astonished, yea be
horribly afraid. And let these sottish Creatures hear, and be ashamed. Go to
the Brutes, ye fearless Wretches, and learn of them to fear GOD. Hear now this,
O foolish People, which have Eyes and see not, which have Ears, and hear not.
Fear ye not me, says the LORD! Will ye not tremble at my Presence; who have
placed the Sand for the Bound of the Sea, and though the Waves thereof toss and
rore, yet they cannot prevail! -- Receive ye the Pagan Mariners Reproof to
stupid Jonah; What meanest thou, O Sleeper! Arise, call upon thy GOD, if so be
GOD will think upon us, that we perish not.

SHALL a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the People not be afraid? Shall
there be Evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Seek the Lord, lest He
break out like Fire; and there be none to quench it. Boast not thy self of to
morrow: for thou know not what a Day may bring forth. Be ye not Mockers,
lest your Bands be made strong! My Son, Despise not the Chastening of the Lord.
It will be the Madness of Folly in you, not to regard the Operations of the
Lord. Whosoever is wise will observe these Things. The Man of Wisdom will see his
Name, and tremble at his Rod.

SURELY they act a reasonable Part, who are fearing greatly because of the
Earthquake. It Is but a just Comportment with the Voice and Call of Providence.
The Dispensation in it is own Nature has a powerful Tendency to work on the
Minds of Men by way of Conviction and Terror, and to beget a trembling frame of
Spirit, from the apprehension of an invisible Almighty Hand shaking the Earth.
And it is what GOD expects, that we tremble at his Presence, and fear his Wrath
at such a time. He says now unto New England, "Surely thou will fear Me; Thou will receive Instruction: So thy Dwellings shall not be cut off.

HENCE we may look upon it as a Token for Good, that such extraordinary
Impressions are made upon the Hearts of many by this awakening Dispensation.
For by the Terrors of the Lord Men are often persuaded and prepared to turn
unto GOD, and believe on the Name of JESUS. The Evangelists tell us, That all
the People which came to see the Crucifixion of our Lord, when they saw the
Earthquake, and the awful Things that came to pass, smote on their Breasts and
returned -- sorrowful and in a very pensive frame, deploring the wicked Fact,
which had been committed, and trembling for fear of the dreadful Judgments they
could not but apprehend were coming upon them. Thus their Hearts were in a
manner softened, and made susceptible of the Impressions of sanctifying Grace.
It Is thought the Convictions they now were under, proved happy Preparatives to
the good Work which was afterward wro't upon them, when several Thousands
together were converted by Peter's Preaching. -- So in the Case of the Jailer,
(Act. 16.26, etc.) the sudden and terrible Earthquake which opened the
Prison-Doors, and set loose his Prisoners, was the Occasion of his Awakning and
Repentance.

AMONG ourselves, it is a hopeful Symptom of the Spirit's cooperating with
Divine Providence* that we hear so many, in great fear and concern for their
Souls, crying out with the Jailer, What must I do to be saved? Hitherto the
awful Dispensation we are under, seems to have been in Mercy unto Many, to
bring them to Repentance In many Towns and Congregations considerable Numbers
have been awakened; so that ill Customs are broken off in a great measure:
Family Worship set up in prayerless Houses: the Table of the Lord more desired,
and thronged. Great Additions have been made to one Church and another. The
Lord grant they may be of such as shall be Saved! -- Now we live, if they stand
fast in the Lord.
. It Is like Absalom's firing the Field, to bring Joab to him.

IT affords a happy Opportunity for Persons in Places of Authority and
Influence, to endeavor a Reformation of Manners, and the Revival of dying
Religion.

O that Heads of Families may be excited to walk in their Houses with greater
Exemplariness, and Circumspection, and to counsel, instruct, reprove and warn
their Children and Servants! Now GOD has been terribly shaking our Houses, and
has preserved them from falling into Ruins, let us every one take up David's
pious Resolutions, Psalm. 101. I will Sing of Mercy and Judgment: unto Thee, O
Lord, will I sing. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way. I will walk
within my House with a perfect Heart. I will set no wicked thing before mine
eyes. -- He that walks in a perfect way, shall serve me: But he that works
Deceit shall not dwell in my House. He resolved to set an Example in his House
of Family-Order and Worship. Let us go and do likewise. O that from henceforth
there may no more be any prayerless, irreligious and disorderly Houses among
us: lest GOD should be provoked to come forth in his Wrath, and pour out his
Fury upon the Families that call not upon his Name! -- O that Heads of Families
may be excited to look to the ways of their Household, and command all under
their Charge to worship, fear and serve GOD: lest the Lord swear in his Anger
concerning our Houses, as in the Case of Eli, 1 Samuel 3.13. I will judge his
House for ever, for the Iniquity, which he knows; because his Sons made
themselves vile, and he restrained them not.

AND O that our Civil RULERS may be awakened by the late awful Dispensation, to
a greater Application, Activity and Zeal in the performance of their respective
Trusts: to stand up for GOD, against the workers of Iniquity; and set
themselves to be a Terror, not to good Works but the evil! As the LORD has
arisen, and lifted up his Arm, to take hold on Vengeance: So let our
Magistrates be Imitators of GOD, in taking Hold on Judgment, and not bear the
Sword in vain. Trim your Lamps, to search out all punishable Iniquity: and whet
the Weapons of Justice, not only to brandish them over the heads of Sinners,
but to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil, without partiality or connivence.
You are GOD'S Ministers, and he requires you to be attending continually upon
this very thing. Let none content themselves with the Honor of being in
Authority; but let all make Conscience of discharging the Duties of their Post,
to preserve Peace and Order, and promote Virtue in the midst of us. We beseech
you, Sirs, in the Name of CHRIST, that in the first place you will every one
labor to set the brightest Example of all Morality and Religion, (and blessed
be GOD, we have at this day so many worthy Examples in the Magistracy) that you
may drive away Iniquity with the Rebukes of your grave Countenances, and in
your unblemished Lives speak Conviction and Terror to bold Transgressors. O let
there never be Reason for Complaints, that any of those who make the Laws, or
that are solemnly Sworn to maintain them, do themselves put a slight upon them
in any Instance, and so expose their Authority to the Contempt of others.
Particularly as your faithful Monitor this Day I will take Leave to exhort and
entreat, that those in places of Power and Rule will carefully avoid all
Tavern-Clubs, or unnecessary Resort to Public Houses; as you would not have
Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness: and even as you would pay a
just Regard to the good Laws of the Province; which as they exclude
Town-Dwellers the Tavern after nine of Clock in the Night, and forbid them to
sit drinking idly there at any time; so they likewise do forbid all (except
Travelers and Persons upon Business or some extraordinary Occasions) even to
continue there above the space of one Hour: and whosoever continues there above
the Space of one Hour (other than as aforesaid) is liable to a Fine, or to be
set in the Stocks Law-Book, Chap. 8.
. -- Now then, my Fathers and Brethren, after our own Laws have thus put such
Discountenance and Disgrace upon all unnecessary frequenting public Houses,
will any in the Magistracy, claim as a Privilege, the Indulgence of being there
One Hour, upon any pretense whatever! Let it not be!

BUT then as you are to be Examples of all Virtue and good Order, so you ought
to employ all the Powers of your respective Offices to promote the same in all
Places where you come: and being your selves Patterns, you may do this with the
better grace and advantage.

O let us beseech you, Sirs, to stir up your selves and call upon one another
to bear Testimony against Vice and Immorality, in a faithful, zealous, and
resolute Attendence to the Law, in all it is important branches. By the wisdom
of the Legislature, we have a Body of Laws excellently calculated to the
public Weal: Let it not be complained that they are not put in Execution.

MAY the Terror of the Earthquake immediately awaken all in places of Power,
from an affecting view of the great Necessity of a Reformation, to labor the
Subduing of the many provoking Evils, which make the Land tremble!

MUST it not be said to thee, O Boston! to thee O New England! as the Prophet
said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 16.49. Behold, this was the Iniquity of thy
Sister Sodom: Pride, Fullness of Bread, and Abundance of Idleness was in her and
in her Daughters. And can there be nothing done to correct the Extravagance of
the Times, to reform the Idle and Dissolute! Surely the Judgments of GOD call
this People to lay aside their vain Ornaments, to retrench the Superfluities of
their voluptuous Tables, and to awake out of that criminal Sloth and indolent
trifling way of spending their precious Time, which Multitudes are guilty of.

IS it not said, Woe to the City that is filthy and polluted! -- Now are there
not abominable Fornicacations and Adulteries committed in this Land? And might
not more be done for the Restraint of this growing Wickedness!

IS it not said, Woe to the oppressing City! And is there not much of
Oppression, Extortion, and unrighteous Dealing practiced among us? May it not
be complained, All the foundations of the Earth are out of Course! And is it
not the Language of Providence, How ye down Trees, and cast a Mount against
Jerusalem: This is a City to be visited; She is wholly Oppression in the midst
of her! GOD seems to be smiting his Hands at our dishonest Gain. May not the
Earthquake, which came as a Thief in the Night, put us in mind of the Cousenage
and clandestine Villainies (as well as the secret Impurities) which are
practiced by so many!

AND when we have felt the Earth tremble, and our Houses reel to and fro like a
drunken Man (as the Prophet gives us the elegant, but reprochful Comparison)
should it not mind us of the wicked Intemperance, which threatens (among other
foolish and hurtful Lusts) to drown us in Perdition, unless there be some
speedy and very powerful Stand made!

Furthermore, Is not Truth fallen in our Streets; and the Spirit of Falsehood
reigning, to a scandalous degree among us? What Promise-breaking, Backbiting,
Lying and Slandering, do Multitudes live in the practice of; who give their
Mouths to Evil, and their Tongues frame Deceit! -- Is there not also much of
profane Swearing and Cursing; by reason of which the Land mourns! How do
Multitudes among us in the most impious and barefaced manner rend and tear the
sacred Name of GOD! The Earth surely might well rore at this: and it is a wonder
it was not rent; that it did not open it is mouth, and swallow up the profane
Wretches; bury them alive in some dark Recess, and so put their lying and
swearing Lips to Silence.

Again, IF we reflect on the particular Season, when GOD visited us with the
Earthquake, may we not see his Finger pointed at the great and growing Iniquity
of Sabbath-breaking! O how is the Lord's Day polluted by Multitudes! Are there
not many, who very frequently, if not habitually, do neglect the public
Worship? Are there not many who prostitute the Day (or part of it) to worldly
Business or vain Recreations! How general a Custom is it, for Men to continue
exercising their Trades, or pursuing their Diversions, till late in the Evening
before the Sabbath, and to spend the Evening after in Idleness and Vanity: by
which means our blessed LORD, the Lord of the Sabbath, is defrauded of a
valuable Portion of holy Time, and the good Ends of sacred Ordinances and
Duties very much defeated! Well then may the Earth tremble, and the Heavens at
this be astonished. -- There are good and wholesome Laws providing suitable
Remedies in these Cases: But how little are they regarded, and what a Coldness
in many to have them put in Execution!

Moreover Is there all due Care taken to encourage and support the Ministry of
the Gospel in this Land, in some Towns especially? -- If GOD'S Altar be
starved, and there be a Robbing of GOD in Tithes and Offerings; has He not
said, I will even send a Curse upon you! -- Now if our Rulers perceive that the
Portion of the Levites has not been given them, have they not as much Power,
as Nehemiah of old, and are they not equally concerned and obliged to apply
some effectual Remedy? -- Neh. 13.11. Then I contended with the Rulers, and
said, Why is the House of God forsaken? "Why are the Levites starved out of it?
Why did you not take Care, and prevent this? It is required of Christian
Magistrates, that they use their Power to oblige Ministers to do their Duty,
and People to do theirs. And when they don't do what they can to encourage and
support the Worship of GOD, they will have a great deal to answer for. Henry in
loc.


IN a word, Is there not a deplorable Neglect of Family-Order among us? How
little is there of Religion and Government in many Houses? And does not the
late terrible Shaking of our Houses admonish us of our Family-Disorders and
Neglects? -- Should not our Rulers then exert themselves for the Reformation of
these things! Might not some further public Laws be enacted for that End; to
oblige Parents and Masters to keep better Hours and better Orders in their
Houses; and to restrain Children and Servants from many vile Practices! -- Are
there not some Houses among us, that are mere Nurseries of Lewdness and
Debauchery, or Receptacles of Thefts and Robberies, or full of scandalous
Strifes and Brawlings? And might not more Pains be taken to subdue and reform
such disorderly vicious Families!

THUS I have mentioned some of those Sins, which make the Times perilous, and
expose the Land to shaking Dispensations. O that by the awful Hand of GOD
stretched out, our Rulers may be excited to lay these things more to Heart; and
not only as Christians, to sigh and cry in secret places for all these
Abominations, but also as public Ministers of Justice, to be open and swift
Witnesses against them, both by Word and Deed! May our Magistrates put on Zeal,
with Phinehas, and contend like Nehemiah, in this day of Degeneracy, that they
may turn away Wrath from the Congregation!

AND O that the Ministers of the Word may be quickened, directed, and assisted
of GOD, to improve their Opportunity! It seems to be a happy Season for the
Ministry of the Word. After Men have been so terrified by Earthquake and great
Noise, what more likely to melt and charm their Souls, than the still small
Voice of the preached Gospel? The Lord make us wise to win Souls; give us the
tongue of the Learned, that we may know how to speak a word in season to him
that is weary: and make us faithful, that we may cry aloud in the ears of
Sinners, and spare not; warning every Man, and reproving with all
long-suffering! The Lord pour out his Spirit upon us, that we may give
ourselves wholly to these things, and unto Prayer!

AND O that the People of GOD in our several Churches may be rouzed and
quickened to the Duties of Self-Examination, Humiliation and Prayer,
Ecclesiastical Discipline, Brotherly Watch and Admonition, Peace and Union!

LET the Churches inquire into their State and Circumstances; examine how they
observe the Feasts and Sabbaths of the Lord; whether they keep the Ordinances,
as they have been delivered to them, and the Faith as it was once delivered to
the Saints? -- May not the Earthquake admonish us of the Spirit of Giddiness
and Wavering, that is to be found in Multitudes of Professors! May we not speak
of them in the Language of the Prophet, They are drunken, but not with Wine;
They stagger, but not with strong Drink! -- O look to your selves, that ye lose
not those things which ye have gained. Be watchful, and strengthen the Things
which remain, that are ready to die. So stand fast in the LORD, my dearly
Beloved. Remember, O New England, how thou have received and heard; and hold
fast and repent.

REMEMBER from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first Works: Or
else, says the Lord, I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of it is place, except thou repent. Let us fall down upon our
Faces in penitent Humiliations before GOD for all our Errors and Miscarriages,
for all our Impenitency, Unbelief, Ingratitude and unfruitfulness under the
Gospel; and let us besiege the Throne of Grace with our ardent Cries, that GOD
would pardon all our Iniquities, and turn away from us the fierce Anger, which
we have seen such awful Tokens and Prognostics of. -- And let the Churches
study a Reformation of all that is amiss among them. Purge out the old Leaven,
that you may be a new Lump. Keep the Feast, not with the Leven of Hypocrisy, or
the Leven of Malice, Hatred and Variance: for which things the Wrath of GOD
comes down upon a Land. Neither let any go in the way of Korah, with a spirit
of murmuring and gainsaying; lest the Earth open it is mouth for them also,
while they are muttering Perverseness against Moses and Aaron the Lord's
Servants. -- But keep the Feast with the unleavened Bread of Sincerity and
Truth. And let such as neglect the Table of the Lord, speedily prepare and
come. Let a Man examine himself; and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup. Let us judge our selves for our faulty Neglects, and our unworthy
Receivings. If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.

IN fine, May all the People of the Land lay to heart the terrible Visitation
we are under! The surprising Earthquake and subterraneal Thunder was GOD'S
Voice crying to the Town and Country. O let us hear attentively the Noise of
his Voice, and listen to the Sound that goes out of his Mouth. The Lord has
spoken in his Holiness: O hear ye the shaken Rod, and who has appointed it.
Hear ye now what the Lord says: hear, O ye Mountains, the Lord's Controversy,
and give Ear, ye little Hills! for the Lord has a Controversy with his People,
and He will plead with Israel.

SEARCH out the Lessons writ upon the present Dispensation: and be instructed,
O Jerusalem, says the Lord, lest my Soul depart from thee; lest I make thee
desolate, a Land not inhabited.

WE should learn how great and terrible a GOD we have to do with; and therefore
make Him our Fear and our Dread. -- We should learn our absolute Need of an
Interest in CHRIST; out of whom GOD is a consuming Fire: To Him therefore we
should fly for Refuge, and plead his Sacrifice as the Atonement for the
Congregation. -- We should learn our entire Dependence upon Divine Providence
for Preservation and all outward Comforts; and adore Him as the GOD of our
Life. -- We should learn the Instability and Vanity of the World; how foolish
it is to set our Affections on Things here below, and what an uncertain
Foundation they stand upon, who build their Confidence on the Earth, and place
their Happiness in it is Entertainments. -- We should learn what a mutable World
we live in, and how happy they that are got beyond the Reach of the Accidents
of Time, and settled in a Kingdom which cannot be moved. -- Moreover, We are
admonished of a Day of Judgment coming, when our glorious Lord will arise to
shake terribly the Earth; will rise up suddenly, and by his immediate Hand
dissolve the whole Frame of Nature. And seeing we look for such things, we
should give Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, that if that Day
of the Lord should hasten and come upon us suddenly, we may nevertheless have
Boldness and not be affrighted at the Noise of a dissolving World.

IN a word, We should learn the Evil of SIN, which brings down Divine Judgments
on the Earth, and throws Nature into the terrible Convulsions and Disorders we
behold. -- We should inquire, What means the Heat of this Anger? We should
study the Grounds of GOD'S Contention with us: and endeavor that all provoking
Evils may be put away from the midst of us. We should judge ourselves for our
Sins as the moral procuring Causes of the Earthquake, and be found repenting in
Dust and Ashes. -- We should consider how unworthy we are of the Earth for our
Habitation, and admire the Riches of Divine Patience and Clemency in yet
reprieving us from Death and Hell. Are we not as Brands plucked out of the Fire!

O let us realise the sparing Mercy and preventing Goodness, mixed with the
awful Dispensation we are passing under. If GOD had pleased, He could have by
his Earthquake shook down our Houses, and buried Multitudes in the Ruins. He
could have caused the Earth to burst open, in many Chasms, and swallow Men up
alive. He could have kindled a Flame in his Anger, and poured out fatal Streams
of liquid Fire to consume us: or have made the Earth sink under our feet, and
drowned us all in one moment under a desolating Flood of mighty Waters: as He
overthrew Sodom, and as He destroyed the Cities and Villages of Sicily,
Jamaica, and other parts of the World. -- But He has only appointed over us
Terror, without Consumption: Blessed be his Name! -- As great as the Miseries
we were exposed to so great is our Deliverance. Sing, O ye Heavens, for the
Lord has spared his Inheritance: Shout, ye lower parts of the Earth: Break
forth into Singing, ye Mountains, O Forest, and every Tree therein: for the
Lord has redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.

IN former days this Land has felt the gentle Shocks of Earthquakes, one after
another. GOD has visited us once and again; but in Tenderness, remembering Mercy
in the midst of Wrath. The Language of his Providence is that, How shall I give
thee up! How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim; which
the Lord overthrew in his Anger and in his Wrath? -- O let us consider the
great Deliverance we have received, and never forget the Hazards we have passed
through. GOD has shown us the Riches of his Patience and Compassion, together
with his Power and Majesty. He has shown us what He could do, and hinted to us
what we deserve. O that by the Terrors of the Lord we may be persuaded: and by
his Goodness led to Repentance! Let us attend to the Voice of his monitory Rod:
that his Long-suffering may be Salvation to us. As our Psalmist exhorts, O come
let us worship and bow down; let us kneel before the Lord our Maker. For He is
our God, and we are the People of his Pasture and the Sheep of his Hand: To Day
if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts.

O that Such as are secure may be awakened; and that such as are under
Convictions may be brought to a true Repentance! GOD has come, not to slay us,
but only to affright us, and call our Sins to Remembrance. Let us reflect on
the Motions and Thoughts of heart within us, when we were alarmed by the Noise
and Terror of the late melancholy Night. Did not Conscience rouse up, and begin
to do it is Office, in accusing and condemning! O let us cherish the
Impressions, retain the Thoughts of those distressing Hours, and improve the
same to a through Repentance and Reformation. Beware that you don't relapse into
Security: Quench not the Spirit. Satan and his Instruments will be busy to
cancel any good Impressions begun upon you: but resist the Devil, forsake all
vain Company, and fly the Inticements of an evil World. Strive to enter in at
the strait Gate. Diligently attend the Means of Grace. Watch and pray, that ye
enter not into Temptation. And exhort one another daily, lest any Man be
hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin. Often recollect the Vows, which your
Lips uttered, in that tremendous Season, when your Soul was in Distress: and
fail not to perform your Vows.

AMEND now your Doings, says the Lord: and trust not in lying Words. Be not
deceived: GOD is not mocked. Beware of Hypocrisy. It is a melancholy Account we
have, Psalm. 78.34, 36. When he slew them, then they sought him: and they
returned, and enquired early after God. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with
their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues. And though we do the
like, GOD may (as in their Case) yet have Compassion, and not stir up all his
Wrath, speedily to make an utter End of us. But verily his Patience will not
last always. Abused Patience will sooner or later turn into implacable Fury. --
Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the Lord, He is
GOD in Heaven above, and upon the Earth beneath: with whom is terrible Majesty.
The Earth shook and trembled; the Hills also moved and were shaken, because He
was wroth. He has lifted up his Voice, and spoken to us from the invisible
Caverns below, in the most awful Accents of holy Displeasure. Hear this, ye old
Men, and give Ear, all ye Inhabitants of the Land: Has this been in your days
or even in the days of your Fathers? Tell ye your Children of it, and let your
Children tell their Children, and their Children another Generation: that they
may fear GOD, and not forget the Works of the Lord, but keep his Commandments,
that it may be well with them.

THEREFORE also now, says the Lord, Turn ye even to ME with all your Heart,
and with Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning; and rent your Heart, and
not your Garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and
merciful. Who knows if He will return, and repent Him of the Evil! Only
acknowledge thine Iniquity, that thou have transgressed, O backsliding Israel!
So I will not cause mine Anger to fall upon you, says the Lord. Circumcise
therefore your Heart to the Lord, and be no more stiffnecked. O let us hear his
Voice to Day, while it is called to day, and turn at his Reproof. -- That Is the
Call of GOD; Repent and turn, lest I come quickly, and smite the Earth with a
Curse, that shall devour the Inhabitants. O let us make Haste to put far away
all Iniquity from our Tabernacles, that our Houses may be safe from Fear. Let
us immediately labor to get Sin purged out of our Hearts and Lives, and let us
cry mightily to GOD, that Salvation may be nigh to us, and Glory dwell in our
Land. It is Time to seek the LORD, till He come and rain Righteousness upon us.
It is high time to awake out of Sleep. Awake unto Righteousness, and sin not.
-- So shall we in the most effectual way flee from the Earthquake, and obtain
Lengthning out of our Tranquillity. But if by these things we will not be
reformed; if we will not hear, and if we will not lay it to Heart, to give
Glory to GOD, we have Reason to fear He will punish us yet seven times more, as
He did his People Israel of old

THEREFORE our Text warns us in those terms; To day if ye will hear his Voice,
harden not your Hearts, as in the Provocation, and the day of Temptation in the
Wilderness: when your Fathers tempted me; unto whom I swear in my Wrath, that
they should not enter into my Rest. -- Agreably the Apostle observes, 1 Cor.
10.5, 6. But with many of them God was not well pleased: for they were
overthrown in the wilderness. Now these things were our examples, to the intent
we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted. So the Prophet, Jer.
7.12. But go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at
the first, and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel. In
like manner it may be said, Go to Antioch; Go to Smyrna, and to Laodicea, and
to Sardis; and see what an incensed GOD has done to them for all their
Wickedness. And let us fear the like Doom. Places they were once famous for the
Christian Profession, but growing degenerate were finally destroyed by terrible
Earthquakes. O let not New England be highminded, but fear: be zealous, and
repent. To come nearer home, I might say, Go to Lima, in the Southern Part of
America The Spaniards have met with terrible Blows in this City once and again
by Earthquakes. Particularly in the Year 1687, it was totally overthrown; the
Houses were thrown down, and above a Thousand of the Inhabitants perished in
the Ruins, or were drowned in the Sea, which breaking over it is Banks
overflowed the Seaport Towns round about; carried Ships three Leagues up
within Land, and made great Havoc every where. Vast Numbers of Cattle were
drowned, and Multitudes of People in one Town and another, besides what
perished in the City. It Is said, Five Thousand Corpses were taken up at one
place, after the retiring of the Waters: And doubtless many were carried out to
Sea. Atl. Geogr. for America, p. 230. And Genesis Hist. of Earthq. p. 135.
; or go to Jamaica, to Antego, and other Islands in the Northern Part About the
Year 1690, happened an Earthquake, which affected almost all the Leeward
Islands, and was very terrible at Antego, Nevis, St. Christophers and
Montserrat. At Antego, it threw down many of their Houses, Sugar-works, and
Wind-mills. One then wrote to his Correspondent here. That the Earth was seen
to heave and roll like the Waves of the Sea, that Rocks were thrown from the
Mountains, Houses shattered, and some Points of Land swallowed up. [Dr. I.
Mather, of Earthq. p. 27.] -- At Nevis, it made great Desolations. It ruined
most of Charlestown. The Ground opened in the Streets, and a hot stinking Water
spouted out of the Earth to a great height. The Earth in many places broke open
and swallowed some Thousands of great Trees, that were never more seen. At St.
Christophers, the Earth opened nine foot wide in many places, buried solid
Timber, Sugar-Mills, etc. And threw down the Jesuits College, and all the other
Stone-Buildings -- This Earthquake broke off part of another Island, and threw
it into the Sea, with a Noise like a Cannon, and sent up a mighty Cloud of Dust
into the Air -- Atl Geo. p. 514, 516, 517, 524.] It was also at Barbados; but
did no Hurt there. -- And we are now informed, That the late Earthquake which
shook New England, was at Barbados, on the Day before, about Noon; which is
nigh two Thousand Miles from Boston. The Shake much as it was here in some
Places: Their Houses were in a great Convulsion; and the Streets rose and fell
like the Waves of the Ocean; so that they were afraid of the Earth's sinking,
and all ran down to the Wharves, to get into Boats and Ships for Security.
: and consider the Works of the Lord, how terrible He has sometimes been in his
Dealings with impenitent Christians. And what Plea now has Boston; what Plea
has New England to make for an Exemption, if we go on still in our Trespasses!
GOD has once and again put into our Hands a Cup of Trembling: and we may expect
He will make us to drink deep of his Vengeance, if we continue impenitent; even
deeper than other places, in proportion to the Guilt and Demerit of our most
aggravated Sins. GOD may cause the Calamity to rise up a second time, and then
give it a Commission to destroy; except we repent. Verily there is no
Contending with GOD, as Job speaks, Job 9.4, 5, 6. To day then if ye will hear
his Voice, harden not your Hearts; lest there come upon us sudden Destruction
without Remedy.

BUT if utter Desolation hasten not upon the Land, by literal Earthquakes, and
other the like Judgments; yet have we not Reason to fear sad Revolutions,
Church-quakes and State-quakes, that shall swallow up all our dearest
Privileges! Have we not felt repeated Shocks already, that have made the very
Foundations tremble under us, and threatened a terrible Dissolution! Are there
not many that hate our Zion, who cease not crying, Raze it, Raze it to the very
foundations! And is not the Number of New-England's best Friends lessning every
day! How is the ancient Stock of pious praying Christians, and faithful,
active, zealous Servants of the Public dying off apace? [Among others I would
here mention two late Instances, one in the Magistracy, and the other in the
Ministry; the Honorable Col. John Otis, of his Majesty's Council, and the Rev.
Mr. Samuel Danforth, Pastor of the Church in Taunton, who having in their
various Stations faithfully served their Generation, are now fallen asleep in
JESUS.] And of those rising up, how few are there possessed with with the first
Spirit of New England! Are we not daily degenerating from the Principles and
Zeal of our primitive Times! Is not Apostasy growing upon our Churches in
regard of Faith, Worship, Discipline and Conversation! Are there not those Sins
abounding among us, which might justly provoke GOD to take away his Kingdom
from us, to tear in pieces our happy CHARTER, and visit us with Persecution and
Oppression! And does not a Spirit of Contention and Perverseness, the Love of
the World, and licentious Customs, threaten to ruin us, in our best Interests,
by a natural and powerful Efficacy!

O let these Reflections awaken all that love Jerusalem, to tremble for the Ark
of GOD, and to plead for the City of our Solemnities. Hear the Exhortation,
with which I now conclude, Isa. 62.6, 7. -- Ye that make mention of the Lord,
keep not silence; And give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make
Jerusalem a praise in the Earth.

FINIS.

