Mr. Foxcroft's SERMON On the DEATH of His late MAJESTY King GEORGE, etc.

GOD the Judge, putting down One, and setting up Another.

A SERMON Upon Occasion of the DEATH Of our late Sovereign LORD King GEORGE,
AND THE ACCESSION Of his present MAJESTY, King GEORGE, II. To the British
THRONE.

By Thomas Foxcroft, A. M. MINISTER of the Old Church in Boston.

BOSTON in New England: Printed for S. GERRISH at the lower end of Cornhil.
MDCCXXVII.

To the HONORABLE William Dummer, Esquire Lieut. GOVERNOR and Commander in Chief,
in and over his MAJESTY'S Province of the Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND,
SIR,
WE all very sensibly feel the Blow of GOD'S Sovereign Hand, in the late awful
and affecting Instance of Mortality; which suddenly beheaded Kingdoms, and
deluged Nations

WAS it possible then for King GEORGE, the Great and Good, whom irresistible
Death has ravished from us, to slide silently into his Grave?

WHO can forbear following Him with that mournful Cry, My Father, My Father!
The Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof! Who can forbear this, that
has in his breast the least spark of Ingenuity and Gratitude, or any thing of
the true English Temper, or Protestant Principles! Sure I am the Man must be
abandoned to a wretched Stoicism, or be under the power of a scandalous
Indifference to the grand Cause of Civil Liberty, and the Reformed Religion,
that does not regret the Loss of a Prince, who has been so celebrated, so
avowed a Patron of them both, the Light of Israel, and the Terror of all their
Adversaries: A Prince whose conspicuous Excellencies and most auspicious Reign
may well be the Wonder and Praise of all Posterity, as they are very much the
Triumph and Admiration of the present Day.

IMPOSSIBLE it seemed to me for any one to refrain from mingling his Tears with
the public Sorrows, and adding a Voice to the Consort of Mourners, upon this
melancholy Occasion: which for my own part I could not tell how to pass over in
Silence.

SIR, THE following Sermon pretends to very little singular, besides what has
been already published among us by some of my Brethren. I have not attempted
his late Majesty's CHARACTER; A Work fit for the best Orator of the Age, and
vastly above any Talent of mine: nor could any expect from the Pulpit his Royal
HISTORY. I have but made a few general Touches upon things, with the Simplicity
and practical Turn, that I apprehend always most becoming the sacred Desk: --
Humbly to express my deep Sense of BRITAIN'S and NEW-ENGLAND'S Loss in the
Death we have been called to Mourn; together with my loyal Concurrence in the
common Joy at the happy Succession of the High and mighty Prince GEORGE Prince
of Wales, to the British THRONE, whereby the sovereign Dominion of these
dependent Provinces, and other Plantations in America, is come into his
rightful and gracious Hands. Which presages a new Scene of Glory, to enliven
our Hopes, and opens those splendid Prospects before us, that may justly
correct the passionate Griefs of the present Season: And we trust the Smiles of
his Royal Grace and Clemency will soon dissipate all our Clouds, and entirely
reverse the gloomy Reflections of this dark Day.

SIR, You Will pardon me that I have presumed to inscribe your honorable NAME in
the front of this unfinished Discourse: which, I was the less backward to
comply with the Request of some of my Friends, in thus exposing to View, if it
might be shrouded under your favorable Umbrage. Although it may not appear in a
dress altogether so fit to wait upon your HONOR: Yet having had such
Experience and observed so much of your distinguished Candor and Goodness on
many Occasions, I could not but flatter my self that it would have a kind
Reception with you; especially when I reflected on the Occasion it was preached
upon, which as it required me to put on a sable Habit, so allowed me to speak
with faultring Accents: And when I considered how highly grateful the Design
and Tenor of my Discourse must undoubtedly be to ONE, whose inviolable Loyalty
to our late glorious Sovereign, and Zeal for the Protestant Blood in his
illustrious House, are so known and undisputed, that they leave no possible
room to suspect your candid Construction of the feeblest Effort to do Honor to
the sacred Memory of that admirable Prince, and to inculcate a wise and pious
Improvement of the National Loss, that so our GOD the Judge, may gain some
Glory thereby.

PERMIT me now to condole your HONOR'S particular share in the common
Bereavement. --

SIR, I make no doubt you religiously entertain the Admonition, that Heaven
sends you of your own Mortality, in this severe Stroke, which comes so near you.

I pray GOD confirm your HONOR'S Health, and prolong your Opportunities of
serving your KING, and your native Country: who have hitherto seen You, through
the Grace of GOD (and to the glory of that Grace be it spoken) so faithful and
prudent in the Conduct of your honorable and weighty Trust; in those critical
and difficult Junctures you have passed through; so equally holding the
Balance, duly asserting the Rights and Prerogatives of your Royal Master,
while yet you have been tender of the Subjects Liberty and Privilege; to your
own great Reputation, and to the Security and Flourishing of the Public in its
most valuable Concerns.

MAY your HONOR be abundantly supported under the weight of the public Cares;
which centring so much on your Shoulders at present, must needs sit heavy upon
you: and may a remarkable Success, so long as you sit in the Chair, and always
in all future Capacities you may sustain, visibly attend your Counsels and
Endeavors for the common Good! May you still be accepted of the Multitude of
your Brethren, in seeking their Welfare: and your Services for the Crown be as
acceptable to his most excellent Majesty, our present King (whom GOD of his
mercy preserve and bless) as they have been to his Royal Father, of blessed
Memory!

MAY you also ever experience much of the spiritual and gracious Presence of
your Covenant-GOD with you, in the more private Concerns of the Christian Life!
May your virtuous and happy Consort long live, a mutual Delight and Blessing to
your Honor: and may you Both be Heirs together of all the sure Mercies of an
everlasting Covenant, which will assign you a Place and a Name better than of
Sons and of Daughters!

AND now, SIR, I beg Leave to recommend my Self, with my Family who are so much
your own Flesh, and my dear Church, where you received your Baptism, and which
you are pleased to favor with your stated Presence in our public Worship and
Communion, to an affectionate Remembrance in your devout Addresses to the
Throne of Grace; where I doubt not you are daily carrying the Case, not only of
your Person and Family, but also of your Friends, and of this whole People, who
look upon you as their common Father. SIR, We are persuaded that you love Zion,
and pray for her Peace; that you will seek the Good of Jerusalem all your days;
and that the Honor of CHRIST, the supreme Majesty and Head of his Body the
Church, by whom Kings reign, whose you are and whom you serve, lies ever near
your Heart, as your governing End. You can therefore most sincerely and
delightfully join in that Doxology, with which I conclude these Lines: -- To
the only wise GOD our Savior, be Glory, Dominion, and Power, both now and
ever. AMEN!

I am Your HONOR'S Very obedient Humble Servant, THOMAS FOXCROFT.

A Sermon Upon the DEATH of King GEORGE, etc.
PSALM. LXXV. 7. GOD is the Judge: He puts down One, and sets up Another.


AT the very first mention of this Text, I doubt not, your Thoughts have
instantly recurr'd to the surprising News and solemn Occasions of the last Week
The Sermon was preached on the next Lord's Day after the Advice of the KING's
Death.
; which there are none of you such Strangers in Israel, as to be ignorant of.
That Is the Language of the Day, Know ye not that a Prince and a great Man is
fallen! The KING is dead! King GEORGE is dead! -- Very melancholy Tidings
indeed, that struck an universal Damp on the Spirits of his loyal Subjects
here. And we must have been sighing out our Sorrow, with the most dejected
Airs, and in all the Accents of a desperate Grief; were it not for the
refreshing Mixture of Joy and Hope in the concurring Advices of a NEW KING,
peaceably seated on the Throne: Which Reflection creates a sensible Tumult
among the contending Passions of the Mind, and makes it difficult to know how
to frame our Speech or model our Countenances, whether for Joy or Sorrow most.
Like the Israelitish Cloud, the present Dispensation has a double Aspect; has
it is bright side. No sooner is the Light of Israel extinguished; but another
Sun ascends the Horizon to our grateful Surprise. -- We have been liberally
pouring out our tributary Tears of Sorrow at the funeral Obsequies of a
deceased Sovereign, his late MAJESTY KING GEORGE, whose Memory is blessed: and
in the same day the swelling Tide of our confluent Affections took a sudden
Turn into another Channel, and our Tears of Joy irresistibly flowed out with
equal Plenty, at the loud Congratulations of our present Sovereign KING GEORGE
the Second, upon his happy Succession to his late Royal FATHER'S Crown and
Dignity.

OUR GOD is giving us to Sing both of Mercy, and of Judgment: and unto thee, O
Lord, I will Sing. We may justly temper the sorrowful Sense of our common
Bereavement, with the consolatory Though It of that Royal Life, which now inherits
the Crown, and with the happy Prospect before us of a lasting Succession in
that Royal Line, which is so much the Joy of Britain, and the Hope of the whole
Protestant Interest throughout the World. -- For we have not only another
Protestant KING upon the Throne now: but as if this were a small thing, the
Lord our GOD is also speaking of his Servant's House for a great while to come.
And now let it please the Lord to bless the House of his Servant, that it may
be established for ever! On HIM and on his latest Royal Posterity, let the
Crown flourish: but let his Enemies lick the dust, and melt away; the Cause of
a Popish Pretender be for ever blasted, and Confusion attend the unreasonable
Attempts of such as would make them a Captain to return into Egypt. -- O the
Folly of a restless disaffected Party in the Nation, that know not their own
Happiness! Astonishing the Madness of Loyalty, falsely so called, which cannot
be satisfied without the glorious Chains of Romish Tyranny! The stupidity of
the Men, to court their own Ruin! That have Plenty of Happiness round about
them: but make themselves poor by Discontent, and miserable by Envy! O the
folly of Men, that flatter themselves, against all possible Checks and Frowns
of Heaven, with the vain aspiring Hope of seeing their pretended Heir one Day
restored to his natural Rights, and swaying the British Scepter: And they under
Him sharing among themselves all public Honors!

I would turn them to our Context, where we find very apposite Language to
address them in: -- I said to the Fools, Deal not foolishly: and to the Wicked,
Lift not up the Horn. Lift not up your Horn on high: Speak not with a stiff
Neck. For Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from
the South. But (as it follows in our Text) GOD is the Judge: He puts down
one, and sets up another.

THE words are part of an Hymn of Thanksgiving, which is generally though it to
have been penned by David (or by Asaph, in the Person of David, as his
Poet-Laureat) at his Royal Highness's Accession to the Throne of Israel. Or, as
some think, it may be an Abstract of some Speech made by King David to a
Convention of the States, at his coming to the Crown: which Asaph might turn
into Verse, and publish in a Poem to make it the more popular. Noble Language
it is, to come from the Throne! Alas! That we hear so little of any such
devotional Strains, either in Declarations and Speeches of crowned Heads, or in
Addresses to Thrones in our Day.

THE Royal Author, in very emphatical Terms, devoutly gives Thanks to GOD, and
resolves to sing Praises for ever to the God of Jacob, who had anointed him to
be King, and done so many great and good things for his People and Him. Then as
a just Return of Gratitude, he lays himself under the bond of a solemn Promise,
to manage his great Trust with Integrity, and exert himself for the public
Weal. He seems to express his Hope of a prosperous Reign, by the Will of GOD,
notwithstanding the present cloudy posture of Affairs, through the prevalence of
Parties and Factions in the Kingdom; which necessarily weaken the Strength and
slur the Beauty of any Government.

HE hopes to bear up the Pillars of the Land; to support a just Authority: and
makes that Declaration, truly worthy a religious Prince; -- All the horns of
the Wicked will I cut off, but the horns of the Righteous shall be exalted.

HE gives a public Rebuke to the insolent Opposers of his Government; whether
the dissolute Wretches, that hated him for his known Zeal in Religion, and were
for doing all in their power to obstruct the due Administration of Justice: Or
that malignant Party in the Nation, that boldly struck at the King's Head, and
denied his Right of Succession to the Crown; who had proclaimed Ishbosheth,
Readiness Son, to be King, and appeared in open Arms against David. Many violently
opposed his Settlement on the Throne; raised one audacious Rebellion after
another in favor of the then -- Pretender; and there was a long struggle
between the house of Saul and the house of David: -- Abner, General of the
Army, and other Men in place, making themselves strong for the house of Saul.
-- But David was not afraid of their Terror: His Enemies made very loud Boasts,
and heaped all possible Insults upon him: But as a religious King, he boldly
appeals for Justice, to that GOD who is King of Kings, the grand disposer of
all earthly Crowns and Kingdoms: and as a Royal Prophet he foretells the
Destruction of his unrelenting Adversaries.

"IN singing this Psalm (says a pious Expositor) we must give to GOD the glory
of all the Revolutions of States and Kingdoms; believing that they are all
according to his Counsel, and He will make them all to work together for the
Good of his Church. We sometimes see strange Revolutions in Kingdoms and
States, and are surpised at the sudden Disgrace [or Decease] of some, and
Elevation of others: We are full of the Changes, when they happen. But here we
are directed to look at the Author of them: and are taught where the Original
of Power is, and from whence Promotion comes. Whence comes Preferment to
Kingdoms; to the Sovereignty of them? Whence come Preferments in Kingdoms, to
subordinate places of Power and Trust? The former depends not on the Will of
the People, nor the latter on the Will of the Prince: but both on the Will of
GOD, who has all Hearts in his hand. -- Therefore to GOD alone; David would
give the Praise of his Advancement: Therefore having received his Power from
GOD, he would use it for him, and hopes in him for Divine Conduct and Support:
and therefore they were Fools, that lifted up the horn against him Vid. Henry
in loc.
.

HAVING thus opened the Design and Scope of the Psalm, we may now center our
Tho'ts on the Text in particular, which I have chosen for the Subject of my
present Discourse. And here we may observe,

1. A general Truth asserted; GOD is the Judge.

2. AN Application of it to two particular Cases: He puts down one, and
sets up another.

I shall consider the several Paragraphs or Clauses, in the order wherein they
lie here: And accordingly,

I. WE may employ our Thoughts for a while on that general Truth, GOD is the
JUDGE.

THIS Title, in it is more restrained and proper notion, is the name of a
judiciary under-officer in the State, whose Province it is to hear and
determine Causes referred to him, to apply and execute the Laws, and to
distribute Justice between Man and Man. But it is sometimes used in a more
extensive sense, so as to take in the Characters of Lawgiver and King, and is
applied to the Prince or Chief Ruler. So the extraordinary Governors, which GOD
raised up and placed at the head of the Jewish Nation, between the Times of
Joshua and Saul, were styled Judges.

THE LORD our GOD is Judge, in the highest and most comprehensive View of the
Word. The very Name of GOD carries in it Sovereignty, the height of Dominion
and judicial Power. He that is GOD, must necessarily be conceived of, as the
Supreme Being, the highest Authority, who gives Law to all, and judges all.

THE incomparable Excellencies of his most perfect Nature qualify Him to be the
Judge. Among the Gods, there is none like unto Him: None of like Capacity; none
of like Merit, with Him. -- Now this is the Order of Nature and Reason, that
the Greater and more Excellent should rule and judge the Lesser.

AND then the various Superior Relations, which GOD sustains toward the World,
entitle Him to be the Judge. Thus, He is the great Creator and high Possessor
of Heaven and Earth: the first Cause, and the last End of the Creature: the
continual Preserver, and bountiful Benefactor of the Universe. -- He has
therefore an indisputable Right to prescribe Rules and Laws to the World; to
inspect the Behavior of his Creatures, and call them to an Account, concerning
their Regards to his Authority, and Improvement of his Favors, which are only
so many Talents, of which they are but Stewards, and so accountable.

Hence, THE Scriptures, which were given by Inspiration of GOD, do every where
assert his Character, as Judge. The Psalmist draws up that Conclusion, Verily
he is a God that judges in the Earth Psalm. 58.11.
. Jephtha appeals to Him in those terms, God the Judge Judge. 11.27
. So the Prophet triumphs in him, The Lord is our Judge Isa. 43.22.
. And the Apostle calls him, God the Judge of all Heb. 12.23.
. GOD is literally and properly a Judge: yea eminently and emphatically the
Judge.

HE is vested with all the Powers, and performs all the Offices of a Judge. He
gives Laws to the whole Creation: All the Laws of Nature, Reason, and
Revelation are equally the Result of his Sovereign Will and Pleasure. All
Things come to pass by the determinate Counsel and Foreknowlege of GOD. He
works all things according to the Pleasure of his own Will. He passes
Sentence, and gives it Accomplishment: decrees the Event, and gives it
Existence. Execution is the Life of the Law; and this is the peculiar care of
his superintending Providence. The Sufferings of the present time are the
Inflictions of his corrective Hand. The Miseries of Hell are the Effects of his
destroying Vengence. And the Blessings both of Heaven and Earth are the
Displays of his remunerative Grace and Bounty. Thus then GOD is the Judge, to
all Intents and Purposes.

AND now, If you inquire into his CHARACTER and Properties; I will give you the
same, in the following Hints; which might very profitably be enlarged upon, but
designing only a single Discourse, upon the present Occasion, I must study
Brevity.

TO proceed then,

GOD is a most Rightful Judge. His several Claims, which are all founded in the
stricted Equity, have been already recited.

HE is a Royal Judge. Not a judicial Minister, as the greatest
Lord-chief-Justice upon Earth is, and no more; but an enthroned Judge; Imperial
Majesty sitting in Judgment.

HE is an Independent, Self-sufficient, Almighty Judge: Derives not his Power
from any, nor depends on any for the Continuance or Exercise of it: Needs
none to stand as Witnesses, or sit as Assessors with Him, in the Judgment, or
assist in Execution. He is omnipresent, and omniscient; that none can hide
themselves in Darkness, nor fly out of his Reach. Infinitely wise, that none
can deceive him by false appearances, or outwit Him by subtle Reasonings;
Unsearchable in his Judgments, and his Tho'ts very deep: confounding all the
Policy of Hell and Earth. -- And equal is his Power; his Will irresistible, his
Hand uncontrollable. Who has been his Counselor? or who can disannul his
Judgment? Who art thou, O man, that reply against GOD!

Moreover, HE is a most Patient and Compassionate Judge: Seated on a Throne of
Grace; Long-suffering and abundant in Goodness: Slow to Anger, and ready to
forgive: not willing that any should perish: not dealing with us after our
Iniquities, but in the midst of Judgment remembering Mercy: leaving Room for
Repentance, and beseeching Sinners to be reconciled to Him: Making all possible
allowances to his People, for human Infirmities: He will not break the bruised
Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax. Commiserating all our Wants and Miseries:
He is Eyes to the Blind, Ears to the Deaf, Feet to the Lame, a Shepherd to the
Poor, a Father to the Orphan, and the Judge of Widows.

Again, HE is a most Equal and Impartial Judge: always unerring and exact in
his Precepts, his Sentences and Executions: steady to the Rules of Law and
Justice, Wisdom and Goodness, by which he proportions Rewards and Punishments:
Firm to his own Establishments, true to his Word, and doing nothing by absolute
Prerogative, or mere arbitrary Will, so as to violate the wise and just
Constitutions of his Kingdom. Far be it from GOD, rhat He should do Iniquity:
and from the Almighty, that He should pervert Judgment! With Him there is no
unrighteousness; no respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts. He is a most holy
and upright Judge: will by no means justify the Wicked, nor condemn the
Righteous.

HE is an Universal and Everlasting Judge. GOD is the Judge of all, the Judge
of Quick and Dead, of Men and Angels. He rides in Circuit through the Heavens,
and his Eyes run to and fro in all the Earth: beholding the Evil and the Good;
dispensing Punishments and Rewards. His Powers and Operations are most
constant, unwearied and never ceasing: He continually attends on this very
thing, Inspecting; governing and judging in the Earth. And in the last day,
that great day of Assizes, the whole World shall be convened before his
Judgment Seat, and all having given an Account of themselves to GOD, shall
receive their various Dooms, according to their different Conduct in the
present State. GOD will sentence the Wicked to the Flames of Hell, but his
Righteous ones to the Joys of Heaven. And this will be an Eternal Judgment:
instantly executed, without any Reprieve; without any Appeal, and without all
possibility of being reversed. The Sentences then pronounced, shall be to all
Eternity in Execution. GOD will sit King for ever: and of his Dominion and
Judgment there shall be no End; no Period to Everlasting.

NOW let these Sayings sink down into our Hearts, and have a powerful Influence
on our Tempers and Deportments.

WHAT has been said may serve to raise our Apprehensions of the excellent
Majesty and Greatness of the Blessed GOD; and of the Lord Jesus, to whom all
Judgment is committed, that Men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father. O let his Excellency make us afraid. The greatest of Mortals may well
tremble at his Presence. The Though It of his all-seeing Eye, and righteous
Tribunal, may well strike an universal Terror on the World. Let all the Earth
fear before Him. Let the Princes and Judges of the Earth, fear his Name: for He
is King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and Judge of Judges. They stand on a common
Level with others, before GOD, and are equally obnoxious to his terrible
Displeasure. He will break the Teeth of the Ungodly, and dash them in pieces
with a Rod of Iron. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be instructed, ye Judges
of the Earth. Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling. Kiss the
Feet of the SON of GOD, lest he be angry, and your way perish. Will ye provoke
the Lord of Hosts to Jealousy? Are ye stronger than He? Or think thou this,
O Man, which judge others who do such things and do the same, That thou
shall escape the Judgment of GOD! Verily none ever hardened themselves against
GOD, and prosper'd. -- Let us all carry it suitably to our glorious LORD;
prepare to give our Account, and engage our Judge to be our Friend.

Furthermore, HERE is an excelling Pattern for all Rulers and Judges to form
and govern their Conduct by. Let the many admirable Excellencies of this
Heavenly and Chief Judge be attended to, and drawn into Imitation by our
Earthly Governors: So shall we have our Judges as at the first, and venerate
them as little Images of GOD upon Earth.

Again, Here is matter of abundant Consolation to the People of GOD.

THIS glorious Judge is their Friend, their avowed Friend, and He will save
them. How safe and happy must they be, who have secured an Interest in tne
Favor of GOD the Judge of all! He will choose all their Changes for them. He
will plead their Cause. against the Enemies of their Souls. No Evil happens
to the Just: but all things work together for Good. Realise it, O Believer,
that GOD is the Judge, and that all his dealings with you are in Righteousness
and in Wisdom. Let not your Heart then be troubled: but rejoice in the Lord,
and again I say, Rejoice.

NEITHER let your Heart be afraid. Don't distrust the Power or Faithfulness of
divine Providence. Cast all your private Cares on the Lord, and He will sustain
you. Commit also to Him the Church of GOD in the World, and refer all it is
Concerns to his sovereign Dispose. He will plead the Cause of his People Israel
at all times, as the matter may require; and will overruled in all Cases for
the securing his own Interest and Glory. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail.
The Curse causeless shall not come. The Enemies of his Kingdom may conspire
with their united Force and Rage against it; but they shall imagine a vain
thing. The Friends of Zion may die and fail, and scarce any of her Sons be left
to take her by the hand: Yet GOD, who judges his People, lives and reigns
world without end. And he can raise up successive Instruments, to serve his
Designs: or else bring Salvation with his own immediate Arm. -- The Lord our
GOD is the sovereign Arbiter of the World, and absolute Disposer of all Events.
He balanceth the Clouds of Heaven; He weighs the Mountains in Scales, and
hangs the Earth upon Nothing. He sits upon the Circle of the Universe: and
his Arm rules over all the Kingdoms of Men. We often talk of Earthly
Potentates holding the Balance among the Nations: But this must be understood
in a limited Sense, and with just Reserves to DIVINE Sovereignty. For GOD is
the Judge, the supreme Moderator, who most truly holds the Balance of Power in
his mighty hand, and turns the Scale on which side he will, governing all
natural Causes and moral Agents, and overruling all public Actions,
Resolutions and Events, as He pleases. The Hearts of Kings, and Affairs of
States and Empires are under his Eye and Influence; entirely suspended on his
uncontrolable Determinations. Trust in HIM therefore, O ye People! The Lord
reigns: let not Zion be afraid.

Finally, LET us improve the Point before us to holy Thankfulness; admiring and
magnifying our GOD the Judge, for all his great Goodness to Israel: That He
has pleaded the Cause of his People, and upheld his Church in the World,
amidst innumerable Evils, Wars, Persecutions and Oppressions. The LORD is great
in Zion: and He rules in the midst of his Enemies. Surely there is no
Enchantment against Jacob. But Israel may set up their Ebenezer, and say,
Hitherto the Lord has helped us!

WHAT an admirable Train of glorious Deliverances did GOD the Judge give his
People in old Time to experience! The whole Story of the Jews is brightened
with very numerous and most surprising Memorials. -- And the Conduct of
Providence toward the Christian Church, both in the primitive and later Ages,
has been almost equally full of Wonders.

THE English Nation in particular has been the Stage of many the most
remarkable Dispensations. Not to go up higher than these last Centuries: -- By
what mavelous Methods of Providence was the blessed REFORMATION from Popery
accomplished! And how has this glorious Interest been signally guarded, by an
amazing Series of special Interpositions to this day! It has passed through many
a hazardous Crisis, and been reduced to an expiring Posture time after time:
But has received new Life, and been made to flourish again, by some happy Turn
of Affairs, so sudden and unaccountable, that the Finger of GOD has visibly
appeared; It Is Enemies themselves being Judges: And all the World have been
forced to say, Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous; Verily there is a
GOD that judges in the Earth.

AND here, How can I help taking a particular Notice of the wonderful
Appearances of Heaven for our NONCONFORMING Brethren at home; a despised, but
truly valuable, most loyal and religious Part of the Nation: who have been
further prosecuting the holy Aim of the First Reformers, and carrying on the
Work they so happily began! How strangely has this feeble Interest been
protected, when in the utmost Danger: and when in a sinking dying Condition,
how often recovered, by the merciful Operations of a special Providence!

OR how can I refrain mentioning the Salvation that has been nigh to
NEW ENGLAND! The Stones would cry out, if I should pass over this in silence!
But who can utter the mighty Acts of the Lord toward the Inhabitants of these
Villages! The great Actions and Specialties of Providence in favor of his
People here, have been many and astonishing: And afford Materials for as
bright, as entertaining and affecting a Story as any Place in the whole World,
in the same Compass of Time, can furnish out. For whether we reflect on the
Beginning and Rise, or Continuance and Progress of these Plantations, that were
begun upon a religious Foundation, we are on all sides presented with very
wonderful Displays of the saving Power, directing Wisdom, beneficent Goodness,
and unfailing Truth of our Covenant-GOD. A signal Hand of Providence has
interposed from time to time in particular for the preservation of our
invaluable CHARTER-Constitution: so much our Glory and Strength, and a
Protection upon our dearest Interests, our Schools and Churches; but the Envy
of Many in the World, who cease not crying, Raze it, Raze it from the very
foundations. Yet it has not fallen a Prey to their thirsty Malevolence. Verily
our GOD has helped us: and blessed be his Name. Next under his powerful and
more immediate Care, the Continuance of our precious Privileges and Freedoms is
owing to those National Mercies, which have extended their benign Influence to
these distant Regions, the Revolution, and the Protestant Succession. However
Men may glory in the Blessing of the Restoration, That would have entailed a
Curse (rather) on Posterity, had it not been for the happy Changes, that by a
kind Disposition of Providence, have since passed over the Kingdom. For, as a
celebrated Bishop Dr. B. Hoadly.
of the present Day observes, If you view the Restoration, without the
Revolution and the Protestant Succession, It leads you directly to a Popish
Prince, holding an arbitrary Hand over all your Liberties; tearing up the
Fences of all your Laws; fixing all Right in his own Will and Power; and
persecuting all his Subjects into the Exercise of his own, superstitious,
idolatrous, and cruel Religion. And this is the whole of the Blessing, in which
you would see it end at last. A Blessing, which may be a fit Reward for the
slavish Bigottry of Papists! But for Protestants -- fit only for Those of them,
who deserve it. And They deserve it, who choose it; whom no Experience, no
Consideration, no Miracles of Providence can engage to prefer their own
Happiness before their own Destruction.

IT is owing (under GOD) to the Revolution, and the Hanover-Succession, that
the British Kingdoms and Dominions have seen a Period of arbitrary Rule and
Popish Madness. That Revolution and that Succession have been the means of
preserving the Reformed Interest in Britain, and securing the civil and
religious Liberties of these dependent Colonies. O! How can we reflect on it
without the highest Pleasure and Gratitude! Surely if we have any just Notion
of what Happiness means; if any Feeling of the Happiness, which in such plenty
surrounds us on all sides; we must be filled with the most passionate Joy and
Praise, when we reflect on those Works of Wonder, in the accomplishment whereof
such an almost miraculous Hand of GOD appeared.

IF we should cast our Eyes back to the glorious Revolution under King
WILLIAM'S happy Conduct, who has been well styled the Moses of his Day, for
redeeming the Nation from Slavery, and the David of his Time, for fighting the
Lord's Battles, and bearing up the Pillars of a dissolving State: If we should
take a View of that stupendous Attempt, and consider how it was begun and
carried on, and what an unparalled Coincidence of desirable Circumstances
there was, without which there had been no hope of Success; this would lead us
into a grateful Variety and astonishing Scene of remarkable Events: Such as
loudly proclaim to the World an interposing Hand of Providence, guiding and
influencing that great affair, from first to last.

ONE of the most illustrious Consequences of the Revolution, and what was
necessary to complete and establish the Public Happiness, was the fixing the
Succession to the Crown in the Protestant Line. This happy Settlement was King
WILLIAM'S sublime Projection; the grand care of his Life, and one of the
noblest Acts of his auspicious Reign. This was the most effectual Security of
the Protestant Religion, the Legal Toleration, and Liberty of Conscience.
Without this, the Nation had probably tasted the sweet Fruits of the Revolution
but for a very short Season. Without this, insolent Popery and arbitrary
Government might long since have returned, and laid us all in Chains again. But
Thanks be to GOD, who put such an earnest Care into the Heart of King WILLIAM
for us, and who bowed the Hearts of the Nobles and Parliaments of that day to
come into his happy Though It of the Hanover-Succession; to put the public Sanction
upon it, and to confirm the Royal Decree by repeated Resolutions, and
concurring Votes of Lords and Commons from time to time. It Is remarkable how
all Factions and Denominations have at least pretended to unite in this wise
Expedient for the Nation's Safety. Several Parliaments of a different
Complexion, and under the Influence of contrary Views and Principles, have
centred in this Design, and openly declared for it. And all the Protestants in
the Nation swore to the Protestant Succession, even before it took Place.
Herein was the Finger of GOD!

And then, WHEN it actually begun, in his late Majesty King GEORGE, there were
bright appearances of a Divine Hand, in his coming to the Throne with so many
Circumstances of Peace and Glory. Vast had been the Hazards attending the
Protestant Settlement of the Crown: Many a Cloud had hung over it: and for
several years before it in fact took place, it was under a very threatening
Cloud indeed, and seemed to be almost hopeless and lost for ever. But all of a
sudden there was an unexpected Turn of Affairs, and way made for the Protestant
House of Hanover to take Possession of the Throne, in the Person of glorious
King GEORGE. Whose Accession was at a Juncture and in a Manner, which had such
signal Characters of a kind Providence interposing (to rescue a sinking Nation
out of the hands of mercenary and faithless Statesmen, who had miserably
betrayed their Queen and Country) that it is hardly possible for any that
observed those Signatures of a Divine Hand, ever to forget them. When it is
considered how ripe things seemed at that day in favor of the Pretender; how
many foreign Friends he had engaged, and what numbers of powerful Adherents he
had in the Kingdom; what a weak and disjointed state Things were in at home;
how remote King GEORGE was from his British Dominions, etc. When we reflect on
these Circumstances, it must be confessed the Protestant Succession past through
a very dangerous Crisis, and his late Majesty's peaceable Settlement on the
Throne, gave a most surprising Deliverance to the Nation.

"IT was in an Extremity (says Bp. Burnet, who had as true an understanding in
the Times, perhaps as any Man in his day) when the Best Men in the Nation were
preparing themselves for dismal Events; having a Scene of Ruin and Confusion
before them: But it pleased GOD to break the Cloud, and dissipate our Fears all
at once. It was with a sudden Stroke that all the World was surprised: the
plotting Enemies of the Hanover-Settlement thrown into great Confusion, their
Counsels all perplexed, and they themse ves It deserves a Memorandum, That as
the Restoration of King CHARLES, which made way for the present happy
Succession, was the work of a Presbyterian Parliament: so the bringing in of
King GEORGE was at last actually done by a Tory Ministry, though sorely against
their Wills.

And it is though it worthy of Remark, That at the time when a Race of Princes was
called home to the Throne, who soon after went directly into those Popish and
Arbitrary Measures, which would have been the Nation's Ruin; a wise and good
Providence kindly took Care for his People, that at that very time, this great
Protestant Prince, our late glorious Sovereign, should be born into the World,
viz. on May 28 1660.


strangely obliged to proclaim the Legal Successor: and thus all bad designs
were prevented, by the immediate Succession of a Protestant KING, unanimously
proclaimed, and soon possessed of the Throne, without any Molestation at home
or from abroad. Here was the overruling Hand of GOD the Judge, in confounding
the designs of a disaffected Party, and blasting the Hopes of a Popish
Pretender, when just at the point of Accomplishment. They were lifting up the
Horn on high, and boasting with a stiff Neck: while the Friends of the Legal
Settlement were almost bro't to Despair, and ready to give it up for lost. At
such a Conjuncture it was, that GOD the Judge, appeared for his People's
Relief; pleaded their Cause, and scattered the thick impending Cloud of Sorrows
near in View, by introducing the illustrious House of HANOVER to the British
Throne. Then our Righteousness went forth as Brightness, and our Salvation as a
Lamp that burns. GOD our Judge gave us a King, who was as the Light of the
Morning, when the Sun rises, even a Morning without Clouds. And all true
Protestants, were ready to salute KING GEORGE in the Language of Amasai, Thine
are we, and on thy side* Peace, Peace be to thee; and Peace be to thy Helpers:
for thy God helps thee.

THE Blessing of the Hanover-Succession came recommended, with a peculiar force
and charm, by the uncommon ruling Virtues and Accomplishments of the First
Possessor, which challenged the Love and Reverence of all his People: And also
by the Prospect of a lasting Line of Princes descending from Him, which boded a
long Succession of public Blessings in future times. Herein was the favor of
GOD to his People: Those two Circumstances contributed exceedingly to
facilitate the Legal Settlement's taking Place, and to dispirit all it is
Enemies.

AND herein was the Favor of GOD to this Protestant Royal Family. It is a
Circumstance that deserves a grateful Observation, That the House of Hanover
descends from that excellent KING and QUEEN of Bohemia, which were such
renowned Patrons of the Protestant Religion, and so great Sufferers for it.
This has been noted often, and can never enough be celebrated; That as a
Kingdom was lost for Fidelity to the Protestant Religion; so the GRANDSON of
them who lost it; was for the sake of that very Religion, rewarded with more
considerable Dominions. -- GOD remembered David and all his Afflictions, and
showed Mercy unto his Seed. This is the LORD'S doing, and it is mavelous in
our Eyes. GOD is the Judge: Rejoice in Him, ye People! Ascribe ye Greatness to
our GOD; ascribe Righteousness to Him: and praise Him for his mighty Acts of
Justice and of Mercy.

KINGS are subject to GOD; appointed by Him and dependent on Him. They come to
Honor, at the Time, and in the Way, that He has appointed: and rise to the
Height that He has decreed.

THIS is the Doctrine taught in our Text and Context. Promotion comes neither
from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South, nor yet from the North.
But God is the Judge; He puts down One, and sets up Another. GOD is
represented as gathering the Winds in his Fist, and establishing all the Ends
of the Earth. The fair Gale of Promotion is not under the power of second
Causes; but blows by direction of the First Cause, the supreme Moderator of all
Events. The LORD makes poor, and makes rich: He brings low, and lifts up
1 Samuel 2.7.
. He removes Kings, and sets up Kings Dan. 2 21.
; whom, and when, and how it seems good in his sight.

BUT I would consider these two Articles distinctly, according to the order
wherein they lie in the Text. Wherefore in the next place,

II. WE may bestow a few Thoughts on that Proposition, He puts down One.

HERE we might premise this Remark, That there are frequent Depositions and
Overturnings seen in the World. This is applicable both to Societies and
Persons.

WE often see Societies put down: Families, Towns, Provinces, Kingdoms and
Empires brought low, by unhappy Vicissitudes. It is with political Bodies, as
with Bodies natural: They are often out of order, and are sometimes reduced to
a very unhealthy Condition: labor of dangerous Distempers, and have Shame
poured on all their Glory.

WE often see particular Persons put down. Sometimes Men are reduced from a
State of general Prosperity; deprived of their Riches, Pleasures, Grandeurs;
and sunk into a State of Affliction, Poverty, and Meanness. Riches take to
themselves wings, and the Fashion of this World passes away. -- Sometimes we
see Men cast down from their Dignity in particular, and fall under public
Disgrace: by the Displeasure of the Prince; by the Resentments of the Populace;
or by a sense of their own Villainies forcing them to seek Obscurity. Thus we
see some who once made a figure among our English CHIEFS, now turned Renegades
and Fugitives with an abject Chevalier. -- We see frequent Changes in the
public Ministry of States and Kingdoms: And sometimes even Crowned Heads have
been forced to stoop to their Rebel-Subjects, or have fallen before some
powerful Invader. -- So frail and uncertain is all human Glory!

In fine, WE oftnest of all see Men in Place and Power, put down by the
undistinguishing stroke of DEATH. The King of Terrors is the mightiest Monarch
in the World: bearing down before him all the Powers of the Earth. Both High
and Low fall Victims to his conquering Sword. We see that our titular Gods, how
highly soever exalted above their Brethren, are yet equally tributary to Death,
and not exempted from paying the common Debt of Nature. They are called Gods;
but die like Men. "They are Gods to us: but are Men to GOD". They have the same
corruptible Nature, as other Men: and are under the same inflexible Sentence of
Mortality. What Is become of the Cesars and the Alexanders, that once made such
a Figure, and such a Noise in the World? They are long since put down by the
powerful Hand of inexorable Death; put down in the Dust; put down below all the
Living. The most potent Monarch has nothing to secure him from the fatal
Stroke, any more than the feeblest Peasant: And that brings them on a Level. He
is liable to the same Diseases and Disasters. And neither his Earthly Riches,
nor Civil Honors; nor yet his Moral Excellencies, are any Protection to him.
Moses, the Servant of the Lord, King in Jeshurun, as well as proud Pharaoh, his
Enemy, King of Egypt, died at last. David, King of Israel, a Man after GOD'S
own Heart, as well as ungodly Saul, whom the Lord rejected, was dethroned by
the irresistible Conqueror. -- So, to give an Instance fresh in your Memories;
That glorious Deliverer of the Nation, WILLIAM the Third, was put down by
Death, as well as miserable James the Second. And now King GEORGE, that most
renowned Hero of the Age, is dead, as well as an unhappy Russian Empress. --
Their Breath was alike in their Nostrils: It went forth, and they are fallen a
common Prey to devouring Worms.

NOW what are the Lessons we are taught by these awakning Dispensations?

WE are hereby taught the Instability of the World; the Precariousness of every
Condition; the Vanity of the most prosperous and exalted Life; the Folly of
putting our Confidence in the most sufficient and powerful Friends on Earth.
Cease ye then from Man: for wherein is he to be accounted of! -- Trust not in
Princes: in whom we might trust, if in any among all Mankind; because they have
the greatest Powers and most extensive Advantages. Yet it is said, Psalm. 146.3,
4. Put not your Trust in PRINCES: -- Their Breath goes forth, and they return
to the Earth, like the Rest of their fellow creatures. The Though It of their
Mortality should subdue those towering Expectations we are apt to raise from
the superior Abilities of good and great Princes. -- That Though It should also
correct all sinking Fears from an apprehension of the formidable Power of
Enemies, or the Rage of oppressing Tyrants. -- And it should repel every
Tendency to invidious Regret at Men's Prosperity in the World. Let not your
heart be envious, neither let it be afraid, when one is made rich, when the
glory of his house is increased: for when he dies, his Glory shall not descend
after him Psalm. 49.16, 17.
.

IN a word, LET us receive Conviction of our own Mortality, and be put upon
diligent Preparation for a dying hour, which is hastening upon us all. If Death
conquers KINGS, besure meaner Men may expect to find no Discharge in this War.
The Decease of our late Monarch is a loud warning to his whole Kingdom and
Dominions; as much as the Death of a Father to all his House. The Death even of
any common Person, how obscure and minute soever, carries in it matter of
impressive Observation, and calls us to serious Reflections: Much more the Fall
of great Men, Rulers and Princes; in which, as the Stroke is heavier, so the
Voice louder, and both more extensive.

THE Death of a King calls aloud to the Kings of the Earth, especially to the
next in Succession to him, to consider their End, and reign as dying Creatures.

THE Death of a KING is in particular a solemn Peal rung in the Ears of all
subordinate Governors and Magistrates in his Kingdoms and Dominions. The
general Vacation of Commissions by his Demise, should put them upon preparing
to be finally turned out of place The Day of Death is by the Latins called,
Dies depositionis.
by their own Death, which will soon follow. For, though (as by a special Act in
that Case it is provided, in our Nation, that Persons in Office shall continue
in their Stations for half a year after the King's Death, unless sooner removed
by the succeeding Prince: So) perhaps you may be allowed a short Reprieve from
Daath; yet sooner or later you must die, and go the way of all the Earth. --
May our honorable Rulers, whom we see in Mourning for the public Bereavement,
be enabled to lay it truly to heart, and so be animated to greater Zeal and
Diligence in serving their Generation, and preparing to give up their Accounts
to GOD the Judge.

MAY we all be made more mindful of our approaching End. The Language of
Providence to us is that, Be ye ready; for ye know not the day nor the hour.
Watch, lest your Lord coming suddenly, should find you sleeping. -- His late
Majesty's Death The public Prints tell us, That the KING died of an Apoplectic
Fit, in his Travels abroad; being on his Journey to Hanover, and having just
reached Osenburg; at the Palace of his Brother, the Duke of York, June 11.
was by a sudden and surprising Stroke. And we are almost daily alarmed by
repeated Instances of sudden Death among our selves. O let us hereby be roused
out of that Security we are so incident to, and be excited to hasten our
Preparations for Eternity; as not knowing how soon we may be called off the
present Stage.

BUT I come now,

TO observe, That GOD is the Author of all these Changes and Revolutions. GOD
is the Judge: HE puts down.

IN whatever Sense any are put down, it is by the sovereign Hand of GOD. If Men
be turned out of their worldly Possessions, it is GOD that impoverishes them;
whether it be done by those Casualties that are more immediately at the dispose
of Divine Providence, or by the Interposition of humane Instruments. -- So if
any be turned out of their Posts of Honor, it is GOD that displaces them. Even
those Disgraces, which come upon the Innocent, through the Envy and Malice of
undermining Rivals, are by the Permission of GOD. Has it not been known in some
Reigns, that the most faithful Ministers of State, and most victorious Generals
have been discarded, and very unaccountable alterations made; without any other
Reason assigned but what is as bad as none, viz. mere Will and Pleasure! And
how often have Men been run down and ruined by mere dint of Slander! Yet in all
this we must look above Instruments; as devout David, who said, The Lord has
bid Shimei: to curse me. -- But the Divine Agency is more especially seen in
those Disgraces, that fall upon the Guilty, and are deserved; which very often
happens. Particularly, there are many times strange Retributions in the Turns
of Providence: as when wicked Haman was himself hanged on the very Gallows he
had newly erected for loyal and pious Mordecai. GOD preserves the Faithful,
and plentifully rewards the proud Doer. When we see those Men degraded, that
were instrumental in the supplanting and oversetting of others, and triumphed
in it: When we see Men stripped of their Estates and Honors, and banished their
native Country, who had plotted to take away the Subsistence of others, and rob
them of the very Rights of Nature, and Privileges of Englishmen: So when we
see Them attainted of Treason, or punished for Rebellion, who have signalis'd
their Fury against Those that are quiet in the Land, under Color of their
being Men of dangerous Principles and seditious Practices: -- What can we say
in all such Cases? Who knows not in all these, that the hand of the Lord has
wrought this? GOD is many times known by the Judgments, which He executes.
Have we not in our day seen the fulfillment of those Scriptures? -- He takes
the wise in their own Craftiness: and saves the Poor from the Sword, from the
Mouth, and from the Hand of the Mighty. Lo! The Deceived and the Deceiver are
His. He leads Counselors away spoiled: He pours Contempt on Princes: He
overthrows the Chief of the People, and causes them to wander in Exile.

HAVE we not seen a Divine Hand remarkably putting down the Enemies of King
GEORGE! Setting aside an abjured Pretender; taking off certain Potentates, his
powerful Friends, at the critical Junctures; and frustrating his infatuated
Votaries, by a Series of wonderful Providence! The Trumpet of Sedition has
been almost ever sounding; and dangerous Plots so frequently repeated, that
they may be called one continued Conspiracy. But the Lord poured Contempt on
their Counsels, and disgraced all their Measures. We have seen an invading
Sennacherib, with a Hook in his Nose, and a Bridle in his Lips, turned back by
the way which he came. GOD showed Mercy to his Anointed, and subdued the People
under Him. He bound the Floods from overflowing: and the Thing that was hid,
brought he forth to Light. He has destroyed the wisdom of the Wise, and
scattered tho Proud in the Imagination of their Hearts. They are brought down,
and fallen: but we are risen and stand upright. -- Unto Thee, O LORD do we give
Thanks: for that thy Name is near; thy wondrous Works declare. If it had not
been the LORD, who was on our side, may Israel now say: If it had not been the
LORD who was on our side; the Waters had overwhelmed us, the proud Waters had
gone over our Soul. But our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the
Fowlers. Blessed be the LORD, who has not given us a Prey to their Teeth. We
have seen very bright Displays of a divine Hand, putting down Those that have
exalted themselves, to imagine a mischievous Device; almost as sensible as when
they fought from Heaven, the Stars in their Courses, against Sisera.

BUT I pass now to hint,

WHEN any are removed by Death, and laid in the Dust, it is GOD that puts them
down.

GOD is the sovereign Disposer of the Lives of Men. Even the Princes of the
World subsist by his Power and Mercy. So it was said to King Nebuchadnezzar,
The God in whose hand thy Breath is, and whose are all thy ways --. He takes
away their Breath when He pleases, and so takes their Crown from them.

HENCE then we may learn,

First, WHOM to fear; not Man but GOD. If GOD be for us, we may boldly say, The
LORD is my Helper; I will not fear what Man can do unto me, or the Son of Man,
who is a worm. But fear GOD, who has thy Life in his Hand; and because there is
Wrath, beware lest He take thee away with his Stroke: then a great Ransom
cannot deliver thee.

Again, WE learn Whom to put our Trust in; not Man but GOD. The Psalmist wisely
concludes, It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put Confidence in
Princes. O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: He is your Help, and your Shield.
Some boast themselves in the Multitude of their Riches; some in Chariots, and
some in Horses: But we will remember the Name of the Lord our GOD. We will
trust in Him to save his People, and to preserve his Anointed: to establish the
Throne of Great Britain in the present Royal Family, against all the Claims and
Attempts of a Pretended Heir; to turn the Counsel of Ahitophel into
Foolishness, and preserve the Lamp that GOD has prepared, for a Light to his
People Israel.

IN a word, WHAT has been said, directs us to eye the Hand of GOD in the
Revolutions we experience or observe. In all Changes whether personal,
domestic, or public, we must realise a Divine Agency. Under all Crosses,
Bereavements, Necessities, Reproaches, etc. we must look at the hand of GOD
stretched out, and inquire wherefore GOD is contending with us. We must humble
our selves in the sight of GOD, under the Calamities that befall our Country or
Nation.

Particularly, AT this day, we are called to consider GOD as the Judge, who
puts down KINGS: and should lay to heart the awful Stroke of his hand in
removing our late glorious MONARCH from our Head.

KING GEORGE seemed to be formed for the Happiness of Mankind: raised up by a
kind Providence, to be the common Protector of Europe, the Guardian of the
Reformation, and the Defense of Britain. Therefore his Royal Person was under a
constant peculiar Tutelage of Heaven, and appeared the visible Favorite of
Providence. He was in Labors and Fatigues more abundant; in Journeying often, in
Perils many, in Perils by Sea and Land, in Perils among false Brethren, in
Perils by secret Traitors, and open Enemies --. But GOD covered his Head;
preserved his precious Life, and made his Glory great in his Salvation. He
delivered Him not up to the Will of his Enemies, to them who breathed out
Cruelty and Slaughter. -- But now alas! He has given Him over to Death, and to
the power of the Grave.

HOW has the LORD covered Zion with a Cloud, and cast down to the Earth the
Beauty of Israel, the Breath of our Nostrils. The World has lost one of it is
brightest Glories, and the Church of GOD no little part of it is Strength and
Riches. Behold, the LORD, the LORD of Hosts takes away from Jerusalem the Stay
and the Staff, the mighty Man, and the Man of War, the Judge, and the Prudent,
and the Ancient --. O let us mourn the public Loss: and humble our selves under
the mighty Hand of GOD. Surely it is a Dispensation that challenges an eminent
Asterism to be put upon it; peculiar Notice to be taken of it; and calls for
all proper Expressions of a deep Regret and Sorrow.

YET while we are mourning the common Bereavement, we may not pass over those
alleviating Considerations, that present themselves to refresh our Sorrows.

LET us then with Thankfulness to GOD, review the bright Train of Blessings,
that filled and adorned King GEORGE'S Happy Reign: admire the many shining
Beauties in his Regal Character, and preserve a fresh Idea of his excellent
Administration, which has been as it were one continued Scene of Glory: wherein
we beheld a lively Copy of the Legal Constitution; according to which the Crown
has "many Prerogatives to protect us and do us Good, but none to invade our
Liberty or Property." We saw an uncommon Instance of Princely Greatness: the
height of Royal Majesty, and the depth of humble Indulgence, in a happy
Conjunction: An intrepid Bravery of Mind, and the Softness of human Passions,
met together: which is observed to make the most perfect composition of a happy
Prince. We beheld an earthly Crown cast down at the foot of Divine Sovereignty,
while his Majesty asserted the Rights of Conscience, and pleaded the Cause of
Christian Liberty. We beheld the National Laws governing the Royal Scepter;
triumphing over Tyranny, disgracing arbitrary Power, and putting illegal
Government quite out of Countenance. We saw a provident Care and frugal
Disposition of the public Treasure. We saw a successful Restorer of Trade and
Commerce, and of the public Faith: a powerful Protector of Innocence; and
Preserver of the Peace and and Tranquillity of the Nations. We saw a very
glorious Example of Truth and Firmness to Alliances. We saw a British KING
applied to, as the common Arbitrator between contending Powers, and the grand
Security of public Treaties: extending his happy Influence through all Europe, to
give Life and Vigor to the Protestant Interest, and secure the lasting
Happiness of his own Dominions. We saw a Prince as clement at home, as he was
terrible abroad: as Meek under Insults, as fearless of Enemies: as gracious on
the Throne, as he was courageous in the Field, and powerful on the Seas. We can
never enough admire the incomparable Temper and Mildness of his Government; the
unspotted Justice of his Administration; his happy Judgment and Knowledge of the
true Interests of the Public; the profound Wisdom of his universal Conduct; the
inflexible Constancy of his well concerted Resolutions; the Magnanimity of his
Attempts for the public Good; the admirable Dispatch of Affairs; the steady
indefatigable Attention to the public Helm; the Munificence of his Royal Hand
on many occasions; the indelible Sense of real Merit in his Servants, and the
Fidelity of his Friends --. But I forbear. It Is far from me to pretend to give
his MAJESTY'S Character, or an Account of his Administration. One may as well
attempt to celebrate Light and Health; Blessings to be rather felt than
described.

BY these things, He has very much retrieved the Glory of the English Nation,
and promoted the public Happiness. -- For these things, let the Name of KING
GEORGE the First, live immortal, and shine in the Rolls of Fame, through the
Series of all Posterities, with a never-fading Luster. -- And for these things,
let us give Thanks to GOD, the Father of Lights, from whom comes down every
good and perfect Gift. We should entertain our selves with such Reflections as
these, while we are mourning the public Loss. It Is a just Tribute to the Memory
of the KING, and a proper Expression (as well as Motive) of Gratitude to GOD,
who bro't Him to the Throne, and made him such an extensive Blessing. Though we
are in Tears for his Removal: yet we should be glad of heart for all the
Goodness of the LORD to his Servant David, and which He has done for his
People Israel.

Moreover, LET us reflect with a particular Sense of the favor of Heaven, on
the Manner in which the KING has been put down. That he was not deposed by the
hand of his Adversaries: not put down by a treasonable Deprivation; nor by
execrable Parricide; nor did he fall in Battle: but by the power of Disease, he
died a natural Death, and went the way of all the Earth. The Crown is fallen
from his Head: but not plucked thence by human Power; which might have provoked
the loud Triumphs and Insultings of his envious Enemies, which are also ours.
The Scepter dropped out of his royal Hand: not wrested away by the Sons of
Violence. He was not forced out of the Throne by an untimely End, as ONE of his
Predecessors: nor did he perish in an inglorious Exile, as ANOTHER: nor did he
as Others of Them, after some gloomy years of unhappy Management, depart
without Desire, like Jehoram. But King GEORGE died in the Bed of Honor, in the
midst of universal applause and Renown, in Possession of his Throne, and of his
People's loyal Hearts; and in the prospect of increasing Glory: in the 13th
year of his Reign, and 68th of his Age: full of Days, and full of Prosperity,
Wealth and Grandeur.

Finally, WE may note the Time when He was put down, and the happy Posture he
left Things in. We have Reason to be thankful to GOD for continuing his Servant
so long a public Good. -- We have cause to be thankful, that although he was
taken off at a critical Juncture, when the Eyes of all Israel were upon him,
waiting the Issue of his prudent Counsels: yet it was after Affairs abroad had
taken a favorable Turn, by the powerful Influence of his Care and Conduct. Had
he died but a few Months or Weeks sooner, in all probability, there had been a
darker Scene before us than at present appears. Let us bless GOD, who orders
the Times and Seasons, that the KING lived to see his wise Measures for
restoring the public Tranquillity, so far obtain their Accomplishment, as to
afford some Prospect of a general Pacification.

LET us be thankful, that Things at Home were left under so many Guards; and
all the Barriers of our civil and religious Liberties, in full force and secure.

LET us be thankful, that GOD has given his Servant a Royal HEIR and
Successor, who we hope will improve the Felicities we are left in possession
of, and complete the excellent Designs his Royal Father died in the prosperous
Pursuit of. As Moses died in the Wilderness, before he had perfected the work
of Israel's Redemption: but left a Joshua to carry on and finish that glorious
Enterprise. So his late Majesty was taken off by a sudden Stroke, and left
unfinished the happy Measures he had entered into, for the Tranquillity of
Europe, and Prosperity of his British Dominions: yet blessed be GOD, we have
Reason to hope that his Tho'ts will not so perish with him, but that the
admirable Schemes he has projected, will be pursued by his Illustrious
SUCCESSOR, for preserving the Balance of Europe. If one of the Admirers of King
GEORGE the First, (and who among us does not profess himself to be of that
number) should put Solomon's Question, What can the Man do that comes after the
King? It is answered, We hope King GEORGE the Second will not only do that
which has been done already, but even greater Works. The Prospect of HIS
Succeeding to the Crown, was no small Pleasure to his Royal FATHER, and to the
Nation. We hear King David on his Deathbed expressing a mighty Satisfaction,
at the Thought of Solomon's being his Successor in the Throne, 1 Kin. 1.48.
Thus said the King, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which has given One to
sit on my Throne this day mine Eye even seeing it! A like Satisfaction our late
KING expressed, in one of his most gracious Speeches to the Parliament: It is
My HAPPINESS (and I am confident you think it yours) to see a PRINCE of Wales,
who may in due time succeed me on the Throne; and to see Him blessed with many
Children; the best and most valuable Pledges of our Care and Concern for your
Prosperity. -- And as when David declared Solomon his Heir, to be King in his
stead, One answered the King, and said, AMEN! The Lord God of my Lord the King
say so too 1 Kin. 1.36.
. In like manner the loyal Subjects of the Crown have all along through the late
Reign, prayed for the High and Mighty Prince, GEORGE, Prince of Wales, that he
might survive his Royal FATHER, and in GOD'S time sit upon his Throne.

AND now by the Mercy of the most HIGH, we see an happy Answer of that Prayer:
which gives a just Allay to our present Grief, enlivens our Joy, and raises up
all our Hopes. We are groaning under the public Wound: yet it refreshes us to
see there is Balm in Gilead, and a Physician there.

BUT this brings me to the last part of my Subject, viz.

III. TO consider that Act of Providence, The Setting up Another.

AND here, I did design at first to reserve Room for some Enlargements; but
find I shall trespass on your Patience, if I do any more than give the
following Hints.

THE Psalmist attributes both Acts to the same Divine Hand: He that puts
down One, sets up another.

IT is GOD that exalts Men in the World. Prosperity in general, is from his
bountiful Providence. And in particular Promotion to places of Power and
Dignity is from GOD. Both Riches and Honor come of Him: In his hand it is to
make Great. It is GOD that furnishes Men for public Stations; forms their
Genius and Temper, according to the Variety of Employments; calls them forth to
actual Service, and by his overruling hand supplies all manner of Posts and
Offices, whether hereditary, or commissionary and elective.

GOD is the Founder and Upholder of States and Kingdoms. The Pillars of the
Earth are the Lord's; and He has set the World upon them. His Providence
governs in modelling the various Constitutions: and in all the Preferments of
Persons from time to time. Monarchy is a lawful form of Government; approved of
GOD. He (says the Prophet) sets up KINGS. As to the first indeed, that He
sat up in Israel, it is said, Hos. 13.11.
He gave him in his Anger, and took him away in his Wrath. But a Second he gave
in Mercy, and a Third in Love; to feed Jacob his People, and Israel his
Inheritance. It is mentioned as one Article of the Jews Happiness, That they
prospered into a Kingdom Eze. 16.14.
. And it was one great privilege of that Nation that their King was obliged to
administer according to Law, (the Judicial Part of the Body of Divine Laws, the
only Civil Law of that People) and was required to keep a Copy by Him, to read
in Day and Night; that He might learn to fear GOD, and his Heart not be lifted
up above his Brethren Deuteronomy. 17.19.
. WE enjoy no less Happiness. We live under a Legal Government, that takes our
own Consent to the Laws we are ruled by, most advantagiously places the
Executive Power, and puts the public Justice under a regular Administration: --
A mixed Monarchy, where the Prerogative is limited, and the Subjects liberty and
Property secured by Legal Fences: An excellent Constitution, and as well
perhaps as any in the World, answers the End of Civil Policy, which is the Good
of the Community. Let us be thankful to GOD, for the public Liberty and Order,
both in the Nation and among our selves: which ought to be the Joy of every
true Briton, as it is the Wonder and Envy of those that hate our English Israel.

AND we have much more Occasion to rejoice in the Goodness of GOD, when He
commits the Administration of Government into able and faithful Hands. It
redoubles the Blessing to a People, and adds not a little to the Glory of the
Royal State, when the Throne is filled with a wise and good Prince, who makes
the Felicity of the Kingdom more his Aim, than his own Grandeur, and is as
sollicitous for the Security of his Subjects Legal Rights, as of his own.

AND blessed be the Lord our GOD, we see the Throne of Great Britain at this
day possessed by a PRINCE, whom we have heard Declaring in a most gracious
manner, " That the RELIGION, LAWS, and LIBERTIES of the Kingdom are MOST DEAR
to Him: and professing a great Affection to his People, from the Knowledge and
Experience He has had of them." Who now can refrain breaking out, in the
Language of Hiram, of whom we read 1 Kin. 1.7.
When he heard the Words of Solomon, he rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be
the Lord this day, which has given unto David a wise SON over this great
People.

SURELY King GEORGE the Father, still lives in His Royal SON; who begins his
Reign with the same excellent Spirit, and lays his Foundation in those
illustrious and benign Principles, which for these thirteen bright years have
Swayed the British Scepter.

LET us praise the GOD of Peace, who of his great Mercy has been giving Rest
to his People, and is yet speaking Peace to Israel. He is distinguishing us
still with a KING, who devotes His Royal Powers to the Service of his People,
and chears us with the pleasing Prospect of a happy Administration. Let us
admire and praise the Divine Care and Goodness. May we not take up the words of
the famous Queen of Sheba, in her Address to Solomon, 1 Kin. 10.8. Blessed be
the Lord thy God, which delighted in Thee, to set Thee on the Throne of Israel:
Because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore made He thee King, to do
Judgment and Justice. -- And has not SOLOMON set a noble Pattern to our KING,
in that devout Address which he made to GOD at his Accession to the Crown: --
THOU have showed unto thy Servant David my Father great Mercy, and have kept
for Him this great Kindness, that Thou have given Him a SON to sit on his
Throne. And now, O Lord my God, give thy Servant an understanding Heart: for
who is able to judge this thy People, so great a People! -- Devout and humble
Language, from a most exalted Throne! And it is remarked, The Speech pleased the
LORD, that Solomon had asked this Thing. 1 Kin. 3.6, -- 10.

LET us all now fear GOD, and honor the KING, whom he has set over us: and
study to walk worthy the Privilege of so happy a Government. -- Blessed art
thou, O Land, whose King is the Son of Nobles --. Curse not the King: no, not
in thy Thought. -- My Son, Fear thou the Lord, and the King: and meddle not
with them that are given to Change. -- I counsel thee to keep the King's
Commandment: and that in regard of the Oath of God. -- Be of the faithful and
peaceable in Israel. --

YOU all seem to be joyful for the Goodness and Favor of Heaven to our Nation
and Land, in filling the Throne again so happily. Your Protestant Hearts have
moved you to proclaim and receive King GEORGE the Second, with the loudest
Acclamations of Delight and Transport, and with all visible Demonstrations of
Joy. There has been the shout of a King among us; so that the City rang again,
and the Earth rent at the sound; As at the Proclaiming of Solomon, when they
blew the Trumpet, and all the People lifted up their joyful Voices, saying, GOD
save King SOLOMON! Now let us continue to honor the KING, and by our future
Loyalty (expressed in all the proper Instances of it) bear a convincing
Testimony to the Truth and Sincerity of our present Rejoicing. We may learn our
Duty, and what will be our Glory, from that Observation, 1 Chro. 29.23. Then
Solomon sat on the Throne of the Lord, as King instead of David his Father, and
prospered; and all Israel OBEYED Him.

FLY the Tents of Murmurers and Complaners (if any such there shall be among
us) whose Hearts are haughty, Exercising themselves in matters too high for
them.

LET us all study to live a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and
Honesty: that we may cut off all Occasion from them that seek Occasion against
us. Thus Wisdom and Knowledge shall be the Stability of our Times.

WHAT now remains, but to exhort also that Prayers and Intercessions be made,
as for all in Authority, so in special for the KING 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
. Thus, when Solomon was established on his Throne, we are told 1 Kin. 8.66
, All Israel BLESSED the King, and went unto their Tents joyful, and glad of
Heart --. And when he was crowned, even before his Royal FATHER'S Death, we
read how the King's Servants came to bless their Lord King David, saying, GOD
make the Name of Solomon BETTER than thy Name, and make his Throne GREATER than
thy Throne! So Benajah had just before saluted His Royal Master, saying, As the
LORD has been with my Lord the King, even so be He with Solomon, and make his
Throne greater than the Throne of my Lord King David Chap. 1. ^7, 1^.
.

HERE we have approved Patterns of Prayer. Wherefore take with you words, and
lift up your fervent Cries to GOD, for the KING'S Life and happy Government.

LET us pray now, That the GOD of all Grace would sanctify, to the whole Royal
Family, and in particular to the KING, the sudden Death of his late Majesty:
Afford them all that divine Influence, which may be needful for their Support
and Consolation under so surprising a Bereavement, and in order to an Holy
Mourning for it; That the King may begin his Reign with such indelible
Impressions of his own Mortality, as may be of lasting Efficacy to promote a
Fear of the Lord his GOD, and to preserve his Heart from being lifted up above
his Brethren: to the end He may prolong his days in his Kingdom; He and his
Children in the midst of Israel Deuteronomy. 17.20.
.

AND let us continue in Prayer for his Majesty; the Security of his Person, and
Prosperity of his Reign. The Truth of it is, The greatest Monarchs upon Earth
need the Help of their People's Prayers, as much as of their Tribute. And as
the KING himself is served by the Profits of the Field: so may He by the
Devotions of the Closet. Kings are Men subject to like Passions as we are: and
lie open to the same Temptations. Their exalted Station exposes them to
peculiar Storms and Hazards. A Crown (says one) is a very glittering Thing, and
apt to dazzle the Eyes of Those who wear it; so that they cannot see so well,
either their own Imperfections, or the Treachery and Flattery of their
Attendents: Amongst whom, there are usually but Few, so bravely Virtuous, as to
dare tell them the Truth. -- And in the midst of all, they have commonly some
who are their Enemies, pursuing them with unwearied Slander and Malice: -- And
then their Work is great; such as calls for Wisdom and Strength, as of an Angel
of GOD. -- In a word, Kings are Persons of a diffusive Influence; and on their
Temper and Conduct, commonly speaking, the Peace and Welfare of the whole
Community depends.

LET us therefore pray always for our Sovereign, King GEORGE the Second: That
He may rule with GOD, and be faithful before the MOST HIGH, who has set Him on
his Throne, and to whom He must finally give an Account of his Stewardship. --
That the King may ever be an illustrious Example of all Regal Wisdom and
Christian Virtue: That He may even outshine his Royal FATHER (who has set
before Him such an Idea of good Government) in all Princely Merits, and be a
yet more extensive Blessing to the World; the bright Ornament of his Protestant
Profession, the Glory of his noble Race, and the most admired Hero of his Age.
That his Reign may be brightened by the most signal and happy Successes. That
the King may be to his loyal Subjects, as an hiding place from the Wind, and a
Covert from the Storm: As Rivers of Water in a dry Place: As the Shadow of a
great Rock in a weary Land: Even as a Nursing Father to all Israel. That GOD
would strengthen Him in his Kingdom, cloth his Enemies with shame, and cause
the Crown to flourish on his Head. That he may have Dominion from Sea to Sea;
that the Isles may bring Presents to Him, and they that dwell in the Wilderness
bow down before Him. That the King's Favor may be always unto wise Servants;
and to his most dutiful Subjects, the Protestant Nonconformists, to strengthen
their Hands in the work of the House of GOD, the GOD of Israel. That GOD will
please to bless his Majesty with a wise Council, and a faithful Parliament, at
all times: with a virtuous Court, and with the steady Affections of an obedient
People. In a word, That Length of Days may be added to Riches and Honor; and
that when he is called to die, He may go up the Mount as Moses the Servant of
the Lord, and receive the Rewards of Divine Grace in an heavenly Crown that
will not fade away.

LET us also pray for his Royal Consort, Queen CAROLINE; that truly noble and
virtuous Princess It deserves to be remembered; This illustrious Lady had the
Honor formerly to be solicited in Marriage by a certain Great Potentate, then
King of Spain. But she preferred her Protestant Religion to a Crown; having her
Heart engaged in the Pursuit of an Heavenly Kingdom, A rare Instance of heroic
Faith; like that of Moses, who refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh 's
Daughter. And it must raise our Ideas of her Virtue, when we consider, She had
no Prospect at that time of the Superior Honors She is since exalted to. Who
can help now celebrating the admirable Conduct of Divine Providence, in so
signally rewarding her distinguished Piety, by giving her, both a better
HUSBAND, and a better CROWN.
, who is as a fruitful Vine by the sides of his House; That her Majesty may
long live a Support and Ornament to the Throne, the Pattern of her Sex, and a
Nursing Mother to the Israel of GOD.

LET us also pray for Their Majesty's Royal ISSUE: That they may be endowed
with all Princely Gifts, and Christian Graces, and reserved for illustrious
Blessings to the World.

THE Language of Providence to us at this day, is that ( Ezra 6.10.) Pray to
the God of Heaven, for the Life of the King, and of his Sons. We see the Throne
now, by the Favor of GOD, incircl'd with Happiness. To borrow the Psalmist's
beautiful Phrases, We see a fruitful Vine near it, with a desirable Number of
Olive-Branches round about it, the liveliest Emblems, and the surest Pledges of
Safety and Prosperity. The words of Samuel come to my Tho'ts on this Occasion,
-- Upon Whom is the DESIRE of all Israel? Is it not on Thee, and on all thy
Father's House? And we are entertaining our selves with the pleasing Tho'ts,
that as Hereditary, and Parlementary Right are now one, so they shall be
established in this happy Union; and the Blessings of the Protestant Succession
be diffused among us for Ages to come. But we must not confide too strongly in
human Probabilities. GOD can easily dry up our Springs, and destroy our Hopes,
by laying desolate our Royal Tribe. Gideon left no less than Seventy Sons when
he died; and yet in a short time they were cut off by a murderous Hand. Ahab
left the like Number, and they were all beheaded in one day. Other Instances we
find in History, of such bloody Massacres, and Destruction of the Seed Royal.
Hence whatever hopeful Prospects we have before us; yet there is no dependence,
but upon GOD, whose Prerogative it is to kill and to save alive to put down,
and to set up. Let us then be commending the Kingly Family of Great Britain, to
the special Care and Benediction of Divine Providence; making mention of Them
always in our Prayers.

IT is a worthy Subject of Prayer. From this happy Nursery alone it is that we
can rationally expect any Plants of Renown. Should this Royal Line fail; Or
should the Kingdom be translated out of it, and the illegal Pretenses of an
abjured Competitor take place; We have Reason to think the Nation will be
deluged in Confusion and Misery, and that these Provinces will be made to drink
deep of the Malice and Revenge of a Popish Usurpation: which doubtless will be
for kindling Smithfield-Flames again, and will proclaim Liberty to the Sword,
and to Famine, to devour English Protestants. My God, think Thou on Tobiah and
Sanballat according to these their Works!

VERILY, The HOPES of the Kingdom, as to the Continuance of Civil Liberty and
Property, and the Protestant Religion, the dearest Interest of all: -- The
HOPES of Protestant Dissenters, as to the Legal Toleration, so agreeable to
Christian Charity, so equitable a Reward of their distinguishing Loyalty, and
so necessary to the Trade and Quiet of the Nation: -- And the HOPES of
New England, as to the just Enjoyment of our invaluable CHARTER- Privileges; --
are all resolved into the Continuance of the present happy Establishment and
Royal Line.

UNGRATEFUL They who make light of the Protestant Succession! -- Let us bear it
on our hearts before GOD continually: Praying that GOD will build the King a
sure House, and entail his Crown (with the choicest Blessings) on his
Offspring, to the latest Generations.

AND now these are the Wishes of my Soul. -- May the Hopes of a Popish
Pretender be eternally extinguished! May the Protestant Religion, and the
Hanover-Succession be for ever secured! May we always see the Throne filled as
at this day! May also the Chief Chair of Government in this our Zion, be always
possessed by Men of true Merit, that love GOD, and love his People! -- And
while we have the Benefit, let GOD have the Praise.

NOW to these things, let all that hear me, say Amen, AMEN!

FINIS.

