Dr. Mather's REMARKS ON THE EARTHQUAKE That shook NEW ENGLAND, In the NIGHT,
Between the 29 and the 30 of October. 1727.

The Terror of the LORD.

Some ACCOUNT of the Earthquake That shook NEW ENGLAND, In the NIGHT, Between
the 29 and the 30 of October. 1727. With a SPEECH, Made unto the Inhabitants of
BOSTON, Who Assembled the Next Morning, for the proper Exercises of Religion,
On so Uncommon, and so Tremendous an Occasion.

2. Cor. V. 11. Knowing the Terror of (...) LORD, we persuade Men.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for S. Kneeland, and Sold at his Shop in
King Street. 1727.

REMARKS UPON THE Earthquake.
THE Night that followed the Twenty ninth of October [1727.] was a Night
whereto NEW ENGLAND had never in the Memory of Man, seen the like before. The
Air never more Calm, the Sky never more Fair; every thing in all imaginable
Tranquillity: But about a quarter of an Hour before Eleven, there was heard in
BOSTON, passing from one end of the Town to the other, an horrid rumbling like
the Noise of many Coaches together, driving on the paved Stones with the utmost
Rapidity. But it was attended with a most awful Trembling of the Earth, which
did heave and shake so as to Rocque the Houses, and cause here and there the
falling of some smaller Things, both within Doors and without. It cannot be
imagined, but that it gave an uncommon Concern unto all the Inhabitants, and
even a degree of Consternation, unto very many of them. This first Shock, which
was the most Violent, was followed with several others, and some Repetition of
the Noise, at sundry times, pretty distant from one another. The Number of them
is not entirely agreed; but at least Four or Five are allowed for; The last of
which was between Five and Six of the Clock in the Morning.

How far this Earthquake extended through the Country, we are not yet informed;
but that it extended Scores of Miles, we have already a certain Information.
And what added unto the Terrors of it, were the terrible Flames and Lights, in
the Atmosphere, which accompanied it. The Vessels on the Coast, were also made
sensible of it, by a shivering that siezed on them.

When the greatly affected People, had a little Opportunity to look about them
in the Morning, the Pastors of the Old North Church, directed the Bells to be
rung, that such of the People as could and would, might assemble immediately
unto some seasonable Exercises of Religion. The Pastors of the New joined with
them in sending up unto Heaven, the Supplications which the solemn Occasion
called for. And the Pastors in the other part of the Town, made a speedy and
hearty Appearance, and most affectionately united in a Concurrence with them.
The Assembly that came together, did more than crowd and fill the most
capacious of our Meetinghouses; And as there was a multitude of serious
Christians, who are acquainted with Real and Vital PIETY, so the whole Auditory
expressed a Devotion which was truly Extraordinary.

When these Exercises were finished about Two in the Afternoon, after some
short Interraission of an Hour or Two, several Churches in the other part of
the Town, followed the Exemple, and with vast Congregations, continued the
proper Exercises of Religion, until about Eight a Clock in the Evening. For the
Animation thereof, there was not only the joint Inclination of the Pastors and
the People, but likewise a Recommendation from His Honor the L. GOVERNOR;
Whose Piety, ever discovered on every other, as well as this, Occasion,
disposed him, to Direct also the keeping of the Thursday following (which is
the Day of the usual weekly Lecture,) as a Day of SUPPLICATIONS in all the
Churches of the City.

In the Year 1580. England felt an Earthquake, which though no considerable
Damage was done by it, awakened the Government of the Nation, to call upon all
the Subjects throughout the Kingdom, to be fervent and instant in Prayer, that
the Wrath of GOD whereof the Earthquake was a Token, might be averted from the
Land. Such a Disposition possesses our Commander in Chief, and his People most
readily come into it.

One of the MINISTERS, who did their part, in the Great Assembly of the Morning
judged it Expedient, yea, Necessary, that PRAYER should have the WORD
accompanying of it. He thought, that if ever he did preach the Word IN SEASON,
he should now do so, by taking the Present SEASON to render the Voice of the
Glorious GOD, in the EARTHQUAKE, while it was yet scarce over, Articulate and
Intelligible unto the Hearers: 'Twould be Emphatically, A WORD IN SEASON. And
he hoped, that Hearts made soft by the ALMIGHTY Troubling of them with the
Occurrences of the Night before, would be more likely than ever, to receive
Good Impressions, and be molded into durable Resolutions of Godliness; Yea,
that as the primitive Outpouring of the Holy SPIRIT, was attended with an
Earthquake, so the EARTHQUAKE would now be attended with such on Out-pouring of
the Holy SPIRIT as would make an Holy, and so an Happy People. Accordingly,
with the Divine Assistance, he made a SPEECH, [or, if you please, A SERMON,]
which was no sooner offered in the Assembly of Zion there convened. but it was
desired, that it might be further offered in the way of the Press, for the
Service of PIETY, not only here, but in other parts of the Land, which GOD
makes to Tremble. He durst not reject the Desire. It Is true, There can be
expected none but a mean Preparation, from a few Minutes of a Morning filled
with Disturbances; which may be an Apology for the Deficiencies which a curious
Reader may soon discover in it. But our Gracious GOD is pleased sometimes to
make use of such, to do Good in the World; that so, Man may be Nothing, and HE
may be All in All. It Is not possible for him to give Word for Word, a Discourse
which he could have no Time to Write, before it was delivered. But it is here
without many material Additions, and perhaps, with some Forgetful
Substractions, Exhibited as very near as can well be asked for, to what was
delivered.

O! May the Holy SPIRIT of our GOD, make it come with Efficacy!

We find, the Hill on the North side whereof Joshua was buried, had [Josh.
XXIV. 30.] the Name of, Har-Gayash; which Name signifies, The Mountain of
Trembling. The Jews have a Tradition, That at the Time of his Burial, the
Mountain Trembled with an Earthquake, to testify the Displeasure of GOD against
the People. My Friends, We approach as to an Har-Gayash, in what is now to be
set before us.

A SPEECH, Made by One of the Ministers, to the Inhabitants of BOSTON;
Assembled the Morning after the EARTHQUAKE. Octo. 30. 1727.
THE Glorious GOD has Roared out of Zion. We have the last Night heard the
terrible Roaring; with general and uncommon Terror, heard the awful Repetition
of it. Who is here of you, among them who felt the Earth trembling under them,
that said not upon it, When I heard, my Lips quivered at the Voice, and I
trembled in my self, that I might find Rest in the Day of Trouble! Who is there
that said not, Lord, my Flesh trembles for fear of Thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments! The Lion has roared; Who will not fear? We are worse than Beasts,
if we tremble not.

Never did the City of BOSTON, in the Ninety seven Years that have rolled over
it, see such a Night, as what we saw a few Hours ago. A MIDNIGHT CRY was heard;
The Consternation whereof is not this Morning over with us; An Auguish like
that on a Travailing Woman, siezed upon Men as well as Women. What Fear, from
the Apprehension of going to the Pil, by a stroke like a suare upon us!

We have had the repeted, more than three times repeted Shocks, of a Formidable
EARTHQUAKE. And GOD knows, whether there are any more to come, or what
Execution they may do, when they come.

When the never-to-be-forgotten Sicilian EARTHQUAKE in our Days, had given some
Shocks which only terrified the People, after an Intermission of Two Days,
there came on those, which horribly destroyed them; A Bosom of Destruction that
swept away near one hundred and fifty Thousand of them.

The Ancient Cry of the Prophets, is now most certainly the Cry of our
Earthquakes; Hos. X. 12. It is Time to seek the Lord. The poor Popish
Idolaters, in their Earthquakes, make their Processions and their Addresses to,
Lying Vanities, and silly gods that cannot save them; They cry, but there is
none to save them! We will walk in the Name of JEHOVA-JESUS, who is our only
GOD, as those unhappy Creatures walk in the Name of Theirs. Their Rock is not
as our Rock; We have a SAVIOR, in whom we find a sufficient Refuge, for us,
and a very present Help in Trouble, when the Earth is moved under us, and the
Mountains are shaking about us. We will invert the Order of the Eighteenth
Psalm; The Psalmist said, In my Distress I called on the Lord, and cried unto
my GOD, Then the Earth shook and trembled. We will say, Since the Earth shakes
and trembles; Now in our Distress we will call on the Lord, and cry unto our
GOD. It is with pleasure that I read in Eusebius, a Letter of Antoninus, who
was a stranger to the True GOD, but yet complains, That the Pagan urged him to
persecute the Christians; Whereas (he says) I understand, that they are a good
People, and whenever there happens an Earthquake, their Course is to go and
pray unto their GOD, that His Wrath may be turned away from us; And in this
they show more of Religion than the People that urge me to destroy them! We are
this Day doing what the Primitive Christians did, and what all Genuine
Christians will.

We have Two Occasions, to repair unto our gracious GOD; we have Two Petitions
to carry unto Him. The one is, That we may have the Grace to know, and to do,
the Duties, which the Earthquake does in its hideous Rumbles most sensible call
us to. The other is; That there may be no such Returns of the Earthquake as to
lay us in Desolations, and make our Plagues wonderful. But, the success of our
Supplications, will very much turn upon our Attention to the Voice of our
glorious GOD in the Earthquake which is now affrighting of us. Don't we
remember those Divine Retaliations; As He cried, and they would not hear, so
they cried and I would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts. And again, Because I
called, and ye refused, I will laugh at your Calamity, and I will mock when
your Fear comes; when your Fear comes as Desolatioa, and your Destruction
corneth as a Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish comes upon you? Yea, I may
say unto you, The Dispositions of PIETY, will be so many Supplications; and
indeed, the best sort of Supplications, the most proper and the most potent
Supplications; There are pure Hands lifted up in our Supplications when we Do
what our GOD has obliged us to.

Wherefore, as a Praeliminary, and as a Foundation to the Discourse, wherewith
I propose to treat you, the TEXT which I now pitch upon is That;

Mic. VI. 9. The Voice of the LORD, cries unto the City.

CErtainly, you will not expect, that I should spend any time in proving, That
there is a VOICE of the glorious GOD, in all that He does, in the World. All
the Works of Creation, and all the Works of Providence, there is a Voice of the
glorious GOD in them. He speaks in all that He does. And there is no place,
where their Voice may not be beard. O Deaf we, if we hear it not! -- That
Voice, -- O Love, O Admire, O Adore, the glorious One, who does all these
things. O Fear this GOD, and give Glory unto Him!

It Is very sure; In the Works wherein the glorious GOD goes out of the Ordinary
Road, or, His Extraordinary Dispensations; In these, His Voice becomes very
Notable; and most inexcusable are they who Regard not the Works of the Lord,
nor the Operation of His Hands: He shall destroy them, and not build them up.

EARTHQUAKES are such Works. We read, Psalm. XXIX. 8. The Voice of the Lord
shakes the Wilderness. There is the Voice of the Lord, in it, when He shakes
our Territories. -- There may be some Earthquakes more Supernatural than
others: We reckon that of Mount Sinai One; And so we reckon that at the
Resurrection of our Blessed JESUS; and yet more conspicuously that of His
Crucifixion. The split Rocks at this Day observed by Travelers who are
Protestants, and somewhat Nice in their Credulity, are thought by some no
Injudicious Men, to be the lasting Monuments and Memorials of it. But usually,
our Earthquakes have Natural Causes assigned for them. What they are, it is now
and here, neither a Time nor Place for Philosophical Disquisitions. Whether
Colluctations of Minerals producing Vapors that must have an Explosion, may
cause those direful Convulsions in the Bowels of the Earth, which are selt in
our Earthquakes? -- Or, whether the huge quantities of Waters, running in the
Bowels of the Earth, may not by Degrees wash away the Bottom of the upper
Strate here and there, so as to cause their falling in? -- Or, whether the
Subterraneous Fires, getting head, may not by their Sulphurous and Bituminous
Exhalations in the Bowels of the Earth, cause a Combustion that may carry all
before it? -- Or, whether -- But it must be something more Theological, that
you are now to be treated with. Let the Natural Causes of Earthquakes be what
the Wise Men of Euquiry please, They and their Causes are still under the
Government of HIM that is the GOD of Nature. Shall we say, All this is but a
Chance that happens to us, or the mere unguided Motion of Matter? Ah, profane
Philistine! -- It Is a Language for none but a Philistine. A Christian cannot
speak so; No, He is one that will be sensible of GOD in these things. Verily,
In them, Lo, GOD sends forth His Voice, and that a mighty Voice unto us.

You will yet less expect, that I should be at any pains, for proving, That
this VOICE of the glorious GOD, is to be hearkened to. When the great GOD who
formed all things, will please to utter His Voice, What? Shall it not by all
that have the Faculties of Reason in them rendering them capable of hearkening
to it, be hearkened to? O most unreasonable! GOD our Maker says, Unto you, O
Men, I call, and my Voice is unto the Sons of Men. We are Bruits rather than
Men, and Colts of the wild Ass, yea, Children of the wicked One, rather than
the Sons of Men, if we do not hearken to the Voice of his Eternal Wisdom. He
will not own us, for the People of His Pasture, and the Sheep of His Hand, if
we do not even To Day bear His Voice. An hardy Pharaoh may say, Exodus V. 2. Who
is the Lord, that I should Obey His Voice! Words to come from the Mouth of none
but a Pharaob, and a Devil! But, Ah, Pharaoh, ah! Monster, The Almighty GOD,
whom thou so insultest, and whose Voice thou so defiest, what will the
affronted JEHOVAH do unto thee! What will He do unto thee!

Indeed there is this Argument for hearkening to the Voice of our GOD, that if
we do it not, we provoke Him to Render His Rebukes in Flames of Fire unto us;
We provoke Him, to inflict great Plagues and of long continuance upon us. If we
do not hearken to His Voice, especially in His Castigatory Dealings with us, --
He says, If ye will not hearken unto me, I will punish you yet seven times more
for your Sins.

And therefore, Be now at length effectually Alarmed, O Inhabitants of BOSTON,
yea, and of the whole Country whereof this is the Metropolis. What a Trial,
Yea, what a Gradually descending Trial, is our glorious GOD making of us,
whether we will hearken to His Voice or no? A few Months ago, how fearfully did
we see the Heavens blazing over us, with Coruscations that filled People with a
fearful Expectation of the fiery Indignation which is anon to devour the
Adversaries of GOD! And how frequently did loud Thunderclaps rouse us out of
our Lethargies! How frequently did hot Thunderbolts fall where many Objects
felt the Force of an Arm which, What can stand before? But, alas, Did we bear
Attentively, and Obediently, the Noise of Hu Voice, or, Mind as we should have
done, the Sound that went out of His Mouth? After this, The Stormy Wind which
fulfils His Word, came rushing down upon us. We saw an Horrible Tempest. A
Storm came, which tore up the Trees of our Fields by the roots; tore down parts
of our Houses; Yea, Wounded and Killed some of our People. The great and strong
Wind which rent the Mountains, had a Voice in it. Indeed, it was not a still
small Voice; but was it therefore the less to be hearkened to? And now, After
the Wind an Earthquake! -- Oh! Let it not be said, The Lord was not in the
Earthquake. Our GOD says, Now surely, they will fear me, and they will receive
Instruction; -- that I may not proceed unto a more dreadful Extremity, and cut
off their Dwellings, and them with and in their Dwellings!

What I am now therefore to proceed unto, is the Consideration of that CASE.

What may be the VOICE of the glorious GOD unto us, in the EARTHQUAKE, wherein
we have bad the Earth just now trembling under us?

O People Trembling before the Lord; Hear now my SPEECH, and hearken to all my
Words. For indeed, I may declare unto you, The opening of my Lips will be of
Right Things; and you will not understand Wisdom, nor be of an understanding
Heart, if you do not hearken to them.

I. The VOICE of the glorious GOD crying to the City in His Earthquake is This;
O Glorify the Perfections of the glorious GOD, which are displayed in the
Earthquake; And very particulary, the Power and Mercy which He displays when He
causes the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof, to tremble before Him.

Syrs, Don't you clearly see the Eternal Power and Godhead of Him, who can
shake the Earth, yea, shake it all to pieces at His Pleasure? Oh! see it, and
shake before it! As when He sets fast the Mountains, He shows that He is Girded
with Power; So, when He shakes the Mountains He shows that He has a Girdle of
matchless Power. This whole Globe, though the Ambit of it be more than Twenty
four Thousand and Nine Hundred Miles, and in the solid Content must be more
than Two Hundred and Sixty one Thousands of Millions, yet it is no more than
the light Dust of the Balance, in the Hand of the glorious GOD; who made it,
and can Tear it and Rend it as He pleases. In our Earthquake, the great GOD,
says to us, yea, to the greatest of Men, with an infinitely greater Claim, than
a Roman Governor could speak so, to any Man, Know thou not that I have
power over thee, to put thee to Death, or save thee alive? We cannot but own
His Absolute and Sovereign Dominion over us, and our Lives, and if He go to
extinguish our Lives by an Earthquake, we must own, We are in the House of the
Potter, and Lord, Thou may break us and lodge us where thou please. But at
the same time, the Earthquake proclaims the Irresistible POWER, where with He
can Crush a World, (as He made it) with a Word. If He touch the Earth, it
shivers and crumbles before Him. The Finger of GOD, it can rip open the Earth,
and cause Castles, and Cities, and the largest of Territories to sink into it
in a Moment. Lords who knows the power of thine Anger! -- O all you that go on
still in your Trespasses and persist impenitently in Rebellion against the
glorious GOD; What are you but Fighters against GOD? What mean you, O
Foolhardy Wretches? Dare you provoke Him who is Lord GOD Ominipotent? Are you
stronger than He? O Tremble to continue under the Wrath of the Almighty. The
Trembling Earth calls upon you; O Fear Him, that is able to destroy! Fear Him,
on whose order for it, Earth, open thy Mouth! you you presently go down into
the Pit; you are swallowed up in a Moment!

But then, O the Mercy of our GOD! In the midst of the Lamentations and
Ejulations caused by the Earthquake, yet we are to make that Confession, and,
Oh! make it with wonderment; Lord, It is of thy Mercy that we are not consumed!
If we had our Desert, what would an Earthquake presently do unto us! Our Hearts
are so Earthly, that we deserve to be buried in the Earth. We Bury our selves
in it, while we neglect our Souls through the pursuits and hurries of it. A
jealous GOD may justly say of us; Let the Earth swallow them up; It has already
swallowed them up. They have changed their Center; The Earth is become their
Center. Let them go down unto their Center! We have such a share in the Sins of
them who dwell on the Earth, which have made the Earth obnoxious unto
Earthquakes, that we cannot complain of being unjustly dealt withal, if we have
our share in their Woes. By the Earthquakes with which the Earth has been
visited by the Lord of Hosts, multitudes have perished wonderfully. That we
have not, this lays Obligations upon us, for continual Acclamations, Oh! The
patience of a GOD slow to Anger and plenteous in Mercy! Oh! the Riches of His
Goodness and Forbearance, and long-suffering! I pray, what are we better than
any of them? Josephus writes of a dismal Earthquake, wherein Judaea was
horribly shaken, and near Ten Thousand People were slain by the fall of Houses
upon them. It Is likely that in that Earthquake, a Tower built over the
Portico's at the Poll of Bethesda fell, and slew Eighteen that were there
waiting for a Cure. Now, have you forgotten what our SAVIOR said about those
Eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell? This, This is what He now says
unto us. Think ye, that all they who have perished in Earthquakes were Sinvers
above all the Men that are yet walking on the Earth? I tell you, No; You are
all of you so very sinful, that you deserve to perish, as much as many of those.

Oh! Let us be deeply affected, with the sparing Mercy of our GOD unto us.
Behold the Compassion and Severity of GOD! Severity to them who have perished
in Earthquakes; But Compassion toward thee, who have not so perished. -- Lord,
why am I spared, and yet standing on the Earth before thee! Why, why does thy
Earth yet bear such a Sinner against thee upon it!

II. The VOICE of the glorious GOD crying to the City in His Earthquake, is,
This; Let the Crimes that Cry to the Holy GOD for all the Vengeance of an
Earthquake upon you, be generally and thoroughly Reformed among you.

The Cry is, REFORMATION, O Degenerating Plants, REFORMATION; or more Evil to
come upon you!

It Is no fond Superstition to think, An Earthquake usually carries in it, some
Intimation of the Divine Displeasure; It Is a Token which we who dwell in the
Wilderness may be afraid of. If God overturn the Mountains as He does in
Earthquakes, it is in His Anger that He does it. If the Earth Tremble, as it
does in Earthquakes, it is at His Wrath, that it does so. When the Mountains
quake, as they do in Earthquakes, it is from His Indignation. It was declared
concerning some Tents of Wicked Men; Number. XV. 30. If the Earth open its Mouth,
and swellow them up, and they go down alive into the Pit, you shall understand
that these Men have provoked the Lord. Yea, If no Body be killed in the
Earthquake, yet the Divine Displeasure against Sin, is to be apprehended in it.
By such an Earthquake did the Father of our Blessed Jesus testify something of
His Resentment, upon the Wickedness of the Jews, when, All their Wickedness was
in Golgotha: The most nefandous Wickedness that was ever perpetrated! Rarely an
Earthquake sent any where, till a People have sinned grievously. If we search
for the Moral Causes of an Eartiquake, a Prophet of GOD has declared them; Isa.
XXIV. 5. The Earth is defiled under the Inhabitants thereof.

And shall I now Cry aloud, and spare not, but lift up my Voice like a Trumpet,
and show unto you, O our People, that you have sinned grievously? It Is true,
Our People are not for the most part so Abandoned unto Immoralities, as they
are in many Ungospellized, or Apostatized and Antichristian Regions. But our
Faults are aggravated into Crimes, because we sin under, and against the
glorious Gospel of the Blessed GOD. We Rebel against the light in what we do
amiss; and a light which teaches us, and quickens us, and gives us many
Advantages, to be the best People in the World. If we are not the Best People
on the Face of the Earth, it must not be wondered at, if the Earth do Groan, in
the Murmurs of Earthquakes under us. It has been thought by some, that
Earthquakes are not mentioned among the Plagues in the Twenty Eighth Chapter of
Deuteronomy, because of a Transcendency in this beyond all other Plagues, [It
is impossible to contrive any Defense against it; but it says, Though they hide
in the top of Carmel, I will find them there!] which renders it a more proper
Vengeance for Sins under the Evangelical Dispensation. Our Sins are such. But
Oh! What a Black List is there to be formed of them!

[I see none Asleep at this Time. It Is a Congregation of Hearers, that I am
this Time speaking to. This very circumstance awakens a Thought in me; That
sleeping in the Assemblies of Zion, when it is Indulged, and not a mere
Involuntary surprisal upon Insirmity, it is utterly a Fault, and offfers an
Affront unto Heaven: But it is a very Epidemical Miscorriage in the Country.
Now, Syrs, You have an Earthquake to give you a push like that of the Goads
given of old, by the Masters of the Assemblies, for the Awaking of the Drowsy
Sleepers there. An Earthquake is crying in your Ears, What meanest thou, O
Sleeper in the House of GOD? Oh! No more sleeping in this dreadful place! It
may soon be made so.] I can go on, and be heard.

How do the Sins of Intemperance grow upon us! It Is the Description of an
Earthquake, The Earth reels to and fro like a Drunken Man. How does it call for
an Earthquake, when the Earth can show so many ugly pictures of such a Thing,
in Drunken Men reeling to and fro upon it!

How do the Sins of Unchastity under the Curse of Heaven Increase and Multiply
among us? The Cities which GOD overthrew in His Anger, and sunk for the compass
of Eighteen Miles in Breadth and Eighty Miles in Length, and are covered with a
Lake that is called, The Dead Sea: Was there not an Earthquake that helped in
the overthrowing of them? If an Earthquake do unspeakable things upon us, let
the Impurities of Sodom stand indicted for it.

How do the Sins of Dishonesty bring an abominable scandal on our Profession;
and the pernicious ways thereof, make the way of Truth to be evil spoken of?
The Habitations, that are not Habitations of Righteouswess, but built, or
filled, or sed, by Dishonest Gain, it is not wrong, if the Earth don't bear them
to stand upon it. GOD sends an Earthquake to demolish the Nests that have been
Feathered with so much Iniquity.

To these Miscarriages may we not annumerate the Lust of Excesses and Vanities
in Apparel; the Costly Pride whereof is a Temptation to take Indirect ways, for
the supporting of it? The Earthquake says to us, Put off some of your Ornaments!

And shall the Cry of Defrauded Laborers, be stifled? I am sure, the Pulpit
may speak of them; the Earthquake does it.

How are we in regard of Sabbatizing? The Right and High Strain of it, how is
it sadly decayed with us? An Offended GOD by an Earthquake has not suffered us
to take the Rest, into which we were composing our selves; has fetched us out
of our Beds, and made us incapable of enjoying our usual Rest. Most Equally
punished! We have wretchedly Violated the Rest of GOD, by our Profanantions of
the Holy Sabbath, with which He has favored us.

The Evenlng that follows the Lord's Day! -- I do not plead for holding it
properly a part of the Holy Time that belongs to the Christian Sabbath. Not
only the Scripture, but also the Practice of the whole Church in all Ages and
in all Places, have ever made the Evening that precedes the Lord's Day, to be a
part of it; until a certain Writer in Switzerland a little while ago, started
that Opinion for another Beginning of the Sabbath, which now so many run into.
But yet, I hope, I may plead, That this Evening may not be prostituted unto
such Vile Purposes, as to spoil and lose all the Good of the Day; And that
there may no more be such a Quick Transition as there often is, from the
Exercises of Godliness, to all Ungodly Vanities and Lewdnesses. It is
complained, That there is more Sin committed on that Evening among us, than in
any Evening of all the Week beside. Young People, Where were you, and what was
it that you did last Night? And in what Airs did the Earthquake find you?
Verily, Syrs; The Glorious GOD has taken the most Suitable Evening that could
have been taken, to send an Earthquake upon us. A Time, how Indigitating! What
He speaks to us, what He points to us, is plainly This. Let the Evening that
ensues upon my Day, be better spent than it use to be. Spend it more in
Employments, that may be agreeable and serviceable unto the Intentions of my
Day that is then Expiring with you. Oh! That Housekeepers would restrain those
that are within their Gates, from going out of them, and assign them those
Things to do, which may be most useful to them. [The Societies of Young Men
meeting to Worship GOD and Edify one another, on this Evening, how much ought
they to be Encouraged!]

Family-Religion; In what Condition is it? We are told, they are most Ominously
abating of it, among those whom we esteem our United Brethren Beyond Sea. But
is not there amongst us also, some Abatement of it? There were Twelve Sermons
on Family-Religion lately preached unto the City, in so many Lectures of your
United Pastors. They were not regarded as they should have been; And GOD now
makes an Earthquake succeed them, which preaches them over again, in a manner
to be trembled at. It is upon Record, That there was a Town in Switzerland, all
destroyed by an Earthquake: Only One House escaped, in which the Good Man was
at his daily Family-Sacrifice. If the Earthquake last Night, had caused every
House to fall, that has not a daily Family-Sacrifice to GOD in it, what a
rueful Spectacle had we seen this Morning! O Prayerless Householders, How
Obdurate, How Obstinate are you, How Inexpressibly and Prodigiously given up to
a Reprobate Mind, if upon this Earthquake, which you have outlived, [But are
not sure, that you shall Another!] you do not call your Domestics together,
and let them know, You are exceedingly troubled, that your Family has been so
long exposed unto the Great Wrath of GOD, by being a Family that has not called
on His Name, and that from THIS TIME, such Atheism shall no longer be persisted
in; from THIS TIME you will have them join with you, in seeking of GOD that you
may Live. And BEGIN without any further Delay: Fall down on your Knees before
the LORD, with the Expressions of a Soul Returning to Him; and then Rise up
Resolving, As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord.

[I might go on, and ask; Are we not sound faulty in having our Hearts divided
as they are, in our foolish Factions? And may not the Glorious GOD cause the
Earth to split with Chasms and Gasps and frightful Divisions; to animadvert
upon our sinful Divisions?

Oh! Let us not be Impenitent, and worse than the Rocks which have been moved
by this Earthquake, -- Impenitent under such Reproofs of GOD, as have been
given us. What? Shall another Earthquake be invoked? -- Or, must something like
a Pestilence follow upon it?]

Syrs, Let every one of us, [For I call upon you in the Style of the two
Micahs; Hear this, O all ye People, every one of you!] -- I say, Let every one
of us, be awakened, -- Will Not a Rugient Earthquake awaken us? -- To search and
try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. Find out, what Errors in our Lives, our
Conscience may Condemn us for. When an Earthquake is at work, it will be
strange indeed if our Conscience be not also at work. The Work of the Law
written in our Hearts will be now exerted. And, O Man, What thy Conscience may
now convict thee of, as a Thing to be Reformed in thy life; Bewail it, Abhor
it, Repair to thy SAVIOR, that it may be pardoned, and that He may grant thee,
the Aids of His Grace for the avoiding of it. Oh! That we may now all speak
aright, in the Ear of the glorious GOD, who hearkens to hear, how His
Earthquake operates upon us; and that these Two Words may from every Quarter,
be our Echo to the Earthquake! The one, What have I done? The other, I will not
offend any more!

But more especially, Hear the Word of the Lord, Ye Rulers of BOSTON. -- Has
there not been of late, a blameable Intermission of the Laudable and Excellent
Zeal, with which the Sword in your Hands, is to be and sometimes has been, a
Terror to Evildoers? The great GOD by His Earthquake to Night has been shaking
and jogging and pulling of you, to make you shake off the slumber, that may be
upon you. Syrs, will you be prevailed withal, to meet and consult and contrive,
what you may do, for the Suppression of Disorders; for the Correction of all
Punishable Wickedness; and particularly, for the stopping of that Language of
Fiends, heard so often in our Streets, from the Tongues that are set on Fire of
Hell; and for the discountenancing of Idleness; and for the breaking up of the
Execrable Seminaries for Wickedness, which there are in some Wicked Houses! --
You may be the Phineas's, that shall turn away the wrath of GOD from the
Congregation, and save it from a desolating Earthquake, by the Zeal of GOD
boiling in you, which is now more loudly than ever called for.

III. The VOICE of the glorious GOD, crying to the City in His Earthquake, is
This; IMMEDIATELY get into such a STATE of SAFETY, that no Earthquake may cause
an Heartquake in you; but that you may be Ready for all the Events and Changes,
which may be intended for you, and impending over you. IMMEDIATELY, I say. Stay
not for Another shock. -- The Rumbles of the Earthquake, -- Oh! How do they
ring that peal in our Ears; Match. XXIV. 44. Be ye Ready! Can any of you tell,
when there may be Another shock. And, what horrendous Effects it may have? -- I
say again, What you do, must be done IMMEDIATELY. You must not put off a
Moment, what you have to do, that you may be brought into, A state of Safety
for Eternity.

Our LORD mentioning the Signs of His coming to Burn THIS World, and Create New
Heavens and a New Earth wherein shall dwell Righteousness, He says, Luke XXI.
11. There shall be great Earthquakes in diverse places.

Our SAVIOR having foretold, That His Coming will be with all possible
Surprise upon the World; like that of a Thief in the Night, wholly unlooked
for; no more looked for than the Fate of the old World, and of Sodom, in the
Day that it overtook them; and, The Day shall come as a Snare, on all them who
dwell on the Face of the Earth: How is this consistent, with such Signal, such
Observable, such Astonishing, Forerunners of His Coming? -- It seems to me, the
Signs which He foretells, were to be Things which were not so much Immediately
to precede His Coming, and Rowse a sleeping World, as to Prefigure, and
therewith to Demonstrate unto Mankind, How Things will be at His coming. And it
is intimated, as if they would be given Immediately after the Tribulation of
those Days, which dispersed the Jewish Nation. I suppose, the Stupendous
Earthquakes, which in Those Days more than ever shook the World, in Diverse
Places, and especially that unparalled one at Antioch, the second City of the
World, when People were come together to wait upon the Emperor, and celebrate
their Sports, from all parts of the World, might sufficiently fulfill what our
SAVIOR foretold, of Great Earthquakes in diverse places. I verily Believe,
That all the Signs, which our LORD promised of His coming, have been given; and
are passed, and over; and the Heedless Children of Men, under the Intervening
Reign of Antichrist, have taken little Notice of them. For my part, I can ask
for no more! Nevertheless, in every Earthquake, there is a Renewing and an
Enforcing of the promised Signs: GOD puts us in mind, of what He is going to
do, upon a World, that has His Curse lying upon it: And it becomes us to look
upon every Earthquake, as a Praemonition of the Day, wherein, as we are
certified; Isa. XXIV. 18, 19. The Foundations of the Earth shall shake; The
Earth shall be utterly broken down; the Earth shall be clean dissolved; the
Earth shall be moved exceedingly. We are certified; Rev. XVI. 18. There will be
a great Earthquake, such as has not been since Men were on the Earth, so mighty
an Earthquake, and so great an one. Every Earthquake has that Voice in it, Make
Ready, make Ready, for the Dissolution, which the Glorions LORD is coming, [who
can say, How Quickly!] to bring upon a sinful World.

-- But, what a CONFLAGRATION, will be joined with it! --

When I consider, That the Coming of the Son of Man in the Clouds of Heaven,
[which must mean His Literal, Personal, Visible Coming; We take the Name of the
Lord in Vain, if we Expound it otherwise,] It Is to be at and for the Destruction
of the Roman Monarchy, in the Papal and Final Form of it; And when I consider,
the Flames, declared by Daniel, and by Paul, and by Peter, to accomplish it; I
confess, I cannot but admire, how any Men of Thought can content themselves,
with the commonly Received Opinions, about the Coming of our SAVIOR in His
Kingdom, which are indeed calculated, as if on purpose, to lay and keep the
World in that profound SLEEP, wherein the Day of GOD is to find it: Opinions,
which the Petrine CONFLAGRATION, makes a miserable Hay and Stubble of! -- But,
if I should own, That I know of Nothing that remains to be done, before the
Lord shall destroy the Man of Sin by the Brightness of His coming; If I should
own, That this Word, is like a Fire in my Bones, and I am not easy in
forbearing; If I should make the Cry, FIRE, FIRE! The Fire of GOD will sooner
than is generally thought for, fall upon a wretched World, which dreams little
of it! -- I should be as much mocked, and as little minded, as Lot was in the
Morning of the Day when he went out of Sodom. The Sleepy People of GOD, will
not bear to be Awakened: Our SAVIOR has foretold, That it must be so! --

Wherefore, I will wave it. I will say no more of That. I will say, only what
no body doubts of! And I will the rather supersede the former Contemplation,
because the very same Actions of Religion, which will prepare for what we are
sure cannot be far from us, [Oh! Let us not make it an evil Day, by putting it
far from us!] will also prepare us for the Day of GOD, which many are not for,
Hastening of; though they are Looking for it; but choose to put it further off.
It Is This; That within a little while, a very little little while, we shall
every one of us, be swallowed up in the Earth. Although the Cry of the many more
than Ten Righteous ones prevent any further Earthquake; yet the Opened Mouth of
the Earth, will shortly swallow every one of us up! It will do so, in the
common way of Mortality: At our Interment it will do so. Indeed, there will be
This Difference. In that way we die, and go one after another, and not All
together. And in that way, we are not Buried at once on the spot where and when
we expire; but are carried from the House where we die, to the House appointed
for all the Living. But still, We may die as very suddenly, as if we were
suffocated by an Earthquake: and we may go down into the lower parts of the
Earth, before another Week be over with us. For this, Of the Day and the Hour
knows no Man. There is no Man in this very Numerous Collection of People,
does know, whether This may not before this Day Se'might be his Portion.

Wherefore, in taking the Methods of PIETY which are to be taken, for our
Safety, the Voice of our Earthquake is, Do with thy might what thy band finds
to do. More particularly, An Earthquake awakened a poor Man to cry our, What
shall I do to be saved? Oh! That upon our Earthquake, this Enquiry were more
made among us. I am upon answering that Important Enquiry.

First. A Process of Repentance, I say, A PROCESS OF REPENTANCE: You must go
through That IMMEDIATELY. You can have no safety in an Earthquake, till That be
done. For a Man to have This to Do, when the sudden Convulsions of an
Earthquake are upon him, -- I say unto you, I would not be in the Circumstances
of that Man, for ten thousand Worlds!

The perils of an Earthquake bring us all into that woeful plight; Thy Life
shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear Day and Night, and thou
shall have no Assurance of thy Life. Yea, there is not one Unregenerate among
us, but what may say, I have no Assurance, that I shall not be in Hell before
to Morrow Morning. How can any Man dare to live so? Now, an Immediate Process
of Repentance is the only security.

There was an Earthquake at the giving of the Law. An Earthquake should bring
us to a Reflection on our breaking of the Law. Retire, O sinful Man, Retire;
and first Confessing the Sovereign Grace which must shine forth in enabling of
thee, if thou art enabled ever to turn unto GOD, then Consider thy ways. Take
the Ten Commandments, with the Exposition of the Catechism upon them; and
Reflecting upon thy Trespassing against what is Forbidden and what is Required,
in the Commandments, loath and judge thy self before the Lord, for thy many and
heinous Trespasses. Go back to thy Original Sin, which has been the source of
all thy Actual Sins, and of Innumerable Evils: Thy share in the Guilt of the
first Apostasy: Thy deriving from thence an Heart that is Desperately wicked,
and a Mother of Abominations. Full of Self-abborrence, present before the
glorious GOD, the Blood of His own SON, which Cleanses from all Sin; Admiring
the Merit and Virtue of that Blood, Beg and Hope on the account thereof to be
cleansed from all thy Sin. Do this, and weep to a GOD Ready to pardon; until
His good SPIRIT has raised a Comfortable Persuasion in thee, that He has
pardoned thee. At the same, take up a full purpose of Heart, that thou will
cleave to Him, and walk with Him, in perpetual Endeavors to keep a Conscience
void of Offense before Him, to the period of thy Days. This is the way, Oh!
walk in it; and thou shall find Rest for thy Soul; A Rest wherein though an
Earthquake may toss about the Earth under thy seet, thou shall yet sing; The
Lord is my Defense, I shall not be moved!

Secondly; A speedy Flight unto the only REDEEMER: This is the ONE THING
NEEDFUL. 'Twill procure our safety in an Earthquake. As they fled from before
the Earthquake in the Days of Uzziah King of Judah, so let us now Flee unto the
LORD whom we see on a Throne high and lifted up; the High priest upon the
Throne; the SAVIOR who calls upon us, Come unto me! We read much about being
safe and lodged and hid in the Tabernacle of GOD. But, O! what? O! where? -- is
the True Tabernacle? Truly, our Blessed JESUS is Tabernacle of GOD; Our Bible
calls Him so. In Him there personally dwells the Fullness of the Godhead; Here
the Shechinah. My Friend, Get into a CHRIST, and thou art in all the safety, in
which the Tabernacle of GOD can cover thee: A Tabernacle that no Earthquake
ever can reach unto.

But, How is this to be done? Briefly, A glorious CHRIST has in a Covenant of
Redemption engaged unto His FATHER for His People; That He would furnish them
with a Sacrifice and a Righteousness, in Relying whereon they should be
Forgiven and Accepted with Him; And, That He would then fill them with the Love
of GOD and their Neighbor, and Heal all that is Amiss in them, and fit them
for and bring them to all the spiritual Blessings in the Heavenly places. Now
consent unto it, O Gospellized Soul, That thou may be comprehended in this
Covenant of thy SAVIOR. Beg it of Him; O my SAVIOR, Do for me all that thou
have engaged unto thy FATHER to do for all thy chosen! This Consent brings thee
into the Covenant of Grace. Thy SAVIOR takes thee under the shadow of His
Wings; And what can any Earthquake do unto thee there? My Neighbors come about
me, and Cry, Oh! What shall I do, if I see the Earth opening under me, and seel
my self going down into the Pit? I cannot for my life think on a better Answer
than This; Get and keep a fast hold of a CHRIST, and you are in eternal safety.
I have just now told you, how to do it. Soul, Thy SAVIOR calls to thee, With
me thou shall be in safety. Oh! Repair to Him, and say, Lord, I am Thine; save
me! If an Earthquake should now sink thee down, thou have a SAVIOR that will
fetch thee up again.

-- And now, O EARTHQUAKE, Do thy worst. Thou can not make me miserable. My
SAVIOR is my Friend, I will not fear; what can an Earthquake do unto me!

Thirdly; A Life of Serious, Watchful, Prayerful, and Fruitful PIETY; This will
do. All its Ways are Ways of Tranquillity, and all its Paths are Safety. He
that walks with GOD, what has he to sear, though he should have the Earth
trembling under his Feet? The Life of GOD, come into That, and thou have what
cannot be killed; No, Not by an Earthquake. Believer, Get a Soul as full of a
CHRIST as ever thou can; especially, in Precious Thoughts of Him. Let thy
Life be filled with Devotions toward GOD, and with Benignities toward Men.
Make the serving and pleasing of GOD in them, the main Scope of thy Actions;
Make the seeing and serving of GOD by them, the main Sweet of thy Enjoyments.
Be daily devising of Good, and have a peerless Delight in doing of it, and, Be
not weary of well-doing. If an Earthquake find thee so doing, -- how Safe, how
safe, art thou? What can harm thee, if thou be such a Follower of the Good One?

Alas, When I see the Epidemical Decay of Real and Vital PIETY, and how
Lukewarm we are in all that is Good, with how few Agonies the affairs of
Salvation are carried on, methinks, I see sufficient cause for Earthquakes, to
throw us into Agonies. Laodicea had this charged upon her, Thou art Lukewarm.
It Is Our unhappy and prevailing Temper. But what is become of Laodicea? It Is
entirely lost, in amazing Earthquakes. No Travelers can find where Laodicea
stood! -- It is entirely absorbed and vanished, in horrible Earthquakes.

Lastly. What a Contempt is due to an Earth, whereof we see all the Possessions
lying under such a dismal Uncertainty!

We find People casting away their Idols, when they see the LORD arising to
shake terribly the Earth. The Earthquake wherein we just now saw the Glorious
GOD arising to shake terribly the Earth, has in it this Voice unto us; Don't
Idolize this Earth! Set not your Hearts upon an Earth, which may easily and
suddenly prove a Grave unto you, and unto all that you have upon it! If we
could look into the uncertain Ground which we stand upon, and build upon, and
could see the deep, the wide, and hideous Vaults below, and how liable the thin
Arched Roof over the hollow Recesses of the Subterraneous World may be to fail
and break and sink upon the Expansion of the Vapors there, certainly it were
enough to make us almost swoon with Fear, and in a shuddering Horror, and our
Hearts even die away within us. The dreadful Abyss, over which there is bent
and laid the shallow Bridge, that sustains us, and all that the Men of this
World have to subsist upon, or find comfort in! Syrs, we have no earthly
Possessions, but what may be called, Movables; Our very Houses are so! O you
that mind Earthly Things! What of this Idolized Earth is there, that you can be
sure of? How does all appear, when an Earthquake shows you truly what it is?
How Undone! How Undone! How Damned are you, if you are put off with a Portion
here? The Text, of which the Earthquake is a Cogent and a Pungent Sermon, is
that; Col. III. 2. Set your Affections on the Things that are Above, not on
Things that are on the Earth. My Fellow-Travellers; Let us live like Strangers
on the Earth, and even as Dead unto it; and maintain a wise Indifferency to all
the Enjoyments and Endearments of it. As Dying, and behold we Live!

I have done. -- But now, Return and discern between the Righteous and the
Wicked; between him that serves GOD, and him that serves Him not.

And here, first, see the forlorn and frighted Aspect of the Wicked; How their
Countenance is changed, and their Thoughts trouble them, and their knees do
swite one against another! Their Flesh it self evidently quivering, and their
Hearts failing for fear, and for looking after: be Things that are coming on
the Earth! -- And NOW, they wish, Oh! That I were in good Terms with Heaven!
they think; Well, If they may escape this once, how they will Exercise
themselves unto Godliness; how Regularly they will order their Conversation;
how conscienciously they will work out their own Salvation! -- Say thou so,
Friend? -- But Oh! Let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more! We shall see, how
they remember the Vows of GOD upon them; how they behave themselves.

But then, the Righteous! Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright; See the
Peace of GOD that fortifies him, even, when he has a prospect of his End just
come upon him. There is indeed a Reverence and godly Fear with which he regards
what the great GOD is doing in an Earthquake. Even a Moses himself is an
Example of it. He is neither a Stoic, nor a Mocker. But yet -- not Afraid with
any Amazement! -- you may see an Amiable Serenity in him, when all the World
about him is in an uproar. How free from the Commotions, and Convulsions and
Confusions, with which the reft of the World is agitated. Even an Heathen Poet,
celebrates it among the privileges and prerogatives of a Virtuous Man, Let an
Earthquake break and sink the World, [Impavidum serient Ruinae] be is not
frighted at the Ruins! But O the Triumphs of the Man that indeed Lives unto
GOD, and feels a CHRIST, living in him! He is assured, If the Earthquake put a
stop to my Breath, my Soul will be in the Paradise of GOD before the morning.
Like Paul and Silas, he can Sing in the midst of an Earthquake; he can Sing for
the Majesty of the Lord; he can say, O Death, where is thy sting! O Earthquake,
where is thy Victory!

Thus do we turn to see the Voice! -- We read, Rev. XI. 19. The Temple of GOD
was opened, and there were Voices, and Thundrings, and a great Earthquake. We
are this Day come into the Temple, that we may hear the Voices of our Great
Earthquake.

A Great Earthquake is called in the Bible, A Trembling of GOD. But, O! If we
may Tremble more than the Earth, and be those whom GOD shall see Trembling at
His Word; This, This would be a Trembling of GOD indeed: Such as, Blessed are
they that come into it.

In some Expectation, that GOD giving forth His Thundering Voice, in and by the
melting of the Trembling Earth, His Voice will be hearkened unto, and that our
Earthquake will prove the most useful Dispensation that ever we have seen, in
all the Days of our Pilgrimage, We shall now conclude; and presently Sing part
of the Forty sixth Psalm, with the last Verse of the Fourth Psalm annexed unto
it.

AN APPENDIX.
[Written Saturday, Nov. 4.]
BEFORE Six Days from the First Shock of our EARTHQUAKE are Expired, we are
able to Relate, That it has reached, as far as it is possible for us in this
Time to learn, upon all points of the Compass. We already know of it is reaching
from North to South, near one hundred and forty Miles. It seems, to have been
at the Northward, rather more formidablethan in our parts. The Roar of it
longer and louder, and the Noise of the Explosion somewhere or other, after
more than an Hours murmur, more audible, and more terrible; equal to that of
many discharged Cannon. It affects Travelers to see, not only vast Quantities
of Stone-Wall thrown down by it, but also mighty Rocks either overset, or sunk
some way into the Earth. It Is not known, how many Houses, or Chimneys are
damnified. But then, That no more! -- That no Worse! -- That no Lives that we
yet know of, Sacrificed! --

Scarce a Night has passed all this Week, without a sensible Repetition of the
Sbocks, with the concomitant Rumbles in money Places. But the smell of Sulphur,
which is affirmed by many to have been plain unto them, -- adds to a Fearful
Expectation of a Fiery Indignation, -- in GOD's Time and way to be proceeded in.

Indeed, the Glorious GOD has heretofore spoke to New England, by lesser
Earthquakes; and our Predecessors made such an Holy Improvement of them, that
they proved profitable Dispensations.

About, Jun. 2. 1638. there was an Earthquake that shook the Houses, and shook
down the Things that stood upon Shelves in them; and People that were abroad,
could not stand, but laid hold upon what was next them, to preserve them from
falling down. A second Shock succeeded, but not equal to the former. The Sea
also was troubled; and the Vessels there felt the Shock, with surprise and
consternation.

GOD was at the same time, shaking the Churches in the Country, with a Shock
that would have torn them to pieces: if GOD in the midst of them, had not
prevented their being moved: Their GOD and SAVIOR helped them, in that Morning
of the Colony.

On October. 29 1653. there was an Earthquake; on which the Aged Hand of the
famous Mr. Peter Bulkly, the never-to-be-forgotten Pastor and Glory of Concord,
could not forbear taking a Pen, and Writing this Epigram. [Taken from, His
Life, in the Magnalia CHRISTI Americana. B. III. p. 98.]

Ecce, DEI Nutu Tellus Pavefacta tremiscit,
Terra tremens mota est sedibus ipsa suis.
Nutant Fulera Orbis, Mundi compago soluta est;
Ex Vultu irati Contremit ille DEI.
Contremuit Tellus, imis Concussa Cavernis,
Ponderibus quamquam sit gravis illa suis.
Eo^mit ore putres magno cum murmr Ventos,
Quos in visceribus clausorat ante suis.
Ipsa tremit Tellus Scelerum gravitate Virorum,
Sub Sceleris nostri pondere Terra tremit.
O Nos quam duri! sunt Ferrea pectora nobis!
Non etenim gemimus cum gemit omne solum.
Quis Te non metuit, metuit quem Fabrica Mundi,
Qu^^que timent Caeli, Terraque tota timet!
Motibus a Tantis nunc tandem Terra quiescat;
Sed cessent potius Crimina nostra, Precor.
Another Aged Hand assumes the Honor of so Translating it:

Lo, Our Great GOD by His Almighty Beck,
Makes the affrighted Earth to move and break.
The Pillars of the World all shake; The Frame
Of Nature fails, when once His Wrath shall flame.
The Earth all trembles, and it is Inwards move;
Their weight cannot bear the ponderous Load above.
It belches noisome Winds, with hideous Roar,
Which in it is Bowels lay shut up before.
It shakes, pressed with the heavy Guilt of Men;
The Earth cannot bear the Burden of our Sin.
O! most Obdurate WE! O Hearts of Steel,
That Sigh not, when the Earth's loud Sighs we feel!
My GOD, who will not Fear a GOD whom All,
All Creatures fear, and shocked before Him fall!
Lord, Put an End unto the Shocks betimes:
But, Oh! First put an End unto our Crimes.
In the Year, 1658. New England felt another considerable Earthquake. Nothing
memorable is left upon Record concerning it. It had Concomitants that were too
Memorable.

In the Month of January, between 1662 and 1663, there was an Earthquake,
whereof we find this Account given by that worthy Man, Mr. Samuel Danforth of
Roxbury;

Jan. 26. and 28. The Foundations of the Earth trembled, and some our Houses
rocqu'd like a Cradle. Six or seven times did the Earth shake under us, in the
space of Two or Three Days. It was then though it and said, That these Earthquakes
might portend the shaking the Foundations of our Churches, and of our Civil
State.

In the Year 1705. there was a small Earthquake felt by the
Massachuset-Province on Jun. 16. And in Connecticut-Colony, Jun. 22. On which
occasion Dr. Increase Mather, preached and printed, A Discourse concerning
Earthquakes. In that Sermon, there are these among other Passages:

The Lord seldom Visits any Town or Country with desolating Judgments, but He
first gives them Warning of it, by one means or another; and many times by
Earthquakes. A Roman Historian observes, that the City of Rome never felt any
Earthquake, but some terrible Judgment soon followed. In the Scripture, it is
said, There shall be Earthquakes in diverse Places; The Next Words are; And
FAMINES and PESTILENCES. Earthquakes are sometimes prodromous of those other
Judgments. -- But, -- We have at this Day Reason to expect that a Notable
COMING of the LORD is near at hand. Yea, we may say, The Great-DAY of THE LORD,
is Near, it is Near, and it Hastes greatly.

There have been more than One or Two lesser Earthquakes, besides these, at
several Times in the Country. But never any that on all Accounts has equalled
THAT which is now Alarming of us.

We will at present conclude, with a few Lines extracted from a little Treatise
entitled, Geologia Norvegica: written by a Danish Minister, whose Name was
Michael Peterson Escholt, on the Occasion of (what he calls) That very great
and spacious Earthquake, almost quite through the South Parts of Norway, Apr. 24.
1657.

He says, It carried such a Noise and Sound with it, that the People at first
knew not but it was the Noise of Thunder, until they perceived the Houses
shook, and all their Movables totter. -- Yet it has not done any Remarkable
Harm; for which we ought to be very Thankful unto GOD. -- Nevertheless, in
regard that this Earthquake was of such a Length and Breadth, namely an hundred
and sixty Miles, we need not doubt but that it may signify some Remarkable
Change and Alteration. The ancient Historiographer Herodotus, has recorded it;
That when any Remarkable Change or Calamity approaches, it is commonly
signified by such preceding Tokens! --

-- When GOD Almighty, now in these last Times of the World, shall permit such
Great and Spacious Earthquakes, for so many many Miles in length to happen, Men
ought not carelessly to slight them, and think no more of them: No, But regard
and receive them, as partly signifying some unusual Accident Impending or
Approaching; and partly as infallible Forerunners of the DAY, which the earnest
Expectation of the Creature waits for, yea, Groaneth and even Travaileth in
Pain.

FINIS.

