Mr. Cotton's DISCOURSE AFTER THE Earthquake.

A Holy Fear of GOD, AND HIS JUDGMENTS, EXHORTED TO: IN A SERMON Preached at
Newton, November 3. 1727. ON a Day of FASTING and PRAYER, Occasioned by the
Terrible EARTHQUAKE That Shook NEW ENGLAND, on the Lord's Day Night before.

BY JOHN COTTON, Pastor of the Church of CHRIST there.

With an APPENDIX containing a Remarkable Account of the Extraordinary
Impressions made on the Inhabitants of Haverhill, etc.

Psalm. 55.5. Fearfulness and Trembling came upon me.

Job 31.23. Destruction from God was a Terror to me.

2 Cor. 5.11.10. Knowing therefore the Terror of the Lord, we persuade Men --
We pray you in Christ stead, be ye reconciled unto God.

BOSTON: Printed by B. GREEN, jun. for S. GERRISH, at the lower end of
Cornhill. M.DCC.XXVII.

TO THE Flock of CHRIST, UNDER MY Pastoral Care.
Beloved Brethren, and Neighbors,
I HOPE, and have reason to believe, there have been many among you, of every
Age, Fearing and Trembling before GOD, and Preparing to meet Him in the way of
His Judgments; and therefore you have been such a number of you, so desirous of
having the following Sermon put into your hands, which if it may any ways
contribute to the exciting a holy fear of GOD, and his Terrible Judgments in
any, my Heart shall rejoice, even mine.

IT was a pleasure to me, to see your ready and general attendance upon the
late day of FASTING and PRAYER, and your diligent and affectionate attention to
the messages of GOD, then delivered to you.

WOULD to GOD, that this Sermon together with the seasonable and pungent
Discourse you had from my worthy Brother Mr. Allin of Brooklin.
on the same day, may in the hands of the Almighty Spirit be instrumental to
bring on the Repentance and Reformation, then earnestly exhorted to, as the
call of GOD to us by his Judgments, and by the EARTHQUAKE in a more particular
manner.

I Beseech you Cherish your Convictions; -- Were you not almost resolved in
that Week of fear and concern, that you would for time to come, be more
watchful, prayerful and diligent in getting ready for the Coming of the Lord?

IF the Spirit of GOD, has been thus striving with you, Quench not the Spirit;
Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling: for GOD will then work in
you, both to will, and to do, of his own good pleasure.

LET the Grace of GOD shown to others encourage and animate you, especially if
any Impressions have been made, to cry earnestly to GOD to set them home.

RESOLVE (by the help of GOD) upon a New Life, cry day and night, for a Heart
to Repent and turn from every Sin, and be restless till you are brought to that
Resolution, Wherein I have done iniquity, I will do so no more; and that, The
Lord our God, will we serve, and his voice will we obey.

LET me be yet more particular: And,

I. As to Omissions of Duty.

YOU that have not Prayed in Secret, and if there be any that do it not in
their Families; neglect it no longer, if you would not have the wrath of GOD
poured out upon you.

YOU that neglect to Instruct, Restrain, and Govern your Children and Servants,
endeavor to do your duty faithfully and effectually in these regards for time
to come.

YOU that have too much neglected the Public Worship of GOD, say now, I will
no longer so forsake the House of the Lord: You that have been Sleepy and
Slothful there, be so no more.

YOU that have lived without Baptism, to this day, Arise and be Baptized.

YOU that were Baptized in your Infancy; Remember frequently your early
Consecration to GOD, and the Solemn bonds lying on you, to be the Lords. And as
you come to Years of Choice, Renew the Dedication of your selves unto the Lord:
And Choose the GOD of your Fathers to be your GOD and Portion: Will you not from
this time cry unto Him, to be your GOD and the Guide of your Youth?

YOU that have never done what Christ has commanded you to do in Remembrance of
Him; bewail your disobedience, and be not contented while you live in it; be
restless until you find those dispositions in you, that shall encorage your
humble and penitent approaches to his Holy Table.

II. As to Commissions of Evil.

YOU that have been Profane, dare not any more to take the Name of the Lord in
vain. Let him now be your Fear and your Dread.

YOU that have been Sabbath Breakers, Sanctify the Lords Sabbaths, and
Reverence his Sanctuary. And know, that though you may escape Punishment from
Men, you shall not escape the righteous Judgments of GOD.

YOU that have been Disobedient to Parents and Masters, Obey them in the Lord;
and be obedient to your Masters -- with fear, and trembling.

YOU that have been Passionate, and then unguarded as to the words of your
mouth; Set a watch before your mouth, keep it with a bridle, that you sin not
any more with your Tongue.

YOU that have Ly'd, and Stole, put away Lying, and Steal no more.

IF any have been Contentious, let there be no more Contentions, or Divisions
among you. If it be possible as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all
Men.

IF any have been keepers of Bad Company, say now to your evil Companions,
Depart from me, for I will keep the Commandments of GOD.

IF any of you have idly and needlessly spent your time at Taverns, to the
wounding of Soul and Body, Name and Estate, do so no more.

WOE, Woe will be to such as tarry long there, for at the last, it will bite like
a Serpent, and sting like an Adder.

IF Sinners entice you to Chambering and Wantoness, consent not; walk not thou
in the way with them, lest you fall into the pit into which the abhorred of the
Lord do fall; and mourn at the last, when your flesh and body are consumed.

YOU that have been Extravagant, in Dress and Apparel, (another of the crying
Sins of this Land and Day) Be so no more; Retrench those SUPERFLUITIES of
NAUGHTINESS.

YOU that have been inordinately pursuing the World to the neglect of the One
Thing Needful, you now see what an uncertain and shaking Foundation you are
upon; let not the things of this Passing World, any longer swallow up so much
of your time and thoughts; Let your Conversation be without Covetousness, and
be content with such things as ye have. And be ready to distribute, and willing
to communicate, and withold not more than is meet, for if tends to Poverty.

IN Fine,

LET no Man go beyond, and defraud his Brother, or bear false witness against
his Neighbor.

SUCH Omissions of Duty, and Commissions of Evil, I call on you to bewail and
reform, as you would be found of your Judge in peace.

THIS you have been of late earnestly exhorted to from 2 Pet. 3.14.
and can any of you think, you shall ever arrive to it, if such Admonitions and
Calls of GOD, be not hearkened to? Bless not your selves in your own hearts,
saying, I shall have peace, though I go on to add one Iniquity to another; for
the Lord has said, He will not spare such, but his anger and jealousy shall
smoke against that Man; There is no peace says my God unto such.

YOU can have no peace in your own Consciences, nor peace in the day of Death
or Judgment, and this is what I would if possible awak'n in you a due concern
and solicitude about, as knowing what manner of persons you must be in all
holy conversation and godliness, if you would be found blameless in that Day.

THE Reformation urged upon you, is to bring you into such a Conversation, that
you may thereby lay a foundation for peace and comfort in the Day that is
approaching, that you may be accounted worthy to escape all the things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man.

AND for your Quickening; Suffer me to use with you the three following Motives.

MOT. I. THE coming of the Lord is doubtless foretold to excite and quicken us
to diligence in getting ready for it.

THIS was written for our admonition and warning upon whom the ends of the
world are come. GOD foresaw how carnally secure and stupid a wicked World would
be, how ready to put far from them the day of his coming; that they might
therefore be rowz'd out of such security, he does by his Prophets and Apostles
solemnly warn a secure World to prepare for it, lest coming suddenly, he finds
us sleeping. Now surely, the Great GOD would not do thus, nor speak so much of
his coming, were it not to quicken us to a diligent and instant preparing for
it. Hence the Prophet Joel after he had prophesied of the Terrible Day of the
Lord approaching, he immediately exhorts to Repent, and turn to the Lord Joel
2.12.
. So that it seems evidently to be the great design and end of GOD in
denouncing his Judgments and particularly, in the awful predictions of that
Great Day of the Lord's coming upon a secure World, to awaken Men to the utmost
care and diligence in getting ready for his Coming.

MOT. II. OUR Condition will be unutterably distressing if we are not prepared
for the Lords Coming, if we shall then be found in a Christless Estate.

IF that Great and Terrible Day we look for, should speedily arrive, when the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt
up; and the Son of Man, the glorious Judge of the World, shall personally and
visibly descend with a glorious retinue of Holy Angels, and that voice, that
Midnight cry, shall be heard, ARISE YE DEAD, AND COME TO JUDGMENT; If this were
to be the Day of the glorious descent of the Son of GOD, in which he were to
punish with an Everlasting destruction from his presence and the glory of his
power, all such as have not obeyed his Gospel: How terrible must his Approach
be? Finding our selves among the number of his Enemies, who would not have him
to reign over us. We shall in the midst of our confusion with bitterness of
heart, and bitter wailing reflect on our past refusals of offered Grace and
Mercy, when we were so often entreated to be reconciled to GOD, to make haste
to Christ, as our City of Refuge, that in such a day we might have been hid
under the shadow of his wings, and had a blessed time of refreshment from the
presence of the LORD:

WE shall think with anguish upon the many warnings we had of such a day
approaching, and hastening upon us, and yet that we should regard them no more:
that we should notwithstanding go on in the ways of our hearts and in the sight
of our eyes, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, without any
grief or remorse of Spirit at all therefore: that the calls we had to Repentance
and Reformation one time after another, should be so slighted and disregarded
by us; that though Christ stood so long at the doors of our Souls, knocking for
entrance, desiring to come in, and take possession of us, for himself, that he
might rule and reign in us, and conform us to his holy Image and likeness; that
we notwithstanding bolted the door fast against him, were so slothful and
sluggish that we would not arise to let him in. And alas, We now see, we are
miserable and undone without Him, that there is none can save or help us but
Christ: Though it will be now in vain to look for Salvation from the Hills, or
the Multitude of the Mountains, yet we shall not forbear crying to the rocks
and mountains, we see making and trembling about us, to fall upon us, and hide
us from the presence of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb. We shall dread to make our Personal appearance before the Judge of
the whole Earth; How glad should we be, we might in a moment be annihilated,
and return to our first nothing? But when we see, we must whether we will or
no, immediately attend the Summons, and appear before our Judge, and receive
our Doom; Oh with what reluctance, shame and regret, must we be forced away to
the Bar of GOD, whom we shall behold as a consuming Fire, ready to adjudge us
to Everlasting Fire with the Devil and his Angels, in this lower World all on
Fire ready to devour us; How shall we tremble, and die away with anguish, to
think, we must now take up our dwelling in Flames, and though we should lift up
our Eyes, and cry for a drop of Water, to cool us while so tormented, there
would be no hope of obtaining it.

IF We should beg some of the Saints to take pity on us, their bowels will not
yern toward us; though they know us, as deformed and wtetched as we appear,
and it may be were near and dear to us, while together on Earth, and were then
willing to have done their utmost for our comfort, they will not at all relent
for us, now, they will be entirely satisfied in the final determination of the
Righteous Judge.

NOR will the Holy Angels minister to our relief, in that day: They were ever
ready before, to do us acts of kindness, and many were the kind and good
Offices done by them for us, and glad would they have been to have seen us
heirs of Salvation, and to have ministered to us, as such, at such a Day; but
since we were not by all the goodness of GOD, engaged to love, and serve, and
live devoted to him, they will know that our condemnation is just, that we are
justly miserable, and deserve no pity or relief from them, no more than from
the Saints, and therefore they will never hearken to any cries or entreaties from
us. Which way shall we then turn our selves? --

SURELY we cant hope, nor in the least expect, any relief from the Evil Angels;
Though they soothed and flattered us, while we hearkened to their vile
solicitations, as if there was no danger, we might go on securely, and never
feel such impressions of the wrath of GOD, we were often threatened withal,
they will now its probable be so far from attempting our relief, that they will with
cruel Joy be the executiouers of GOD'S holy vengeance on us; and will upbraid
us exceedingly for our inexcusable folly, in regarding their Solicitations as
we did, from one time to another, when even our own Consciences condemned us at
the same time: They will be doubtless instrumental of increasing, if possible,
our everlasting vexation and sorrow, while tormented with them.

BUT cannot the Multitudes in torment with us, afford some relief; will not the
vast numbers of our Fellow Creatures with us, be some alleviation, or in some
Measure abate our Torments? Surely we cant have the least hope of this: the
beholding of them in Torment may be an aggravation, or increase of ours: We may
perhaps, behold several under the same condemnation, tearing themselves and
cursing of us, as having been instrumental of their ruin, by our evil examples,
by enticing them into those paths that led down to those Chambers of Death: If
they had not hearkn'd to our Solicitations to evil, and been Companions with
us, they might have been rejoicing with Saints and Angels, in the Kingdom of
GOD; but such was the pernicious bewitching influence of our evil Conversation,
that they were miserably deluded and led away thereby, and so were never
rescued out of the paths of the destroyer: With what indignation and revenge
must such behold one another, and how will such Reflections exasperate their
angry furious minds, and add to their extreme anguish?

AND

FINALLY, When they consider, there will be no Intermission of their Torment,
and no End of it, that the Worm shall never Die, nor the Fire be ever Quenched;
who can possibly imagine how cutting and tormenting such Reflections must be?

BUT its impossible for me to give you any adaequate Ideas or conceptions
thereof; I have now endeavored to raise some Ideas in your Minds of the
miserable distressing Condition you will be in, if found out of CHRIST at his
Coming.

AND I appeal to your Conscience, whether you have not the same Apprehensions
as to those, who will be then found in an Unconverted Estate; and if you have,
should not the Consideration of it, excite you to the utmost care and
diligence, that you may be found of him in Peace?

AND thus I have considered something of the anguish that must fill the Souls
of those who shall be found in a Christless Estate, if the Day of the Lord
should immediately come upon us.

I will now go on to consider something of the like distress, of Christless
Souls in the day of their Death, when the Lord shall in this way come unto them.

THE Lord may be yet Long-suffering toward an evil World, and for wise and
holy ends delay his Coming to Judgment; GOD may have yet more great and
glorious things to accomplish before his Coming, in this sense. But when it
shall be, is reserved as a secret in his own Eternal Councils: Of that day and
hour knows no man, no, not the Angels in Heaven, nor the Son of Man.

BUT if we should suppose it to be yet a great way off, yet the Day of the
Lords coming to us by Death, and so calling us immediately after to Judgment,
we certainly know, this coming of the Lord, cannot be far off, and that
determines our State for Eternity as surely, as if it were the general Day of
Judgment. And how soon the day of our Death may come upon us, is altogether
uncertain to us; our Souls may this very night be required of us.

IF the Messenger of Death were to call us out of this World, before the light
of another Morning, should we not dread the King of Terrors thus approaching to
us, to behold the Pale Horse and Death, and Hell with him, or following after
him; If we evidently felt our lives drawing nigh to the Grave, that our
Immortal Spirits must presently leave these dissolving Bodies, and take their
flight into the unseen World of Spirits to take up our Everlasting abode there,
if we had the free use and exercise of our Reason and understanding, how
distressing would the prospect be to us, finding our selves hastening to a Day
we are utterly unprovided for; a day, that notwithstanding all the Warnings we
have had, we have put far from us -- and so have left undone many things we
should, and thought to have done, and have been doing many things, we had
better have left undone, and so have been laying in for a bitter Repentance,
against such a day: We shall now find our selves in ill terms with Heaven, see
nothing but Frowns in the face of GOD, and find him rebuking us in his anger,
and chastning us in his hot displeasure, the terrors of GOD setting themselves
in array against us, filling us with terrible impressions of fiery indignation
and wrath ready to devour us; We shall with grief of heart reflect on our not
being persuaded by those who knowing the terrors of the Lord were often warning
and urging us to flee the wrath to come, to make our peace with GOD, and get
ready for a dying Day.

AND now, finding our selves utterly unfit for the Kingdom of GOD, having
hearts full of enmity to GOD, and Christ, and Holiness, and knowing we have
never heartily submitted to Christ's Kingly power and government, but been
trampling his Holy Laws under our feet, and so have dishonored his Name,
quenched and vexed his holy Spirit, and wounded our Souls, and have the guilt
of all lying upon us, a burden heavy enough to sink us into the pit of
everlasting sorrows; Oh how oppressed and distressed may we well be? We used to
think light of Sin before, and could run into the commission of it, with little
or no concern; But now we see, they are fools who make a mock at Sin, and that
all Sin is infinitely more provoking to GOD, than ever we thought it to be:
Beginning now to feel what the wages of Sin are, we may well fear and tremble,
The death of the Body is very awful, to think of being presently turned into a
lifeless lump of Clay, and hid in the Grave; but this has not such a shocking,
terrifying aspect, as the fears of a second Death, the death of the Soul, the
everlasting separation of it from the presence of GOD, to hear from the mouth
of our incensed Judge, that Sentence, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I
know you not; depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his angels. Oh the direful convulsions and tremblings we may be well
put into! But I pass from this Melancholy Head, to one more pleasant and
delightful.

MOT. III. WE shall be inexpressibly and inconceivably blessed, if we are found
of our Judge in peace, without spot and blameless.

IF we are of the number who have fled for refuge to Christ, have by a true and
lively faith laid hold on his glorious Righteousness, and thereby obtained
Peace, and Justification before GOD; with what calmness and serenity of Mind,
may we entertain the thoughts of the Lords coming, either as to his visible and
personal Coming in the glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels, or his coming
to us in the way of Mortality; His coming in both ways is what we have employed
our thoughts much upon, and have been above all things concerned that we might
be ready for; while others have made it their great enquiry, what they should
eat and drink and wherewithal they should be clothed, it has been our great
Solicitude what we should do that we might inherit Eternal Life, that we might
be entitled to, and made meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in light; our
Souls have been therefore following hard after GOD, prizing and earnestly
seeking communion with him in the way of Ordinances, according to his Command
and direction, and have thereby obtained gracious Manifestations of his Love
and favor, so that we have comfortable grounds of hope, that a new and saving
change has passed upon us, that we are born of the Spirit, and born from above,
are by a gracious adoption become the Children of GOD, and heirs of the
Heavenly inheritance, and are daily preparing and ripening for the employments
and enjoyments of the Kingdom of GOD: With what pleasure and satisfaction may
such look for the coming of their Savior in the Clouds of Heaven? When he
shall thus appear, it will be to their Eternal joy, for in a moment they shall
be changed, this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal put on
immortality, and so Death shrll be swallowed up in victory, and they shall be
caught up in the air, and be together, and forever with the Lord: So that they
may now sincerely and cheerfully pray, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. And if He
should speedily come by Death, he shall be a most welcome messenger to them.
Knowing their Savior has by dying taken away the sting of Death, they shall be
able to sing that Song of triumph; O Death where is thy Sting, O Grave where is
thy Victory! Its refreshing to them to think Christ himself descended into the
dark and silent Grave, to make it a bed of rest for them, that their Bodies
might sleep quietly there, and awake refresh't in the bright and glorious
morning of the Resurrection, and then stand up in their lot, and share in the
joys and glories of the Resurrection World: And that their Spirits guarded by
Holy Angels through the territories of the Prince of the power of the air, shall
go immediately to the Paradise of GOD, to the mansions prepared for them in
their heavenly fathers house, to associate with glorious and holy Angels, and
the Spirits of just men made perfect, to be led by the Lamb that is in the
midst of the Throne to living Fountains of Waters, and have all tears wiped
away from their eyes, and spend an eternity in admiring and adoring riches of
redeeming love and grace manifested toward them; And they shall have an
inexpressibly satisfying assurance of all this immediately after their Death;
for being found clothed with the glorious Robe of the Righteousness of Christ,
they shall be presented before the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy;
and immediately hear that Blessed Sentence, from the mouth of their Savior and
Judge, Come ye blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the World. But eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it
entered into the Heart of Man to conceive of the blessedness of those who shall
be found ready and prepared for the Coming of the Lord.

YOU are I trust, (through grace) a number of you, (DEARLY BELOVED) Heirs of such
blessedness, -- and have this evidence of it, that You are diligent that you
may be found of your Judge in peace, without spot and blameless; I am persuaded
such things of you, and things that accompany Salvation; for GOD is not
unrighteous to forget your work, and labor of love, which ye have showed
toward his Name: And I desire that every one of you do show the same diligence
to the full assurance of hope unto the end: That ye be not Slothful, but
fervent in Spirit serving the Lord, seeing to it, that ye walk circumspectly
not as fools but as wise, redeeming the time because the days are evil;

THUS adorn your high and holy profession by a Godly Life and walk; holding
fast the profession of your faith without wavering, considering one another to
provoke to love, and good works; exhorting one another, and so much the more,
as you see the Day approaching.

IN Fine,

LET not your heart be troubled: At what time you are afraid, Trust in GOD, as
a present help

YOU need not be afraid of any great or awful events of Providence, if your
Hearts are thus fixed trusting in the Lord: For He will give you rest in the
Day of trouble.

THEREFORE my Brethren, Dearly Beloved and longed for, and whom I hope to have
for my Joy and Crown in the Day of CHRIST'S appearing, so stand fast, my Dearly
Beloved, and the peace of GOD which passes all understanding shall keep your
Hearts and Minds through JESUS CHRIST.

KEEP your selves in the Love of GOD, and looking for the Mercy of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST unto Eternal Life.

AND how, I beseech you Brethren, for the Love of the Spirit, and by the coming
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and our gathering together unto Him, that ye strive
together with me, in your Prayers to GOD for me, that I may have Grace to be
faithful, and find Mercy of the Lord to be Successful, that I may save my own
Soul, and the Souls of them that hear me;

Who am, Your affectionate Friend, And Servant, for JESUS sake, John Cotton.
Newton, December 13. 1727.
A FAST SERMON After the TERRIBLE EARTHQUAKE. October 29. 1727.
PSALM, CXIX. CXX. MY Flesh Trembles for fear of Thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments.


I PERSUADE my self, this Text has employed the thoughts of many of us, since
we have felt the awful Shaking and Trembling of the EARTH under us, that we
have been, and are now ready upon it to Cry out, My Flesh Trembles for fear of
Thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. It is a Day of no little distress,
concern and fear, and it may well be so; and what a holy and provoked GOD may
be about to do with us, HE only knows. It Is certain, our Transgressions have
been multiplied, and our Iniquities do testify against us. And the Lord has
been in Years past, in various ways awfully testifying his Anger and
Displeasure against us, and we may well be afraid of his doing thus yet more
awfully and terribly: I believe and am persuaded that this is this Day, the
great fear of every one that truly fears the Great GOD; and would to GOD, there
were not so much grounds for it, to Fear, That the Lord will yet dispense more
terrible things in Righteousness to a Sinful Unreformed People. Sure I am, the
Spirits of all Flesh in the midst of us, have reason enough to tremble for fear
what GOD may further bring upon us. I shall Improve the Words then, on this
Solemn Occasion as applicable not only to particular Persons, but more
especially to a backsliding and sinful People, and accordingly observe this
Doctrine from them, for our present Instruction and Improvement.

DOCTRINE.
DOCT. That the Condition and Circumstances of a People may be such, as that
their Flesh may well Tremble for fear of GOD, and they may well be afraid of
his Judgments.

IN the Prosecution of this Doctrine, I will show,

I. WHAT may be meant by the Judgments of GOD, and what Judgments we are
exposed to, and may be afraid of?

II. WHAT may be meant by Trembling for fear of GOD, and being afraid of his
Judgments?

AND then,

III. and lastly. SUCH may be our Condition and Circumstances, that we may have
abundant reason to be so.

I. I am to show, WHAT may be meant by the Judgments of GOD, and what judgments
we are exposed to, and may be afraid of?

FOR Answer,

THE Judgments of GOD are those manifestations of his vindictive or corrective
Justice, whereby He lets the World know, what a Sin-hating GOD He is.

THESE Judgments are Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal. GOD can arm the whole
Creation against us, and make every thing we enjoy to be destructive to us. GOD
does not willingly afflict or greive the Children of Men; but when by their
Sins they provoke Him, he sends down his Judgments on them; the Judgments of
GOD are the proper Object of a natural Man's fear, for hereby GOD discovers his
just displeasure at Sin, Psalm. 9.15. The Lord is known by the Judgments which
he executes: Yea, Godly Men have been afraid of GOD'S Judgments; thus was the
Psalmist in the Text, I am afraid of thy Judgments; so was holy Job, 31.23.
Destruction from God was a terror to me. Various are the Judgments of GOD, and
the rebukes of Heaven, we lie exposed unto, and are often suffering and
groaning under. The Great GOD who is holy in all his ways and righteous in all
his works, is sometimes provoked to come out in Judgment, and to write bitter
things against us in the way of his Providence. It is sometimes the Sovereign
and holy Pleasure of GOD, to lay us under some sore Judgments, and to threaten
the infliction of yet more, and greater; There are the Judgments of Sword,
Famine, and Sickness, the Lord often brings upon us. He sometimes sends
cleaness of teeth, a great scarcity of the necessaries of Life, sometimes he
withholds the Rain, which makes the Earth Fruitful, causing the Heavens over us
to be as brass, and the earth under us as iron, and the rain of the land powder
and dust: We have sometimes had sad occasion to say with the Prophet, Joel,
chap. 1.19, The fire has devoured the pastures of the Wilderness, the rivers of
water are dried up, etc. So does GOD sometimes visit his People with scorching
Droughts, and sometimes with long and excessive Rains, the Fruits of the Earth
have been often diminished, the Trees not yielded their Fruit, nor the Land its
usual Increase. Sometimes GOD sends Infectious, Epidemical Sickness, that
proves Mortal, and sweeps away Multitudes, the slain of the Lord have been
awfully multiplied in one place and another; there is also the Judgment of the
Sword, when GOD lets loose the enemy upon us, to waste our Substance, and
destroy the Lives of many. How dreadfully has a Sovereign and Righteous GOD
punished us in Years past, by long and bloody Wars, when we have seen Garments
rolled in Blood, our young Men slain, and many carried into a miserable
Captivity, and there poisoned with the Romish Religion? There are also the
Judgments of Storms and Tempests of Wind, Thunder and Lightning, which we have
seen and felt to an uncommon degree, in the Weeks and Months that are past; But
a very few Weeks ago, upon the Evening before the Sabbath, Sept. 16.
what a Violent Storm did the Lord bring down upon us, how awful were the
Effects of it in our Orchards, and among the Trees of the Woods, in one place,
and another, and not a little damage thereby sustained; yea some in the City
were sorely Wounded, and One Slain. And now, upon the Evening after the
Sabbath, the Lord has bro't upon us, the unusual and terrible Judgment of the
EARTHQUAKE; we have thus seen that awful word fulfilled, Isa. 29.6. Thou shall
be visited of the Lord of hosts, with thunder, and with Earthquake, and great
noise, with storm, and tempest, and flame of devouring fire; and that in Psalm.
18.7. Then the Earth shook and trembled, the foundations also of the hills
moved, and were shaken --. Among the awful Judgments of GOD, this of the
EARTHQUAKE is much spoken of. It is very particularly and most awfully, in the
twenty fourth Chapter of Isaiah, which you may do well to read this Day with a
very great attention; I will single out a few verses, and read them to you now;
Behold the Lord makes the Earth empty, and makes it wast, and turns it
upside down, and scatters abroad the Inhabitants thereof. The Land shall be
utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled, for the Lord has spoken this word, the
Earth mourns, and fades away, the World languisheth. The haughty People of
the Earth do languish; the earth also is defiled under the Inhabitants thereof,
because they have transgressed the laws, and broken the everlasting covenant;
therefore has the Curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein, are
desolate, therefore the Inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left,
all the merry hearted do sigh: the noise of them that rejoice ends; they
shall not drink wine with a song, strong drink shall be bitter to them that
drink it; all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone; in the City is
left desolation, fear, and the pit, and the snare are upon thee, O Inhabitant
of the earth; and it shall come to pass, that he who flees from the noise of
the fear, shall fall into the pit, and he that comes up out of the midst of
the pit, shall be taken in the snare; for the windows from on high are open,
and the foundations of the earth do shake: the earth is moved exceedingly, the
earth shall reel to and fro like a Drunkard: and the transgression thereof
shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall and not rise again. In Isaiah, Chap.
2. from the 19 ver. we read, In that day, they shall go into the holes of the
Rocks, and into the caves of the earth for fear of the Lord, and the glory of
his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the Earth. In the 13th Chap. at
the 13th ver. we also read of the Lords Shaking the Heavens, and the Earth,
removing out of her place; The Prophet Ezekiel also speaks of it, Ezekiel. 38.19,
20. In that day, there shall be a great shaking in the Land, etc. The Prophet
Joel also; Chap. 2. from the begin.
Let all the Inhabitants of the Land tremble, for the Day of the Lord comes,
for it is nigh at hand, a day of darkness, and gloominess, a day of clouds, and
of thick darkness, there has not been ever the like, nor shall be any more
after it, a fire devoureth before them, and behind them a flame burns, the
people shall be much pained, all faces shall gather blackness, the earth shall
quake before them, the heavens shall tremble, the sun and moon shall be dark,
and the stars shall withdraw their shining, and the Lord shall utter his voice
before his army; His Camp is very great, for he is strong that executes his
word, for the day of the Lord is great, and very terrible, and who can abide
it? He speaks of it again in the next Chapter, The day of the Lord is near,
etc. The Lord also shall rore out of Zion, and the Heavens and the Earth shall
shake, The Prophet Haggai says, Chap. 2 6. For thus says the Lord of Hosts,
yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens and the earth, and
the Sea, and the dry land, and I will shake all nations: The Prophet Malachi
also speaks of this day of the Lord; Mal. 4.1. For behold the day comes, that
shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall
be as stubble, and the day that comes, shall burn them up, says the Lord of
hosts, that it shall leave them, neither root, nor branch. In the Gospel we
read of Earthquakes, as forerunners of our Saviors coming to Judgment, Math.
24.7, 8. There shall be Famines and Pestilences, and Earthquakes, all these are
the beginning of sorrows: He speaks here of the Son of Man's coming in the
Clouds of Heaven, with Power and great Glory, and of the same signs preceding
it, that the Prophets but now mentioned spoke of; The Apostle Peter also, in
the third Chapter of his Second Epistle, speaks remarkably of our hasting unto
the coming of this Day of GOD, and of its coming most suddenly and unexpectedly
upon a secure unprepared World, When the Heavens should pass away with a great
noise, and the Elements melt with fervent heat, etc. So that, we may well look
for such awful shaking dispensations, as we have been this Week under; They are
indeed very terrible, and GOD only knows, what will be the issue -- It
certainly looks as if GOD was very Angry with us, and we ripe for his terrible
Judgments; And therefore when GOD threatens to bring them, and this of the
Earthquake in a particular manner he says, Isa. 13.13. I will shake the
Heavens, and the Earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord
of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger; And also in Ezekiel. 38.19. For in
my Jealousy, and in the fire of my wrath, have I spoken, surely in that day
there shall be a great shaking in the land, etc. Our Flesh therefore trembles
for fear of what GOD may be about to do, by this Judicial Dispensation, in a
more especial manner.

I might Finally, under this Head speak of Spiritual Plagues and Judgments, we
ly exposed to, and its to be feared, many have dreadfully exposed themselves to
their being inflicted on them, and these are the worst of Judgments, to be
given up to blindness of mind, and hardness of heart, to be cast away from the
presence of GOD, and to have his holy Spirit cease striving with us, to have
the word, and means of grace made a savor of Death unto Death, having a
blinding and hardening efficacy on the hearts of Men. Oh Dreadful Judgments! And
above all other to be deprecated, for if this Judgment be inflicted on any,
they will ripen apace for Eternal Destruction; If they are continued longer
upon the Earth, it will be only to fill up the measure of their Iniquities, and
treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the
righteous Judgments of God, which will be revealed against them, and forever
inflicted on them in the World they are going into.

BUT this may suffice for the First Particular, viz. What may be meant by the
Judgments of GOD, and What the Judgments are, we are exposed unto, and may be
afraid of?

THEY are outward and Temporal, and also Spiritual and Eternal Plagues and
Judgments.

II. THE Second thing proposed was to show, What may be meant by Trembling for
fear of GOD, and being afraid of his Judgments?

AND here,

1. IT may mean, or imply in it, our Solemn and Awful Apprehensions of the
Great GOD, who brings such Judgments upon us. That we adore his Infinite
Wisdom, and Almighty Power, adore Him as a GOD wise in heart, and mighty in
strength, against whom none ever hardened themselves and prosper'd, who removes
the mountains, and they know not, who overturneth them in his anger, who
shakes the earth out of her place, and at whose presence the pillars thereof
tremble: That we Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and make Him our Fear and
our Dread: That we adore his Sovereignty and Righteousness, in his awful
dispensations, that we employ our serious, devout, and solemn thoughts on
these, and other glorious Excellencies and Perfections of Almighty GOD
displayed in his Judgments; they must be the Subject of our frequent and solemn
Meditations, that so we may always maintain on our Hearts suitable
Apprehensions of the Great GOD who sends his Judgments upon us.

2. IT may imply in it, and mean our being sensibly touched and affected with
the consideration of the Judgments that are, or may be yet brought upon us.
That we so resent them, as that they make deep impressions upon our Hearts,
that our Spirits are most sorrowfully affected with the tokens of the Divine
anger visible therein; and that we weep bitterly in secret places, in the
consideration thereof, wishing our heads were waters, and our eyes a fountain
of tears, that we might weep day and night therefore. Thus grieved and concerned
should we be continually, which may be very much meant by our trembling for
fear of God, and being afraid of his Judgments. Our Hearts then being deeply
and sorrowfully affected with the Judgments of Heaven inflicted, or threatened,
may be meant hereby.

Again,

3. HEREBY may be meant our humbling our selves exceedingly before GOD who is
thus visiting, and threatening of us. That we lay our hands on our mouths, and
our mouths in the dust before Him, and there repent and abhor our selves; that
we do, while trembling before him, judge and condemn our selves, acknowledging
we are guilty before GOD, and that he might justly be angry with us, till he
has consumed us, so that there should be no remnant, nor escaping. We must
humbly acknowledge and declare the Lord to be just, in whatever He is pleased
to lay upon us, that he does right, but we have done wickedly, that he punishes
us much less than our iniquities have deserved, that he shall be therefore
justified when he speaks, and clear when he Judges, that we will accept the
punishment of our Sins, and bear the indignation of the Lord, because we have
sinned against Him. That we continue sighing and crying for the abominations
that are committed among us, for the many provoking evils that are to be found
in the midst of us, to the infinite dishonor of the Holy GOD, and the wounding
of many precious Souls.

Again,

4. THIS may imply in it, the greatness of our fear and distress. It is here
spoken, as if the apprehensions of GOD'S Judgments did so affright the
Psalmist, as nothing else could. It is doubtless thus expressed to set forth
the greatness of his fear, how deeply he resented the hand of GOD therein; we
see how Moses resented the Judgments of GOD, Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power
of his Anger, even according to thy fear so is thy wrath. We must so resent the
Judgments of GOD, as to manifest, they are no light and trivial matters to us,
as the Psalmist did, and therefore prays as in Psalm. 6.1. O Lord Rebuke me not
in thine anger, nor chasten me in thy hot displeasure. When Men are much
affrighted, how do their Countenances change, and their Bodies tremble, and
what can cause this more than the sense of GOD'S Anger, which he manifests in
his Judgments, if we are rightly sensible of them; How did Belshazzars knees
shake and tremble at that Judgment threatened in the Writing on the Wall; yea,
how did the Holy Prophet Habakkuk, Tremble for fear of GOD, Hab. 3.16. When I
heard my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rotteness entered into
my bones, and I trembled in my self. And so the Psalmist does in these words
express the greatness of his fear, at the apprehension of GOD'S displeasure in
his Judgments. So then they may imply, our fearing nothing so much as the Lords
anger in his judicial dispensations; that the consideration hereof fills us
with the greatest fear and concern of Spirit, that GOD has been so provoked to
come out against us in his Anger, and to threaten our utter ruin and desolation.

Once more,

5. and lastly, THS fear, and trembling may imply in it, a conscientious and
diligent care to avoid and forsake every provoking evil, and repair to GOD in
Christ, as our only City of Refuge for Safety. That our fear of GOD excites us
to depart from all evil, to abstain from appearances of it, and approaches
toward it, that we therefore Stand in awe of GOD, and dread to allow our
selves in the commission of any known evils, which are the procuring causes of
the Divine Anger; that we do with a holy fear and concern of Soul, in our times
of distress and danger, under Judgments inflicted, or feared, make haste to
Christ and get under the shadow of his wings; that should be our language while
we are Fearing and Trembling before Him, Psalm. 57.1. Be merciful unto me O God,
Be merciful unto me, for my Soul trusts in thee, yea, in the shadow of thy
wings, will I make my refuge, until these Calamities be overpast.

SUCH things as these may be implied in our Trembling for fear of GOD, and
being afraid of his Judgments.

I Proceed now to the Third and last Head Propounded.

III. THAT such may be our Condition and Circumstances, that we may have
abundant reason and occasion thus to Tremble and be Afraid.

A Professing People may be left to fall into sad degeneracies, to forsake the
Lord, the Lord GOD of their Fathers, they may be left to depart from the
blessed truths of GOD, and may forsake GOD in respect of his holy Institutions,
his holy Worship and Ordinances, and forsake him in respect of Conversation, by
walking in the ways of Pride, Sensuality, and Unrighteousness, by being Unholy
and Profane; the fear of GOD may be evidently wanting in Men, there may be
scandalous miscarriages in many, firming against great light, love and grace.
Such may be, and are our apostasies from the good ways of the Lord, that He may
say to us, as in Jer. 2.21. I planted thee, a noble vine, wholly a right seed,
How art thou turned into the degenerate, plant of a strange vine unto me. It is
recorded concerning the Children of Israel, Judge. 2.17. They turned quickly out
of the ways which their Fathers walked in, obeying the Commandments of the
Lord; but they did not so. Their Fathers did endeavor to uphold Religion in
the power of it, but their Children did not so. See how Moses once spoke to
them, Numb. 32.14. Behold ye are risen up, in your Fathers stead, an increase
of sinful men. Alas! How much is it thus, at this Day; the first Generation of
Christians is gone off the Stage, and in a manner the second, and is there not
another and a more sinful risen up in their stead? We read in Joel 1.2. Hear
this ye old Men, and give ear all ye Inhabitants of the land, has this been in
your days, or even in the days of your Fathers says the Lord. Were there such
Judgments formerly, as now there are: You may therefore conclude, you have
departed from GOD, and by your sins have provoked him so to punish you. And may
it not be thus said, with reference to our state, and circumstances and the
late dispensations of GOD toward us, Alas! for us! Had we ever more reason to
stand trembling before GOD under fearful apprehensions of impending vengeance;
when we consider of the many scandalous provoking evils abounding among us,
such as Oppression, Injustice, Cozning and Deceit, Falsehood and Evil Speaking,
Pride, and Contention, Intemperance, Drunkenness, Unchastity, an Excessive
Inordinate love to the World, and I may add the Rudeness and Profaneness of
Young People? How is GOD himself and our duty to him evidently neglected and
forgotten by many, and a form of Godliness maintained and kept up, without the
life and power of it? How is the sacred and dreadful Name of GOD dishonored,
and blasphemed, by profane Cursing and Swearing? How are his holy Sabbaths
instead of being strictly observed and sanctified, very much profaned, by idle,
vain, trifling and unsuitable Carriages? Do not some Forsake the House of the
Lord, frequently neglecting, and needlessly staying away from the Public
Worship of GOD? And have not the Lords holy Ordinances and Institutions a
manifest contempt put upon them? How many are regardless of coming up to them
in a serious and worthy manner? Finally here, Don't mutual Christian love and
Charity grow cold, the love of Men to GOD, and their Neighbor, a visible
coldness and indifference toward GOD and the power of Godliness? Alas for this
People! Are not such and many more iniquities prevailing among us, and
testifying against us, that loudly proclaim our impiety and great degeneracy,
that we are an impenitent incorrigible, and unreformed People still, and
ripening apace for a destruction without remedy? Surely then if the case be
thus with us, we have reason to tremble for fear of GOD, and to be greatly
afraid of his Judgments; we may well be afraid of temporal plagues and
Judgments, of heavier and sorer, than we have been yet visited withal; for the
transgressions of GOD'S Covenant People are evceedingly provoking to Him, and
deserve to be severely punished, yea, they are the more offensive and provoking
for their being a People in Covenant, GOD'S professing People; Amos 3.2. You
only have I known above all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish
you for your iniquities. See how GOD once solemnly threatened to punish a
professing People, we may well tremble when we read, and be afraid of the
Judgments threatened in the 26th Chapter of Leviticus, from the 14th v. But if
ye will not hearken unto me, if ye shall despise my Statutes, and break my
Covenant, I will do this unto you, I will appoint over you, Terror, Consumption
and the burning Ague, that shall cause sorrow of Heart, and I will set my face
against you, they that hate you shall reign over you; and if ye will not yet
for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times more for your
sins, I will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as brass, the land shall
not yield its increase, neither shall the trees of the land yield their fruits;
and if ye will walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me, I will
bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins, I will make you
few in number, and your high ways shall be desolate, and if ye will not be
reformed by these things, but will walk contrary unto me, then will I also walk
contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for your sins, and will
bring a Sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant, and I
will send the Pestilence among you, and ye shall be delivered into the hand of
the Enemy, and my Soul shall abhor you, and I will make your Cities waste, and
bring your Sanctuaries unto Desolation, and I will bring the Land into
Desolation, your Land shall be desolate and your Cities waste. May Not we be
justly afraid at this Day of the fulfillment of these terrible threatenings;
Indeed some of them have been awfully inflicted already, and when we consider
of our many and grievous provocations of the Great GOD, maynt we fear, we shall
be laid utterly waste and desolate? Or if the Lord shall yet spare us, maynt we
be greatly afraid of having bro't on us that fearful Judgment denounced against
Israel after the Lord had sworn He would not forget any of their Sins, and that
the Land should tremble for them, see Amos 8. 11, 12. Behold the days come
says the Lord God, that I will send a Famine in the land, not a Famine of
bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord, and they
shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North, even to the East, they shall
run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. But if our
eyes shall yet see our Teachers, and our ears yet hear the word of Life
dispensed to us, have we not reason to fear, that the Lords Ambassadors shall
be sent on that doleful errand the Prophet Isaiah was, Isa. 6.9, 10.
And the Lord said, Go and tell this People, hear ye indeed, but understand
not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not, make the heart of this people fat,
and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be
healed. I say, when we reflect on our past unprofitableness and unfruitfulness,
under the precious means and advantages enjoyed by us, maynt we fear the Lords
thus Judicially coming out against us, and causing the means of Grace to have a
blinding and hardening efficacy upon us? May Not we fear, that some are, and more
shall be under such a Judicial dispensation, who have not been, nor are like to
be reformed either by Signal Mercies, or Terrible Judgments? May not the Lord
say unto this People, as he once did unto Jerusalem, when he wept over it, Luke
19.42.
Oh that thou had known in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace,
but now, they are hid from thine eyes! What awful Symptoms are there, of
blindness, and hardness of heart; May Not we fear Men are dreadfully blinded,
and hardn'd in their Sins, when there is not so much as an External
Reformation, by all the Judgments of GOD? Are not the very iniquities that have
been frequently and solemnly testified against by the Lord's Ambassadors,
prevailing as much as ever? It was once said, by an Eminent Divine of our own,
in a Sermon on a very Public and Solemn Occasion.

;THAT there was not a General Reformation in respect of so much as any one Evil
found amongst us.

IF it be thus still, and we continue going on incorrigibly in our evil ways,
we may look for a continuance of Temporal Judgments, and of shaking
dispensations to be trembled at, Amos 8.7, 8. The Lord has sworn, surely I
will never forget any of their works, shall not the Land tremble for this, and
every one mourn that dwells therein? But this may suffice for the
confirmation of the Doctrine, viz. That such may be our Condition and
Circumstances, that we may have abundant reason to Tremble for fear of GOD, and
to be afraid of his Judgments. And if I am not greatly mistaken, we are in such
a Condition, and in such Circumstances at this day, as may give us sad Occasion
for such Reflections.

I Proceed to make some APPLICATION of these things.

AND here;

USE I. WE learn from what we have heard, the Astonishing Stupidity, Madness,
and Folly of such, as fear not the Lord, nor are afraid of his Judgments.

SINNERS usually mock at GOD'S Judgments, and put the evil day far from them;
but did they consider that GOD'S omniscient Eye can find them out, and how his
omniscient Arm can punish them, they may justly Fear and Tremble, as the Godly
Psalmist does here. I would fain hope, there is not a Man, Woman, or Child able
to reflect upon the Providential dispensation of GOD toward us, but what have
had, and especially since that lawful Night after the last Sabbath, some
concern of Spirit awakned in them, about working out their Salvation with Fear
and Trembling, and thereby preparing for the coming of the Lord. Verily, if you
cant say that it has been so -- you have been exceedingly Stupid, and if you
cherish such a frame, you are guilty of the greatest madness and folly, and if
you don't fall down before, and give glory to that GOD who has made the Earth to
Tremble, and so make Confession of your Sins, and seek earnestly for Peace with
him, he may not give you any further Warning, before he executes the fiercness
of his Anger upon you. Jer. 5.21, 22. Hear now this O foolish People; and
without understanding, which have eyes, and see not, which have ears, and hear
not; Fear ye not me? says the Lord; will ye not tremble at my presence?

USE II. WE hence learn, What is the best frame to entertain GOD's Judgments
withal.

TO adore the Perfections of the Glorious GOD displayed in them, to be afraid
of them, deeply to resent the Divine displeasure, and humble our selves under
his mighty hand, and so stand in awe of him, as to Renounce and Abandon every
evil way, and betake our selves to the Lord JESUS CHRIST, as the only City of
Refuge; and happy shall they be who do thus Kiss the Son of GOD with a kiss of
Homage and Subjection, They shall not perish from the way; when his wrath is
kindled, and he is angry, Blessed shall they be who thus put their trust in him
Psalm. 2.12.
.

USE III. LEARN hence, that it is no Cowardice, to be afraid of GOD's
Judgments; but very agreeable to true Christian Courage.

GOD is no fit match for us to contend withal, none ever hardn'd themselves
against him, and prosper'd; Job 9.3. He is our Creator, we are his Creatures,
and are as Clay in the hand of the Potter; He is the King of Kings; and Lord of
Lords; GOD cannot miss of his end, as the Princes of this World may, in the
execution of their displeasure, through impotency or want of knowledge; for he is
infinite in Knowledge, Wisdom and Power; and there is no comparison between
Infinite and Finite: It is then no Cowardice to fear GOD: our Savior Math.
10.28. advises us to this Fear; and it is agreeable to true Christian Courage;
this should be expressed in maintaining a reverential fear of GOD upon our
minds, in fighting against the Enemies of our Salvation, in mortifying our
lusts, and steadfastly persevering in all the duties of our Holy Religion, and
not in disobeying his Commands, and despising his Judgments, contemning his
Rod, and setting our selves in opposition to his Threatenings; this is the most
daring and prodigious f;olly and madness, and will be found so in the end.

USE IV. WE learn from what we have heard, The reason of the Lords awful
threatening us, as he does at this day.

OUR many provoking Iniquities have been the procuring cause: our evil ways and
doings have procured these rebukes from Heaven upon us: We are not humbled even
unto this day, neither have we feared, nor walked in his Statutes which he set
before us, and before our Fathers. Therefore the Lord of Hosts, the GOD of
Israel, has set his face against us for evil Jer. 44.10, 11.
.

Wherefore,

V. and lastly. LET our Flesh now Tremble for fear of GOD, and let us be afraid
of his Judgments; and let us once at last hearken to the Exhortation, to Reform
and Amend our ways and doings, if we would look, or hope to be Saved from
destroying Judgments.

MY dear Neighbors, are you Trembling this Day for fear of GOD, and are you
now afraid of his Judgments? Are you sensibly touched and deeply affected with
the Threatening Tokens of the Divine Anger? I am sure, you ought to be so; and
if you are not, you are stupid indeed! I hope there are few or none before the
Lord now, but are in this Day of fear and concern, serious and thoughtful, what
may be the meaning of GOD in this Terrible Dispensation, Surely, the Great GOD
is very wroth, and therefore he has been so terribly Shaking the Earth This
Week, and we may look to feel yet more terrible Shocks -- if a thorough
Repentance and Reformation prevent not: And this you have been Oh how often
exhorted, and urged to, and the Lord who alone knows and searches Hearts, knows
how many of You there are, who have never yet complied with this Exhortation,
and have therefore been greatly instrumental of bringing down this unusual
Judgment of GOD upon us; and unto such I would now address my self, and with
bowels of pity and concern, entreat and beseech them, not to go on any longer
in their Sins unrepented of; I would advise such, as they would not be deaf to
GOD'S voice this Week unto them, to be searching their Hearts, and trying their
ways; that you do without any longer delay, take some suitable time, to look
within your selves, and to reflect with all possible Seriousness and Solemnity
of Spirit, upon all your past evil ways and doings, you are able to bring to
your remembrance; and especially mourn for the Carnality, the corruptions and
great wickedness of your evil Heart, that carnal mind and heart within you,
which is enmity against GOD; And Oh be persuaded to bring your hard, corrupt,
and depraved heart to GOD, for renewing and cleansing, for softning and
healing: to take away your heart of stone, and give you an heart of flesh: And
Oh plead with GOD the gracious promises he has made to do so, unto those who
will inquire of, and seek to him for it: And bring unto the Lord, as thy
corrupt and wicked Heart, so come to him also with the wickedness of thy Life
lying heavy upon thy Heart, by which you have dishonored GOD, and quenched the
Spirit of GOD, and wounded your Soul: Oh let it be with utmost grief, distress
and anguish reflected upon; know and see the evil and bitterness of such ways
and doings, which your Consciences must tell you, have not been right; abhor
your selves before GOD in the remembrance of them, judge and condemn your
selves before him, as utterly unworthy of any Mercy or Salvation from him; and
having thus mourned for your Provocations of GOD, earnestly implore Divine pity
and Pardoning Mercy through the merits of Christ, for his sake alone; and resolve
by the help of Divine grace you will cast away from you all your
transgressions. Then might you hope to be Saved from the Judgments of GOD, or
hid under the shadow of his wings until the heat of his indignation be
overpast: By such a Repentance and Reformation, you may answer the Lords design
and end in the Threatening Dispensation -- you might then have reason to hope
that the Lord would repent him of the evil which he had though it yet further to
have bro't upon you. Jer. 26.13. Therefore now amend your ways and your doings,
and obey the voice of the Lord your God, and the Lord will repent him of the
evil that he has pronounced against you.

OH what Encouragement have we then to be humbling our selves before GOD, as we
do this day, but what will all our Confessions avail, if we will not forsake as
well as confess our Sins: Let each one of us then, from this day, set himself
to reform and amend every thing that is amiss, every one saying, What have I
done? And have not I done a great deal, to bring down this new and tremendous
Judgment? If we don't with the greatest concern of Soul do so, this will not be
an acceptable Day unto the Lord. I trust GOD has a remnant of his reformed and
faithful People here, a number of such as tremble at his word, and at his
Judgments, Men of a humble and contrite Spirit, Men of Prayer, and of a holy
Conversation, who are laying to heart the Sins of the Times, and of the Place
in which they live, and who are daily interceeding with GOD for sparing Mercy
to a sinful Land: And how many such are there in other Towns and Places doing
so, and have been in a very solemn manner this Week The Day before, all the
Churches in Boston kept a Day of Fosting and Prayer, and at Charlestown.
and are this Day at Roxbury and Cambridge.
Pleading with GOD for Mercy to a sinful People; but whether their
intercessions shall prevail, GOD only knows.

OH that this might be a Day of Atonement to us, and our Houses, that GOD
would hear and answer our Supplications to him, in this time of our distress,
while we are trembling before him, and greatly afraid of further terrible
manifestations of his holy displeasure. Let us beg of the Lord to show to us
what he would have us to learn and do, by this awful Voice unto us: I hope (My
Neighbors) this is your great concern this day; I dare not any longer delay
Calling You thus together, that we might once more unite in Humbling our selves
before GOD, and seeking his face and favor, as not knowing what a Day or a
Night may bring forth: We are told 2 Pet. 3.10.
That the Day of the Lord will come as a Theif in the Night, which intimates
how unexpected it will be, and how surprising to a secure and wicked World: How
frequent and solemn are the exhortations given us in the Gospel to Watch and
Pray, and how awakning are the motives used to excite us to do so, see Mark
13.33. Take ye heed, Watch and Pray, for ye know not when the time is; and in
the 35, and 36. ver. Watch ye therefore for ye know not when the Master of the
House comes, at evening, or at midnight, or at the Cock crowing, or in the
morning, lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping. What cause have we had to
think much upon this Exhortation and Call of GOD to us since the last
Lords-Day-Night --? How very surprising and amazing was the First sudden Shock
and Convnlsion we felt at 40 min. after 10.
-- Our Houses and Beds shaking, and the Earth Trembling and Reeling under us;
the like to which I suppose none ever felt in this part of the World before:
And how many times has the Awful Noise been repeated, though not to so fearful
a degree! Well may the People in the City, and in the Country, be filled with
the Surprise and Consternation, we see, and hear of; Multitudes seem to be
under great Convictions, Distress and Concern, about their Souls and Eternity:
Oh that the Impressions may abide until the great work of their saving and
thoro' Conversion to GOD is accomplished!

IT may be, many of us, have not been duly affected with the Awful Providence
-- I trust many of you are now become more thotful about Death, Judgment and
Eternity, and the Speedy coming of the Lord; And Oh that the Spirit of GOD,
might now set home your Convictions, and never leave you, till you are savingly
bro't home to GOD.

YOU will now surely, be afraid of delaying your Repentance and Reformation any
longer: Be thankful for the space you have given you to Repent; you might have
been swallowed up in the deep Vaults and Caverns of the Earth, the very First
Night; but GOD the Mighty GOD, has stayed his hand, and has spared you to this
hour; and will you not now Do, as you were exhorted the Last Lords Day, from
Acts 9.16,
to come Trembling and astonished to your Savior and say, Lord what will thou
have me to do? And with the Jaylour trembling after an Earthquake, saying,
Sirs, What must I do to be Saved Acts 16, 29.30.
Give Glory then to the Lord your GOD, I beseech you, before he cause Darkness,
and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for
light, he turn it into the shadow of Death, and make it gross darkness Jer.
13.16.
. Seeing all these things shall de disolv'd, what manaer of persons ought ye to
be in all holy conversatson and godliness 2 Pet. 3.11.
How watchful and prayerful, that you may be accounted worthy to escape all the
thiugs that shall come to pass, and to stand before the son of man Luk 2 1.36.
. Wherefore Beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be deligent, that ye
may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless. 2 Pet. 3.14.
If you have an Interest in GOD, through Jesus Christ, as the portion of your
Soul, he will be your hope and your strength: Joel 3.15, 11. The day of the
Lord is near; The Lord also shall rore out of Zion, and utter his Voice, the
Heavens and the Earth shall shake, But the Lord will be the hope of his People,
and the strength of the Children of Israel. Such of you may say and sing with
the holy Psalmist, Psalm. 46. God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble, therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and the
mountains be carried into the midst of the sea, though the waters thereof rore
and be troubled, though the mountains shake at the swelling thereof. The Lord of
hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. We may say with the Prophet
Isaiah, Chapter 30. from the 5th ver. We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear,
and all faces are turned into paleness, alas! for that day is great, so that
none is like it, it is even the time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved
out of it. The Lord will set a mark upon such as are sighing and crying for
their own Sins, and the sins of others, and he will be their Protection, and
give them a part, and portion in his Kingdom, that cannot be shaken, when
multitudes about them shall Cry to the shaking Rocks and Mountains to fall on
them, and hide them from the presence of him that sits upon the Throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb. Oh that we could realize these things more; Let us
cry to GOD with whom is the residue of the Spirit, that he would now pour it
out upon us, and our Families, that our Houses may be sprinkled with the Blood
of the great Sacifice; and let us all resolve, that we will by the help of GOD,
walk before him in our Houses with a perfect Heart, that we will put away all
iniquity far from our Tabernacles. That Family Religion, Family Prayer,
Instruction and Government, shall be maintained and kept up in them: that we
will be more deligent and faithful in our Masters work, that we will make
Conscience of Sanctifying his Holy Sabbaths, that we will be no longer slothful
in the Business of Religion, but fervent in Spirit serving the Lord. That we
will be now working out our Salvation with fear and trembling, make haste to
Christ, and so get into good terms with Heaven. Give not sleep to your eyes,
nor slumber to your eyelids, till you have sought earnestly a Reconciliation to
GOD: GOD may not suffer you to rest quietly if you neglect it. Oh now
comfortable would it be, to be able to say with holy David, Psalm. 4. last ver.
I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep, for thou Lord alone make me
dwell in safety.

I will only add, I am greatly afraid, that notwithstanding the Surprise and
Consternation many have been and are yet in, because of these Terrible
Earthquakes, that if they should quickly, wholly cease, many in every place,
will Return to their carnal, secure frames again; -- What need have we then to
Cry mightily to GOD, to make the Impressions lasting on the Souls of Parents,
and Children, Young and Old, Rich and Poor, Bond and Free! We have done it
already, we will continue to do it, and we hope the Lord will not turn away our
Prayers, nor his Mercy from us.

Appendix.
JUST as the foregoing Sermon was committed to the Press, I received the
following Letter from my worthy Brother, the Minister of Haverhill, which I
cannot but think well worthy of the public view, and will be a grateful
Entertainment to many and to all such especially, who after their sincere
Humiliations and fervent Supplications, are waiting and hoping to see, and hear
of gracious answers of Prayer.

When that GOD with whom is the residue of the Spirit, shall pour it out upon
the Inhabitants of any place, it is certainly a just cause of great rejoicing.

But while we behold, or hear of such grace of GOD, manifested toward such
numbers, and are glad, and are giving to GOD the glory of his free and
sovereign grace, in such remarkable effects of it; Let us earnestly pray, that
their goodness may not be as the morning cloud, and early dew that soon goes
away; that they may with purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord: That as they
have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so they may walk in Him, and be stablished
in the faith: that they may stand fast in the Lord: That the Spirit of GOD may
fast'n the convictions, and impressions made upon their hearts, and make them a
People ready and prepared for the Lord: And that there may be joy in Heaven,
and upon Earth, at seeing hopeful Symptoms of a true Repentance, and thorough
Reformation, upon yet many more there, and in other places.

Would to GOD we might have reason to call upon others, as they do on us, to
glorify GOD for remarkable Convictions and deep Impressions -- on the hearts of
Parents and Children among us, and in our Neighborhood; and consequent hereon,
a flocking of many to the Lord Jesus Christ, as of Doves to their windows
asking the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, and saying, come and let
us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall never be
forgotten, and to the Church and People of GOD, and by due approaches to Christ
at his Table, prepare for his Coming.

Let the grace of GOD shown to others, encourage even the chief of Sinners,
under their Convictions, to cry mightily to GOD, that the like free and
Sovereign Grace may be glorified toward them.

If the Impressions should wear off, and such should return to, and go on in
their foolish and hurtful ways again, there will be less hope than ever, of
their Reformation and Conversion.

If the late terrible EARTHQUAKE don't stir Men up to amend their ways and
doings, and Return unto the Lord;

If after this Shaking, they settle upon their Lees again, I also say, The Lord
have Mercy on them.

The Letter.
Haverhill Nov. 20, 1727. Rev. and Dear Brother.
I Have wanted very much to write to, and hear from you, ever since the first
Earthquakes but I think, have scarce had time to write. The Earthquakes as far
as I can hear, were much more terrible hereabouts than with you; I think there
has not the space of 24 Hours past, since the First, but we have heard them.

As to the Damage done by them, I suppose you may have had a better Account
than I can give, they say it has broke the Ground in many places in Newbury; in
our Town I think no such thing has been observed, but only shaking down Tops of
Chimneys, shattering some Brick Houses, and shaking others so as to throw
Pewter off the Shelves, make Andirons jump off the Hearth, throw down Stone
Wall, etc. In our House it stopped our Clock just half an Hour past 10. P. M.

We were in Bed, and I have not time to tell you how much we were surpised, and
indeed almost all the good People, as well as bad in the Town.

But something of the deep and (I hope) good Impressions it has made on us, I
think my self concerned in honor to our SAVIOR to relate.

The next Day Oct. 30. We kept a Public Fast, and had an extraordinary full
Meeting, from all parts of the Town, 6 Miles distance, at 2 or 3 Hours warning;
I Preached from Isaiah 26.21. For behold, the Lord comes out of his place to
punish the Inhabitants of the earth for their Iniquity: We were very earnest
and enlarged in Prayer, which seemed to be a Token for good: The next
Wednesday, (the Earthquakes still continuing) we kept another Fast, had 2
Meetings very full, with only giving notice in the Morning: Mr. Parsons of
Bradford, preached in the forenoon from Isa. 27.9. By this therefore shall the
iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin:
which I hope will be fulfilled. I preached in the afternoon from Isa. 26.9.
With my Soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit within me
will I seek the early: for when thy Judgments are in the earth, the Inhabitants
of the World will learn righteousness. We were again very much assisted, and
enlarged, and the Congregation the most affected that ever I saw. On Thursday,
we met and prayed at Bradford: from thence to Saturday Night, I was fully
employed in discoursing People about their Souls -- by night and day. On the
Lord's Day, Nov. 5. I preached on Hosea 11.8, 9. How shall I give thee up,
Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how
shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are
kindled together. I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, etc. Not any
further to Alarm, but melt our Hearts into Repentance: The same Day, some
Persons that stood Propounded to own the Covenant, were now forthwith admitted
to full Communion, and above 30 Persons more were propounded.

And all the Week before and after Thanksgiving, I was still full of Company,
rain or shine; some Days from Morning till 8 a Clock at Night, without so much
as time to take any bodily refreshment. (I had but a few Hours intermission for
making my Thanksgiving Sermon, from Psalm. 65.1 Praise waits for thee, O God,
in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be performed.) The next Sabbath Nov. 12.
we had propounded 84 Persons; and again Yesterday Nov. 19. (for my hands were
full the 3d week) 39. and People are still coming to me. So that now, since the
Earthquakes, I have admitted and propounded 154 Persons; 87 for the Lords
Table, the rest for Baptism, or the Renewing their Baptismal Covenant: The
number of Men and Women pretty near equal; mostly younger People, from 15 to
30, some upwards. And they that own the Covenant the bigger part unmarried
Persons.

Besides these a great many that have not knowledge enough to make any
Profession, yet now gladly come to enquire, What they shall do to be saved? And
I never saw better Symptoms of Conversion, -- Persons so deeply affected, and
seemingly humbl'd for their Sins; and though many of them were thoughtful, and I
trust something experienced in Piety before, yet I cannot but think, some have
been immediately converted in this Time of the EARTHQUAKES. Some that were the
worst of Drunkards, Swearers, often blaspheming GOD, and others the most loose
Livers, are bro't to their Knees, humbled to the dust, melted into tears, and
seemingly the profoundest resolutions for a new Life. There seems to be in the
Town, a General Reformation. Profaness restrained, Family Worship set up even
in the most unlikely Houses, the Public Worship attended with earnestness;
Young Men's Meetings multiply, and increase, Family meetings set up, etc. and
Christians generally awakn'd, and seem to have quite another view of this and
the other World.

It has looked in short, as if we were going into a New World; which things
have occasioned in me various thoughts -- and been as surprising as the
Earthquakes.

I Have just now on this occasion been looking over the additions made to our
Church heretofore; and I find of 109 Persons that have owned the Covenant,
since my Ministry, 54 of them have done it since last May was twelvemonth, and
above 20 Young Persons unmarried, in the Summer past. And of 130 Persons
admitted to the Lords Table from 1719. till these Earthquakes, 30 of them have
been admitted within a Year past, which is 3 times so many as in any one Year
before, except the first Year of my Ministry, in which I admitted 32. So that
we have for some time past been growing and ripening for this Harvest.

I need not make any reflections to you, on these things, I want very much to
hear what effects the awful visitation has had near, and about you, and what
are the thoughts of the most Judicious about the Signs of the Times.

I beg of you to send me the best accounts, and communicate this where you
think proper; That they may Glorify GOD for our professed Subjection to the
Gospel of Christ, and by their Prayers for such a miserable, sinful People, as
in general we have been.

The Account I have given is in a degree (proportionably) true, as far as I can
learn, of the Towns hereabouts, considering how much less reason they have had,
to be Humbled and Reformed than We.

At Exeter I heard a Week ago, there had been 40 Persons Baptized since the
EARTHQUAKE: At Almsbury (as one informed me,) they seemed as if they were
willing to spend their whole time in the Worship of GOD. Though too remarkably
backward and slothful in duty before.

But I have been so busy at home, I Have heard but very little from abroad; But
after all, among Us, the Impression is not so General, but there are some, alas
too many, remaining to appearance just where they were, in their former
security, a Generation in their declining age, settled on their Lees, (a proof
of the Sovereign Grace of GOD in effecting these things among us,) The Lord
have Mercy on them.

Begging your Prayers, the Impressions and Convictions made on so many, may
Issue in a Repentance unto Salvation not to be repented of, and that we may be
Prepared for all future events of Providence, yea, and for the Coming of the
Day of GOD:

I Subscribe, Your Loving BROTHER, John Brown.


