Mr. Sewall's SERMON On Constant Preparedness for DEATH.

THE Duty of every Man To be Always Ready to Die. A SERMON Occasioned By the
very Sudden DEATHS of Mr. Thomas Lewis, Aged 32. And of Mr. Samuel Hirst, Aged
22. On Saturday Jan. 14. 1726, 7.

By Joseph Sewall, Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

Matthew. xxiv. 44. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an Hour as you think
not, the Son of Man comes.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by B. Green. 1727.

It much Concerns ALL TO BE Always Ready to Die.
ACTS XXI. 13. Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep, and to break my heart?
for I AM READY not to be bound only, but also TO DIE at Jerusalem for the Name
of the Lord Jesus.


THESE are the words of the Apostle Paul; the occasion of them was this: The
Prophet Agabus had foretold that the Jews would bind him at Jerusalem, and
deliver him to the Gentiles, which moved his friends to beseech him with tears
not to go up. And we see here that this generous Person, who could say of his
own sufferings, None of these things move me, was scarce able to bear the
Sympathy of his friends; however, he rebukes them for urging him to spare
himself: What mean ye to weep, and break my heart: -- And with great firmness
of Mind declares his Resolution to comply with GOD's Will, whatever befell him.
I am ready -- upon which they also submit to the Will of GOD, 14. v. And when
he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, the Will of the Lord be done. A
most suitable Expression to flow from hearty Submission under the most dark
Providence; for GOD is infinitely holy, just and good, and works all things
according to the Counsel of His own Will, in unerring Wisdom and spotless
Holiness. Woe to him that strives with his Maker; but happy is he that resigns
to him, saying, Let him do what seems good unto him, and shall in the
Conclusion find, that all GOD's Providence work together for his good. Let the
same mind then be in us which was also in Christ Jesus, Mat. 26.39. O my Father
-- Not as I will, but as thou will. But to return, The Words of my Text express
the Apostles readiness to die, yea to suffer Martyrdom for the Name of Jesus. I
am ready -- I have my self in a Readiness as Soldiers for an Engagement. Mr.
Henry.
Which Heroic Example teaches us that we should be ready to obey GOD at what
time, or in what manner soever He shall Call us out of the World. And we have
also the Command of our Lord and Savior for this, who when He had prophesied
of the Destruction of Jerusalem, in which vast numbers of the Jews perished,
and of the last Judgment as is supposed, which will find us in the condition
Death leaves us; said, Mat. 24.44. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an
hour as you think not, the son of man comes.

Let us then Attend to this DOCTRINE.

It is our Duty to Prepare, and to be always in a Readiness to Die.

Now there are such Duties as these following, to be discharged by us, if we
would be Ready to Die.

1. We must use the Means GOD affords us to make Ready for Death.

GOD in His Word, threatened, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
die, Genesis 2.17. and assures us that it is appointed unto man once to die, and
after that the Judgment, Heb. 9.27. Yea, that Man who is born of a Woman, is of
few days, Job 14.1. We must then look into the Scriptures, and learn from them
the procuring cause, the certainty, and consequence of Death. This plain truth
must be received upon the Testimony of GOD's Word, even when we do not feel the
approaches of Death. And then, We must heedfully and religiously observe the
Providence of GOD, which are a lively Comment upon His Word, and cry in our
Ears, All Flesh is Grass --. Our Daily Experience must be improved to Excite us
to be also ready. When we see others taken away, and some very Suddenly, we
should regard the operation of GOD's Hand, and receive Instruction. Again, We
should be much in serious and close Meditation on this important Subject. We
should consider the shortness of Life, the certainty of Death, the great
uncertainty of the time when we must die, and the great Change Death will make
upon us, when we must bid an eternal farewell to the business and enjoyments of
this Life, yea to the means of Grace we now enjoy; and lanch forth into an
amazing Eternity, to be fixed forever in perfect Happiness, or extreme Misery.
And here, We must take pains to bring our Minds to a close Application to these
truths, which are irksome to flesh and blood, and endeavor to muse till the
fire burn, and our Hearts are suitably affected. Furthermore, under a deep
sense of our inability, as of our selves, to improve the Means; we should Ask
of GOD His Holy Spirit to bless them to us, and Pray, as Psalm. 39.4. Lord, make
me to know mine End. And 90. 12. So teach us to number our days, that we may
apply our bearts unto wisdom. For unless we obtain this Divine Teaching, though
the Deaths of others, especially when very sudden, may startle us, yet the
impression will wear off without any saving effect. GOD may call once, yea
twice, but we shall not hear and answer his just expectation. Prove. 1.24. I
have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded.

2. WE must seek after a saving Conversion to GOD, and not be at rest till we
have closed with the Lord JESUS CHRIST, as offered to us in the Gospel. We must
be brought out of a state of Nature, into a state of Grace, by the Almighty
Power of GOD, or we are not so much as habitually prepared for Death. We were
all by Nature, and as Children of the first Adam, Dead in trespasses in sins,
and Children of Wrath. The Wages of Sin is Death, not only temporal but eternal
Death. If we are therefore found under the guilt and dominion of Sin, when
Death overtakes us, Hell follows. Certainly then, it most nearly concerns us to
labor after a saving Conversion to GOD, and vital Union with our Lord Jesus
Christ, in order to our being in a readiness for Death. We must be born again,
born from above, of the Spirit of GOD, or we cant enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, and therefore are not fit to die. There must be a saving change wrought
on all the powers of our Souls; we must be turned from all Sin, unto GOD, or
this great change will find us unprepared. We must by the Grace of GOD obey
that word, Act. 3.19. Repent and be Converted --. Unless we heartily grieve and
mourn for our Sins as they are against GOD, turn from them with Godly Sorrow
and Hatred, and return to GOD as our highest end and chief good; the valley of
Death will lead to that place where is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth for ever. We must also obey that Word of Christ, Joh. 14.1. -- Ye believe
in God, believe also in me: For unless we receive the Record GOD has given of
His Son in the Gospel, and "Rest upon Him alone for Salvation" with that Faith
which also purifieth the heart, and works by love; the second Death will come
after the first: we shall die in our Sins, and perish for ever. Joh. 3.36. He
that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: and he that believes not the
Son, shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides on on him. And 11.25.
Jesus said unto her, I am the Resurrection and the Life: be that believe thin
me, though be were dead, yet shall be live.

3. We must labor diligently in finishing the Work GOD has given us to do in
this present Life. We have a Race to run, a Service to perform, before we
accomplish as an hireling our day. There is the business of our General
Calling, which must be engaged in and prosecuted with persevering diligence: We
must work out our own Salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God which
works in us, both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.12, 13. And
there is the business of our Particular Calling, which must be attended in
subordination to the other. And if we would be ready, we must be not slothful
in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. The slothful and
unprofitable Servant, that hides his Lords Talents, may well be afraid of His
coming to reckon with him. We must therefore (...) good and faithful Servants,
improve our Talents, and all our Advantages to the honor of GOD. Now these are
various; there are the Powers of Soul and Body, Gifts and Graces, Estate,
Friends, etc. And all must be diligently employed, that our Lord when He comes
may find us about His work, and so in a meetness, through Grace, to enter into our
Master's joy. Our Lord Himself said, I must work the works of him that sent me,
while it is day: the night comes when no man can work, Joh. 9.4. And when
about to leave the World, he could appeal to his Father, and say, I have
glorified thee on earth: I have finished the work thou gave me to do, Joh.
17.4. And we must be followers of Him in our diligent Care to glorify GOD, by
doing His Will on Earth, if we would be Ready for our departure. Indeed after
all, we must confess we are unprofitable Servants, yea that we have fallen
short of our duty, and accordingly depend on the perfect and meritorious
obedience of Christ for Pardon and acceptance with GOD. However, we must by a
patient continuance in well-doing seek for Glory --. When we are wearied with
constant labor in our Lord's Service, though not weary of it, we shall think
with pleasure of the Rest which remains to the people of GOD in Heaven, and not
need to be surprised when GOD calls us to give up our Account. Let us then obey
that word, Eccl. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might;
for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whither thou go. O Christian! do you not yet stand complete, as to your
profeised subjection to Christ. Have you not shown forth the Lords Death at his
Table, and openly Sealed the Covenant in obedience to that Command, Do this in
Remembrance of Me. Or make haste to keep this Commandment, lest the reflection
on so great an Omission make your (...) bed very uneasy to you. Have you signal
advantages of serving GOD and your Generation; improve them without delay. Are
there any any Relative Duties you live in the neglect of, O repent and
discharge them instantly. Have you greatly wronged your Neighbor by your ill
carriage, by unfaithfulness and dishonesty; O seek to give him proper
Satisfaction, make Restitution. Are there unhappy Differences where relative
bonds oblige to especial Love and Endearment: seek to get them removed, that
you may die in love and peace Are there any Instructions or Warnings needful
for your Children and Servants, O delay them not. In a word, do your best that
your Work may be done, and well done, that when Death comes you may have
nothing to do but to Die.

4. Live in the diligent Mortification of Sin, and groan daily for perfect
deliverance from it. Sin is the Sting of Death, and the remains of it in GOD's
own Children, are the cause of their inordinate fear of Death; this causes the
Natural Reluctance there is in us to a dissolution to degenerate into a
Criminal backwardness and unwillingness to answer GOD, when He calls us out of
this World. Here then, we must seek the destruction of our Lusts, die to Sin,
and so prepare for Death. We must wage an holy war with Sin, with our most
beloved Lusts, cutting off the right hand, and plucking out the right eye. Col.
3.5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth; fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupicence, and covetousness, which
is idolatry. For this end we must improve the Death of Christ. By Faith we must
realize it that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might
be destroyed, and lay aside the sin which most easily besets us, by looking
unto Jesus. For this end we should walk in the Spirit, cherish its motions and
follow his directions, who is the chief efficient in this work. Romans 8.13. For
if ye live after the flesh ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body ye shall live. In a word, the remains of sin in
us should be our heavy burden under which we should groan for deliverence. Our
Cry should be that, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? Such a frame as this maintained in the Soul, would
be an excellent means of reconciling us to Death; for at Death, and not till
then, shall GOD's People be delivered from this worst of evils. Then their
Warfare is accomplished, and they are presented faultless before GOD.

5. We must endeavor more and more to sit loose from this World, and to get
our Hearts weaned from Earthly Enjoyments. If we would be ready to Die, and
leave this World, we must not be conformed to it, Romans 12.2. There are the Men,
and Things of this World; there are its corrupt Customs, Fashions and
Practices, from which we must separate. Our Savior gave himself for our sins,
that he might deliver us from this present evil World, Gal. 1.4. And we must
improve the bitter Death and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ to crucify
our inordinate Affections to it. Gal. 6.14. By whom, i. e, a Crucified Savior;
or whereby, i. e. the Cross of Christ, the World is crucified unto me, and I
unto the World. This World contains those objects which Satan makes use of to
draw forth the lusts of Men. The lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the World, 1 John 2.16.
Now if we love the World, and the things of the World as our Portion, the love
of the Father is not in us; and we are not prepared to leave it: We must then
take care we do not walk according to the Course of this World, but Renounce
it. We must rejoice even in the lawful Enjoyments of this Life, as if we
rejoiced not, and use this World as not abusing it, for the fashion of this
World passes away. We must not look upon this as our Resting Place, but
confess we are strangers and pilgrims on the Earth, Heb. 11.13. We must behave
our selves as those that are called out of this World, and do not depend on
these things for our happiness. We should look upon this Life to be as a short
passage to an endless Eternity, and sit loose from these things, that we may be
ready to remove at short warning. And though it be true, we have here valuable
Enjoyments, which we ought to acknowledge, to the honor of GOD who gives us
these things richly to enjoy; yet we must realize it, that they are all
uncertain, and not the good Part which cannot be taken away; and accordingly we
should maintain some kind of holy indifferency toward them, and in the temper
of our Minds a readiness to leave them. To be sure then we should not with
Covetuous desires pursue the Riches, or other Enjoyments of this World, and
weary our selves for these Vanities; but rather moderate our desires toward
these things, and be contented with GOD's allotment; for we brought nothing
into this World, and it is certain we can carry nothing out, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8.
Moreover, we should manage our Worldly business with a great deal of
Resignation to the Will of GOD, and learn to say, If the Lord will, we shall
live, and do this, or that, James 4.15. When Men's heads are full of wordly
projections, and their hearts are deeply rooted in the Earth, they must be as
it were torn away from it by violence; but when their hearts are already weaned
and taken off from worldly things, they will be in a good measure prepared to
leave them, and go to GOD. But O how much do we need the especial Influences of
GOD's Grace that it may be so!

6. We must live in the Exercise of Faith on invisible Realities, and set our
Affections more on things above. There Is a variety of Graces to be Exercised
while attending this Duty; as a lively Hope of the Glory to be revealed to
GOD's People: an holy Fear of the Judgments of GOD, which should Excite us to
give diligence that we may be found of our Judge in Peace. But I shall
especially instance in Faith and Love, the vigorous Exercise of which upon
proper objects is an excellent preparative for Death. Man is an empty Creature,
and has an inextingushable Thirst after happiness: and therefore while he is
sitting loose from this World, he must look at heavenly things, and live by the
Faith of the Son of GOD. The World we pass into at Death is the Invisible
World. We have no knowledge of it, but by Revelation from GOD, and there must
be Faith to receive the Testimony of GOD so as to lean the weight of our Souls
upon his unchangible Truth, Faithfulness and Goodness. We must have an entire
dependence on that GOD who is the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. There
must be Faith in exercise that we may commend our departing Spirits into the
hands of GOD the Father, as our reconciled Father in Christ; Faith, to Commit
our Souls into the hands of GOD the Son as our Redeemer. See Dr. Owen, of dying
daily, p. 182.
And to trust in the Spirit of GOD to put the finishing hand to his work of
Grace in us, that being made perfect in holiness we may pass into that Glory
where nothing enters that defiles. There must be Faith to realize it, that our
departed Spirits should be received to the Paradise of GOD, that when we are
absent from the body, we shall be present with the Lord, and that being joined
with the Spirits of just men made perfect. We shall act and enjoy after a
better manner then we can in this frail State. We must by Faith receive the
Doctrine of the Resurrection as a certain truth; that the GOD of Abraham will
raise his People to a Glorious and Blessed Immortality; yea that when GOD our
Savior appears, He will change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to
subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3.21. There is the nearest Union between
Soul and Body, and these most intimate companions cant part comfortably, unless
we have a good assurance of their meeting again, to their great advantage.
Again, There must be Faith in exercise to realize the fullness of joys, which
GOD's people shall have with the Lord, in Heaven, where there will be the
highest Employments for GOD, and the full Enjoyment of Him to all Eternity;
yea, and the communion of the Saints in full perfection, as well as the happy
Society of Blessed Angels. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen, Heb 11.1. And we must live by it, looking not at
the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things
which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen, are eternal.
The ancient Worthies celebrated in the 11th. to the Heb. Died in Faith, 13. v.
And then your Faith must work by Love, Col. 3.2. Set your affections in things
above, not on things on the earth. We must return to GOD as to the Rest of our
Souls, and seek after intimate communion with him. Thirst for GOD, and say as,
Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that
I desire besides thee. We should account the Son of GOD, who is GOD manifest in
the Flesh, to be more excellent then ten thousands, and altogether lovely, and
labor to come to this, to be willing to part with all that is dear to us in
this World, when he shall call; that we may go to be with him, to behold his
Glory in Heaven. Phil. 1.23. -- Having a desire to depart, and to be with
Christ; which is far better: Such an heavenly frame as this, would enable us in
a good measure to be willing to Die. Lord, increase our Faith! Our Souls cleave
to the dust, O quicken and raise them up to Divine Things! Let our Conversation
now be in Heaven!

7. We must seek after the Assurance of our Interest in CHRIST, and endeavor
to keep our Evidence for Heaven clear. A Child of GOD may walk in darkness, and
when GOD hides his face, no wonder if he is troubled, and the thoughts of Death
terrify him. We should therefore give diligence to make our Calling, and so our
Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Our Election evident and certain to us by our
effectual Calling; for whom GOD did Predestinate, He also Calls in time. All
that believe, were ordained to eternal Life, and shall receive the end of their
Faith, the Salvation of their Souls GOD's People should then examine
themselves, and try their Faith; Looking to GOD to shine upon His own Work in
their Souls, and to give them his Spirit to witness with their Spirits, that
they are the Children of GOD: And take heed they do not grieve the Spirit of
GOD, whereby they are sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. The joys of
the Holy Ghost are the earnest and first fruits of the heavenly Canaan, and we
should seek after them, that we may long for the full Harvest in Heaven. And be
able to say, when resigning our Spirits at Death, 2 Timothy 1.12. -- I know whom I
have believed --.

8. We must Wait and Watch for the Coming of our Lord. We should have our loins
girded about, and lights burning, like unto them that wait for their Lord, Luke
12.35, 36. Expecting that He will come, and submissively waiting that we may
answer when He Calls, and yield a ready Obedience. Job says, 14 14. If a man
die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed time will I wait till my
change come. Some understand this change of Death; others of the Resurrection:
Take it in the former sense, and then the next words, v. 15. intend that he
would be in a readiness to answer and obey the summons, when GOD should call
him out of this World. And while we are dutifully waiting our Lord's time, we
must also Watch, by taking care to preserve a wakeful frame of Spirit. Mark
13.35 -- 38. Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the house
comes; at evening, or at midnight, -- or in the morning, Lest coming suddenly,
be find you sleeping. The Children of GOD themselves should take heed, and
beware of a drowzy frame of Spirit. Even the wise Virgins slumbred and slept,
Mat. 25.5. What need is there then that we gird up the loins of our minds; that
we govern our sensitive appetites, and beware lest our hearts being overcharged
with sensual pleasures, worldly cares or the like, we be heavy to sleep. Luke
21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged
with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares. We must take this care that we be not surprised when our
Lord shall come to call us hence by Death, no not, though his coming should be
sudden, and the particular warning given, very short: And therefore we ought to
live every day, as not knowing but it may be our last; for we know not what a
day may bring forth. But O how much easier is it to lay down Rules for our
Preparing for Death, than it is duly to practice according to them; The LORD
teach us the Divine skill of being always Ready to Die.

I. might have considered the Obligations we are under to this important Duty;
but I shall only say, That the right discharge of it, is most needful and
useful in order to our Living to the Glory of GOD in this World, and to our
preparing for the enjoyment of Him in the World to come. So that we must attend
this Duty, or fall short of the Glory of GOD, miss of the chief End of our
being, and live in vain.

USE, (...) How great, and how much to be lamented is the Stupidity of the
greater part of Mankind in this matter! That they are so thotless about this
great change of Death, so regardless of the consequences, and so very negligent
in making ready for it. The Providence of GOD makes this truth, Thou shall
surely Die, as plain and familiar almost as can be. Daily experience teaches
it: Yea, so wise are Men for this World, that they will scarce trust their
Neighbor's life for a day, without taking some security of him, when any
temporal Interest depends upon it: while at the same time they run all hazzards
tespecting their precious Souls, and walk at all adventures respecting their
future State; pursuing this pasting World as their Portion. Psalm 49.11 -- 14.
Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their
dwellingplaces to all generations; -- This their way is their folly; -- Lake
sheep they are laid in the grave --. Who regard not though one after another they
are led to the slaughter. Thus Man is become like the beasts that perish. O
dreadful Stupidity! Practical Atheism! He knows better, would he consider and
show himself a Man. Madness is in their heart while they live, and after that
they go to the dead, Eccl. 9.3. Yet, alas! the best of us have great reason to
bewail the remains of this evil Disposition in us: How foolish are we, and slow
of heart to believe?

USE, II. Let us seriously Inquire, Whether we have set about this great Duty
of Preparing for Death. Have we laid this to heart, That we must Die, and
considered what is like to become of us after Death? Have we been quickened
from a Realizing view of our Mortality to secure the favor of the Eternal GOD,
and to make haste unto CHRIST in whom all GOD's People are made alive? Do we
Watch for our Lords coming, and give diligence that we may be found of our
Judge in Peace? In what condition should we be, if GOD should now call us out
of the World? Are we in some measure prepared to attend that Work which can be
done but once, and upon which, ETERNITY depends? Surely we should not be easy,
till we get these Inquiries well resolved.

USE, III. Let us hear and obey the call our Lord gives us in His Word, and by
His Providence, Be ye Ready also. We might have been a Warning to Others, who
are gone to the Place of Silence; but the Lord of Life has made them a Warning
to us, and calls aloud to us; Particularly, in the very Sudden Deaths of the
last Week, to be Preparing for our own. Let us then to Day, Hear His Voice, and
not harden our hearts, Heb. 3.7, 8. The distinguishing goodness of GOD to us
should affect us, and lead us to Repentance. Let us hear that Voice of the
Lord, Luke 13.2, 3. Jesus said unto them, Suppose ye that these Galileans were
sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you,
Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Hear ye then; Give
Glory to the LORD your GOD before be cause darkness, and before your feet
stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for light, he turn it into
the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness, Jer. 13.15, 16. GOD speaks to
Old and Young, to the middle Aged, and the blooming Youth, to Consider, and
Obey His Voice. However I would in an especial manner direct the Exhortation
where Providence seems to point it, To our Young People, and those that are in
their full Strength, Prepare to follow. You may be tempted to put away the the
evil Day, and to say, Soul, take thine ease, -- To morrow shall be as this day;
because your Constitution is unbroken, and you feel no symptoms of an
approaching Dissolution. But let the Word and Providence of GOD repel this
temptation which has destroyed it is ten thousands. It Is no strange thing for
Persons to die in Youth: Yea, sometimes that cry is heard in a very sudden and
surprising manner, The young Men are Dead, Job 1.19. Your Sun may set ere it be
Noon, and the shadows of the Evening cover you before you reach the middle Age
of Life. And will you run the dreadful hazard of eternal torments for the short
uncertain pleasures of sin. O do it not! Eccl. 11.9. Rejoice O young man in thy
youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all
these things God will bring thee into Judgment. It is appointed unto you once
to die, and after this the Judgment. Surely then you should now give glory to
GOD in whose hands your breath is; you should now acquaint yourselves with him,
you should now in the Morning begin to work out your Salvation, beseeching GOD
to work in you to will and to do. O Young People, you are our Hopes and our
Fears. The time of Youth has been the day of Salvation to many, yea it is
likely to most that have been Converted: And yet, there is great reason to be
afraid of you, and jealous over you with a Godly jealousy. Such is the
corruption of your Hearts, such the snares laid for you by Satan, and an evil
World. Be persuaded then to make haste to your Almighty and Compassionate
Savior, who said to his Ancient covenant People, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how
often would I have gathered thy children together even as a hen gethereth her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Matt. 23.37. O let it not be said
of you, you will not come to Him! but now fly to Him that you may find rest and
protection under the shadow of His Wings, who is able to save to the uttermost.
Heavenly Father make them willing in the day of thy power! Don't bid me go away
for this time; for this is the fittest time, and it may be the only time ever
you shall have. Now it may be, your Consciences are awakned, and the Spirit is
striving with you. O don't resist Him; but cry to GOD now to turn you, that you
may be turned; for He is your Covenant GOD. Now seek Christ early, earnestly,
and you shall find him. But if you reject Him, and neglect His great Salvation,
it may be He who has the Keys of hell and of death, will say to you, Thou
fool! this Night thy Soul shall be required of thee. Whereas if you now hear
and obey, your Souls shall live. I close this particular Exhortation, with
those words, Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my
spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you.

To enforce the general Exhortation, and further press it upon all of us, I
would say by way of Motive,

(1.) Your Life is Short and very Uncertain. What is your Life? it is even a
Vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, James 4.14.
You know not how soon, how suddenly your Lord may call. The living know that
they shall die; but the day of Death and Judgment are a great secret: and why
so? That we may be always ready.

(2.) Your Doom will be very dreadful if you are found unprepared at Death.
GOD's own Children may be under darkness in that hour, for want of actual
preparedness; But if you have taken no care to make ready, your surprise and
terror will be inconceivable when Death shall seize upon you, and your despised
Savior shall stand afar often from your help; yea, shall enter into Judgment
with you, and send you to the Spirits in Prison to be reserved to the Judgment
of the Great Day. Matt. 24.48. -- 51. But and if that evil servant shall say in
his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow
servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken: The Lord of that servant shall
come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not ware
of; And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites:
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

(3.) But if you make Ready, the day of your Death shall be better to you, then
the day of your Birth. GOD will stand by you in the hour of Death, and will
receive your Spirits, when the vital union between Soul and Body is dissolved,
into the Arms of his Eternal Love and Mercy; the holy Angels shall guard your
departed Spirits to the heavenly Paradise: And while your flesh rests in hope,
your Souls shall wait in a joyful Expectation of the Redemption of your Bodies
at the Great Day. Matt. 24.46, 47. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when
he comes, shall find so doing Verily, I say unto you, that he shall make him
ruler over all his goods.

USE, IV. Let this then comfort GOD's People who are making ready for their
LORD's coming at Death. Be not afraid of this last Enemy, while you are
preparing for the encounter, tho Nature calls him the King of Terrors. By Faith
behold your Mighty Savior Dying on the Cross, that he might take away Sin the
sting of Death, and destroy him that had the power of Death, which is the
Devil. Behold Him descending into the Grave, that this might be a bed of rest
unto you; Behold him, Rising Victorious, and that as a Public Person, and
become the first fruits of them that slept. Behold Him in our Nature Ascending
into Heaven, where He is gone to prepare a Place for you, that when the frail
House of this earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved, you may have an House not
made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. And do not perplex your selves with
disquieting thoughts about the Time or Circumstances of your Death; but cast
all those cares and burdens on the LORD, and say with the Psalmist, Psalm 23.4.
Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. And be
assured that neither Death nor Life -- shall be able to separate you from the
love of GOD which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. For you to live is Christ, and
to die shall be gain. 1 Cor. 15.55, -- 58. O death, where is thy sting? O
grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin
is the law. But thinks be to God, which gives us the victory, through our Lord
Jesus Christ. Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor is
not in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

