Mr. Foxcroft's DISCOURSE Preparatory to the Choice Of a Minister.

A DISCOURSE PREPARATORY To the Choice of a Minister. Being the Substance of
two Sermons preached to the Old or First gathered Church in Boston, June 11.
1727. The Lord's day before their Election of a Colleague-Pastor.

By Thomas Foxcroft, A. M. Pastor of the said CHURCH.

Acts V. 38, 39. And now I say unto you, -- If this Counsel, or this Work be of
Men, it will come to naught. But if it be of GOD, ye cannot overthrow it.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed by GAMALIEL ROGERS in long Lane, for SAMUEL GERRISH at
the lower end of Cornhill. 1727.

A DISCOURSE Preparatory To the Choice of a Minister.
ACTS I. 24 and 25. And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord, which know the
Hearts of all Men, show whether of these -- Thou have chosen; that he may take
part of this Ministry --.


THE special Occasion that turned my Thoughts to this singular Text, must be
obvious to every one, acquainted with the present Situation of Affairs in this
Flock: And to such, it is presumed, I need make no Apology for being on so
peculiar a Subject to day.

The Consideration of this historical Passage might be introduced by some
Remarks on the Context and Story it belongs to. But all I shall observe, is
only this; That there being a Vacancy in the College of the Apostles, and
several Candidates (called the one Joseph, or Barsabas; the other Matthias)
being singled out by the Church and nominated for that important Post, they
referred it to the Determination of Heaven, by the sacred method of a Lot, which
of them should be the Man to fill up that superior Station. An Expositor on the
place observes, Mr. Henry.
They were both such worthy Men, and so well qualified, that none could tell
which of them was fittest, but all agreed it must be one of them: Yet they did
not propose themselves, nor strive for the place, but humbly sat still, and
were appointed to it. The Church having chosen out and set up these as
Candidates, they carried the matter to the Throne of Grace, spreading the Case
before the Lord in Prayer, and then unanimously appealing to Him by a Lot for
Determination. The Sum of the Prayer upon this great Occasion, we have on
Record in the Text, -- They prayed and said, Thou Lord who know the hearts
of all Men, show whether of those two thou have chosen; that he may take part
of this Ministry.

I shall discourse to the Words, under these Observations.

1. When some one is needed to fill up a Vacancy in the Ministry, it should be
the Care and Desire of all concerned, That the LORD JESUS CHRIST would show
whom He has chosen.

2. Application should be made to Him by earnest Prayer in this important Case.

3. CHRIST is to be considered by us at all times and in all matters, but
especially in the present Case, as the Lord, who knows the Hearts of all Men.

Finally, I might observe, from the Interest the Eleven Apostles had in the
Appointment of one to fill up their Number, and the Pattern they have left of a
just Concern and Forwardness before, and Satisfaction after the Choice; That it
is a very desirable thing to a faithful Minister to have an agreeable
Colleague, to be a Partner and Fellow-helper with him in his Charge: And that
he will be disposed gladly to receive such an one as a Brother, whom the Lord
shows he has chosen. -- But I shall dismiss this last Remark with barely
mentioning it, and only insist on the three former.

DOCT. I. When some one is needed to be put into the Ministry, and fill up a
Vacancy in this Ecclesiastical Order, it should be the Care and Desire of all
concerned, That the LORD JESUS CHRIST would show whom HE has chosen.

THOU Lord, show whether of these thou have chosen.

The Person immediately addressed to was most probably the LORD JESUS CHRIST,
who is Lord of all, and Head of the Church; whose Prerogative it was to make
Apostles, and who had before his Ascension personally chosen and appointed the
Eleven.

The Ministry intended in our Text, was more especially the Apostleship; which
is therefore added in the Text, -- This Ministry and Apostleship. -- It hints
to us this just and useful Thought, (which indeed might have been mentioned
first as a distinct Doctrine) That every Office in the Church of CHRIST is a
Ministry; the Apostleship it self was so. Even CHRIST the Son of GOD, came to
minister: And shall the Servant be above his Lord? The Apostle says to
Christians, We preach JESUS CHRIST the LORD, and our selves your Servants for
JESUS sake. And if the Apostles, who were extraordinary Men of God, styled
their Work a Ministry; much more may the Pastoral Office be so called, which is
in its Nature ordinary, and in dignity inferior to the Apostolate.

The Ministry is a common Name, which takes in all Offices in the Church,
ordinary and extraordinary, higher or lower. It is particularly very often
applied to ordinary Pastors and Teachers; and is grown by Custom very much
their special Character and Denomination. They are set in the Church for the
work of the Ministry: They are called to minister about holy things; are
separated to the Ministry of the Word; appointed to minister the Gospel of
Salvation. Their Office indeed, as it is a Ministry, relates more directly and
properly to CHRIST, their only Lord and Master. However, in a Sense, they are
Servants of the Church; as Magistrates are Servants of the Commonwealth, or as
Angels are called ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister unto the Heirs of
Salvation. Yet suffer me to observe, they are not so the Church's Servants, as
to be obliged only to obey their Orders, and execute their Votes and Decrees.
But are called Guides and Overseers of the Flock, and said to have the Rule
over them. Not that they have Dominion (...) your Faith, or Power to tyrannise
over Conscience, by human Impositions, as Lords over God's Heritage; but are
designed to be Ensamples to the Flock, and Helpers of your Joy, by assisting
your Walk in the Faith and Order of the Gospel: and should desire only by
manifestation of the Truth, and humble Exercises of the Power which CHRIST has
given them for Edification, and not for Destruction, to commend themselves to
every Man's Conscience in the sight of GOD.

IT is only a Ministerial and Stewardly Power, that is vested in them; to be
regulated in all its Operations, by the sacred Rules and Instructions given in
the Word of CHRIST. N. B. The greatest part of what is premised here, was for
brevity omitted in the Pulpit; though its thought fit to insert it in the Print.
From hence they must learn how they ought to behave themselves in the house of
GOD, and to govern their respective Charges; expecting no other Subjection and
Obedience, from their People, than what it is the Will of CHRIST his Churches
should render to such as have the Oversight of them. Although they should take
Care not to betray the Authority of the Eldership; but be just to their
Commission, true to their Master, and speak boldly in his name, according to
his Word, teaching and warning every man, and as there is occasion, rebuking
some sharply: Yet they must take heed on the other hand, they don't make unjust
Encroachments on the Privileges of the Fraternity, but allow them their full
Power of Consent and Liberty of Judgment, in Church-Administrations; in things
proper taking their Concurrence, and ever using the utmost Care to give no
offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed. In particular they
should beware of an uncondescending Spirit, an unhappy Stiffness of Opinion,
and resolute Opposition to the Brethren, in Cases of lesser Importance, where
(whatever is pretended) Humor will seem to govern them, more than Conscience.
It Is true that by the Constitution of these Churches a considerable Power is
lodged in the Elders, insomuch that it seems they can put a Negative (for
weighty Reasons) upon any Vote of the Fraternity, whether concerning
Admissions, Dismissions, Censures, or the like. For so runs the last Paragraph
in the tenth Chapter of our Platform of Church Discipline; The ordinary Power
of Government belonging only to the Elders, and the Power of Privilege
remaining with the Brotherhood, -- It follows, that in an organick Church, By
an organick Church, is meant (as our Synod in 62 have defined it, under Quest.
II.) A particular Congregation of visible Saints in Gospel Order, furnished
with a Presbytery, at least with a teaching Elder, and walking together in
Truth and Peace.
and right Administration, all Church-Acts proceed after the manner of a mixed
Administration, so as NO Church-Act CAN be consummated or perfected without the
Consent of Both. -- By which it appears, that as according to our Principles,
the Elders are not to exercise Church Power, but by the Consent of the
Brethren; So neither is there any Church-Act in ordinary cases valid without
the Sanction of the Eldership: And indeed the Platform says, in so many words,
That what the Churches are to act and do in these matters, they are to do in a
way of Obedience -- to the Direction -- of the Elders. Heb. 13.17. Obey them
that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves etc. Further, the eighth
Paragraph is express, Nor may they oppose and contradict the Judgment or
Sentence of the Elders, without sufficient and weighty Cause; because such
Practices are manifestly contrary unto Order and Government, and Inlets of
Disturbances, and tend to Confusion. And, as our famous Mr. Cotton (one of the
Fathers of New England, and first Teacher of this Church) has expounded our
Platform in his celebrated Book of the Keys; the Power and Influence of the
Presbytery, both in the Church and in Synods or Councils, seems to me carried
up to a greater Height considerably, than is either usually practiced by
Elders, or in fact allowed by the Brethren. However, it behooves them, as
Ministers of the meek and lowly JESUS, as much as possible, to deny themselves;
to deny their own Opinions, and Wills, and Rights, and stoop to the Infirmities
of Men, and submit to Things difficult enough to be borne, in many cases; upon
the excellent Principles and Views that acted the first Ministers of CHRIST, (2 Thessalonians. 3.9.) Not because we have not Power, but to make our selves an Ensample
unto you to follow us. -- So 1 Cor. 9.12. We have not used this Power, but
suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. And 2 Cor. 6. In
all things approving our selves as the Ministers of GOD, in much Patience, in
Afflictions, in Necessities, in Tumults, under Honor and Dishonor, evil
Report and good Report etc. -- They are not indeed to be the Servants of Men,
so as tamely and servilely to prostitute their Authority to popular Humors, or
Traditions of Fathers: Yet they must let their Moderation be known to all Men,
while they faithfully execute the Commission they have received from CHRIST;
and labor to be Examples of Meekness, Prudence and Condescension; becoming all
things to all Men; pleasing them for their Good to Edification; not seeking
their own Profit, but the Profit of Many, that they may be saved; watching for
Souls, as those that must give an Account, and consider they are Stewards of
the Mysteries of GOD.

But I proceed to observe as a further Preliminary. This Ministerial Trust is
peculiar to a distinct Order of Men, instituted by CHRIST and of standing Use
and Obligation.

The Ministry was originally appointed by CHRIST; and designed, not for the
Apostolic Age only, but to continue in the Church throughout all Ages; as
might be argued, in that the Reasons of the Institution are of a moral nature,
and perpetual continuance; and also from those Scriptures, which tell us, That
CHRIST has set Pastors and Teachers in his Church for the Work of the Ministry,
till we all come to a perfect Man; -- That in the Lord's Supper (the
Administration of which is their peculiar Province) CHRIST's Death must showed
forth until He come again; -- And that He has left a Promise to be with his
Ministers (teaching and baptising in his name) to the End of the World etc.

And it is an Office peculiar to a distinct Order of Men. It Is a sacred
Enclosure, and does not lie in Common, for every one that pleases, to invade
and occupy. All public and special Offices in the State are limited to
particular Subjects: So is the Ministry of the Gospel. This Honor no Man
takes to himself, but he that is called of GOD. A liberty of prophesying, as
held by some, appears to me but an unlawful License, and tends to unhappy
Consequences. The LORD is a GOD of Order, and not the Author of Confusion, but
of Peace: and would have all things done decently and in order, in all the
Churches of the Saints. It Is said indeed, Covet to prophesy, and forbid not to
speak with Tongues: If a Man be inspired with miraculous Gifts, let him speak.
But otherwise let him be orderly called and separated to the Work. In ordinary
Cases, a regular Election and solemn Investiture into the Office are required
to the Exercise of it: So that without these Praerequisites, even the preaching
of the Word in a public and stated manner (without design or desire of engaging
in the Ministry, when called to Office) and much more the Administration of
Sacraments, must be looked upon as no small Irregularities. Not that the Power
(strictly speaking) comes by Election, or Ordination of Men, but by a Charter
or Commission from CHRIST opened in the Gospel: Yet those human Actions are
generally necessary to the orderly exercise of Ministerial Authority. A Power,
and the Right to exercise that Power, are two things very distinguishable: The
former usually derived by Commission from some superior Authority; but the
latter by a solemn Investiture, done in many cases by Equals or Inferiors. It Is
the Charter of a City or Laws of a Country, that appoints all Offices, and
their several Powers and Businesses: Yet that alone does not entitle any
individual Person to this or that Office, one more than another. But there is
something further required to put any into Place, and authorize their assuming
and exercising public Trusts. Thus, in some cases, there must be a particular
Commission from the Government, and in others Election by the People: And in
all cases there is usually a solemn Oath administered to the Party chosen or
appointed, which is a necessary introductive to the authentic performance of
his Office. A Counselor elect, though approved by the Chair, sits not at the
Board, till he has accepted the Place, and taken the Oath of Fidelity. A
Justice, or other civil Officer, cannot use his Power, till he is sworn in solemn
Form. The Commission or Election indigitates the Persons to whom the Law or
Charter gives this or that Power: But it is his taking the Oath appointed, that
properly invests him in his Office, or introduces him into the public Exercise
of it.

Even so, in the present case, The Power of a Gospel-Minister originates and is
founded entirely in the Institution of such an Order of Persons, which our Lord
was pleased to make, and has revealed in the Gospel: Where He states their
Duty, limits their Authority, and fixes their proper Character; which it is not
left to the uncertain Humors of Men to vary from, add to, or diminish. So that
to institute new Offices in the Church, or alter Offices divinely instituted,
by increasing or lessening their proper Powers, Qualifications, and
Employments, is nothing short of a bold Usurpation of CHRIST's Prerogative, and
a rude Reflection upon his governing Wisdom, Goodness and Fidelity.

Yet the Institution requires some things preparatory to the Exercise of the
Office: And in ordinary cases (whatever may be allowed for cases of Necessity,
which seem to carry a sufficient Warrant in themselves) it must be held
contrary to Gospel Order, for any to exercise the Pastoral Power (or any branch
of the Ministerial Office, except as Candidates or Probationers, occasionally)
until solemnly invested with that Authority, and separated to that Work: Which
is partly done by Election of the Church, and Laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery, and partly by a voluntary devout Self-consecration.

Now (to come to the Business before us) when the Appointment and Investiture
of some one into the ministerial Office is proposed by a People, it should be
the Care and Desire of all concerned, That the LORD JESUS CHRIST would show
whom HE has chosen.

In speaking to this point, several Things may be briefly attempted. As (1.) to
consider who is intended by the Person whom CHRIST has chosen. (2.) To inquire
how or in what ways He does show whom he has chosen. (3.) To give the Reasons
why it should be the Care and Desire of a People, that CHRIST would show whom
He has chosen.

I. I am to consider Who is meant by the Person whom CHIRST has chosen.

And here,

1. It means in general one whom He approves as sutably qualified for the
Ministry, and in particular the Person whom He judges fittest for this place
and people, and will own and bless.

When we read of the Fast, which GOD has chosen, it means such an one as He
desires, approves of, and takes pleasure in. When we read of the chosen Men of
Israel, it means the Choicest of their Tribes, the mightiest and best Men they
had. So a chosen Generation, means an excellent Generation, the Lord's peculiar
Treasure, a Generation of his Praise. -- Moses his Chosen, is Moses his
Beloved, in whom is an excellent Spirit, and in whom is his Delight. When we
read Mat. 22.14. Many are called, but few are chosen; it may be expounded by
ver. 8. They which were bidden, were not worthy. So 1 Pet. 2.6. Behold, I lay
in Zion a chief Cornerstone, Elect, Precious: -- (ver. 5.) Disallowed indeed
of Men, but Chosen of GOD, and precious. -- A Man approved of GOD among you,
Acts 2.22. -- The Apostle means the same thing by those different phrases, Romans
16.10 and 13. Apelles approved in CHRIST; -- Rufus chosen in the Lord.

So in our Text, by him whom CHRIST has chosen, we are to understand One that
he approves of, as qualified for the Ministry, and has in special fitted for
this Place and Station, and will accept, own, and bless therein. 1 Thessalonians. 2.4.
We were allowed of GOD, to be put in trust with the Gospel. Acts 9.15. He is a
chosen Vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the
Children of Israel. John 13.18. I speak not of you all; I know whom I have
chosen.

(2.) It means the particular Person whom the Lord has decreed and appointed to
this Post and Service.

There are many Persons sutably accomplished for the Ministry, that Christ
never designs to employ in this Work: And among the Candidates for a particular
Station in the Ministry, there may be a Number sufficiently fitted, and almost
equally agreeable to a People; yet One only is designed for it by our Lord, and
his Counsel shall stand.

Show whether of these Thou have chosen, means in part, Show which Thou have
appointed and separated, in thy secret Counsels, unto this Ministry.

The Word of the LORD assures us, that Men are predestined according to the
Purpose of Him, who works all things after the counsel of his own Will. And
as He has chosen us before the foundation of the World, unto the Adoption of
Children, according to the good pleasure of his Will: So He has predestined
some of us unto special Offices in his Church, and in particular unto the
Ministry of his Gospel, to the praise of the glory of his Grace. Hence that of
the Apostle, Gal. 1.15. Who separated me, from my Mother's Womb. -- Which may
be explained by that to the Prophet, Jer. 1.5. Before I formed thee in the
Belly, I knew thee; and before thou came forth out of the Womb, I sanctified
thee (or separated thee to an holy use) and I ordained thee a Prophet unto the
Nations.

It is from the beginning predetermined Who shall serve the Lord CHRIST in the
work of the Gospel, and where he will employ them, in this or that part of his
Vineyard. He has determined the Times before appointed, and the bounds of
their Habitation. If the Gospel of the Circumcision be committed unto Peter,
and the Gospel of the Uncircumcision unto Paul, it is the Lord's doing; and
herein he does but perform the thing that was appointed for them.

I pass now in the next place,

II. To consider How or by what Means the Lord Jesus Christ does show whom He
has chosen.

And here it may be observed; He shows this sometimes in extraordinary ways,
and sometimes by more ordinary means.

I. He has sometimes shown it in an extraordinary manner, by an immediate Call.

Thus, Aaron was made a Priest by the express Designation of GOD himself.
Samuel and the Prophets in old time, were called in uncommon ways, by heavenly
Visions and Inspirations. -- So the Apostles under the Gospel Dispensation. Our
LORD in the days of his flesh, personally nominated his first Ministers, and
orally showed whom he had chosen. See Mark 3.13, 14. -- Again, When he rose
from the Dead, he renewed his Commission to the Apostles, and after his
Ascension confirmed their Call in an extraordinary manner, when they received
Power from on high, as we read Acts 3. -- So He appeared to Saul in a
miraculous Vision, to make him a Minister, and called him by a Voice from the
excellent glory; as in Acts 26.13 --

And besides the Apostles, many in the Apostolic Age, received immediate Calls
to the Ministry; among whom were inspired Prophets and Evangelists. And perhaps
oftentimes the Humane Call and the Divine Call, both met in one. It should
seem, Timothy and Barnabas were Instances of this. See Acts 13.2. and 1 Timothy
4.14.

But we are not nowadays to look for extraordinary Calls: besure not such as
are neither of Men, nor by Men. If any pretend to an immediate Mission from
Heaven, let them confirm their Pretenses, by evident Miracles and Prophecies;
or we cannot think they come with sufficient Credentials.

2. The LORD usually shows whom He has chosen in more ordinary ways, by a
mediate Call.

He shows it by the voice of his Providence and Spirit, in more common methods
of discovery.

Under the old Testament, Men were instated in the Priesthood by a Law of
carnal Generation. GOD appointed the Posterity of Aaron to this Office, and the
Succession went by natural Birth.

But now under the Gospel we have nothing to do with a Lineal Succession. This
Method is abolished, and the Church of GOD left at their Liberty to determine
the Persons that shall be in Office among them. They are not confined to one
particular Tribe or Family; but may choose out of all the People.

Here I shall say distinctly, (1.) The Matter is usually to be referred to a
voluntary Election by Vote, or Human Agreement. Yet (2.) in some cases, it may
be determined by the special medium of a Divine Lot.

1. The Matter is usually referred to voluntary Election, and Determination by
VOTE: And when so, there must be such a Concurrence of Circumstances, as to
render the Call plain and clear, if we would know whom CHRIST has chosen.

I might premise here, It is a principle professed among us, that the Churches
of CHRIST have in the present case a power of Election; the Liberty to vote for
their own Officers. In defense of which it is urged that the very Apostles would
not appoint so much (...) Deacons, to serve Tables, without the express
Suffrage of the People. (See Acts 6. begin.) And it is argued, from Acts 14.23.
Where we are told, They ordained them Elders in every Church; That the
Disciples were allowed the same Liberty and Privilege in the Choice of their
Pastors: The original word for ordained, signifying in its first political use,
to design or constitute any Person an Officer by common Consent, which was
usually expressed by lifting up the hand. The word is but once more used in the
New Testament, 2 Cor. 8.19. where it plainly signifies Election to an
Employment. -- Speaking of some very worthy and famous Minister, the Apostle
says, Who was chosen of the Churches to travel with us. But not to dwell upon
this Argument; it is undisputed, that even in the Choice of an Apostle, to fill
up the Twelve, the Disciples (being in number about 120 met together in one
Body) were allowed to come so near as to appoint the Candidates; any two from
among themselves, whom they judged meetest for the place; and then they
(together with the Apostles present) having first prayed, gave forth their Lots
for the particular Person. And the Lot falling on Matthias, he was numbered with
the Eleven Apostles, i. e. according to the Etymology of the greek word, was
reckoned among them by common Suffrage, received as an Apostle with universal
Approbation. -- These things laid together are, I think, Authority sufficient,
for the practice of the Churches, in choosing their own Officers: Which
Ecclesiastical Liberty has been defended by some of our Divines, also from
acknowledged Principles of natural Reason and common Equity, from the undoubted
Rights and Customs of all free Societies, from the Nature of instituted
Churches, and the Ends of Order and Office-Power, as well as from primitive
Practice See Dr. I. Mather's, Order of the Gospel, page 69. And Dr. Owen's True
Nature of a Gospel Church, page 62, etc.
. But We have no Leisure at present to recite what is said on these several
heads.

All I have further to do here, is to limit and qualify the method in common
use among us: And would say, In order to a discovery of the Mind of CHRIST, or
knowing whom the LORD has chosen, a People must see to it that their Election
he regulated according to his revealed Will, and the Call plain and clear, fair
and orderly.

Now to this End,

First, Some things are required on the part of the Electing Body or Fraternity.

For Instance, This must be rightly constituted; consisting of Persons duly
qualified to act in the affair. They that choose must be rightful Members of the
Church of CHRIST. This is made necessary, by our Scheme of Church Order, to
qualify Persons to vote in choosing a Minister: And for it, we have the
Countenance of Scripture, particularly in the famous Example before us. They
that appointed the Two, as Candidates for the Choice in our Text, were all
Disciples: By which Name the Body of Believers in that day were commonly
called, in distinction from the Twelve. The Two were chosen, as the Seven are
said to be, by the multitude of the Disciples. And we are told how many were
present at the Choice of Matthias: -- The number of the Names were about an
hundred and twenty: who are described as Men which had associated with the
Apostles, all the time that the Lord JESUS went in and out among them. They
were open and known Disciples of CHRIST, who had confessed Him before the
World, and communicated in the special Ordinances of his Kingdom. They are
represented afterward (together with others added to them) as continuing in
the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread --. It seems
they were all in full Communion, and approved Christians: Not any Persons among
them, of a scandalous Character, or an incomplete Profession.

Now, from this leading Example, it is thought, we may learn who are proper
Subjects of the Liberty and Power of Election in the Cafe before us; Namely,
the avowed Members of a Gospel Church, statedly associating therewith in all
public Worship and Ordinances. -- And indeed it is judged scarce rational, that
any should be admitted to vote in a Community, or confederate Body, of which
they are not orderly and confessed Members. Hence if there be any such distinct
Society as a congregational Church, instituted in Scripture, it is thought a
Principle founded in Reason and the Nature of things, That none but approved
Members of this particular Body, have a just Right to vote in their
Ecclesiastical Affairs, especially in a case of such peculiar Concern and
Importance to the Peace, Purity, and Welfare of the Church, as that of choosing
a Pastor to watch over their Souls, and break the Bread of Life to them. It Is
pleaded by our Divines, that if we extend the Privilege beyond those Limits, we
shall not easily know where to stop: Whether in respect of the Persons who must
be admitted to this Privilege, or of other Privileges that such Persons may as
reasonably lay Claim to. And it is observed, That some of the main Arguments
for stretching this Liberty further (and in particular, that of contributing to
the Minister's Maintenance) will if pursued in their genuine Consequences,
carry the thing to a Length, that few, even of them who dislike the Limitation
among us, will care to have it brought to. Now it is a known Maxim, That
Argument that proves too much, proves even nothing to the purpose.

To proceed,

Another thing is, The Church must see to it, that there be a due Examination
and Trial had of the Candidates for Office among them. It is expressly required
in the case of a Deacon, that the Person be first proved (tried and approbated)
then let him use the Office. (1 Timothy 3.10.) Now surely it is of greater
Consequence, that Elders and Teachers pass under a proper Trial: and this not
only with regard to their general Qualifications for the Ministry, but
especially as to their Fitness and Accommodation unto this Church and Place in
particular. It seems reasonable that Christians should judge for themselves, in
this case. And who ordinarily are like to pass a better Judgment than the
Church concerned? They that were able in the Apostles day to look out among
themselves, for the Deacons Office, Men of honest Report, full of the holy
Ghost, and of Wisdom, seem to me sufficiently capable of judging upon the
Meetness of Persons for the Pastoral Care also. And are they not in many Places
of Scripture expressly directed and exhorted to try the Spirits, whether they
are of GOD; to beware of false Prophets, that come to them in Sheeps clothing,
but inwardly are ravening Wolves, whom they should know by their fruits; and if
any Man preach any other Gospel unto them, than they have received, to hold him
accursed. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine (says the
Apostle) receive him not into your house, neither bid him GOD speed. It Is
observable, the Bereans are commended for trying of Paul and Silas's Doctrine
by the Scriptures. And the Church of Ephesus is commended for trying them which
said they were Apostles. These Scriptures (together with the Reason of the
thing) appear to me a sufficient foundation for the common Custom among us of a
popular Trial of Candidates. And if besides the usual Probation by public
Preaching (which is more subject to Mistakes) there were also private
inquiries, especially by personal Conference, it might be of great Use and
Benefit: Though this kind of Exploration seems to belong more particularly to
the Presbytery of the Church, if there be any such before instated. Agreeably
the New England Platform assigns it to the Elders, as their special Province,
saying Chap. X. Sect. 9.
It belongs unto the Elders to examine any Officers, before they be received of
the Church. -- Which seems highly reasonable, particularly for that by our
Constitution, the Elders of the Church are to transact the Business of
Ordination, and officially or authoritatively install Persons into the Offices
they are chosen to. It Is one Resolve, or Rule stated, Platf. Chap. IX. Sect. 3.
In such Churches where there are Elders, Imposition of Hands in Ordination is
to be performed by those Elders. -- Hence They are eminently concerned in that
Apostolic Charge, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man. -- It is meet
therefore Chap. VIII. Sect. 3.
before any be ordained or chosen Officers, they should first be tried and
proved: And that the Eldership already subsisting in the Church, should not
have any Colleague obtruded or imposed upon them at least, while they have any
rational grounds of Dissatisfaction. For as the Prophet speaks, Can two walk
together, except they be agreed? -- It is observable, the Vote and Lot in the
Designation of Matthias were managed in the Presence and under the Conduct of
the Apostles. And so was the Election of the Deacons: as you may see in the
Story. From whence some infer, that there is a Power of Inspection and Guidance
in the Choice of Officers (as well as in the Admission of Members) which
belongs to the Elders; if there be any praeexisting in the Church. But whether
this be a standing Right of the Eldership, or whether they have no more than
the Liberty of common Suffrage, I list not to dispute. And upon another head,
Our venerable Fathers have left us their concurrent Opinion, saying, Sect. 8.
We judge it much conducing to the Well-being and Communion of the Churches,
that where it may conveniently be done, Neighbor-Churches be advised withal,
and their Help made use of in the Trial of Church Officers, in order to their
Choice. Upon which One See the late Rev. Mr. Symmer's Life, page 63.
has well observed to this Purpose; "The Communion of Churches and Interest of
Religion depend very much (humanely speaking) on the Unity and good Agreement
of the Elders in the Vicinity. If they love one another, and agree well
together, they will strengthen one another in their Work: But if they disagree,
this will tend to weaken their Hands, and discourage their Hearts more than a
little. "Churches therefore ought, what in them lies, to suit their Neighboring
Ministers and Churches, in the Choice of a Minister: Remembering they are not
only to choose an Officer for themselves, but a Neighbor for Them.

And certainly then it is advisable that the Congregation (as we distinguish)
or Body of Noncommunicants (being baptized Professors, associating constantly
in the Word and Prayer, with the Church concerned) should have some Regard
shown to them in this Affair; surely at least, as much as is due to any
Christian Neighbors. And a great deal of Prudence is generally necessary here,
to consult their Peace and Satisfaction, while the Church's Right of Election
(or Precedence in the Choice) is asserted and exercised.

But however these things be, surely a Trial ought to be made, by one means or
other, sufficient for the Church more immediately concerned, to form a mature
Judgment upon; that there may be no place for Jude's Complaint, There are
certain Men (false Teachers) crept in unawares. It behooves them to take Counsel
together, for imparting Light to one another, in a way free from all
Party-Designs and Artifices; to proceed with a just Deliberation, and in the
whole Affair to act with Caution, Prudence and Impartiality. They must
especially ask Counsel at the Throne of Grace, by devout and fervent Prayer; as
we have an Example in our Text.

And the Result must be a general Union of Hearts in a free and voluntary
Choice, made without any Collusion or Constraint; without all deceitful or
violent Measures, to flatter or force on a Vote for any Histories inform (as
one observes) That in ancient Times the Choosers of Overseers (or Pastors) gave
with their Voice solemn Asseveration or Oath, that their Choice was wholly
free, and not the fruit of undue Influence.
. A willing Concurrence of the Majority of the Church is necessary, by all the
Rules of Society, to a determining Vote: And the more of Unanimity, the clearer
Discovery is made of CHRIST's Mind and Will; especially when Persons of
Eminence and Distinction (for their Gifts and Graces, rather than worldly
Abilities) are concurring in the Choice.

Secondly, There are some things required on the part of the Candidates in
view, to make them capable Subjects of an Election. There are certain
Qualifications, indispensably necessary to this End, to be respected by the
Chusers.

Thus, the Sex must be regarded; according to those Apostolic Canons, which we
have in 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. And 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.

Again, The Age must have some Regard paid to it. Under the Levitical Law, they
were allowed to perform Service in the Tabernacle, only from thirty years and
upwards, until fifty years old: Though in David's time Persons were admitted
Probationers at twenty, and as it should seem stood so for ten years. However,
this is no Rule now under the Gospel, and I know of no Reason for Persons
waiting now till they are thirty years old, before they enter upon the
Ministry, any more than that they should be discharged at fifty, as in Jewish
days. Yet that ancient Constitution seems to carry so much of Morality and
Reason with it, that it appears highly proper, decent and expedient, that
atleast Persons be come to years, to Men's Estate, before they be chosen into
the Ministry. -- But I shall not enlarge here; having already given my
Sentiments on this head in a Sermon Sermon. at Mr. Lowel's Ordination, page 30
etc.
which some of you have in your hands.

And then a Man's moral Character, and intellectual Furniture, as well as
Orthodoxy must be respected. He must be a Person of known Integrity, Capacity,
and Fitness. Not only a Man of sufficient Learning, but one apt to teach, and
holding fast the faithful Word; One of unblemished Morals and exemplary Piety;
One of a meek, humble, and Self-denying Spirit, and indu'd with a good degree
of Prudence and Discretion, to take Care of the Church of GOD, and secure its
Peace and Purity, while he contends earnestly for the Faith, and diligently
attends the practical Concerns of Government, Order and Discipline. According
to that Apostolical Directory, 1 Timothy 3. And Tit. 1. Which Chapters I commend
to serious Consideration at your leisure.

In a word, He ought to be a Person, not only of good Life, and good Abilities,
but of a Ministerial Genius; regularly inclined; disposed to the Work, upon
proper Motives, Desiring the Office of a Bishop, as the Apostle hints, 1 Timothy
3.1. Indeed a Man may covet the Office, and not be at all qualified (as they, 1 Timothy 1.7.) In which case, an Election to Office is ipso facto null and void;
being the choice of an incapable Subject. By previous Qualifications for the
Ministry, a general Designation of the Persons to be called to it, is made by
CHRIST himself: But where this is wholly wanting (says One Dr. Owen.
) it is not in the Power of any Church under Heaven, by virtue of any outward
Order or Act, to communicate Pastoral or Ministerial Power unto any Person
whatever. So on the other hand, Persons may have a competent portion of
Ministerial Gifts; and yet being habitually averse to the Work, and resolutely
engaged for some other Employment, or disposed to this only for worldly Ends,
if these things be known, it cannot be proper to choose any such: And in either
case the Call is not clear. Something like the Spirit of the old Prophets, to
whom the Word of the LORD, came and was in their Hearts as a burning Fire,
begetting an ardent Thirst after the Glory of GOD, and good of Souls, is one
considerable step toward a Divine Call. Some inward Sense of this seems
necessary to make a Man's Call clear to himself: And a rational Apprehension of
it in the People seems necessary to legitimate their Election. For as the LORD
looks on the Heart: So must we, as far as it is discoverable; though still we
must beware of uncharitable evil Surmisings. But if a Man plainly discovers a
strong Bent to any civil or secular Employment, it is unadvised to make Choice
of such an one for the Ministry. Or if he visibly discovers the prevailing
grounds of his Inclination to the Ministry, to be grossly carnal and worldly
(as Eli's Posterity, 1 Samuel 2.36.) can a People safely, or even lawfully, choose
such an one? I may add, if one in general sincerely inclined, is invited to
this or that particular Station in the Ministry, and cannot find a Heart (even
after serious Inquiry and humble Prayer) to comply, I see not that the Call of
any People is of such force and obligation, as that he must sin in refusing of
it. We find, in a case of somewhat the like nature, even Apostolical
Invitations and Entreaties, were in vain with Apollos: See 1 Cor. 16.12. It is
requisite then that a Man have a well-principl'd Disposedness to the Ministry,
and to the particular Place where he is invited.

And when there is thus a Sufficiency of Gifts and Qualifications, and a
suitable Inclination in the Candidate, concurring with an unanimous or general
Agreement of a Christian People (both Fraternity and Presbytery) in the
Election and Approbation of him; especially if also there be the Concurrence of
Neighbour-Elders and Churches; here is such an assemblage or conjunction of
happy Circumstances, as renders the Call strong and valid, and seems clearly to
point out the Person whom CHRIST has chosen. In ordinary cases, the regular
Vote of a Church (enforced by such a general Desire and Agreement on all sides)
is looked upon as the Voice of GOD, by which He calls Men forth to Service in
his Church. The good Shepherd so called, may well be said to enter in by the
Door.

But yet,

2. In some special Cases, it should seem proper to refer the Matter to a LOT,
for Determination; and if this be done in a regular and solemn manner, the
Issue may justly be looked upon as a manifestation of the Will and Mind of
CHRIST.

I shall a little particularly insist on this too, because I am so naturally
led to it by the Context, which tells us that this was the Method in which
CHRIST showed He had chosen and appointed Matthias to be an Apostle.

As to the Nature of a Lot, I shall only say, The Word may be sometimes used in
a lax, and less proper Sense, for any kind of Reference made to GOD, though in
a way that implies the Contrivance and Activity of Men, and requires only a
Divine Influence to direct their Thoughts and Powers, in order to the Event. In
which sense the Vote of any Body of Men, may be called a Lot. But yet strictly
speaking, the Lot is an awful Appeal to Heaven, in such a way and manner as
shuts out human Counsel and Influence, and depends on a special Agency of
Divine Providence, for the actual determining of an Event. Prove. 16.33. The Lot
is cast into the Lap; but the whole Disposing thereof is of the LORD. The
Judgment's the LORD's. "The Event, though casual to Men, is directed and
determined by GOD's Counsel and Providence", which controuls and governs in all
Cases.

The Lot was an Ordinance of GOD much in Use under the Jewish Dispensation, for
Decision of Right in uncertain cases, and putting an Issue to weighty Matters
depending, which were not with facility determinable in any other way. Thus the
Land of Canaan was divided to the several Tribes by Lot. ( Numb. 26.55, 56.)
The Scapegoat was chosen by Lot. (Lev. 16.7.) The Lot was made use of, in
detecting of secret Criminals: as in the case of Achan ( Josh. 7.16.) And of
Jonah ( Jon. 1.7.) And of Jonathan (1 Samuel 14.42.) The Method of a Lot was
taken to determine the Time, when each Family should bring in their Quota of
Wood for the Service of the Temple, after the Jews Return from their Captivity:
And who of the People should go up out of the Villages and Cities of Judah, to
dwell at Jerusalem, where the Rulers resided, and the House of GOD was in
building, and where they would be most exposed to the Malice and Envy of their
Adversaries: It Is said, The People cast Lots, to bring one of Ten, to dwell
there. (Neh. 10.34. and 11.1.)

In a word, this Method was used in the Election of Persons to Office; as in
the case of Saul chosen King of Israel. (1 Samuel 10.19 --) So of the Priests and
Leontes, whom King David distributed into many distinct Companies or Courses
(as well as the Militia of the Kingdom.) They cast Lots for every Post and
Service, as well the small as the great, according to the house of their
Fathers; as you have the Account at large in 1 Chronicles. 24 th Chapter and
onwards. --

And it is remarkable, the first Election of any Person into Office in the
Christian Church (wherein there was any thing of the ordinary Acting or
Influence of Men) viz. that which our Text relates to, was consummated or
perfected by a Lot. Indeed there was a previous Nomination of Two, by Suffrage
or Vote of the whole Multitude: But the Determination of the particular Person
(whether of these two) they for very good Reasons put upon a different Issue,
and appealed to Heaven by a solemn Lot.

As to the Manner of this Lot, we are left at an uncertainty: Though some tell
us Vid. Whirby in loc.
"They put two Lots into two Urns, or Ballot-boxes; the one containing the two
Names of Joseph and Matthias, the other the Name of an Apostle, and a Blank or
void Lot; and then drawing forth the Name of Joseph out of one Urn, and the
void Lot out of to her, they knew that the Lot remaining with the Name of an
Apostle upon it, belonged to Matthias.

As to the Reasons or special Grounds of their casting the Lot in this case,
neither are we particularly informed of them. Whether there was any thing in
the Nature of the Office, the Person was to be appointed to; as some are of
Opinion, who say, the ultimate Determination of the individual Person, and
immediate Disposition of him into his Office, by GOD, was necessary to give him
Apostolical Authority: or whether it was done upon no other than the common
moral Reasons, which influenced in the cases abovementioned, in old
Testament-times; I shall not enter into any Debate.

The late excellent Mr. Henry Vid. Expos. 1 Chro. 24.
seems to have been of the Judgment, that the Lot in these cases was
presidential.

So the memorable Mr. Baxter, whose Words upon the place Vid. Paraphr.
are; I know no Reason why the -- Pastors of the Church (at least in cases of
doubt) should not now be so chosen, i. e. by Lot.

What the Judgment and Practice of Antiquity was, I have not had Leisure
particularly to inform my self. Only I Will give you a Passage out of The Order
of the Gospel (by the late venerable Dr. Mather) where he has the following
words: Nothing is more evident than that in the first Ages of the Church,
Pastors were chosen by all and only their Flocks: In choosing a Minister, they
did Clerozein, that is, Choose him by Lot; from whence it was that Ministers had
the Name of Clergy given to them Page 69.
.

All I would say upon the Lot in the present Case, give me Leave to offer in
the following Hints. And allow me the freedom of young Elihu, in saying Hearken
to me, I also will show my Opinion.

As to the Lawfulness of a Lot, for determining in this Case, if under a just
Regulation, I presume no one will dispute it, that does allow of the practice
in civil Cases. "And it is hardly imaginable that GOD should not have left that
lawful, which is so evidently necessary to the Peace and Security of Mankind,
and which the unavoidable Condition of human Affairs makes of such great and
eminent Use to the World."

And now for the Expediency of it in Cases sacred, particularly in the present
Case, under some special Circumstances, which frequently happen, I suppose much
might be easily said, and strongly argued.

In general, it is a Case of no little Importance; such as will bear us out in
applying so awful a Method for Determination. The Lot is a thing holy and
reverend: and to use it in a ludicrous or wanton manner, about Trifles, and
Matters of small moment, is a Folly in Israel, judged to be no less than taking
the Name of the LORD in vain. But the case before us is of vast weight and
solemn consideration: such as calls for the most serious Treatment from Men;
and wherein, if in any matter at all (the Honor of CHRIST being so nearly
concerned in it) we may hope that the Lord will own and accept the Appeal made
to Him, and give an answer of Peace.

Moreover, It Is often a doubtful Case, and attended with no small degree of
Uncertainty. Many times the case is like that in the Story of our Text: Several
Candidates present, who are very worthy and desirable for their
Accomplishments, and so recommend themselves by their public Performances, as
well as private Conversation, that a People are willing it should be either of
them, and agree it shall be one, or at least suppose it will, and yet scarce
know where (many of them) to pitch their ultimate Choice. Now in doubtful
cases, what more proper method for Determination than a religious Lot? Indeed
in things already determined by a clear Revelation of the Mind of CHRIST in
holy Scripture, or very apparent to human Reason, and capable of being easily
determined by a little serious and impartial Consideration; here there is no
occasion for such an extraordinary method: And if there be no occasion, it will
be judged but profane trifling with the Name of CHRIST, to appeal to him by a
Lot. -- But where there is real Uncertainty, and sober Doubt, or a Variety of
Apprehensions among the Parties concerned in an important Case (important
whether in regard of its Nature, or its Consequences) and there be little
Probability of a peaceable Issue by any other means; then cast the Lot, for a
Resolution of the Doubt.

In fine, the case before us is many times attended with a great deal of
Difficulty; and the divided Sentiments among a People do too often, for want of
some happy means of Accommodation, at last throw them into great Contentions
and Disorders.

Among a number of Candidates, there is generally seen a Diversity of Gifts and
Talents: And hence, among a People, as there is a variety of Tastes and
Judgments, so in consequence hereof, there is usually a difference of Choice and
Inclination; one being determined for this, and another for that --. And now as
Men are commonly very much disposed to be fond of their own Opinion or Fancy;
so this by a natural efficacy makes them the more wedded in their Affections,
and resolved in their Choice; that they cannot tell how to brook a
Disappointment. Hence they are too often put upon sinister Methods to obtain
their Ends: or if balk'd of their Expectations, are carried into inordinate
Resentments and contentious Measures. Such is the remaining Infirmity in the
best and wisest of Men, and such the Subtilty and Power of our grand Adversary
the Devil (who goes about, as a roaring Lion, to devour and to disturb) That
through the just Judgment and Permission of Providence, the Peace of the
Churches is oft-times miserably broken, in pursuit of unreasonable Prejudices
on the one hand, or of a fond Opinion and extravagant Affection on the other;
while they have Men's Persons in Admiration, so as to be puffed up for one
against another. And in no case hardly are a People more apt to fall into
carnal Contention, than in that before us. Scarce any thing makes so much
Noise, and occasions (for the time) so much sinful Anger and Evil-speaking
Symmos 's Life p. 57.
. Even Paul and Barnabas, those eminent Saints and Servants of CHRIST, differed
about a Companion and Fellow Laborer in the Ministry: And the sacred Historian
tells us Act. 15.39.
The Contention was so sharp between them, that they parted one from the other,
and each took his Colleague. So of the Church at Corinth, we have the Apostle
giving that doleful Account, 1 Cor. 1.11 -- It has been declared unto me of
you, my Brethren, that there are Contentions among you. Now this I say, that
every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas etc.
Again, Chap. 3.3, 4. For whereas there is among you Envying, and Strife, and
Divisions; are ye not carnal, and walk according to Men? For while one says, I
am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? -- And in our Days,
O! how much is there of this Carnality to be seen among Professors; this spirit
of party and faction, the leven of malice and wickedness! How often have
Churches been almost rent to pieces by scandalous Quarrels about the Settlement
of a Minister; to the great Dishonor of Religion, to the Reproach of our
Profession, and to the Gratification of them that malign our Ecclesiastical
Constitution, and envy us our happy Rights and Privileges! For want of a wise
Conduct, popular Votes and Choices are too often attended with ungodly Strifes
and Emulations. Now as the Apostle observes, Where Envying and Strife prevail,
there is Confusion and every evil work. And then such Divisions are difficult
to be healed. We may apply here that of Solomon, -- A Brother offended, is
harder to be won than a sirong City, and their Contentions are like the Bars of
a Castle. Hence then in this critical case it greatly behooves a People to study
for Quietness, to follow the Things that make for Peace; and if it be possible,
manage so as to secure this. The beginning of Strife, is as when one lets
out Water: When it has got some little Vent, it will it self widen the Breach,
and in a little time grow irresistible, if speedy care be not taken to put a
stop to it. Therefore says the wise Man, leave off Contention before it be
meddled with.

Now, what more effectual Method to this End, (that is, to leave off Contention
before it be meddled with) can be used, in the present case, than that of a
religious Lot? The Lot, every one that has any thing in him serious, looks upon
as sacred and venerable. The very Pagans yous find in the case of Jonah, paying
a profound Reverence to the Lot, as carrying in it something peculiarly Divine.
Here GOD is beheld as sitting in Judgment: And the Awe of this will have the
strongest Influence, of any Reflection in the World, to restrain Men's
turbulent Passions, and suppress those fretful Resentments that so frequently
break out upon a Disappointment, when we eye only the hand of Men in it. The
less there is of Man, and the more of GOD is seen, in any affair, the greater
Content shall we take in the Issue. -- What was I that I should withstand GOD!
-- Lest happily ye be found even to fight against GOD!

The Apostle observes, An Oath for Confirmation, is to Men an End of all
Strife. And agreeable is that Remark of Solomon, Prove. 18.18. The Lot causes
Contentions to cease, and parts between the mighty. Here the Wise Man hints
the right application of the Lot, viz. In difficult and doubtful Cases, to
prevent or end Contentions. By telling us what is done, he tells us what ought
to be done, in such Cases. Then a Lot is lawfully used, when it either
preserves or procures Peace and Equity Dod and Cl. in loc.
. And as to the Efficacy of this Method, you have not only the Wise Man's
Testimony, but the concurrent Suffrage of common Reason, and universal
Experience.

Hence, upon such Views and Considerations as these, it seems a high Propriety
(at least in some Cases) to take the Method of a Lot, in the Choice of a
Minister: Which will make it more emphatically a Divine Choice, and have a
happy Tendency to settle the Minds of Men, and adjust all Disputes where there
are contending Parties.

But then in this Method there are several Provisoes and Limitations to be
carefully observed. Particularly,

1. It seems necessary that some certain Candidates be singled out, and
nominated, by general Consent in a voluntary Vote: (For this you have the
Example of the Church who appointed Two, in order to the Lot for an Apostle)
Which will effectually secure the privilege and liberty of the Body
Ecclesiastic, to all good Intents and Purposes.

2. It is necessary that the Persons in view, be sutably qualified: -- I do not
say equally in all respects, but each of them in some agreeable measure. -- For
It must be a lawful and justifiable Case, in which the Lot is used. And
therefore it must not be cast for any that are apparently incapable Subjects of
Election: Because there is no uncertainty here. If either of the Persons
proposed are known to be disqualify'd by any essential Defects, whether in
point of Knowledge, Faith, or Morals; it is but a profane mocking and tempting
of CHRIST, to draw the Lot: and therefore unlawful to put the Matter to such an
Issue. It is but as Haman's Lot for the choosing some lucky day to accomplish a
wicked Design: Or as the Soldiers impious Lot for our Savior's seamless Coat
(so famed for its miraculous Virtue) which could give none of them a just
Propriety.

3. The Lot must be employed in a solemn and religious manner.

Being a practical Appeal to Heaven, it is but fit the Matter should be
transacted in a serious frame, after a godly sort. The Lot is too awful a thing
to be dally'd with. It must not be used rashly, and in a light and lusory way;
but with Deliberation, Seriousness, and Solemnity. And it is highly fitting this
sacred Transaction should be accompanied with devout Prayer; at least
Ejaculatory, and in such Cases of Importance as that before us, with more
solemn Supplications. At the Division of the Land among the Children of Israel,
it is observed, Joshua cast Lots for them in Shiloh, before the Lord Josh. 18.10.
.

And now if the Lot be thus regulated, the Success may (I think) in Faith be
committed to Divine Providence: And the Event may well be looked upon as an
incontestible Discovery of the Mind of CHRIST; showing hereby whether of these
He has chosen. I could never yet see why in such a Case we may not nowadays,
as they did in old time, expect the special Interposition of Heaven, to give a
perfect Lot: As King Saul prayed to the LORD GOD of Israel, in the Case
depending between Him and his Son on one side, and the People on the other 1 Samuel 14.41.
.

Indeed the Religious Lot is grown much out of Custom; though the Civil be
retained and in frequent Use: yet the Divisory Lot, more than the Elective. But
why the Lot is so disused in matters spiritual and ecclesiastical, I can at
present think of no better or truer Reason than the common Abuses and
Profanations of it in other cases. It is generally owned, The Lot may lawfully
be used about civil Concerns, where weighty Consequences are in prospect, and
where unhappy Differences cannot well be prevented or issued any other way. Yet
even here, whatsoever is more than this, comes of Evil. The Lot is a virtual
Calling upon GOD the LORD, to direct and determine us: And therefore to employ
this religious Rite, in cases that are plain and clear, beyond all rational
Dispute, or in frivolous, much more in sportive Matters, is by Divines judged
unlawful, as making too bold with Providence. And the customary unhallowed use
of it in trivial Plays and Pastimes (with the too unserious, and perhaps often
unnecessary Application of it in many Affairs of Life) appears to me the most
obvious Reason why it is fallen into Disuse in sacred Things. It Is owing to the
Subtilty and Influence of an Hellish Tempter, that the Lot is so desecrated and
perverted, in a sensual sportful World. As one observes; GOD has his
Ordinances: the Devil has his. GOD has Sacraments for his People: the Devil
has his. Is the Oath GOD's Ordinance? In Affront to this, the Devil set up
profane Swearing, to lessen the Authority and Veneration of a sacred Oath. So
is the Lot GOD's Ordinance? Herein also the Enemy sows his Tares: and to
affront GOD in this Ordinance of his, he has his gaming and sportive Lotteries.
That there may be no Religion in the use of Lots [and that the Lot may not be
applied to the Service of Religion] the Devil has turned them all into Play and
Diversion, or a method of Gain and Profit, or into Superstition, Bible-Lottery
(as it is called) and Sorcery or Divination. However, the frequent Abuse and
Misapplication of a thing, capable of being directed to so excellent purposes,
as the Lot is, does not at all forbid the regular Improvement of it: And I
cannot see why it may not be as safely and profitably employed in sacred Cases
(where it seems indeed the most proper and needful) now as ever. Nor can I see
why the Lot should be laid aside, on the Account of vulgar Abuses, any more
than the Oath; which though as much prostituted and as often violated, is
notwithstanding made use of still, without any Scruple, and with good Success,
as an End of Strife.

You may observe, I go very much on rational Grounds; and build not upon
Scripture only: Though if this directs to a Lot, in any Case, I think it is
sufficient Authority, were there no such evident Grounds in Reason for it. But
I have enlarged here, on a too uncultivated Subject, much further than was at
first intended. I shut up this head with that free Address of Elihu to his
worthy Fathers, the three Friends of Job; -- Hear, O ye wise Men, and give Ear,
ye that have Knowledge. For the Ear tries Words, as the Mouth tastes Meat.
Let us choose to us Judgment: let us know among our selves what is good.

I hasten now to the last thing under the Doctrine, which is --

III. To say Why it ought to be the Care and Desire of a People, in the Case
before us, that CHRIST would show whom He has chosen.

And here I shall only hint,

In the first place, It Is but fit and reasonable, that He should have the
Choosing of his own Servants; and is desirable that Such should be put into the
Ministry, whom he approves, and will own and bless.

He is the Fountain of all Power: and may lodge it in whose hands he pleases.
He has instituted the several Offices in the Church: And it is his Province, as
Head and Lord, to fill them with his Servants; whom, and in what way he
pleases.

As the Ordinances must be only such as are of his Institution: So the
Dispensers of them must be such as are of his Designation; else they cannot
expect his Presence to be with them. The LORD once complained of some Prophets,
That they ran, and He did not send them: Of whom He declares (which is
threatening enough) That therefore they should not profit the People at all,
Jer. 23.21, 32. It is a dreadful thing to sit under the Preaching and
Administrations of a Man, whom we cannot see CHRIST bearing Testimony to, by a
special Blessing on his Labors, or any visible Tokens of his spiritual
Presence with him.

Hence it is a very reasonable Care, when a People are concerned and desirous,
that CHRIST would show whom He has chosen. It Is fit his Will should be done,
his Counsel take place; and to be desired that his good Pleasure may be known.

Again, Consider, CHRIST is infinitely Wise, and able to make the best Choice
for a People. We may imagine him looking upon them, and saying (as in Jer.
49.19.) Who is a chosen Man that I may appoint over them? For who is like Me?
-- Who Is like Me, for choosing the fittest Instruments, and spiriting them for
their Work? -- We may allude to Rev. 17.14. He is LORD of Lords; and they that
are with Him, are called, and chosen, and faithful. As He will accept none but
such as are of his own Appointment: So He perfectly foreknows whom He will own
and bless. Job. 13.18. I know whom I have chosen. Hence He said to Ananias
concerning Saul, against whom that Disciple had entertained very great (and
once just) Prejudices, as you read, Acts 9.13 etc. Ananias objected, Lord, I
have heard by many of this Man, how much Evil he has done etc. But the Lord
said unto him, Go thy way; for he is a chosen Vessel unto me to bear my Name
before the Gentiles. We may be apt to throw aside this or the other, as a
despised Lamp; when to the LORD he may be a Chosen Vessel. We should gladly
therefore refer it to his Wisdom, to determine for us; and be sollicitous that
he would show whom He has chosen. Thus we shall put Honor on his wise and
sovereign Providence.

In a word, Thus we shall consult our own Interest and Peace. For a People will
be more disposed to receive Such in the Lord with all gladness, and hold them
in Reputation, whom they see CHRIST showing He has chosen. Whatever Objections
Ananias had against Saul; yet when he heard those Words, He is a chosen Vessel
unto me, the good Man instantly embraced him as a Brother, with great
Affection. And this will have a natural and (by the Divine Blessing) a powerful
Tendency to a People's profiting by the Ministry of such an one. -- And then
this will afford no small Consolation to the People of GOD, as it is to them an
evident Token of Salvation; a happy sign of the Lord's Presence with them; that
his Spirit remains among them, and that his Kingdom shall be still upheld in
the midst of them. Ezekiel. 34.29, 30. I will raise up for them a Plant of Renown.
Thus shall they know, that I the LORD their GOD am with them; and that they,
even the house of Israel, are my People, says the LORD GOD.

For these and other Reasons, it should be the Care and Concern of a People,
who have before them the Choice of a Minister; That the LORD would show whom He
has chosen, whom he has appointed, and will approve. This was the Solicitude
and Desire of the Church and the Apostles, in the Case our Text refers to; and
this Record was made of it for the Admonition of all Posterity. For whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were written for our learning and ensample.

The Afternoon-SERMON.
ACTS I. 24 and 25. And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord, which know the
Hearts of all Men, show whether of these -- Thou have chosen; that he may take
part of this Ministry --.


THE Subject we were upon in the Morning was, That when some one is wanted to
supply a Vacancy in the Ministry, it should be the sollicitous Desire of all
concerned, That the LORD JESUS CHRIST would show whom He has chosen.

I come now to another Observation from the Words, viz.

DOCT. II. In the important Affair of calling a Minister, Application should be
made to the LORD JESUS CHRIST, by fervent Prayer, expressing the Concern and
Desire of our Souls, that He would show whom He has chosen.

So in our Text, They prayed and said --

Prayer is a devout offering up of our regular Desires to the Throne of Grace.
It should not only be our Hearts Desire, but our Prayer also, That CHRIST would
show us whom He has chosen.

Here we might observe,

The LORD JESUS CHRIST (the Son of GOD) is together with the FATHER and HOLY
GHOST, the proper Object of religious Worship. He has all those Divine
Perfections, and sustains all those Divine Relations, Titles and Characters,
which proclaim him the worthy Object of our Faith, Love, Prayer and Praise, in
their most exalted Sense, and highest Exercises. And to Him should our Prayers
sometimes be immediately directed; if we would honor the SON, even as we
honor the FATHER. The Protomartyr Stephen in his dying moments prayed to the
Lord JESUS. And in our Text, we have the Apostles and an Assembly of the first
Disciples, uniting their solemn Supplications to Him. -- The Title, LORD, is
the special Title of CHRIST; his constant Style, throughout the New Testament.
And it was customary among the primitive Christians to make their religious
Addresses unto Him; insomuch that they were characteris'd, and distinguished
from Jews and Heathen, by their Calling upon the Name of the LORD JESUS Act.
9.14. Romans 10.12. 1 Cor. 1.2.
.

There are some special Cases, wherein it seems peculiarly proper and
congruous, distinctly to invocate the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Thus, particularly in
the Administration of the LORD's Supper, which is of his Institution, and bears
his Name, and the primary Design whereof is to do honor to his Memory, by a
grateful Celebration of his redeeming Love. So in the Election (as well as in
the Ordination) of Persons, to serve CHRIST in the Ministry, it seems equally
proper, that the Name of the LORD JESUS should be expressly and immediately
called upon.

Now, if you ask What is to be requested of Him, in such a Case; I answer in
general, as in our Text, That He would show whom He has chosen: -- (Implying)
That he would choose for us in great Mercy, and that he would discover his Mind
and Will to us, in those ways in which it may be expected: That he would
preside and govern in the Choice proposed by us; influence our Views and
Resolutions, and cause a Coincidence of all things to the accomplishment of his
own Counsel), and bringing the Affair to a happy Result: That all matters of
Controversy between Him and us may be removed, and no Obstructions lie in the
way to hinder a Blessing from being bestowed upon us: That when the Lot is cast
into the Lap, there may be a gracious Disposal thereof, by his Power and
Wisdom; that the Lot may fall upon One, who shall be a Pastor according to his
Heart; One whom He has called by his Grace, and will delight to bless and
prosper. -- This may be the Tenor and Scope of our Prayers on such an Occasion.

And if you ask Why we should thus employ Prayer in the Case? I answer,

1. Our LORD himself has directed us to this Method. Besides that Prayer is the
appointed way for obtaining all the Benefits we desire. It Is particularly
prescribed in the Case before us; It Is implied in that direction to the
Disciples, Mat. 9.38. Pray ye the Lord of the Harvest, that He will send forth
Laborers into his Harvest. -- It is observable, the Apostle Paul frequently
and pathetically desired the Prayers of this and the other Church whom he
purposed to visit; That he might come to them with Joy by the Will of GOD etc.
(See Romans 15.30 -- 32. So Heb. 13.18, 19.) Which Directions will very well take
in the present Case, by parity of Reason. Now this is Argument enough, in any
Case: It Is the Will of GOD in CHRIST JESUS concerning you.

2. The Example in our Text should have it is influence upon us. They had their
Eyes to the LORD for a Decision from his special Providence, and they lifted up
a Frayer: wherein they have left a good Copy for future Ages to imitate. The
Apostle said ( Phil. 3.17.) Ye have us for an Ensample. So (2 These. 3.7.) Your
selves know how ye ought to follow us. And doubtless the sacred Historian put
the Prayer in our Text on Record, to make the Apostles and primitive Church an
Ensample unto us to follow them. As the bad Actions of Men are related in
Scripture-Story, for our Admonition and Warning: So the good and laudable
Actions of the Saints are story'd, not only for their Commendation, but for our
Imitation and Learning. Hence we are exhorted to be Followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the Promises. Heb. 6.12.

3. It Is a Case wherein we have special Declarations and Promises of CHRIST, to
plead, and to animate our Faith, in Prayer on this Occasion.

It Is a virtual Promise we have in Psalm. 68.18. Thou have ascended on high; --
Thou have received Gifts for Men; yea for the Rebellious also, that the Lord
GOD might dwell among them. Which Gifts (as the Apostle expounds the Psalmist,
Ephesians. 4.11.) particularly mean suitable Instruments for the Work of the Ministry.
Such Gifts CHRIST has received, to be bestowed on his Church and People, as the
visible Signs and Means of his gracious Presence in the midst of them. This
affords one advantageous Plea. And we may put in suit that precious Promise,
Isai. 20.30. Though the Lord give you the bread of Adversity -- Yet thine Eyes
shall see thy Teachers etc. Also that, Jer. 3.14, 15. Turn, O backsliding
Children; for I am married to you; -- And I will give you Pastors according to
mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. GOD expects
that we in faith convert these Promises into Petitions and Pleas at the Throne
of Grace. As you may learn from Ezekiel. 36.37. Where, after various Promises
made, it is added, Thus says the LORD; yet for this will I be enquired by the
house of Israel to do it for them.

4. The Gift we receive in answer to Prayer, we may hope will prove a Blessing
indeed, in which we shall rejoice.

Usually, the Benefits we receive by Prayer, are doubly sweet and pleasant.
'Twas a most comfortable Reflection to pious Hannah, For this Child I prayed.
So when it may be reflected, For this Minister I prayed, how great the
Consolation! -- When the LORD, by any satisfying Evidences, shows whom He has
chosen, as it will afford peculiar Encouragement to the Person to accept the
Call: so it will by a natural efficacy help us to attend on the Ministry of
such an one with a greater Faith and livelier Hope for a special Benediction of
Heaven upon his Administrations and Labors among us. Such a Minister may
humbly triumph, with the Apostle, as in Romans 15.29. I am sure, that when I come
unto you, I shall come in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of CHRIST.
And a People so highly favored, may make that the Song of their grateful
Souls; Psalm. 65.14. Praise waits for Thee, O GOD, in Sion: -- Blessed is the
Man whom thou chusest, -- we shall be satisfied with the Goodness of thy House.
So Psalm. 118.21, 26. I will praise the Lord, for thou have heard me. -- Blessed
is he that comes in the Name of the Lord: We have blessed you out of the House
of the Lord.

I shall only add, by way of Argument,

5. It Is a very concerning Case; in which it exceedingly behooves a People to
choose well, and is very awful to commit an Error. -- It Is but fit all Business
of any moment should be carried on with Prayer. How much more the very
important Busi-of Calling a Minister! It Is a great Affair of CHRIST's Kingdom,
and important Concern of his Glory. -- It is of vast Moment to our Souls, and
has a near Aspect on the best Interests of our dear Posterity. An Error here
will be of dangerous Tendency, and extensive Influence. -- And then it is a very
critical Case; in which without CHRIST's special Direction and Leading, we
shall certainly commit egregious Mistakes, and run into Confusions: shall be in
danger of laying on Hands suddenly, and so of being partakers of other Men's
Sins. For (as one observes) Whoever have a sinful hand in the Choice of an
unskilful and unfaithful Pastor, are so far guilty of all the Hurt he does, and
shall answer to GOD for the Blood of the Souls, which perish through his
Mismanagement. Their Sin in this Case, makes way for the Hireling; and so has
Influence upon all the Harm he does. There should be a holy Solicitude then,
lest we take any false Steps, or fall upon any wrong Measures, or come into any
unhappy Resolves: but that all be done to the Glory of GOD, and with the
Security of the common Good.

Hence, it will be our Wisdom to put the Affair under our LORD's Conduct; and
not lean to our own Understandings, nor trust in our own Hearts. Commit thy
Works to the Lord: So shall thy thoughts be established. Make thy Prayer unto
Him, and He will hear thee: Thou shall also decree a thing, and it shall be
established unto thee; and the light shall shine upon thy ways.

These Reflections afford very strong and moving Arguments for Prayer on the
solemn Occasion before us.

But then, if we expect an Answer of Peace, we must see to it, that we offer
the Prayer of Faith, and lift up holy Hands; without Wrath and Doubting. In
many Cases, it may be said, Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss. Let
us every one think with the Psalmist, If I regard Iniquity in my Heart, the
Lord will not hear me. -- Verily let not that Man, who is of a double heart,
imagine that he shall receive any thing of the LORD. We must ask in Faith;
embracing the Promises, and realizing CHRIST's Sufficiency and Faithfulness to
perform them. -- Yet we must ask humbly; sensible of our utter unworthiness;
confessing our Sins, and putting all our Iniquities from us. -- In a word, we
must pray fervently, and with a holy Importunity, as those that know the Worth
and Moment of the Gift we are asking of our ascended LORD. -- Every one
concerned, should wrestle for it in fervent Prayer by himself in secret. And
every Family apart. And the Congregation of the LORD; making Mention of it
always in their common Prayers, and uniting in solemn extraordinary
Supplications (as they in our Text) on so weighty an Occasion.

It has been the laudable practice of these Churches, to have their Days of
Fasting and public Prayer, when meditating the Choice of a Minister: Which
Days, I would observe, should be kept seasonably (in general, the earlier the
better) before the Thoughts and Resolves of a People are particularly fixed and
terminated.

Now, let us every one reflect a little on our Conduct in this Matter. Have we
been thus employing Faith and Prayer, with regard to the Choice before us. It Is
true, when we had our Church- Fast upon upon Occasion of the Removal of our
late worthy Pastor The Rev. Mr. BENJAMIN WADSWORTH; who being chosen President
of Harvard-College, and Application thereupon made by the Hon. and Rev. the
Overseers, for the Church's Consent to part with him for that Service; the
Church after humble Prayer, with serious Consideration and previous Inquiry
into his Mind upon this weighty Affair, voted a conditional Compliance;
Resolving, That if he judged it his Duty to accept of the Call given him, We
would humbly submit, and say, THE WILL OF THE LORD BE DONE! Which Vote was
passed June 16. 1725. With a considerable degree of Unanimity, as it pleased
the LORD then to dispose our Hearts; and with no small Appearances of a very
solemn Awe upon every one's Spirit: together with the sensible workings of a
just and great Affection to our faithful Pastor, and the visible Tokens of a
special Divine Conduct and Influence; the apprehension of which, as it gave a
general Satisfaction, so it was my Relief under the Anxieties of that critical
Juncture; and in the Days of doubtful Expectation which have since rolled over
us, that Reflection has often refreshed the Bowels of many; particularly by
furnishing us with an Argument or Plea in Prayer, and encouraging our Hopes,
That the LORD who had called his Servant from us, and who has the Residue of
the Spirit, would lead and influence in the Choice of a Successor; to preserve
Peace and Truth, and provide graciously for us --.

Not long after the President's Instalment, and actual going from us, the
Church at an occasional Meeting, saw fit (among other things) unanimously to
agree upon keeping a Day of Prayer, with a special View to the remarkable
Change of Circumstances we were now come under. Upon this great Occasion
Judging our selves called to extraordinary Prayer, It was therefore resolved
(GOD willing) that we would speedily keep a day of Fasting together, to beg of
GOD a sanctified Use of so important a Dispensation; and that He would teach us
the way wherein we ought to go, and in his good Time provide for us another
Pastor according to his own Heart. -- The said Fast was on Aug. 17. following.

I have thought it not amiss, to gratify the Public, by this particular
Account of that Affair, and our proceedings upon it.


from us unto another important Post, We did unitedly spread our Case before
the LORD; and have at our occasional Meetings, as well as upon the LORD's day,
from time to time been humbly moving our blessed SAVIOR and Head to look upon
in our present State and supply our Wants: But have we all likewise in our
private Requests been continually making mention of our Case, and begging
Divine Appearances for us, with a suitable Concern and Fervor of Soul! Can our
Closets and our Families testify on our behalf, that we have been giving our
selves to Prayer; beseiging the Throne of Grace day and night with our ardent
Cries, and believing Entreaties, that the LORD would show us (among all the
Candidates we have heard) whether of these He has chosen? Or have we been
contenting our selves with a few prayerless Thoughts and Endeavors? Have we
not been cold and indifferent, and too unthinking? Or else all our Care and
Zeal too indevout, irreligious, and not accompanied with a spirit of prayer and
resignation to GOD?

Surely it is fit we examine into our Temper and Conduct here. This becomes us,
as Men and as Christians. And then this is necessary for the better ordering
our Expectations and Hopes. For if we have sought the LORD humbly and
earnestly, we may look He will be found of us. Since he has assured us, as in
Mat. 18.19. Again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in heaven. But if we have been casting off Fear and restraining
Prayer, while we have pursued our several Aims and Desires; we may justly
expect He will hide his Face from us, and cover our Paths with Darkness.

Hence then (whatever our personal Managements and Dispositions have been) let
us now stir up our selves to seek the Lord by importunate Prayer. Ye that make
mention of his Name, call upon him in the Daytime, and in the Night, keep not
Silence before Him. Entreat his Favor with your whole Heart, and give Him no
rest, until he show whom He has chosen; until He restore the Smiles of his Face
on his Sanctuary, which is so far desolate, and set up a burning and shining
Light in this his Candlestick. Let the Prophet's Resolution be ours, Isai.
62.1. For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will
not rest until the Righteousness thereof go forth as Brightness, and her
Salvation as a Lamp that burns. -- Thus we shall be prepared to receive the
Blessing from the LORD, and to give Him the Glory and the Praise.

But I hasten to the last Observation.

DOCT. III. CHRIST is at all times and in all Affairs, especially in the
present important Case, to be considered by us as the LORD, who knows the
hearts of all Men. -- So in the Text, Thou LORD, which know the Hearts of
all Men, show whether of these Thou have chosen.

Here I might (not unprofitably) go into the Proof of CHRIST's Dominion and
Omniscience, that he is LORD, and that he does know the hearts of all Men; and
doctrinally treat upon the exalted Title and relative Perfection here ascribed
to our blessed SAVIOR; which indeed are none other than the incommunicable
Prerogatives of JEHOVAH; the high Glories and appropriate Characters of the
Supreme and Infinite Mind N. B. There were some distinct Enlargements upon
these Heads in the Discourse given from the Pulpit, which are here left out,
only for brevity sake to accommodate the Reader.
.

But it is the practical Improvement, to be made of these Reflections, which I
mainly aim at. And they are very applicable, to regulate our Views, and govern
our Tempers and Deportments; as in all other Affairs, so particularly in the
present Case. -- Hence the Church in our Text, prayed, saying, Thou Lord, which
know the hearts of all Men --. Doubtless it was not without a special
Direction of the HOLY GHOST, that they fixed on this particular Property, and
this Tide of CHRIST, in their Invocation; whereby were ministered unto them
those pious Reflections, that probably had an excellent Influence into the
whole Conduct of the Affair. And it may be of no small benefit to a People in
the like Case, to make use of and apply these affecting Idea's of CHRIST.

I. A due consideration of CHRIST as the LORD, may be of very profitable
Consequence, in the management of the Affair before us.

To give a few hints here distinctly.

1. This will teach us, from a Reverence to the Office of the Ministry, as the
Institution of CHRIST our Glorious LORD, to treat the Affair of choosing and
calling a Person to that Office, with a becoming Seriousness and Solemnity.

Is CHRIST the LORD? We should then fear before him, and make Him our Dread.
His Name is holy and reverend: And all that wears the stamp of his Authority,
should appear venerable to us. The LORD's Day, the LORD's Supper, his Word, his
People, should be called the Holy of the LORD, Honorable. So the LORD's
Ministers should be highly esteemed in Love, and their Office held in
Reputation by all such as would honor JESUS CHRIST our LORD, both theirs and
ours. For he has said to his Ministers, He that despises you, despises Me. --
A reverent regard to the Institution of CHRIST, should teach us to treat all
Affairs relating to the Ministry, and in particular to behave our selves in the
important Work before us, with the greatest Gravity, with solemn Thought, a
deep Awe, and religious Concern.

2. The serious Consideration of CHRIST as LORD, will help to regulate our
Aims, and guide our Choice.

It will influence us to consult the Glory of our LORD; to do all in the Name
of CHRIST, and study to manage so as to secure his Honor, and promote his
Interest, I may allude to some of the Apostle's Words, and say, He that
realises the Dominion of CHRIST, will care for the things that belong to the
Lord, how he may please the Lord. In the electing of a Minister, that
Consideration will terminate our Views on such a Person as we do deliberately
and upon rational Grounds judge will be most acceptable to CHRIST, and most
likely to be a special Instrument of his Praise: One that is not only
capacitated by a due portion of Gifts and Powers, to serve the Interest and
Kingdom of CHRIST; but whose Heart is (visibly to us) set right with GOD, and
bound for his Glory. It will tend to make this our governing Aim; and transport
us above the corrupt Influence of carnal or sinister Regards, the unhappy
Results of a vicious Self-Love.

3. It will point us to the Word of CHRIST, as our Rule, in fixing our
Judgment, and conducting the whole Business before us.

It will lead us to consult the Scriptures for Direction, and to take Counsel
from them, in managing this Affair of CHRIST's Kingdom. It will influence us to
attend to the inspired Apostle, as if CHRIST the LORD spoke to us, where he
describes the Evangelical Bishop, and sets down Rules for choosing a good
Minister of JESUS CHRIST.

And it will preserve in us a just Concern, through the entire process of the
Affair, to demean our selves with a strict Conformity to the revealed Will of
CHRIST; that we may carry it as becomes the Gospel, and walk worthy of the
LORD, unto all pleasing.

4. It will direct us to go to CHRIST with our Prayers, and our Thanksgivings,
for Success.

It is a Motive to earnest Prayer, and will put each one upon applying to
CHRIST, in that humble Language, Acts 9.6. Lord, what will Thou have me to do?
It directs and excites us to be looking unto JESUS who is the Author and
Finisher of every happy Settlement; and to be entreating his Favor, his
Conduct, Assistance and Blessing. -- Also it teaches us to be thankful to him
for Prosperity in our Endeavors; to give him the Glory, if we succeed, who is
LORD over all, and governs second Causes after his sovereign Pleasure. Hence
that of Ezra, By the good hand of our GOD upon us, they brought us a Man of
Understanding, a Minister for the house of our GOD, Ezra 8.18.

5. It may be improved to check all distrustful Fears, and encourage the Faith
and Hope of a favorable Answer to our Prayers, and happy Result of our serious
Consultations and Endeavors.

A firm belief and due thought of CHRIST's Dominion, as Head of the Church,
will tend to lay a Restraint upon our impatient Fears, in a Day of Clouds and
Darkness; to enliven and invigorate our Hopes, in Cases of Difficulty, and in
times of doubtful Expectation. If CHRIST sits at the Helm; if He be the supreme
Moderator of all Events; we are sure then, Nothing shall come to pass but by
his Permission, and with the Security of his own Interest and Glory. There are
many Devices in the heart of Man: but the Counsel of the Lord, that shall
stand. He sits upon the Floods, and rules the Waves of the Sea, and stilleth
the Tumult of the People. He scatters the Proud in the Imagination of their
Hearts; but his Thoughts are very deep, and his Designs cannot be defeated. He
is Head over all things to the Church: And if He love the Church, which is his
Body, we may trust He will protect and keep it; will nourish and cherish, and
make all needful provision for it. We may be sure that all things shall be
overrul'd for the promoting of Jerusalem's Peace and Welfair. Hence then in the
present Case, we should establish our Thoughts, and confirm our Faith and Hope,
by meditating on CHRIST's Power and Dominion. A realising View of this will
help our Unbelief, strengthen our Hearts to wait upon the LORD; who is a GOD of
Judgment, and blessed are all they that wait for him. Be patient therefore,
Brethren, unto the appearing of the Lord: Behold, the Husbandman waits for
the precious fruit of the Earth, and has long Patience for it. Be ye also
patient; stablish your hearts: Be not faithless but believing. Believe in the
LORD your GOD, so shall ye prosper.

6. It will be of happy use, to promote in us a due Resignedness and Submission
to his holy Will and Dispose.

Knowing that when the Lot is cast into Lap, the whole disposing thereof is of
the Lord; This will teach us a willing Subjection to his Counsel and Pleasure.
The Disciples having prayed, as in our Text, proceeded to cast the Lot; and it
falling on Matthias, it is observed, He was numbered with the Eleven Apostles;
doubtless with great Peace and Harmony. And so much seems intimated in this
Remark of the Historian; the original word for numbered, Calculis allectus.
Beza.
importing (as hinted before) his being counted among them by the united
approbatory Suffrages of all concerned. Barsabas and his Friends doubtless
readily yielded to the Choice, and all unanimously received Matthias (though
not the first in Nomination) as the Man whom CHRIST had chosen and preferred. We
hear of no Murmurings or Exceptions.

Now a serious Consideration of CHRIST as LORD, will tend to assist us unto the
like excellent frame and carriage, in the Affair before us.

Antecedent to the solemn Transaction, there should be a humble referring the
Conclusion to a Divine Dispose; in that primitive Language, Acts 21.14. The
Will of the LORD be done! The Consideration of CHRIST as LORD will promote this
happy Resignation of Soul; and will help to save us from that ungodly
Peremptoriness and Presumption in our Designs and Resolves, and that vain
boasting in Creatures, which it should be our Care to avoid. According to that
of the Apostle, James 4.15, 16. For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, We
shall -- do this or that. But now ye rejoice in your Boastings: all such
rejoicing is evil. -- 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. Let no man glory in Men: for all things
are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas.

And so, when the Work is brought to a fair and orderly Issue, it is then our
Duty to acquiesce in the Choice, and be satisfied wherever the Lot falls.
Neither let us tempt CHRIST, nor murmur ye. Our Language must be like that, of
Hezekiah, 2 Kin. 20.19. Good is the Word of the Lord. Is it not good, if Peace
and Truth be in my days?

Suitable Views of CHRIST's Dominion will tend to produce in us a Patient
Submission to his Providence, if crossed in our Desires, and disappointed of
our Hopes: will make us willing to part with our dearest Enjoyments; to give up
our fondest Expectations, at his bidding, and not pursue our Designs against
the manifest Checks of Providence, as if we meant to step into the Throne of
CHRIST, and correct the Measures of the most High.

It will dispose us to a cheerful Reception and Christian Treatment of Him, as
our Brother and Minister of GOD, whom we behold approved in CHRIST; chosen in
the LORD. Hence we read, Gal. 2.9. When James, Cephas and John who seemed to be
pillars, perceived the Grace that was given unto Paul, they gave to him the
right hands of Fellowship. And hence that Exhortation to the Church of Corinth,
1 Cor. 16.10, 11. Now if Timothy come, see that he may be with you without
fear: for he works the work of the Lord, as I also do. Let no man therefore
despise him.

And then it will by natural Consequence make us patient toward our Neighbors
and Brethren, will restrain us from passionate Resentments and dividing
Measures, under a Frustration of our Hopes, and excite us to do all things
without Murmurings, Disputings or unreasonable Oppositions. Hence the Apostle
makes use of the Name of the LORD JESUS, in persuading the Church at Corinth
unto Peace and Union, when carnally contending, and divided into Parties, one
saying, I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollo: As in 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I
beseech you, Brethren, BY THE NAME OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, that ye all speak
the same thing, and that there be no Divisions among you: but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same Mind and in the same Judgment. The Name
of the LORD JESUS carries a sacred Charm with it, that tends to still all
Contention, Clamor, and Dispute among his Disciples (particularly in the
present Case) and excite the greatest Care of Peace, Charity, and Unity, as
that which makes very much for the Honor of CHRIST, and the Interest of his
Kingdom. Hence those pathetical Expostulations and Counsels of the Apostle, in
Rom 14. Who art thou that judge another Man's Servant? Or why do thou set
at naught thy Brother? -- For he that in these things serves CHRIST, is
acceptable to GOD, and approved of Men. Let us therefore follow after the
things which make for Peace, and things where with one may edify another.

But I pass now to say,

II. The Consideration of CHRIST, as knowing the Hearts of all Men, is another
very useful Reflection, and may be of great Service in the present Affair.

This gives a very awful, and yet an equally joyful Idea of our Lord; and what
He would have solemnly considered by his People. Rev. 2.23. All the Churches
shall know, that I am He which searches the Reins and Hearts. How else indeed
should He judge the Secrets of Men, and give to every one according to his
Works; as He certainly will do! The Eyes of the Lord are in every place,
beholding the Evil and the Good Pro. 15.2, 11.
. Hell and Destruction are before the Lord: how much more then the Hearts of
the Children of Men? Verily to his piercing Eye every Bosom is transparent, and
all things there appear in the most open Light to Him, which are beyond the
Reach of all human Discovery. And this Thought is capable of an application to
very good Purposes, both by way of Direction and Incentive; as in the common
Concerns of the Christian Life, so particularly in the extraordinary Affair
before us.

To illustrate this, let me suggest a few particulars.

For Instance,

I. The Consideration of CHRIST's knowing the Hearts of all Men, as in our Text
applied to the present Affair, may be useful to direct us in our Choice, what
to aim at, and what regards to be influenced by.

It was a Reproof the Apostle gave to some in the Church of Corinth, who
indulged such a spirit of Emulation about their Teachers (2 Cor. 10.7.) Do ye
look on things after the outward appearance? This is a common Rule of judging:
but a false Rule, at least a very imperfect and insufficient One. It should
seem, that some boasted mighty things of themselves, and affected to make a
fair Show in the flesh, but they boasted of things without measure, and by fair
Speeches deceived the Hearts of the Simple. We often suffer our Views only to
glide upon the Superficies of Men and Things, and take no pains to enter into
their Realities and true Characters. We are either easily imposed upon by
deceiving Appearances, and draw up a hasty Judgment. Or else we are led away
with Mistakes about the Nature of Things, and consider not where true
Excellency lies. Agreeably, things of comparatively less Significancy, often
have the preference with us: the things of the Body, to the things of the Soul:
So again the things of the Mind, to the things of the Heart; intellectual
Accomplishments, to spiritual Graces and moral Virtues: Which is the most
perverse Judgment in the World. And to act under the Influence of such a false
View of things in the Affair before us, must needs be of dangerous Tendency.

But here our Text may set us right; which intimates that the Disciples looked
chiefly at the Heart, in the Choice before them; and that CHRIST looks at the
Hearts of Men, in choosing Pastors for his Church. We are apt to look chiefly at
the Head, and external Appearance, an happy Utterance, bright Gifts, the Powers
of Reason, the Beauties of Language, or the like: but verily the Lord looks
at the Heart. The Lord weighs the Spirits; and he estimates us by our inner
Man. To be renewed in the spirit of our Minds, after the Image of Him that
created us in Righteousness and true Holiness, this is our highest Glory; and
is the most exalted Character of a Minister of the Gospel: Whose Adorning, let
it not be that outward Adorning of Eloquence, Beauty, or worldly Pomp: but let
it be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the
Ornament of Humility and Sanctity, which is of great price in the sight of GOD.
The Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor. In a Minister, it is the
Christian, we are to look at, more than the Scholar, or the Orator. He should
indeed be apt to teach; able also to convince Gainsayers. And a People should
Covet earnestly the best Gifts: Yet show I unto you a more excellent way: Seek
a Proof of CHRIST speaking in him, and being with him. For though one speak
with the Tongues of Men and Angels, and have not Charity (a Principle of Divine
Love reigning in his Soul, the Love of CHRIST constraining him) he is as a
sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal: And though he have the Gift of Prophecy,
and understand all Mysteries, and be filled with all Knowledge; yet if he have
not a true Love to CHRIST, and Love to Souls, prevailing in him, verily he is
Nothing 1 Cor. 12.31. and 13.1, 2.
. That Is a Divine Rule, for proportioning our Esteem of others, as well as of
our selves; Romans 12.3. To think soberly, according as GOD has dealt to every
man the measure of FAITH; in judging of which, a rational Charity must be our
Guide and set the Limits.

2. The Consideration of CHRIST as knowing the Hearts of all Men may serve
further to animate and encourage the Hope and Faith of his People in the
present Case.

It may serve to encourage Prayer on this occasion, and the Hope of a gracious
Answer. Moses seems to have had it in View* when he prayed, as in Numb. 27.16.
Let the Lord, the GOD of the Spirits of all Flesh set a Man over the
Congregation. -- He forms the Spirit of Man within him, and he pondereth the
Spirits of Men. He knows every one's particular Temper, Capacity, and real
Character, with unerring exactness. He knows the Hearts of all Men; the Hearts
of Ministers and People; of Candidates and Electors. -- CHRIST knows the Wants
of his People, and knows their Hearts Desire and Prayer; and as our Advocate
with the Father, represents the same unto Him; which may assure us of obtaining
our Requests, if agreeable to his Will. See Mat. 18.19, 20. So 1 Job. 5.14, 15.

He knows what is the Mind of the Spirit: whom the holy Ghost will make
Overseers of the Flock; and so how to order his Mediatorial Intercession, in
the present Case, according to the Will of GOD. (Romans 8.27.)

He that searches the Hearts, knows who are the fittest to be chosen; who
will be the most holy, humble, skilful, faithful, active Instruments of his
Glory. Solomon observes, The fining pot is for Silver, and the furnace for
Gold: but the Lord tries the Hearts Pro. 17.3.
. He has a clear prospect into the secret Recesses of the Soul, and knows
whose Heart is upright toward him, and who is most formed for his Praise. As to
Men, they themselves scarce know what spirit they are of. Hence not he that
commends himself, is approved; but whom the Lord commends 2 Cor. 10.18.
. And as for popular Applause, this is often founded in false Notion of Worth,
or ignorance of Men's true Characters. Hence that of our LORD to the Pharisees
in his day, who were so much had in honor among the People; ( Luke 16.15.) He
said unto them, Ye are they which justify your selves before Men; but GOD
knows your Hearts: for that which is highly esteemed amongst Men, is
Abomination in the sight of GOD.

I may allude to the Story 1 Samuel 16.
of Samuel's viewing the Sons of Jesse (among whom GOD had provided him a King
to reign over Israel) and observe, We are ready to say of this and the other,
Surely the Lord's Anointed is before him: But the Lord sees not as Man sees.
We look upon Eliab, and are flushed with Hopes, he is the Man; but the Lord
says, Look not on his Countenance, or on the Height of his Stature; for I have
refused him. And when we look upon Abinadab, neither has the Lord chosen him.
And when Shammah is made to pass before us, Behold, neither has the Lord
chosen this. Yea, though we turn our Eyes to seven others, it yet appears The
Lord has not chosen these. And when we are ready to inquire, with Samuel, --
Are here all? It happens there remains still one, the most unthought of: and
the Lord says, Arise, anoint him; This is he. For Man looks on the outward
Appearance; but the Lord looks on the Heart: And when He bestows in Mercy,
and not in Wrath, He gives a David, a Man after His own Heart. -- Indeed he was
pleased to appoint a treacherous Judas to be one of his first Apostles: and He
often permits a worldly Demas to be put into the Ministry. But then He has some
wise and holy Designs of his Kingdom to serve by it: and it is sometimes done in
Judgment to a People, that have provoked him to Anger. But when he has
Intentions of Favor to a People, in whom he delights, he gives them a
faithful Ministry. See 1 Timothy 1.12. And I thank CHRIST JESUS our LORD, who has
enabled me; for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry.

His Knowledge of the Hearts of Men qualifies him to judge infallibly of Men,
and to make a most wise and just Choice. The righteous Lord tries the Hearts
and Reins. ( Psalm. 7.9.) Since He knows the Hearts of all Men, He cannot be
deceived: but is able to make the most righteous Judgment, and give a perfect
Lot. His Eyes are upon the righteous; He beholds every Peter, that can appeal
to Him, saying, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love Thee:
And unto such an one He says, Feed my Sheep Joh. 21.17.
.

His Knowledge of the Hearts of Men argues his Ability to prepare and dispose
Men's Hearts aright: And if he does not find them at present fit for his
purpose (as in the Case of Saul, who from a Blasphemer and Persecutor, was
changed into a Preacher and Apostle of JESUS CHRIST) he has power to enable
them 1 Timothy 1.12.
, to furnish and spirit them to their Work. He can give them another Heart, as
in the case of the former Saul, the famous Son of Kish 1 Samuel 10.6, 9.
. Behold, a Company of Prophets met him, after he was anointed by Samuel, and
the Spirit of GOD came upon him, and he prophesied among them, and was turned
into another Man. And it became a Proverb in Israel, Is Saul also among the
Prophets! -- So true are those Observations of the Wise Man, The King's heart
is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of Water, He turns it whithersoever
He will Pro. 20.1.
. -- The Preparations of the heart in Man, and the answer of the Tongue, are
from the Lord Chapter 16.1.
. He has all Hearts in his Hand, as well as under his Eye. He fashioneth Men's
Hearts, and works in them to will and to do of his good pleasure. Unto every
one of us is given Grace according to the measure of the Gift of CHRIST. He can
easily inspire a Man with Divine Principles, and heavenly Tempers: can fill him
with Knowledge and put Wisdom in his Heart, that he may go out and come in
before his People. The LORD is able to make all Grace abound toward him; to
give him largeness of Heart, and Wisdom exceeding much. -- Hence then,
supposing in the case before us, the Lot should fall upon a Person, whom some
may apprehend less accomplished, and less worthy: yet consider that the Lord
knows and influenceth the Hearts of all Men, and can prepare his Heart to the
Work he is called unto, and let this suppress every anxious Passion or
unbelieving Thought; still our Complaints, and open our Hearts to lay out Faith
and Prayer for him.

In a word, Consider, He who searches the Reins, can govern your Hearts, as he
pleases, and can unite you in your Judgments and Inclinations, The hand of GOD
may be to give you one Heart. So that you shall be perfectly joined together in
the same Mind, and with one Mouth glorify GOD, in the unanimous Choice of some
meet and worthy Person. Or if he should permit you to be somewhat divided in
your Apprehensions, He can prevent the Disagreement from passing over to the
Affections, and still keep your Hearts knit together in Love. Or if any (which
GOD prevent) should be irregularly disposed after the Matter is reduced to a
fair Issue, He that sits in the Heavens, and that knows the Thoughts of the
Wise, can restrain and overruled, to his own Glory.

All which Reflections tend to strengthen Faith and Hope. Wherefore let not
your Heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. Trust in the Lord at all
times, O ye People, pour out your Desires before Him; and in the way of Duty
leave the Affair and all Events with Him. In cases of Difficulty, which depend
very much upon the Hearts of Men, as well as in all others, we should
cheerfully refer the Administration and Success of our Concernments unto Him,
in whose hand the Righteous, and the Wise, and their Works are, and whose are
all our Ways; not anxiously perplex our selves, about the Events of uncertain
Futurity, but persuading our selves that the Lord will do better for us than
our own Counsel and Choice, be resigned to his good Pleasure. And when He by
his Providence declares his Will (as one Dr. Tillotson. Vol. II. page 636.
observes) look upon it as the Sentence of a wise and just Judge, in which all
Parties concerned ought to acquiesce and rest fully satisfied. We cannot but be
convinced, that this is very reasonable, to leave the management of things to
Him, whose Understanding is infinite, and therefore knows best how to order
them. The Government of the World is a very curious and complicated thing, and
not to be tampered with by every unskilful hand: and therefore as an unskilful
Man, after he has tampered a great while with a Watch, thinking to bring it
into better Order, and is at last convinced that he can do no good upon it,
carries it to him that made it, to mend and put it in Order; so must we do,
after all our Care and Anxiety about our own private Concernments, or the
public State of Things: we must give over governing the World, as a Business
past our Skill, as a Province too hard, and a Knowledge too wonderful for us,
and leave it to him who made the World, to govern it and take Care of it. And
if we be not thus affected and disposed, we do not believe the Providence of
GOD, whatever Profession we make of it; or are not firmly persuaded of the
Wisdom and Goodness of it.

3. The Consideration of CHRIST, as knowing the Hearts of all Men, will have a
further Influence, to promote a Care of Integrity, in the whole Conduct of the
Affair before us; and to comfort us by a Sense of our Sincerity, both under the
Crosses of Providence, and the Calumnies of Men.

This Reflection duly entertained, will be a Motive and Help to Sincerity: will
tend to rectify our Aims; to make us keep our Hearts with all Diligence, and
study to show our selves approved unto Him, who tries the Reins. That is
Christian's Motto, 1 These. 2.4. Not as pleasing Men, but GOD which tries our
Hearts.

It will be a good Preservative and Guard against the Rashness and Folly, which
is too often committed in this Affair, when the LORD JESUS CHRIST is left out
of our Schemes, or we leave to him only the Execution of our Decrees, and mock
him by commending to his Benediction, what we have projected without his
Counsel.

It will promote Sincerity in our Desires and Prayers, that CHRIST would show
us whom He has chosen: and therefore will make us beware that no Idol of
Jealousy have harbor in our Bosoms; which will provoke the Lord to pass that
Doom upon us, Ezekiel. 14. These Men have set up their Idols in their Heart; --
should I at all be inquired of by them? -- Surely I the LORD will answer them
by my self, and will set my Face against them. -- The Scripture has put those
solemn Words of prayer into our Mouths, 1 Kin. 8.39. Then hear thou in Heaven
thy Dwelling place, and give to every one according to his Ways, whose Heart
Thou know. But how shall we dare to pray in such awful Language, without a
most sollicitous Care to avoid Hypocrisy; and to seek the Lord with our whole
Desire, lifting up holy Hands, and drawing nigh to Him with a true Heart: Whose
penetrating Eye has an immediate Access to the Mind, and a distict Prospect of
all the secret Motions in every Breast, through all possible Masks and
Disguises!

Moreover, If we are under the power of this apprehension, that his Eye is upon
us, by whom Actions are weighed, and who understands our Thoughts afar off;
it will excite a Care of Uprightness in our Choice and whole Management. That
is proposed as a Motive to Sincerity and Care to please the Lord: Prove. 21.2.
Every way of a Man is right in his own Eyes: but the Lord pondereth the Hearts.
Hence David strongly recommends it to his Son 1 Chro. 28.9. Serve him with a
perfect heart, and with a willing mind; for the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts. This Reflection had an
excellent Influence on holy David himself, 1 Chro. 29.17. I know, my GOD, that
thou triest the heart, and have pleasure in Uprightness. As for me (therefore)
in the Uprightness of my heart I have willingly offered all these things. The
Sense of this will be a powerful Excitement to do what we do, heartily, as to
the Lord, and not to Men; to act with an upright View to his Glory, as our
ultimate Aim, and to propose no other Ends but what as subordinate to this, He
will approve of. The Sense of his Heart-searching Eye upon us will make us
abhor vain Thoughts and wicked Purposes, as an Abomination to the Lord; and put
us upon purifying our Aims from all base alloy of Prejudice, Interest, or any
other impure tincture. It will antidote and fortify us against all manner of
Temptations to Evil, by the Principles of Shame and Fear. The People of GOD
found it a happy Restraint to them: Psalm. 44.18 -- 21. Our Heart is not turned
back, neither have our steps declined from thy way. -- If we have forgotten the
Name of our GOD; shall not GOD search this out? For He knows the Secrets of
the Heart. -- This is improveable as a strong Caution against all criminal
Partiality. Hence the Apostle exhorting Timothy to be impartial and upright in
his Conduct, addresses him after that solemn Manner, 1 Timothy 5.21, 22. I charge
thee before GOD, and the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and the elect Angels, that thou
observe these things, without preferring one before another [or without
Prejudice, as the Original properly signifies, and the vulgar Latin translates
it] doing nothing by partiality: Lay hands suddenly on no Man, neither be
partakers of othea Men's Sins.

Thus a Sense of the Eye of CHRIST upon us tends to make us beware of
Partiality and Hypocrisy: and that Consideration receives additional force from
the prospect of a future Judgment. For this Knowledge and critical Observation
of Men's Hearts and Ways, is in order to a day of reckoning. (Jer. 17.10. and
Prove. 24.12.) And the serious Consideration of our being all to appear before
the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, tends to make us labor, that we may be accepted
of Him. Such Influence it had on the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. Hence our LORD
said to his Disciples, Luke 12.1, 2. Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees,
which is Hypocrisy. For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed;
neither hid, that shall not be known. A due Sense of our Accountableness to the
LORD JESUS CHRIST will awe and restrain us from Sin, and excite us unto Duty:
will make us ponder our Ways, and look well to our Goings, that we may be in
Behavior as becomes Holiness; doing nothing in any Affair, but what will bear
the Light; and so may have this for our Rejoicing, the testimony of our
Conscience --. Then shall we have Confidence toward GOD: Whereas if our Heart
condemn us, the Lord is greater than our Heart and knows all things. He will
bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret thing. Then the Thoughts of
Men's Hearts shall be revealed: Whatsoever ye have spoken in Darkness, shall be
heard in the Light; and that which you have spoken in the Ear in Closets, shall
be proclaimed upon the House-tops. The good Works of some are manifest
beforehand, and they that are otherwise, cannot be hid. And hence the
Conscience of Integrity will give us a prospect of our having boldness in the
Day of Judgment, and Confidence before the Son of Man at his appearing.

A Sense of Sincerity will give us a holy boldness now, and Access with
Confidence unto the Lord in Prayer: will embolden us to wrestle with Him for
the Blessing, unto whom we may with the utmost Security commit every good
Cause. Prove. 16.2, 3. The Lord weighs the Spirits: Commit thy Works to the
Lord, and thy Thoughts shall be established.

And it will minister to our Consolation under any Disappointment we may meet
with, if we can appeal to the Searcher of Hearts, as witness to our Sincerity.
Psalm. 142.2. When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knew my
Path. Yea, if the Lot of any be involuntarily cast under an unfaithful
Ministry, and they have born due Testimony against the same, it may be
consolatory to them to think that CHRIST knows their Works and their Patience,
and how they cannot bear them which are evil, and have tried them which say
they are Apostles and are not. (See Rev. 2.2.)

So under invidious Characters, hard Speeches and Reproaches of Men, who may
tax us with Partiality, carnal Policy, secret Intreagues and fraudulent
Practices, or with sinister Respects, and unjust Prejudices, or the like; here
a View to the future Account, and the Thought of CHRIST's all-seeing Eye, may
support and comfort us, if we are really conscious to our Integrity and
Innocence. We may appeal to Heaven, and say as the Prophet ( Jer. 20.12.) O
Lord of Hosts, that triest the Righteous, and see the Reins and Heart, --
unto Thee have I opened my Cause. We may humbly hope that GOD which knows the
Hearts, will bear us Witness. ( Acts 15.8.) And may learn to despise the
uncharitable Censures of Men, when they speak Evil of the things which they
know not. Hence that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. -- It is required in Stewards,
that a Man be found faithful. But with me it is a VERY SMALL thing that I
should be judged of you, or of Man's Judgment. But he that judges is the Lord.
Therefore judge nothing before the Time, until the Lord come, who will bring to
Light the hidden things of Darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of the
Heart: And then shall every man have Praise of GOD; every Man who has walked in
his Uprightness.

In a word, The thought of CHRIST's Inspection of us, and our Accountableness
to Him, will tend to prevent all unchristian Heats and Animosities; to allay
and hush Men's Passions, so apt to be unquiet and impetuous, when crossed in
their particular Views. It will teach us all to watch against uncharitable
Thoughts, and evil Surmisings, contrary to the Love which should be among
Brethren: and will teach us to take heed to our Ways, that we offend not with
our Tongues: will teach us to forbear all Clamor, and Wrath, and
Evil-speaking, Impatience, unreasonable Humor, and Self-willedness: And on the
contrary will teach us to deny our selves, to be kindly affectioned one to
another with brotherly Love, in honor preferring one another, being swift to
hear, slow to speak: Not to mind high things, but to condescend unto Men of low
Estate, and every one please his Neighbor for his Good, to Edification: To be
of a yielding Temper, studying to be quiet; and if it be possible, as much as
lies in us, endeavoring to live peaceably. To this End is that Exhortation,
Col. 4.6. Let your Speech be always with grace, seasoned with Salt, that ye may
know how ye ought to answer every Man. And hence those Entreaties, Phil. 4.1,
2, 5. Therefore my Brethren, dearly beloved, and longed for, my Joy and Crown,
so stand fast my dearly beloved. I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntiche, that
they be of the same Mind in the LORD. -- Let your Moderation be known to all
Men. THE LORD IS AT HAND. And agreeable are those Counsels of the Apostle
James: My Brethren have not the Faith of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, the LORD of
Glory, with Respect of Persons. -- So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall
be judged by the Law of Liberty. -- My Brethren be not many Masters; knowing
that ye shall receive the greater Condemnation. -- Do ye think that the
Scripture says in vain. The Spirit that dwells in us lusts to Envy? But
submit your selves to GOD: Resist the Devil; and grudge not one against
another, Brethren, lest ye be condemned: Behold, the Judge stands before the
Door.

I conclude with those Apostical Benedictions and Apologies, in Romans 15.

Now the GOD of Patience and Consolation grant that you be like-minded one
toward another, according to CHRIST JESUS. That ye may with one Mind and one
Mouth glorify GOD. -- The GOD of Hope fill you with all Joy and Peace in
believing, that ye may abound in Hope through the power of the HOLY GHOST. And
I my self am persuaded of you, my Brethren, that ye are full of Goodness,
filled with all Knowledge, able also to admonish one another. Nevertheless,
Brethren, I have written the more boldly unto you, in some sort, as putting you
in Mind; because of the Grace that is given me of GOD, that I should be the
Minister of JESUS CHRIST unto you. Now therefore I beseech you, Brethren, for
the LORD JESUS CHRIST's sake, and for the Love of the Spirit, that ye strive
together with me in Prayers to GOD for me, that I may with you be refreshed.
And now the GOD of Peace be with you all. Amen.

FINIS.

