A modest Reply to the Speech of Isaac Norris, Esquire delivered from the Bench, in
the Court of Common Pleas, held for the City and County of Philadelphia, the 11
th Day of September, 1727, and afterward Printed.
THE Design of this Paper is by no Means to promote Faction, or to reflect on
Mr. Norris, either in his public or private Capacity; or to offer the least
Disrespect to his Person. But as that Gentleman seems to have appealed to the
Public, by Printing the Speech he pronounced in Court the 11th Day of
September last; and as Infallibility is not to be claimed by the wisest or
greatest Man on Earth, (especially in any free Nation) the Author would fain
hope at least for Mr. Norris's Pardon, if he cannot merit his Thanks, by this
honest Attempt, to convince him and the World, of some very material Mistakes,
in the two Cases he has there stated, as well as of some severe Reflections on
the Characters of Sir William Keith, and his Council, which (it is humbly
conceived) their Conduct never deserved, on that, or any other Occasion.

NO Man can be more thoroughly persuaded of that ready Deference and Submission
which is due to all the legal, and regular Powers of Government: At the same
Time it is presumed, the odious Name of Faction does not so properly belong to
them, who promote the Cause of Liberty, by all dutiful and modest Ways, and
who, when they complain of Oppressions, are angry with Things, and not Persons;
as to those, who pretended to fear Excess of Power, while it was not
communicated to themselves, and evidently show by all their Actions, they think
it can never be high enough advanced, when they are in the Administration.

THE two Cases, if I am not entirely mistaken, were really thus.

Sir WILLIAM KEITH was arrested in an Action of the Case, by M. Fitzwilliams,
as Attorney to a Gentleman in Virginia. His Lawyer did not plead to a repealed
Act, but only read some Parts of it, that by comparing it with the Act in
Force, the Sense of the latter (which I am very much misinformed, if it was not
made industriously obscure, by the Gentleman entrusted to draw it up) might be
more clearly explained and determined.

Mr. BROWN also arrested Mr. Isaac Miranda, for violently detaining from him
his Commission of Judge of the Admiralty; (which upon his leaving the Province,
in Order to embark for England from Maryland, he had in Confidence committed to
his Custody,) but not before he had made many repeated Demands thereof, and at
last formally protested against him, by Mr. Ralph A^eton, Notary Public for
the City of Philadelphia.

THE Act, as has been already observed, is conceived in very ambiguous and
doubtful Terms; and there are so many Exceptions to the main Design of it, as
explained by the Court, in their Determination of the two Cases above
mentioned, that it is presumed, the Sense of the Lawmakers, by which some
Benefit was designed to be conferred on Freeholders in general, must have been
their chief, if not only Direction in all their Deliberations about it.

THE Quotation from the Act in Mr. Norris's Speech, is allowed to be genuine,
to which therefore the Reader is referred; and if he was, or had the Court been
of Opinion, that the Exceptions in it are so many, and so general, as to
destroy the precedent enacting Clauses and had accordingly held Miranda as well
as Sir William to Bail, it could not reasonably be censured, either as rigorous
or partial.

BUT, not to oppose the Sentiments of a Private Person to the legal Decision of
a Court, it surely will not be thought a Reflection on either the Capacity or
Candor of the Bench, to offer with all the Regard and implicit Obedience which
this Paper never meant to dispute with it, whether the Prevention of Fraud, the
previous Demand, together with the Party's being worth in a Freehold, no Ways
mortgaged, more than the Value or Debt demanded, be not the three Points the
Act seems principally to regard; neither can it in Justice be any greater
Offense to observe that the Reason of Mr. Prothonotary's being so exactly
diligent in his Duty in one Case, that it might be supported by the Court, and
so entirely remiss in the other, that it might be dismissed, (as it was) with
Charges against Mr. Brown, remains a Mystery, which is in no Part of Mr.
Norris's Speech or Supplement revealed.

THERE was another Case before this Court, which Mr. Norris is pleased to omit,
though it occasioned as much Speculation, and was generally thought altogether as
extraordinary as either of the other two; I mean that of Mr. John Brown of
Maryland. He had out of Friendship to his Neighbor, Mr. John Johnson, indorsed
a Bill payable to the latter, sold it in Town, and paid Mr. Johnson the Money:
This Bill it seems, was afterward protested, and Mr. Brown coming to Town, by
the Instigation of Mr. John Moore, was arrested for it. He immediately offered
to pay it, upon a proper Discharge; but the Bill had been sent into Maryland,
and there satisfied some Months before, by Mr. Johnson himself. Mr. Brown then
moved in Court for an immediate Trial, and though no Cause of Action appeared, he
was refused it, and held to special Bail, which rather than be at the Trouble
of giving, he deposited the Money in the Prothonotary's Hands, for this very
individual Bill, that had been thus already discharged. This is not mentioned
with the least View of aspersing the Court, whose Rules might possibly require
this strict Procedure, which however will be allowed a Misfortune to Mr.
Brown, who must be at the Fatigue, and Expense of a long Journey, to attend
another Court, when he was ready to pay what was demanded, to any one that
could legally acquit him; as certainly no one could for what had already been
complied with.

THE Supplement comes now to be considered; which contains the first Bill that
was brought into the House, for the Regulation of Elections, which with the
concluding Paragraph, is intended as a Refutation of three Positions, asserted
in two Papers, that have incurred Mr. Norris's High Displeasure: And with how
little Reason he accuses the Authors with Contradiction, and Inconsistency with
themselves, will very soon appear.

THE First Print alleges, The said Bill was only a Politic Scheme, to
obstruct the Freedom of Elections, in having the Inspectors nominated by the
Justices, and consequently by the Governor and Council.

THE other Print says, That in the Bill two Justices were added to the Sheriff,
as Judges of the Elections, to have the sole Nomination of Inspectors, etc. And
Thirdly affirms, That the ascertaining the Number of Inspectors, and laying
them under a Qualification, was from first to last, unanimously conceded to by
the whole House, without one dissenting Voice.

TO show the two Inferences drawn from the Nature and Design of the First Bill,
were solid, proper, and judicious; and could proceed from nothing but a tender
Regard for their Country's Welfare, in the Genlemen who made them, it will be
necessary, to give the Secret, and true History of that Bill, of which I am
informed, by a Member of the House, of unquestionable Honor and Veracity, that
the Copy printed in the Supplement, is by no means genuine; for the Bill as
first brought in, was so very shocking to a great Majority of the House, that
the Committee who drew it up, thought fit to suppress it; and though many Members
insisted, that it might be lodged with the Clerk of the House, and to have
Copies, their Request could never be obtained.

THE Occasion of bringing in the first Bill, and enacting the present, was
plainly this;

THE Inspectors of Elections were formerly under no Oath, or Legal
Qualifications, which so important a Trust most justly required: Therefore,
some great and designing Men, under the Pretense of reforming this Abuse, had
calculated this first Bill, to turn the Course of Elections in a new Channel;
and it is appealed to the Memory of every individual Member, if the Purport of
the first Bill is not truly related, in the two Papers aforesaid, and to the
whole World, if it is not somewhat surprising, that Mr. Norris should be able
to procure without Doors, a Copy of a Bill, that was denied to the Members
within.

BUT to take the Bill as Mr. Norris has given it us, does it not evidently
appear, that whereas the Sheriff was before, sole Judge of Elections; here are
Justices and Aldermen added, at least to ASSIST; which being a Word of very
dubious Signification, when it came to be explained by Judges, who claim the
Authority of expounding all our Laws in the last Resort, their Skill might
probably give it such a Meaning, as the House never intended, and such, as
would too well admit of the Inferences, so severely censured by Mr. Norris.

AS to the third Assertion; admitting the latter Paper had said, the Bill had
passed Nemine Contradicente, as it only does, that the ascertaining the Number
of Inspectors, and laying them under a Qualification, did not meet with one
dissenting Voice: So immaterial and slight a Mistake certainly does not amount
to what is termed an astonishing Falsehood.

BUT it is plainly Mr. Norris that has mistaken one Proposition for another;
and whether this proceeded from Inadvertence or Design, to have the Occasion of
accusing his Adversary with Falsehood, is not very easy to decide.

THE whole Matter then, concerning the Regulation of Elections, may be reduced
to a very narrow Compass, and is really no more than these two Points;

1. The House designed very wisely to lay the Inspectors under a Qualification;
and to that End, ordered a Committee to bring in a Bill; who very much
exceeding their Instructions, it for that Reason miscarried; and though the
Committee, as is before recited, thought fit to suppress their Original
Draught, and refuse the Members a Copy; yet some of them afterward had the
Assurance to complain of the Inconveniences which attended the People's
Privilege of choosing Sheriffs annually; and moved for Leave to bring in a Bill
to put that Choice under a better Regulation.

2. The laying the Inspectors under a Qualification, was never opposed by one
Member from the Beginning to the End; though a Clause or two in the present Bill
were debated, so that it could not be said to pass Nemine Contradicente.

UPON the whole, to consider the Daring Motion just before mentioned, and take
the Bill as printed in Mr. Norris's Speech to be the same as was first brought
in, it will be evident to the meanest Capacity, that the main Scope of this
Bill was not agreeable to the first Pretense of it; viz. the laying the
Inspectors under a Qualification; but truly, to have them nominated by the
Justices, and consequently by the Governor and Council; and that this was a
most sure and politic Scheme, to obstruct the Freedom of Elections, shall be
clearly demonstrated.

THE Inconvenience of having the Judges dependent on the Court, and liable to
be removed at Pleasure, was by long Experience, found so inconsistent with the
Freedom of an English Constitution, that some Years since it occasioned there,
an Act of Parliament, whereby all the Judges are constituted for Life, and
cannot be removed from their Offices, but in Cases of Male Administration.
Whether such a Regulation is practicable or expedient, in the Colonies of
America, or in this Province in particular, may possibly become the Wisdom of
the respective Legislatures to discuss. At present, it is notorious here, that
the whole Magistracy may be modelled, and changed by the Governor's Will alone.

THIS Evil our first Proprietor most prudently foresaw, and the excellent
Balance he contrived against this Excess of Power, by leaving his Governor
only the Confirmation of the People's annual Choice of their Sheriffs, an
Officer, on whom our Fortunes, Lives and Liberties so immediately depend, is an
equal and undeniable Instance, both of his Wisdom and Humanity; and whoever
would attempt to deprive us of this invaluable Blessing, stands plainly
convicted of the highest Ingratitude to the Memory of their great deceased
Benefactor, as well as of the blackest Conspiracy against the Liberty and
Happiness of their Country. The Influence that is still left the Governor on
the Sheriff, has been so very apparent in a late Case, as to make it perfect
Madness to remove the Weights into the opposite Scale, which Experience, the
best Teacher, shows to be at present sufficiently heavy.

THE Observation is as true, as common, that so much Prejudice and improper
Bias is incident to the very best Compositions of human Nature, that when the
least Way is once given toward it, Men are ever more successful, in imposing
on themselves, than others: How otherwise is it possible to imagine, that Mr.
Norris, who is very justly distinguished for the Exactness and Politeness of
his Manners, should be capable of deliberately treating a Gentleman, (who was
so lately his Governor, and to whom Clamor and Calumny it self can object no
one Action, in an Administration of Nine Years,) with the utmost Contempt in
Print; and so openly striking at the Fortune of another, who was never known to
provoke him, either in Court, or out, but has constantly behaved to him on all
Occasions, with the greatest Esteem and Respect. It were Injustice to pass by
in Silence the many useful Services the latter has already done the Public, or
the very early Progress he has made in his Profession, which leaves no Room to
doubt, that when Things shall happen to be under a more equal Management, he
will very soon obscure the Tinsel Merit of his only Rival; who, though he seems
at present to be much followed, yet his real Worth may come hereafter to be
better understood.

THE Writer would fain hope, that nothing irritating or imposing, can be
imputed to this Paper; and he assures Mr. Norris, that Truth is so absolutely
the End of all his Enquiries, that no one can be readier to point out any Error
he may have committed, than himself is to acknowledge and atone for it, to the
very utmost of his Power. He allows a greater Spirit of Party and Division has
appeared this last Year, than in the whole preceding Nine; but would by no
Means despair of the public Safety, even in the Hands to which it is at
present committed: And as a Cure for that Gentleman's melancholy Apprehensions,
we shall conclude with a diverting Story, the Application of which is left to
the serious, or facetious Reader.

A Mountebank had drawn a huge Assembly about him: Among the rest, a fat
unweildy Fellow, half stifled in the Press, would be every Fit crying out,
Lord! what a filthy Crowd is here! Pray, good People, give Way a little! Bless
me! what a De -- l has raked this Rabble together? What a plaguey squeezing is
this? Honest Friend, remove your Elbow. At last, a Weaver that stood next him
could hold no longer; A Plague confound you (said he) for an overgrown Sloven!
and who (in the De -- l's Name, I wonder, helps to make up the Crowd half so
much as your self? Don't you consider (with a P-x) that you take up more Room
with that Carcass than any Five here? Is not the Place as free for us as for
you? Bring your own Guts to a reasonable Compass (and be h -- g'd) and then
I Will engage we shall have Room enough for us all.


