Dr. Mather's ESSAY, On the Good Impressions produced by the Earthquakes.

Boanerges.

A Short ESSAY to preserve and strengthen the Good IMPRESSIONS Produced by
Earthquakes On the Minds of People that have been AWAKENED with them. With some
Views of what is to be Further and Quickly looked for.

Addressed unto the Whole People of NEW ENGLAND, who have been Terrified with
the Late EARTHQUAKES; And more Especially the Towns that have had a more
singular Share in the Terrors of them.

1 Chronicles XXIX 18. O Lord GOD, Keep this for ever in the Imagination of the
Thoughts of the Heart of thy People, and confirm their Heart unto thee.

BOSTON: Printed for S. Kneeland, and Sold at his Shop in King Street. 1727.

Good Impressions cultivated.
Psalm. LXXVIII. 34, 36, 37. When He slew them, then they sought Him, and they
returned and enquired early after GOD.

Nevertheless, they did flatter Him with their Mouth, and they lied unto Him
with their Tongues.

For their Heart was not Right with Him, neither were they steadfast in His
Covenant.


AND this was the Wretched Issue of all the GOOD IMPRESSIONS which the Terrors
of GOD had made upon them. It Is the story of what has been done millions of
times; of what is daily done by millions of Men! O! may we, on whom the End of
the World is come, and who have had these things written for our Admonition,
take warning from it!

The Psalm which relates the matter, contains a compendious Church History, of
Divine Favors conferred, and of Divine Judgments inflicted, on the Nation of
Israel, from their Bondage in Egypt even to the Reign of David. The Rebellions
of that People, against the glorious JEHOVAH, who made them His People, and His
wondrous Patience, and Mercy, and Justice, toward them, under these
Rebellions, are the main subject of this History.

In the particular Article we have now before us;

Behold, first, a poor People under Good Impressions in a time of Danger; and
from an Apprehension of the Glorious GOD coming to slay them. He slew some of
them; Yea, an Horrendous EARTHQUAKE, was the way wherein He slew a Number of
them. The Survivers were a while under Good Impressions from such occurrences.
When they were afraid, that GOD was going to slay them, yea, to Damn them, for
their Sins, Then they Bethought themselves; Then they thought they would become
the Diligent Seekers of GOD; Then they thought they would no more Despise their
SAVIOR. But then,

Behold, next, what becomes of all these Good Impressions, when the Danger
seems to be a little over with them. They are not Effectual ones; They are not
Abiding ones; They all go off, with miserable Demonstrations, that their Hearts
were the same they were before. They are not Sincere, and so they are not
steadfast in the Declarations they made, when the Good Impressions were upon
them. It becomes apparent, that all their short lived Piety was but Flattery.
The Good Impression what are they but a Vapor, which appears for a little
while, and soon vanishes away? They soon Evporate. The Sinners in a very little
while are just such Murmurers and Infidels, as they were before.

My Friends; There is a melancholy observation that I have made; A grievous
Vision is declared unto me! What I have observed, must be the DOCTRINE which I
am now to insist upon; But which, Oh! Allow me to say, I beseech you, Brethren,
to do all you can for the practical Confutation of. It Is This;

The sentiments of PIETY, and the GOOD IMPRESSIONS, which People have in the
Time of DANGER, [Say, The Time of EARTHQUAKE] are too easily, too usually
Forgotten, when they think the DANGER is over with them.

There was a Notorious Exemple of this DOCTRINE, in the Infamous Pharaoh, whom
a Sovereign GOD raised up, that He might show forth His power upon Him. GOD was
Revenging on the Egyptians, the Injuries that had been done by them unto His
Israelites. No less than Ten Remarkable Plagues did the wrath of the Almighty
send upon them: and probably all of them within the space of one Month. A Month
devoured them! So memorable were these Plagues, upon the Egyptians, that the
Philistines Four Hundred years after spoke of them, with some Consternation;
Yea, so memorable, that we find in Pagan Antiquity, the Egyptians did for many
Hundreds of years with Mourning, and Howling, and lighted Candles, ^^ep up an
Anniversary Commemoration of them. They were such terrifying Plagues, that though
Setho^^, the Successor of the King who was now upon the Throne, did celebrated
Exploits in the East, in the first Nine years of the Israelites being in the
Wilderness, yet he durst not meddle with a little Handful of Israelites, in
whose cause the GOD of Heaven had so appeared. One of those plagues, was
accompanied, with terrible Thunders, that filled the Land with Flaming Fire,
and scattered Hot Thunderbolts upon it. Pharaoh too, the King, whom the old
Chronologi^s distinguish by the Name of Amosis, was Thunder struck, into some
Sentiments of PIETY, and showed some Good Impressions upon them. Pharaoh
changes his Note: Moses, The Man of GOD, whom Pharaoh hated above all the Men
in the World, even him does Pharaoh under his Good Impressions apply unto, and
ask his Prayers for him. The Servant of GOD, foresaw and foretold what the Good
Impressions would come to. Said he, Exodus IX. 29, 30. The Thunder shall cease.
-- But I know that you will not yet fear the LORD GOD. Methinks, I see Pharaoh
Trembling while he hears the Almighty Thundering, and sees the Corruscations in
the Heavens, with which the Lord GOD Omnipotent, can strike the most haughty
Monarch Dead in a Moment; [And before now, He has done so] He Trembles; -- And
who would not? He cries out, I am sorry that I have abused the People of GOD! I
am sorry that I have despised the Servants of GOD! I am sorry that I have
detained any thing that GOD has called me to part withal. I will do any thing
that the Great GOD would have me to do! Well; The Thunders go over: Pharaoh
outlives the Thunders. And now, How is it? Alas, He is Pharaoh still?

Thus it is, even among Israelites as well as Egyptians. People who apprehend
themselves in Dangers of a deadly Aspect upon them, do commonly Think and Speak
many Good Things. But they do almost as commonly Forget those Good Things, when
their Apprehensions are over. The Thoughts and the Frames, which are frequent
with People, when they are frighted by Earthquakes and by other Dangers, are
soon Forgotten! Soon Forgotten! The Frights are no sooner over, but People
Forget the Thoughts, and the Frames, and the Vows, to which the Terrors of GOD
awakened them. The Hebrew Name for, MAN, signifies, Forgetful Man. I mind this
Elegance and Emphasis, in the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. VIII. 4. What is
Forgetful Man, that thou Remembrest him! O Forgetful Man, Thou show what
thou art, by nothing more than thy soon Forgetting of the Good Impressions,
which Dangers make upon thee.

. We will begin with a more General Assertion. DANGERS of all sorts, especially
all deadly Dangers, often are most Hypocritically played withal. O the Hypocrisy
in the Heart of Man, which is Deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked! All sorts of Dangers, do frequently drive People into some Sentiments
and Purposes of PIETY: But when the Dangers are over, the Sentiments are worn
away, the Purposes are laid aside; the PIETY is no further prosecuted; and the
Religion which was but a flash, is all forgotten.

First, We see, Dangers make People Devout and Serious. People use to be
devoutly disposed, when deadly Dangers are impending over them. Affliction and
Affrightment is how often, the Mother of Devotion! I wish, it may not be said,
a Spurious Devotion. Imminent and sensible Dangers of Death, make Men grow
Thoughtful; and it will be strange, if the Advance of the Leviathan do not
cause them to purify themselves. They whom a sense of Death approaching does
not compel to some Sober Thoughts, what are they? Hardened and Frantic -- one
cannot say, What! -- Not Rational Men. They do not act as Creatures exercising
Reason, who cast off all Thoughts of Religion, when they have Death staring on
them, scaring of them. It was once expostulated with a Malefactor in the Jaws
of Death: Luke XXIII. 40. Do not thou Fear GOD, seeing thou art under
Condemnation? But that was a Monster of a Man. Shall it be said of a Man, He
does not Fear GOD, when he is in a Danger that looks like a sentence of Death
upon him? Verily, 'Twill be a very monstrous Character.

We will Enquire, first, after the Ground, then, after the Proof, of this
unhappy matter.

First; The Ground of it, is, A Conscience excited by Dangers unto its
Operations. In deadly Dangers, the Conscience comes to operate. By Dangers, the
Minds of Men are chased from those things which drowned the Murmurs of their
Conscience. Yea, in Dangers, People are compelled not only to bear the Murmurs
of Conscience, but also the Whispers are turned into Thunders. There is a
Preacher in the Bosom of every Man; and upon Dangers, this Preacher becomes a
Thunderer.

There are Three Things, which the Thundering Voice of CONSCIENCE will speak to
People, when deadly Dangers are upon them.

One Admonition of Conscience, is This; O Man, There is the Providence of GOD
in the Dangers that have now overtaken thee. Dangers don't come, nor so much as
a little Bird fall into them, without the Providence of GOD. There is the Hand
of GOD, in all the Dangers that are brought upon thee. GOD has taken thee into
his Hand, when be thus brings Dangers upon thee. Conscience now subscribes to
That; Amos III. 6. Shall there be Evil in a City, and the Lord has not done
it! O Thou exposed one, GOD is the Doer, in all the Evil that is hanging over
thee.

A Second Admonition of Conscience, is This: It Is a GOD offended by thy Sin,
who sends thy Dangers upon thee. Thou art a Sinner. Thy Sin has been an Offense
unto GOD; Thy Sin makes thee obnoxious unto the Anger of GOD; lays thee open
unto the Vengeance of GOD. It is a Thing of the greatest Importance, that the
Displeasure of GOD, should not remain burning against thee; A displeased GOD is
an Adversary, which -- how can thy Hands be strong, or how can thy Heart
endure, to encounter with Him Conscience now subscribes to Thee; Prove. XIII.
21. Evil pursues Sinners.

A Third Admonition of Conscience, is This: REPENTANCE, REPENTANCE! That is the
most likely way to escape thy Dangers. O wicked one, Forsake thy ways; O unjust
one, Forsake thy Thoughts; Return to the Lord, and He will have mercy! If thou
Repentest not, thou may Fear, that the Arrows prepared on the bent Bow of
GOD, will be let fly upon thee. The Language of Conscience now is That; Jon.
III. 8, 9. Turn every one from his evil way, -- who can tell, but GOD may turn
away from His fierce Anger, that we perish not.

When the Conscience begins to Thunder at this rate, and make a Noise like the
hideous Rumblings of an Earthquake, it must needs throw the Threatened People
into some Religious Dispositions.

As a Supplement unto this Meditation, let this be added. The Glorious GOD
throws Men into Dangers on this very Design; To make them hearken unto what He
speaks by the Mouth of His Deputy, their Conscience, to them. Truly, Syrs, this
is the very Errand that your Dangers are sent upon. The Conscience in Man, may
complain, as in Jer. XXII. 21. I spoke unto thee in thy presperity; But thou
said, I will not hear. Men are Deaf to Conscience; It Groans, it Cries, it
Thunders, and they do not regard it. GOD now does cast Men into Dangers on this
Intent; Man, Hear now, what thy Conscience has to say unto thee: It has a
Message from GOD to thee! From this it is, that Men so seem to be Religious,
when Dangers are upon them.

Secondly; The Proof of it; For this we will repair unto Experience. And, Hear
this, O all ye People, every one of you: May we not say, It Is your own
Experience. The Scripture tells us, of some; Isa. XXVI. 16. Lord, In Trouble
have they visited thee; they poured out a Prayer, when thy Chastening was upon
them. Yea, but our Experience will every day tell us, Lord, How many are they,
who when they are afraid of Trouble, do say, They will visit GOD every day as
long as they live! How many are they who pour out a Prayer, when Danger is upon
them! O that the Sermon of this Day, might be a Sermon to bring unto
Remembrance! How many, O our dear People, How many of you, may Remember the
Dangers, wherein you were at that pass; Jer. II. 20. Thou said, I will not
Transgress! Remember you not, what you said, when you lay Sick, and like to Die
of your Sickness, and pale Death looked you in the Face, and you looked on
yourselves as deprived of the Residue of your years, and Summoned before the
Tribunal of GOD? Then you said, Oh! If GOD will spare my life, I will do
nothing but serve the GOD of my life: I will hate and loathe and shun all the
Sin that once I loved; and lead a life of all Godliness and Honesty! Remember
you not, what you said, when a Storm at Sea had almost swallowed you up, and
you were cast into Horror, by the Horrible Tempest; Your Soul was melted
because of Trouble; You saw yourselves going down into the deep Waters; You
feared you were going down into the Eternal Burnings? Then you said; Oh! If GOD
will please, that I may outlive this Death, I will never Sin against Him any
more as heretofore! I will do nothing that may render my Death uneasy and
unwelcome to me!

The Memorandums are not over yet. My Friend, Remember you not, what you said,
when you were in the Land and the Hand of your Enemies; you sat in Darkness,
and in the shadow of Death; and you had little Hope of ever being again in the
Arms of those, who were now put far from you? Then you Cried unto the Lord; and
you said; Oh! If the Lord will Restore me to my Liberty, with what an Enlarged
Heart shall I run the way of His Commandments.

And will the Daughters of Eve give me leave to be a Remembrancer unto Them?
When the Time of your Travail and your Trouble, and the perils of Child bearing
drew near, and you conceived yourselves entering the Valley of the shadow of
Death, You Then said, Behold, The Handmaid of the Lord! If the Lord carry me to
and through my Time, I will forever behave my self as becomes an Handmaid of the
Lord.

In fine, Do you Remember nothing of what you thought when you self the Earth
trembling and rumbling in a tremendous Earthquake under you? Did not your
Hearts then smite you for your keeping at a distance from your SAVIOR; and for
the various Miscarriages of an ungodly and unrighteous Life? And was it not the
purpose of your Hearts, I will not offend any more?

If you don't Remember what you said, GOD Remembers it; it is all down in the
Book of His Remembrance. Perhaps, New Dangers and Sorrows are coming upon you,
to bring it unto your own Remembrance; In the latter Days ye shall consider it!

I must now pass on to a Second Remark. But, one that is a Lamentation, and
shall be for a Lamentation.

Secondly; Men use quickly to Forget how Devout they were, when their Dangers
were upon them. It Was all but a Religious Pang. Ah, Deceitful Pang! like the
Morning Cloud, and the Early Dew; It passes away. We read of some, Psalm. CVI.
13. They soon forgot His Works. Even so, Men soon Forget what workings they had
in their own Hearts, when they saw the Hand of GOD lifted up to smite them.

Of this thing, we are every where entertained with a mournful Evidence. The
Bad lives of Men, make it most notoriously Evident. The most of Men lead Bad
lives: They do not Live unto GOD. With what pungency may they feel it said unto
them; Can you say, That you lead such a Life as you said, you should and would,
when Destruction from GOD was a Terror to you? When our SAVIOR was in the
Temple, the Hearers that were Convicted in their own Conscience by what He
said, Went out, and, Lo, He was left alone. Oh, How far, how far! -- would it
go toward breaking up the Congregation, if all should go out, who may be
convicted in their own Conscience, that they do not live, as under the Terrors
of GOD, they said, They would. A great Man once putting that Case to a good
Man, How shall I order my life, that I may glorify GOD? He only gave him this
Answer; Live as when you lately apprehended your self a dying, you thought you
would live, if GOD would let you live. There are many who do not glorify GOD.
And we may conclude, They don't live, as in their Dangers, they said, They
would. Where one is Reformed, a Thousand are as they were!

But, whence does this come to pass? It Is, From the Spirit of the Old Covenant
in Men's Inclinations and Resolutions. When the People of old were appalled at
the Lightnings and Thunders and Earthquakes of the Burning Mountain, they said,
All that the Lord shall speak we will do. But it was with the Spirit of the Old
Covenant that they said it. GOD therefore said upon it; Deuteronomy. V. 28. 29. I have
heard the Voice of the Words of this People, which they have spoken; They have
well said, all that they have spoken: Oh! That there were such an Heart in
them! -- Even so. People remaining yet in the old Covenant of Works, will say,
This and That, and they will say very well in all that they speak. Oh! But
there is no more than a Voice of Words, in all that they have spoken: There
wants a New Heart in them; There is no Heart in them to do what they say.
Frighted People say, that they are Fallen out with Sin. But it is only from
some External Compulsion upon them. The SPIRIT of GOD has not yet Internally
Changed the Biass of their Minds: The Love of Sin yet reigning in their Hearts
is not extinguished. They say, They will set themselves to do the Things that
please GOD. But they set themselves about it in their own strength. And thus,
All presently comes to Nothing!

No Dangers are enough to Convert a Sinner. I have seen Men brought from the
Gallows, who yet have not been brought from the Wicked Courses which had
brought them to the Gallows. In going to their expected Execution, they have
declaaed unto me, That they had rather Die that Afternoon, than return to the
ways of wickedness which they formerly lived in. They have had a Reprieve, and
a Pardon. But how after That! Alas, I have seen the Dogs return to their vomit;
and go on still in their old ways of wickedness. Ah, sinful Men! If One went
unto them from the Dead, yet they will not Repent. The Devils and the Damned,
with the hideous Chains and Flames of the Horrible Pit appearing to them, would
not cause them to Repent. Should Hell be set open before their Eyes, and should
they be held over the Smoke of the Torment which Ascends forever and ever,
t'wil do nothing to take out the Hellish Tang of Sin which is in their Souls.
Till that be taken out by the Spirit of Grace, there will be no Frighting Men
out of their Sin. He that is Filthy will be Filthy still. When the Dangers are
over, you will find it so!

We read of mighty Legions, who after they have been Damned for seven Thousand
years, and have been actually, in the direful Torments of the Damned for one
thousand of them, yet being let loose again, they play the Devil again just as
they did a Thousand years before; and again attempt with a Satanic Assault of
Temptations to disturb the Camp of the Saints, and with Diabolical Delusions
and Stratagems, draw in those in the Hidden places of the Earth, who go up from
under the Breadth of the Earth, to join with them in their War against the Holy
ones. Hell it self will not fetch out the sinful Tendencies, in the Souls of the
wicked. Not only if One went from the Dead unto the wicked that are not yet
gone to the Dead, they will yet refuse to Repent, but also if they that are
there were permitted themselves to go from the Dead, yet even These would not
Repent: Except with New Lives they should also have New Hearts given them from
Above. They that go down to Hell, with the Lusts in them which were the Weapons
of their War, and have their Iniquities in their very Bones, if they that have
been shut up in the Prison, should after many Days be Visited, and Released;
they would again be as wicked as they were before.

Be sure, Earthquakes alone, will not cure the Love of Sin in Men, and cause
them to Turn and Live unto GOD. If People should feel what may force them to
flee for their Lives, with the utmost confusion, from an all-devouring
Earthquake, -- As they fled from before the Earthquake, in the Days of Uzziah
King of Judah, -- This will not cause them to flee from their Sins. If People
should see what is not now a New Thing, the Earth open its Mouth, and swallow
up their Neighbors by Hundreds at a Morsel, and a multitude going down alive
into the Pit, and the Earth closing upon them, yet in flying from the Tents of
wicked Men at their lamentable Cry, Lest the Earth swallow up them also, -- it
would be no New Thing, if they do not fly from the Ways of Wicked Men. Are
there not Nefandous Instances of People continuing in the Actual Commission of
Disorderly Things, even in the very Time of an Earthquake? Yea, People making
themselves Drunk, and Reeling to and fro with strong Drink, while the Earth has
just been Reeling to and fro like a Drunkard under them, and roaring against
them? And Robberies committed, even while the Earthquake has afforded an
Opportunity for the Thieves to exert their cursed. Faculty? Hardened Sinners!
There is no Reclaiming of them!

It is a Remark very near akin to This. How do amazing Thunders usually
operate? People are Afraid even with much amazement under the Thunderclaps;
Afraid of Irresistible and Far-terebrating Thunderbolts. When the Lightning is
directed unto the Ends of the Earth, and after it a Voice roreth; and God
Thunders with the Voice of His Excellency; God Thunders marvellously with His
Voice; Lo, At this our Hearts tremble, and are even removed out of their place.
But how quickly, how sadly, do the Thunders lose their Efficacy! The Thunders
do cease, and yet Men do not Fear the Lord God, as when it Thundered, they say,
They would.

O the Inconstancy of our Carnal minds! Constant only in their Enmity to GOD!
People seem to be very Good while they have the loud peals of the Thunders
discharging over them; and they fear lest the Next Flash of the Lightenings
render them a Pillar of Salt. But they are not the same after the Thunders are
over, that they were in the Time of the Thunders. -- How often have I thought!
-- O! If my dear Neighbors were disposed after the Thunders as they are under
them! -- How Happy would they be! How Holy would they be! What a Religious
Neighborhood; and how full of PIETY!

From this Remark on Thunders, I return to Earthquakes, which are of the same
Family with them: And, my Remark upon them is, That it is very plain, the
Earthquakes which have lately shook the Earth under us for many Hundreds of
Miles, and which in many places have been continued for diverse Weeks together,
have produced very Good Impressions on many Thousands of Minds. If there be a
few Stocks and Stones and Prodigies of Impiety, which have had no Good
Impressions made upon them from the mighty Voice of GOD sent forth in these
Earthquakes, verily, they are not only most unaccountably Sottish Wretches, but
even worse than Brutish ones: I say, worse than Brutish ones; For it might
have affected even those profane Indolents themselves, to have seen the Horrors
which these Earthquakes raised in the Brutal World, at the Moments of the
Tremors: How the greater and the smaller Cattle, and the very Dogs themselves,
expressed themselves moved, and horribly terrified, when they felt the Earth
moving under them. They that now had no Awe upon them, and no Sense of a
Glorious GOD and their Duty to Him, and felt no Good Impressions on their
Minds, what shall be thought of them! -- I suppose, there were very few such
Monsters to be seen, in our Land. No; There have been Good Impressions made
upon the Minds of People every where in Town and Country. The like was never
seen in our Land! The many that fly into the Covenant of GOD, as unto the Horus
of the Altar, that they may be sheltered from the Mischiess of Earthquakes
there, most certainly run thither with Good Impressions on their Minds. Yea,
there are multitudes with whom it is a Time of such Good Impressions as they
never felt in their Lives before. But now, O! The Extreme Hazard which there
may be, left these Good Impressions do quickly die away, quickly wear off,
quickly come to nothing: Extreme Hazard, lest People anon be just what they
were before, and will not yet Fear the Lord GOD, whose Voice has thus loudly
called upon us. For my part, my Heart more trembles at this, than at an
Earthquake. --

^ Wherefore from Asserting, we will proceed now to Exborting. And, Oh! Suffer
the Word of EXHORTATION, which is now in a Few Words to call upon you.

We are very sollicitous, that when our Earthquakes are over, the Good
Impressions which they have caused may not be over too. But what was it I said?
-- when our Earthquakes are over! Who can say when That will be! I will mention
a Thing which is not generally known among us. The Celebrated Earthquake, which
terrisied New England in the latter end of January, between the years 1662. and
1663. not only reached unto Canada to the Northward of us, and, as the French
Historian says, Occasioned incredible Desolations on the surface of the Earth
for above four hundred Leagues throughout that Country: But also continued
Five or Six Months together. Who can say, what may be our Portion? I am sure,
there can be nothing more seasonable, than the Exhortation I am coming to.

We read concerning Two Ministers, upon whom our Lord put the Name of
BOANERGES. The Name will signify, Sons of Earthquake, as well as what we
commonly take it, Of Thunder. Our Lord in imposing that Name on these two
Ministers, might have Respect unto that Prophecy, I will shake all Nations, and
the desire of all Nations shall come. These Ministers might have a Notable
Delivery, as Nazianzen intimates, by the Advantage whereof what they delivered
might come like Thunder on the Hearers. But this is not all; There were to be
mighty Commotions even like those of an Earthquake, in subserviency to the
Interests of the Gospel; and our Lord would make a singular use of these
Ministers in those Commotions; who were to carry the Gospel with a Force like
that of Thunder also, through the Jewish Nation.

Oh! That one of the Boanerges were here to have the management of this
EXHORTATION; and that he who is a Son of Earthquake, in Essays to serve the
Intentions of the present Commotions, might be a Son of Thunder, in bringing
with it the Right Words that shall be Forcible!

The EXHORTATION that now speaks unto you, and must not be Forgotten, is This.
Let those that have had Good Impressions on their Minds from the Earthquakes
which have newly shaken us, Beware lest they lose the Good Impressions;
Exceedingly Beware, Infinitely Beware, lest when they imagine the Earthquakes
are ceased, it appear that that their Heart was not Right in, and not Reached
by, the Good Impressions, nor were they steadfast; But they Forget what they
Thought and Said and Vowed, when the Earthquakes were upon them.

At the Time of the Battle between those two Grand Robbers, which were
disputing the Empire of the World, there was a Great Earthquake: But the
Business of the Battle so engaged the combatants, that they took not the least
Notice of it. Few People have been so Busy, or so Drowsy, or so Stupid, as to
take no Notice of the Repeted Shocks and Roars, wherein GOD has from a
Trembling Earth sent forth His Thundering mighty Voice unto us. I wish, we may
not be so Busy about our Worldly Affairs and Pleasures, as to take too little
Notice of what that Thundering Voice has declared unto us. But we read of such a
Thing as That, Hos. VII. 16. They are like a Deceitful Bow. The Thing whereof
there is a most grievous Hazard, is, That the Wicked Bent of many Minds for the
ways of Sin, having by the Earthquakes had some strain upon it, upon the
ceasing of the Earthquakes, the Deceitful Bow will return where it was; the
strain being taken off, they will return to their old Bent, and they will go on
still in their Trespasses.

O our dear People, and all you that have had the Right Thoughts of the
Righteous by the Earthquakes at all awakened in you, Our Hearts Desire and
Prayer to GOD for you, is, That the Good Impressions upon you may not end, in
any thing short of a Thorough TURN to GOD and CHRIST and PIETY: And that such a
View of Things as you had in the Minutes of the Earthquakes, may in an
Effectual Work of Grace, abide with you; and the Fruit thereof be, that you
will Fear GOD all the Days that you live upon Earth; and pass the Time of your
sojourning here in the Fear, not of Earthquakes, but of the glorious GOD, who
has the deep places of the Earth in His Almighty Hand.

In order to THIS, let these Admonitions of the Lord find a due Entertainment
with you.

I. A NEW HEART, a NEW HEART, is the First Thing to be made sure of. Be sure,
that you do not rest in a Superficial, Defective, Delusive Work, or stop short
in any thing less than a Thorough CONVERSION, from the Error of your way, with
a Work of Real and Vital PIETY upon you. A lamentable thing, is that work of
the Wicked, which is a Deceitful Work. If the Heart be not Right, O Israelite,
thou will not be steadfast, in adhering to thy Good Impressions. A Thorough
CHANGE of STATE, and therefore and therewith a Thorough CHANGE of HEART, is
requisite, that so the Good Impressions made upon you, may continue with you;
In these is continuance, and so you shall be saved! Without a principle of
PIETY, restoring to the Glorious GOD His Throne in your Souls, your Good
Impressions from the Earthquakes, will be a sort of Mushrooms rising from the
Earth, and presently Wither, and Moulder, and Crumble, and come to nothing.
Unless the Love of GOD, which is the Root of the Righteous be implanted for a
living Principle of PIETY in your Souls, your Good Impressions will be like the
Alcherva of Jonah, and Wither in a Night or two.

When the Earth was in its Convulsions, and threw you into yours, This was the
First Thing, which threw you into Agonies; Alas, I am a miserable
Unregenerate; I am still in my sins; I am not Reconciled unto GOD; I am falling
into those Hands which it is a fearful Thing to fall into! And This is the
First Thing that you have to look to. Oh! Look to This; That you may have a
Thorough CONVERSION to GOD and CHRIST, and a Life of that Acquaintance with
Him, whereby Good will come unto you.

But, How shall This be come at? Very surprising is that Command; Ezekiel. XVI.
31. Make your selves a New Heart. What? When, O Sinner, Thou art Feeble and
sore Broken, and maystly Roaring by reason of the Desperate Wickedness in thy
Heart, from which, none but an Almighty GOD, Oh! wretched one that thou art! --
None but an Almighty GOD can deliver thee! It is none but an GOD even one who
can transform Stone into Flesh, that can give thee Another Heart; None but one
who can Create a whole World, can Create a Clean Heart, and can make a New
Heart in a Sinner that is Accustomed to do Evil. Wherefore when our GOD bids
thee, Make thy self a New Heart; His meaning is, Look unto me, to make it for
thee! The Good Work begins, in an Hearty Weeping and Making Supplication to GOD
for a New Heart. Seeing and Feeling and Owning thy own Death, and lying among
the slain, Oh! Make thy Moans and thy Groans, even the Groans of a deadly
wounded Man, unto a GOD, whose Name is, The Lord GOD, Merciful and Gracious and
abundant in Goodness. Groan at this rate unto Him; Turn thou me, O Lord, and I
shall be Turned! O Great GOD, Make me a New Creature, and bestow a New Heart
upon me! It looks Hopefully, -- as if the Fear of GOD were actually beginning
in thee, and as if the Beginning of Wisdom were dawning on thee, when thou art
come into a desire to Fear His Name. The Good Work has its Beginning in the
desire of it. GOD will be attentive to the Prayer of such as desire to Fear His
Name. Life is beginning to show it self in Breathing after it.

In short, The Method of CONVERSION is This. The Foundation of the work must be
laid in a deep Humiliation of Soul, confessing, That thou art Unable to Turn
unto GOD, and Unworthy that He should enable thee, and yet most Worthy to
perish if thou do it not. Being thus Humbled unto the Dust, now Cry from thence
to the glorious GOD. Quicken me, O GOD of Sovereign Grace, Quicken me, to Turn
unto thee, and Fly unto my SAVIOR. And hereupon Try, whether He do not Help
thee. Try particularly, whether thou can not give an Hearty Answer to the
Calls of the Gospel. The Gospel calls, Be sorry for thy Sin. Try whether thou
can not Heartily say, Lord, I am sorry, I am sorry, that I have wandered from
thee! The Gospel calls, Let the great Salvation which thy JESUS has for thee,
be welcome to thee. Try whether thou can not Heartily say; Lord, The Benefits
of a JESUS, are all welcome to me, all welcome to me! The Gospel calls, Resolve
upon a Life of Obedience to GOD all thy Days. Try whether thou can not
Heartily say, Lord, The way of thy Commandments, with paying of acknowledgments
to Thee in all my ways, I Resolve upon it, I Resolve upon it! -- Behold, Thy
Calling and Election made sure in thy Arrival unto this.

To set the Matter in a yet further light; The CONVERSION so importunately
urged for, is, A Translation from the First Adam to the Second Adam. Wherefore,
O Convert passing from Death to Life; Get thy Heart very strongly affected with
the Evil Circumstances, into which thy Fall from GOD in the First Adam has
reduced and ruined thee. Let Horror take hold on thee when thou do behold the
Universal Disorder and Corruption with which the Poison of the old Serpent so
imbibed has infected thee; and behold the Innumerable Transgressions and
Rebellious wherein thou have wickedly denied the GOD that is Above. Go on to
behold the violated Law of GOD binding thee over to suffer all the Evil that
pursues sinners: Behold the powers of Darkness enslaving of thee, and thy Soul
cistempered and languishing with grievous Diseases; Behold how obnoxious thou
art unto the Strange Punispment reserved for the workers of Iniquity in a
Future World. And now, Fly away to the Second Adam for thy Help under all these
Distresses; Help laid on one that is mighty to save. Behold the Blessed JESUS
offering to take thee and make thee His own, and save thee to the uttermost.
Beg of Him, and Hope in Him, That by the Sacrifice which he made of Himself on
the Accursed Tree, and by Influences, derived from Him, all the Miseries
conveyed unto thee from the Forbidden Tree, may be releeved and removed. Put
thy Trust in the Blessed JESUS, for a life that shall be the Reverse of all the
Death, which the unhappy parent of thy Flesh has entailed upon thee. Entreat of
Him; O my SAVIOR, let thy Spirit fill me with the life of GOD. Entreat of Him;
O my SAVIOR, Fit me for, and fetch me to, all the spiritual Blessings of the
Heavenly places. Rely on Him, as thy Redeemer. And this with a Comfortable
Persuasion of thy Favorable Reception with Him. Thus a CONVERSION is
accomplished.

But yet, efteem it not accomplished until you can say those Things, which are
the Three Grand MAXIMS of Real and Vital PIETY.

The First. The serving and pleasing of the Glorious GOD, and my being and my
doing of what may be a grateful Spectacle unto Him, who is acquainted with all
my ways, is what I close withal as the chief END, ^^^ch all my Motions are to
center in.

The Second. My Fyes are continually to a Glorious CHRIST, that I may be made
Righteous and be made Holy by Him; and I long to have His Image instamped on me.

The Third. I do not indulge my self in any Ill Frame toward my Neighbor, but
am willing to do as I would be done unto. --

Now, It is Finished! Now, thou shall never be moved. Thus doing the Will of
GOD thou shall Abide forever; And so shall the Good Impressions that He has
made upon thee.

II. Whatever Miscarriages in your Lives, you felt your Hearts, when the
Earthquakes rowsed them, smite you for, Oh! Forsake them, Oh! Reform them;
After the Earthquakes are over, Oh! Don't return unto those Miscarriag^s. When
the Earth was Trembling, were you conscious to no Miscarriages, which the
praesages of a Judgment to come set you a Trembling for? Perhaps, the Rumbling
Earth, which turned the Night of your pleasure, [unto many, Too much so!] into
Terror, made the Murmur in your ears, which, once made the Ears of a Shimei to
tingle; I. King. II. 44. Thou know all the wickedness which thy Heart is
privy to. The Wretch who in the Defiances which by Swearing and Cursing and the
Language of black Fiends, proclaimed a Tongue set on Fire of Hell; in the Time
of the Eartquakes, doubtless he felt his Heart misgive him; The Great GOD whom
I have insulted and affronted, may now send me down into that Fire of Hell,
where a drop of water to cool the scorches of my Blasphemous Tongue will be in
vain wished for! The Beast which threw away so many precious Hours at the
Tavern, and was Drun^^^^ often with the Liquors wherein is Besotment, and was
intoxscated so often with a Cup of Excess; in the Time of Earthquakes,
doubtless he felt his Heart misgive him; A Just GOD now makes me stagger by
other means than I use to do it; and gives me a Cup of Trembling! How shall I
drink off the Dregs of the Cup which there is in the Hand of the Lord for the
wicked of the Earth? Such as walked after the Flesh in the Lusts of
Uncleanness, in the Time of the Earthquakes doubtless felt their misgiving
Hearts griping of them, and saying, Am not I one of the Filthy Inbatritants
under which the Earth is defiled? Is there not a Day of Judgment coming wherein
such wickeness as mine is to be punished? Shall not I have my part in the
perdition of ungodly Men, when the Day comes that shall burn like (...) Oven?
The False-dealer, and such as had Rob^ed or Earthquakes felt their misgiving
Hearts reminding them of their Dishonest Practices, and saying; Have thou
stole? O steal no more; But Restore as soon and as far as thou can, what has
been stolen.

The Great and lewd City of Lima, some while ago, felt an Earthquake that sunk
a large part of it, and brought in the Sea hideously rolling over it. In their
Great Perplexity upon it, the Survivers professed much Attrition of Soul, and
laid aside the Quarrels that were among them, and cried out, Our Oppression,
our Injustice, and our Extravagances have brought all this upon us. Those poor
Spaniards may be our Monitors. -- But I have not said all. The Sabbath-breaker,
doubtless in the Time of the Earthquakes felt some Twitch^^^^d some Wishes of a
Misgiving Heart; The Holy GOD, who will not let the Earth rest under me, now lets
me know, that if I go on to break His Holy Rest, He will send me where I shall
have no Rest, neither Day nor Night, but the smoke of the Torment will ascend
forever and ever. Lord, Help me to Sabbatize better than I use to do. But, What
am I speaking of? Of SABBATIZING! The Thing which pure and undefiled RELIGION,
either Lives or Dies withal. Our Sabbath! -- NEW ENGLAND, Thy Sabbath, it is thy
Beauty and thy Defense. Oh! let nothing of This World ever take away thy Crown.
Let thy Sabbath be thrown away way, and sinned away, and an Ichabod will soon
be written on all thy Glory. -- Sirs, I cannot go on, without speaking a Good
Word for the Best of Days. -- Where, where are the True New-English
Sabbatizers? Must we repair unto the Sepulchers of our Fathers to look for
them? Where are the Householders that Remember the Sabbath, and make all within
their Gates to do so? Where are the Nehemiahs, who will do all they can to lay
Restraints upon those, who would bring Wrath upon us by profaning the Sabbath?
Can the Ministers of the Gospel do no more, that the Remote Inhabitants of
their Parishes, where many stay at or near the Meeting Houses all the Time that
intervenes between the two public Meetings, may be put into the Best Method of
spending the Holy Time in the Best manner; and keep up the zeal of Sabbatizing?
If we will not Rest with and in GOD on His Day, GOD will not suffer His Earth to
Rest under us, or permit us to Rest upon it. A plain Countryman once being
changed and raised into a Prophet of GOD, the Date of his (...) phecies was,
Two Years before the [Famous Uzztan] Earthquake. Now, having foretold, That in
that Earthquake, the Lord would Rore out of Zion, he mentions the
Transgressions that would call for such a thing. One of them is This; [Amos
VIII. 5.] Ye say, when will the Sabbath be over? They could not forbear
entrenching on the Sabbath with secular Affairs, or sensual Frolicks. It
follows, And shall not the Earth Tremble for this? -- An Earthquake ensues upon
it.

I will not have this called, A Digression. However, I will go no further in
This; but go on to say, We read, I. Joh. III. 20. If our Hearts Condemn us, GOD
u Greater than our Hearts, and know^th all Things. Now, Bring Things to mind, O
Transgressors. In the Time of the Earthquakes, the Glorious GOD, set up his
Tribunal in your Hearts, and set you as before His Judgment Seat. Every Thing
in your ways, which the light of GOD in your Hearts, then Condemned as an Evil
Thing, Oh! Hate it, Oh! Shun it, Oh! Avoid all occasions of it: And if you are
Tempted at any time hereafter to Repeat it, Answer and Conquer the Temptation
so: If I felt the Earth now shaking under me, and gaping for me, should I
venture to do such a wicked Thing? It were as bad as to leap into the direful
Chasms of the Earth opening in an Earthquake, to do such a wicked Thing! When
the Egyptians would venture into the Deep, at a Time when, as it is hinted in
the LXXVII. Psalm, The Earth trembled and shook; what came of it? We read,
Exodus XV. 12. Thou stretchedest thy Hand and the Earth swallowed them. Hardy
sinner, Will thou velure on, to do as thou did use to do? To do so is to
challenge the out-stretching of that Hand, that can soon cause the Earth to
swallow thee.

III. Make Haste, and, Oh, Delay not Immediately to keep those Commandments of
GOD, in which the Earthquakes made you think, Without any further delay, this
Duty shall be complied withal Not only Sins of Commission but also Sins of
Omission had in the Earthquakes the Reproofs of GOD given unto them. Truly, The
Best Thing that can be desired for you, is; That you may order your
Conversation aright, just as you most approved, at the Time when the
Earthquakes made you d^^e the Salvation of GOD. Some in the Time of the
Earthquakes are for getting as near to those whom they take to be Good Men as
they can, professing their Choice to die with such. But, Children, whom do you
choose to live withal? There are Points of a Good Conversation in CHRIST, which
perhaps you were not fully come up to. But in the Time of the Earthquakes you
thought, I will now do what I know to be my Duty. Now, with the Earthquakes
there was that Roaring out of Zion unto you; Heb. III. 7. To Day, Oh! Hear the
Voice of GOD. There can be no greater Part or Proof of Prudence than This; For
a Man to think, What have I left undone, that if I were now a dying I should
wish to have done? And go do accordingly. And now, My Friends, Think with your
selves. If you felt the Earthquakes causing your Houses to fall upon you, and
crush you to Death in the Ruins of them; Or, if you felt the Earthquakes cause
those formidable Apertures in the Ground, which would be the Gates of Death
hideously opening for you; Think, What is the Duty which, I have lift undone,
the Neglect whereof would now make me feel the Bitterness of Death upon me? The
Religion of the Closet, and, Family Religion, and, The Holy Table Religiously
approached unto; Such as these are Points of PIETY, which Earthquakes compel
the Minds of Men, to confess their Obligations to, and Chastise them for the
neglecting of. If you saw your selves going down into the horrible Caverns,
which Earthquakes may sink you down into, would it not exceedingly terrify you,
to think, I have not this Day been on my Knees in secret before the Glorious
GOD? If Earthquakes made it not safe that you should stay in your Habitations,
and yet made you at a loss where to be safe by running out of them, would it
not exceedingly terrify you to think, that you had never, or seldom, or poorly
called upon GOD in your Habitations? There is the Duty of Commemorating the
Death of our SAVIOR at His Holy Table, whereof the precept is as plain as any
words can make it; THIS DO! For the Epidemical Neglect of this Duty, the usual
Apology is a very wicked one. It Is, I have not prepared for it! Man, The very
Apology is it self an Impiety. It Is thy Crime, that thou art not prepared. It
is pleaded; It is not in me, I cannot prepare my self. But, Have thou done all
that is in Thee, and as much as Thou can, that thou may be prepared? The
Neglect of this Duty is always a Grief of Mind on a Deathbed, unto such as are
not Hardened in their Sins. It must needs be a Grief of Mind in an Earthquake.
'Twil then be a Disconsolate Reflection: There is one Thing, wherein I have
disobeyed, and have dishonored my SAVIOR all my Days. Not prepared, you say!
But suppose it could be told you, Before this Month is out, a formidable
Earthquake shall put a stop to your Breathing on the Face of the Earth any
more! What would you do to prepare for it? With Madness in your Hearts you are
going down to the Dead, if you do not now Immediately, all that were Necessary
to be done that you may prepare for This. Now prepare to meet with your own
Death, as you are given up to a Reprobats Mind if you do it not, and you will
prepare to show forth your Lord's Death at His Holy Table as you ought to do.
The jogs of the Earthquakes, have been as Goads upon you, for stimulating of
you to your Duty. Methinks, you may hear your SAVIOR from the Earth calling to
you, as once from Heaven to another; Soul, Soul, Why do thou keep at a
distance from me? It is hard for thee, and it cannot be safe, to Rick against
the Goads.

When Rahab joined her self to the Church of Israel, she had a Scarlet-Cord
given her, and something to show for her preservation, when an Earthquake threw
down the Walls of Jericho. Truly, To come with the preparation of the
Sanctuary, and join your selves to an Instituted Church of the GOD of Israel,
and so to dwell in His Tabernacle, it is to seek a Refuge under the covert of
His Wings.

IV. The purposes of PIETY which you take up from the Terrors of the shadow of
Death in the Earthquakes, let the Covenant of Grace give life unto them: And
with the Spirit of that New Covenant proceed unto the performing of what you
have purposed. The Good Impressions made by the Earthquakes do shoot forth
First, in Good purposes to walk according to that Rule, which brings Peace to
the Israel of GOD. The Good Impressions are lost, when those Good purposes fail
of being Executed. And they will fail if you keep up the Spirit of the Old
Covenant, when you set about the Execution of them. The First Thing you must
see to, is, That your Good purposes be not made in your own strength: Or with
an Imagination of your being Able to will and to do at your own pleasure; If
they be so, there will be no strength in them. The Adversaries of the Lord, and
of Good purposes to walk with Him, O Man, By thy own strength, never, never
shall thou prevail against them. Under the Horrors of the Earthquakes, you
purpose to express a Respect unto these and those, and even All the
Commandments of GOD. You Trust you shall do as you say; never do as you have
done. You have no Fear of it. But, I have! -- In whom do you Trust? In thy own
Heart, O Vain Man! Then thou art a Fool. All will soon come to Nothing. There
is a Clause of more than ordinary Significancy, which must be an Ingredient of
all Good Purposes; Even That; Phil. IV. 13. THROUGH CHRIST WHO STRENGTHENS ME.
The Covenant of Works, the Frame and Strain of That, will choke all Good
Purposes, and kill them in the Bud. The Covenant of Grace, is that which alone
will Preserve them, Secure them, Nourish them. And you are thus to conceive of
it. There is an Eternal COVENANT between GOD the FATHER, and GOD our SAVIOR.
In that Covenant of Redemption, your SAVIOR promised, not only that He will
pay the Price of Redemption for you, [which has been done!] but also, that He
will Quicken and Incline and Strengthen the People, whom He brings under the
Shadow of His Wings, to Glorify GOD, and Live unto Him. Your Good Purposes are
best expressed in the Form of giving the Consent of your Souls, that the
Blessed JESUS, who is your Savior and Surety, should Assist you unto the Doing
of all the Good, which you Purpose to do. I freely own to you, that I am not
entirely satisfied in a Form of Covenanting with GOD, wherein we act our selves
as Principals, and a Glorious CHRIST is brought in only as an Accessory. Though
an exceeding great Multitude which no Man can Number, have been brought home to
GOD in that Form, yet, I judge, the more Evargelical the Form is, and the more
that CHRIST is All in it, it is the Better, and the Surer, and the Faster. The
Style of your Good Purposes is to be such as This; O Great GOD, Be Thou my GOD.
I am not able to pay unto Thee the Homage of PIETY, in the Duties of it, which
I owe unto Thee. But, I Desire, I Desire to do it; I desire to do these Duties.
My Blessed JESUS has engaged that His People shall, through Him acting as a
Principle of Life in them, do these Duties; And it is my Desire to be
comprehended in this Engagement, and be Found in Him. I Consent, I Consent,
That He should cause me to do them; and work in me all that is well-pleasing in
the sight of GOD. I put my self under His Conduct, that He may do so. And even
in my giving this Consent, it is His Help that has brought me to it. -- Now, O
Evangelized Soul, Go on, and prosper.

But, Oh! Remember at the same time, to lay aside all Thoughts of going to
Establish your own Righteousness, or of making to your selves a Righteousness
of your own Obedience, to the Commandments of GOD; No, Though it should be in the
Evangelical Way carried on. You must propose to stand Justified before the
Thrice-Holy GOD, only in the Righteousness of that Obedience, which the Blessed
JESUS yielded unto His Law for you. And you must not so much as Propose to be
Recommended, unto the Liberty and Privilege of pleading that spotless
Righteousness, by your own Obedience, or by your Good Purposes of it: But come
to it with no Recommendation, but the Character of the Poor that must make This
their only Refuge. If you take up Good Purposes, with the Indirect Views of a
Self-Justiciary, they will all soon die away, and be laid under that Epitaph,
My Purposes are broken off, even the Thoughts of my Heart.

It will be well for you, if you fall into the hands of Skilful Divines, and
Pastors that will wisely lead you in the Paths of Righteousness.

V. Allow me to Conclude with one brief Direction, which I tender as an
Appendix to the rest. There is a Stratagem of your Adversary the Devil, which
you are to be warned of.

In the Concern of Mind, which the Earthquakes raise in you, be not so
concerned about lesser, and perhaps doubtful Matters, as to overlook the more
Weighty matters of the Gospel. The Good Impressions from the Earthquakes, may
be much damnified, by being diverted from the MAIN THINGS that are called for;
Or, by Exclamations against the lesser Faults in others, putting by and
shifting off, the Charge of much Greater in our selves. There may be the
fine-spun Devices of Satan, in a Preposterous and an Irregular, and a
Self-Opinionated Zeal; And we should not be Ignorant of His Devices.

As for Garments, by all means, let all Exorbitances and Extravagances be
rebuked, and retrenched; All Trespasses against the Modest, and Shamefaced, and
Sober Apparel, which the Word of GOD requires, be Redressed. GOD, as well as
Good and Wise Christians, is displeased at them. Yea, it is now a proper season
to make Humble Abatements, even of some lawful Ornaments. For the rest, let us
keep to the Word of GOD, and moderately use, every Creature, which He has there
granted us a Charter for: And not fall into the Arrogant Pride of making Things
to be Sins, which the Word of GOD has never made so: [But may be as lawful as
for a Man to wear an Hat of Beevers Fur, or a Ca^ of Sheeps wool upon his
Head.] Nor let us lay the Main stress of our Demands, on Things, which the
worst People in the World, can as easily come to as the Best. But while we are
zealously affected, as it is a Good Thing to be, against the Vanity and Luxury
of a few Foolish People in their Garb, and the like, let us be Proportionably
zealous against those grosser efforts of Ungodliness and Unrighteousness, which
have the Wrath of GOD reveled from Heaven against them. And let our Main care
be for, a SOUL so full of submission to GOD, a SOUL so full of Conformity to
CHRIST, a SOUL so full of Benignity to Men, as the Gospel calls for. This is
what all Wise Men are agreed in. While there may be those, who may see False
causes of Punishment, and may enquire not wisely upon them.

If we will be Nice at straining of Gnats, I beseech you, let it be Inquired,
[Not as if That were one!] What is to be thought about the Cry of DEFRAUDED
LABORERS going up to the Lord of Sabbath.

Yea, if Things not yet by all Good Men Agreed on, may be spoken of, let it be
Enquired, Whether Christians do generally pay to a glorious CHRIST, the Dues
which they that would count themselves, the True Sons of Abraham, should be
induced easily to Confess, belonging to our Melchizedek? And whether they
Devote unto PIOUS USES, that portion of their Income, which the pattern of our
Father Jacob, and the precept of the Gospel, has plainly declared for? And
whether the SON of GOD, be not Robbed, as in a Sacrilege, when this ^ortion is
witheld from Him? And whether if this ^ortion were honestly paid unto the LORD,
a very small Morety of it applied where it should be, would not put a stop to
the Cry of many DEFRAUDED LABORERS? But it seems, this is, Not Agreed on. And
I know very well, what I say of this matter will be little regarded; But see,
whether a perpetual Series and Succession of Impoverishments, and Remarkable
ways devised by the Justice of Heaven for it, be not what our Land will be
doomed unto. -- I have done. Behold the Method for preventing of an Abortion on
our Good Im^ressions, and this unhappy Account of them, We have been in pain,
we have brought forth wind, we have not wrought any Deliverance for the Soul
that has been going with us.

I come to the Conclusion of the Matter. It may be hoped, The Good Impressions
from our Earthquakes, will be such, that the Trembling of the Earth under us,
will prove the most useful Dispensation of Heaven, that ever we have met
with^l. Many Children of GOD, will Bless Him to Eternal Ages, for the
Excitations which the Earthquakes have given into the PIETY which was too
languid in them. And many Elect of GOD who were not yet His Children, are made
such, by the Earthquakes driving of them, into those Motions of PIETY, which
carry them to their SAVIOR. The Lord of Hosts ^oming to shake the Earth,
hereupon the Desire of ^ll Nations has come, and filled their Hearts with his
Glory. As we read, The Voice of the Eternal GOD makes the Hinds to bring forth;
By the starting Roars of the Thunders over them, when they are Travailing, they
are thrown into Frights that force their Offspring from them: So the Voice of
the Eternal GOD, in the ghastly Roars of the Earthquakes under us, will cause
many a Soul to be New Born; and many Slow, Dull Dilatory Intentions of Doing
the Will of GOD will be brought forth into Endeavors that never will be
repented of. The Churches in the Capital City of the Province, and many other
Churches throughout the Country, have set apart Whole DAYS of Supplications to
Obtain the Blessings of a Successful Gospel. We have stood waiting for some
while, and wondering what was become of our Prayers. The Success was not
presently what we looked for. We did not presently see the Answers of our
Prayers. But, Lo, as we read of the Primitive Believers, When they had prayed,
the place was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit. Even thus,
the Glorious GOD shakes the place where these Prayers are made, and grants
those Effusions of the Holy Spirit for which we made our Prayers. Yea, By
Terrible Things in Righteousness He answers us, as the GOD of our Salvation,
and grants us the Petitions we have desired of Him. O Wonderful! O Wonderful!
Our GOD instead of sending Earthquakes to destroy as He justly might, He sends
them to fetch us home unto Himself, and to do us the greatest Good in the
World! If these Good Impressions grow, and hold, and last, and come to a due
Maturity, it looks as if some Salvation may be nigh to us, and Glory may dwell
in our Land.

What a Deplorable Thing is it, That some of our Congregations have such
Contentions and Confusions in them, as greatly to defeat such an Enjoyment and
such an Improvement of Good Impressions as others are exceedingly Rejoicing in
O Lord JESUS, pity them!

On the other hand; A Relapse is always dangerous. If the Good Impressions on
the Minds of People from the Earthquakes, quickly vanish, and People become
generally as Worldly, and as Prayerless, and as Vicious, as before the
Earthquakes, and if the Goodness whereof there is a show made on the
Earthquakes, do go away with them, we may Tremble, we may Tremble, at, what is
a coming! They who dwell in the Wilderness have cause to be afraid of the
Tokens.

As for the Miserables themselves, it looks awfully, as if it must be said, All
is in vain; They are a Reprobate Metal; the Lord has Rejected them. It looks
awfully, as if this were the Doom from GOD upon them, Never, Never shall any
Fruit be found upon them; and as if the Oath of GOD were gone out against them,
That they shall never enter into His Rest. There seems to be that sentence from
the Mouth of GOD upon these Obdurate Sinners; Ezekiel. XXIV. 13. Because I have
purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged any more, till
I have caused my Fury to rest upon thee. That there should be Earthquakes
extending for more than Five Hundred Miles; and in several places the Roars
continue every Day for some Weeks together, and the shocks be given many sevens
of times in these Weeks; and not one life be lost in all! -- O the Goodness and
Forbearance, and Long-suffering of our GOD! But if this be trifled with, what a
Wrath, O Hardened ones, what a Wrath, are you treasuring up against the Day of
Wrath! It will be well, if something of a Pestilential Aspect be not quickly
shot among us, wherein the slain of the Lord way be many. -- I say, something
of a Pestilential Aspect. Our LORD having spoken of, Earthquakes in diverse
places, presently proceeds to speak of, Pestilences. Upon the amazing
Earthquakes, wherein the mighty City of Antioch, with many other places was
demolished, before our Apostle John could be well cold in his Grave, which, I
suppose, our Lord in His Praediction had His Eye first upon, there came on such
a Pestilence that it looked as if the World was going to be dis-peopled; and
the Relics of it remained even to the Time of the Martyr Cyprian. When there
had been an Earthquake in the Wilderness, where the People as soon as they
Recovered out of the Cries into which it had thrown them, discovered an
Incurable Obstinacy in their Vile Tempers, and their Base Doings, the Next News
is, A Pestilence, which destroyed many Thousands of them. After the
never-to-be-forgotten Earthquake in one of our well-known Islands, that some
now among us were present at, Half the People saved from the perdition at
Port Royal, died of a Pestilence at Kingston; where five hundred Graves were
dug within a Month, and sometimes Two or Three buried in one Hole together; And
the rest of the Island had a deep Draught in that Cup of Astonishment which GOD
gave them after He had caused the Earth to Tremble under them. Indeed, the
Exemples of Mineral and Malignant Steams, from Earthquakes terminating in a
raging Pestilence, have been very Usual and very Dismal. Yea, American Exemples
of such a thing. Though the proper Plague was never known in America; it is well
known, that after some Earthquakes, which overturned almost the whole Capital
City of Chili, in the South-America, not very many Years ago, almost all the
surviving Inh^^itants died of a Pestilence, more Mortal than a ^oper Plague use
to be. We are not certain, that our Earthquakes will have any such Effects. The
(...) portunity, to Methods of Repentance may prevent them. Our Flight unto our
SAVIOR with the Faith of the XCI. Psalm; This may save us from them. Yet, In
Conformity to what our SAVIOR spoke of some Tragical Accidents which had
happened a little before, whereof one seems to have been an Earthquake, --
Except ye Repent, -- I will venture to say, I verily Fear, That the Glorious
GOD, having within a little while singled out several Towns, that were None of
the Worst, [Not Sinners above all Men!] but full of Godly People, and ordered
the Destroying Angel to make a Doleful Havoc among them, He has therein shot
off Direful Warning-pieces to all the Land: I say, Direful Warning-pieces! --
And His Voice to the whole Country, is, O! Let there be a General Turn to GOD,
in a Life of Serious PIETY, lest a more General Stroke do make fearful
Devastations upon you!

I do not speak these things, as a Melancholy Visionary, or because of any
Delight I can take in keeping my Neighbors under a Fear which has Torment in
it. And indeed I am sorry to see, that ever now and then, upon some Idle
Rumors and Whimseys, the Heart of this People is moved, as the Trees of the
Wood are moved with the Wind; More moved, alas, than they are by the plain Word
of GOD brought unto them: Sorry, sorry, to see, That foolish Notions ^yer now
and then started by the Devil, to torture as, and to triumph over our Guilty
Souls, will work more upon us, than all the plain Commination of that Word,
wherein we have the Glorious GOD marvellously Thundering over us! No, But
^^^ying the Terror of the Lord, we would persuade you, unto that PIETY, which
may divert the Judgments of GOD, that may be hanging over us. And we would have
you sing in the ways of that PIETY; fain have you Live Comfortably, and be
bravely above the Fear of Evil. You know the Course that Ninive took, and how
it succeeded. What? Shall a New England be worse than a Ni^^ve? GOD forbid!
Syrs, They whom Earthquakes do chase into a Life of PIETY, do the best Thing
that can be done, to procure a Mark of GOD upon them, for their Preservation,
if He should send an Overflowing Scourge, and pour out the Vials of His Wrath
on the Children of Disobedience, and of Unperswadeableness. O Believers, Thus
taken under the Protection of your SAVIOR, Hear Him now saying unto you, Fear
not, for I am with thee: Be not dismayed, for I am thy GOD.

But, Lifting up a Voice like a Trumpet, I declare unto you that are Impenitent
under and after such Earthquakes as have come to rowse us from the Dead sleep
upon us, Earthquakes are not all the Arrows, in the Quiver of GOD, ordained for
those, by whom He is proveked every day. But if Earthquake; will not move you,
it seems come to a, Conclama^um est. -- Alas, -- It looks as if the last Mean;
were used; and all that remains were only this; He that being often Reproved,
hardens his Neck, shall be lestroyed suddenly, and without any Remedy. Yea.

Yea, A General Impenitence under and after such Earthquakes, what w^^ it
betoken, but that these Earthquakes, are not other than the Beginning of
Sorrows! There have been tremendous Earthquakes in former and ^^er Ages; The
History of them were enough (...) cast a wicked World into all the Trepidations
which a Mean Tekel threw a Belshazzar into. The Motto on the Title Page of such
an History, ^ight be That, Come and see the Works of GOD; I^e is Terrible in
His Doing toward the Children of Me^. But I am certain, a Greater Earthquake
than all of those, is what we have cause to live in Expectation of: Even that
Earthquake, whereof we are warned, Rev. XVI. 18. A Great Earthquake, such ^s
has not been since Men were on the Earth, so Mighty (...) Earthquake, and so
Great an one. I again, and again, declare it unto you; The Coming of the Son of
N^^n in the Clouds of Heaven, it is what we know of Nothing to Retard it or
Protract it. We are told, It must be at and for the Destruction of that Roman
Monarchy, for which the last Period of Twelve Hundred and Sixty Years are most
certainly upon their Expiration. An Excellent Pen, which New England will have
Singular cause to know, has in an Incomparable Treatise on the Sacred
Prophecies, with much Erudition shown, and with much Demonstration proved, That
there is abundance of cause to think, the Expiration of that Black Period may
have been above Ten Years ago. What Pause our Glorious LORD may now make,
before the Next Thing which we have to look for, and what He may please to Do
in this Pause, and whether in this Pause a more General, and a more Terrible
Slaughter of the Witnesses, m^^^ not be carried on, we can not say; For my
par^^ I have not the Knowledge of the Holy ones. But for the Coming of the Son
of Man in the Clouds of Heaven, which, O Vain Men, will not be found a
Metaphor, It may, for any thing I know, be the Next Thing that is to be looked
for. All that the Oracles of GOD have mentioned, (...) Things to be done before
it, an^ Accomplished: I say, All Accomplished! Certainly, The Kingdom of GOD is
at hand: And in the introducing of it, The Foundations of the Earth shall
shake; The Earth shall be utterly broken down; The Earth shall be clean
dissolved; The Earth shall be moved exceedingly. O Kiss the Feet of the SON of
GOD, whose hot wrath will quickly flame; and then, Blessed are they who trust
in Him. Our Lord is coming to send a Fire on the Earth; [But it shall be
Visited of the Lord of Hosts with Earthquake as well as Fir^:] and, what if it
be in the subterraneous Receptacles, already kindled! From this Consideration,
I beseech you, let not the Good Impressions of the Earthquakes be laid aside: I
say, This Consideration, That more Earthquakes are to be looked for; form which
you can have no Refuge but This: O my SAVIOR, Under the Shadow of thy Wings
will I make my Refuge.

History gives us the Names of some Philosophers among the ancient Pagans, who
upon some Circumstances observed in the bottom of Wells, and some other such
Occurrences, foretold Earthquakes; which came to pass accordingly. We
Christians have a more sure Word of Prophecy, according to which we may
foretell, That our Earthquakes are not all over yet; It must not be thought.
That Earthquakes have done all they have to do, upon a World sinking under an
Enormous Load of Wickedness which with an Accumulation of Guilt from Former
Ages lies upon it. I am not so much of a Natural Philosopher, as to form any
Judgment on the Constitution of ^ur Soil, which is well known (...) be vastly
replenished with fores both of Iron and of (...): Though I am aware, what
surprising Imitation of Earthquakes, the Dust of these Mixed and Warmed, will
^hord unto us: And some it may be, would from hence these a Suspicion, That our
Earthquakes may by'nd by iss^^ in some Fiery Eruptions; and may ^oceed anon to
a Fire, that shall burn to the Foundations of the Mountains. But I am so much
of a Christian Philosopher, as to suspact, that when the (...) Period, which
cannot but be now very near unto (...) coming on, stupendous Earthquakes, will
be some of the Things, which an Earth, from whence a Cry to Heav^^ still waxing
Louder for the Days of Vengeance to come upon it, must be torn withal. O thou
Land, where GOD has been so Forgotten, and which have so impiously Denied the
GOD that is Above, Thou shall be tern to pieces, and there shall be none to
deliver thee! Yea, There is more cause to suspect than it is now and here
proper to Declare. That the Holy and Mighty ANGELS of JEHOVAH-JESUS, who are
His Ministers, to do His Pleasure, and very much concerned in the Management of
Earthquakes, when it pleases Him to Order them are coming down with Commissions
to do those Things whereupon it shall be Aid, Come, Behold the Works of the
Lord, what Desolations He has made in the Earth. Doubtless, In GOD's Time for
them, There are more Earthquakes to come; And it is of the Last Consequence
unto us, that in the ways of PIETY, we be brought into a State of Safety for
Eternity before they come; and that when they come, the Good Impressions made
by Former Earthquakes be found Abiding on us, and Abounding in us.

BOSTON-Lecture. Dec. 14.1727.
An APPENDIX. Written Dec. 2^. 1727. A Collection Of some Observable
Occurrences, Which the present Earthquakes of NEW ENGLAND, [The Shocks and
Roars whereof, we had no longer ago than the Last Night awakening of us,] Lead
us to take Notice of.
I. The First OBSERVABLE.
THE Occurring of EARTHQUAKES in DIVERSE PLACES, is what our SAVIOR has advised
us to consider of. Truly, In this Year of NEW-ENGLAND's Trembling, there are
occurring EARTHQUAKES in DIVERSE PLACES. If the jogs given to France and
Britain, do little to rowse the Europaean World from the Lethargy of the last
Time, yet it may be hoped some in America may hear Attentively the Noise of the
Voice of GOD in them, and the Sound that goes out of His Mouth.

In our coming to relate the Earthquakes of this Year, it may not be amiss, but
be a decent Introduction, to relate, that so lately, as a little above a Year
ago, in the Night between the first and second of September, between the Hours
of Ten and Eleven, the City of Palermo in Sicily, felt some shocks, of an
Earthquake, which were not at first very Violent. But they soon increased with
great Fury for above Twenty Minutes; whereby about a quarter part of that ^reat
City, was overturned and overwhelmed, and ^ade an Heap of amazing Rubbish: From
whence Three Thousand of the Dead, were draw out, five days after, fearfully
crushed and mash'd, and ^^^erably broken to pieces. In one Ward of the City, a
whole Street gaped at once with an hideous and horrid Noise; and from the
Chasm, there issued out Flames, which were mixed with calcined Stones, and a
Torrent of Burning Brimstone, whereby in less than half an Hour, the whole Waid
was consumed. It was computed, that about Fifteen Thousand People perished in
this Desolation. But This Year is what we are now confined unto. We are
informed that in the Month of May last, they had several Shocks of an
Earthquake, at Arles, in France; and one so Violent, that all the Inhabitants
ran out of the City, for fear of being overwhelmed under the Ruins of their
Houses, and continued encamped in the open Country, till they hoped the Danger
was over. Some of the Shocks were more Violent about Languedoc, than at Arles.

Our Accounts from Great Britain, inform us, That on the Nineteenth of July
last, there were Earthquakes felt at Swanzy, before which there was heard a
mighty Noise, like that of Thunder at a Distance. The Houses trembled; The
Walls of Gardens rocqued; The tops of Chimneys fell; Many lest their Habitan^^
-- At the same time they felt the like at Hig^^worth, and the Neighboring
places, where the People were thrown into the greatest Consternation, from the
Apprehension of their Houses falling upon them. An Alteration in the Face of
th^^^ky, and the Color and Quivering of the I^^^inaries there, before it, was
very much ob^^^ed. At the same time the City of Bristol had (...) share of the
Consternation.

About Exeter, they had the Earthquake which gave dreadful Concussions; People
could not stand when they felt it; It rang the Bells in the Sceeples; And some
Damage was done by it. From several other parts in the West, there have come in
the like Accounts.

The Relation from Wa^s, is yet more Expressive. On Wednesday the Nineteenth of
July, a little after Four in the Morning, we had a most terrible Earthquake.
They that were in the Field, and heard it coming (as they say, from the East,)
could not tell what to liken it to, but to Great Guns, firing under Ground, or
some terrible Thunder. The Hedges and Trees seemed to walk, or move from their
Places; The Birds flew out from thence, as if they were frighted; The Walls of
the Park and Gardens [at Margam] were shook down; The Doors of the Church, and
of several Houses flew open, though Locked and Bolted. The Bells tolled of
themselves; several Stacks of Chimneys were thrown down. Houses untiled;
Windows and Shutters broken. The Milk-People in the Fields, declare, That the
Earth trembled so, that the Milk dashed over the Edges of the Pails. The Rivers
swelled several times higher than was usual, and the Water changed unto the
Color of Whey. The Houses and Beds rocqued like Cradles.

Besides these Things; on Aug. 25. In the Vale of Good-Cheap, adjoining to the
Parishes of Wye and Hinxhil, several Brooks were on Fire for many Days
together; which People were, as well they might be, very much surprised at.

The Second OBSERVABLE.
We soon knew, that our EARTHQUAKE extended more than Five Hundred Miles. But
shall we reckon it a part of ours, if we find an EARTHQUAKE within a Day or Two
before ours affecting the Caribbee-Islands? Reader, Consider what we are going
to Relate, and think, with a just Reflection, How deep the Fires may ly, which
may give so near Simultaneous Agitations, to the Tottering Arch which is our
only Foundation; [if we have no share in the City that has better Foundations!]
and what a mighty Force they may anon exert upon it!

We have Advice, that the Earthquake we had here; (if it may be said so) Oct.
29. between Ten and Eleven in the Evening, was felt at Barbados the Day before,
about Noon; which is near two Thousand Miles distant from us; And much after
the manner we had it here. The Houses were in a very frightful Convulsion; The
Streets rose and fell, even like the Waves of the Sea; The People in utmost
Consternation from an Apprehension that the Earth might sink under them, ran to
the Wharfe, that they might get into Vessels for their safety.

We have Advice also, that Martineco, A Day or two before the Time of our
Earthquake, underwent a more terrible one than that of Barbados, or, that of
New England. Their Temple and their Prison were thrown down; and many of their
Sugar-works ruined; and their Negros killed. The Noise as well as the Shock,
was beyond Expression hideous; They that have arrived from thence unto us,
discover an Abiding Horror, at what they heard and felt and saw, in what they
are escaped from.

It may be added, That some of our Vessels, which were at a considerable
Distance from us, in the midst of the Huge and Wide Atlantic, at the Time of
our Earthquake were visited with such Thunder, as they had scarce ever known to
be paralleled.

III. The Third OBSERVABLE.
There was This Year, a very strange occurrence in Ireland; which drew as in
Miniature a most lively Emblem, of what it is that EARTHQUAKES come for; and of
the Condition and Confusion which falls upon Forsaken Sinners, when held in the
Cords of their Sins, and fiez'd by the Irresistible Vengeance of Heaven. The
Story is worth telling; and by the ordering of GOD it is come to pass, that it
is told among the Nations; Yea, and in America too this lively Picture is now
exhibited. Here it is; look upon it!

On the Fourteenth of the last August, (1727.) as one John Byrn, a Wretch of a
very Dissolute and Abandoned Life, stood at the Gallows in Kilkenny, with a
Rope about his Neck, in order to be executed for the Murder of one Mr. Tailor,
and was relating the Murder with an amazin^ Indolence and Insolence, a Noise
like Thunder was heard under the Gallows, and the Earth fell a Trembling, with
the terrible Shocks of an Earthquake, for many Yards round about the Place, but
not extending any further. It was looked on as an amazing Expression of the
Divine Displeasure, and the Wrath of GOD revealed from Heaven, against the
Crimes of so horrible and obdura^e a Criminal. The astonished Sheriff, and his
Guards, and the Spectators, which were very numerous, all ran away with the
utmost Consternation a^^ Expedition; and with such Distraction, that Malefactor
being left alone, had a strange ^^portunity, to have made his Escape, if he had
^^tempted it. But he was himself so terrified a^^ confounded, as to be found
presently Stupefied when the Sheriff returned, and finished the Execution.

The Fourth OBSERVABLE.
Our EARTHQUAKES unavoidably lead us to the Consideration, of what is to be
expected from the Subterraneous Fires, in the Day of the Lord that shall burn
like an Oven; when they shall conspire with the Fires, which at the Glorious
Appearing of our great GOD and SAVIOR, shall fill and cleanse the Heavens, and
those High places which ^re now occupied by Wicked Spirits. When the Lord our
GOD shall come, and a Fire shall devour before Him, and it shall be very
Tempestuous round about Him, Then the Fire and Brimstone which will in an
Horrible Tempest be Rained like Snares, upon the wicked, even upon all but
those Holy and Humble Walkers with GOD, that shall have His Mark upon them, and
with a surprising Change upon ^^^n Shall be caught up to meet the Lord: This
Fire will meet with, and give an Attractive and Amazing Energy to, the
Subterraneous Fires, in which t^^ Trembling Earth is to fall a Sacrifice.

Now, if the Eighteen on whom the Tower of Si^loam fell, were to be construed
as a Figure and Foretaste, of what was to befall incredible Multitude^ by the
Fall of Towre^ upon them, in the approaching Destruction of Jerusalem; Why may
not the Hundred and Eighteen that perished the other Nigh^ (...) the Barn at
Barwel, be shown unto the World, (...) Type, of what shall be done to many
Millions, ^he CON^LAGRATION, which is to come ^^snare upon all them who dwell
on the Face of the ^^ole Earth? If one would see a Tragical T^^^ ^aiture, of
the Business which the World is very much taken up withal; Yea, and very much
of the Religion which is in the World pretended to; (...) of the sudders
Destruction by Fire, which the miserable People of the Earth will find
themselves, beyond all possibility of escaping, reserved for; Let them look
into the Barn at Barwel It Is a disinal and a shocking Story; The Relation is
thus conveyed unto us,

About Eight o'Clock, in the Evening that followed the Ninth of September, 1727
at a place called Barwel, in Cambridge-shire, (about Th^^^ M^les from
New Market) there was a Popp^^-Show ^^cting^in a Barn, which was built with
Barwe. Stone and thatched with Straw. The Man going to give his Attendents the
sight of the Show, (...) only Locked but also Nailed, the Door. There was a
Place adjoining to the Barn, which had in it a Quantity of Hay and Straw; and a
Boy who set a Wooden Lanthorn with a short Candle down, while he peeped in to
see the Spectacle. A Man, who had threatened, that if he were not let in to see
it for nothing, he would set the Barn on Fire over their Heads, beat the
Lanthorn about, so as to set the Hay and Straw on Fire, and ran away. The
Flaming Hay and Straw presently set the Barn on a Flame; which had a Floor
above the People; and the Fire getting into the False Roof, ran like Wildfire;
and the falling of the Floor hastened the Death, of the smothered Miserables.
The People could not get out; but about Five or Six escaped the Flames; The
rest, which were about One Hundred and Twenty, among whom there were several
Young Gentlewomen of considerable Estates, miserably perished. Some had their
Legs burnt off, some their Hands, and some their Heads; and some were entirely
incinerated. The Merry-Andrew that belonged unto the Show, got out, but so
horribly burnt, that he lived no more than a Day and a Night. It was for some
little while the melancholy Employment of the Neighbouring-place, to see
whether they could not pick out the Roasted and Mangled Carcasses of their
Particular Friends; but most of them were carried in Carts, and put into an
Hole in the Churchyard. And about Seven or Eight Houses of the Neighborhood,
were consumed in the same Disaster.

Whosoever is wise, will observe these things.
FINIS.

