Dr. Mather's ESSAY on Man's not knowing his Time

Ignorantia Scientifica.

A brief ESSAY ON Man's not knowing his TIME: THE Just INFERENCES from it, AND
THE Great ADVANTAGES of it. Upon a Special and Mournful Occasion.

Psalm. xc. 12. So teach us to Number our Days.

Fieres si scires unum tua tempora Mensem;
Rides, quum non sint forsitan una Dies?
In English.

It Would make thee serious, did thou surely know,
Down to the Grave thou in a Month must go:
Why to vain Mirth a loose then can thou give,
Not knowing that thou have a Day to live?
BOSTON in NE Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, the lower End of
Cornhill, 1727.

INSTRUCTION Fetched from IGNORANCE.
On the Sudden DEATH of a Young Gentleman. Jan. 14.1726, 7.
Eccl. IX. 12. Man knows not his Time. --


AND therefore there is no Man in the Auditory at this Time, who knows any
other but that This may be the Last Time of his being here; For ought that any
One knows, This may be the Last Sabbath he shall have shining on him; This the
Last Sermon he shall have speaking to him. Certainly This alone may be enough
to bespeak from us, a Great Attention to what we have now before us.

Man knows not is Time.] The Text is capable to have a Lively, yea, a Daily
Paraphrase made upon it. -- What think you of such a Paraphrase as This? --

-- A Young Gentleman, Mr. SAMUEL HIRST.
Descended of worthy Progenitors; Accomplished with the Advantages of a Liberal
as well as Religious Education; Recommended unto the Loves and Hopes of his
Friends by many Desirable circumstances; After very little more than Three
Times Seven Years of Appearance in the World; Be to all Apprehension in perfect
Health; in the midst of Business, and of Company; -- And -- But here the Story
Stops! -- At once to fall down Dead in the Street! -- The Mounting and Glowing
Spark, in a Moment go out, and fall down into the common Heap of Ashes! -- This
is a Paraphrase, which the Great GOD has just now given us, on, Man knows not
his Time. An affecting Paraphrase! Go to now, ye that say, To Morrow we will do
this or that! ye know not what shall be on the Morrow. What is your Life? It is
even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

BUT the matter must be further looked into.

MY Text is found in a Book Entitled, The Preacher. It seems, the Things which
are in this Book insisted on, are such as it well becomes a Preacher to insist
upon. We have here the Retractations of a Solomon, writing a Treatise upon, The
Chief End of Man; An Aged Solomon, after much Experience, confessing his own
Errors, and correcting of ours, upon that Important Subject. The Word which we
render, The Preacher, carries in it some Intimations of, A Soul upon
Recollection. We have here that Enquiry managed, What is true Happiness? And,
How, or Where, is true Happiness is to be met withal! Upon a Serious
Recollection, it is here pronounced, That our Temporal Happiness is to Enjoy
Cheerfully what we Possess Honestly. But, Woe to that Man, who Stops here; who
is put off so; who knows none but a Temporal Happiness. There is an Eternal
Happiness, which a Man ought always and chiefly to be concerned about: An
Happiness to be found in the Day when G O D shall bring every work into
Judgment. And the way to obtain this Happiness is for a Man to Fear G O D and
keep His Commandments. In the prosecution of these things, very pertinent are
the Remarks made in this Book, upon the Diverse Vanities, whereof Men do in
this Life undergo the grievous Vexations. One of those Diverse Vanities, is
Remarked in the Text before us; Man knows not his Time. It refers to such
occurrences, as the preceding Verse takes notice of. Time intends the Changes
which befalls us in Time; The Changes which are also called Chances, because we
see not the Causes of them. The Reasons as well as the Seasons are secret unto
us. But above all, Time intends the end of our Time. It is our Death which is
our Time: The Time wherein we are to Die, and we are to have no more Time
allowed unto us. The uncertainty of this Time, wherein it pleases the Holy Lord
of Time, who Inhabits Eternity to keep us, has here some elegant Illustrations
and Resemblances. The Fish Knows not the Time of its being taken in the Nett.
The Bird knows not the Time of its being taken in the Snare; So are Men
Suddenly taken by the Evil-Time of a Dying Hour. The Netts of Death are spread
for us. The Snares of Death are laid for us. Man knows not the Time of his
being taken in them.

ATTEND unto a DOCTRINE of an Importance as Useful as Awful, to be at all Times
thought upon.

LITTLE do People know the Times that are hereafter to pass over them: Little
do we know what Changes are to come, and when they are to come upon us.

CONTINGENCIES are Things which we cannot have a certain knowledge of. It Is at
best, but an Opinion, it is at best but a Conjecture, that we can have of them.
Now, with respect unto us, what are all Futurities, but Contingencies.

MY DOCTRINE is a String which the Quill of Solomon did very much harp upon.
And most certainly the Wisdom of a Solomon could not be expressed without
Strong Impressions from such a Meditation. It Is bewailed by Solomon as the
Misery of Man, Eccl. VIII. 7. He knows not that which shall be; For who can
tell him when it shall be! Oh! may we have the Wisdom to make our Advantage of
this Misery; since we do know what we have to do, that we may be prepared for
that which shall be.

THIS, This is the Tendency of the Meditation upon which we are now proceeding.

WE will Inquire, First, What is there in the Times passing over us, which we
must not have the Foreknowledge of?

TWO words will fully eno' express the matter.

First LITTLE do we Foreknow the Quantity of our Time; or what will be the
Duration of it. Man knows not his Time; in that he knows not, whether it will
be a Longer Time, or a Shorter Time. As it has been said, What man is he that
lives, and shall not see Death? So it may be said, What man alive is there,
who knows when he shall see Death? We are told, The living know that they shall
Die. But which of the Living are they who know when they are to Dye? The
Presages that some few have had of their Time, are extraordinary! One said, Gen
XXVII. 2. I am old, I know not the Day of my Death. And the Young does as
little know the Day of his Death. It is an ancient saying, If an old Man has
Death standing before his Face, a young Man has Death standing behind his Back.
The Time of its giving the Fatal stroke, is as little known to the one, as to
the other. One that is in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet,
and having his Bones moistened with morrow; Even such an one does not know his
Time; for even such an one may Die at this very Time. One that is in Bitterness
of Soul, and never Eats with pleasure, because of the Infirmities under what he
languishes; even such an one also does not know his Time. For even such an one
may be Reprieved from Death beyond expectation; and see many Stronger ones ly
down in the Dust before him. We do all know, That it is appointed unto man once
to die. But which of us does know his appointed Time for it; or when he is to
Die? Ordinarily, of that Day and Hour knows no Man.

Secondly, LITTLE do we Foreknow the Quality of our Time; or what we are to
Encounter in it. Shall we have a Good Time, or a Bad Time of it? Man knows
not! In our Time shall we see Days of Pleasure, or Days of Sorrow? Man knows
not! Shall we have our Time sweetened with much Prosperity, or embittered with
much Adversity? Man knows not! The World may not prove either so Good as we
hope, or so Bad as we fear? It Is most commonly so. Some look for a sadder Time
than ever does arrive unto them. So did the Israelitish Hero, when he said, I
shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. But much oftener do Men look for a
better Time, than what anon comes unto them. They say, I shall never be moved;
But, GOD hides His Face, and they are Troubled. When Joseph was a Prisoner and
his Foot they did humble with the affliction of a chain; The Iron, that did
penetrate into his very Soul: Did he know what was to be done for him, when the
King constituted him to be the Ruler of his House; yea, and the Governor of
all that was possessed by him. When Haman was in all the Grandeur of the
Persion Court, and the chief Minister of State there; Did he know how near he
and his Family were, to a matchless confusion? What Accidents we are to meet
withal, whether Joyful Accidents, or Woeful Accidents, we must not know, indeed
so much as one day before hand. So we are admonished; Prove. XXVII. 1. Thou
know not what a Day may bring forth. O Man, Thou know not, what may This
Day befall thee in thy Person, in thy Family, in thy Interest. Thou know not
what may be the Tidings that will This Day be brought unto thee. Thou know
not in the Evening what may befall thee before the Morning, or in the Morning
what shall befall thee before the Evening; Any more than the Men upon whom the
Tower of Siloam fell, that the Tower was to fall, while they were under it.

THE Articles wherein you have had set before you, the Future Events of our
Times, whereof our GOD will keep us in the greatest Uncertainties, are then
these Two; First, That which is the greatest of all our Changes; And, then, all
the Changes which may before That come upon us. Our Meditation must not easily,
and presently dismiss these Articles of our Times which are unknown unto us.
But before we pass any further, Let an earnest EXHORTATION prevail with us, To
Entertain this Meditation, and he duly affected with it. Oh! may this Thought
be often rolling in our Minds; I know not my Time, nor do I know any thing that
is to befall me in my Time! And may our Minds feel the power of it; bring our
Lives under the power of it! The very Pagans would sometimes give an
Entertainment unto this Meditation; and say, Nescis quid serus Vesper vebat; O
Man, Thou know not what may before Night be to come upon thee. Certainly, It
becomes Christians to give a more affecting entertainment unto such a
Meditation.

First; THE case of Mortality is above all to be thus considered; That Man
knows not his Time, when his Mortality must have the Operation of it finished.
Man lies under a Sentence of Death; and the Time for Execution is determined
with GOD; Lord, The number of our Months is with thee; Thou have appointed our
Bounds, that we cannot pass. But Man must not know the Time, until the
Executioner come and bring the Bow-string. There is no Day that breaks upon any
Man, but for ought he knows, His Time is come, and the Day of his Death. Sudden
Deaths are some of those Things, whereto all Men living are exposed. We find it
supposed, Numb VI. 9. A man may die very suddenly. It Is what we see fulfilled
on great Numbers; We need not for the proof of it quote the Book of Numbers.
The commissions which our glotious GOD gives to the Angel of Death are often
kept secret until the very Day, that he comes and swears unto them, No more
Time shall be given them. It may be the Portion of Wicked Men to Die suddenly.
The profane Men, who can say of the Thing they never once thought upon, They
thought no more of it than of their Dying Day; find it according to their word;
Their Dying Day comes at a Time which they thought not of. The Men of Sodom;
Did they know their Time? A bright fair, Sunshiny Morning, found them wallowing
in all Impurities; Before Night the Vengeance of Eternal Fire came down upon
them. The Egyptians; Did they know their Time? In the Morning they were full of
brave Expectations to divide Spoils and Slaves among them, and to do wondrous
Exploits. That Night they were Drowned, and Damned; the Sea covered them. The
Philistines; Did they know their Time? In the Morning they had nothing in their
Eye, but the Sports of an Holiday. E're the Night came, they were crushed all
to pieces. Ananias and Sapphira; Did they know their Time. They came out well
to the Meeting, and they are carried home Dead! It may be the Portion of Godly
Men also to Die suddenly. It may be a Privilege granted by GOD unto some of His
most Favored ones, to Die such a Death. Uzzah, Did he know his Time; In the
Morning of the Day, when the Ark was to be carried into the City of David? or,
The Prophet sent unto Jeroboam; Did he know his Time, in the Morning of the Day
when the Lion fell upon him? Others less obnoxious find it so.

Yea, Secondly; THE Case of every Calamity is thus to be considered. Man knows
not his Time, when that Calamity will befall him, wherein GOD will perform the
Thing that is appointed for him. One that has an Husband, or a Father, in the
Morning, does not know, but before Night, the state of a Widow, or an Orphan
may be Theirs: The Sun may set at Noon with us, and leave us in a Sudden
Darkness. A Job has his House full of Children in the Morning; but he does not
know that before Night, he shall have neither House nor Children left unto him.
In this evil World, every Man knows, that his Dependence may be like that of
the Apostles, Afflictions wait for me: But then he must add like the Apostle.
Act. XX. 22. Not knowing the Things that shall befall me. And much more, Not
knowing the Time when they shall befall me.

IT was counted a Flight of Wisdom; All that I know, is that I know nothing! It
will be wisely done of us to make the knowledge of our Ignorance in this point,
as efficacious as may be upon us; This I know, that man knows not his Time.

WE will enquire, Secondly; Whence is it, that we must not have the
Foreknowledge of the Times that are to pass over us?

Now, First; THERE is for it, the First Reason of all things; the grand Reason
of all Reasons. The Sovereign will of GOD; That is Reason enough. The
Sovereignty of the Great GOD will be maintained in it. It was a just
Acknowledgment; Psalm. XXXI. 15. O Lord, my Times are in thy Hand. It was a just
Admonition; Act. I. 7. It is not for you to know the Times, which the Father
has put in His own power. All that shall befall us in our Times, is Decreed by
the GOD that made us. Now, the Decree is by our Sovereign kept a Secret: For
such is His will and pleasure, that it should be so. There is a Glorious One,
who is in our Translation of the Bible, called, The Ancient of Days. The
Original is, The Appointer of Times. It Is fit, that our Times remain unknown to
any but Him that has the Appointing of the Times.

BUT, there is more than this to be said of the matter.

First, IT is from the Pity and Mercy of our Gracious GOD unto the poor
Children of Men, that they must not know their Time, nor what is to befall them
in their Time.

IT may well be ascribed unto the Pity of our GOD, That we do not know our
Time; For such a knowledge would very much destroy the comfort of our Time;
very much make for us a most uncomfortable Time, Here, Here, most emphatically;
He that increases Knowledge increases Sorrow. It would mightily take away the
comfort which we take in any thing under the Sun, if we knew aforehand, When
and How we are to take our leave of that comfort. It is reported concerning
Elisha, 2 King. VIII. 11, 12. The man of God wept; And Hazael said, Why weepeth
my Lord? And he answered, Because I know the evil, that thou will do. Thus, If
a Man know the evil Time that is to befall himself, or his House, and the Time
of the Evil, he would fall a weeping at it; into such a weeping, that he would
be able to find little Relish in the gifts of GOD unto him. The Anticipations
of Trouble would break the Hearts of Men, if they knew before hand all the
Trouble that is to come upon them, and the Time when it will come. Our Lord has
told us; Math. VI. 34. Sufficient unto the Day is the evil thereof. It will be
soon enough to know the evil, when the Day comes. If we should know the evil
before the Day, it would multiply exceedingly, and keep growing and growing,
and scalding upon us; we should be more scalded before it falls, than we should
be in the Actual Falling of it. It is a most conspicuous Difference between a
Man, and a Bruit. And I look upon it, as no despicable Argument, that Man is
made for a World that is to come. A Man has a strong Apprehension of what is to
come: And what he knows is to come, he feels it Exquisitely, he feels it
Wonderfully. Oh! Should many a Man know, At such a Time, shall my House be laid
in Ashes; Or, At such a Time, a Relative that is the Desire of my Eyes will be
taken from me: Or, at such a Time I shall my self be carried unto my long Home,
and the Mourners for me shall walk about the Streets; Verily, this knowledge
would cause an unspeakable Anguish in him. Such a knowledge of our Time, would
cause a cry to be heard among us, like that which was once heard in Egypt; A
cry whereof they kept an Anniversary commemoration among them, for many Ages.

Again; IT may be ascribed unto the Mercy of GOD, that we do not know our Time.
For, hereby we come the better to Know and to Do, the Duty of our Time. Here is
indeed an Ignorance, that is very truly, and very justly, the Mother of
Devotion. Our not knowing our Time, and the Things to come, does train us up,
to a Filial Faith in the Fatherly Care, of the Lord, who only has all those
Things in His own Hands. We read; Jam. IV. 14, 15. Ye know not what shall be on
the Morrow; -- Ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this or
that. We Refer our selves to the Will of GOD, with the more of Resignation; a
most humble and lovely Resignation; because we know not what shall be on the
Morrow. And our Preparation, a Watchful and Prayerful Preparation for the worst
that may happen to us; This is promoted by our not knowing our Time, and what
shall happen to us. It is pressed upon us; Mar. XIII. 33. Take heed, watch, and
pray; for ye know not when the Time is. Because we know not the Time, when we
or ours are to Die, or what is to befall us; If this will not put us upon Watching
and Praying, and keep us in a way of Holy walking, I don't know what will! I
know not my Time, nor what I am to see in a very Little Time. A Man of any
sense will think so. But Methinks, One that has the least grain of sense, must
go on to think; I desire now to keep alive the constant Fear of GOD, all the
Time that He shall allow me; I desire to be armed with Patience and Submission,
for all the uneasy Things which in my Remaining Time I may find reserved for
me. Sirs, we must yield a Blindfold Obedience unto GOD; This Blindfold
Obedience is a Well aimed Obedience.

Secondly. THERE is a Dreadful Judgment of GOD, upon Wicked Men in it, that
they must not know their Time. The wrath of GOD upon Wicked Men must overtake
them. After what manner must it overtake them? We read; Psalm. XI. 6. Upon the
wicked He shall rain snares -- and an horrible tempest, We read; Psalm. LXXIII.
18, 19. Surely, Thou have set them in slippery places; -- How are they brought
into Desolation, as in a Moment? Of the Wicked Man, we are told; Psalm. XXXVII.
13. The Lord shall laugh at him, for He sees that his Day is coming. Why; The
Man does not see it himself! This gives a greater Triumph to the Justice of
GOD, in the Day that comes upon him. The Vengeance of GOD upon a wicked Man,
must come Irresistibly. It comes at once, and that makes it the more
Irresistible. A Whirlwind of Wrath must come upon a wicked Man. A Whirlwind,
that must rise at once. It must gather Suddenly, It must be big with terrible
Thunder. It must break him to pieces, before he has any Time to look about him.
He must not know his Time. No; He must be Surprised by the Vengeance of GOD.

BUT now, Let us make our more particular Improvement of these Faithful sayings.

I. SINCE our GOD will not let us know our Time, we must beware of curious
Inquiries after the Future Events of our Time. There is a certain Prerogative,
of which Vain Man that would be wise, is very ambitious; That is, that
Prerogative of Divination: Men would fain know their Time, and what is to come
hereafter. And, how many cursed Arts of Divination have been invented for the
gratification of this Curiosity! But, O vain Man, Thou liftest up thy hand unto
a Forbidden Tree of Knowledge, when thou art Inquisitive about Futurities. Take
the Rebuke of GOD; Deuteronomy. XXIX. 29. Secret Things belong unto the Lord our GOD.
Indeed there are some Things to come, whereof we may commendably and profitably
be Inquisitive; But they are such Things as our GOD has Reveled unto us, in the
Prophecies of our Bible. These are Things, which Piety would make us Desire to
look into. The Tribe which has Understanding in the Times, is to be applauded
for it. They who Descern not the Signs of the Times, to be upbraided for it.
But what is this, to the Impious and Criminal Curiosity of them, who will needs
be prying into Faturities, which GOD will have to be concealed from us? I tell
you, The Bethshemites might as well pry into the Ark of GOD. For Men to grasp
after such a Knowledge of their Time, as may indispose them for a modest
waiting upon the Providence of GOD; Verily, It Is a great Iniquity. Hence, to
consult Astrologers and Fortune Tellers, about our Time, and the Events
thereof; It Is a Crime; As to Believe them, it is a Weakness, it is a Madness.
Those Prophetasters; Pitiful Jugglers Mankind strangely degrade and disgrace
themselves, by suffering those Jugglers to impose upon them. Indeed, they have
no Rules worth a straw to go by. If they do any thing to purpose, it is by a
Satanical Impulse. Their pretended Rules of Art are mere cheats. And the
wretches themselves usually have such Tragical, but Unforeseen Things befalling
of them, it is mavelous that the credit of the whole Sect is not for ever
Extinguished. Indeed, one cannot but wonder, as the Roman Orator long ago did
about their Augurs, how the wretches can look one another in the Face, without
a scornful sneer at the cheats which they agree to put upon the Vast Herd that
pay Regard unto them. Christians, Indulge not the Vice of a Mind Curious to
know your Time. It Is a crime, that will ripen People for the punishments which
use to come upon Sinners, when they have quite filled up the measure of their
Iniquity. We have seen fearful Examples of Persons, that have gone to
Forbidden-ways of coming at the knowledge of their Time, and they have never
seen one Good Day after it. When Soul was gone so far, as to consult a Witch,
Then the wrath of GOD would bear no longer with him!

II WE must not know our Time; Then it is a Folly for us, to presume upon a
Time, which our GOD has given us no Assurance of. Such is the Folly of them,
who presume upon an Happy Time, while they make it a Time of Impiety, a Time of
Impenitence, a Day of Provocation. O presumpteous ones, In all the word of GOD,
where have you a promise of an Happy Time, for ungodly People, going on still
in their Trespasses? Yea, such is the Folly of all, who presume that their Time
will always be just what it is. For Men to Dream that all things will continue
Long unaltered from what they are at this Time: Let me tell you, This. Dream is
usually a very deadly Symptom. When Men are most Secure, and are Fearless of
any Alteration upon their Circumstances; Then it is, that the Deadliest
Alterations are most near unto them. An Old Man brags, he is as Well and Strong
as he has been these Many Years; he hopes he shall yet see Many Years. He Dies
this Year! Oh! Don't fall into a Dead Sleep of Security. It Is a tremendous
passage; [And mark what I tell you, There are whole Nations that will VERY
QUICKLY have it fulfilled upon them!] 1 These. V. 3. When they say, peace and
safety, then sudden destruction comes. When and How is a Belshazzar taken off?
Instead of a Foolish Security be evermore Suspicious, and still Suspect what
may happen between the Cup and the Lip, and with an easy Frame of Mind Leave
all in the Hand of a Glorious GOD ready to take any Cup that He shall order for
you. Say with an easy Mind; I know not my Time; and I am content that I do not
know it. But, O my God, I know in my Time nothing will befall me, but what thou
orderest, and I cheerfully refer all to thy ordering! But I will go on, and
charge this Folly upon all that presume on the Time to come. While Man knows
not his Time, thou may O Man know so much of thy Time, That the Present Time
is thy only Time. All Thy Time, is This Time. Do not Rely upon a Tomorrow, or
upon, A more convenient Season, for any thing that thou art now to do for the
Good of Thy self or Others O Do with thy might, what thy Hand find to do. For
know this; Thou know of no other Time for the doing of it.

III. WHAT now remains, but this Word of Command, Make all Ready! Oh! Let us
make Ready for whatever Times are to pass over us.

MAKE Ready for Changes of Every Sort. This do by getting into that posture of
Mind, which is described so, Psalm. CXII. 7. He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings; His Heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.

BUT above all, Make Ready for that Greatest and Sureft of all our Changes; The
DEATH of which I may say, The Day is Near, it is near, and it hastneth greatly!
Indeed, for the animation of all PIETY, this Meditation, Man knows not his
Time; It Is an Instrument of which I may say, There is none like it. How would it
come like a Red-hot Stone from the Altar, to inflame our Devotions, if when we
are going to Prayer, we should think, I know not my Time: This may be the last
Time that ever I shall call upon GOD, before I am fetched away to appear before
Him! What Salt would it season our Speech withal, if in our Conversation with
our Friends we should think, I know not my Time: This may be the last Time of
my Conversing with such as I am now talking to! At what a rate should we
Sabbatize, if upon the Arrival of the Lord's Day, we should think, I know not my
Time: This may be the last Lords Day that I shall see before my Dying Day! But
the Grand concern of PIETY, is in that, Be Ye Ready. And, My Friends, That you
may be Ready for the Death, whereof you do not know the Time, you do know, That
you must begin Immediately to Live unto GOD. Your Immediate CONVERSION to GOD,
This you do know, is absolutely Necessary; And your coming into His Covenant,
by consenting that your Great SAVIOR should fulfill for you and in you the
Good pleasure of His Goodness. By this you make sure of Grace, and of Glory,
and of Every Good Thing: and you lay hold on Eternal Life. This you do know,
That without this, you have the Wrath of GOD abiding on you; If you Die without
this, you Die in your Sins; and you pass into a World which cannot be without a
Shuddering Horror though it upon! People refuse to Turn to GOD, and Close with
CHRIST, and Fly from SIN. They do it by Procrastinating; By putting off to
Another Time. O the Phrensy of this Procrastination! Unadvised People, You know
not your time. And therefore This you know; This Work must not be left undone
until Another Time. If your Time should be done, before that Work be done,
which must be done that you may be Reconciled unto GOD, O Miserable Ones, you
Perish Wonderfully! O Miserable Ones, you fall into hands, which it is a
fearful Thing to fall into!

THERE once came unto an unhappy Man, that Message, Jer. XXVIII. 16. This Year
thou shall Die. Man, Thou know not thy Time; And therefore the Message may be
brought unto thee, This Year thou may Die. But what if the Dead Warrant could
be more evidently shown thee, O Thou Prisoner of the Earth: And it could be
more positively said, This Year thou shall Die? Would thou not Immediately
Retire to Consider thy ways; Immediately plead the Sacrifice of a Glorious
CHRIST for the Salvation of thy Soul, the Righteousness of a Glorious CHRIST,
for thy Acceptance with GOD; Immediately give up thy self unto the Holy SPIRIT
of the Lord, and with a most flaming Agony entreat Him to take Possession of
thee! Oh! then do this Immediately, O all ye People every one of you! For, O
Man, Thou know not thy Time. There is not one of us, but for ought he knows,
he may Die before this Week be out: Man, For ought thou know, This Night thy
Soul may be required of thee!

BUT, my Friends, If your Time, when it comes find you unprepared, and
alienated from the Life of GOD, what a Lamentable Condition do you fall into!
what amazing Lamentations are you thrown into! The doleful Cry, Lord, Lord,
Open to us! what will it avail. Twill be All too Late! All too Late! But the
Horror of such a Confusion, O consider of it before it be too late.

YEA, Consider me as now coming to you with a Message from the Dead, and a
Message directed more peculiarly and pathetically to the YOUNG PEOPLE among us;
and a Message which brings with it a Demand of EARLY PIETY, and their Immediate
Conversion to GOD, and Espousal to their SAVIOR.

AN Early Death, and a very Sudden One too, should never occur, without our
Apprehending a Voice of the Glorious GOD unto the Survivers in it. Yea, The
Voice of the Lord Cries to the City, and very particularly to the YOUNG PEOPLE
of the City; The Children of Wisdom will hearken unto it, and with awakened
Souls Lift up their Cries to Heaven upon it; Oh! That before I am cut down, I
may bring forth some Fruit unto GOD!

THE famous Waldo, whose Name has been so considerable among the Waldensian
Witnesses of our Lord, was brought home to GOD, and made a Prayerful, Watchful,
Fruitful Walker with GOD all the rest of his Days, upon his beholding a Young
Friend of his fall down Suddenly Dead before him. And what? Shall never any
more, come to Think on their Ways, and make haste into a Walk with GOD, upon
such an awakening Spectacle!

THOUGH the Child Samuel, were a very Religious Child, and a bright Exemple of
EARLY PIETY, we find, that no less than Three times over, the most Holy GOD,
from the Holy of Holies, called unto him, and he was not aware whose Voice it
was; he was not sensible that there was the Voice of GOD in the call. Alas,
It Is an Error whereto we are all too often liable; and the less of EARLY PIETY
there is in Young People, the more liable they are unto it. Children, There is
a Voice to you, in what you have seen; and a Voice as much directed unto you,
as if you were like Samuel, by Name called upon: and it is a Voice wherein your
EARLY PIETY is very audibly and awfully called for. But are you aware, whose
Voice it is? It Is the Voice of the most Glorious GOD, and of a SAVIOR waiting
that He may be Gracious to you. Oh! Listen to the Voice, Answer to the Voice;
and say, Lord, Speak, for thy Servant hears; and I will be thy Servant: I am
Ready to comply with thy whole will in all hearty Obedience! But what, Oh! what
is the Voice, to be thus hearkened to! The Voice is, Oh! Immediately go through
the Process of Repentance, which the Life of thy Soul depends upon! The Voice
is; Oh! Immediately by coming into the Covenant of GOD get thy Soul bound up in
the Bundle of Life! The Voice is, 'Oh! Immediately Deny all Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, and come into the Resolutions of a Godly and a Sober and a
Righteous Life! Thou know not how soon thy Time to do these Necessary Things
may be over with thee.

NO doubt, There are many Young People among us, who have some Convictions on
their Minds, That things are not with them, as they should be; and they must no
longer continue as they are: Nor are they without some feeble Purposes, I will
not offend any more. Children, Beware lest you Sin away these Convictions, and
a Penal Blindness and Hardness be what you shall thereupon be for ever left
unto. We read concerning Sampson, That while he was yet in his Youth, perhaps a
very Young Lad; Judge. XIII. 25. The Spirit of the Lord began to move him at
times. Thus, there are many Young People, who feel the Spirit of the Lord
beginning to move them at times; and they feel Pious Motions in their Hearts;
They think, They will shake off their Vain Company; They will take up the
Religion of the Closet; They will prepare for, and approach to, the Holy Table.
But, Oh! Don't lose these Motions; and let not the Spirit of the Lord be
provoked by your contempt of His Motions to Depart from you. Woe to them, when I
depart from them, says the Lord! It was among the Dying words, which the late
Eminent Professor of Theology in the University of St. Andrews, in Scotland,
used unto one of his Children; You seem sometimes to have Convictions; Beware
how you treat them. They are the most dangerous things that ever you meddled
with. [ Mr. Haldburton.]
Each of them is a Messenger of GOD. If you seek not GOD, and if you despise
the Messenger of GOD, He will be terribly avenged on you.

IN the Firmament of the Sacred Scriptures, what a Terrible Thunderclap is
That! Prove I. 28. They shall seek me Early, and they shall not find me! Our
Blessed REDEEMER, who is the Wisdom of GOD, says, They that seek me Early shall
find me. How and why is it then said, They shall seek me Early, and they shall
not find me! There is a sad Solution of it. There is the SAVIOUS Early; and
there is, the SINNERS Early. The proposal of the SAVIOR is, To Day if thou will hear my Voice. Yea, As Soon as thou do hear of me, obey me, and submit
unto me. Betimes, Quickly, Presently, without any Delay, make a surrender of
thy self and thy All unto me. But now, the SINNER puts off his cares to get
into the Righteousness of GOD, until all his Youth have been spent in the way
of his own heart, and Satan his had his Marrow, and he begins to feel
Destruction coming as a Whirlwind upon him. Then he thinks it is Early enough to
become a Seeker of GOD. This, This is the EARLY, which Mercy is denied unto.
This the Early, which the Abused Patience of GOD will not permit the Sinner to
find Mercy in! You know the consequence. Oh! Be persuaded, knewing the Terror
of the Lord.

BUT I leave the work in the hands of another Preacher, and a flaming one. It Is
a Preacher that will go home with you; and there I entreat you to Hearken unto
him, that GOD may hearken unto you another Day. Let Conscience now do its
office. I refer the whole Issue to the Conscience of the Hearer; and I beseech
you, that you would in a due Retirement this very Evening, hear what your
Consciences will speak upon this point; What should be done by One who does not
know his Time, nor know whether he shall have one Day more, to do what he has
to do, that he may be Happy to all ETERNITY.

FINIS.

