THE HISTORY OF THE Five INDIAN Nations Depending on the Province OF NEW YORK
In America.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford in New York, 1727.

TO His EXCELLENCY William Burnet, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief of
the Provinces of New York, New Jersey, and Territories thereon depending, in
America, and Vice Admiral of the same, etc.
SIR;
THe Indian Affairs of this Province have appeared to your Excellency of such
Importance to the Welfare of the People here, that you have carefully applied
your Thoughts to them, in which I hope your Excellency will have such Success,
that not only the present Generation shall enjoy the Benefit of your Care, but
our latest Posterity likewise may bless your Memory under their Happiness, the
Foundation of which may be laid under your Excellency's Administration, if the
People here, who is Interest is chiefly concerned, do on their parts second your
Endeavors, as their Duty requires, toward securing the Peace and advancing
the Prosperity of their Country.

The following Account of the Five Nations will show what Dangerous Neighbors
the Indians have been, what Pains a Neighboring Colony (who is Interest is
Opposite to ours) has taken to withdraw their Affections from Us, and how
dreadful the Consequences may be, if that Colony should succeed in their
Designs, and therefore how much we ought to be on our Guard. If we only
consider the Riches which a People, who have been and may again be our Enemies,
receive from the Indian Trade (though we were under no apprehensions from the
Indians themselves) it may be thought imprudent in Us to suffer such People to
grow Rich and Powerful, while it is in our Power to prevent it, with much less
Charge and Trouble than it is in theirs to accomplish their designs.

These Considerations are sufficient to make the Indian Affairs deserve the
most serious Thoughts of the Governor of New York. But I know your Excellency's
Views are not confined to the Interest of your own Country only.

The Five Nations are a poor Barbarous People, under the darkest Ignorance, and
yet a bright and noble Genius shines through these black Clouds. None of the
greatest Roman Hero's have discovered a greater Love to their Country, or a
greater Contempt of Death than these Barbarians. have done, when Life and
Liberty came in Competition: Indeed, I think our Indians have outdone the
Romans in this particulars for some of the greatest Romans have Murdered
themselves to avoid Shame or Torments, This will appear by several Instances in
the second Part of this History.
Whereas our Indians have refused to Dye meanly with the least Pain, when they
thought their Country's Hononr would be at stake, by it, but gave their Bodies
willingly up to the most cruel Torments of their Enemies, to show, that the
Five Nations consisted of Men whose Courage and Resolution could not be shaken.
They fully, however, these noble Virtues by that cruel Passion Revenge, which
they think not only lawful, but Honorable to exert without Mercy on their
Country's Enemies, and for this only they deserve the Name of Barbarians.

But what have we Christians done to make them better? Alas! we have reason to
be ashamed, that these Infidels, by our Conversation and Neighborhood, are
become worse than they were before they knew us. Instead of Virtues we have
only taught them Vices, that they were entirely free of before that time. The
narrow Views of private Interest have occasioned this, and will occasion
greater, even Public Mischiefs, if the Governors of the People do not, like
true Patriots, exert themselves, and put a stop to these growing Evils. If
these Practices be winked at, instead of faithful Friends that have Manfully
fought our Battles for us, the Five Nations will become faithless Thieves and
Robbers, and join with every Enemy that can give them the hopes of Plunder.

If care were taken to plant in them, and cultivate that general Benevolence to
Mankind, which is the true Principle of Virtue, it would effectually eradicate
those horrid Vices occasioned by their Unbounded Revenge; and then the Five
Nations would no longer deserve the Name of Barbarians, but would become a
People whose Friendship might add Honor to the British Nation, though they be
now too generally despised.

The Greeks and Romans, once as much Barbarians as our Indians now are, dei^ied
the Hero's that first taught them the Virtues, from whence the Grandeur of
those Renowned Nations wholly proceeded; but a good Man will feel more real
Satisfaction and Pleasure from the Sense of having any way forwarded the
Civilizing of Barbarous Nations, or of having Multiplied the Number of good
Men, than from the fondest hopes of such extravagant Honor.

These Considerations, I believe, would make your Excellency think a good
History of the Five Nations worthy of your Patronage. As to this, I only hope,
that you will look on my offering the following Account, however meanly
performed, to proceed from the Desire I have of making some Public Profession
of that Gratitude, which is so much the Duty of

SIR, Your Most Obliged And Most Obedient Humble Servant, Cadwallader Colden.

The PREFACE.
THough every one that is in the least acquainted with the Affairs of
North America, knows of what Consequence the Indians, commonly known to the
People of New York by the Name of the Five Nations, are both in Peace and War,
I know of no Accounts of them Published in English; but what are mere
Translations of French Authors. This seems to throw some Reflection on the
Inhabitants of this Province, as if we wanted Curiosity to enquire into our own
Affairs, and that we were willing to rest satisfied with the Accounts the
French give us of our own Indians, notwithstanding that the French in Canada
are always in a different Interest, and sometimes in open Hostility with us.
This Consideration, I hope, will justify my attempting to write an History of
the Five Nations at this time; and my endeavoring to remove that Blame with
which we may be charged; perhaps will at^one for many Faults which the want of
Capacity may have occasioned.

Having had the Perusal of the Minutes of the Commissioners for Indian Affairs,
I have been enabled to collect many Materials for this History, which are not
to be found any where (...): And this Collection will, at least, be useful to
any Person of more Capacity, who shall afterward undertake this Task. When a
History of these Nations shall be well wrote, it will be of great use to all
the British Colonies in North America; for it may enable them to learn
Experience at the Expense of others; and if I can contribute any thing to so
good a Purpose, I shall not think my Labor lost.

It will be necessary to Excuse two things in the following Performance, which,
I am afraid, will be found fault with by those that are the best Judges. The
First is, My filling up so great part of the Work with the Adventures of small
Parties, and sometimes with those of one single Man. The Second is, The
inserting so many Speeches at length. I must confess, that I have done both
these designedly.

As to the First, The History of Indians would be very lame without an Account
of these Private Adventures; for their Warlike Expeditions are almost always
carried on by Surprising each other, and their whole Art of War consists in
managing small Parties. The whole Country being one continued Forest, gives
great Advantages to these Sculking Parties, and has obliged the Christians to
imitate the Indians in this Method of making War. I believed likew^^^, that
some would be curious to know the Manners and Customs of the Indians, in their
Public Treaties especially, who could not be satisfied without taking Notice
of several (...) Circumstances, and some things otherwise of no Consequence. We
are fond of searching into Remote Antiqu^y, to know the Manners of our Earliest
Progenitors: if I be not mistaken, the Indians are living Images of them.

My Design in the Second was, That thereby the Genius of the Indians might
better appear. An Historian may paint Men's Actions in lively Colors, or in
faint Shades, as he likes best, and in both cases preserve a perfect Likeness:
But it will be a difficult Task to show the Wit, and Judgment, and Art, and
Simplicity, and Ignorance of the several Parties, managing a Treaty, in other
Words than their own. As to my part, I thought my self incapable of doing it,
without depriving the judicious Observer of the Opportunity of discovering much
of the Indian Genius, by my Contracting or Paraphrasing their Harrangues, and
without committing often gross Mistakes. For, on these Occasions, a skillful
Manager often talks Confusedly and Obscure^y with design; which if an Historian
should endeavor to amend, the Reader would receive the History in a false
Light.

The Reader will find a great Difference between some of the Speeches made at
Albany, and those taken from the French Authors* The first are genuine, and
truly related, as delivered by the Sworn Interpreters, and where Truth only is
required; a rough Style with it, is preferable to Eloquence without it. But I
must own, that I suspect ou^ Interpreters may not have done Justice to the
Indian Eloquence. For, the Indians having but few words, and few complex Ideas,
use many Metaphors in their Discourse, which interpreted by an hesitating
Tongue, may appear mean, and strike our Imagination faintly, but under the Pen
of a skilful Interpreter may strongly move our Passions by their lively Images.
I have heard an Old Indian Sachem speak with much Vivacity and Elocution, so
that the Speaker pleased and moved the Auditors with the manner of delivering
his Discourse; which, however, as it came from the Interpreter, disappointed us
in our Expectations. After the Speaker had employed a considerable time in
Haranguing with much Elocution, the Interpreter often explained the whole by
one single Sentence. I believe the Speaker in that time imbellished and
colored his Figures, that they might have their full force on the Imagination,
while the Interpreter contented himself with the Sense, in as few words as it
could be expressed.

He that first writes the History of Matters which are not generally known,
ought to avoid, as much as possible, to make the Evidence of the Truth depend
entirely on his own Veracity and Judgment: For this reason I have often related
several Transactions in the Words of the Registers. When this is once done, he
that shall write afterward need not act with so much Caution.

The History of Indians well wrote, would give an agreeable Amusement to many,
every one might find something therein suited to his own Pallat; but even then,
every Line would not please every Man; on the contrary, one with praise what
another condemns, and one desires to know what another thinks not worth the
trouble of Reading: And therefore, I think, it is better to run the Risque of
being sometimes Tedious, than to omit any thing that may be Useful.

I have sometimes thought that the Histories wrote with all the Delicacy of a
fine Romance, are like French Dishes, more agreeable to the Pallat than the
Stomach, and less wholesome than more common and (...) Diet.

An Historian's Views must be various and extensive, and the History of
different People and different Ages, requires different Rules, and often
different Abilities to write it: I hope, therefore, the Reader will receive
this first Attempt of the kind, in this Country, with more than usually
Favorable Allowances.

The Inhabitants of New York have been much more concerned in the Transactions
which followed the year 1688, than in those which preceeded that year. As it
requires uncommon Courage and Resolution to engage willingly in the Wars of
Cruel and Barbarous Enemies; I should be sorry to forget any that may deserve
to be remembered by their Country with gratitude. The First Part of this
History going abroad by it self, may give those that have any Memoirs of their
Friends who have distinguished themselves, an opportunity of Communicating
them, and may thereby enable the Writer hereof to do some Justice to their
Merit.

They likewise that are better acquainted with the Indian Affairs may, perhaps,
find some Mistakes in what is now Published, and may know some things which I
know not, if they will be so kind as to Communicate them, I shall gladly Amend
and Insert them in what is to follow.

C. C.

A short VOCABULARY of some Words and Names used by the French Authors, which
are not generally understood by the English that understand the French
Language, and may therefore be Useful to those that intend to read the French
Accounts, or compare them with the Accounts now Published.

Names used by the French. The same are called by the English or Five Nations.
ABENAGUIES, OWENAGUNGAS, or New England Indians, and are sometimes called the
Eastern-Indians. ALGONKINS, ADIRONDACKS, AMIHOUIS, DIONONDADIES or
TUINUNDADEKS, a Branch or Tribe of the Quatoghies* ANIEZ, MOHAWKS, called
Maquas by the Dutch living in the Province of New York. BAY des PUANS,
ENITAJICHE. CHYGAGON, CONERAGHIK, CORLAER ou CORLARD, SCHENECTADY. But the Five
Nations generally call the Governor of New York by this Name, and they often
likewise comprehend under it the People of this Province. DE-TROIT,
TEUCHSAGRONDIE, HURONS, QUATOGHE. But the French now generally call those of
that Nation only Hurons, who live at Missilimakinack, and who are called
Dionondadiks ronoon by the Five Nations. ILINOIS, CHICTAGHIKS, IROQUOIS, The
FIVE NATIONS. LAC HURON, CANIATARE QUATOGHe or Quatoghe Lake. LOUPS, SCAKHOOK
INDIANS. MANHATTAN, NEW YORK. The Island on which the City stands was called
Manhattan by the Indians, and still retains that Name with the old Dutch
Inhabitants. MASCOUTECS, ODISTASTAGHEKS, MAURIGANS, MAHIKANDER or
River-Indians. MIAMIES, TWIHTWIES. MICHILIMAKINAK, ou MISSILIMAKINAK
TEIADONDORACHIE. MISSISAKES, ACHSISAGHEKS. NADOUESSIAUX, NADUISSEKS. ONEYOUTS,
ONEYDOES. ONNONTIO, YONNONDIO, The Name given to the Governor of Canada by the
Five Nations. ONTARIO LAC, CADARACKUI LAKE, ORANGE, ALBANY. The Dutch of this
Province call this Place Fort Orange to this Day, being the Name given to it by
the Hollanders when they possessed this Country. OUTAGAMIES, Under this Name
the French comprehend the Quaksies and Scunksiks. OUTAWAES, UTAWAWAS or
Wagunhas, and sometimes Necariages, the English generally comprehend under the
Nations living near Missilimakiuak. RENARDS, QUAKSIES, SAUTEURS, ESTIAGHIKS,
SHAOUONONS, SATANAS, TATERAS, TODERIKS, TERRE ROUGE, SCUNKSIKS, TONGORIAS,
ERIGEKS, TSONONTOUANS, SENNEKAS.

N. B. The Five Nations, as they have severally a Different Dialect, use
different Terminations, and the French generally distinguish that Sound in the
Indian Language by ( t) which the English do by ( d) but I have neglected such
small Differences.



A Short VIEW OF THE Form of Government OF THE FIVE NATIONS.
IT is necessary to know something of the Form of Government of the People
whose History one reads. A few words will serve to give the Reader a general
Notion of that of the Five Nations, because it still remains under Original
Simplicity, free from those complicated Contrivances which have become
necessary to those Nations where Deceit and Cunning have increased as much as
their Knowledge and Wisdom.

The Five Nations (as their Name denotes) consist of so many. Tribes or Nations
joined together by a League or Confederacy, like the United Provinces, without
any Superiority of any one over the other. This Union has continued so long
that the Christians know nothing of the Original of it.

They are known to the English under the Names of Mohawks, Oneydoes,
Onnondagas, Cayugas and Sennekas; but it is probable that this Union at first
consisted only of three Nations, viz. the Mohawks, Onnondagas and Sennekas, and
that the Oneydoes and Cayugas were afterward adopted or received into this
League; for the Oneydoes acknowledge the Mohawks to be their Fathers, as the
Cayugas do the Sennekas to be theirs.

Each of the Nations are distinguished into 3 Tribes or Families, who
distinguish themselves by three different sorts of Arms or Ensigns, viz. the
Tortoise, the Bear and the Wolf. The Sachems of these Families, when they sign
any Public Papers, put the Mark or Ensign of their Family to it.

Each Nation is an absolute Republic by its self, governed in all Public
Affairs of War and Peace by the Sachems or Old Men, whose Authority and Power
is gained by and consists wholly in the Opinion the rest of the Nation have of
their Wisdom and Imegrity. They never execute their Resolutions by Compulsion
or Force upon any of their People. Honor and Esteem are their Principal
Rewards, as Shame and being Despised are their Punishments. They have certain
Customs which they observe in their Public Affairs with other Nations, and in
their Private Affairs among themselves, which it is scandalous for any one not
to observe, and draw after them public or private Resentment when they are
broke.

Their Generals and Captains obtain their Authority likewise by the general
Opinion of their Courage and Conduct, and loose it by a Failure in those
Virtues.

Their Great Men, both Sachems and Captains, are generally poorer than the
common People, for they affect to give away and distribute all the Presents or
Plunder they get in their Treaties or War, so as to leave nothing to
themselves. If they should once be suspected of Selfishness, they would grow
mean in the Opinion of their Countrymen, and would consequently loose their
Authority.

Their Affairs of Great Consequence, which concern all the Nations, are
Transacted in a General Meeting of the Sachems of every Nation. These
Conventions are generally held at Onnondaga, which is nearly in the Center of
all the Five Nations. But they have fixed upon Albany to be the Place for their
Solemn Treaties with the English Colonies.

The Tuscaroras, since the War they had with the People of Carolina, fled to
the Five Nations, and are now incorporated with them, so that they now properly
consist of Six Nations (though they still retain the old Name among the English.)
The Tuscaroras, since they came under the Government of New York, behave
themselves well, and remain peaceable and quiet By which may be seen the
advantage of using the Indians well; and, I believe, if they were still better
used, (as there is room enough to do it) the Indians would be proportionably
more Useful to us.

As I am fond to think, that the present state of the Indian Nations exactly
shows the most Ancient and Original Condition of almost every Nation; so I
believe, here we may with more certainty see the Original Form of all
Government, than in the most curious Speculations of the Learned; and that the
Patriarchal, and other Schemes in Politics are no better than Hypotheses in
Philosophy, and as prejudicial to real Knowledge.

I shall only add the Character which Mons. De la Poterie gives of the Five
Nations in his History of North America, viz.

When one talks (says he) of the Five Nations in France, they are thought, by a
common Mistake, to be mere Barbarians, always thirsting after Human Blood; but
their true Character is very different: They are the Fiercest and most
Formidable People in North America, and at the same time as Politic and
Judicious as well can be conceived. This appears from their Management of the
Affairs which they Transact, not only with the French and English, but likewise
with almost all the Indian Nations of this vast Continent.

Errata.
Page 3. line 18. for of the read of these. P. 13. l. 9. f. Naoious r. Nations.
P. 17. l. 19. for Nipererinions r. Nepiceriniens, l. 25. dele toward the. P.
24. l. 13. dele But. P. 28. l. 13. for accomparied r. accompanied. P. 36. l.
11. f. was r. were. P. 74. l. ult. f. Dedonondadik r. Deonondadik. P. 80. l.
16. f. did not, we should r. do not, we shall. P. 94. l. ult. f. Peterie r.
Poterie. P. 111. l. 28. f. Prevent, Mr. r. prevent this, Mr. P. 115. l. 23. f.
when r. then. There are some other small Errors, which do not affect the Sense,
and the Reader may easily correct.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now Published a MAP of the great Lakes, Rivers and Indian Countries
mentioned in the ensuing History. Printed and Sold by William Bradford in
New York.

THE HISTORY OF THE Five INDIAN Nations Depending on the Province of NEW YORK.
PART I.
From the first Knowledge the Christians had of the Five Nations, to the Time
of the happy Revolution in Great Britain.

CHAP. I.
The Wars of the Five Nations with the Adirondacks and Quatoghi^s.
THe first Account we have of the Indians, who call themselves Rodinunchsioum,
now commonly known by the Name of the Five Nations, (and by the French called
Les Iroquois) was from the French, who settled Canada under Mr. Champlain,
their first Governor, in the year 1603. six years before the Dutch settled
New York. When the French first arrived, they found the Adirondacks (by the
French called Algonkins) at War with the Five Nations, which, they tell us, was
occasioned in the following manner.

Hi^toire de L' Amerique sep^enrionale par Mr. de Bacqueville de la Potheric,
Vol. 1. Lettre 11.
The Adirondacks formerly lived about one hundred Leagues above Trois Rivier^s,
where now the Utawawas live; at that time they employed themselves wholly in
Hunting, and the Five Nations made Planting of Corn their whole business, by
which means they became useful to one another, and lived in Friendship
together, the Five Nations exchanging with the Adirondacks Corn for Venison.
The Adirondacks valued themselves, and their manner of living, as more Noble
than that of the Five Nations, and despised them for that reason.

At last the Game began to be scarce with the Adirondacks, they therefore
desired that some of the young Men of the Five Nations might join with them,
and assist them in their Hunting, which the Five Nations the more willingly
agreed to, in hopes that thereby their People might acquire skill in Hunting.

It has been a constant Custom among all the Nations of Indians, to divide
themselves into small Companies while they Hunt, and to divide likewise the
Country among their several Parties, each having a space of 3 or four Miles
Square alloted them, in which none of the others must pretend to Hunt; and if
any Nation should encroach upon the Limits of another, in their hunting, they
certainly draw a War upon themselves.

At this time the Adirondacks were obliged to spread themselves far, because of
the scarcity of the Game, and each Party took some of the Five Nations along
with them, who being less expert than the Adirondacks, performed most of the
Drudgery in their March. One of the Parties, which consisted of six
Adirondacks, and as many of the Five Nations, marched further than any of the
rest, in hopes of the better Sport: They had, for a long time bad luck, so as
to be obliged to live upon the Bark of Trees, and some Roots, which those of
the Five Nations scraped out of the ground, from under the Snow. This extremity
obliged the Adirondacks to part from those of the Five Nations, each making a
separate Company; and after they had agreed on a Day to return to a Cabin
where both of them left their Baggage, each took his Quarter to hunt in: The
Adirondacks were unlucky, and returned first to the Cabin, where not finding
those of the Five Nations, they did not doubt of their being dead of Hunger;
but these young Men of the Five Nations, were become dex^rous with their Bows,
and very cuning in approaching and surprising their Game, which was chiefly
owing to their being more patient and able to bear ^atigues and Hardships than
the Adirondacks were, accordingly they soon arrived loaded with the flesh of
Wild Cows. The Adirondacks could not believe that they were capable of such an
Expedition, without being assisted by some of their Nations. However, the
Adirondacks received them with pleasant Countenances, and congratulated them on
their Success. Those of the Five Nations made the other a Present of the best
of their Venison: They eat together with much Civility, on both sides: But the
Adirondacks becoming Jealous of this Success, conspired together, and in the
Night time murdered all the six Men of the Five Nations, while they slept. Next
Morning the Adirondacks followed their Footsteps, by which they had returned
to the Cabin, and found the place where they had hunted, and much Venison
which they had killed, which the Adirondacks dried, and carried home along with
them.

The rest of the Five Nations enqui^^d after their Companions; The Adirondacks
answered very cooly, that they parted soon after they had left home, and they
knew not what (...) become of them. But the People of the Five Nations being
impatient to know something certain of their Companions, sent out several
Parties in quest of them: They followed the Footsteps of those Hunters, and
found the six Dead Bodies, which the wild Beasts had dug up; and upon
Examination found they had been Murdered. They made many Complaints to the
Chiefs of the Adirondacks, of the Inhumanity of this Murder, who contented
themselves with blaming the Murderers, and ordering them to make some small
Presents to the Relations of the murdered Persons, without being apprehensive
of the Resentment of the Five Nations; for they looked upon them as men not
capable of taking any Revenge.

Those of the Five Nations ^mother'd their Anger, and not being willing to
trust themselves any longer with the Adirondacks, they returned home to their
own People, who then lived near Montreal on the Banks of St. Lawrence River.
They gave an account of this Assassination to their Nation, who upon hearing it
conceived a vast Indignation against the Adirondacks, who being advised of the
secret movements of the Five Nations, Re^olv'd to oblige them to submit to
their Law, by force of Arms. The Five Nations apprehending their Power, retired
to the Southward of Cadarackui Lake, where they now live, and defended
themselves at first but faintly against the Vigorous Attack^ of the
Adirondacks. But afterward becoming more expert, and more used to War, they no
only made a brave Defense, but likewise made themselves Masters of the great
Lakes, and chased the Shawanons from thence.

While the two Nations were at War, the French arrived and settled in Canada,
and the Five Nations having forced the Adirondacks to leave their own Country
and retire toward Quebeck, the French thought themselves obliged to assist
their New Allies, the Adirondacks, without examining into the Reasons of the
War.

Thus began a War and Hatred between the French and the Five Nations, which
cost the French much Blood, and more than once had like to have occasioned the
entire Destruction of their Colony. The War had driven the Adirondacks to
Quebec, and the desire of Trading with the French, had drawn likewise all their
Allies that way, who agreed with them jointly, to make War against the Five
Nations, and to attack them in their own Country.

Mr. Champlain desiring to give his Allies Proof of his Love, and the Valor of
the French Nation, put himself at the Head of a Body of Adirondacks, and passed
with them into Corlars Lake, which from this time the French have called by Mr.
Champlain's name.

They had not long been in the Lake before they discovered a Body of the Five
Nations going to War. As soon as they saw each other, Shouts and Cries began on
both Sides. Mr. Champlain made his men keep their Canoes at some distance; The
Five Nations in the mean time landed, and began to entrench themselves, by
cutting down the Trees round them; The Adirondacks stopped their Canoes near the
Enemy, and sent to offer them Battle, who answered, That they must stay till
Morning, when both sides would have the Advantage of the Day Light: The night
passed in Dancing and War Songs, mixed with a thousand Reproaches against each
other. Mr. Champlain had put some French in each Canoe, and ordered them not to
show themselves, that their appearance might be the greater surprise to the
Enemy, in the time of the Battle. As soon as day light appeared, the
Adirondacks ^anded, in order of Battle, and the Five Nations to the Number of
200 Men marched out of their ^ntrenchments, and put themselves in order, with
three Captains in the Front, having large ^lumes of Feathers on their Heads,
and then advanced with a grave Air and slow Pace. The Adirondacks gave a great
Shout and opened to the Right and Left, to give room for Mr. Champlain and the
French to advance: This new Sight surprised the Enemy, and made them halt, to
consider it, upon which the French firing, the three Captains were killed: This
more surpised the Five Nations; for they knew that their Captains had a kind
of Cuirass made of pieces of Wood joined together, that was Proof against
Arrows, and they could not perceive in what manner the Wound was given by which
they fell so suddenly. Then the Adirondacks gave a terrible Shout, and attacked
the Enemy, who received them bravely, but a second Volley from the French, put
them into such Confusion (having never before seen fire Arms) that they
immediately fled. The Adirondacks took twelve Prisoners, and as the Custom of
the Indians is, burnt one of them alive, with great Cruelty; His Torment had
continued much longer than it did, if Mr. Champlain had not in Compassion, and
abhorrence of such Barbarity, Shot the poor Wreth through the Head.

The Adirondacks having their Numbers thus very much increased, and their fire
Arms giving them new Confidence, proposed nothing less to themselves, than the
entire Destruction of the Five Nations, by open Force; And upon this their
Young Warriors became Fierce and Insolent, and could not be kept under any
Discipline, Order or Subjection to their Chiefs or Captains, but upon all
Occasions rashly attacked the Enemy, who were obliged to keep themselves upon
the Defensive, and to make up what they wanted in Force, by Stratagems, and a
skillful management of the War. The Young Men of the Five Nations soon
perceived the Advantages they gained by this Conduct, and every day grew more
submissive to their Captains, and diligent in executing any Enterprise, while
the Adirondacks confiding in their Numbers and their fire Arms, thought of
nothing but of Conquering by mere Force.

The Five Nations sent out small Parties only, who meeting with great Numbers
of the Adirondacks, retired before them, with seeming Fear and Terror, while
the Adirondacks pursued them with Fury, and without thought, till they were
cunningly drawn into Ambu^cades, where most of their men were killed, or taken
Prisoners, with little or no loss to the Five Nations.

By these means and their being frequently surpriz^d by the Five Nations, while
they remained consident in their Number, the Adirondacks wasted away, and their
boldest Soldiers were almost entirely destroyed, while the Number of the Five
Nations rather encr^ased by the Addition of the Prisoners which they took from
the Sh^^vanons.

It has been a constant Maxim with the Five Nations, to save the Children and
Young Men of the People they Conquer, to adopt them into their own Nation, and
to educate them as their own Children, without Distinction; These young People
soon forget their own Country and Nation; and by this Policy the Five Nations
make up the Losses which their Nation suffers by the People they loose in War.
The wisest and best Soldiers of the Adirondacks, when it was too late,
discovered that they must imitate and learn the Art of War from those Enemies,
that they at first Despised. Now five of their chief Captains end^avour to
perform by themselves singly, with Art and by Stratagem, what they could not
perform by Force at the Head of their Armies; but they having no longer any
hopes of Conqu^ring their Enemies, their thoughts were only set on Revenge.

The Five Nations had taken one of the chief Captains of the Adirondacks, and
had burnt him (...). This gave Piskaret, who was the chief Captain of the
Adirondacks so deep a (...), that the Difficulty or Danger of the most
desperate Attempt made no Imp^^^sion upon his Spirit, where he had the hope of
Revenge.

I shall give the Particulars of this from the French Accounts; for by it the
nature of the Indians, and the manner of their making War^ may be more easily
understood.

Piskar^t, with four other Captains, set out from Tro^s ^ivieres in one Canoe,
each being provided with three Fuz^es. In two Days they reached Sorel River,
where they p^rceiv'd five Canons of the Five Nations with ten Men in each. At
first those of the Five Nations believed that this Canoe was the van of some
considerab^e Party, and therefore went from it with all the force of their
Paddl^s. When they saw that after a considerable time, no others followed, they
returned, and as soon as they came within call, they rais^d their WarShout,
which they call S^ss^kue, and b^d Piskaret and his Fellows Surr^nder. He
answered, That (...) was their Prison^r, and that he could no (...) surviv^
(...) Captain they had burnt; but that he might not be accused of surr^nd^ing
Cowardly, he bid them advance to the middle of the River, which they did, with
surprising Swiftness. (...) had before hand loaded all his Arms with two
Bull^ts each, which he joined together with a small Wire ten Inches in length,
with design to t^ar the Canons in pieces (which it could not fa^l to do, they
being made only of Bir^h Ba^k) and gave his Compa^^ns Direction, each to choose
a Canoe, and level his shot between Wind and Water

As the Canoes approached, he made as if he had designed to escape; and to
prevent him, those of the Five Nations separated from each other with too much
Precipitation, and Surrounded him. The Adirondacks, the better to amuse the
Enemy, sung their Death Song, as ready to surrender themselves, when every one
suddenly took his Piece and fired upon the Canoes, which they Reiterated three
times, with the Arms that lay ready. Those of the Five Nations were extremely
surpised; for Fire Arms were still terrible to them, and they tumbled out of
their Canoes, which immediately sunk. The Adirondacks knocked them all on the
head in the Water, except some of the chiefs that they made Prisoners, who is
Fate was as cruel as that of the Adirondack Captain, who had been burnt alive.

Piskaret was so far from having his Revenge glutted with this Slaughter, and
the cruel Torments with which he made his Prisoners dye, that it seemed rather
to give a keener edge to it; for he soon after attempted another ente^priz^, in
which the boldest of his Countrymen dur^t not accompany him.

As he was well acquainted with the Country of the Five Nations, he set out
alone about the time that the Snow began to melt, with the precaution of
putting the hinder part of his Snow Shoes forward, that if any should happen
upon his footsteps, they might think that he was gone the contrary way; and
for further security went along a Ridge, where the Snow was melted, and where
his footsteps could not be discovered, but in a few places. When he found
himself near one of the Villag^s of the Five Nations he hid himself in a hollow
Tree: In the Night he found out a Place nearer at hand, and more proper to
re^ire into, for the execution of any Enterprise. He found four Piles of Wood
standing close together, which the Indians had provided against the Winter and
their b^^ie times, in the middle of which was a hollow place, in which he
thought he could safely hide. The whole Village was fast asleep when he entered
a Cabbi^ ^ill'd four Persons and took off their Scalps, being all that were in
the House, and then re^^rn'd quietly into his Hole. In the Morning the whole
Village was in an Alarm, as soon as the Murder was discovered, and the young
Men made all possible haste to follow the Murderer. They discovered Pisk^rets
footsteps, which ^ppear'd to them to be the footsteps of some Person that
fled; this ^ncourag'd them in their Pursuit: Sometimes they lost the Track, and
sometimes found it again, till at last they en^^^ely lost it, where the Snow
was melted, and they were forced to return, after much useless fatigue.
Piskaret quiet in the midst of his Enemies waited with impatience for the
Night. As soon as he saw that it was time to act ( viz. in the first part of
the night, when the Indian are observed to sleep very fast) he ^nter'd into
another Cabin, where he killed every Person in it, and immediately retired
into his Wood-pile In the morning there was a greater Outcry that before,
nothing was seen but Wailing, Tears and a general Consternation. Every one run
in quest of the Murderer, but no Tract to be seen besides the Tract which they
saw the day before. They searched the Woods, Swamp and Cli^^s of the Rocks, but
no Murderer to be found. They began to suspect Piskaret who is Boldness and
Cunning was too well known to them. They agreed that two me^ next night should
watch in every Cabin. All day long he was contriving some new Stratagem he
bundles up his Scalps, and in the night he slips out of his lurking place, He
approach^^ one of the Cabbins as quietly as possible and peeps through a hole to
see what could be done there he perceived Guards on the Watch, he went to
another, where he found the same care When he discovered that they were every
where upon their Guard he resolved to strike his last blow, and opened a Door,
where he found: C^ntinel nodding with his Pipe in his mouth Piskaret split his
Scull with his Hatchet, but had not time to take his Scalp, for another man who
watched at the other end of the Cabin, raised the cry, and Piskaret fled. The
whole Village immediately was in an Uproar, while he got off as fast as he
could; Many pursued him, but as he was so swift as to run down the Wild Cows
and the Deer, the pursuit gave him no great uneasiness; When he perceived they
came near him, he would Halloe to them; to quicken their pace, then spring from
them like a Buck. When he gained any distance he would loiter till they came
near, then halloe, and fly. Thus he continued all day, with design to tire them
out, with the hopes of over-taking him.

As they pursued only a single Man, five or six only of the Nimblest young Men
continued the Chase, till being tired they were forced to rest in the Night,
which when Piskaret observed, he hid himself near them in a hollow Tree. They
had not time to take Victuals with them, and being wearied and hungry, and not
apprehending any Attack from a single Person that fled, they all soon fell a
sleep. Piskaret observed them, fell upon them, killed them all, and carried
away their These are the Trophies of Victory which all the Indian Nations carry
home with them, if they have time to (...) the Scalp from the Skull of their
Enemies, when they have killed them; and sometimes they are so Cruel as to
(...) the Scalp off, without killing them, or otherwise (...) them, but leave
them in this miserable Condition with their Skull (...).
Scalps.

These Stories may seem incredible to many, but will not appear to be
Improbable to those who know how extremely Revengeful the Indians naturally
are. That they every day undertake the greatest Fatigues, the longest Journeys,
and the greatest Fatigues, the longest Journeys, and the greatest Dangers, to
gratify that Devouring Passion, which seems to gnaw their Souls, and gives
them no ease till it is satisfied. All Barbarous Nations have been observed to
be Revengful and Cruel, the certain Consequences of an unbounded Revenge, as
the Curbing of these Passions is the happy Effect of being Civilized.

The Five Nations are so much delighted with Stratagems in War, that no
Superiority of their Force makes them neglect them. They amused therefore the
Adirondacks and their Allies, the Quatoghies, (called by the French, Hurons) by
sending to the French, and desiring Peace. The French desired them to receive
some Priests among them, in hopes that these prudent Fathers would by some Art
reconcile them to the French, and engage their Aff^^^^ons. The Five Nations
accepted the Offer, and some Jesuits went along with them. But after they had
the Jesuits in their Power, they used them only as Hostages, and by that means
obliged the French to be Neuter, while they prepared to Attack the Adirondacks
and Quatoghies, and accordingly entirely destroyed the Quatoghies in a Battle
fought within two Leagues of Quebeck, while the French dur^t not give their
Allies any assistance.

Indeed the French Author says, That if the Five Nations had known the weakness
of the French at that time, they might easily have destroyed that Colony.

The Defeat of the Quatoghies struck Terror into all the Allies of the
Adirondacks, who were at that time very Numerous, because of the benefit of the
French Trade, which they had by their means; for before that time the Indians
had not any Iron Tool among them.

The Nipeceriniens, who then lived on the Banks of St. Laurence River, fled to
the Northward, in hopes that the extreme Coldness of the Climate, and a barren
Soil, would free them from the fear they had of the Five Nations. The remainder
of the Quatoghies fled with the U^awawas toward the Southwestward, and for
their greater Security settled in an Island, which the French still call by
their Name, which being further than the Name of the Five Nations had at that
time reached, they thought themselves secure by the Distance of the Place.

This Expedition having succeeded so well, the Five Nations gave out, that they
intended next Winter to visit Yonnondio (the name they give to the Governor of
Canada.) These visits are always made with much Show. They gathered together
1000 or 1200 Men, and passing over Corlaers Lake, they fell in with Nicolet
River, where it falls into the South side of Lake St. Pierre in St. Laurence
River, eight Leagues above Trois Rivieres; Six Scouts marched three Leagues
before the Army, who met with Piskaret, as he returned from Hunting, loaded
with the Tongues of wild Cows. As they came near him, they sang their Song of
Peace, and Piskaret taking them for A^^ba^^adors, ^topt, and sung his. It is
probable that he having glutted his private Revenge, and his Nation having been
long harassed with a Cruel War, he too greedily swallowed the Bait: Peace being
what he and all his Nation earnestly desired. He invited them therefore to go
along with him to his Village, which was but two or three Leagues further: and
as he went, he told them, that the Adirondacks were divided into two Bodies,
one of which hunted on the North side of St. ^aurence River at Wabmache, three
Leagues above Trois Rivieres, and the other at Nicolet. One of the Scouts had
on purpose staid behind, this Man followed Piskaret, and coming up behind him,
knocked him on the Head with his Hatchet. Then they all returned to their Army
with Piskaret's Head. The Five Nations immediately divided likewise into two
Bodies, they surprised the Adirondacks, and cut them in pieces.

Thus the most Warlike and Polite Nation of all the Indians in North America
was almost entirely Destroyed by a People they at first despised, and by a War
which their Pride and Injustice brought upon them. Immorality has ever ruined
the Nations where it abounded, whether they were Civilized or Barbarians, as
Justice and strict Discipline has made others Flourish and grow Powerful.

A very few Adirondacks now remain in some Villages near Quebeck, who still
waste away and decay, by their drinking Strong Waters, though when the French
first settled Quebeck, 1500 Men of them lived between that and Silleri, which
are only a League distant, besides those that lived at Saguenay, Trots
Rivieres, and some other places. After this Battle the Adirondacks have never
been considered as of any consequence, either in Peace or War.

The Quatoghies and Utawawas soon began to be in want of the European
Commoditi^s, and their desire to make themselves considerable among their new
Friends, set them upon attempting to return to trade at Quebeck, by which means
the place of their retreat was discovered to the Five Nations, who not having
their Revenge satiated, so long as any of that Nation remained, resolved at all
hazards to march through these vast unknown Deserts, to satisfy their cruel
Passion. The Quatoghies had the good Fortune to discover them time enough to
make their Escape, and fled to the Putewatemies, who lived a days Journey
further, where they and all the Neighboring Nations secured themselves in a
large Fort. The Five Nations followed, but being in want of Provisions, they
could not attempt a Siege, and therefore proposed a Treaty to the Putewatemies,
which was accepted. The Putewatemies agr^^d to a League of Friendship, in which
they acknowledged the Five Nations to be the Master of all the Nations round
them, applauded their Valor, and promised to supply them with Provisions, but
would not trust themselves out of their Fort. The Putewatemies accordingly sent
them out a supply of Provisions, but with design to effect, by Treachery, what
they dur^t not attempt by Force; for they Poi^on'd all the Provisions This was
discovered to them by an old Quatoghie, who had a Son Prisoner among the Five
Nations. His affection for his Son overcame his hatred to his Country's
Enemies. This Treachery enraged the Five Nations against the P^tewatemies, and
the Neighboring Nations, but Famine obliged them to return at this time, and
to separate their Army into Parties, the better to provide for their
Subsistence by Hunting. One of these Parties fell in with a Village of the
Chichtag^icks (called by the French, Ilinois) and surpised the old Men, Women
and Children, when the young Men were abroad Hunting, but they upon their
return gathered all the rest of the Villages; pursued the party of the Five
Nations, and recovered the Prisoners.

This was the first time that the Five Nations had appeared in those Parts, but
their Name was become so Terrible, that the Chicktaghicks, notwithstanding of
this Advantage, left their Country, and fled to the Nations that lived
Westward, till the general Peace was settled by the French, and then they
returned to their own Country.

CHAP. II.
Their Wars and Treaties of Peace with the French from 1665. to 1683. and their
Affairs with New York in that Time.
IN june, 1665, Mons. de Trasi being Appointed Viceroy of America, arrived at
Quebeck, after he had visited all the Islands in the West Indies, and brought
with him four Companies of Foot. In September of the same year Mr. Coursel
arrived with the Commission of Governor General of Canada, with eleven Vessels,
which transported a Regiment, and several Families, with all things necessary
for the establishing of a Colony. The French Force being thus so considerably
augmented, he resolved in the Winter to send out a Party against the Mohawks,
which by the Cold, and their not knowing the use of Snow-Shoes, suffered very
much, without doing any thing against the Enemy.

This Party fell in with Schenectady, a small Town which Corlaer (a
considerable Man among the Dutch) had then newly settled. When they appeared
near Schenectady they were almost killed with Cold and Hunger, and the Indians,
who then were in that Village, had entirely finished their Ruin, if Corlaer, in
Compassion of fellow Christians) had not ^ontriv'd their escape. He had a
mighty Influence over the Indians, and it is from him that all the Governors of
New York are called Corlaer by the Indians to this Day, though he himself never
was Governor. He persuaded the Indians that this was but a small Party of the
French Army, come to amuse them, that the great Body was gone directly toward
their Castles, and that it was necessary for them immediately to go in Defense
of their Wives and Children: which they did. As soon as the Indians were gone,
he sent to the French, and supplied them with Provisions to carry them back.
The French Governor, in order to Reward so signal a Service, invited Corlaer to
Canada, and, no doubt, with design to make use of his Interest with the Indians
in some Project, in favor of the French Colony; but as he went through the
Lake (by the French called Champlain) his Canoe was Over^et, and he drowned.
From this Accident that Lake has ever since been called Corlaers Lake by the
people of New York.

There is a Rock in this Lake, on which he Waves dash and fly up to a very
great height, when the Wind bl^ws strong; the Indians fancy, that an Old Indian
lives under this Rock, who has the Power of the Winds, and therefore as they
pass this Rock in their Voyages through this Lake, they always throw a Pipe or
some Tobacco, or something else to this Old Indian, and pray a favorable Wind.
The English that often pass with them, sometimes laugh at them; but they are
sure to be told of Corlaers Death with a grave air. Your great Countryman
Corlaer (say they) as he passed by this Rock, jested at our Fathers making
Presents to this Old Indian, and in derision turned up his Backside toward
the Rock, but this Affron^ cost him his Life.

But the next Spring the Viceroy and the Governor, with 28 Companies of Foot,
and all the Inhabitants of the Colony, marched into the Country of the Mohawks,
with a design to destroy this Nation, which by the War not only prevented their
Commerce with other Indians, but even prevented the Settlement of the Colony.
This certainly was a bold Attempt, to march thus above 250 Leagues from
Quebeck, through unknown Forre^ts; but all they were able to do, was to burn
some of their Villages, and to Murder some Old Men, that (like the Old Roman
Senators) would rather dye than desert their Houses.

This Expedition. however, gave the Five Nations Apprehensions they had not
before; for they never before that saw so great a Number of Europeans^ whose
Firearms were extremely Terrible, and they therefore thought proper to send
and beg a Peace, which was concluded in 1667.

But they (...) naturally very Enterprizing and Haughty, a Party of the Five
Nations met with a Party of the French a hunting, and quarrelled with them. The
French Author does not inform us of the particulars: But it seems the Indians
had the Advantage, for they killed several of the French and carried one
Prisoner into their own Country. Mon^. De Coursel sent to Threaten the Five
Nations with War, if they did not deliver up these Murderers.

The Five Nations being at this time apprehen^ive of the French Power, sent
Agariata, the Captain of the Company that did the Mischief, with forty others,
to beg Peace; but Mr. Coursel was resolved to make an Example of Agariata. He
therefore ordered him to be H^ng'd, in the Presence of his Countrymen, which
kind of Death they having never seen before, it struck them with Terror, and
the French, think that this Severity was a great means of preserving the Peace
till the year 1683.

The Dutch having settled New York in 1609. (which they called the
New-Netherlands) they entered into an Alliance with the Five Nations, which
continued without any Breach on either side, and were frequently useful to the
French, in saving the French that were Prisoners from the Cruelty of the
Indians, as before observed.

In 1664. New York was taken by the English, who immediately entered into an
Alliance and Friendship with the Five Nations, which has continued without the
least Breach to this Day. History, I am afraid, cannot inform us of an Instance
of the Most Christian or Most Ca^holick King Observing a League so strictly,
and for so long a time as these Barbarians have done.

Both the English and French (Peace being every where settled) endeavor to
extend their Commerce and Alliances among the Indians which lie to the Westward
of New York. The French in their Measures discovered a Design of Conquering and
Commanding; for Mr. de Front^n^c, who had succeeded in the Government of Canada
in the Year 1672, persuaded the Indians to allow him to build a Fort at
Cadarackui, under the Notion of a Store for Merchandise and security for his
Traders, and under the same pretense built small Forts at some other
considerable Passes far in the Country.

The English and Dutch Prosecuted their (...) only with the Arts of Peace, by
sending People among the Indians to gain their Affections, and to per^wade them
to come to Albany to Trade; but even these honest^ Designs met with
Obstruction, and had not so considerable Success, by reason of the War with the
Dutch, as otherwise they might have had; for in the Year 1674. New York being
Surpised by the Dutch, and Restored, the alterations in Government and of
Masters, obstructed very much the designs of gaining the Indians. Their Trade
was likewise considerably hindered by the War, which the Five Nations had with
the The Indians living on the Banks of Hudsons River, within or near the
English Settlements.
River Indians, which forced many of the River Indians to seek shelter among
the Utawawas, who fell under the French Government.

At last the English, Dutch and French having made Peace in Europe, and the
Governor of New York likewise having obtained a Peace between the Five Nations
and Mahikanders or River Indians, the English and French were at full liberty
to prosecute their designs of extending their Commerce among the Indians, which
both did with very considerable success and advantage to the Inhabitants of
their Colonies.

But this Justice must be done to the French, that they far exceeded the
English in the daring attempts of some of their Inhabitants, in traveling very
far among unknown Indians, discovering new Countries, and every where spreading
the Fame of the French Name and Grandeur, by making themselves the Arbitrators
in all difference between the Indian Nations. The Sieur Perot deserves to be
remembered, who pushed his Discoveries as far as the Putewatemies and Indians
living round the farther Lakes, with the greatest Fatigues and Danger. He
acquired the Languages of many Nations, and brought them to Canada to Trade,
before the Peace was made with the Five Nations. In the Year 1667 he
accomparied the Officer that was sent to the Fall of St. Mary, to take
Possession of all that Country, in the name of the French King, in the presence
of many of the Sachems of the Nations that lived round the Lakes, where there
was an Alliance agreed to with the French, but (even by the French Books) no
Subjection was Promised.

In the Year 1697. Mr. De la Sale built a Sloop or Bark of sixty Tons on
Ohswego Lake, and provided her with great Guns. He carried this Vessel as far
as Missilimackinack, and there loaded her with Furrs and Skins, and then went
on the Discovery of the Misissipi. He only left five or six French on board to
carry her back to Oniagara: But the Indians entertained such a Jealousy of this
floating Castle, that they resolved secretly to destroy it, though they expressed
nothing to Mr. De la Sale, but Admiration of the extraordinary Machine, and
sent for all the Nations round to come to see it. When they were together they
consulted how to surprise and destroy it; and this design they kept so secr^t,
not only before the Execution, that Mr. De la Sale had no suspicion of it, but
afterward likewise, for it was long before it was known what became of this
Vessel. At first they thought of killing all the French among them, and
throwing themselves on the English for their Protection; but their Courage
fan'd them. They thought they might act with more security after Mr. De la Sale
and his Company should be gone on their intended Discoveries. The French having
no suspicion of their designs, permitted a Number of Indians to come on board
in a Bay where the Bark came to an Anchor, in her return, and the Indians
taking advantage of their Numbers, and the security of the French, murdered the
Men and burnt the Vessel.

The Courage and Resolution of these Gentlemen ought to be taken Notice of, for
their Honor, not withstanding that the English say, that the Barrenness and
Poverty of Canada pushes the Men of Spirit there upon Enterprises they would
not attempt if they lived in the Province of New York.

CHAP. III.
The Affairs of the Five Nations with the Neighboring English Colonies.
THe Five Nations being now amply sup^ply'd with Firearms and Ammunition give
full swing to their Warlike Genius and therefore resolved to Revenge the
Affronts they had at any time received from their Neighbors. The nearest
Nations as they were at^^ckt, commonly flying to those that were further off,
the Five Nations pursued This, together with a desire they had of Conquering
and of making all the Nations round them their Tributaries, or to acknowledge
the Five Nations to be their Masters, made the Five Nations overrun the
greatest part of North America. They carried their Arms as far South as
Carolina, and to the Northward of New England, and as far West as the River
Misissipi, over a vast Country which extends 1200 Miles in Length, from North
to South, and about six hundred Miles in Breadth, and entirely Destroyed many
Nations that made Resistan^^.

These Warlike Expeditions often proved ^roubl^som to the Colonies of Virginia
and Maryland; for not only the Indians who were Friends to those Colonies,
became Victims to ^he Fury of the Five Nations, but the Christ^^n ^nhabitants
likewise were involved often in the ^ame Calamity.

For this reason about the year 1677. the Government of Maryland sent Coll.
Coursey to Albany to make a League of Friendship between Virginia and Maryland
on the one part, and the Five Nations on the other; but this League was soon
shaken by some Parties of the Oneydoes, Onond^g^s and S^nn^k^s, who were out
when this Covenant was made, and were ignorant of it. One of these Parties met
with the Susquehana Indians, who were in Friendship with Maryland, and ^ell
upon them, ^ill'd ^our, and took six Prisoners. Five of ^hese Prisoners fell to
the share of the Sennekas, who, as soon as they arrived in their Country, sent
them back with Pr^s^nts, to show that they kept to their (...) with Maryland;
but the O^eydoes d^tain'd t^^ Prisoner they had.

Another (...) went against the (...) Inhabitants, and carried away their
Scalps with six Christian Prisoners.

The Mohawks all this while kept themselve strictly to their League, and
suffered none to their Indians to go toward Virginia and Maryland.

There is reason to think that the Dutch, who lived at Schenectady at that
time, spirited up the Indians against the English; For the Command at Albany
hearing that the Five Nations, (the On^ydoes especially) were in an Alarm from
some Jealousy that they had entertained of the English at New York sent Arnout
and Daniel, two Interpreters of the Indian Language, to persuade them to come
to Albany, in order to be assured of the English Friendship, and to have their
Jealousy removed. Which the Interpreter having happily brought to pass,
Swerisse, one of the chief Men or Sachims of the Oneydoes excused his
Countrymen at Albany, the 15th of February 1678, 9. as follows,

Father Corl^^r;

WE are now come to speak to you of some strange Occur^nces that have lately
happened.

Last Harvest one of our Indians, called Treuhtanendo, went to Schenectady to
buy goods; he was told of the Mischief we had done in Virginia; To which the
People of Schenectady added, That the English of this Government were very
Angry, and that they would kill us.

Soon afterward another of our Indians, called, Adagounwa, went to
Schenectady, in his way to Albany; He was told by the People there, That if he
went forward to Albany he might sing to Morrow, for the English there would
bind and kill him; Whereupon he and another Indian immediately returned, and
brought this Report to to our Castle at Oneido.

But we now see the Governors good heart, notwithstanding of all this bad News.

At last the People of Schenectady told five of our Indians, who intended for
Albany, That if they went forward they would all be Dead Men; upon which one
run immediately back, but the other four went forward. This Man, (who is called
O^^^wahrarihta) told us, That the other four Men were taken by the English, and
that two or three hundred Men were upon their way to fight us. Upon hearing of
this, I acknowl^dge, that though I, Swerisse, be a Sachem, I left the Affair
wholly to our Soldiers, seeing that they were Soldiers who came against us;
Whereupon our Men immediately Resolved to Fortifi^ the Castle.

While this was doing the War-Shout was raised. Our Men called out, That
Horsemen came against us; Now we shall be put to it. These proved to be the
two Interpreters, who being received into the Castle, our young Soldiers, whose
Spirits had been vehemently raised, run round them with their Hatchets in their
hands, threatening to kill them. But I, Swerisse, did what I could to pacify
our Men, and told the Messengers, That we would hear them to Morrow.

Father Corlaer; We desire that your Anger may be appeased, and that your Mind
may be quieted. We give no credit to the stories which our Indians brought us
from Schenectady, and we shall not believe any such Stories for the future
Seeing all of us to the Westward, even from New York to the Sennekas, are under
one Government, Why is Schenectady the only bad place? for We hold firmly to
the Old Covenant.

Then he gave a Belt of Wampum Wampum is the current Money among the Indians,
it is made of the large Whelk Shell ( Briecinum) and shaped like long Beads.
With this, put upon strings, they make these Belts, which they give in all
their Treaties, as signs of Confirmation, to remain with the other Party. The
Wampum is of two sorts, viz. White and Black; the Black is the ^ar^^t, and most
valuable. By a regular mixing of the Black and White they distinguish their
Belts with various Figures, which they often suit to the Occasion of making use
of them. Wompum is called Zewant by the Dutch in this Province.


He in the next place gave an account of what had happened in Virginia, And
then said,

Father Corlaer;

Have Pity on our Indian Prisoners, as We have had on these Prisoners ( viz. A
Woman and her two Children) which we now deliver to you, notwithstanding that
they have been given away, according to our Custom. We pray therefore his
Honor to take Pity on our People that are Prisoners, especially on the Indian
Woman, his Kins-Woman, whom he has adopted as a Grandchild. Let them be
Released, if alive, otherwise give us some of the Canastoga Indians in their
room. As to the other three Christian Prisoners, the Woman and her two Children
that are yet with us, We desire first to have our Indians Restored, or others
in their room, before they be Delivered.

Governor Andross, being acquainted by Letter with this last Proposal of the
Oneydoes required the immediate Delivery of the Christian Prisoners, and
promised to write to Virginia to have the Indian Prisoners saved Some Presents
being given to to the Oneydoes they answered,

We Thank the Governor for his good Inclination and Affection. Our Heart is
good, and we see his Heart is likewise good; if it was otherwise we could not
live: We thank the Governor for the Present now given us: It is his welcome
from England.

Father Corlaer, We are your Children, and the Mobawks, your Brethren, are
likewise our Fathers. We rejoice because your Heartsare good. Since the
Governor is not satisfied with these three Prisoners, we have now unanimously
Resolved to bring the other three which are still with us, as soon as possible;
but the Rivers are now so full of Water, that we cannot bring them this Moon,
but the next Moon, I, Swerisse, promise to come with them.

We obey the Governor's Orders, that we may not be ashamed, and therefore We
Release all the Prisoners. We hope the Governor will likewise act so as he need
not be ashamed.

We do not now say, that we will see our Prisoners before we deliver the other
Christians, but refer this Affair wholly to the Governor's Wisdom, which, we
hope, will tend to our good and continued Wellfair. And say again, That we will
bring the three Christian Prisoners by the first opportunity of fair Weather.

We likewise make known to our Father Corlaer, That in our Fury and Anger
(after the People of the South had fallen upon us) We took these six Prisoners,
and afterward four Scalps were brought by our People, and no more.

We speak as Oneydoes, for our selves. If the Susquehana or Delaware Indians
have done any Mischief, let not that be imputed to us.

Eight of our People are now out against the Christians, of which we told
Aernout and Daniel when they were at our Castle. They know nothing of what we
have now agreed to, and therefore if they should happen to do any harm, let it
be passed by, for they are entirely Ignorant of the Governor's Orders. If they
shall do any thing, we shall not keep it secret. If any of the Christian
Prisoners shall dye before we bring them, we should be sorry; yet they are
Mortal.

Accordingly in May following the Oneydoes brought the other three Prisoners to
Albany. And on the 24th of that Month Swerisse made the following Speech, when
he delivered them to the Commander at Albany, and the Commissioners for Indian
Affairs.

Brethren;

WE are come to this place with much Trouble, as we did last Winter, and renew
the Request we then made, that six Indians be delivered to us in the room of
the six Christians, in case those of our People who are Prisoners in Virginia
be dead. None of our Indians have gone out against the English since we were
last here; but we have told you that some of ours were then out, who were
ignorant of the Governor's Orders, and we desired that if they happened to do
any harm, it might not be ill taken. Now thirteen of our People who went
against our Indian Enemies, met with eighteen English on Horseback, as far from
any of the English Plantations as Cahnuaga The first Mohawk Castle.
is from Albany. They fired upon our People; ours being Soldiers, returned
their Fire and killed two Men and two Horses, and brought away their Scalps.

It would be convenient that the Governor nor acquaint the People of Virginia,
not to send their Men so far abroad, for if they should happen to meet our
Parties in their way against our Enemies, the Cahnowas, whom the English call
Arogisti, dangerous Consequences might follow.

We have now submitted to the Governor's Order, in bringing the three other
Christian Prisoners. When we were here last Winter, we left the Affair of our
Prison^rs wholly to the Governor, and promised to bring the three Christian
Prisoners that remained with us. This we have now performed: But where are our
Prisoners, or if they be dead, the others in their room, though it be already so
late in the Spring: However, we still refer this to the Governor.

(Then taking the Christian Girl, who was a Prisoner, by the hand, said) This
Girl was delivered to an Indian Squa A Woman.
here present, who is Brother then was killed. If we had been full of Wrath, and
not afraid of further Inconveni^nci^s, we would have burnt her.

(Taking the Boy, another of the three, by the hand, said) This Boy was given
to an Indian here present, but he is now free. We have now performed our
Promises, and are not ashamed. We hope Corlaer, who Governs the whole Country,
will likewise do that of which he needs not be ashamed.

Corlaer governs the whole Land, from New York to Albany, and from thence to
the Sennekas Land; We who are his Subjects shall faithfully keep the Covenant
Chain: Let him perform his Promise, as we have performed ours, that the
Covenant Chain be not broken on his side, who governs the whole Country.

Corlaers Limits, as we have said, stretch so far even to Jacob my Friend, or
Jacob Young, and we have heard that Corlaer is in good Correspondence with
Virginia and Maryland; Why is it then that our People, who are Prisoners, are
not restored? Let what we now say be well observed, for we have observed the
Governor's Orders.

Lastly (taking the Woman Prisoner by the hand, said) This Woman was given to
that Indian, ( pointing,) but is now free, being the sixth. If those of our
People who are Prisoners be Dead, let us have six Indians in their room. It is
not by my Authority that these Prisoners have been released, but by the good
Will of them to whom they were given.

Our Soldiers are to go out against the Dewagunhas, let us have Ammunition
cheap.

Then the Commissioners gave them Presents for their kind Usage of the
Prisoners.

After which Swerisse stood up and said, Let Corl^er take care that the Indian
Squa that is wanting come again, and for those that are killed, others in their
room. If Corl^er will not hearken to us in this Affair, we shall not hereafter
hearken to him in any.

They hearing afterward that these last words were ill taken, Swerisse,
Jehonongera and K^nohguage, three of the chief Oneydo Sachems excused it,
saying, What we said of not hearkening any more to Corl^er, was not from the
heart, but only by way of Discourse, to make Corl^^r more careful to release
our People that are Prisoners; for it was said after your Answer, and without
la^ing down either Bev^r or any Belt or Wampum, as we always do when we make
The word Proposition has been always used by the Commissioner^ for Indian
Affairs at Albany, to signify Proposals or Articles, in the Treaties or
Agreements made with the Indians.
Propositions; Therefore we desire that if it be noted, it may be blotted out,
and not made known to Corlaer; for we hold firmly to our Covenant, as we said
in our Propositions.

They at the same time told, That the Sinnondowans A Castle of the Sennekas,
from whence the French call all the Sennekas, Tsonontouan.
came to them with eight Belts, desiring that they should no longer prosecute
the War with Virginia, or Virginia Indians, but to go with them to War against
the Dowaganhas, Comprehended under the General name of Utawa^^us.
a Nation lying to the North-west ward; and that the Sennekas did desire them
to set these Christians at Liberty, and to carry them to Albany. All which they
said they promised to do.

The Five Nations continuing still to be troublesome to Virginia, that
Government, in September following, sent Col. William Kendall and Col. Southley
Littleton to Albany, to Ren^w and Confirm the League between Virginia and the
Five Nations. Col. Littleton died at Albany before the Indians arrived. Col.
Kendall spoke to the Oneydoes, as follows,

The Propositions of Col. William Kendall and Col. Southley Littleton
Commissioners sent by the Governor, Council and Burgesses of Virginia, at a
Grand Assembly held in James-City.
WE are come from Virginia, being, as all these Countries are, under the Great
King Charles, to speak to you upon Occasion of some of yours having entered our
Houses, taken away and destroyed our Goods and People, and brought some of our
Women and Children Captives into your Castles, contrary to your Faith and
Promise. It is also a Breach of the Peace made with Col. Coursey, without any
Provocation or Injury in the least done by us, or disturbing you in your
Hunting, Trade, or Passing, until you were found taking our Corn out of our
Fields, and plundering and burning our Houses.

Though your Actions already done are sufficient Reasons to enduce us to a
violent War against you, which might engage all our Confederate English
Neighbo^rs, Subjects to our great King Charles; yet through the great Respect
we have to and the Perswa^ions of the Governor here, whom we find your great
Friend, and the Information that he has given us, that you have quietly and
peaceably delivered to him the Prisoners you had taken from us, who are also
returned safely into our Country, and your Excusing the same, and Inclination
to continue Peaceable, without Injuring us for the future, We are therefore
willing, and have, and do forgive all the Damages which you have done our
People, though very great, Provided neither you nor any living among you, for the
future, do not offend or molest our People or Indians living amongst us.

And we do acquaint you, that we have a Law in our Country, that all Indians
coming near Christians must stand still, and lay down their Arms, as a token of
their being Friends, or otherwise are taken and looked upon or destroyed as
Enemies. Therefore desire you will take notice thereof accordingly, for we have
many of our People in the Woods abroad every way.

He spoke to the Mohawks, and the other Nations seperat^ly from the Oneydoes,
because the other Nations were supposed not to have done any Mischief.

We are come here from Virginia upon occasion of some of your Neighbors doing
of Mischief or Harm in our Country which upon the Interposition and Persuasion
of the Governor here, we have wholly passed by and forgiven. And being
informed, that you are not concerned therein, but disowning such Actions, we
did desire to see you, and to let you know that continuing the like good
peaceable Neighborhood, you shall find us the same, and willing to do your
Friendship at all times, but we must acquaint you, that we have a Law, etc.
(repeating the same words which he spoke to the Oneydoes on that subject.

On the Twentyfifth, he thought it necessary to repeat this last Speech to the
Mohawks by themselves, who after they had received some Presents, answered on
the Twentysixth before Noon,

WE are glad to see you here, and to speak with you in this place, where we
never saw you before. We understood your Propositions; We thank you for your
Presents and shall give you an Answer Afternoon.

In the Afternoon they said,

Brethren;

You have had no small trouble to come hither from Virginia, for it is a long
Journey. We are at your request, and with our Governors Consent, come to meet
you in this House, which is appointed for our Treaties, to hear you speak, and
to give you an Answer. But before we give an Answer, we make the appointed
House clean by giving this A Fathom of Wampum is a single string of Wampum of
that length, it is of less value than the Belts, and therefore given in Matters
of smaller Consequence; and by cleaning the House, they mean putting away
Hypocresy and Decei^.
Fathom of Wampum.

We just now said, that your long Journey must have not been without much
Fatigue, especially to you who are an Old Man. I am old likewise, and therefore
I give you this Fathom of Wampum to mitigate your pain.

In the Beginning of your Speech you tell us of the League or Covenant made
with Coll. Coursey. We remember it very well, that it was made in our Governors
Presence. We have kept it hitherto, and are resolved to keep it Inviolably. We
are glad to see you here, to renew this Covenant. You do better than the People
of the East, (New England) who made a Covenant at the same time; for we have
seen none of them since, to renew and keep up the Remembrance of it. Then they
gave a Fathom of Wampum.

We have said what we have to say, as to the Covenant made with Coll. Coursey.
You desire us likewise to continue our good Neighborhood. This we not only
promise to do, but likewise to keep the The Indians always express a League by
a Chain by which two or more things are kept fast together.
Chain, which cannot be broken, clean and bright, and therefore we desire you
to do the same. Then gave a Belt of Wampum twelve deep.

We are glad that by the Interposition and Persuasion of our Governor, the
Mischief which our Neighbors did in your Country is passed over, and now
wholly forgiven. Let it be buried in Oblivion; for if any mischief should befall
them (seeing we make but one body with them,) we must have partaken with them.
We approve of your Law, to lay down our Arms as a token of Friendship, and we
shall do so for the future. Then gave a Belt fourteen deep.

We were told before we heard your Propositions, that one of the Agents from
Virginia was Dead. We lament and bewail his Death, but admire that nothing was
laid down, according to our Custom, when the Death of such a Person was
signified to us. We give you this Belt of Black Wampum (thirteen deep) to wipe
away your Tears.

The Onnondagas did not come till November, on the 5th of which Month the
Virginia Agent spoke to them in the same words he had done to the Oneydoes.
None of their Answers appear upon the Registers, except the Mohawks, which we
have given. It is certain that the Onnondagas and Oneydoes did not observe the
Peace with Virginia, but molested them with the reiterated Incursions of their
Parties. It is observable however, that these two Nations and the Cayugas only,
had received French Priests among them, and that none of the rest who were not
under the Influence of those Priests, ever molested the English; for which
reason Coll. Dongan, though a Papist, complained of the ill Offices the Priests
did to the English Interest, and forbid the Five Nations to entertain any of
them, though the English and French Crowns, while he was Governor of New York, in
King James's R^^gn, seemed to be more than ever in strict Friendship.

The French could have no hopes of persuading the Indians to hurt any of the
Inhabitants of New York, but they were in hopes, that by the Indian (...) doing
frequently Mischief in Virginia, the Government of New York would be forced to
join in resenting the Injury, and thereby that Union between the Government of
New York and the Five Nations would be broke, which always obs^ructed and often
defeated the Designs of the French, to subject all North America to the Crown
of France. For this reason the Gov^rnors of New York have always, with the
greatest Caution, avoided a Breach with these Nations, on account of the little
Differences they had with the Neighboring Colonys.

These new Incursions of these two Nations were so troublesome to the People of
Virginia, that their Governor, the Lord Howard of Effingham, thought it
necessary for their Security, to undertake a Voyage to New York.

The Sachems of the Five Nations being called to Albany, his Lordship met there
eight Mohawk, three Oneydoe, three Onnondaga and three Cayuga Sachems, and on
the Thirtieth of July, 1684. being accompanied with two of the Council of
Virginia, he spoke to them as follows, in the presence of Col. Thomas Dongan,
Governor of New York, two of the Council of New York, and the Magistrates of
Albany. The Sennekas living far off were not then arrived.

Propositions made by the Right Honorable Francis Lord Howard of Effingham,
Governor General of His Majesty's Dominion of Virginia, To the Mohawks,
Oneydoes, Onnondagas and Cayugas.
IT is now about seven years ago since you (unprovoked) came into Virginia, a
Country belonging to the Great King of England, and committed several Murders
and Robberys, carrying away our Christian Women and Children Prisoners into
your Castles. All which Injurys we designed to have Revenged on you; but at the
desire of Sir Edmond Andross, then Governor General of this Country, we
desisted from destroying you, and sent our Agents Col. William Kendall and Col.
Southley Littleton, to Confirm and make sure the Peace that Col. Coursey of
Maryland included us in, when first he Treated with you. We find, that as you
quickly forgot what you promised Col. Coursey, so you have wilfully broke the
Covenant Chain, which you promised our Agent, Col. Kendall, should be most
strong and bright, if we of Virginia, would bury in the Pit of Oblivion, the
Injurys you had then done us, which upon your Governor Andross's Intercession,
and your Submission, we were willing to forget; But you not at all minding the
Covenant then made, have every year since, come into our Country, in a Warlike
manner, under pretense of Fighting with our Indians, our Friends and
Neighbors, which you ought not to have done, our Agent having encluded them
likewise in the Peace. You not only destroyed and took many of them Prisoners,
but you have also killed and burnt our Christian People, destroying our Corn
and Tobacco, more than you made use of, killing our Horses, Hogs and Cattle,
not to eat, but let them ly in the Woods and stink. This you did, when you were
not denied any thing you said you wanted.

I must also tell you, that under the pretense of Friendship, you have come to
our Houses at the heads of our Rivers (where they have been fortified) with a
white Sheet on a Pole, and have laid down your Guns before the Fort, upon which
our People taking you to be Friends, have admitted your great Men into their
Forts, and have given them Meat and Drink, what they desired. After the great
Men had refreshed themselves, and desiring to return, as they were let out of
the Fort Gates, the young Men rushed into the Fort and plundered the House,
taking away and destroying all the Corn, Tobacco, Bedding, and what else was in
the House. When they went away, they took several Sheep with them, and killed
several Cows big with Calf, and left them behind them, cut to pieces and flung
about, as if it were in Defiance of the Peace, and destroying of our Friendship.

These, and many more Injurys that you have done us, have caused me to raise
Forces, to send to the heads of our Rivers to defend our People from your
Outrages, till I came to New York to Col. Thomas Dongan, your Governor General,
to desire him, as we are all one Kings Subjects, to assist me in Warring
against you, to Revenge the Christian Blood that you have shed, and to make you
give full Satisfaction for all the goods that you destroyed. But by the
Mediation of your Governor, I am now come to Albany to speak with you; and to
know the reason of your breaking the Covenant Chain, not only with us and our
neighbor Indians but with Maryland, who are great King Charles's Subjects; for
our Indians have given great King Charles their Land. Therefore I, the Governor
of Virginia, will protect them, as your Governor under the Great Duke of York
and Albany; will henceforth you, when the Chain of Friendship is made between
us all.

Now that I have let you know that I am sensible of all the Injurys that you
have done us, by the desire of your noble Governor General, I am willing to
make a new Chain with you for Virginia, Maryland, and our Indians, that may be
more strong and lasting, even to the World's end, so that we may all be
Brethren and Great King Charles's Children.

I propose to you, First, That you call out of our Countries of Virginia and
Maryland all your young Men or Soldiers that are now there.

Secondly, That you do not hinder or molest our, Friend Indians from Hunting at
our Mountains, it having been their Country and none of yours. They never go
into your Country to disturb any of you.

Thirdly, Though the Damages you have done our Country be very great, and would
require a great deal of Satisfaction, which you are bound to give, yet we
assure you, that only by the Per^wasions of your Governor, who is at a vast
deal of Trouble and Charge for your Welfare, which you ever ought to
acknowledge, I have passed it by and forgiven you, upon this Condition, that
your People, nor any living among you, never commit any Incursions on our
Christians or Indians living among us, or in Maryland.

For the better Confirmation of the same and that the Peace now concluded, may
be lasting, I propose to have two All Indians make use of the Hatchet or Ax as
an Emblem to express War.
Hatchets buried as a final Determination of all Wars and Jarrings between us:
One on behalf of us and our Indians, and the other for all your Nations united
together, that ever did us any Injury, or pretended to War against our Indian
Friends or Maryland.

And that nothing may be wanting for Confirmation thereof, (if you desire it)
we are willing to send some of our Indian Sachems with an Agent next Summer,
about this time, that they may Ratify the Covenant with you here in this
prefixed House, where you may see and speak together as Friends.

That the Covenant now made between us in this prefixed House, in the presence
of your Governor, may be firmly kept and performed on your parts, as it always
has on ours, and that you do not break any one Link of the Covenant Chain for
the future, by your Peoples coming near our Plantations; When you march to the
Southward, keep to the feet of the Mountains, and not come nigh the heads, of
our Rivers, there being no Bever Hunting there; for we shall not for the future
(though you lay down your Arms as Friends) ever trust you more, you have so often
deceived us.

The next Day the Mohawks answered first by their Speaker, saying,

WE must, in the first place, say something to the other three Nations by way
of Reproof for their not keeping the former Covenant, as they ought, and
therefore we desire you, great Sachem of Virginia, and you Corlaer, and all
People here present, to hearken, for we will conceal nothing of the Evil they
have done.

(Then turning to the other three Nations) You have heard Yesterday all that
has been said; as for our parts, we are free of the blame laid on us for the
Mischief done in Virginia and Maryland. You are Stupid, Brutish, and have no
Understanding, thus to break your Covenant. We have always been obedient to
Corlaer and have steadily kept our Covenant with Virginia, Maryland and Boston;
we must therefore Stamp Understanding into you. Let the Covenant made
Yesterday, be carefuly kept for the future. This we earnestly recommend to you;
for we are ready to cry, for shame of you. Let us be no more ashamed on your
Account, but be obedient, and take this Belt to keep what we say in your
Remembrance.

Hear now, now is the time to hearken. The Covenant Chain had very near slipped.
You have not observed your Covenant. Observe it now, when all former Evil is
buried in the Pit.

You On^ydoes, I speak to you as The Mohawks always call the Oneydoes Children,
and the Oneydoes acknowledge the Mohawks to be their Fathers.
Children. Be no longer void of Understanding.

You Onnondagas, our Brethren, you are like Deaf People, that cannot hear,
your Senses are covered with Dirt and Filth

You Cayugas, Do not return into your former ways. There are three things we
must all observe.

First, The Covenant with Corlaer. Secondly, The Covenant with Virginia and
Maryland. Thirdly, The Covenant with Boston. We must Stamp Understanding into
you, that you may be obedient. And Take this Belt for a Remembran^er.

Th^n Odianne, the same Mohawk Speaker, turning to my Lord, spoke in behalf of
all the four Nations.

We are very thankful to you, great Sachem of Virginia, that you are pleased to
be persuaded by Corlaer, our Governor, to forgive all former Faults. We are
very glad to hear you and to see your Heart softened. Take these three Bevers as
a Token.

We thank the great Sachem of Virginia for saying, that the Ax shall be thrown
into the Pit. Take these two Bevers as a Token of our Joy and Thankfulness.

We are glad that The Name which the Five Nations always give the
Assarigoa, will bury in the Pit what is past, and stamp thereon. Let a strong
stream likewise run under the Pit, to wash the evil all away. Gives 2 Bevers.

My Lord, you are a Man of great Knowledge and Understanding, thus to keep the
Covenant Chain bright as Silver, and now again to Renew it, and make it
stronger.

(Then pointing to the oath three Nations said,) But they are Covenant
Breakers. I lay down this as a Token that we Mohawks have kept the Covenant
entire on out parts: Giving two Bevers and a Raccoon.

The Covenant must be kept; for the fire of Love of Virginia and Maryland burns
in this place, as well as ours, and this Covenant House must be kept clean.
Gives two Bevers.

We now plant a The Five Nations always express Peace under the Metapher of a
Tree, in this manner.
Tree, who is tops will reach the Sun, and its Branches spread far abroad, so
that it shall be seen afar off; and we shall shelter ourselves under it, and
live in Peace, without molestation. Gives two Bevers.

You proposed yesterday, that if we were desirous to see the Indians of
Virginia, you are willing to send some of their Sachems next Summer about this
time to this Place. This Proposal pleases us very much. The sooner they come,
it will be the better, that we may speak with them in this House, which is
appointed for our speaking with our Friends. And gave two Belts to confirm it.

You have now heard what Exhortation we have made to the other three Nations.
We have taken the Hatchet out of their hands. We now therefore pray, that your
Hatchet may likewise be buried in the Pit. Giving two Bevers,

Let the River be secure, for we sometimes make Propositions to the Raritan and
Nevessink Indians; but above all, let your Virginia Indians come securely
hither, that we may keep a good Correspondence with them.

My Lord, Some of us Mohawks are out against Our Enemies that live a far off.
When they come near your Plantations, they will do you no harm, nor Plunder as
the others do. Be kind to them, if they shall happen to come to any of your
Plantations. Give them some Tobacco and some Victuals; for they will neither
Rob nor Steal, as the Oneydoes, Onnondagas and Cayugas have done.

The Oneydoes particularly Thank your Lordship for hearkening to lay down the
Ax. The Hatchet is taken out of all their hands. And gives a Belt.

We again thank your Lordship, that the Covenant Chain is Renewed. Let it be
kept clean and bright, and held fast, Let not any one pull his Arm from it. We
enclude all the Four Nations in giving this Belt.

We again pray your Lordship, to take the Oneydoes into your Friendship, and
that you keep the Covenant Chain strong with them; for they are in our
Covenant. Gives a Belt.

The Oneydoes give twenty Bevers, as satisfaction for what they promised my
Lord Baltimore, and desire that they may be Discharged.

My Lord and the Governor told them, That they would use their Endeavors with
the Lord Baltimore, to p^r^wade him to forgive what remained.

Then the Indians desired that the Hole might be dug, to bury the Axes, viz.
One in behalf of Virginia and their Indians, another in behalf of Maryland and
their Indians, and three for the Oneydoes, Onnondagas and Cayugas. The Mohawks
said, there was no need of burying any on their Account; for the first Chain
had never been broke by them.

Then the three Nations spoke by an Onnondaga, called Thanohjanihta, who said,

We Thank the great Sachem of Virginia, that he has so readily forgiven and
forgot the Evil that has been done; And We, on our parts, gladly catch at and
lay hold of the Chain. Then each of them deliver an Ax to be buried, and gave a
Belt.

The Speaker added, I speak in the Name of all three Nations, and inculde them
in this Chain, which we desire may be kept clean and bright like Silver. Gives
a Belt.

We desire that the Path may be open for the Indians, under your Lordships
Protection, to come safely and freely to this place, in order to confirm this
Peace Gives six Fathom of Wampum.

Then the Axes were buried in the South-east ea^t end of the Courtyard, and
the Indians threw the Earth upon them. After which my Lord told them, That
since now a firm Peace was concluded, We shall hereafter remain Friends, and
Virginia and Maryland will send once in two or three years to Renew it, and
some of Our Indian S^chems shall come, according to your desire, to Confirm it.

Last of all, the Oneydoes, Onnondagas and Cayugas, jointly, sang the Peace
Song, with D^monstrations of much Joy; and Thanked the Governor of New York for
his effectual Mediation with the Governor of Virginia, in their favor.

The Mohawks by themselves, and the other three Nations by themselves, spoke to
the Governor of New York, much to the same purpose that they did to the
Governor of Virginia, so far as it r^lated to the Affair of Virginia, but with
some particular Marks of Personal Esteem; for he had won their Affections by
his former carriage toward them. And they desired the Duke of York's Arms to
put upon their Castles. Which, we may suppose, they were told, would save them
from the French.

Coll. Dongan desired them to call home those of their Nations that had settled
in Canada, The French Priests had (from time to time) persuaded several of the
Five Nations to leave their own Country, and to settle near Montreal, where the
French are very indus^^ous in encouraging them. Their Numbers have been
likewise ^ncrea^^d by the Prisoners the French have taken in War, and by others
who have run from their own Country, because of some Mischief that they had
done, or Debts which they owed to the Christians. These Indians all profess
Christianity, and therefore are commonly called The Praying Indians by their
Countrymen, and they are called Cahnuagas by the People of Albany.
To which they answered, Corlaer keeps (...) Correspondence with Canada, and
therefore he can prevail more than we can. Let Corlaer use his endeavors to
draw our Indians home to their own Country. And gave a Bever.

At the same Time, the Government of the Massachusets-Bay had appointed Coll.
Stephanus Cortlandt, one of the Council of New York their Agent, to Renew their
Covenant with the Five Nations, and to give them some small Presents: Which was
accordingly done.

The Governor of New York, Coll. Dongan, concluded all, with this Advice to
them, Keep a good Understanding among your Selves: If any Difference should
happen, acquaint me with it, and I will compose it. Make no Covenant or
Agreement with the French, or any other Nation, without my Knowledge or
Approbation. Then he gave the Dukes Arms, to be put upon each of their Castles,
in hopes it might deter the French from attacking them (as they were threatened
from Canada) after they had so manifestly declared themselves to be under the
Protection of the Crown of England.

Before I proceed further it will be necessary to incert a Remarkable Speech
made by the Onnondagas and Cayugas, to the two Governors, on the 2d day of
August, viz.

Brother Corlaer;

YOur Sachem is a great Sachem, and We are but a small People. But when the
English came first to Manhatan, New York.
Aragisk^, Virginia*
and to Yakokranagary, Maryland*
they were then but a Small People, and we Great. Then, because we found you a
good People, we treated you civilly, and gave you Land. We hope therefore, now
that you are Great and we Small, you will protect us from the French. If you do
not, we shall loose all our Hunting, and our Bevers. The French will get all
the Bever. They are now angry with us, because we carry our Bever to our
Brethren.

We have put our Lands and our Selves under the Protection of the great Duke of
York, the Brother of your great Sachem, who is likewise a great Sachem.

We have given the Susquehana River, which We won with the Sword, to this
Government, and we desire that it may be a Branch of the great Tree that grows
in this Place, the top of which reaches the Sun, and its Branches shelter us
from the French, and all other Nations. Our Fire burns in your Houses, and your
Fire burns with us. We desire that it may always be so.

We will not that any of the great Penn'ss People settle upon the Susquehana
River; for we have no other Land to leave to our Children.

Our young People are Soldiers, and when they are disobliged they are like
Wolves in the Woods, as you Sachem of Virginia very well know.

We have put our Selves under the great Sachem Charles, that lives on the other
side of the great Lake. We give you these two White dre^t Deer-Skins to be sent
to the great Sachem, that he may write on them and put a great Red Seal to
them, to Confirm what We now do, and put the Susquehana River above the Wasuhta
The F^^lis.
and all the rest of our Land under the Great Duke of York, and give that Land
to no body else. Our Brethren, his People, have been like Fathers to our Wives
and Children, and have given us Bread, when we were in need of it: We will not
therefore join our selves or our Lands to any other Government but this. We
desire Colaer, our Governor, may send over this Proposition to the great
Sachem, Charles, who dwells on the other side the great Lake, with this Belt of
Wampum, and this other smaller Belt to the Duke of York, his Brother; And we
give you, Corlaer, this Beaver, to send over this Proposition.

You great Man of Virginia, We let you know, that great Penn did speak to us
here in Corlaers House, by his Agents; and desired to buy the Susquehana River
of us, but we would not hearken to him; for we had fa^ten'd it to this
Government. We desire of you therefore, that you would bear Witness of what we
now do, and that we now Confirm what we have done before. Let your Friend, the
great Sachem that lives on the other side the great Lake, know this, that We
being a Free People, though united to the English, may give our Lands, and be
joined to the Sachem we like best. We give this Bever to Remember what we say.

The Senekas arrived soon after, and on the 5th of August spoke to my Lord
Howard in the following manner.

WE have heard and understood what Mischief has been done in Virginia. We have
it as perfect as if it were upon our Fingers ends. O Corlaer! We Thank you for
having been our Intercessor, so that the Ax has not fallen upon Us.

And you, Assar goa, great Sachem of Virginia, We Thank you for burying all
Evil in the Pit. We are informed, that the Mohawks, Oneydoes, Onnond^gas and
Cayugaes have buried the Ax already; Now we that live the remotest off, are
come to do the same, and to include in this Chain the Cahnawaas, your Friends,
who live amongst you. We desire therefore, that an Ax, on our part, may be
buried with one of my Lords. O Corlaer! Corl^er! We Thank you for holding one
end of the Ax: And We thank you, great Governor of Virginia, not only for
throwing aside the Ax, but more especially for your putting all Evil from your
Heart. Now we have a New Chain, a strong and a str^ight Chain that cannot be
broken. The Tree of Peace is planted so firmly that it cannot be moved. Let us
on both sides hold the Chain fast.

We understand what you said of the great Sachem that lives on the other side
the great Water.

You tell us, that the Cahnawaas will come hither to strengthen the Chain. Let
them not make any Excuse, that they are Old and Feeble, or that their Feet are
Sore. If the Old Sachems cannot, let the Young Man come. We shall not fail to
come hither, though we live the farthest off, and then the New Chain will be
stronger and brighter.

We understand, that because of the Mischief which has been done to the People
and Cattle of Virginia and Maryland, we must not come near the Heads of your
Rivers, nor near your Plantations, but keep at the foot of the Mountains; for
though we lay down our Arms, as Friends, we shall not be trusted for the future,
but looked on as Robbers. We agree, however, to this Proposition, and shall
wholly stay away from Virginia: And this we do in gratitude to Corlaer, who has
been at so great Pains to persuade you, Great Governor of Virginia, to forget
what is past. We commend your Understanding, in giving ear to Corlaer's good
Advice; and we shall go a Path which was never trod before.

We have now done speaking to Corlaer, and the Governor of Virginia. Let the
Chain be forever kept clean and bright, and we shall do the same.

The other Nations, from the Mohawks Country to the Cayugas, have delivered up
the Susquehana River, and all that Country, to Corlaer's Government. We Confirm
what they have done, by giving this Belt. Ten Bevers are at the Onnondagas
Castle in their way hither; We design five of them for Corlaer, and the other
five for the Sachem of Virginia.

Coll. Bird, one of the Council of Virginia, and Edmond Jennings, Esquire; Attorney
General of that Province, came with four Indian Sachems, (according to my Lord
Howard's Promise) to Renew and Confirm the Peace, and met the Five Nations at
Albany in September, 1685.

Coll. Bird accused them of having again broke their Covenant, by taking an
Indian Girl from an English Man's House, and four Indian Boys Prisoners.

They excused this, by its being done by the Parties that were out when the
Peace was concluded, who knew nothing of it; Which Accidents they had provided
against in their Articles. They said, The four Boys were given to the Relations
of those Men that were lost, and it would be very difficult to obtain their
Restoration. But they promised to deliver them up.

The Senek^s and Mohawks declared themselves free of any blame, and child the
other Nations.

So that we may still observe the Influence which the French Priests had
obtained over those other Nations, and to what Christian-like Purposes they
used it.

The Mohawks Speaker said, Where shall I seek the Chain of Peace? Where shall I
find it, but upon Our Path? And whither does Our Path lead us, but unto this
House? This is a House of Peace. And sang all the Covenant Chain over. He
afterward sang by way of Admonition to the Onnondagas, Cayugas and Oneydoes,
and concluded all with a Song to the Virginia Indians. But I suppose our
Interpreters were not Poets enough to Translate the Songs, otherwise I might
have gratified the Reader with a taste of Indian Poetry.

lately repeated that Desire, by Onnissanti^ the Brother of our Father
Twirhaersira, tha^ sits there. He has not only entreated us (...) our Father,
but by two Praying Indians, on an Onnondaga, the other the Son of an Oh Mohawk
Sachem, Connondowe. The brought five great Belts of Wampum, no a Fathom or two
only, as you bring. Now Ohquesse has been sent with three Frenchmen Yo^n^ndi^
not content with all this, has like wise sent Dennehoot, and two other Mohawk
to persuade us to meet him, and to speal with him of good Things. Should we no
go to him, after all this Entreaty, when (...) is come so far, and so near to
us, certainly if we did not, we should provoke (...) Wrath, and not deserve
this Goodness. You say we are Subjects to the King of England and Duke of York,
but we say, we are Brethren. We must take care of our selves Those Arms fixed
upon the Post without the Gate, cannot defend us against the Arm of La Bar.

Brother C^rlaer, We tell you, That (...) shall bind a Covenant Chain to our
Arm and to his, as thick as that Post ( Pointing to Post of the House) Be not
dissatisfied; should we not embrace this Happiness offered t^ us, viz. Peace,
in the place of War; yea we shall take the Evil doors, the Sennekas by the
hand, and La Bar likewise, and their ax and his Sword shall be thrown into a
deep Water. We wish our Brother Corlaer were present, but it seems the time
will not permit of it.

Accordingly Garangula, one of the chief Sachems of the Onnondagas, with thirty
Warriors, went with Mr. Le M^ine to meet the Governor of Canada at K^^hohage.
After he had remained two Days in the French Camp Mr. La Bar spoke to him, as
follows, (the French Officers making a Semicircle on one side while G^r^ngula,
with his Warriors, completed the Circle on the other.)

Voyag^s du B^ron (...), Tome 1. Le^^re 7.
Mons. De La Barre' s Speech to Garangula.
THe King, my Master, being informed that the Five Nations have oft^^ in^ring'd
the Peac^, has ordered me to come ^ither with a Guard, and to send O^quesse to
the Onnond^gas to bring the chief Sachems to my Camp. The Intention of the
great King is, that you and I may smoke the Calumet The Calumet is a large
Smoking Pipe, made of Marble, most commonly of a dark Red, well polished,
shaped somewhat in the form of a Hatche^, and adorned with large Feathers of
several Colour^. It is used in all the Indian Treaties with Strangers, as a
Flag of Truce between Contending Partys, which all the Indians think a very
high Crime to violate. These Calumets are generally of nice Workmanship, and
were in use before the Indians knew any thing of the Christians; for which
Reason we are at a (...) to conce^ve by what means they pierced these Pipes and
shaped them so finely, before they had the use of iron.
of Peace together, but on this Condition, that you Promise me, in the Name of
the Sennekas, Cayugas, Onnondagas, Oneydoes and Mohawks, to give entire
Satisfaction and Reparation to his Subjects, and for the future never to molest
them.

The Sennekas, Cayugas, Onnondagas, Oneydoc^ and Mohawks have Robbed and Abused
all the Traders that were passing toward the Illinois and Umamies, and other
Indian Nations, the Children of my King. They have acted, on these occasions,
contrary to the Treaty of Peace. with my Predecessor. I am ordered therefore to
demand Satisfaction, and to tell them, That in case of of Refusal, or their
Plundering us any more, that I have express Orders to declare War. This Belt
Confirms my Words.

The Warriors of the Five Nations have conducted the English into the Lakes,
which belong to the King, my Master, and brought the English among the Nations
that are his Children, to destroy the Trade of his Subjects, and to withdraw
those Nations from him. They have carried the English thither, not withstanding
the Prohibition of the late Governor of New York, who foresaw the Risque that
both they and you would run I am willing to forget these things, but if ever
the like shall happen for the future, I have express Orders to declare War
against you. This Belt Confirms my Words.

Your Warriors have made several Barbarous Incursions on the Ilinois and
Umamies. They have Massacred Men, Women and Children, and have made many of
these two Nations Prisoners, who thought themselves safe in their Villages, in
time of Peace. These People, who are my Kings Children, must not be your
Slaves, you must give them their Liberty, and send them back into their own
Country. If the Five Nations shall refuse to do this, I have express Orders to
declare War against them. This Belt Confirms my Words.

This is what I had to say to Garangula, that he may carry to the Sennekas,
Cayugas, Onnondagas, Oneydoes and Mohawks the Declaration which the King, my
Master, has commanded me to make. He does not wish them to force him to send a
great Army to Cadarackui Fort, to begin a War, which must be fatal to them. He
would be sorry that this Fort, which was the Work of Peace, should become the
Prison of your Warriors. We must endeavor, on both sides, to prevent such
Misfortunes. The French, who are the Brethren and Friends of the Five Nations,
will never trouble their repose, Provided that the Satisfaction which I demand,
be given, and that the Treatyes of Peace be hereafter observed. I shall be
extremely grieved if my words do not produce the Effect which I expect from
them; for then I shall be obliged to join with the Governor of New York, who is
Commanded by his Master to assist me, and burn the Castles of the Five Nations,
and destroy you. This Belt Confirms my Words.

Garangula was very much surprised to find the soft words of the Jesuit, and of
the Governors Messengers, turned to such threatening Language. They were
designed to strike Terror into the Indians. But Garangula having had good
Information, from those of the Five Nations living near Cadarackui Fort, of all
the Sickness and other Misfortunes which attended the French Army, they were
far from producing the designed Effect. All the time that Mon^. Del^ Bar
spoke, Garangula kept his Eyes fixed upon the end of his Pipe. And as soon as
the Governor had done speaking, he rose up, and having walked five or six times
round the Circle, he returned to his place, where he spoke standing, while
Mons. De la B^rre kept his Elbow Chair, and said,

Garangula' s Answer.
Y Onnondio, I Honor you, and the Warriors that are with me all likewise
honor you. Your Interpreter has finished your Speech; I now begin mine. My
words make haste to reach your Eears, hearken to them.

Yonnondio, You must have believed when you left Quebeck, that the Sun had
burnt up all the Forests which render our Country Unaccessible to the French,
Or that the Lakes had so far overflown their Banks, that they had surrounded
our Castles, and that it was impossible for us to get out of them. Yes,
Yonnondio, surely you must have thought so, and the Curiosity of seeing so
great a Country burnt up, or under Water. has brought you so far. Now you are
undeceived, since that I and my Warriors are come to assure you that the
Sennekas, Cayugas, Onnondagas, Oneydoes and Mohawks are all alive. I thank you,
in their Name, for bringing back into their Country the Calumet which your
Predecessor received from their hands. It was happy for you that you left under
ground that Murdering Hatchet which has been so often dyed in the Blood of the
French. Hear Yonnondio. I do not Sleep, I have my eyes Open, and the Sun which
enlightens me discovers to me a great Captain at the head of a Company of
Soldiers, who speaks as if he were Dreaming. He says that he only came to the
Lake to smoke on the great Calumer with the Onnondagas. But Garangula says that
he sees the Contrary, that it was to knock them on the head, if Sickness had
not weakened the Arms of the French.

I see Yonnondio Raving in a Camp of sick men, who is Lives the great Spirit has
saved, by Inflicting this Sickness on them Hear Yonnondio, Our Women had taker
their Clubs, our Children and Old Men had carried their Bows and Arrows into
the heart of your Camp, if our Warrior had not disarmed them, and retained then
when your Messenger, Ohquesse appeared in our Castle. It is done, and I have
said it.

Hear Yonnondio, we plundered none of the French, but those that carried Guns,
Powder and Ball to the Twihties and Chictaghicks; because those Arms might have
cost us our Lives. Herein we follow the example of the Jesuits, who stave all
the Barrels of Rum brought to our Castle, lest the Drunken Indians should knock
them on the Head. Our Warriors have not Bevers enough to pay for all these Arms
that they have taken, and our Old Men are not afraid of the War. This Belt
preserves my words.

We carried the English into our Lakes, to traffic there with the Utawawas and
Qutoghies, as the Adirondacks brought the French to our Castles, to carry on a
Trade which the English say is theirs. We are born free, We neither depend upon
Yonnondio no^r Corlaer.

We may go where we please, and carry with us whom we please, and buy and sell
what we please. If your Allies be your Slaves, use them as such, Command them
to receive no other but your People. This Belt Preserves my Words.

We knocked the Twihtwics and Chictaghi^^ on the head, because they had cut down
the Trees of Peace, which were the Limits of our Country. They have hunted
Bevers on our Lands: They have acted contrary to the Custom of all Indians; for
they left none of the Bevers alive, they killed both Male and Female. They
brought the Satanas (...) (...) by the (...).
into their Country, to take part with them, and Armed them, after they had
concerted ill Designs against us. We have done less than either the English or
French; that have u^urp'd the Lands of so many Indian Nations, and chased them
from their own Country. This Sel^ Preserves my Words.

Hear Yonondio, What I say is the Voice of all the Five Nations. Hear what they
Answer, Open your Ears to what they Speak. The Sennekas, Cayugas, O^nondagas,
Oneydoes and Mohawks say, That when they buried the Hatchet at C^darackui (in
the presence of your Pr^d^c^ssor) in the middle of the Fort, they (...) the
Tree of Peace, in the same place, to be there carefully preserved, that, in
place of a Retreat for Soldiers, that Fort might be a Rend^vouze of Merchants;
that in place of Arms and Munitions of War, Bevers and M^^chandize should only
enter there.

H^^r, Yonondio, Take care for the future, that so great a Number of Soldiers
as appear here do not choke the Tree of Peace planted in so small a Fort. It
will be a great Loss, if after it had so easily taken root, you should stop its
growth, and prevent its covering your Country and ours with its Branches. I
assure you, in the Name of the Five Nations, That our Warriors shall dance to
the Calumet of Peace under its leaves, and shall remain quiet on their Mats,
and shall never dig up the Hatchet till their Brethren, Yonnondio or Corlaer
shall either jointly or seperately endeavor to attack the Country which the
great Spirit has given to our Ancestors. This Belt Preserves my Words, and this
other, the Authority which the Five Nations have given me.

Then Garangula addressing himself to Mr. Le Main, said,

Take Courage, Ohquesse, you have Spirit, Speak, Explain my Words, Forget
nothing, Tell all that your Brethren and Friends say to Yonnondio, your
Governor, by the Mouth of Garangula, who honors you, and desires you to accept
of this Present of Bever, and take part with me in my Feast, to which I invite
you. This Present of B^v^rs is sent to Yonnondio on the part of the Five
Nations.

When Garangula's Harrangue was explained to Mr. De la Bar, he returned to
his Tent^enraged at what he had heard.

Garangula feasted the French Officers, and then Returned And Mons. De la Bar
set out in in his way toward Monreal. As soon as the General was ^mbarqued
with the few Soldiers that remained in Health, the Militia made the best of
their way to their own Habitations, without any Order or Discipline.

Thus a very Chargeable and Fatiguing Expedition (which was to strike the
Terror of the French Name into the Stubborn Hearts of the Five Nations) ended
by a Dispute between the French General and an Old Indian.

When the Indians came to Albany, after they had met with Mr. De la Bar, (and
were upbraided for it by (...) Dongan) Carachkond^e, an Onnondaga, slyly
answered, We are sorry, and ashamed; for new we understand that the Governor of
Canada is not so great a Man as the English King that lives on the other side
the great Water; and we are vexed for having given the Governor of Canada so
many five Wampum Belts.

CHAP. V.
The English Attempt to Trade in the Lakes, and Mr. De Nonvill^ Attacks the
Sennekas.
MOnsicur Le M^rquis de Nonville having succeeded Mr. De la Bar, in 1685. and
having brought a considerable Reinforcement of Soldiers with him, he resolved
to Recover the Honor the French had lost in the last Expedition, and to
Revenge the Slaughter that the Fiv^ Nations* continued to make of the Twihtwiks
and Chictagh^ks, who had put themselves under the Protection of the French; for
the Five Nations having entirely subdued the Chicktaghiks, Called Ilin^is by
the French.
after a six years War, they resolved next to f^ll upon the Twih^wies, and to
call them to an account for the Disturbance they had given some of the Five
Nations in their Bever-hunting. The Five Nations have few or no Bevers in their
own Country, and are for that reason obliged to hunt at a great distance, which
often occasioned Disputes with their Neighbors about the Property of the
Bever, in some parts of the Country. The Bevers are the most valuable part of
the Indian Trade. And as the Twihtwies carried their Bever to the French, the
English favored the Five Nations in these Expeditions, and particularly in the
beginning of the year 1687, made the Five Nations a Present of a Barrel of
Powder, when their whole Force was preparing to go against the Twihtwies. The
English were the better pleased with this War, because they thought it would
divert their Thoughts from the Indians that were Friends to Virginia: But the
French were resolved to Support their Friends more effectually by a powerful
Diversion, and to change the Seat of the War.

For this purpose Mr. De N^nville sent, in May, 1687, great Quantities of
Provisions to Cadarackui Fort, and gathered the whole Force of Canada to
Montreal. His Army consisted of 1500 French of the Regular Troops and Militia,
and 500 Indians that lived near Monreal and Quebeck.

He sent likewise Orders to the Commandant at Missilimakinak to assemble all
the Nations round him, and to March them to Oniag^r^, in order to join the
Forces of Canada designed against the Sennekas. And the other Officers posted
among the Indians West ward, had the like Orders.

The Tw^htwies received the Hatchet with Joy, from the hands of the French
Officer, against the Five Nations. The Outagamies The Outagamies, Kikabo^s,
Malhomini^s and Puans live on the West side of Lake Michigan.
Kikabous, and Maskoutuhs, who were not used to Cannoes, were at first
persuaded to join the Twihtwies, who were to march by Land to Teuchsagrondie,
where there was a French Fort, at which they were to be supplied with
Ammunition: But after the French Officer left them, the Utagamies and
Maskuticks were dissuaded by some of the Mahikander Indians, who happened to be
with a neighboring Nation at that time.

The Putewatemies, Malhominies and Puans offered themselves willingly, and went
to the Rendevouze at Missilimainak, where they were received by the Utawawas
with all the Marks of Honor usually paid to Soldiers, though the Utawawas had no
inclination to the present Enterprise; they could not tell, however, how to
appear against it, otherwise than by inventing what Delays they could to
prevent their Marching.

In the mean while, a Cannoe arrived, which was sent by Mr. De Nonville with
his Orders to the Officers. This Cannoe in her Passage discovered some English
commanded by Major Mr. Gregory, in their way to Teiodondaraghie. The English
thought (after they had an account of the new Alliance their King had entered
into with the French) that the French would not disturb them in prosecuting a
Trade with the Indians every where, and that the Trade would be equally free
and open to both Nations. With these hopes a considerable Number of Adventurers
went out under the Conduct of Major Mandapos; Gregory to Trade with the Indians
living on the Banks of the Lakes; and that they might be the more welcome,
persuaded the Five Nations to set all the Dionondadie Prisoners at Liberty, who
went along with the English and conducted them toward Missilimakinak or
Teiodondoraghie. But the English found themselves mistaken, for the French
Commandant at Teiodondoraghie, as soon as he had Notice of this, sent 300
French to intercept the English.

Histoire de Le Amerique Septe^trionale par Mr. De la Pe^erie, Tome 2. Chap. 16.
The Utawawas and Dionondadies having likewise an account of the English,
d^signed to support their own Independency, and to encourage the English Trade.
The Return of the Dionondadie Prisoners made that Nation very hearty in
favoring the English, they therefore marched immediately off, with design to
join Major Mandapos; Gregory, but the Utawawas were divided in their
Inclinations, their Chief, with about thirty more joined the French, the rest
remained in suspense and stood Neuter.

The Utawawas thus wavering, disconcerted the Measures of the Deionondadies,
for they began to suspect the Utawawas, and therefore immediately returned to
secure their Wives and Children they had left near the French Fort with the
Utawawas. The English and their Effects were seized without any Opposition, and
were carried to the French Fort at Teiodondoraghie.

The English brought great Quantities of Rum with them, (which the Indians love
more than their Life) and the French being afraid that if the Indians took to
drinking, they would grow ungovernable, did what they could to keep them from
it. They were most concerned that the Putewatemies, (who had no knowledge of
the English, or of that bewitching Liquor, and were firmly attached to the
French) should not taste it.

The Utawawas still contrived delays to the March, and having got some of the
Putewatemies privately by themselves, they offered them a Cag of Rum, and said,
We are all Brethren, we ought to make one Body, and to have one Soul. The
French invite us to War against the Five Nations, with design to make us
Slaves, and that we should make our selves the Tools to effect it. As soon as
they shall have destroyed the Five Nations, they will no longer observe any
Measures with us, but use us like those Beasts that they tie to their Plows.
Let us leave them to themselves, and they will never be able to accomplish any
thing against the Five Nations.

But the Putewatemies had entertained such Notions of the French, as made them
Deaf to all the Politics of the Utawawas.

The French however grew Jealous of these Caballings, and therefore resolved to
delay their March no longer, and would not stay one day more for the Utawawas,
who desired only so much time to Pitch their Canoes, but went away without them.

Mr. Tonti Commandant among the Chictaghicks met with another Party of the
English of about 30 Men in Lake O^swego as he marched with the Chi^^aghicks and
Twihtwiks, and other neighboring Nations to the General Rendevouze. He fell
upon the English, Plundered them, and took them Prisoners. The French divided
all the Merchandise among the Indians, but kept the Rum to themselves and got
all drunk. The Dconondadic Prisoners, that Conducted the English, joined with
the Mihikander Indians that were among Mr. Tonti's Indians (who had privately
dissuaded about 200 of the neighboring Nations from going along with Tonti)
and endeavored to persuade all the Indians to fall upon the French, while they
were drunk, and destroy them, saying, The French are a Proud, Imperious,
Covetous People, that sell their goods at an extravagant Price: The English are
a good Natured, Honest People, who will furnish you with every thing at
reasonable Rates. But these arguments were to no purpose, for these far Indians
had entertained extraordinary Notions of the French Power, and knew nothing of
the English.

The French and Putewatemies being gone from Teiodondoraghie, the Utawawas
began to be afraid of the French Resentment, and therefore the better to keep
up the color they had put on their delays, marched over Land with all possible
expedition, to the general Rendevouz near Oniagara, where all the French Force,
both Christian and Indian was to meet.

The Five Nations being informed of the French Preparations, laid aside their
Designs against the Twihtwies, and prepared to give the French a warm
Reception. Upon this the Priest at Onnondaga left them, and their Soldiers came
to Albany to provide Ammunition. The Commissioners made them a Present of a
considerable quantity of Powder and Lead, besides what they purchased. They
were under a great deal of Concern when they took leave of the Commissioners,
and said, Since we are to expect no other Assistance from our Brethren, we must
recommend our Wives and Children to you, who will fly to you, if any Misfortune
shall happen to us. It may be we never shall see you more; for we are resolved
to behave so as our Brethren shall have no reason to be ashamed of us.

We must now return to Mr. De Nonville's Army.

Mons. Champigni marched eight or ten Days before the rest of the Army, with
between two and three hundred Canadiens. As soon as they arrived at Cedarackui,
they surprised two Villages of the Five Nations, that were settled about eight
Leagues from that Place, to prevent their giving any intelligence to their own
Nation of the French Preparations, or the State of the French Army, as it was
supposed they did in the last Expedition under Mr. De la Bar. These People
were surprised when they least expected, and by them from whom they feared no
harm, because they had settled there at the Invitation and on the Faith of the
French. They were carried in cold Blood to the Fort, and ty^d to Stakes to be
tormented by the French Indians (Christians, as they call them) while they
continued singing in their Country manner, and upbraiding the French with their
Perfidy and Ungratitude. But the French Policy had no Compassion on these
Miserable People, when they were resolved to destroy their whole Nation.

While Mr. De Nonville was at Cadarackui Fort, he had an Account that the
Chicktaghicks and Twihtwies waited for the Quatoghies and Utawawas at In the
S^^eights between Ohswego Lake and Quatoghies Lake,
Lake St. Clair, with whom they designed to March to the general Rendevouz at
the Mouth of the Sennekas River. For this Expedition was chiefly designed
against the Sennekas, who had absolutely refused to meet Mr. De la Barrie, and
were most firmly attached to the English. The Sennekas for this reason were
designed to be made Examples of the French Resentment to all the other Nations
of Indians.

The Messenger having assured the General, that it was time to depart, in order
to meet the Western Indians, that came to his Assistance, he set out the 23d of
June, and sent one part of his Army in Canoes, along the North Shore, while he
with the other part passed along the South, that no accidents of wind might
prevent the one or the other reaching within the time appointed at the Place
the Indians were to meet him. It happened, by reason of the good weather that
both the Parties arrived on the same day, and joined the Western Indians at
Irondequat. As soon as the men were put on shore, they hawled up the Canoes,
and began a Fort, where 400 Men were left to guard the Canoes, and the Baggage.
Here a young Canadien was shot to death, as a Deserter, for conducting the
English into the Lakes, though the two Nations were not only at Peace, but their
Kings in stricter Friendship than usual. But this Piece of severity is not to
be wondered at, when the French were resolved to undertake an unjust War, and
every thing to put a stop to the English Trade, which now began to extend it
self far into the Continent, and would in its consequence ruin theirs. The next
day the Army began to march toward the chief Village of the Sennekas, which
was only seven Leagues distant, every man carrying ten Biskets for his
Provision. The Indian Traders made the Van with part of the Indians, the other
part marched in the Rear, while the Regular Troops and Militia composed the
main Body. The Army marched four Leagues the first day, without discovering any
thing. The next day the Scouts advanced before the Army, as far as the corn
Fields of the Village, without seeing any body, though they passed within Pistol
shot of 500 Sennekas* that lay on their Bellies, and let them pass and repa^s,
without disturbing them.

On the Report which they made, the French Marched with much haste, but little
Order, in hopes to overtake the Women, Children and Old Men; for they no longer
doubted of all being fled. But as soon as the French reached the foot of a
Hill, about a quarter of a League from the Village, the Sennekas suddenly
raised the War-shout, with a Discharge of their Firearms. This put the Regular
Troops, as well as the Militia into such a Fright, as they marched through the
Woods, that the Battalions immediately divided, and run to the Right and Left,
and in the Confusion fired upon one another. When the Sennekas perceived their
Disorder* they fell in among them Pell-mell, till the French Indians, more used
to such Fights, gathered together and Repulsed the Senn^kas. There were
(according to the French Accounts) a hundred Frenchmen, ten French Indians,
and about foursc^re Sennekas killed in this Rencounter.

Mr. De Nonvelle was so dis-spirited with the Fright that his Men had been put
into, that his Indians could not persuade him to pur^ue. He halted the
remainder of that Day. The next day he Marched on with design to burn the
Village, but when he came there, he found the Sennekas had saved him the
trouble; for they had laid all in Ashes before they Retired; Two Old Men only
were found in the Castle, who were cut into Pieces and boiled to make Soop for
the French Allies. The French slaid five or six Days to destroy their Corn, and
then marched to two other Villages, at two or three Leagues distance. After
they had performed the like Exploits in those Places they returned to the Banks
of the Lake.

Before the French left the Lakes, they built a Fort of four Bastions at
Oniagara, on the South side of the Streights, between Ohswego Lake and
Cadarackui Lake, and left a hundred Men, with eight Months Provisions in it.
But this Garrison was so closely blockt up by the Five Nations, that they all
died of Hunger, except seven or eight, who were accidentally relieved by a
Party of French Indians.

The Western Indians when they parted from the French General, made their
Harrangues, as usual, in which they told him with what Pleasure they saw a Fort
so well placed to favor their Designs against the Five Nations, and that they
Relied on his never Finishing the War but with the Destruction of the Five
Nations, or Forceing them to abandon their Country. He assured them, that he
would act with such Vigor that they would soon see the Five Nations driven
into the Sea.

He sent a Detachment of Soldiers to Teiodondoraghie, and in his Return to
Canada, which was by the North side of the Lake, he left the same Number of Men
and Quantity of Provisions at Cadarackui Fort.

The French having got nothing but dry Blows, sent thirteen of the Indians that
they surprised at Cadarackui, to France, as Trophies of their Victory, where
they were put into the Galleys, as Rebels to their King.

CHAP. VI.
Coll. Dongan's Advice to the Indians. Adario's Enterprise, and Montreal Sacked
by the Five Nations.
COll. Dongan, who always had the Indian Affairs very much at heart, met the
Five Nations at Albany as soon as possible after the French Expedition, and
spoke to them on the 5th of August, in the following words, viz.

Brethren;

I Am very glad to see you here in this House, and am heartily glad that you
have sustained no greater loss by the French though I believe it was their
Intention to destroy you all, if they could have surpriz'^ you in your Castles.

As soon as I heard of their de^in to Way with you, I gave you Notice, and came
up hither my self, that I might be ready to give all the Assistance and Advice
that so short a time would allow me.

I am now about sending a Gentleman to England, to the King, my Master, to let
him know, that the French have invaded his Territories on this side the great
Lake, and War'd upon the Brethren, his Subjects. I would therefore willingly
know, whether the Brethren have giver the Governor of Canada any Provocation or
not; and if they have, how, and in what manner, because I am obliged to give a
true account of this matter. This business may cause a War between the King of
England and the French King, both in Europe and here, and therefore I must know
the Truth.

I know the Governor of Canada dare not enter into the great King of England's
Territories, in a Hostile manner, without Provocation, if he thought the
Brethren were the King of England's Subjects; But you having two or three years
ago, made a Covenant Chain with the French, contrary to my Command, (which I
knew could not hold long) being void of it self among the Christians; for as
much as Subjects (as you are) ought not to treat with any Foreign Nation, it
not lying in your Power, have brought this Trouble upon your selves, and, as I
believe, is the only reason of their falling upon you at this time.

Brethren, I took it very ill, that after you had put your selves into the
Number of the great King of England's Subjects, that you should ever offer to
make Peace or War without my consent. You know that we can live without you,
but you cannot live without us. You never found that I told you a Lie, and I
did offer your Assistance as you wanted, provided that you would be advised by
me; for I know the French better than any of you do.

Now since there is a War begun upon you by the Governor of Canada, I hope
without any Provocation by you given, I desire and command you, that you
hearken to no Treaty but by my Advice, which if you follow, you shall have the
Benefit of the great Chain of Friendship between the great King of England and
the French King, which came out of England the other day, and which I have sent
to Canada by Anthony Le ^unard; In the mean time I will give you such Advice as
will be for your good, and will supply you with such Necessarys as you will
have need of.

First, My Advice is, that as many Prisoners of the French, as you shall take,
that you draw not their Blood, but bring them home and keep them to Exchange
for your People, which they have Prisoners already or may take hereafter.

2 dly, That if it be Possible, that you can order it so, I would have you take
one or two of your wisest Sachems, and one or two chief Captains of each
Nation, to be a Council to manage all Affairs of the War. They to give Orders
to the rest of the Officers what they are to do, that your designs may be kept
Private, for after it comes among so many People, it is Blazed abroad, and your
designs are often frustrated. And those chief Men to keep a Correspondence with
me, by a Trusty Messenger.

3 dly, Now the Great matter under Consideration with the Brethren, is, how to
strengthen themselves, and weaken your Enemy. My Opinion is, that the Brethren
should send Messengers to the Utawawas, Twihtwichs, and the farther Indians,
and to send back likewise some of the Prisoners of these Nations, if any you
have left, to bury the Hatchet, and to make a Covenant Chain, that they may put
away all the French that are among them, and that you will open a Path for them
this way, They being the King of England's Subjects likewise, only the French
have been admitted to Trade with them, for all that the French have in Canada
they had it of the Great King of England, that by that Means they may come
hither freely where they may have every thing Cheaper than among the French.
That you and they may join together against the French, and make so firm a
League that whoever is an Enemy to one, must be to both.

4 thly, Another thing of Concern is, that you ought to do what you can to open
a Path for all the North Indians and Mahikanders that are among the Utawawas
and farther Nations: I will endeavor to do the same, to bring them home; for
they not daring to return home your way, the French keep them there on purpose
to join with the farther Nations against you, for your Destruction; for you
know, that one of them is worse than six of the others. Therefore all means
must be used to bring them Home, and use them kindly as they pass through your
Country.

5 thly, My Advice further is, That Messengers go in behalf of all the Five
Nations, to the Christian Indians at Canada, to persuade them to come Home to
their Native Country, and to promise them all Protection. This will be another
great means to weaken your Enemy; but if they will not be advised, you know
what to do with them.

6 thly, I think it very necessary for the B^ethrens Security and Assistance,
and to the endamaging the French, to build a Fort upon the Lake, where I may
keep Stores and Provisions, in case of necessity; and therefore I would have
the Brethren let me know what Place will be most convenient for it.

7 thly, I would not have the Brethren keep their Corn in their Castles, as I
hear the Onnondagas do, but to bury it a great way in the Woods, where few
People may know where it is, for fear of such an Accident as has happened to
the Sennekas.

8 thly, I have given my Advice in your General Assembly by Mr. Dirk Wessels
and Akus; the Interpreter, how you are to manage your Partys, and how necessary
it is to get Prisoners, to exchange for your own Men that are Prisoners with
the French. And I am glad to hear that the Brethren are so United, as Mr. Dirk
Wessels tells me you are, and that there are no Rotten Members nor French Spies
among you.

9 thly, The Brethren may remember my Advice which I sent you this Spring, Not
to go to Cadarackui; if you had, they would have served you as they did your
People who came from Hunting thither; for I told you then, that I knew the
French better than you did.

10 thly. There was no Advice or Proposition that I made to the Brethren, all
the time that the Priest lived at Onondaga, but what he wrote to Canada, as I
found by one of his Letters which he gave to an Indian to carry to Canada, but
was brought hither. Therefore I desire the Brethren not to receive him or any
French Priests any more, having sent for English Priests, with whom you may be
supplied to your Content.

11. I would have the Brethren look out sharp for fear of being surprised. I
believe all the Strength of the French will be at their Frontier Places, viz.
at Cadarackui and Oniagara, where they build a Fort now, and at Trois Rivieres,
Montreal and Chambly.

12. Let me put you in mind again, not to make any Treatys without my Means,
which will be more Advantageous for you, than your doing it by your selves, for
then you will be looked upon as the King of England's Subjects. And let me
know, from time to time, every thing that is done.

Thus far I have spoken to you relating to the War.

Then he chid them for their Breach of Faith with Virginia. He told them, that
he was informed that last Spring they had killed a fine Gentleman, with some
others, and that a Party of the Oneydoes was now there at the head of James
River, with intention to destroy all the Indians there-about. They had taken
six Prisoners, whom he ordered them to bring to him, to be Restored; and that
for the future they should desist from doing any Injury to the People of
Virginia or their Indians, otherwise all the English would unite to destroy
them. But at the same time he freed the Sennekas from any blame, and commended
them as a brave and honest People, who never had done any thing contrary to his
Orders, except in making that unlucky Peace with the French three years a go.

Lastly, He recommended to them, Not to suffer their People to be Drunk, during
the War^ A Soldier thereby (he said) looses his Reputation, because of the
Advantages it will give the Enemy over him.

This honest Gentleman earnestly pursued the Interest of his Country; but, it
seems, his Measures were not agreeable to those his Master had taken with the
French King; for he had Orders to procure a Peace for the French, and was soon
after this Removed from his Government. Indeed such an Active, as well as
Prudent Governor of New York, could not be acceptable to the French, who had
the Universal Monar^hy in view, in America as well as in Europe.

Coll. Dongan's Message to Mr. De Nonville at a time when the Crowns of England
and France had so lat^ly entered into a strict Friendship, had, no doubt, some
Influence on the French Governor. But the little Success he had in his
Expensive and Dangerous Expedition, together with the Obstruction that the
French Trade met with from the War, inclined him more effectually to Proposals
of Peace, which Coll. Dongan was forced to make, and the ^ive Nations to yield
to: For notwithstanding Coll. Dongan's Advice to them, as above related, he by
his Masters Orders (who was entirely devoted to Bigotry and the French
Interest) obliged the Five Nations to agree to a Cessation of Arms, and to
deliver up their Prisoners without any Conditions, in order to obtain a Peace
on such Terms as the French should agree to. And that no Accident might
prevent, Mr. De Nonville sent his Orders to all his Officers in the Indian
Countries to observe a Cessation of Arms till the Ambassadors of the Five
Nations should meet him at Montreal, as they had given him reason to expect in
a little time, to conclude the Peace in the usual Form.

In the mean time, Adario, the chief of the Deonondadies, finding that his
Nation was become suspected by the French, since the time they had shown so
much Inclination to the English when they attempted to Trade at Missilimakinak,
Resolved by some brave Action against the Five Nations to recover the good
Graces of the French.

For this Purpose he Marched from Missilimakinak at the head of a hundred Men;
and that he might act with more Security, he took Cadarackui Fort in his way
for Intelligence: The Commandant informed him, that Mr. De Nonville was in
hopes of concluding a Peace with the Five Nations, and expected their
Ambassadors in eight or ten days at Montreal for that purpose, and therefore
desired him to return to Missilimakinak without attempting any thing that might
Obstruct so good a Design.

The Indian being surprised with this News, was under great Concern for his
Nation, which he was afraid would be sacrificed to the French Resentment or
Interest, but dissembled his Concern before the French Officer. He went from
Cadarackui, not to return home as the Commandant thought, but to wait for the
Ambassadors of the 5 Nations near one of the Falls of Cadarackui River, by
which he knew they must pass. He did not lurk there above four or five days
before the unhappy Deputies came guarded by forty young Soldiers, who were all
surprised and killed or taken Prisoners. As soon as the Prisoners were all
secured, the cunning Deonondadie told them That he having been informed by the
Governor of Canada, That Fifty Warriors of their Nation were to pass this way
about this time, he had secured this Pass, not doubting of interc^pting them.

The Ambassadors being much surprised with the French Perfidy, told Adario the
Design of their Journey, who, the better to play his part, seemed to grow Mad
and Furious, declaiming against Mr. De Nonville, and said, He would, some Time
or other be Revenged of him for making a Tool of him to commit such horrid
Treachery. Then looking steadfastly on the Prisoners (among whom Dekanesora was
the Principal Ambassador) Adario said to them, Go my Brethren, I Unty your
Bonds, and send you Home again, though our Nations be at War: The French Governor
has made me commit so black an Action, that I shall never be easy after it till
your Five Nations shall have taken full Vengeance.

This was sufficient to persuade the Ambassadors of the Truth of what he said,
who assured him, That he and his Nation might make their Peace when they
pleased. Adario lost only one Man on this occasion, and would keep a Satana
Slave, (adopted into the Five Nations) to fill up his place. Then he gave Arms,
Powder and Ball to the rest of the Prisoners, to enable them to Return.

The Ambassadors were chiefly, if not all, Onnondagas and Oneydoes, who had
been long under the influence of the French Priests, and still retained an
Affection to them; but this Adventure thoroughly changed their thoughts, and
irritated them so heartily against the French, that all the Five Nations from
this time prosecuted the War unanimously.

Adario delivered the Slave (his Prisoner) to the French at Missilimakinak, who
to keep up the Enmity between the Deonondadies and the Five Nations, ordered
him to be shot to Death. As they carried him out, he related the whole of the
Action, but the French thinking that he had only contrived it to save his Life,
had no regard to it, till the fatal Consequences called his Dying Words to
their Remembrance, with sorrowful Reflections.

The same Day that the Satana was shot, Adario called one of the Five Nations,
who had been long a Prisoner, to be an Eyewitness of his Country-mans Death,
then bid him make his Escape to his own Country, to give an Account of the
French Cruelty, from which it was not in his Power to save a Prisoner he
himself had taken.

This heightened the Rage of the Five Nations, so that Mr. De Nonville's
sending to disown Adario in this Action, had no effect upon them: Their Breasts
admitted of no thought but that of Revenge. It was not not long before the
French felt the Bloody effects of this cruel Passion; for 1200 Men of the Five
Nations invaded the Island of Montreal when the French had no suspicion of any
such Attempt, while Mr. De Nonville and his Lady were in that Town. They Landed
on the South side of the Island at La Chine, on the 26 th of July, 1688. where
they burnt and sacked all the Plantations, and made a terrible Massacre of Men,
Women and Children. The French were under apprehension of the Town's being
attacked, for which reason they durst not send out any considerable Party to
the Relief of the Country, till the Indians had blocked up two Forts, when Mr.
De Nonvill^ sent out a hundred Soldiers and fifty Indians to try to bring off
the Men. The French of this Party were all either taken or cut to pieces,
except one Soldier and the Commanding Officer, who was carried off by twelve
Indians that made their escape, after he had his Thigh broke. There was above a
Thousand of the French killed at this time, and Twenty six were carried away
Prisoners, the greatest part of which were burnt alive. The Five Nations only
lost three Men in this Expedition, that got Drunk, and were left behind. This,
however, did not satiate their Thirst after Blood; for in October following
they destroyed likewise all the lower part of the Island, and carried away many
Prisoners.

The Consequences of these Expeditions were very dismal to the French, for they
were forced to burn their two Barks which they had on Cadarackui Lake, and to
abandon their Fort there. They designed to have blown up their Works when they
left that place, and for that end left a lighted Match where the Powder lay,
but were in such a Fright, that they dur^t not stay to see what effect it had.
They went down Cadarackui River, in seven Birch Canoes, and for greater
Security traveled in the Night. One of the Canoes with all the men in it was
lost by their Precipitation, as they passed one of the Falls of that River. The
Five Nations hearing that the French had deserted Cadarackui Fort, 50 Indians
went and took Possession of it, who found the Match the French had left, which
had gone out, and 28 Barrils of Powder in the same place, together with several
other Stores.

The News of the Success the Five Nations had over the French, soon spread
itself among all the Indians, and put the French Affairs every where into
terrible Disorder.

The Utawawas had always shown an Inclination to the English, and they
therefore immediately sent openly four Sachems with three Prisoners of the
Sennekas that they had, to assure them, That they would forever Renounce all
Friendship with the French, and promised to Restore the rest of the Prisoners.
They also included seven Nations that lived near Missilimakinak, in this Peace.

This put the French Commandant there under the greatest Difficulty to maintain
his Post; but there was no Choice, he must stand his Ground; for the Five
Nations had cut off all hopes of Retiring.

The Nep^ciriniens and Kikabous, of all their Numerous Allies, only remained
firm to the French, every one of the others endeavored to gain the Friendship
of the 5 Nations, and would certainly have done it, by Massacreing all the
French among them, if the Si^ur Perot had not with wonderful Sagacity and
imminent Hazard to his own Person diverted them, for which Canada cannot do too
much Honor to that Gentleman's Memory.

Canada was now in a most Miserable Condition; for while the greatest Number of
their Men had been employed in the Expeditions against the Five Nations, and in
Trading among the far Nations, and making New Discoveries and Settlements,
Tillage and Husbandry had been neglected; now they lost several Thousands of
their Inhabitants by the continual Incursions of small Parties, so that none
durs^ hazard themselves out of the Fortified Places. Indeed, it is not ea^ie to
conceive what Distress the French were then under; for though they were almost
every where starving, they could no^ Plant nor Sow, or go from one Village to
another for Relief, but with imminent Danger of having their Scalps carried
away by the Sculking Indians. At last the whole Country being laid Waste,
Famine began to rage, and was like to have put a Miserable End to that Colony.

If the Indians had understood the method of attacking Forts, nothing could
have preserved the French from an entire Destruction at this time. For whoever
considers the state of the Indian Affairs during this Period, How the Five
Nations were divided in their Sentiements and Measures; The Onnondagas,
Cayugas, and Oneydoes, under the In^uence of the French Je^uits, were diverted
from prosecuting the War with Canada, by the Jesuits cunningly spiriting up
those three Nations against the Virginia Indians, and persuading them to send
out their Parties that way: The Sennekas had a War at the same time upon their
hands with three numerous Indian Nations, the Utawawas, Chicktaghicks and
Twihtwies: And the Measures the English observed with the French all King
James's Reign, gave the Indians rather grounds of Jealousy than Assistance. I
say, whoever considers all these things, and what the Five Nations did actually
perform under all these Disadvantages against the French, will hardly doubt
that the Five Nations by themselves were at that time an over Match for the
French of CANADA.

The End of the First Part.

