Obadiah Palmer, Nehemiah Palmer, Sylvanus Palmer, Solomon Palmer, Josiah
Quenby. Tho. Townsend, Richard Cornwall and Henry Cock, Complainants AGAINST
Jacobus van Cortland and Adolph Philipse, Defendants, In Cancellaria Novae
Eborac.
THe Decree in this Cause contains the Bill of Complaint and the Defendants
Answer both at length, the Bill being 173 Sheets, and the Answer 199 Sheets,
which was done because the Defendants, by their Council, insisted on having the
Answer at length, and therefore the Complainants insisted, in like manner, on
having their Bill at length, incerted in the Decree.

The Cause depending on the Construction of Deeds, the Court thought it proper
that the Deeds should be taken in at length, in order that it might always
appear whether the Construction, put upon them by the Court, be just, and that
there might be no pretense of Deceit, in taking in Paragraphs which make one
way, and leaving out the Paragraphs thereof which make the contrary way.

That part of the Decree which contains the material Deeds, and the
Construction that the Court put upon them, is in the words following,

ANd this Cause then standing in Court upon Bill and Answer, the twenty eighth
day of April last, was appointed by this Court for the Hearing thereof: On
which Day the same coming to be heard and debated accordingly, in presence of
Council learned on both sides, the substance of the Complainants Bill, and the
Defendants Answer, appeared to be as herein before set forth; and the material
Writings confessed, discovered and referred to, by the Defendants Answer,
appeared to be in these words,

Governor Lovelace's Patent in 1668. under which both Parties claim.
FRANC^S LOVELACE, Esquire Governor General under his Royal Highness James Duke of
York; Albany, etc of all his Territories in America,
To all to whom these presents shall come, Sends Greeting:
Whereas there is a certain parcel or tract of Land within this Government,
upon the Main, contained in three Necks, of which the Eastermost is bounded
with a Small River, called, Mamaroneck River, being also the East bounds or
limits of this Government, upon the Main, and the Westermost with the gravelly
or Stony Brook or River, which makes the East Limits of the Land known by the
name of Mr. Pells Purchase, having to the South the Sound, and Running
Northward from the marked Trees upon the said Necks, Twenty Miles into the
woods; which said parcel or tract of Land has been lawfully purchased of the
Indian Proprietors by John Richbell of Mamaroneck, Gent. in whose Possession
now it is, and his Title there unto Sufficiently proved; both at several Courts
of Sessions, as also at the general Court of Assizes. Now for a Confirmation
unto him the said John Richbell, in his Possession and Enjoyment of the
Premises, Know ye, That by virtue of the Commission and Authority unto me
given by his Royal Highness, I have given, ratifyed and Confirmed, and granted,
and by these presents; do Give and Ratify, Confirm and Grant unto the said
John Richbell, his heirs and assigns, all the before recited parcel or tract of
Land, as aforesaid; together with all Woods, Beeches, Marshes, Pastures,
Creeks, Waters; Lakes, Fishing; Hawking, Hunting, and Fowling, and all other
Profits, Commodities and Emoluments to the said parcel or tract of Land
belonging, annexed or appertaining, with their and every of their
Appurtenances, and of every part and parcel thereof; and in regard the Distance
of the Plantations already settled, or to be settled upon the said Necks of
Land from any Town, the Persons inhabiting, or that shall inhabit thereupon,
shall have a petty Constable chosen amongst themselves yearly; for preserving
of the Peace and Decision of small Differences under the value of Forty
Shillings; and they shall be excused from all common attendance at Trainings,
or other ordinary Duties at Westchester; But in matters of Assessments and
public Rates, they are to be assessed by the Officers of that Town to the
which they do properly belong, being the nearest unto them; To have and To hold
the said parcel and tract of Land in the said three necks contained, and
pr^misses, with all and singular the Privileges and Appurtenancies to the said
John Richbell, his heirs and assigns, to the proper use and behoof of the said
John Richbell, his heirs and assigns forever, as free Land of Inheritance,
rendering and paying as a Quit-Rent for the same, yearly, and every year, the
value of eight Bushels of winter wheat upon the Five and Twentieth Day of
March, if demanded, unto his Royal Highness and his heirs, or to such Governor
or Governors as shall, from time to time, be appointed and set over them.

Given under my hand and Seal at Fort James in New York, on Manhattans Island
the Sixteenth Day of October, in the Twentieth year of the Reign of Our
Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc, Annoq Domini 1668.
Francis Lovelace.

Deed to Rider in 1669. which describes the bounds of the East Neck,
THIS Indenture made the Three and Twentieth Day of April, in the One and
Twentieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the
Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the
Faith, etc. and in the year of Our Lord God, 1669. Between John Richbell of
Mamaroneck, Gent. of the one part, and John Rider of the City of New York, on
the other part, Witnesses, That whereas there has been long since a Marriage
had and solemnized between the said John Richbell and Anne his present Wife,
the said John Richbell* for and in Consideration of the said marriage, and for
the tender Love and Affection he bears toward the said Anne, for a competent
Jointure, and way of liveing for her, during, her Natural Life, after the
Decease of the said John, and in full Satisfaction and recompense of the Dower
of the said Anne, Does for him, his heirs, executors and administrators,
covenant and grant by these presents, to and with the said John Rider, his
executors and administrators, in manner and form following, that is to say,
Whereas the said John Richbell now is and stands lawfully and solely seized
of a good and perfect Estate in Fee-simple of and in a certain parcel or tract
of Land upon the Main, containing three Necks, commonly called, Mamaroneck
Lands, he the said John Richbell, for the reasons aforementioned, has given,
granted, enfeoffed and settled upon the said John Rider, to and for the use and
behoof of Anne, the present Wife of the said John Richbell, as aforesaid, all
that parcel or Neck of Land where he now lives, called, the East-Neck, and to
begin at the westward part thereof, at a certain Creek lying, being and
adjacent by and betwixt the Neck of Land commonly called, The Great Neck, and
the said East-Neck, and so to run Eastward as far as Mamaroneck River,
including therein, betwixt the two Lines, all the Land, as well North into the
Woods above Westchester path, Twenty Miles, as the Lands below the Pain,
Southward, toward the Sound, with the Message and Dwelling House, and all or
any other Buildings that now are, or hereafter shall be erected thereupon; and
belonging to him the said John Richbell, at the time of his decease, as also
six Cows, Four Oxen and two Breeding Mares, to be marked and delivered to the
use of the said Anne, upon the first Day of May next ensuing the Date of these
Presents, Together with the Privileges belonging to the said Land granted by
Patent from the Right honorable Governor Lovelace, that is to say; to have an
equal Proportion thereof, according to the quantity of Land, as it is extent
above the Path and marked Trees Northward. To have and To hold the said neck of
Lands, with the Buildings thereupon; and Privileges thereunto belonging,
Together with the Cattle and Mares aforementioned; To the said John Rider, his
Executors and Administrators, to the proper use and behoof of the said Anne,
for and during her Natural Life, and after her decease to the use and behoof of
the Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns of the said Anne forever.
Always Provided and Excepted, and it is hereby provided and excepted, that in
case the said John shall survive the said Anne his Wife, that then the said
John may dispose of, give and bequeath the said Message, Buildings and Lands
to all or some of the Children of the said Anne, as he the said John by his
last Will and Testament shall think meet. And the said John Richbell for
himself, his Executors and Administrators does Covenant to and with the said
John Rider, his Executors and Administrators, that the Neck of Land at the
ensealing and delivery hereof is free and acquitted from all and singular former
Bargains or Sales, Estates, Rights, Conditions or Encumbrances whatsoever.

In Witness whereof the Parties to these present Indentures have hereunto set
their Hands and Seals Interchangeably, the Day and year first above written:
John Richbell. Sealed and Delivered in the presence of George Baxter, Richard
Charlton, John Manning.

Mortgage to Steenwick in 1673. discovered by the Defendants, which bounds the
West Neck, and under which the Defendants claim.
APpeared before us subscribed Aldermen of the City of New-Orange, the honest
Mr. John Richbell, Inhabitant of the place Marraneck, in the Main, within this
Province, who acknowledged and declared for himself, his heirs and executors,
fully and duly to be indebted to Mr. Cornelius S eenwick, chief Council of this
Province, a just and neat sum of Two thousand and four hundred Guilders,
Wampum, being occasioned by and from delivered Merchandises, disbursed Moneys,
or otherwise, by him the said John Richbell, to his full satisfaction received
and enjoyed of Mr. Cornelius Steenwick, which aforesaid Sum of 2400 g. he the
said John Richbell by these accepts, and promises to pay, or cause to be
paid to Mr. Steenwick aforesaid, or to him that should or might obtain his
Action with good current Wampum, The Original in Dutch is in these words,

Tot meerder seeckeringe van de gemelte hier Steenwick, and vol-domen
voldeninge van de voors stelt and bint by comparants Neck of stuck Lants,
gelegen op de vast kust, ^nde ^et Wes^^lycke neck Lants van de dr^een, den
comparant in Wettige Eygend^^ toebchorend volgens socker Patent van den
Governor Lovelace, sub dato 16 October, 1668. grensende het voors Neck Lants
op de gravelly of^ steenige wa^ter of Rivier, twelek de oastelz limiten syn van
Mr. Pells Lant hebende aen de suyt ^yde de ^ont and loopende so van de
gemerchte b^^men staen de op de voors Neck noor dez twentigh Mylen b^sw^^rten,
en voorst generaelz syn Persoon and Goederen, roerende and onroorende, etc.


or to deliver the value thereof on or before the first of October next
ensuing, without delay. For the better security of the aforesaid Mr. Steenwick,
and the full satisfaction of the sum aforesaid, he the said John Richbell
binds and engages for a special Mortgage and a Pledge certain of his the
said John Richbells Neck or piece of Land lying upon the Main, being the most
Westerly Neck of Land of the three, to him the said John Richbell in lawful
Propriety belonging, pursuant to certain Patent of Governor Lovelace, dated 16
October, 1668. limiting the Neck of Land aforesaid, upon the gravelly or stoney
Water or River, which are the Easterly Limits of Mr. Pells Land, having at the
South side the Sound, and running thus from the Marked Trees, standing on the
said Neck, North Twenty Miles into the Woods, and further, in general, his
Person, and Goods moveable and immovable, none excepted or reserved,
submitting the same to all Courts, Laws and Justices.

In Witness whereof is this by the said John Richbell benevolently or willing,
the Esquires Aldermen Gelyn ver Plank and Lawrens Spiegel In the Record Book^
of this Town. Signed in New-Orange 20 9ber. 1673.
Mortgage to R. Richbell in 1675. of great Neck, bounded between the small
Necks, under which the Complainants claim, and on which the Dispute arises.
THis Indenture made the 12th day of May, in the 27th year of our Sovereign
Lord the King, and in the year of our Lord 167^. Between John Richbell of
Mamaroneck, within the Government of New York, Merchant, of the one part, and
Robert Richbell of Southampton in Old England, jun. of the other part,
Witnesses, That for and in Consideration of Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds of
Boston Silver, for me and by appointment paid, and disbursed, and part thereof
in hand paid, I the said John Richbell do by these Presents, bargain, sell and
alienate, and have absolutely bargained, Sold and alienated unto the said
Robert Richbell his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, all my Right, Title and
Interest in and to one Neck of Land, lying and being at Mamaroneck, commonly
called and known by the Name of the great Neck, bordered or bounded by the
sound on the one end, and between my other two Small Necks, on each side of the
great Neck aforesaid, To have and To hold all the great Neck with the Commonage
and Privileges and Appurtenances now properly belonging or appertaining to the
same, for and during the term of Ninety Nine Years, from and after the date
hereof, to him the said Robert Richbell or his Heirs and Assigns, free and
clear of all Encumbrances, Claim or Titles whatsoever that may or shall justly
be laid on the same by him the said John Richbell, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any other claiming under him, them or any of
them. Provided always and nevertheless, upon Condition, That if the said John
Richbell, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them do
well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said Robert Richbell, ju^ his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said Sum, with Interest, that
then^ and from thence-forth this present Grant, Bargain and Sale of the
Premises shall cease, determine and be utterly void, frustrate and of none
Effect, or else the same shall stand firm and stable, and be in full Force and
Virtue, any thing in these Presents to the contrary notwithstanding, allowing
to the said John Richbell, his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns, the Mannaging and
the Profits to be gotten or obtained by his care and mannaging the same until
the said Robert Richbell, his Heirs or Assigns shall claim, and be in the sole
Possession thereof.

In Witness whereof the said John Richbell has hereunto set his hand, affixed
his Seal the day and year above-written. John Richbell. Signed and Delivered in
the Presence of Henry Newton, John Sharp, Not. Pub.

Mortgage to Kelland in 1676. of the Revertion of great Neck and West Neck,
discovered by the Defendants, under which both Parties claim.
THIS INDENTURE made the seventh day of July, in the Twenty Eight year of his
Majesty's Reign, Annoque Dominu 1676. Between John Richbell of Mamaroneck in
the Government of New York, Merchant, on the one part, and Thomas Kellond of
Boston, in New England, Merchant, on the other part, Witnesses, That whereas
the said John Richbell by his Obligation bearing date the 4th day of August,
1664. stands bound to the said Thomas Kellond in the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds
of current Money of New England, for the payment of One Hundred Pounds at or
before the time in the said Obligation limited, the which not being hitherto
effected, he the said John Richbell, for further security, and for diverse other
good causes and considerations him thereunto moving has, Demised, Granted,
Bargained and to farm-Let, and by these Presents does Demise, Grant, Bargain
and to farm-Let unto the said Thomas Kelland, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns the reversion of one Neck of Land, lying and being at Mamaroneck,
commonly called or known by the Name of the Great Neck, after that the Sum of
Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds, with Interest, shall be satisfied and paid unto
Robert Richbell of Southon in Old England, jun. Merchant, his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, for which said sum the said neck of land is
Mortgaged unto him, as also the Reversion of one other Neck of Land, being the
most Westerly Neck of three, after that the Sum of Two Thousand Four Hundred
Guilders Servant or value, for the which it is Mortgaged, shall be paid unto
Cornelius Steenwyck of New York, Merchant; his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, both which sold Necks of Land are in the present Tenure or Occupation
of him the said John Richbell, To have and To hold the Reversion of the said
Two Necks of Land, and of every part and parcel thereof, with their and every
of their Appurtena^ces, unto him the said Thomas Kellond, his Executors and
Assigns, after that the said Sum of Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds, and Two
Thousand Four Hundred Guilders shall be satisfied and paid, for, during and
until the full end and Term of Ninety Nine Years from thence Next ensuing, be
fully and completely ended; and it is hereby concluded and agred upon, by and
between the said Parties to these Presents, and the said John Richbell does,
for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, Covenant, Promise and
agree, to and with the said Thomas Kellond, his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, That after the two Debts before specified, shall be satisfied and p^d.
It shall and may be lawful to and for the said Thomas Kellond, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, quietly and peaceably To have, hold, occupy,
possess and enjoy all and singular the said Two Necks and Premises, with their
and every of their Appurtenances, from time to time, and at all times, during
the said Term, without the lawful let or interruption of him the said John
Richbell, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or any other Person or Persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming from, by or under him, and also freed and
discharged of and from all and all manner of former Bargains, Sales Gifts,
Grants, Judgments, Executions and other Charges of Incumberances whatsoever
(other than what is beforementioned, had, made, done or suffered by him.)
Provided always, and it is nevertheless agreed and concluded by and between the
said Parties to these Presents, That it is the true intent and meaning hereof,
That if the said John Richbell, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
either of them, shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said
Thomas Kellond his Executors, Administrators and Assigns the full and entire
Sum of One Hundred Pounds of New England Money, according to the tenor of the
before mentioned Obligation, with interest, on or before the eight day of July,
which shall be in the year of our Lord, 1677. that then this present Indenture,
Demise and Grant, and every Article and Clause therein contained, shall cease,
determine, be void and of none Effect, any thing in these Presents contained to
the contrary thereof in any wi^e notwithstanding.

In Witness whereof the Parties to these Presents have Interchangeably set to
their Hands and Seals the day and year afore-written. John Richbell. Sealed and
Delivered in the presence of Thomas Wandall, John Palmer, Humphry Davenport.

Mortgage to Steenwick in 1678, under which the Defendants Claim.
THIS INDENTURE made the Sixth day of July, in the 30th year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the faith, and c. Annoque
Domini 1678. Between Jo^^ Richbell of Mamaroneck in the Province of New York,
Gent. of the one part, and Cornelius Steenwyck of the City of New York,
Merchant, of the other part, Witnesses, that the said John Richbell for and in
consideration of the Sum of One Hundred and Twenty five Pounds, or the value
thereof, of lawful Money of this Country in hand paid or secured to be paid
unto the said John Richbell by the said Cornelius Steenwyck, at or before the
Ensealing and Delivery of these presents, the Receipt whereof the said John
Richbell, does hereby acknowledge, and thereof and of every part thereof does
hereby also clearly acquit and discharge the said Cornelius Steenwyck, his
Heirs and Assigns, for diverse other good Causes and Considerations him the said
John Richbell, thereunto moving, has demised, granted and to farm-Let unto the
said Cornelius Steenwick, all that his Neck of Land lying upon the Main, being
the most Westerly Neck of Land of the three belonging to the said John
Richbell, there as his Lawful Propriety, according to a certain Patent granted
from the late Governor Coll. Francis Lovelace, bearing date the 16th day of
October, 1668. The said Neck of Land, bordering on the stoney or gravelly Water
or River, which is the East Limits of Mr. John Pells Land, having at the South
side the Sound, and so running from the marked Tree which is upon the said Neck,
North-wards Twenty Miles into the Woods, according to the extent of the said
Patent, if so far it can go, Together with all the Soils, Pastures, Wood-land,
Marshes, Meadow Ground, Springs, Waters, Creeks and Appurtenances thereunto
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, as also all former Deeds, Grants or
Writings concerning the same, To have and To hold the said Neck or Piece of
Land, and Premises, before by these Presents Demised, granted and to Farm-Let,
and every part and parcel, unto the said Cornelius Steenwyck, his Heirs and
Assigns, unto the proper use and behoof of him the said Cornelius Steenwyck,
his Heirs and Assigns forever, to be entered upon and possessed by the said
Cornelius Steenwyck, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from and
after the 20th day of May, which will be in the year of our Lord 1681. And the
said John Richbell, for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
does Covenant, Promise and Grant to and with the said Cornelius Steenwyck, his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, after the Expiration of the time
aforementioned, quietly and peaceably To have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy
all and singular the Demised Premises, and every part and parcel thereof,
without the lawful Let and Interruption of him ^he said John Richbell, his
Heirs, Executors, Adminstrators or Assigns, or if any other Person or Persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under them, or either of them* and
also freed and discharged of and from all and all manner of former Bargains,
Sales, Gifts, Grants, Mortgages, Judgments, Executions and other Charges of
Encumbrance whatsoever, had, made, done or suffered by them or either of them.
Provided always, and it is Nevertheless agreed and concluded upon, by and
between the Party to these Presents, and it is the true intent and meaning
thereof, That if the said John Richbell, his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or either of them, shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto
the said Cornelius Steenwyck, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the
full and entire Sum of One Hundred Twenty five Pounds lawful Money of this
Country, as aforesaid, on or before the twentieth day of May, which shall be in
the year of our Lord 1681. Together with Interest for the same, at the rate of
6 per Cent. from the 20th day of May last past, That then this present
Indenture of Demise and Grant, and every Clause and Article therein contained,
shall cease; determine; be void and of none Effect, any thing in these Presents
to the contrary thereof in any wise Notwithstanding.

In Witness whereof the Parties to these Presents have Interchangeably set
their hands and Seals in New York, the Day and year first above-written. Sealed
and delivered in the presence of Matthias Nicolls, John Juxon.
Upon this last Mortgage to Steenwyck, there appeared several Endorsements, all
which were so carefully blotted out, that not a word of them could be read.

Release of the Equity of Redemption of the great Neck in 1722. under which the
Complainants claim.
THIS INDENTURE made the Eight day of February, in the Ninth year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord George, King of Great Britain, etc. and in the year of
our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty Two, Between Edward Richbell of
the Parish of St. James in the County of Middlesex in Great Britain, Esquire Heir
at Law of John Richbell, heretofore of Mamaroneck, in the Precincts of
Westchester, in the Government of New York (who was son and heir of Edward
Richbell late of (...) City of Westminster, Esquire who was Eldest Son and Heir of
R. Richbell, E^ late of Southampton in Great Britain, deceased, who was the
only Brother and (...) of the said John Richbell) of the one part, and Nehemiah
Palmer, Obadiah Palm^r, Sylvanus Palmer and Solomon Palmer (Sons and Devisees
of Samuel Palmer, late of Mamaroneck, aforesaid, deceased) of the other part.
Whereas by Indenture bearing date on or about the twelfth day of May, in the
year of our Lord 167^ made or mentioned to be made between the said John
Richbell, of the one part, and the said Robert Richbell, (by the Name of Robert
Richbell o^ Southampton, in Old England jun.) of the other part, he the said
John Richbell in Consideration of Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds, Boston,
New England) Silver, did bargain and sell to the said Robert Richbell, his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, all his Right, Title and Interest in and to one
Neck of Land, lying and being in Mamaroneck aforesaid, commonly called and
known by the Name of the Great Neck, bordered or bounded by the Sound on the
one end, and between his other two small Necks on each side of the Great Neck
aforesaid, To hold all the said Great Neck, with all the Commonage, Privileges
and Appurtenances then properly belonging or appertaining to the same, for the
term of ninety nine years from the Date thereof, with Proviso or Condition
therein mentioned, for Payment of the said Sum and Interest, as by the said
Indenture recorded in the Secretarys Office in New York (in America) relation
being thereunto had; may more fully appear; which said Mortgaged Lands and
Premises, were and are parcel of a larger Tract of Land granted by Francis
Lovelace, Esquire Governor General under his then Royal Highness James Duke of
York and Albany, etc. of all his Territories in America, by Letters Patent,
bearing date the Sixteenth Day of October, in the year of our Lord One Thousand
Six Hundred and Sixty Eight, to the said John Richbell and his Heirs, as by the
said Letters Patent recorded in the Secretarys Office in New York aforesaid,
relation being thereunto had, may more at large appear, and which said
Mortgaged Lands and Premises, are the only Lands intended hereby to be
conveyed or released. And whereas the Premises hereby intended to be released,
became lawfully vested in Samuel Palmer, aforesaid, for the remainder of the
said Term of Ninety nine years, and he the said Samue^ Palmer devised his
interest of and in the same Premises to the said Nehemiah Palmer, Obadiah
Palm, Sylvanus Palmer, and Solomon Palmer. Now this Indenture witnesses, That
for and in Consideration of the Sum of Three Hundred and Eighty Pounds of
lawful Money of Great Britain, in hand paid to the said Edward Richbell, party
to these Presents, well and truly paid by the said Nehemiah Palmer, Obadiah
Palmer, Sylvanus Palmer, and Solomon Palmer, at or before the ensealing hereof,
the Receipt whereof the said Edward Richbell does hereby acknowledge, and
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does acquit and discharge the
said Nehemiah Palmer, Obadiah Palmer, Sylvanus Palmer, and Solomon Palmer,
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, by these
Presents, He the said Edward Richbell has Remised, Released and for ever
Quit-claimed, and by these Presents does Remise, Release and forever Quit-claim
unto the said Nehemiah Palmer, Obadiah Palmer, Sylvanus Palmer, and Solomon
Palmer, (in their actual Possession now being) and to their Heirs and Assigns,
all those the aforesaid Lands and Premises, with their and every of their
Appurtenances herein before recited, to have been Demised for the term of
Ninety nine years, as aforesaid, and all the Estate, Right, Title, Equity of
Redemption, Property, Claim and Demand whatsoever of him the said Edward
Richbell, party to these Presents, of, in and to the same Premises, To have
and To hold the said Lands and Premises, with their and every of their
Appurtenances hereby released, or mentioned or intended to be hereby released,
unto the said Nehemiah Palmer, Obadiah Palmer, Sylvanus Palmer, and Solomon
Palmer, and their Heirs and Assigns, to the only use and behoof of them the
said Nehemiah Palmer, Obadiah Palmer, Sylvanus Palmer, and Solomon Palmer, and
their Heirs and Assigns forever. And the said Edward Richbell, Party to these
Presents, for himself, his Heirs and Assigns, does Covenant, Promise and Agree
to and with the said Nehemiah Palmer, Obadiah Palmer, Sylvanus Palmer and
Solomon Palmer, their Heirs and Assigns, by these Presents, in manner and from
following (that is to say) That he the said Edward Richbell at the time of the
Sealing and Delivery of these Presents, has in himself good Right and Lawful
and absolute Authority to Release and Convey the Premises, with their
Appurtenances, with the Equity of Redemption thereof, unto the said Nehemiah
Palmer, Obadiah Palmer, Sylvanus Palmer, and Solomon Palmer, and their Heirs
and Assigns, in manner aforesaid, and that he the said Edward Richbell has not
made, done, committed or suffered any act, matter or thing, whereby, or by
means or occasion whereof the same Pr^misses, hereby released, or intended to
be released, are or may be charged, impeached or incumbered in Title, Charge,
Estate or other-wise howsoever; and fa^ther, that the said Edward Richbell, his
Heirs; Executors, Administrators and Assigns shall and will upon the reasonable
request, cost and charges in the Law of them the said Nehemiah Palmer, Obadiah
Palmer, Sylvanus Palmer, and Solomon Palmer, their Heirs Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, do, make and execute all and every such further and
other Acts, Assurances and Conveyances in the Law whatsoever, for the further
assuring and releasing the Premises, with their Appurtenances, unto the said
Nehemiah Palmer, Obadiah Palmer, Sylvanus Palmer, and Solomon Palmer, and their
Heirs and Assigns, as by the Council learned in the Law, of them the said
Nehemiah Palmer, Obadiah Palmer, Sylvanus Palmer, and Solomon Palmer, their
Heirs and Assigns, crany of them, shall be reasonably devised, advised and
required, so as that the said Edward Richbell, his Heirs, Executors.
Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, shall not be compelled or
compellable to make any further assurance of the Premises, unless the same be
Demanded within five years Next ensuing the Date hereof, and so as he and they,
or any of them, shall not be obliged to travel from the place of his or their
abode; at the time of such request made for such further assurance.

In witness whereof the said Part^ to these Presents have hereunto
Interchangeably let their hands and Seals the day and your first above-written.
Ed. Richbell. Sealed and delivered (being first stamped with three Six-penny
Stamps) in the Presence of Stephens Bayard, Tho. Smith, The. Fitch.

Articles of agreement made in 1723. between the Complainants and Defendants to
prevent disputes about the bounds of the great Neck and West-Neck.
ARTICLES of agreement made and concluded Between Coll. Jacobus van Cor^land,
of the one part, and Josiah Quinb^, Thomas Townsend, and Richard Cornwall, for
and in behalf of themselves and Obadiah Palmer, Nehemiah Palmer, Sylvanus
Palmer, Solomon Palmer, John Rodman, jun. and Henry Cock, of the other part,
Witnesses, That whereas Francis Lovelace, Esquire Governor General under his
Royal Highness the late Duke of York, etc. by Patent bearing date the Sixteenth
Day of October, in the Twentieth year of the Reign of King Charles the Second,
Reciting that there was a parcel or tract of Land within this Government, upon
the Main, contained in three Necks, of which the Eastermost is bounded with
Mamaroneck River, being the East bounds of this Government, and the Westermost
with the Gravelly or Stony Brook, which makes the East limits of Pells
Purchase, having to the South the Sound, and running Northward from the marked
Trees on the said Necks Twenty Males into the woods, Did by virtue of the Power
therein mentioned, grant unto John Richbell, his Heirs and Assigns, all the
aforesaid recited parcel or tract of Land, as aforesaid, with the
Appurtenances, To have and To hold the said parcel or tract of Land in the said
Three Nerks contained, and Premises, with all and singular the Privileges and
Appurtenances to the said John Richbell, his Heirs and Assigns. And Whereas the
said John Richbell, by Indentures bearing date the Three and Twentieth Day of
April, in the One and Twentieth year of the Reign of King Charles the Second,
made between him and John Rider of the City of New York, did grant, en^eoff and
settle upon the said John Rider, for the use of her the then Wife of the said
John Richbell, as therein mentioned, all the Easter-most of the said three
Necks of Land, and Appurtenances thereunto belonging, extending Northward
Twenty Miles into the Woods, as by the same Indenture more fully may appear.
And Whereas the said John Richbell, by other Indentures bearing date the 12th
Day of May, in the Twenty First year of the Reign of King Charles the Second,
made between the said John Richbell and Robert Richbell of Southampton, did for
the Consideration therein mentioned bargain and sell, in Mortgage, unto the
said Robert, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, all his Right, Title and
Interest in end to one Neck of Land lying and being at Mamaroneck, commonly
called or known by the Name of the great Neck, bordered or bounded between his
other two small Necks on each side of the great Neck aforesaid, To have and To
hold all the said great Neck, with all the Commonages, Privileges and
Appurtenances then properly belonging or appertaining to the same, for and
during the term therein mentioned. And whereas the said Josiah Quinby, and the
Persons abovementioned, on the other part, have purchased the Reversion and
Equity of Redemption of the said great Neck from Edward Richbell, Heir of the
said John Richbell: And whereas the said Jacobus van Cortland, by himself and
the Persons abovementioned, on the other part, by themselves, have severally
made endeavors to purchase the Reversion and Equity of Redemption of the
Westermost of the said three necks, (the same now lying under Mortgages and
Incumberances) which several Endeavors, if continued, will prove very
prejudicial to either of the parties aforesaid, who shall obtain the Purchase
thereof. And Whereas it Does not appear that the Line Running into the woods
between the said great neck and the said Westermost neck has ever been settled,
run or marked out, or even the Course that it ought to run, appointed or
limited, which may occasion Difference between the Parties aforesaid, if the
said Jacobus van Cortland should happen to purchase the Reversion of the same
Westermost Neck, To prevent both which Inconveniences, as much as lies in the
Power of the Parties aforesaid, they have come to the following Articles of
Agreement, to wit, First, The said Josiah Quinby, Thomas Townsend and Richard
Cornwall, in behalf of themselves and the other Persons aforesaid, have agreed
to desist giving any further directions to their Agents in England, directly or
indirectly, for the purchasing to them the Reversion of the said Wester-most
Neck, and by the first opportunity that offers, to write to their
Correspondents, To Lesist making any further proffers for the Reversion of the
same Neck. Secondly, The same Jacobus van Cortland has agreed, that in case he
or any Person for him, shall obtain the Reversion of the said Westermost Neck,
by himself, or in Company, or in any way for his use, Joint or in Common with
others, to pay the said Josiah Quinby, Thomas Townsend and Richard Cornwall,
the Sum of One Hundred and Fifty Eight Pounds, in Consideration of the Charge
and Expense they have been at, in Endeavoring the Purchase of the Reversion
aforesaid, and that so soon as he or they shall have notice of his Purchase, as
aforesaid, Together with the Interest of the said Sum, from the date of these
Presents, until its paid. And Thirdly, All the Parties aforesaid, or those
empowered by each of them, have agreed to meet at New-Rochel, in the County of
Westchester, on or before the first day of October Next to come, and shall
proceed from thence to take a view of the said great Neck, and the Wester-most
Neck, and after they have so viewed the same, will to its ^xte^t Twenty Miles
Endeavor amicably, betwixt themselves, to settle the L^ne into the Wo^ds,
betwixt the same Necks; and in case they cannot by themselves agree how it
shall run, then they have agreed to leave the Determination thereof to Six
indifferent Persons, three whereof to be chosen by the said Jacobus van
Cortland, and the other three by the Persons aforesaid, of the other part, with
full Power to the same Persons, or the Majority of them, to arbitrate and
determine how the said Line of Division shall run into the Woods. And in Case
the Majority of them cannot agree, then with full Power to the said
Arbitrators, or the Majority of them, to elect and choose an Umpire, who joined
with one half of the arbitrators aforesaid, shall have full Power to Determine
the said Line. And the said Parties to these Presents, do hereby Promise and
agree, to and with each other, to fulfill and keep these present Articles of
Agreement, according to the true intent and meaning thereof, without taking any
Advantage of each other for the misreciting or miswording any part thereof.

In Witness whereof the said Parties to these Presents, have set their hands
and Seals in New York, this Twenty Ninth day of May, in the Ninth year of his
Majesty's Reign, and in the year of Our Lord, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Twenty Three. J. V. Cortland, Josiah Quinby Thomas Townsend, Richard Cornwall.
Sealed and Delivered in the Presence of us Rans. Nichols, Adolph Philipse.

An agreement at the bottom of the former in the Defendant Adolph Philipse's,
hand writting.
AND the said Josiah Quinby, Thomas Townsend, and Richard Cornwall, in behalf
of themselves, and the other their Partners herein beforementioned, do
Promise, Engage and Agree, That if their Agent or Agents in England, should
actually have finished a bargain for the aforesaid Wester-most Neck, before the
Direction come to their hands, which they are hereby obliged to give by the
first opportunity unto the said Agents to desist making any further Proffers
for the Reversion of the same Neck, the said Jacobus van Cortland, his Heirs or
Assigns, shall then and in such case be interested and entitled unto one full
and equal moiety or half part of the same, and that we shall and will
accordingly convey the said half part thereof to him, his Heirs or Assigns,
when thereunto required, he or they paying an equal half of the Purchase Money,
and bearing likewise a full half of all the Incumberances that are upon the
said Neck.

In Witness whereof the said Quinby, Townsend and Cornwall, in behalf of
themselves and Partners, have hereunto set their hands and Seals in New York,
the first Day of June, 1723. Josiah Quinby. Sealed and Delivered by Josiah
Quinby in the Presence of Hendrick Gissingar, Adolph Philipse.

AND all the other Deeds and writings referred to by the Bill, Concerning the
other deeds not so material.
not so material, and which served only for Conveyance, were either admitted by
the Defendents as such on hearing, or read as Evidence, on hearing, by virtue
of an Act of Assembly of this Province, appointing what shall be Evidence.

UPON Reading whereof, The opinion of the Court on the several Circumstances
and Arguments.
and upon Debating of the matter, and hearing what could be alleged on all
sides, which hearing continued for above Six Hours on the said Twenty Eight Day
of April, and about as many Hours on the First of May, and about as many Hours
on the Second of May, This Court does conceive, as to the One Hundred and Fifty
Eight Pounds, and interest, agreed to be paid to the Complainants, that the
Consideration on the Complainants part to be done, was, First, Th^^r (...) to
make further Proffers for the West-Neck, and Secondly, By the (...) to write to
their Correspondents, to desist; the performance of both which is expressly
averred by the Bill, and no way denied, but confessed by the Answer. That as to
what is alleged on this point, in behalf of the Defendents, viz. That the
Complainants had Circumvented and Surprised them is the Agreement, and had
deceived them, by sending the first Letter by Quinby, Cornwall, and Townsend,
under pretense that they had Correspondents, when the Defendents allege, they
had none, by which they were damnified. It appears, the Defendents had the
Articles in their hands for two days before the Execution thereof, and the
Complainants are but Illiterate, and the Defendants men of Figure and
Knowledge, which leaves little room to suspect either Surprise or Circumvention
on the part of the Complainants. That its not affirmed by the Answer, That
Quinby, Cornwall and Townsend said, they particuarly had Correspondents, but by
their Letter, it appears they wrote not to them as such, but as to the
Correspondents of the Palmers, and Company, and that they had Correspondents,
is admitted, That by the Second Article of Agreement, in the Defendent,
Philips's writing, which was proposed and agreed to, after the first Letter was
sent away, it appears, the Letter agreed to be sent, was then to be sent, which
Could not be that which had been before Sent; and which Letter is acknowleged
to have been received by the Defendents, and which, with the Desisting to make
further Proffers, is a Performance of what, on the Complainants part was to be
Performed; and if any room is left to suppose Surprise or Circumvention, in
sending the first Letter, it seems not sufficient to make void the Argeement,
it not being the Substance of the Matter, but the desisting further Proffers
with the Second Letter by the Palmers, remain sufficient Considerations for
Performance on the part of the Defendents; these being all that appear to be
stipulated to be done on the part of the Complainants.

Then as to the Bounds of the Great or middle Neck, which is the Chief thing in
question, I conceive what appears in the Defendents Answer, and has been urged
by them, as to the meaning of the word Neck, in the Mortgage of Richbell to
Richbell, under which the Complainants now claim, that it extends no further
than the flux of the Salt Water: I conceive it to be an Exposition which will
neither agree with the words of the Patent, nor Deeds that are set forth,
referred to, and produced either by the Complainants or Defendents, nor with
the Intention of the Parties to the Deeds themselves. It has been strongly
insisted on by the Defendents Council, that the word Neck is a plain familiar
English word, and easy to be understood, and that it means not nor can mean any
more than a point of Land, limited or bounded with Water on three Sides, and
can bear the Name of a Neck no further than the Water makes it so, that is,
where the Tide rises; and that the words in the Patent, and all the Deeds
contain two several Grants, to wit, One of the Necks, and another of the Land,
without the Necks, running into the Woods. Now, whatever there might be in this
Exposition of the word Neck, standing singly by it self, which yet I do not
think will hold; for it is well known, that Valleys between two or more Ridges
of Higher ground, far beyond where the Neck reaches, in common acceptance, do
as frequently fall under the Denomination of Necks of Land, as the other: But
leaving that, I say, whatever the word Neck, singly standing by it self, might
signify in the case before me, at present, I conceive, it must be understood as
the Words of the Patent and Deeds of the Grantor describes and intended it. It
will not be denied, but that Names both of Places and Things are arbitrary,
even though very false, as Black and White Acre, which do not receive their Names
from their Color, and yet when things obtain such a Name, by reputation, they
will pass by these Names. A piece of Painting, taking in that part of the body
above the middle, and so in Bu^ts, has obtained the Name of a Head, and is so
called, though we see it takes in the Neck, shoulders, and a great part of the
Body; so it may well be that the extent or bounds of a Piece of Land, cannot
always be gathered, nor clearly understood by the Name which is given it. It is
Evident, that in the original Grant or Patent of this Land it is described to
be A parcel or Tract of Land, contained within three Necks, the Easter-most of
which is bounded with a small River, called, Mamaroneck River, being the
Easter-most Limits or Bounds of this Government, and the Wester-most, by the
Gravelly or stony Brook or River, which makes the Ester-most Bounds of Mr.
Pells Purchase, having to the South the Sound, and running Northward from the
marked Trees upon the said Necks, twenty Miles into the Woods. This parcel or
Tract of Land, it is plain, is described under the Name of one Tract only,
having the Sound to the Southward, and running Northward Twenty Miles into the
Woods; which is the same as to say, being bounded to the Southward with the
Sound, and to the Northward at the Extent of Twenty Miles into the Woods. It
is further Observeable, That in the same Patent, it is granted by the Name of
One parcel or Tract of Land only, and in the Habend^m, there it is called the
said Parcel and Tract of Land in the said Three Necks contained, and a yearly
Quit-Rent of Eight bushel^s of Wheat, is reserved upon the same Tract of Land.
So, I think, by the Patent, there is no doubt but the whole was called and
understood to be One Tract of Land, contained in three Necks. And who can say,
the Grantor had not a right to extend these Necks of Land by the Name of Necks,
as far back into the Woods as he thought fit. But the Second Deed produced and
agreed to by both Parties, is a deed made by the Patentee John Richbell, about
one year after the Date of the Patent, and is a Grant of the Easter-most of the
said three Necks, to one Rider, in trust for a Jointure, to the Grantor John
Richbell's Wife. Now by this Deed, it is evident, that as the said Tract of
Land was granted or patented by the name of three necks, so the Grantee or
Patentee, understood it, and so he calls it; for in this Deed of Riders, he
discribes it by the Name of a certain tract or parcel of Land upon the Main,
containing three necks, and granted for the uses in the said Deed mentioned,
all that parcel or tract of Land where be now lives, called the East-Neck; and
to leave it without doubt, what he means by neck, he says, the Neck includes
all the Lands, as well North into the Woods above Westchester Path, Twenty
Miles, as the Lands below the Path, South-wards toward the Sound. And after
having so described the Neck in the Premises of the Deed, so in the Habendum,
he calls it, without the addition of more words, The said Neck of Land. And in
the Covenant, for further assurance, he calls it by the same Name of Neck only.
From all which, it is plain, to a Demonstration, that the Grantor, John
Richbell, meant and understood by the word Neck of Land, all the Land between
the Sound on the Southward, and the Extent of Twenty Miles to the Northward.
And looking into the Deed of Mortgage, as us Steenwyck, about five years after
date of the Patent, under which Mortgage the Defendents claim, and is by them
set forth and referred to, in their Answer, we find the said John Richbell for
the securing the payment of Two Thousand Four Hundred Guilders, Wampon (which
is worth Sixty Pounds York Money) did Bind his the said John Richbell's Neck or
piece of Land lying upon the Main, being the most Westerly Neck of Land of the
three, to him the said John Richbell belonging, Limitting the Neck of Land
aforesaid, to the South, with the Sound, and running from the marked T^es
standing on the said Necks, Twenty Miles into the Woods. Here he again tells us
what he understood the said Neck to be, and which is contained in as certain
words as can well be expressed. And so, it appears, he had Granted or Mortgaged
both the East and West Necks, as they are described in the Patent, bounded on
the Sound to the Southward, and running Twenty Miles into the Woods. But then,
as to the Deed or Mortgage of the same, John Richbell to his Uncle Robert
Richbell, made about Seven Years after the Date of the Patent, for securing the
payment of Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds, Boston Silver Money, which at that
time was equal in Value to Six Shillings and Te^ Pence per Ounce, by which he
grants all his Right, Title and Interest in and to One Neck of Land commonly
called and known by the Name of the great Neck, bordered or bounded by the
Sound on one End, and betwixt his other two small Necks, on each side of the
great Neck, To have and To hold the said great neck. And thus stand the words
of this Deed, and upon which the whole Dispute, at present, is. The Defendants
say, That here ^o more passes but what nature makes a Neck, because the Extent
of Twenty Miles (...) the woods, is not Expressed, therefore it shall not be
intended to pass; and that wherever the grantor, John Richbell, intended twenty
Miles should pass, he said so, and so expressed it. And here they urge
strongly, That this Grant of a parcel or tract of Land, contained in three
necks having the Sound is the Southward, and running twenty Miles into the
Woods, makes two Different Grants of two several parcels of Land; and say
further, that the words parcel or Tract of Land, should be read, parcel and
Tract of Land; and so by changing the Disjunctive into a Conjunctive, it will
then be clear, that the grant of the Twenty Miles into the Woods, from the
marked Trees on the said Necks, is a separate Tract of Land, and cannot pass by
the word Neck, which is a Distinct parcel of Land, unless mentioned. And so, by
the Mortgage, under which the Complainants claim, nothing can pass but the Land
lying between the Two Creeks, as high as the Salt Water flows; And to support
this Exposition, they product a third Mortgage of the said West-Neck, set forth
and referred to by them in their Answers, and made by the said John Richbell in
One Thousand Six Hundred and Seventy Eight, to the same Cornelius Steenwyck,
for the securing of One Hundred and Twenty Five Pounds. And by this Mortgage
Deed, they say, that John Richbell granted the same West-Neck, and also Twenty
Miles into the Woods; and from thence urge, That as be intended to grant:
Twenty Miles into the Woods, so he took care to express it accordingly. The
words of the Deed are these, Has Demised, Granted, etc. to Cornelius Steenwyck
all that his Neck of Land lying upon the Main, being the most Westerly Neck of
the three, belonging to the said John Richbell, the said Neck of Land bordering
on the stoney or gravelly Water or River, which is the East-Limits of Mr. Pells
Land, and having to the South side, the Sound, and running from the marked
Tree, which is on the said Neck, Northward, Twenty Miles into the Woods. Now,
say they, it is plain, that in the grant of the East-Neck, and in both the
beforementioned Grants of the West-Neck, as he intended to grant the Necks
with the other Tracts of Land Twenty Miles into the Woods, so he Expressed it:
But, as in the Grant of the Middle Neck, Nothing is Expressed but the bare
Neck, so nothing shall be intended to pass, but the Neck only; which they say,
is an easy and natural Exposition of the word Neck, and fully Expresses the
Intention of Grantor, and crave great Allowances for the Ignorance of the
times, when there were few or none that understood Clerkship, or the art of
Conveyancing. Then, to corroberate this, they set forth in their Answer, that
some of the Complainants themselves so understood the word Neck, and offered to
take a Lease from the Defendent Philipse, of part of the Land they now claim.
And as a further argument to prove that the Complainants have no Right to any
part of the Lands in John Richbells Patent, except the Lands in the great Neck,
as far as the Salt Water flows, they produce the Deeds of Lease and Release of
the said John Richbells Heir, to the Complainants, bearing Date the Eighth Day
of Feburary, 1722. in which Release the Mortgage of the great Neck, by John
Richbell to Edward Richbell, made in One Thousand Six Hundred and Seventy
Three, is recited, and the great Neck is there exactly described, as it is in
the said Mortgage, and so from thence conclude, That the Heir of John Richbell,
granting only the great Neck, as being "Bounded to the Southward with the
Sound, and lying between "John Richbells other two small Necks, "Nothing can
pass but what nature makes a Neck. And then, the same Defendents produce their
own Deeds of Lease and Release from the same Edward Richbell, Heir of John
Richbell, Dated the Twelfth and Thirteenth Days of August, One Thousand Seven
Hundred and Twenty Three to these Defendants, for all the residue of John
Richbells Lands, contained in the before mentioned Patent, except the great
Neck, before released to the Complainants, or some of them, and by virtue of
this, the Defendants say, they have a good Right to all the Lands above the
Natural Neck Twenty Miles into the Woods. But I can, by no means, be of the
Defendents Opinion, as to the meaning of the word Neck, nor allow of such a
Change of words, where there is not an absolute Necessity, as in this case
there is not; Nay, I think such a Change of words cannot be admitted, without
making the Patent and the other Deeds contradict themselves; for when the
Grantor himself takes so much pains, when he goes about to grant one of these
Necks of Land, to limit, Describe, and in express words, to call it a Neck of
Land, and so to describe its Bounds and Extent, it would be a very great
Violence done to the Intention of the Grantor, to change his words, in order
either to Diminish or to Enlarge his Grant, without some apparent Necessity or
Reason for so doing, upon the bare supposition of his not intending the great
Neck should extend as far as the East and West Necks, because it is only called
his great Neck lying between his other two small Necks. I say, this would, in
my Opinion, be changeing both the Words and Intent of the Grantor; for by the
Second Mortgage of the Reversion of the great Neck and West-Neck to one
Kellond, under which the Complainants do also Claim, in One Thousand Six
Hundred and Seventy Six, for the security of One Hundred Pounds, Discovered and
referred to by the Defendents, in their Answer, It is manifest, that he
understood the West-Neck and the great Neck to be of the same Extent; for
having before Mortgaged the great Neck to Robert Richbell, without adding the
words Twenty Miles into the Woods, and also to Cornelius Steenwyck, his
West-Neck, with these words Twenty Miles into the Woods. In this Mortgage to
Kellond, of the Reversion of the two Necks, to wit, the great and West-Necks,
he there recites that Whereas he had granted to Robert Richbell his Neck of
Land, commonly called, his great Neck, for Ninety Nine years, for the securing
the payment of Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds, and had granted to Cornelius
Steenwyck his West-Neck for securing the payment of Two Thousand Four Hundred
Guilders, he there grants the Reversion of the said Two necks of Land to the
said Kellond, without any addition or Description, but that of the Necks only,
though it is mainfest, that in the Mortgage of the West-Neck to Steenwyck, here
referred to, in this Mortgage, the words Twenty Miles are contained; yet when
he comes here to mention, that he has formerly Mortgaged it, he calls it only
by the Name of his West-Neck, and thinks this a full Description. And why as
much should not be understood here by great Neck, as by West-Neck, I have not
yet heard a Reason. And were I at a loss to find out the mind of the Grantor,
there is yet a Consideration, which in this Court will always have great
weight, and that is, To make such Construction of Deeds, when the words will
bear it, and such Exposition does not break in upon any known Rule of Law, that
no party may be hurt by the Construction. Now it is plain to me, that to
confine the word Neck in the manner the Defendents would have it; then Robert
Richbell had not a Security for a fifth part of the Money by him advanced. It
is said by the Complainants, and owned by the Defendents, that the Neck, in the
sense the Defendents contend for, contains not above Three hundred and twenty
Acres of Land, the Fee-Simple whereof, at the time of the Mortgage, as the
Complainants charge, was not worth above Seventy Pounds, Money of New York, it
being a New Country, and but very few Inhabitants. Now, shall it be supposed,
that when John Richbell Mortgaged the Fee-simple of the west-neck, running
Twenty Miles into the Woods, to Cornelius Steenwyck for Sixty Pounds, that he
intended that a term of Ninety Nine years, in a fort^eth part of that Quantity
of Land, as a good security for Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds, it is
unreasonable to suppose it; besides, it appears that John Richbell wanted more
Money, and was Obliged to Mortgage the Reversion of both the great and
west-neck for a term of Ninety Nine Years, to commence after the first
Mortgages upon these two Necks were cleared off. Now, can it be easily
supposed, if that part of the great Neck running Twenty Miles into the Woods,
had not been Mortgaged, that Kellond would have left that, and accepted so mean
a security as a term of Ninety Nine Years, in the Reversion of the great and
West-Neck, after the term of Ninety Nine Years should be expired, or the Sum of
two Hundred and Fifty Pounds, and Two Thousand four Hundred Guilders, and
Interest, should be paid, when he well knew, that no Lands at that time in
these parts, would let for any annual Rent at all. I say, these are
Improbabilities, and may only be possible; but it is the more Rational
Conclusion, that John Richbell and Mr. Kellond well Knowing both the whole
great neck and west-neck to be Mortgaged, and that John having settled his
East-neck for a Jointure on his Wife, he had then nothing left but to give a
Second Mortgage on all that he had, which was the Reversion of his great and
West-Neck. Then, as to what was urged by the Complainants, upon reading of the
third Mortgage of Richbell to Steenwyck, under which the Defendents also claim
the West-Neck, I cannot conclude with them, that because in this Mortgage
neither the Mortgagor, nor the Mortgagee have taken any Notice of any former
Mortgage being upon the West-Neck, and that the Mortgagor has also Covenanted,
That the same shall be peaceably held and enjoyed by the Mortgagee, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, freed and Discharged from all other and
former Bargains and Sales, etc. I say, I cannot presume, as the Complainants
insist, that the former Mortgage of the West-Neck, to Steenwyck the Mortgager,
was paid off, and that this last Mortgage for securing the payment of One
Hundred and Twenty five Pounds to Steenwyck, was for all the Money that was
then Due by Bond, or other-wise, Though it seems Strange, that Steenwyck should
advance the Sum of One Hundred and Twenty Pounds upon a New Mortgage of the
West-Neck, which was Mortgaged to himself before, and not take any Notice of a
former Mortgage or the Money due to him upon that Mortgage, nor include the
Money due to him upon the several Bonds set forth in the Defendents Answer; nor
must I presume, that the Obliterations on the back of this Mortgage Deed, as
the Complainants allege, are Receipts for payment of Money due upon that
Mortgage; for as they cannot be read, I must leave them as they are, and
presume, as the Heir of Richbell has done (when he sold the Reversion of the
West-Neck to the Defendents) that the Money on this and the other Mortgages,
was due, and by so doing, I hurt no Person; and the same is not otherwise
properly in Dispute now* than that the Complainants would show, that the
Defendents have no reason to endeavor to stretch their Claims to the Lands of
the great Neck, seeing the Lands of the West-Neck are a far greater
satisfaction than they pretend the Defendents had any Right to; but, as the
Heir of Richbell has Released to the Defendents the Equity of Redemption of the
West-Neck, I cannot think the Consideration of his so doing, ought to be
Enquired into here, upon this Suit. And the case being stripped of all these
particular Circumstances, charged in the Bill, and set forth, confessed or
denied in the Defendents Answer, It will stand thus.

Case stated by the Court, stripped of the before particular Circumstances.
JOHN RICHBELL in One Thousand Six Hundred and Sixty Eight, obtains a Patent
for a Tract of Land in this Province, contained in three Necks, having to the
Southward the Sound, and running from the marked Trees, upon the said necks,
Twenty Miles into the Woods.

John Richbell by sundry Deeds or Mortgages, grants away all this Tract or
parcel of Land contained in these three Necks to sundry Persons.

First, The East-neck to one Rider, in trust for a Jointure to his Wife, and
describes it by the name of his East Neck of Land, including all the Land, as
well North into the Woods above Westchester-path, Twenty Miles, as the Lands
below the path, Southward toward the Sound.

Secondly, By his Deed of Mortgage to Cornelius Steenwyck, for securing the
payment of Two Thousand four Hundred Guilders (which is equal in value to Sixty
Pounds, Money of this Province) he grants his West-Neck by that name, Limiting
it to the South with the Sound, and running from the Marked Trees, on the said
Neck, Twenty Miles into the Woods; and under this Mortgage it is, that the
Defendants had the first Interest in the West-Neck.

Thirdly, John Richbell having already disposed of his East-neck, and Mortgaged
his West-neck, by the Names of his East, and West, Necks, extending Twenty
Miles into the Woods, he then by Mortgage, made in One Thousand Six hundred and
Seventy five, for Two hundred and Fifty Pounds, grants all his Right and Title
to the Neck of Land, commonly called the great Neck, bordered or bounded by the
Sound on one end, and lying between his other two small Necks on each side,
habendum for Ninety nine years. And it is under this Mortgage that the
Complainants had the first Interest in the great Neck.

Fourthly, The same John Richbell having occasion to borrow more Money, did by
Deed, bearing date the seventh Day of July, One Thousand Six hundred and
Seventy six, for the securing the payment of One hundred Pounds* to Thomas
Kellond, grant the Reversion of the great Neck, and the Reversion of the
West-Neck, to the said Thomas Kellond for the Term of Ninety nine years, to
commence after the sum of Two hundred and Fifty Pounds, with Interest, should
be paid to Robert Richbell, for which the Great neck was formerly Mortgaged to
the said Richbell, and after the Sum of Two thousand Four hundred Guilders
should be paid to Cornelius Steenwyck, to whom the West-neck was formerly
Mortgaged, for securing the payment of the said two Thousand four Hundred
Guilders, and the Administrator of Kellond has assigned Thomas Kellond's
Interest in the West-neck, by virtue of this Mortgage to the Defendants, or
those under whom they claim, and the Administrator of the said Kellond has
likewise assigned Thomas Kellond's Interest in the Great neck, by virtue of
this Mortgage, to the Complainants, or some of them.

And Lastly, Edward Richbell by his Deeds in One thousand seven hundred and
twenty Two, has for the Consideration of Three hundred and Eighty Pounds,
Sterling, Released all his Right, etc. in the great Neck to the Complainants or
some of them.

After which time Quinby, Cornwall and Townsend, three of the Complainants, for
themselves and the other Complainants, on the Twenty ninth Day of May, One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty Three, Enter into Articles of agreement with
the Defendant, Courtland, who then had the sole Right to the west-neck, by
virtue of the before mentioned two Mortgages to Steenwyck, and by these
Articles it appears, that the Complainants, or some of them, having before
purchased the Reversion and Equity of Redemption of the great neck, aforesaid,
from the said Edward Richbell, Heir of John Richbell aforesaid: And that the
said Defendent Courtland for himself, and the Complainants for themselves, had
severally used endeavors, to purchase, the Reversion and Equity of Redemption
of the West-Neck: It was thereby agreed between the Parties to the said
Articles, That (whereas it did not appear that the Line running into the Woods
between the said great neck, and wester-most-neck, had ever been settled, run
or marked out, or even the Course that it ought to run, appointed or limited,
which might occasion Differences between the Parties, if the said Defendant,
Courtland, should happen to purchase the same West Neck) the Complainants
should desist giving any further Directions to their Correspondents in England,
Directly or indirectly, for Purchasing the Reversion of the said West-Neck, and
that by the first Opportunity that should offer, they should write to their
Correspondents, to desist making any further Proffers for the Reversion of the
same Neck. And it was further agreed by the said Defendant Courtland, That in
case he should become Purchaser of the Reversion of the same West-Neck, to pay
to the Complainants, Quinby, Cornwall and Townsend, the Sum of One Hundred and
Fifty Eight Pounds, in consideration of the Charge the Complainants had been
at, in endeavoring the Purchase of the Reversion of the West-Neck, with
Interest, from the date of the said Articles. And further, "That the
Complainants and the Defendant, Courtland, should endeavor amicably betwixt
themselves, to settle the Line to its Extent into the Woods, betwixt the same
Great Neck and West Neck; and in case they could not agree how it should be
run, then to leave it to the Determination of some indifferent Persons. It is
charged in the Bill, and admitted by the Answer, that the Complainants did
never make any further Proffers, for the Reversion of the said West-neck; and
it is owned by the Defendants, that the Complainants wrote a Letter to their
Correspondents, to desist making any further Proffers for the same; and that
this Letter was delivered to one of the Defendants to forward to England for
that Purpose: It Is true, by the Answer, it appears, that another Letter was
wrote by the Defendant Philipse, before the signing these Articles, and signed
by the Complainants, Quinby, Cornwall and Townsend, in behalf of the other
Complainants, who were not present, which did prove prejudicial to the Purchase
of the Defendants; but as that Letter was no part of that Agreement, and the
hurt it did, was partly because Messieurs Partridge and Newberry (who used to
correspond with the Palmers, some of these Complainants) did not know the
Complainants, Quinby, Townsend and Cornwall's names; and partly because, when
the Letter was shown to Mr. Richbell, who knew it to be the hand writing of Mr.
Philipse) who had been formerly treating about the Purchase of the said
West-Neck) and therefore supposed there was some design of imposing upon him. I
say, this Letter being antecedent to the Signing of these Articles, and being
wrote at the request, or at least by the approbation of the Defendants, cannot
any ways affect the Articles, but they will s^and as if no such Letter had been
wrote.

And therefore as to the Hundred and Fifty Eight Pounds, I am of opinion, That
the same be Paid by the Defendant, Courtland, according to the Agreement, with
interest from the Date of the Articles, etc.

Opinion of the Court upon the Case so stated.
AND Now upon the whole state of the Case, As to the Land in Question, I think
it appears very plain, that the word Neck must be understood in the Case before
me, in the same sense it is used both in the Patent and Deeds; and in the
Patent it appears the whole Tract of Land is said to be contained in Three
Necks, and its South Bounds is the Sound, and its North Bounds is Twenty Miles
into the Woods. Now, it is plain, there is not two parcels of Land, for the
very Tract that runs Twenty Miles into the Woods, has the Sound for its Bounds
to the Southward, and in this sense the Patentee, John Richbell, understood the
word Neck, as appears by the first Grant he made of one of these three Necks,
in about a year after the Date of his Patent, I mean, his Deed to Rider, in
Trust for a Jointure to his Wife: In the Premises of which Deed, he calls it
the East-Neck, and describes it by these words including therein betwixt the
two Lines, all the Lands, as well North into the Woods above Westchester Path
Twenty Miles, as the Lands below the Path toward the Sound, Habendum the said
Neck of Land. So here we have as particular an account and Description of what
the Grantor, John Richbell understood to be called a Neck of Land as words can
express; and in the next Deed he makes, which is the Mortgage of the West Neck
to Steenwyck, he uses the word Neck in the same sense, and Describes it to be
his the said John Richbells Neck or piece of Land, lying upon the Main, being
the most Westerly Neck of the three, limitting the Neck of Land aforesaid, upon
the gravelly or stoney Water, which is the Easterly Limits of Mr. (...) and,
having at the South Side the Sound, and running thus from the marked (...) upon
the said necks, Twenty Miles into the Woods. So here we find the same
Description of a Neck of Land as before, the same Neck running Twenty Miles
into the Woods. And then, as to the Mortgage of John Richbell to Robert
Richbell, concerning the meaning of which, the present Controversy is, I
cannot conceive how the Grantor or Mortgagor, by the word Neck, in this Deed,
should be understood to mean less than in his other Deeds of Mortgages; for
here he ^ells all his Right, Title and Interest in and to one Neck, commonly
called and known by the name of the great Neck, bordered or bounded by the
Sound on the one end, and between his other two small Necks on each side of the
great Neck aforesaid, Habendum, all the said great Neck. Now what occasions the
dispute, is, that this neck is not said or Described to run Northward from the
marked Trees on the said Neck twenty Miles into the woods; which words I
conceive, are not needful in the description of this Neck, or at least the want
of them, cannot be understood to limit or confine this Great Neck to any Bounds
short of the Extent of Twenty Miles, as the others run; for, Can there be a
plainer Description of it, than here is, to wit, Bounded by the Sound on the
one End, and between his two small Necks on each side. The Patent has described
all the Necks to run Twenty Miles northward; John Richbell has Described both
the other two Necks to run Twenty Miles, northward into the Woods: And what
need could there be, for describing the North Bounds of the middle Neck, after
he had Described it to lie between his other two small Necks? or by what words
are we to find out the Extent of the Great Neck to the Northward, if it must
not run into the Woods as far as the others? Suppose John Richbell had said to
his Uncle Robert, as the truth is, I have settled my East-Neck upon my Wife for
a Jointure, and my West-Neck I have Mortgaged in fee to Cornelius Steenwyck for
Sixty Pounds; I will now give you a Mortgage of Ninety nine Years on my Great
Neck, lying between my two small necks for two Hundred and Fifty Pounds. Now,
can any body suppose, without doing Violence to Reason, that because he called
it his great Neck, and Mortgaged it only for a term of years, and for above
double the Sum of Money advanced upon the Fee-simple of the West-Neck, that
therefore he did not intend him a Twentieth or thirtieth part or quantity of
the Land for his Security. I think his having first described the East and
West-Necks, as running Twenty Miles into the Woods, it was a full and complete
Description of the great Neck, and of its Extending as far as the others, when
he bounded it by his two small Necks, on each side: And this Opinion is
sufficiently supported by the subsequent Mortgage of John Richbell to Thomas
Kellond, where he recites his having before Mortgaged both his Middle and
West-Necks; for though he well knew he had formerly, in express words, Mortgaged
the West-Neck running Twenty Miles into the Woods, to Steenwyck; and his Great
Neck only by words of being between his other two small necks: yet here when he
comes to speak of these Necks, as being formerly Mortgaged, he shows plainly,
that he understood the word Neck, when applied to the great Neck, to mean the
same thing as it did, when applied to West-Neck, for his words are these,
Grant, Bargain and to Farm-Let unto Thomas Kellond, etc. the Reversion of one
Neck of Land, commonly called or known by the Name of the great Neck, as also
the Reversion of one other Neck of Land, being the most westerly Neck of Land
of the three, which is Mortgaged to Cornelius Steenwyck. He has not said, as
also the Reversion of one other Neck of Land, being he most westerly of the
three, and running from the marked Trees on the said Neck Twenty Miles into the
Woods; Here there might have been some room to say he meant one thing by Neck,
and another thing by Neck running Twenty Miles into the Woods; but as he has
not said so, but the contrary, it would be hard to put such a Construction on
his Intentions, when his words would never warrant, but Contradict such a
strained Construction. Now if we come to the Parties themselves, I mean the
Complainants and Defendants in this Cause, it does appear that something more
than the Quantity of Land lying between the two Creeks, was meant by their
Articles of Agreement beforementioned; for there it is said, That forasmuch
that it did not then appear that the Line running into the Woods between the
Great and West-Neck, had ever been settled, marked out, or even the Course that
it ought to run, appointed or limited; therefore to prevent differences
between the Parties to the said Articles, if the Defendent, Courtland, should
happen to purchase the Reversion of the West-Neck, the said Complainants and
Defendants to view the great and west-necks, and endeavor amicably to settle
the line to its Extent into the Woods between the same Necks. Now, if nothing
was understood by the Parties, by the word Neck, but the Land lying between the
two Creeks, as far as the Tide or Salt Water flows, as the Defendents insist:
how id^e, nay, how absurd was it to take all this Caution about running a Line
between the two Necks, if no more was intended? or, can it be understood, that
the words settling the Line to its Extent into the Woods, between the same
Necks, can be satisfied with this Construction? No, it is Contradicting common
sense, in my Opinion, to say so; but I do not rely so far upon the Articles, as
to alter either the words or Intent of John Richbell, in his said several
Grants or Mortgages, but by the Articles it is evident, as well as by the
Answer, that the Complainants claimed the Great Neck, as Extending Northward
Twenty Miles into the Woods. And though the words Twenty Miles were struck out,
as not being a proper Recital of the words of the Mortgage and Release, under
which the Complainants claim, yet it appears they all agreed to run a Line to
its Extent into the Woods, between the two Necks. And for as much as the
Defendants well knew the Claim of the Complainants, and at that time talked of
purchasing nothing but the Reversion of the West-Neck, upon which they had two
Mortgages; and though some thing was said, as appears by the Answer, of getting
the Release from the Heir of Richbell, so General as to include a piece of Land
formerly Exchanged with Mr. Pell, by Mr. Richbell bordering upon the west-neck,
yet it neither appears from the Articles, nor the Answer it self, that ever the
Defendants Discovered the least Design of purchasing any part of the great
Neck, or of the Lands, as the Defendants call them, running from the said Neck
Twenty Miles northward into the Woods, but the Contrary; and it is plain
enough, that what the parties seemed apprehensive of differing about, was the
Running of the Line between the two Necks, to its Extent into the Woods, that
is, least the Owners of the West-Neck should endeavor to run the Line too far
Eastward upon the Great Neck, or that the Owners of the great Neck should
endeavor to run the Line too far Westward upon the West-Neck; and this appears
plainly to be the intent of these Articles, as to the Land in Controversy: And
that both the Complainants and Defendants, as well as John Richbell, understood
more by the word Neck, than the Land between the two Creeks, as far as the Tide
flows. So that what appears here to be meant by the word Neck, in the Patent,
and the several Mortgages that have been produced, and by the Articles
themselves, I must be of Opinion, that the Description of the middle neck is as
Extensive as the East and West, and if so, the Defendants by their Release of
Ed. Richbells Right to all the Lands in J. Richbells Purchase, will not help
them, because the great Neck is expressly Excepted in their own Deed which has
been produced here. Now if it be enquired, how the Equity of the Case stands
upon the part of the Complainants? I think it is plainly with them; for it has
been urged by both sides, That when the words of Deeds are uncertain, they
shall receive such a reasonable Construction and Exposition, as must be without
Injury to the Grantor, and with the greatest advantage to the Grantee. Now, by
this Rule, it is plain, that J. Richbell having only Mortgaged, and not sold,
his Great Neck to his uncle R. Richbell, if the Neck be understood to Extend
Twenty Miles into the Woods, and if that were allowed to be too large a
security, yet it was no hurt to John, because h^ had it in his power to redeem
it, when he thought fit; but if the meaning of the word Neck be limited, as
the Defendants would have it, then the Mortgagee had little or no security for
his Money, and was without any further Relief; for as it appears by the
Mortgage, there was no Covenants for the Payment of the Money to Robert
Richbell: So that by such an Exposition or Construction of the words of this
Mortgage, as the Defendants would make; This Rule of Law would be Inverted, and
the greatest Wrong would be done to the Mortgagee. But understanding the Great
Neck to run to us Extent, or to the Extent of the Patent, which I think is the
same thing, that is, Twenty Miles into the Woods, the Complainants, who claim
under the Mortgage to Robert Richbell, will have Justice done them, and the
Defendants, who well knew before their own Purchase, that the Complainants had
purchased the Equity of Redemption of the great Neck of John Richbells Heir,
and Claimed by that Purchase, all the Lands to the Extent of the Patent, cannot
be hurt; for in their Answer, it is not so much as suggested that the Lands
Released to the Defendants, by the Heir of Richbell, is not a full
Consideration for their Money, and of a far greater Value than what they paid
for them; and were it otherwise, the Defendants being Purchasers of what they
own they knew the Complainants claimed, they could not, according to the Course
of a Court of Equity, expect to be favored here; for a Purchaser out of
Possession, with notice of a former Claim or Encumbrance (and such as its plain
the Defendants are) can never hope to prevail in a Court of Equity.

I am therefore of Opinion, that both by the words of the Deeds, the Intent of
Parties, and the Equity of this Case, the Great Neck does and ought to Extend
as far Northward as the East and West-Neck. And accordingly, it is this present
Day, that is, the Second Day of May, in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord, George, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. by his Excellency William Burnet,
Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief of the Province of New York,
New Jersey, and Territories thereon depending in America, and Vice Admiral of
the same, etc. and Keeper of his Majesty's great Seal of the Province of
New York, Ordered, Adjuaged and Decreed, That the Defendant, Jacobus van
Courtland, do pay to the Complainants, Josiah Quinby, Thomas Townsend, and
Richard Cornwall, the aforesaid Sum of One Hundred and Fifty Eight Pounds, with
the Interest thereof from the Date of the Articles of Agreement aforesaid, for
that Purpose made; and that the Defendants and all Claiming under them, be
enjoined to Desist making any further Claim or Pretense to that Part of the
Great Neck which is to the Southwards and Eastwards of Branks's River, and that
they pay the Complainants Costs of Suit; and it is referred to Robert Walter,
Esquire one of the Masters of this Court, to tax the Complainants Costs of this
Suit, and to make Report thereof to this Court, with all Convenient Expedition.

APPENDIX To the DECREE in the Suit of Palmers, and others, COMPLAINANTS
Against Philipse, and others, DEFENDANTS. In Cancellaria Nova-Eborac.
THe generality of the People of this Province, are not unacquainted how much
Noise the above Decree has made; though few but the Contrivers of the present
Clamours, know the secret Arts and Managery that have been made use of to
procure them; and the Ends intended by them are not difficult to guess.

Whether the Court of Chancery be, or be not, rightly founded; or whether the
Expense of Prosecuting a Suit in that Court, be too great, or not, cannot
affect the merits of this Cause: But the sole Question is, Whether Mr. Philipse
or the Complainants be in the Right? And whether the Decree given by the
Governor be just, or not?

This being the true State (as the Complainants take it) of the Question, it is
not to be expected, that to gratify the Inquisitive and Curious, the
Complainants should enter into the Debate, Whether the Report of the Committee
of the House of Representatives concerning the Chancery, that pr^cured the
Resolves, of the then honor able House, was founded upon any just Complaints,
made to that Committee, or not? Or whether any such Report ever was? Or the
Resolves fairly obtained? When the Complaints, and the Persons that made them
(if any were) shall be assigned, that matter may be sufficiently cleared up Nor
shall the Complainants here venture (if they could) to discuss the grand Point,
Whether the House of Representatives can make an Act (as they say they will do)
or not? Nor, Whether the Governor and Council can admit them to do so, and
retain, at the same time, their Allegiance? Neither, lastly, shall the
Complainants examine, Whether, if the Court of Chancery was imagined to be
Illegal, Oppressive, or a Grievance, it was not more Prudent, more decent and
becoming, as well as more likely to prove effectual, to have redrest any
Grievance occasioned by that Court, to have addressed the Governor at the
beginning of the Sessions (who often publicly had declared his readiness, to
assent to any reasonable Establishment, Regulation or Alteration of it) than to
have reserved these Resolves to the very last Moment, till which they were kept
a Secret? Nor, Whether the declaring all the Proceedings of that Court, Unjust
and Illegal, be either just, prudent, or consistent with the public Peace, at
(...) to Reverse so many Decrees, as have been there given, and consequently
disturb the Possessions of th^se who hold under them, without ever Examining
into the Merus of the Matters there Determined? The Complainants (...); they
shall not give themselves, or their Reader, the trouble of these Enquiries,
though perhaps not (...) foreign (...) if the Determination here was just and
legal, it would have been, and will be Unjust and Illegal to have determined
otherwise, and also Unjust, Illegal and Unreasonable to Reverse a Just and
Legal Decree.

The sole Question then, being, Whether Mr. Philipse or the Complainants be in
the Right? And Whether the Decree be just, or not? The best way to enable any
body to determine that Question, was to publish the Decree, with the Reasons
given for it, which has been done a^ore; and though it appears, that the Opinion
of the Court was chiefly founded on the Construction of the Deeds of the
Parties, yet sundry other Matters were charged in the Bill, and appear by the
Defendents Answer; made upon his Oath (which the Complainants desire the
Reader, once for all, to take Notice of) that the Complainants conceived,
entitled them to the Relief given by this Decree; which the Complainants
conceive themselves bound in Duty (for Self-defence against Clamours) to
Publish to the World, in order to show, how groundless these Clamours have
been* part of which Matters are published underneath, and the honest and
impartial Reader is left to his own Judgment to determine, which of the
Contending Parties is or are in the Right.

The Method taken in this Publication is, in one Colmn, on the Left-side of the
page, to set forth the Substance of the Matters charged in the Bill, and just
against it, in another Column, on the Right-side of the page, to set forth what
appears in the Defendents own Answer upon Oath, or in the Deeds confessed by
that Answer, to make good what is charged against him; and at the end of each
Charge and Answer, some Observations are made.

The Letters (a) (b) (c) etc. direct to the pages of the Office Copies of the
Bill and Answer, where the Matters under each Letter do appear, the Numbers of
which pages, are printed at the bottom of each side, and the Figures -- 1 -- 2
-- 3 -- 4 -- etc. in the Charges, and Answers to them, are used in order to
turn more easily, from any part of the Charge, to the Answer corresponding to
it.

The Substance of the Facts charged by the Complainants Ball. Charge 1st.
-- 1 -- THe Bill sets forth, fol. 1, to 35.
the several Deeds, by which the Complainants claim Title to the Great Neck
(the material ones whereof are before printed) and charge, -- 2 -- fol. 121 132.
That they have been peaceably and quietly possessed of the Lands in question, in
this suit for above twenty five years, till lately that the Defendents have
pretended Title thereto, under their Purchase from Ed. Richbell, and by virtue
thereof they have entered, and threaten to enter into the Lands in question, to
disturb and disquiet the Complainants in their said long and quiet Possession;
-- 3 -- 121 to 132. and 109, 110, 98, 99.
Which Pretense of the Defendents, is charged, to be not only directly
contrary, to the plain sense and meaning of the Patent, Mortgages, and their
own Agreement, but also most Unconscionable and Unjust, in regard that the
Complainants Mortgage Money, with compound Interest, amounts to above Twenty
Thousand Pounds, besides the 385 Pounds Sterling, paid to Edward Richbell for
the Reversion thereof, when there was no Competitors, -- 4 -- Which Moneys are
charged, to be much above twenty times the Value of what the Defendents call
the Neck, which contains only 320 Acres, which was not worth twenty Pounds per
hundred Acres, at the date of the Complainants Mortgages; and to which the
Defendents pretend to confine the Complainants; -- 5 -- and its charged, that
the 400 Sterling, paid by the Defendents, to Edward Richbell, is not near the
Value of the Lands exchanged by Pell and the Reversion of the West-Neck, and so
most Unconscionable to claim all that, and above Nineteen Twentieths of the
Great Neck for that same very Sum.

What appears by the Defendents Answer, and the Deeds, to make good the
Charges. Answer to Charge 1st.
-- 1 -- THe several Deeds printed, (...) 1, to 102.
are confessed by the Defendents, -- 2 -- But they do not directly confess, yet
do not deny, the length of Possession in the Complainants, of the Lands in
question, one of which they ought to have done; but so much is confessed, as
that a long Possession may be inferred; for its confessed, fol. 165 and 166
That Old Palmer (Father of the Complainants Palmers,) was possessed of part of
the Lands in question, and that even his Improvements went beyond what the
Defendents call the Neck; and that the Defendents believe, the Palmers have
bestowed a great deal of Labor, Expense and Improvements on the great Neck,
since the year 1675. and have thereby rendered it more valuable; and 168
don't think the Rent (if to be let to a Tenant) would be so much as the
Interest of the Money that their Improvements might be worth, or made for; and
deny 185.
that the Defendents, or either of them, has entered on the Lands in question
in this Suit, or disturbed others there, as is suggested in the Bill; and say,
that the Defendent, Philipse, conceives, he has a Right to the same Lands, 161,
146, 121,
by the Release (to the Defendents, from Edward Richbell, dated in August,
1723.) of the rest of Richbell's Patent, except the Great Neck sold to the
Complainants.

-- 3 -- It is not to be supposed, the Defendents would confess, their pretense
to be Unconscionable, but they do not deny, that the Complainants Mortgage
Moneys, with the compound Interest thereof, is so much as is charged, seeing
any Person by computation, will find it to be so: But they do tacitly confess
it, 177.
b^ saying, that the Defendent, Philipse, believes, that if compound Interest
were computed, on the several Mortgages, Bonds and Bill, which the Defendents
have, it would amount to double of what the Complainants does. But they no
where say, that the Moneys of these Mortgages, Bonds and Bill were due, and
from the Obliterations on the back of their last Mortgage, arises no small
Suspicion of Payments; and from the bearing Interest before the Date, there is
some room to believe, the last was in full of all former matters, and made upon
settling Accounts to the day from which it carried Interest; and the rather,
because that time was an even half year with the first Mortgage; for which
Matters, see the two Mortgages to Steenwick, before printed; see also page 16
and 17, of the Decree. But be the Defendents Mortgage Moneys what they will,
its nothing to the Complainants; It being enough to them, that their own is so
much as they charge.

-- 4 -- 159.
The Defendents confess, the Great Neck (...) they understand (...) contains
only about 320 Acres; and say 160.
that it extends no f^rther them the Water comes up on each side, 97.
which is to the marked Trees 160.
at Westchester Path, 146, 147.
and say, the Complainants ought not to have any more than the Neck so
understood. The Defendents no where say, it was worth more than 20 Pounds per
hundred Acres, at the date of the Complainants Mortgages, which with the
notoriety of the value of Lands there, at that time, is a sufficient admission
that it was worth no more. -- 5 -- 161, 122, 146, 127, 18^.
And say, that they, the Defendents, by said Release in 1723, from Edward
Richbell ( for which they paid no more than 400 l. Sterling, which was 100 more
than it had been before offered to them for) are entitled to the Lands held in
exchange from Pell, to the West-Neck, and to Twenty Miles into the Woods,
beyond Westchester Path, (...) the Great Neck (besides what Claim they may make
thereby to the East-Neck, by its not being excepted out of the Release, which
ought to have been done, if no Intention was of laying claim to any part of
it.) The Defendents no where deny, that the Lands held in Exchange from Pell,
and the Reversion of the West-Neck, were not of much more Value than the 40
Pounds paid for them, which they would have denied, if they could have done it,
and which they ought either to have done, or confessed it to be as is charged;
but the not denying it, together with the Notoriety of the Value of these
Lands, is a sufficient Admission, they had nothing to say against the Truth of
that.

Observations on Charge the first.
Though the Considerations for each Party's Title be not a matter in dispute in
this Cause, yet its conceived, that with all Men of Reason, they must be of
weight to find out the Meaning of Parties. For, 1st. It cannot be thought that
it was John Richbell's Intention to give, or Robert Richbell's to take, that
Ninety-nine years Mortgage (before printed in fol. 4) of a piece of Land
containing only 320 Acres (the Fee-simple of which, at the Rate of 20 l. per
Hundred Acres, was worth only 64 l.) as a Security for Repayment of 250 l. If
John Richbell so intended it, it must have been a Cheat and Imposition; And why
should we suppose him guilty of that, when the words of the Mortgage (compared
with the Patent, and the other Deeds) can bear, and plainly do bear another
Meaning?

2dly, Again, can it be thought that the Palmers should ever intend to accept
of that 320 Acres, in Satisfaction for their Mortgage Moneys and Interest,
amounting to above Twenty Thousand Pounds, and pay the Heir 385 Pounds Sterling
besides, at a time when there were no Competitors in the Purchase, and when the
Defendants do confess upon Oath, That were that 320 Acres to be Let, it would
not bring in so much Rent, as the Interest of the very Moneys that the Palmers
had laid out upon the Improvement of the Great Neck, and at the same time too
to give up all their Improvements beyond Westchester Path?

3dly, Again, Can there a Reason be shown, to believe or suppose, that Edward
Richbell did not intend to sell as much Land to the Complainants, for their 385
Pounds Sterling, when no Competitors, as he intended afterward to s^ll to the
Defendant for 300 l. Sterling, when there were Competitors; or to believe or
suppose, that he did not intend the Great Neck to Extend into the Woods, as
many Miles as the West Neck?

4thly, Again, Can it be imagined, that Edward Richbell intended to agree to
^^ll all the Lands held in Exchange from Pell, to which the Defendants had
(...) before that, and also agree to sell the Reversion of all the West Neck,
first for 300 Pounds, and (because of the Competition) at last for 400 Pounds,
which together were of much more value than 400 Pounds; And also, for the same
400 Pounds, to sell the 20 Miles into the Woods, from the marked Trees on the
Great Neck, which is above twenty times the value of that 400 Pounds?

5thly. Again, Can it be thought to be Fair and Equitable, to make a pretense
(if there was room for doubt) to that which others have been peaceably possessed
of, for so many years; to that which they have laid out so much Money in the
Improvement of it; to that which Stands them in above Twenty Thousand Pounds;
when the Person so pretending, never paid a Farthing for it, (in so much as the
Lands Exchanged by Pell, and the Reversion of the West Neck, are much above the
value of the 400 Pounds paid for his Purchase) but solely founds his
Pretensions, on a supposed Omission of Words, in Richbell's Mortgage to
Richbell, and when these Pretensions are so palpably absurd, and repugnant to
the intention of all Parties, as before, in part is showen, and hereafter shall
be more fully.

Impartial Reader, Let any Man not divested of Common Sense and Common Honesty
say, how Conscionable this is: And let him judge of the Reason of the Clamours
accordingly.

Charge 2d,
-- 1 -- 40, 41.
THE Bill charges, That the Complainants (about the time they purchased the
Equity of Redemption of the great Neck) acquainted Mr. Courtland ( who was then
entitled to the Mortgages of the West Neck) that there was an Heir in England
to John Richbell; and desired to know, if he had thoughts of purchasing the
Equity of Redemption of the West Neck from him; to which Mr. Cortland answered,
That the Money due to him, on the several Mortgages he had on it, he conceived
was more than the west neck was worth to him, and he wanted his Money, and not
the Land; -- 2 -- 105.
Whereupon the Complainants applied themselves to purchase the West Neck, and
gave Express directions to their Correspondents, to get the Deeds of the
purchase thereof, to run for all the Remainder of said Edward Richbell 's Right
in any ways, by virtue of the Patent to John Richbell; and that for a Reason,
which Josiah Quinby acquainted the Defendants of which appears hereafter in the
third Charge; and the same Remainder was proffered to the Complainants
Correspondents for 300 l. -- 3 -- But the Defendants, did, without acquainting
the Complainants, endeavor to make a Purchase, not only of the West-Neck, 105.
but also of the Great Neck: -- 4 -- 105.
That the Complainants Correspondents having before that, agreed for the
purchase of the Great Neck, they, by Letters, gave Cause to the Complainants to
believe, that an offer had been made to them of 352 l. 13 s. 4 d. as a private
Reward, to Cancel, Loose or Destroy the Agreement; which offer the Complainants
charge to have been made, by the Defendents orders; and that they gave orders,
if the Endeavors to Destroy the Complainants agreement proved Ineffectual, to
use means with the Complainants Correspondents, to let the Defendants into one
half of the purchase.

Answers to Charge 2d.
-- 1 -- fol. 102.
THE Defendant Courtland confesses, that the Complainant Quinby told him of
John Richbell 's Heir; but says he knew it before; and believes he might say,
That if he had had his Money he would not have troubled himself about the
Lands, or words to that purpose, -- 2 -- 102, 103.
And the Defendants allow it may be true, that the Complainants gave Directions
for such purchase as in the Bill, 177, 183, 189.
and don't know, but that it was offered to the Complainants for 300 Pounds. --
3 -- 56, 103, 169.
and the Defendants confess, They gave Directions for the purchasing the whole,
and conceived themselves under no Obligation to acquaint the Complainants
thereof. -- 4 -- 56, 103, 169.
That their Correspondents in Answer, gave them an Account, that before the
Receipt of the said Orders Major Richbell had Entered into Articles with
Newberry and Partridge for the Palmers, for the Reversion of the Great Neck;
And that Major Richbell, being a Gentleman of the nicest honor, would not
depart from the said Articles 169, 170.
and the Defendants confess, they gave Directions, That in case the Palmers
should have purchased the whole, to endeavor to come in for one half thereof
170.
But deny they procured any Sum to be offered, to cancel or destroy the
Complainants agreement, or were privy thereto.

Observations on Charge 2d.
The Complainants conceived, it would be undermineing in them, to attempt to
purchase the West Neck, without first acquainting the Mortgagee of it, to know
whether he had any such intent; And this they conceived though the Mortgagee, had
not laid out any Money upon the Improvement thereof, as its Confessed there was
not, 167.
And so are such Actions termed in their Answer, 60, 65.
not Considering they confess themselves guilty thereof, in a much greater
Degree; in so far as, they attempted the Purchase of the 168.
Great Neck, on which the Palmers had Expended so much in Improving thereof,
that were it to be Let, it would not yield the Interest of the Money so laid
out upon it, without giving them the least notice thereof before hand: Nay,
from their Answer, it may may fairly be inferred, they went further, than a
bare attempt to purchase the Great Neck, without notice to the Palmers; in so
far as they confess, that their Correspondent wrote them, That Mr. Richbell was
of so nice Honor as not to depart from his Articles with the Palmers. How
could they know this, if they had not attempted to make him depart from them?
How came they to lay the not doing thereof to the charge of his Honor, if
something against his Honor had not been proposed to him to do? And though the
procuring the Offer of Money, as a Bribe to the Complainants Correspondence, to
destroy their Agreement for the great Neck, be denied, yet the other part of
the Charge is confessed, viz. Orders by the Defendants to then Correspondents,
to endeavor to come in for one half, if the Palmers had purchased the wh^l^.
Which with all Men of Reason, will be, Tantamount to confessing the whole
Charge: For how could their Correspondents let them in for the one half, unless
they had destroyed the Complainants Deeds, and prevailed upon Richbell to
Execute new ones: If the Complainants had purchased the whole, no body but the
Complainants could convey the half, and the application was to them only
proper, who were near at hand; and not either to Richbell, or the Palmers
Correspondents, who could not have done such a thing, without manifest
Injustice and Villainy, which their own Answer from their Correspondents say, "
Richbell was a man of too nice Honor to be guilty of. Its an easy thing for a
Man to wipe his Mouth, and say, nothing but fair means was intended; But the
Complainants challenge Mr. Philipse, to show which way such a thing could be
done fairly, by any body alive but the Palmers; For if the Palmers had
purchased the whole, Then either the Deeds for the whole to the Palmers would
have been Executed, or there would have been a written or a verbal Agreement,
for to Execute such Deeds: If the Deeds were Executed; Let him show, if he can,
how Palmers Correspondents or Richbell, could Let the Defendant into the half,
without destroying these Deeds: If the Deeds were not Executed, but only
agreements entered into, either written or verbal, Let the Defendant show, if
he can, how Palmers Correspondents could give up or destroy this written
Agreement, or acquit Richbell of the verbal one, without a Breach of Trust and
manifest Injustice to their Employers the Palmers. And could Richbell, have
gone from his own Agreement, whether verbal or in writing, without doing
palpable Injustice, which it seems be abhorred, and was a Man of too nice
Honor to Embrace so Vile a Proposal. Does it look fair, or rather is it fair
and honest, to send 3000 Miles to do that which all the World cannot help
seeing, could not be fairly done any way there; And Omit an Application here
near at hand, to Persons who were to be spoke with every day, and who were the
only persons in the World, that could fairly and honestly, let him into the
half. If this be not Plowing with another's Heifer; and if this be Honest and
Fair, Hang Fair. -- Honest Reader, Judge who had most reason to Clamor, and
Judge of the present Clamours accordingly,

NB. The first sheet of this Appendix was printed off, and so far of this 2d
sheet composed or set, before it was observed, that there was a Mistake in
these words, page 25. line 43. And the rather because that time was en even half
year with the first Mortgage; That Time not being an even half year with the
first Mortgage, but with the Defendants last Bond, as appears fol. 44. of the
Answer.

Charge 3d.
-- 1 -- THat the Complainants ^^ to 67.
and Defendants being both sensible, that their Offers one upon another must
raise the Price of the West-Neck; and it being then whispered, that it might be
disputed, Whether the great Neck extended Twenty Miles into the Woods, as the
other two Necks, they came to a Treaty thereupon; during which Treaty, the
Parties came to agree to the Substance of the Agreement ( before printed in
fol. 9, 10 and 11) excepting the quantity of the Sum, that was to be paid by
the Defendants to the Complainants: which Agreement, upon the 29th of May,
1723, was so put in writing, with a blank Space for the Sum, and delivered to
the Defendant, Courtland, to peruse. -- 2 -- And soon after, what was so
written, was agreed to on all sides; and then they Treated about the Sum that
was to be filled up in the blank space: But differing about the quantity
thereof, the Agreement broke off. And the Complainants having before that,
wrote a Letter (in order to be sent by a Ship then about to sail) to their
Correspondents in London, to complete the Purchase of the Reversion of the West
Neck for the Complainants, though it should cost them 500 Sterling, and not to
suffer it to be sold, to Mr. Courtland, or any other, for less than 1500
Sterling, until they had further Orders; the Complainants showed this Letter to
the Defendants, and upon breaking off the Agreement, put the said Letter on
board the Ship bound for London. -- 3 -- But a day or two after that
disagreement, (viz. Just as the Ship was going to sail for London) they Treated
again about the Sum, and agreed it to be 158 l. and to fill it up in the blank
Space of the Agreement, so put in writing and delivered to the Defendants as
aforesaid. and the Complainants by their Bill 151, 152.
Expressly demand, Whether any other thing was then Expressed to be in
difference between them? and was it not the intent of all parties, that when
that Sum was agreed to, and filled up in the Articles, the Agreement was
Complete? or had the Defendants then a secret Reserve, that they might alter
them as they pleased, after they had got the Complainants Letter back from on
board? -- 4 -- 54.
But the Ship being then Weighing Anchor, at the most pressing request of the
Defendants, Richard Cornwall was sent to bring the Complainants Letter back;
but the Master would not deliver it to him, because it had been delivered by
Thomas Townsend: And therefore in the greatest haste, Thomas Townsend went for
the said Letter, and the rest of the parties hurried to Ellis's Dock;. where
Thomas Townsend brought the said Letter on shore, and delivered it to the
Defendants; and there the Complainants Quinby, Cornwall and Townsend, signed a
Letter, in behalf of the Palmers and Company, wrote by the Defendant Philipse,
for Newberry and Partridge, to desist making further proffers for the
West-Neck; which Letter was sent in a Boat after the Ship, and the Ship lying
too at the Narrows for the Boat, the Letter was there got on Board; the Parties
staying so long on the Shore as to see the Boat come up with the Ship; and then
they went to Mr. Courtland's house to Execute the Articles. -- 5 -- When Quinby
acquainted the Defendants, concerning the Lands Exchanged by Pell, which were
no part of the west Neck, advising them to get their Deeds for all Richbell's
Right, so as the Defendants might be entitled to the Lands so Exchanged, and
advised them rather to give Considerably more than not to have their Deeds so
Comprehensive, (which is the Reason, why the Complainants gave such Directions
on their Treaty for the West Neck, as appears in the second Charge, No. 2.) And
the Bill further charges, -- 6 -- That the Defendant Philipse, in looking over
the Articles of Agreement, which all Parties were come to execute, as
aforesaid, took upon him-self, without any Consent or Order from the
Complainants or even of the Defendant Courtland, to Strike the Words Twenty
Miles out of the third Clause of the said Agreement, and in lieu thereof, he
put in the Words to its Extent, which the Complainants being Surprised at, Asked
him, What he meant by it? who Answered, It was to the same Effect as the Words
TWENTY MILES, Whereupon the Complainants, a little Suspecting the Fraud, he has
since Demonstrated he then designed, and Sensible they could not help
themselves, seeing the Ship was before this time out of the Narrows, with a
fair and fresh Gale of Wind, and so without any possibility of being overtaken,
to put the Complainants Letter on board again, which (in Confidence of the
Complete Agreement, to the said Articles as they stood before) they had been
prevailed upon, to take-from on board as aforesaid, and to give it to the
Defendants, they the said Complainants thought it was most prudent, not to make
many words about it, least the Defendant Courtland, (who seemed to do whatever
Mr. Philipse pleased) should altogether fall off of the Agreement; and
therefore the agreement was so Executed, by the Complainants Quinby, Cornwall
and Townsend, and the Defendant Courtland. -- 7 -- Afterward the Complainants
came to the Agreement annexed to the former, ( before printed in fol. 11.)
which was Executed by Quinby alone, Townsend and Cornwall, having gone out of
Town in haste, before it was written.

Answers to Charge 3d.
-- 1 -- THE Answer sets forth, 66.
That bidding on one another would but raise the Price, 61 to 88.
That the Complainants and Defendants had many Meetings, the Circumstances
whereof the Defendants say 62.
they Ingeniously set forth; and they take about 18 (...) 61 to 88.
to do it: and the Defendant Philipse, confesses, 74.
That during the Treaty, there was mention made of (...) between the Middle and
West Neck, and about the Extent of the Middle Neck, and that some of the
Complainants (...), they hoped it re^^hed to the Extent of the Patent. 67.
That he believed the Complainants view, was to secure the Lands above the
Meddle Neck. ^5.
That the Complainants seemed very much on the Reserve, he was resolved to be
on the Reserve too; and only told them, That if they had a Right to come so far
as the Extent of the Patent, there was no reason to think, but that matters in
such case should be amicably Settled. 70, 71.
That after Sundry draughts made in writing, of the Articles of their
Agreements, partly by the Complainant Quinby, partly by the Defendant Philipse,
partly by young Burling, and partly by John Chambers, 74, 76.
the Complainants carried these Draughts away, and returned with another, (
which is that Printed in fol. 9, 10 and 11.) and 109.
gave it to the Defendant Cortland, who soon after gave it to the Defendant
Philipse, 110.
and the Defendants believe they had it two days. -- 2 -- 110.
The Defendants deny, that it was agreed so far as was then written; But the
Defendant Philipse says, That upon reading it, he took Exception to the said
Expression of 20 Miles into the Woods, and the very next time the said Quinby,
and some others of the Complainants, came to him for an Answer, which was at
least a day before the said Articles were Executed, he declared to them 111.
the same, and told them, that as them Words were not in their Mortgage, they
ought not to be inserted in the Articles as aforesaid. 77.
The Complainants then pretended. That they had Expended 158. Pounds, in
endeavoring the Purchase of the West Neck, and it was consented to by the
Defendants, that that should be the Sum, and did believe matters 78 to 81.
were fully concluded, as to the Sum, and to have the alteration of the 20
Miles made, but the Complainants went away in a silent manner, and thus the
Treaty dropped. 83.
That the Complainants on breaking off the agreement, threatened to give such
Orders, by the Ship then ready to sail, as would hinder the finishing of a
Bargain, till their further Directions arrived there 104.
but don't remember the Letter, 111.
no^ believe the putting it on Board. -- 3 -- 112.
And the Defendant Philipse says, they met afterward about the said Articles,
and talked about the Sum as before; but deny that the Sum, was the only thing
talked of to be in difference, for that the said 113.
Words 20 Miles, were Excepted to, as aforesaid, and the Defendant Philipse
says, he (...) his intention, of having that Expession of 20 Miles altered, but
declared the same to them, as aforesaid. And the Defendant Courtland says, That
he leaving the whole management of the said Treaties, to the other Defendant
Philipse, did not take particular. Notice, of what passed between them. -- 4 --
88 to 94.
The Defendant Philipse says, that he was afterward sent for to the Defendant
Courtlands, where he found two of the Complainants, and they said the third was
gone to bring back their Letter, who coming in shortly afterward, said, the
other must go to fetch it, because it was delivered by him to the Master; The
Defendant Philipse th^n wrote a Letter, for Quinby, Cornwall and Townsend to
sign, and they then went to Ellis's Dock, where they found the third Person;
where the Letter wrote by Mr. Philipse was signed, and sent after the Ship; and
the Defendant Philipse sa^s, it could not have been got on board, if the Ship
had not lain by, she being almost opposite to the Watering-Place, before the
Letter got on board. They then went to the Defendant Courtlands, to Execute the
Articles. -- 5 -- 114.
The Defendants confess it, that Quenby told them of the Agreement between Pell
and Richbell, and that he might advise them as in the Bill, but say they knew
it before. -- 6 -- 95 to 101.
the Defendant Philipse says, he then inserted, the 158 Pounds, in the blank
Space of the Articles, and Struck out the Words Twenty Miles, and Inserted the
Words To its Extent, and says, he had told them, and observed to them, Were
they present then? Vide No. 2.
when he first read the Articles, that it must be done. Don't remember, that
the Complainants made any objection to the alteration, 97.
bet the Defendant Philipse remembers, that one of the Complainants asked him,
Why the Middle Neck could not Extend as far as the other two? Whereupon the
Defendant Philipse said, The Necks are to the marked Trees, and what is above
them is a separate Grant, 97, 98, 116, 99.
but if their Mortgage, or the Release from the Heir, gave them a Right to the
Twenty Miles, above the Neck, it was to the same purpose, whether the Words To
its Extent, or the Words Twenty Miles, were made use of; or words to that
purpose; and they seemed so Convinced and Satisfied, (...), that no further
Discourse was had thereon, as he remembers, and to the Articles were Executed.
-- 7 -- 98.
And all the said Persons, having Du^^d a^ the Defendant Courtland's, Townsend
and Cornwall went away; and 100, 101.
Quinby proposed the additional Agreement, which the Defendant Philipse says,
he thought better to accept it than slight it: and the Defendant Philipse
accordingly drew the same, under the said Original Articles. 191.
Its confessed* That on the 5th of June, 1724 the Defendant, Cortland^,
assigned all his Right to the Defendant Philipse.

Observations on Charge 3d.
Its to be observed, That as the Complainants entered not upon the Purchase of
the West Neck, till they had fairly asked Mr. Cortland, Whether he had thoughts
of it^ and that he slighted it, as by the Answers to the second Charge appears;
so, when they found that Mr. Cortland became a Competitor in the Purchase, they
were willing to desist upon reasonable Terms; and to agree upon such, they had
many Meetings with the Defendants, in order, that if the Defendants should
happen to become so nigh Neighbors, no Dispute might arise betwixt them and
the Complainants, concerning the Line betwixt the Great-Neck and West-Neck,
which then remained unsettled, but that it might be settled in an amicable
manner. It appears confessed, That during the Treaty, before the Parties began
to put their Agreements in writing, the Line betwixt the Great Neck and West
Neck was talked of, But the Defendants avoid saying what was talked of it, and
leave that to be guessed at; And to give a right guess, It must reasonably be
supposed, that what is contained in the Articles of Agreement ( before printed,
fol. 9, 10 and 11.) concerning the Line, is the Result of that Talk. It appears
also confessed, That during that Treaty, it was talked, That the Great Neck
extended the length of the Patent, and that the Defendant Philipse, understood,
that to secure the Twenty Miles into the Woods, from all Claims, was the
Complainants aim; and the Articles contain a full Declaration, that so was
their Aim, even though there had been no Declaration of it before. It appears
these Articles were delivered to the Defendants, two days before they were
Executed, as the matters that had been treated of, and agreed to in the Treaty;
during which two days, the Defendants had them in their keeping to consider of.
By the Articles it appears, that the Complainants agreed, to desist further
Proffers for the West Neck, which was what was to be done on their Parts; And
in Consideration thereof, the Defendant Courtland agreed, to pay their former
Charges about it, and that there might be no dispute, about the Line running
into the Woods between the Great and West Neck. -- 2 -- So flagrant an act, as
the altering an Agreement, after the Consideration performed on one part,
without consent of the Parties who had performed, on Faith and Confidence of
the Execution of the Articles of Agreement, as they stood at the time of
performance, requires some Excuse to be found for it; And the Excuse is, that
says Mr. Philipse, the Articles were not agreed to so far as were written, For,
that he took Exception to the words 20 Miles upon reading the Articles, and
told the Complainants of it, the first time they came for an Answer. But
whether this Excuse be Genuine, or ^nly bought of after the meeting of the
Arbitrators at (...), shall be considered under the 4th Charge, No. 8 and 9.
But here we shall suppose the Except on to have been made as he says; Then, did
the Complainants agree that th^se words should not be in the Articles? No, the
matters in the first Charge, and that being their very aim by the Treaty, fully
^n^ugh show the impossibility they should; and its even not so much as
pretended by all the Answer, that they did agree to leave these words out,
which had they agreed, would not have been forgot. Again, Who made this
Exception? Not Mr. Courtland the other party contracting, but Mr. Philipse, who
was not known by the Complainants to have any concern in the thing, further
than as a Scriviner, or as a Friend to Mr. Courtland; and from Mr. Philipses
having once Excepted to th^se words, it will in no ways follow, that Mr.
Courtland did not agree to them. Again, as Mr. Philipse confesses, that in the
discourse in the Treaty, concerning the Great Necks reaching to the Extent of
the Patent, he was on the Reserve, is not there great reason to believe that
Re^erve was also used here? seeing its concerning the same thing, and
concerning which, the Complainants had fully, by the words 20 Miles, in the
Articles, Expressed their intention? Again, can there be any thing so much as
supposed, that could induce the Complainants, to depart from these words Twenty
Miles? It can hardly be imagined, especially at that time, when they stood as
fair as the Defendants, for the Purchase of the Remainder of the Patent, they
having then the same Opportunity as the Defendants, to make Proffers for it by
the Ship then bound for London and though the Defendants don't remember the Sight
of the Letter, the Complainants put on board of the Ship, yet, as they
remember, they told them, they would give such Orders, it amounts to the same
thing, seeing undoubtedly it was in their Power to give such Orders. -- 3 --
Again, will it follow from such an Exception being once made, that it was
^^sisted on, and not waved? It certainly cannot, but if it was made, its not
only unnatural, to think the Complainants should assent to it, for the reasons
before, but also there is the greatest Probability, that it was not insisted on,
but waved: For, after the making of it, is confessed the Treaty dropped, and they
came to a Treaty again; how consistent the Answer is with it self, and how
evasive concerning that, is left to the Impartial; when its considered, that
its said, before the Treaty dropped, the Sum of 158 Pounds, demanded by the
Complainants, was then agreed to; And again, its said, they met afterward
about the Articles, and talked about the Sum; Its a little Strange, that if the
Sum was agreed to before, that that should be the thing talked of, for its of
things that are in difference, that one should suppose People would Treat of,
and not of things agreed to; And when so Express a Demand as is made by the
Bill, Whether at that further Treaty, any other thing was expressed to be in
difference between them, than the Sum? is considered with the Answer to it,
viz. But the Defendant Philipse denis, that the Sum was the only thing talk^ of
to be in difference; Then, what else was there talked of to be in difference?
If any thing else, it might be reasonably expected, it would have been said
what, but its not said what, for the words that follow are, for that the said
words Twenty Miles were excepted to, as aforesaid; how is it said before, that
they were Excepted to? when he read them, he Excepted to them, and told the
Complainants so, during the former Treaty; But sure that will not be said telling
them so, during this last Treaty: and if so, its plain, that nothing is showed
to be treated of, as in difference, during this Treaty, but the Sum. And when
that other Express Demand in the Bill, Was it not the intent of all Parties,
that when that Sum was agreed to, and filled up in the Articles, the Agreement
was Complete; or had the Defendants then a secret Reserve, that they might
alter them as they pleased, after they had got the Complainants Letter back
from on board: is also considered with the Answer to it, viz. The Defendant
Philipse sa^s, he did not secretly Reserve his Intention, of having that
Expression of Twenty Miles altered, but declared the same to them, as
aforesaid. How, when, and what did he declare, as aforesaid, to that purpose?
I.e, in a former Treaty, says, he told them that the words (...) should not be
there, because they were not in Richbell 's Mortgage; But why did he not tell
them so now? seeing if he had told them so before, the Complainants never
agreed it should be so; and if it was not told them now, upon this last Treaty,
(which neither these Words of his, nor any others in the Answer, can import
that he did) and if he then had such an Intention, it must have been secretly
Reserved to himself, he having no way Expressed such Intention, during this
Treaty. It can hardly be thought, if a matter of such Moment, had been in
difference, during these Treaties, that Mr. Courtland should not have taken
Notice of what passed about it, but the Complainants verily believe he was no
ways privy to Mr. Philipse's Intention, nor does it by the Answer appear he
was, or that he ever gave any Order or Consent to it. -- 4 -- If any such
Exception was made by Mr. Philipse, on the former. Treaty (which the
Complainants do not admit to have been) from what is before, its conceived
plain, that it was never assented to by the Complainants; and that it was not
insisted on, but waved by the Defendants: it being not so much as asserted,
that it was more than once mentioned before the Ship went, and that upon a
former Treaty; And that such Exception was not insisted on, but Waved, will be
more apparent, when the mode of Expressing the Exception, in fol. 76 and (...)
of the Answer, is considered; viz. This Defendant Adolph Philipse was asked his
Opinion about the Agreement, Whether by the other Defendant Courtland, or the
Complainants, or both, he does not remember; but remembers, that he Answered,
in the presence and hearing of the said Quinby, Cornwall and Townsend, in
Substance to this purpose, That as most part of it was made up with Recitals,
he believed them to be right, but as to that part which mentioned Twenty Miles
into the Woods, it must be altered, because the Mortgage to Robert Richbell had
no such Words or Expression in it. From which it seems, it was only objected
to as a Recital, because Richbell^s Mortgage had no such words in it; but that
was no Objection to it in the third Clause of the Agreement, where it stood in
the Articles, being there not a Recital, to which only his was a proper
Objection, but as a matter agreed to; and to obtain which, and to prevent
disputes about that matter, Mr. Philipse confesses, he understood to be the
Complainants aim, by the Treaty and Agreement; and which aim, was fully
expressed and pointed out by that Agreement, and if he really intended such
Alteration, he should then, or after, before acceptance of the Consideration
from the Complainants, have made it, or insisted upon their consent to make it:
neither of which, so much as pretended; and the not doing the one or the other,
but accepting the Consideration upon a further Treaty, without once mentioning
that Exception, must be conceived, with all Men of reason, a desisting from, or
a waving of such Exception, especially seeing it was not made, by the Person
with whom the Complainants were treating; And to illustrate this; Suppose one
offers to do a thing, if another will pay him so much for doing it: upon the
offer, the other excepts, or even objects, in plain terms, to the paying so
much for the doing of the thing; But afterward desires the Person offering, to
do the thing he offered, without desiring, or obtaining any Abatement of what
he offered to do (...), Can any other Construction be put upon this, than that
the other, by accepting of the thing that was to be done, does undertake to pay
what was demanded for doing it? Will it be an excuse to say, that during the
Treaty he excepted or objected to paying so much? Surely that can be none;
unless the other agreed to the Exception or Objection. And to compare the Case
in hand with that; here Suppose there had been even no prior Treaty where
matters were agreed or understood to be agreed, as in this case it appears
there was, but only the Complainants offered (by the Articles of Agreement) to
desist making further Proffers, for the remainder of Richbell's Right (when
they had as good a Title, and as good an Opportunity to do it as the
Defendents) if the Defendants will pay than their past Charges about it, and
agree to settling the Line Twenty Miles into the Woods, between the Great Neck
and West Neck, either amicably or by Arbitration; this offer was given to the
Defendants to consider of, they confess they had it two days to consider of;
Mr. Philipse says, he excepted to the words Twenty Miles; ^e it so: Did the
Complainants agree to quit with them? No, its not so much as pretended: Did the
Complainants agree, to desist making Proffers, with any thing less than what
they offered by the Articles to desist for? No, its not so much as pretended:
Was not the thing offered to be done by the Complainants, accepted of? Its
plainly confessed it was; With what reason then, can the Defendant Philipse,
put them to all the Trouble, of this Suit, to compel him to that, which its
apparent was agreed to, by the Acceptance of the Consideration, on the part of
the Complainants? He himself best can tell: With what reason have all these
Clamours been raised (...) the Court, for Decreeing pursuant to that, which was
so apparently, and deliberately agreed to; and which (by the matters of the
first Charge, had there been no such Agreement) its apparently absurd, and
Repugnant to common Sense and Reason, and the intention of all Parties, to make
any pretense against? Let the World judge. -- 5 -- By this Article, compared
with Article, No. 2: of the 2d Charge, It appears, that had it not been for
this Agreement, the Complainants had an equal Chance, at least, with the
Defendants, to have purchased these their vast Pretentions, by having their
Deeds for all the remainder of Richbell's Right; and by what is before in this
Charge, It plainly appears, they would not have parted with that Chance,
without believing, that by this Agreement, they were fully secured, from any
doubt or dispute that might happen, about the Bounds or Extent of their Lands,
which had stood them in above 20000 Pounds, as before, and on which they had
bestowed so much Improvements, as that its confessed, were they to be Let, they
would not bring the Interest of the Money, so Expended by them, in improvement
thereof: Though in fact, by the Decree it self, and the first Charge before, if
there had been no such Agreement, it evidently appears, there was no Reason for
such dispute, or for disquieting them in their Ancient Possessions. But were
there Ten thousand times more Ground for this vast Pretension of Mr.
Philipse's, yet, as its plain, the Complainants might have hindered him of
Obtaining it, and did only desist hindering him thereof, on a solemn Agreement,
not to turn these Pretensions against them, but to settle their Bouuds
amicably, Its left to the World to judge HOW CANDID AND HOW GENEROUS that must
be, to turn that Weapon put into his Hands against the Givers thereof, and that
directly contrary to so solemn an Agreement, not to do it.

-- 6 -- In inserting the 358 Pounds. Mr. Philipse was in the right, ^^^ause it
was the Express Agreement of all Parties, that it should be so, But where was
his Right to strike (...) the words TWENTY MILES? words of a Plain and
Determinate Sense, and to institute in place of them the words TO ITS EXTENT,
words of an Ambiguous and Indeterminate Sense; its not pretended that Mr.
Courtland ordered any such thing, neither is it pretended, no^ to be supposed,
that the Complainants ever consented to any such thing: As to his pretense for
doing it, viz. That he told them, and observed to them, Quere, If they could
hear him, seeing they were not then present? Vide No. 2.
WHEN HE FIRST READ THE ARTICLES, That it must be done, that could give him NO
RIGHT, unless they had assented to the doing it; and the Accepting the
Consideration on the Complainants part, without insisting on that his Exception
(if he made it) was a desisting from it, and Waving of it, as appears under No.
4 above. Some People have very bad Memories of what makes against them, and
require a great deal of rubbing up, to make them remember such things; and on
the other hand perfectly remember, things which they desire, or what makes for
them, whether such things ever were or not: Whether that be Mr. Philipses case
or not, the Complainants in this place will not say, but will leave the Impartial
Reader to judge, from what Observations will be made, on the 4th Charge and on
the Answer in general. Though Mr. Philipse swears, he does not remember the
Complainants made any Objection to the alteration, yet, that does not say but
that they did; and can any man of Reason believe that they did not? To see,
That which he confesses he understood to be their aim by the Treaty, That which
was plainly by the Articles shown to be their aim, to see that arbitrarly
struck out without their Consent, to see themselves Exposed to Dispute with so
great a Man, and to a Dispute they had taken so much pains to guard themselves
against, Could any man of the greatest Patience see that, and not object
against it? it can hardly be supposed; But his Answer to the Question, he says
they made, fully enough shows an Objection, for, if they had not Objected,
there would have been no need of Satisfying them or Convinceing them about it,
as he says he did, with his Answer; But what was it that Satisfied them? He
says he told them that the Necks are to the marked Trees, and what is above them
is a separate Grant, a very Comfortable thing to hear indeed! (if he said so)
how much it would tend to satisfy them, to see themselves exposed to the
Dispute they had been guarding against, is lest to the Reader to judge; and how
much of Verity was in this, to Convince them, the Reader is referred to the
Patent, Deeds, and Decree it self, to see and judge by. But whether he said so,
or not, will be no small Question, when his Conduct, until the Meeting of the
Arbitrators at Mamaroneck (as will appear in the next Charge, in twelve
Instances there pointed out) shows, that till that time, he understood, as well
as the Complainants, That a LINE was to be run to its Extent into the Woods
BETWEEN the TWO NECKs, which will hardly be consistent with this Saying of his,
in so far as by the Answers to the first Charge it appears, That the Marked
Trees are at Westchester Path, where the Water comes up on each side of the
Great Neck, to which Place it was impossible to divide the Necks by a Line,
because, so far they are already Divided by Water, and therefore, the Line rhat
the Arbitrators were to ascertain, must be beyond the Marked Trees, if any Line
was to be at all: Is it reasonable to think he told them, what is Tantamount to
saying, There Is to be NO LINE at all BETWEEN the GREAT NECK and WEST NECK, and,
yet at the same Time, agree to the Signing of Articles, so expressly agreeing To
settle a LINE BETWEEN the GREAT NECK and WEST NECK, which its impossible could
be any where, but beyond the Marked Trees; The Reader is left to judge, whether
he said so, or not, But if he did, he cannot but be of Opinion, (after he has
read the Twelve Instances in the next Charge) That the Sayings and Doings, and
the Defendant Philipse 's whole Actings, till the Meeting of the Arbitrators at
Mamaroneck, were very Inconsistent with that Saying of his at that time.

The next Thing he said To Satisfy and Convince them, was, That IF their
Mortgages, or their Release from the Heir, gave them a Right to the Twenty
Miles above the Neck, it was to the same Purpose, whether the words TO ITS
EXTENT, or the Words TWENTY MILES, were made use of, or words to that purpose.
A very Satisfactory and Convincing Thing indeed! If the Mortgages, or Deeds, or
whatever they are of the Complainants, gave them Twenty Miles into the Woods,
they would have had that, whether they agreed with the Defendants, or not; and
then, neither the Words TWENTY MILES nor TO ITS EXTENT signified any thing,
taken in that sense; and this might have been as good a Reason for concelling
the whole Agreement, by telling them, Gentlemen, if your Mortgages, etc. gives
you so much or so much, you will have it, and there is no need of any Agreement at
all: 'Twas a fit time to tell them so, and one stroke of the Pen could have
been as easily and as arbitrarily drawn through the whole, as through the words
Twenty Miles, if his gravely telling them so, was a sufficient Reason for doing
it; and how could the Complainants have helped themselves, if he had, seeing
they had desisted to make the Proffers they might have made by the Ship, in
confidence of this Agreement, and seeing by this time the Ship was at Sea, and
impossible to be overtaken? Though its clear enough, by what is before, that the
Complainants had not agreed to the striking out the Words TWENTY MILES; yet,
were it doubtful before, this Answer of Mr. Philipse's puts it past all
dispute, that they had not so agreed; for, if they had, he would not have been
under any necessity of Satisfying them of the Reason of his doing of it at this
time, as by this Answer of his, he says, he did -- 7 --

The Additional Agreement, and Mr. Philipse's Purchase shall be Observed on in
further places.

Charge 4th.
-- 1 -- The Bill charges, 67 to 96.
That the Defendants put off the Time appointed by the Articles of Agreement,
for settling the Division LINE between the GREAT NECK and WEST NECK, because,
they said, they had not an account of their Purchase of the West-Neck. -- 2 --
And that, afterward, the Complainants often waited on the Defendants, to
appoint further times; and two several times the Winter following, were
appointed, at New-Rochel, at which the Complainants attended, but the
Defendants came not, but sent Letters of Excuse. -- 3 -- Afterward, a third
Meeting was appointed at New Rochel, to which the Complainants and Mr. Philipse
came, but they came not to an amicable Agreement betwixt themselves. -- 4 --
Afterward pursuant to the Articles, Arbitrators were appointed on each side,
to determine the Line, viz. Lanc^ster Sy^s, Samuel Bayard and John Hamilton
were appointed for the Defendants, and William Willis, Char^^^ Doughty and
Benjamin Symmonds for the Complainants, to meet at New-Rochel; and the
Complainants and the Defendant Philipse there met with the Arbitrators. -- 5 --
When it was proposed by the Complainants to enter into Bonds, to stand to the
Award of the Arbitrators, but Mr. Philipse refused it, -- 6 -- saying, That the
Authority he had from Mr. Courtland, with his own being present, and assenting
to what the Arbitrators should determine, sufficiently empowered the
Arbitrators; And the Complainants, willing to comply with any thing, rather
than be delayed by so many Meetings to no purpose, gave also such an Authority
and Assent as Mr. Courtland and Mr. Philipse gave, to stand to the Award. -- 7
-- Whereupon the Titles of both Parties, and the Articles of Agreement were
read to the Arbitrators, and some Arguments used concerning the Titles, and how
the ^^^ision-Line should run. -- 8 -- And ^^e Defendant Philipse, then and not
(...) then, to the great surprise and admi^tion of the Complainants, pulle^ the
MASK of the FRAUD and ^^CEIT he intended, when he scratched, as aforesaid, the
Words TWENTY MILES, out of the said Articles of Agreement, and put in lieu
thereof, the Words TO ITS EXTENT, and declared them to have the same meaning,
-- 9 -- And produced the first Draught of the Articles of Agreement aforesaid,
and asserted from it, that he would Demonstrate, that it was not intended by
the Articles of Agreement, that the DIVISION LINE should run TWENTY MILES into
the Woods; and inferred, from the Complainants agreeing to the Articles, with
the TWENTT MILES scratcht out, that they had given up that point. Whereupon the
Complainants, repeated and showed to the Arbitrators, the Time, the
Circumstances, and Manner of making the said Alteration; and how little they
Expected, from a Man of his Character, such an use to be made of it; after his
Declaration of the meaning thereof, as before is set forth; and how unjust it
was, to make that Alteration, after a full Agreement to the Articles, as they
stood before that Alteration; And after having received, a full and
satisfactory Consideration for them, from the Complainants, to wit, their
desisting from directing, the making further Proffers, for the West-Neck, as
aforesaid; and taking back their Letter to that purpose, and giving it to the
Defendants, as herein before is set forth; And thereby putting it out of their
own Power, to give further directions at that time. To which Mr. Philipse
replied, Denying, that the Alteration was made in the Articles of Agreement, as
asserted by the Complainants, and to prove that it was not, produced a Copy of
the Letter herein beforementioned, wrote by Mr. Philipse, and signed by said
Quinby, Cornwall and Townsend, and showed, that the Articles of Agreement, were
dated two Days before the Date of that Letter; and of Consequence, they were
Executed, and the Alteration made two days before that Letter was sent.

In answer to which, the Complainants allowed the Dates to be such, but
alleged, that he the said Philipse very well knew, and could not but remember,
the Disagreement about the Quantity of Money that was to be inserted in the
Articles, was, after the Articles were drawn and dated; and that it was two
Days afterward, before the Execution thereof, and that, from the Circumstances
of the Agreement to the Sum, just as the Ship was going to sail, the haste to
get the Complainants Letter back, and the other Circumstances before, he could
not but recollect soon, if he had forgot, the cause of the Difference of the
Dates, and that the Letter wrote by Mr. Philipse, was on board at the Narrows
before they went into Mr. Courtlands to execute the Agreement; at which time
the Alteration was made; and this he could not deny upon Oath, and referred it
to him. Whereupon the Complainants thought (by Mr. Philipse's silence
afterward) that he was fully convinced -- 10 -- And then the Arbitrators went
by themselves, to consider of the matter, and after some time returned, and
said. They conceived they had not sufficient Power from the Parties, to
Determine the Matter; but, whenever they would g^ve them sufficient Power, they
would be ready to serve them. -- 11 -- The Complainants then again pressed Mr.
Philipse to enter with them into sufficient Bonds or Powers, to compel the
Performance of such Award as the Arbitrators should give, but he would not
agree to it. -- 12 -- That the Complainants had five several Meetings
afterward, at New York, with the Defendants, in hopes of a Determination of
this Matter by fair means; at one of which the Complainants proposed to leave
the whole Difference to Ed. Rich who gave the Deeds to both Parties; which Mr.
Philipse would not do. -- 13 -- At all which Meetings the Defendants continued
giving the Complainants hopes, and appointing another Time, till September,
17^4 when the Defendants told them, they could give them no further hopes of a
Determination of this Matter by Agreement or Award.

Answ. to Charge 4.
-- 1 -- The Defendants confess, 120.
the time appointed by the Articles for Meeting, was put off; as its said in
the Bill. -- 4 -- 129.)
That Mr. Philipse told the Complainants, he designed to come and take a View
of the Premises; and Times for that purpose were proposed by Quinby, but Not
ABSOLUTELY Promised by the Defendants. 130.
That in February, 1723, 4. it was proposed to meet, but being hindered, he sent
them word by Letter, he could not go. 131.
he proposed afterward to meet the l^tter end of March, but the arrival of a
Vessel hindered him, and therefore sent another Letter, but whether the same was
delivered in time enough, he cannot say. -- 3 -- 133.
That afterward he met the Complainants at New-Rochel, where many Proposals
were made by the Complainants, and they pressed him to make some Offers. -- 4
-- 138.
That the Arbitrators in the Bill were named, and Time and Place of Meeting:
139.
That the 16th or 17th of May, 1724 the Arbitrators, Mr. Philipse and
Complainants came to New-Rochel, and agreed to meet next Day at Mamaroneck: --
5 -- 141.
That it was offered by the Complainants to enter into Bonds of Arbitration,
but he declined it. -- 6 -- 142.
said, he had a Power from Mr. Courtland, 143.
and the Complainants signed such another Writing, to empower the Arbitrators;
144.
and a Verbal Assent was promised on both sides, to abide by what the
Arbitrators should determine. -- 7 -- 144.
says, The Defendants Papers were read, 145.
and that he thereon observed, That the Twenty Miles into the Woods was a
separate Grant, and that the Neck cannot go farther than the Water makes it so;
146.
and that by the Defendants Release from Edward Richbell, they were entitled to
the Whole, excepting the GREAT NECK; and that the Palmers were only entitled to
the NECK, 146, 147.
That the Complainants Papers were read, and Arguments thereon, which he cannot
particularly remember. -- 8 -- Denis, that this was the first time, that he
declared his Sentiments about the Boundaries; and affirms, that he had long
before, and at several times, told some of the Complainants, they had a Right
to no more than the Middle Neck only, as has been set forth before. The
Alteration in the Articles, was declared at first sight thereof; and at the
time of making the Alteration, not objected against by them, as is set forth
before. -- 9 -- 150.
And the Defendant Philipse owns, he made use of such argument, as in the Bill
is set forth; but upon producing Quinby, Cornwall and Townsends Letter, dated
the 31st of May, he did not then remember, it was signed before the Articles,
but upon Recollection and Examination afterward, found it was. -- 10 -- 151.
That true it is, the Arbitrators went by themselves for some time; and being
returned, Delivered to each Party their Respective Deeds, and other Papers; and
declared in Substance, as is set forth in the Bill. -- 11 -- 152.
He owns, that he declined to enter into Bonds of Arbitration, as he thinks
they were then called; and did then, and still does conceive, he was not
obliged thereto. Confesses the Complainants asked him, if he would stand to the
Articles; and that he might say, he would, but must ask Mr Courtland first. --
12 -- 153.
Does not remember the five several Appointments afterward, but says, that the
Complainants often called of their own accord, and remembers, that it was
proposed by some of the Complainants, to leave the matters to Edward Richbell,
which he would not do. -- 13 -- 156.
And confesses, that it may be true, he told the Complainants, he could give
them no hopes, to end Matters by Agreement or Award.

Observations on Charge 4th.
ITs to be Observed, That in fol. 145. of the Answer, the Defendant Philipse
says, That Nature makes a NECK, and that the same cannot go further than the
Water makes it so. Which, by what appears in the First Charge, under the
Letters (b) (i) (k) (l) and (m) confines the Great Neck to the Marked Trees at
Westchester-Path; And in fol. 106, he Swears, He always was, and still is of
Opinion, that neither of the Necks extend further than Nature makes them so;
Upon which no small stress has been laid. But, with all due Deference to that
his OATH, the Complainants will beg leave to assign a few Instances, wherein he
either understood the Necks to go further, or his Actions did not square with
his Opinion or Understanding of the Necks, or, in plain English, meant one
thing, and said, acted and transacted another.

First Instance. Let the Reader turn back to page 10. of the Decree, where he
will find this Clause in the Articles of Agreement, Ask whereas it does not
appear that the LINE running into the Woods, between the said GREAT NECK and
the said WESTERMOST NECK, has ever been settled, run or marked out, or own the
Course that it ought to run, appointed or limited, which may occasion
Differences between tix Parties aforesaid, if the said Jacobus van Courtland
should purchase the Reversion of the said WESTERMOST NECK. It appears in the
2d Charge, No. 2. that Mr. Philipse transacted that Agreement for Mr.
Courtland; Then, the Candid Reader, and all the World besides Mr Philipse, will
understand by that Clause, That the GREAT NECK and WEST NECK, were such things,
as were capable of having a LINE between them, running into the Woods. And Mr.
Philipse knows b^^t whether he did not understand so too, by the words GREAT
NECK and WEST NECK there, and LINE between them; And if he did not, he can best
tell what he meant by them there; For sure it is, if the GREAT NECK extended no
further than where the Water comes up, (as he Swears, he always understood) it
could not be divided by a LINE from the WEST NECK, it being already separated
from it by the Water; and if it was such a thing as was to be separated by a
LINE, from the WEST NECK, Undoubtedly, that LINE must begin where the Water
ceased to separate them, and from thence to run into the Woods; and on the one
side of that LINE, (by that Clause) was the GREAT NECK understood to run, and
on the other, the WEST NECK; which is further than what the Water, or Nature
makes to be a Neck.

The Complainants say, The Almighty made every thing that is upon the face of
the Earth, but did not assign Names to them, but left that to Man to do, and
that some Men assign one, and others another Name to the same thing; and some
by one Name understand one thing, others by the same Name understand another
thing. For Exemple, The Geographers and the Learned World, understand by a Neck
of Land, that which joins a Peninsula (or what is almost an Island) to the
Continent or Main Land; and the similitude seems to be drawn from the human
Body; for as the Neck there joins the Head to the Body, so a Neck of Land joins
a Peninsula to a Continent; and there, neither the Peninsula nor the Continent
are understood to be included in the Neck, no more than the Head or Body of a
Man are included in his Neck. Mr. Philipse again, being a little more
favorable to the Complainants, than the learned World, in the meaning of a
Neck of Land, allows it to contain, not only what the Learned World understand
by a Neck of Land, but also the Peninsula it self, or something in a gross way,
allows the Head to be part of the Neck: This certainly is favorable! seeing
the Complainants can show no Title to the Peninsula, more than to the part of
the Main Land they claim; and of Consequence, had he dealt with them so hard as
the Learned World, (it seems) would do, instead of 320 Acres, that he allows
them, the learned World would not have left them, perhaps, the 20 Acres; so the
300 is a piece of mere Favor and Grace.

But others again, (in still a more gross and vulgar way) such as Governor
Lovelace, John Richbell, John Rider, Robert Richbell, Steenwick, Kelland,
Edward Richbell, and the Complainants, by the Patent and Deeds before Printed,
tell you plainly, that they understand, that a Neck of Land contains, not only
the Neck, (as the Learned World understand it) and the whole Peninsula, (as Mr.
Philipse is so favorable to understand it) but also a part of the Main Land
besides; and even Mr. Philipse by his Words and Actions, for near one year (as
by this and the eleven following Instances will appear) had the same way of
Thinking of a Neck too. The Complainants don't deny that the Name is gross, and
far from being accurate and expressive the thing meant; but its some Excuse,
that the whole Herd of Statuaries and Painters have given as gross and unapt
Names from things meant by them; As, By what they call a Head, they mean Head,
Neck and Shoulders. Our Forefathers, (whom we ought not to despise) have by a
Yard of Land, meant often, many Acres, whereas the Learned World, by A Yard of
Land, don't mean so much as the Four hundreath part o^ one Acre. Nay, for one
Name that is accurately Expressive, of the thing meant by it, the Complainants
will be at no great loss to assign ten Names that are not. But had the
Complainants no such Presidents of Vulgar Conceptions to cite, they think its a
sufficient Excuse, that its the Liberty and Privilege of Mankind to assign
such Names as they think proper to Things, and also to assign such Meanings as
they think proper to Names; and if a Man will call his Land, or any part of it,
a Head, a Neck, a Shoulder, a Hand, a Finger, or a Toe, etc. who can hinder
him? And if he tells you, that by the Name of Head, Neck, Shoulder, etc. of
Land, he means a Tract bounded so and so, what reason can there be to
mis-believe him? for he certainly best knows what he means by the Names he
uses. What right has the Learned World, or Mr. Philipse, to say to the Parties
to all the before Deeds, We understand so and so by the word NECK, and you
shall not have the Liberty of understanding otherwise? The Complainants say,
the Learn^d World have no such Right, and far le^s Mr. Philipse; and that
neither have ^ight to impose Names or Meanings on any Body, but as the Liberty
of every ones Meaning and Naming for himself, has hitherto existed, ^oth^y hope
that Liberty will continue, notwithstanding all the Efforts of Mr. Philipse to
the contrary.

Second Instance. Let the Reader turn to the 3d Clause of the Agreement, in
page 10 (...) 11, which has these Words, And shall proceed from thence to take
a View of the said Great Neck and the Westermost Neck, and after they have so
viewed the (...), will endeavor amicably, betwixt themselves, to settle the
Line (...) into the Woods, betwixt the same Necks. We shall suppose the Words
Twenty Miles had not been there, and the Articles always to have been as Mr.
Philipse has taken upon himself to alter them, as appears in the 3d Charge; and
were they even so, Can any man who reads that Clause, think it was the
understanding of the Parties, who transacted that Agreement, that the GREAT
NECK and WEST NECK were such Things as were not capable of (...) a LINE between
them? But if what Mr. Philipse Swears be (...) understood so there: How
consistent his understanding will be (...) Readers, is left to be judged of.

Third (...) Let the Reader turn to the Additional Agreement in page 11. and
(...) and consider it, which, as appears by Charge 3d, No. 7. was (...)
Philipse himself, with this, That its confessed by the Answer, page 167 (...)
Great Neck, so far as the Water makes it a Neck, is much larger (...)
West-Neck, so understood. And in fol. 159. its admitted, That the Great Neck,
so understood, contains only 320 Acres; and of Consequence, the West-Neck
contains much less than 320 Acres: And on the whole, let the Reader judge,
Whether by the word NECK, thrice mentioned in that Agreement, there was not
more understood, than what he Swears he always understood of the Necks. To lead
the Reader the easier to consider this, he finds by that Agreement, it was
agreed, That in case the Complainants Agents should ^^tually have finished a
Bargain for the aforesaid Westermost Neck, then the Complainants were to convey
one half thereof to Mr. Courtland, ^e pa^ing an equal half of the Purchase
Money, and bearing likewise a f^ll half of all the Incrumbrances, that are upon
the said Neck. Now, Suppose the Complainants had made the Purchase of all the
remainder of Richbell's Right, (as appears by Charge 3d, No. 5. they were about
to have done) and suppose the Defendants then der^an^ed of the Complainants to
perform this Additional Agreement, and to that Demand the Complainants had
answered, Gentlemen, We agreed with you, it is true, to let you into the half of
the Purchase of the WEST NECK, bearing ^e half of the ^ncumbrances upon it, and
paying one half of the Purchase Money; but we meant by the WEST NECK only so
far as the Water makes it a NECK, which contains much less than 320 Acres; Now,
if you will discharge one half of the Encumbrances which are upon it (which by
Charge 1st, No. 3. is said by the Defendant, to be as much again as the
Encumbrances on the Great Neck, which are Twenty Thousand Pounds) to wit, the
half of 40,000 Pounds, We will Convey to you for it, the half of the WEST NECK
(which is the half of much less than 320 Acres) and we will not insist upon the
half of the Purchase Money. Now, according to Mr. Philipse's way of
understanding the Necks, this would have been a generous Proffer in the
Complainants, to have given this Less than 160 Acres, for Twenty Thousand
Pounds, when they might have insisted on the half of the Purchase Money
besides. That it was Mr. Philipse's Meaning to accept of this generous Proffer
of the Complainants, if this case had happened, who can doubt? seeing he
Swears, He always was of Opinion, (or, which is the ^ame) understood the NECKS
to run Only so far as the Water; and in this Agreement, nothing more than the
NECKS is mentioned (Here Is none of his NECKS Running Twenty Miles into the
Woods, which he cleverly Distinguishes from NECKS so often, through his Answer)
If this was his Meaning, and he thought better to accept than to slight the
Proffer of this Agreement, as he says in fol. 100. of his Answer, he did; None
can deny but that he was then very moderate in his Demands, for half of the
Encumbrances on the West-Neck, to accept of much less than 160 Acres for them,
and that of Land too, whereon no Improvement was, as appears in fol. 167. of
the Answer. But behold! how variable are Sublunary Things, running from one
Extreme to its Opposite! The Man who was lately Satisfied, to accept of much
less than ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY ACRES of Land, whereon no Improvement was, for
TWENTY THOUSAND POUNDS, so great a Change is wrought on him, that for only FOUR
HUNDRED POUNDS, for which he has got the Lands Exchanged by Pell, to which he
had no Pretense before, and the Reversion of the WEST-NECK, which are admitted
to be of much more Value than Four Hundred Pounds, Now nothing less will serve
him, for the same Four Hundred Pounds, than to have, over and above that, ONE
HUNDRED TIMES ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY ACRES OF SUCH LAND, and that from People
too, who, with their Ancestor, have been above Twenty Five Years in Possession
of it; People who have Expended a great deal in Improving of it, People who
have paid the full Value of it, for it; People whom he had Solemnly agreed
with, to have no Difference with them about it. Upon the Whole, the
Complainants think, The Candid and Judicious Reader cannot long be at a stand
in Determining, That Either Mr. Philipse meant more by the Word NECK, Thrice
mentioned in the Additional Articles, than by his Answer, he Swears he always
did; Or else He meant to give more than half of the Encumbrances on the WEST
NECK, for what is much less than 160 Acres of Unimproved Land. If he meant the
first, the Complainants think the Reader will be at some Difficulty to
reconcile it with his Oath; for the Complainants cannot see how to Reconcile
them; And if he meant the last, the Reader will be no less at a L^ss to
Reconcile his then Moderation, and his now Vast Demands. And the Complainants
think, the Man will be of a happy Invention, that can show what else Mr.
Philipse meant, if he meant neither of these, barring that of his Meaning as
Hackerton did of his Cow, or which is the same, That he meant, that he was to
mean by the Word NECK, when the Complainants should Claim; by it, only so far
as the Water comes; but when he himself should Claim by it, in that Agreement,
then he was to mean all that, and Twenty Miles more. This Third Meaning of
Hackerton's the Complainants allow, he might have, and therefore they must bar
the Man of Invention from assigning that as another Meaning.

And now the Complainants will come to the Articles of the 4th Charge, for some
further Instances of Mr. Philipse's Meaning more by the NECKS than he Swears he
ever did. Or, etc.

Fourth Instance. -- 1 -- Its confessed, The time appointed by the Articles,
for settling the DIVISION LINE, between the GREAT NECK and WEST NECK, was put
off by the Defendants. Will Mr. Philipse say, he understood here, that the
GREAT NECK and WEST NECK, were not capable of having ANY LINE run betwixt them?
If what he Swears be true, he then so understood. But these words, or that act,
of putting off the Time for running the DIVISION LINE, between the GREAT NECK
and WEST NECK, must with all Men of the common way of Thinking, import, That he
understood the GREAT NECK and WEST NECK, were then capable of having A LINE run
betwixt them. So either he thinks different from the Common way of Thinking, or
his Sayings and Actions differ much from his Meaning. Again*

Fifth Instance. -- 2 -- Let the Reader see again the third Clause of the
Agreement, in page 10 and 11, for the view that the Parties were to take, in
order amicably betwixt themselves to settle the Line (call it as he has made
it) to its Extent into the Woods, betwixt the Necks; And in this 2d Article,
Mr. Philipse confesses, he told the Complainants, he designed to come and take
a view of the Premises; the above part of the Articles declares for what
purpose; upon this, the same Question may be put as in the last Instance, and
the same Resolution must be of it; so that at that time also, it would seem, he
understood differently of the Necks, from what he Swears he always did.

Sixth Instance. -- 2 -- In February, 1723-4, its confessed, it was proposed to
meet, viz. for taking a view in order to settling the Line amicably. Upon this,
the same Question and Answer may be as before, so he then understood, that the
Necks were capable of having a Line between them, or all the Absurdities before
must follow.

Seventh Instance. -- 2 -- But being hindered, he sent them word by Letter he
could not go. From whence, a Man of the common way of Thinking, will
understand, that Mr. Philipse, when he wrote that Letter, intended (had he not
been hindered) to have gone, in order to settle the Line amicably, betwixt the
Great Neck and West Neck; And if he so intended, the like Question and Answer
may be as before.

Eighth Instance. -- 1 -- He confesses, He proposed afterward to meet the
letter end of March, viz. in order to settling the Line amicably between the
Great Neck and West Neck. Upon this the like Question and Answer may be, and so
a further time, when he understood differently of the Necks, or etc.

Ninth Instance. -- 2 -- But the Arrival of a Vessel hindered him, and
therefore he sent another Letter. The like may be said on this, as on the
Seventh Instance.

Tenth Instance. -- 3 -- Afterward, he met the Complainants at New-Rochel,
viz. for to endeavor, amicably to settle the LINE between the GREAT NECk and
WEST NECk, according to the 3d Clause of the Articles. Upon which still, the
like Question and Resolution thereof may be.

Eleventh Instance. -- 4 -- Afterward, ARBITRATORS were appointed, pursuant to
the Articles, for determineing, how the DIVISION LINE between THE TWO NECKS,
should run into the Woods. Did he then, as before, understand that the NECKS
were not capable, of having A LINE run betwixt them? other Folks would think,
that when People solemnly enter into an Agreement about A LINE and appoint
ARBITRATORS, to settle how the Course of that LINE should run, that these
People really understood, there was such a thing as A LINE to be run, which
these ARBITRATORS were to determine the Course of; but, if what Mr. Philipse
Swears be true, he had no such meaning, had no thoughts, nor did not
understand, that the GREAT NECK and WEST NECK, were capable of ANY LINE betwixt
them, at the same time that he appointed ARBITRATORS to determine the Course of
it.

Twelfth Instance. -- 4 -- That the 16th or 17th of May, 1724. the Arbitrators,
Mr. Philipse and the Complainants, came to New-Rochel, etc. viz. For
determineing how the LINE OF DIVISION should run into the Woods, between the
TWO NECKS pursuant to the Articles, upon which, the like Question and
Resolution may be, as in the Eleventh Instance.

Above, the Complainants have assigned a Dozen of Instances, and if a necessity
were for it, could assign as many more, wherein, according to the Conception of
Men of common Reason, the Defendant Philipse, must have understood more by the
NECKS, than to where the Water comes up; and that, he understood where the
Water ceased to divide THE NECKS, they were to begin to be divided by A LINE,
from thence running into the Woods: And if every Man of common Reason, must so
interpret his Words and Actions; Why must all these Clamours be against the
Court for so understanding them? when without understanding them so, the
grossest Absurdities and Contradictions must of Course follow. But the reason
of his Swearing, he always understood so of the Necks, may be guessed at a
little; because, if he allows they go beyond the place where the Water divides
them, whatever reason will carry them one Foot beyond it, will carry them to
the Extent of the Patent; for, let but A LINE be, and he well knows there is no
st^pping it till it come there. But when he Swore so, he must have either
Thought his Antagonists so Blind, as not to see through it, or, that if they did,
they would not, or durst not ^enture to point it out: which ^^t he conceived
not altogether amiss in, for though they very well saw that, and many other
things herein set forth, before the hearing, yet they were very loath to Touch
upon them, and what they did toward it, was in so tender Touches, as ^ew but
Mr. Philipse himself could gather much from them; and that because, they
thought the Deeds themselves, made all clear enough, without dipping into these
things; and so the matter should have remained upon that footing only, if so
many vile, false and scandalous Reports. Reproaches and Clamours, had not since
the Decree, been invented and spread through this Province, of this Cause, and of
the Complainants, and of most who have dared to do their duty in it, (by whose
means the Complainants say not, but leave the Reader to guess) that more than
sufficiently, give these Complainants cause, to keep the Truth no longer hid.

But to proceed, -- 5 -- The Complainants shall agree, that Mr. Philipse now
began a little nearer to square his Actions and Words, with what he Swears,
always was his Meaning of the NECKS. And in order to that, it being, by the 3d
Clause of the Articles of Agreement, in the most Express words agreed, That in
case the Parties cannot by themselves agree How the LINE OF DIVISION between
the TWO NECKS shall Run TO ITS EXTENT (as Mr. Philipse has made it) into the
Woods, Then they have agreed, to leave the Determination thereof to six
Indifferent Persons. The first Step that is taken, is to break the that Solemn,
Plain and Express Agreement: That this his Declining to enter into Bo^ds, was a
breaking through it, is plain; for when People agree to leave a Thing to the
Determination of others, it certainly must be thereby also tacitly agreed, to
do every thing that may be necessary to empower these to Determine, and to
compel the Performance of what is determined; and the denying to do these
things, (as here to enter into Bonds) is a denying to comply with the
Agreement, or in plain terms breaking through it. -- 6 -- The Sequel shows, how
much of verity there was in this; if he thought that Power from Mr Courtland,
and his verbal assent, empowered the Arbitrators, why would not he also give
his Bond; Its said AN HONEST MAN, will never Scruple his Bond where he gives
his Word; for AN HONEST MAN, values his Word as much as his Bond, and should
think it a Dishonor to him, for any one to think it of less force; but it
seems Mr. PHILIPSE here, did not put an equal Value on them. -- 7 -- The next
step Mr. Philipse took, to square his Actions and his Words, with what he
Swears always was his meaning; was, that the Defendant Philipse then observed,
that the TWENTY MILES INTO THE WOODS, was A SEPARATE GRANT, and that the NECK,
cannot go further than the Water makes it so. How much truth was in this
Observation, and whether this was not the first time, he had ever opened his
RESERVE, by telling the Complainants so; the Reader is referred to the Patent,
Deeds and Decree it self, which fully discuss that matter; and to the 6th
Observation on the 3d Charge, to judge by. And how Just, Equitable and
Conscionable, his pretension by Edward Richbell's Release is, the Reader is
referred, to the first Charge and Observations thereon, to judge by. -- 8 --
Mr. Philipses denying, that this was the first time, that he had Expressed his
Sentiments about the Boundaries; must appear very Evasive and Ambigu^us; when
its considered, that a Man may have different Sentiments at different Times,
and declaring any of th^se, comes up to all this: and this may as well mean,
that he had before declared his Sentiments, that the Boundaries of the GREAT
NECK, went to the Extent of the Patent, as that they did not; but when its
considered, that Mr. Philipse, for near a years time, viz. From the Executing
of the Articles to this time, had different Sentiments, even at the same times,
viz. a Set of EXPRESSED SENTIMENTS by his Words and Actions that A LINE was to
be run between the GREAT NECK and WEST NECK, as appears from the 12 Instances
before, and a Set of RESERVED SENTIMENTS, that NO LINE was to be run at all,
seeing ^e Swears, he always understood the NECKS to reach no further than the
Wat^, and of Consequence, not capable of being divided by A LINE. Now his
Expressed Sentiments, its agreed, this was not the first time he declared them,
but as to the others, he can hardly show a probability, to induce any Man to
believe he did declare them to the Complainants before; seeing, his Expressed
Sentiments, were so Diametrically opposite thereto. The next Paragraph, viz.
And affirms, that he had long before, and at several times, told some of the
Complainants, they had a Right to no more than the Middle Neck only; as has
been set forth before. When its considered, will appear equally Ambiguous with
the last; for, as to what is before the words, as has been set forth before, its
agreed he might tell them so, and the Complainants never pretended to any more
than the Middle Neck; but they always understood the Middle Neck, to extend
further than what he says he understood it, so that that was just nothing. Then
does the words, as has been set forth before determine his meaning here, to be
theirs or his? No, for the Complainants set forth before, that the Middle or
Great Neck, does extend to the Extent of the Patent, and he otherwise, and
which of these is meant, is left Ambiguous. The next Paragraph is, The
alteration of the Articles, was declared at first sight thereof. The
Complainants need not dispute that, seeing, as before, they were not with him
at the first sight thereof, as appears by the 2d and 6th Articles, and latter
part of the first Article of the 3d Charge, and the Observations thereon; and
of Consequence, that declaration was not to them. The next Paragraph is, And at
the time of making the alteration, not objected against by them, as is set
forth before. That the alteration was objected to, the Complainants conceive
plain, from what appears under the 6th Article of the 4th Charge, and
Observations thereon. But why did not Mr. Philipse once mention to the
Arbitrators, this (so much insisted on) Argument, that he objected to the words
TWENTY MILES before hand; it seems very strange, that what he now conceives, so
weighty an Argument, should have been entirely forgot by him, and not one word
of it thought of, at least Expressed, during all this Arbitration, the
Complainants may well say so, seeing through all his Answer he does not say he
did; but to make up for it, he here introduces in his Answer, concerning the
Transactions before the Arbitrators, a repetition of the old Story, in order
probably to induce these who read it unwarily, to think that it was a matter
insisted on or mentioned before the Arbitrators: but whoever will but read it,
with the least Attention, may easily see, its not pretended to be a matter
mentioned to the Arbitrators; though sl^ly so introduced, as to make it seem as
if it had. And as its Evident from hence, that this mighty new pretense, of
having objected to the TWENTY MILES beforehand, and of having told the
Complainants thereof, was not so much as once thought on, or mentioned before
the Arbitrators, the Reader is left to judge, whether that gives not a great
deal of Ground, to Suspect that to be AN AFTER THOUGHT, as is before hinted,
under Charge 3d, No. 2 and 6; for, had such a thing ever been, its hardly
reasonable to be supposed, it would have been then forgot; seeing that time,
was within a year of the Transaction. And to suspect that Mr. Philipse finding
his GRAND ARGUMENT before the Arbitrators (in the next Article) Defeated, by
making it so obvious to his memory, that the Facts then asserted by him were
untrue: there was a necessity of thinking, or dreaming of some color or other,
to make an excuse, for that flagrant act, of striking out the word^ TWENTY
MILES, after the Consideration for the Agreement had been accepted of; and that
without Consent of the Parties, as before in the 3d Charge fully has appeared.
And when the several places in the Answer, where this Exception or Objection is
^epeated; 77, 95, 110, 112, 113, 115, 118, 147, 148, 149.
are carefully considered together, these Suspicions will be not a little
increased. Truth is always the same, but the Contrary varies. But these
Suspicions, will be much more increased, when he means that Mr. Philipse is
capable of taking, for to gain his Ends (as in the 2d Charge) are considered,
with his Swearing concerning his Opinion of the Necks, (as in the beginning of
the Observations on the 4th Charge) and concerning the power of Attorney (as in
the Observations on the Answer in general.)

And now We come to the GRAND ARGUMENT insisted on before the Arbitrators, -- 9
-- which the Reader is desired to turn back to, and carefully to peruse. The
GRAND ARGUMENT it may be called, for had it been true, there would have been a
great deal of weight in it. As for the other ARGUMENT, That the NECKS are to
the Marked Trees, and what is above them is a separate Grant, it may well be
called the LITTLE ARGUMENT, in respect of the Other; in so far, as any Man of
very moderate Capacity, by looking over Lovelace's Patent (above, Printed in
fol. 1 and 2, of the Decree) cannot be long in Determining, that the Facts of
that Argument are Untrue; For its plain, there is not Two Grants, but One Grant,
Not Two Tracts, but One Tract, granted thereby. But this Argument appearing so
fully Refuted in the Decree, there is no need here of further showing the
Weakness and Littleness of it. But Unluckily the GRAND ARGUMENT falls to the
Ground! That Matter being so lately transacted, as within a year, and in so
Unhandsom a manner, (as before, in the 3d Charge appears) that it could not but
leave lively Impressions of the Circumstances thereof, on the Complainants
Minds; which being ^id before him in so strong a manner, we find it brought the
matter too clear in his Memory to deny it. But had this Matter been slowly
followed, its submitted to the Reader, Whether, probably, Mr. Philipse would
not have in time, Sworn these Things to be True, which he now, before the
Arbitrators, so gravely Asserted to be True, and which by his Answer on this
Point, he confesses, He was Mistaken in. Its also here submitted to the Reader
to judge by this, Whether Mr. Philipse be any way entitled to the Observation
concerning Memories, in the 6th Article of the 3d Charge? And if he should be
of Opinion, That this no ways entitles him to it, then they refer the Reader to
the Observations on the Answer in general. Its also submitted to the Reader to
judge, Whether at that time, had he been in the Complainants Case, he had not a
great deal of reason to believe, he should soon be clear of the Pretensions of
Mr. Philipse, seeing the ONLY ARGUMENTS he then pretended to use, before the
Arbitrators, were so clearly Refuted, as before; His GRAND ARGUMENT by its
UNTRUENESS, and His LITTLE ARGUMENT by the same, and its WEAKNESS together. --
10 -- This Sequel shows, That the Arbitrators were not of Opinion, that the
Words of the Parties were sufficient to Empower them to Determine this Matter,
as Mr. Philipse asserted; and that they were ready to do it, if the Parties
would sufficiently empower them. But notwithstanding that, -- 11 -- Mr.
Philipse again declined to enter into Bonds to empower them, though pressed to it
by the Complainants; which, with his saying, He must ask Mr. Courtland first,
before he would stand to the Articles, was a beginning, in express Terms, to
declare, he intended to break through that solemn Agreement. -- 12 -- How
Groundless and Unfair must this Pretense of his be, that he would not submit it
in a proper manner, to the Arbitrators, who were so willing to Determine? when,
in Conscience, he ought to have done it, seeing it had been so Solemnly agreed
to be done. And how vexatious must the Reader think it, to have given the
Complainants the Trouble of so many Meetings, to settle this matter amicably,
when it would seem, he had no intention of doing it? And (...) must Mr.
Philipse have been, of the Unreasonableness of his Pretense, that he would not
even Refer it to Mr. Richbell, who granted the Deeds of both Parties, and who
must be supposed to know what he meant by the Deeds he gave to both of them. --
13 -- And who must the Reader think the cause of, and to blame for This
Expensive Suit, when Mr. Philipse here tells plainly, He would not stand to the
Agreement, nor give the Complainants any hopes of ending the matter by any fair
means; but continued to lay claim to, and threatened to take away from the
Complainants, their Ancient Possessions and Title, which, as before, stood them
in above Twenty Thousand Pounds, and instead of it would leave them only 320
Acres, which, he confesses, would not bring in the Interest of the Money, that
they had laid out in improving of it; which was, in effect, leaving them
nothing for their Twenty Thousand Pounds. And he must have for his 400 l.
Sterling, not only all the Lands exchanged by Pell, and the Reversion of the
whole West-Neck, as it extends Twenty Miles into the Woods from Westchester
Path, which are not denied, though expressly charged to be of much greater Value
than Four Hundred Pounds; but he must also have for the same Money, the whole
TWENTY MILES into the Woods of the GREAT NECK, which is not denied, though
expressly charged to be Much above Twenty Times the Value of that Four Hundred
Pounds. How Conscionable, Equitable and Agreeable to the Intention of all
Parties this Pretense of Mr. Philipse is, the Matters of the first Charge have
shown; What handsome Means have been attempted and taken to obtain this
Pretense, the Matters of the 2d and 3d Charge about Treating with the
Complainants Correspondents, and Striking out the Words TWENTY MILES, are a
pretty Specimen: And how clear this Pretense is, of Contradictions and
Absurdities, and how agreeable to these express Agreements, printed in fol. 9,
10, and 11, and to Mr. Philipse's expressed Sentiments, Actions and
Transactions, till the Meeting of the Arbitrators at Mamaroneck, by the Matters
of the 3d and 4th Charge, is something apparent; And how closely he has kept up
to Veracity and Truth, with and without Oath, the Twelve Instances and his
Arguments before the Arbitrators, give some Information

Upon the Whole, The Complainants doubt not, but that the attentive, honest and
impartial Reader will easily and soon Resolve the sole Question, in this Case,
viz. Whether Mr. Philipse or the Complainants be in the Right? and will be able
already to guess a little whether Justice has been done to the World, in the
Clamours Trumpeted about amongst them, and whether Falsehoods have not been
imposed on the World for Truths? And whether Truth has not past for Falsehood?
Whether Honesty has not past for Dishonesty, and Dishonesty past for Honesty,
etc.? And for more Particulars, the Reader is referred to the Observations on
the Answer in General, To which the Complainants will now proceed.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE ANSWER In General.
HItherto the Complainants have kept up close to the Facts appearing from the
Answer and Deeds, and have not, to their knowledge, taken any Fact in their
Observations, for granted, which does not appear from thence, notwithstanding
all the (...) that Mr. Philipse has taken to scatter, cloud and color these
Facts; so that it has been no (...) Labor to gather them together* and it
requires not a little ^ttention to discern some of them, through the Clouds and
Colors used.

The Clouds, Color or Pretenses which (...) of the greatest For^^, such as the
Excepting to the words Twenty Miles etc. have been considered and discussed in
the Observations on the Charges and Answers before; the rest of them, the
Complainants conceive, are so weak, or so little to the purpose, that they
think it would have been mis-spending ^ime to have considered them
particularly; the chief View of them being to cast an Odium on the
Complainants: And supposing all true that is said of them, and they were such
Persons as Mr. Philipse is at a great deal of pains to represent them to be,
yet that can be no Reason why they should not have Justice done them, nor no
Reason for taking their Estates from them, and giving them to him. But however
needless it is to consider all these Colors and Pretenses particularly, yet as
they have been made use of, as the Foundation of some of the Clamours, a small
Specimen of these Colors, may not be amiss, in order to judge of the rest by.

In order to cloud, color, or take off the force of that Fact, set forth in
the beginning of the 2d Charge, viz. Of the Complainants telling of the Heir,
and desiring to know whether Mr. Courtland had Intentions to bid for the West
Neck, before the Complainants made any Proffers for it, most part of 24 pages
viz. From page 38 to page 62.
are taken up in telling, That the Defendants knew before that of the Heir, and
that they had been bargaining before with him, for all his Right, with a
multitude of Circumstances of that Treaty of the Defendants with the Heir, and
particularly, That the Defendants might have had all his Right for 400 l.
Sterling, and that in Consequence of that his Treaty, he had given a Power of
Attorney to Mr. Hask^ll, to dispose of his Claim, wherein the Defendant
Courtland was to have the Refusal or Preference. 53, 54.
That the Defendant Philipse remembers ^e was informed, the said Power was sent
back to Major Richbell, and that some of the Complainants at the same time sent
Orders to Treat (...). 60.
And the Defendant Philipse further says, He has been Informed, and thinks by
one of the Complainants, and believes it to be Time, That to facilitate the
same, means were found out to prevail upon Mr. 61.
Haskoll to return the same Power, as aforesaid; and says, That the said
Complainant Quinby, could not disown but it cost Money, but to Whom, or How
much, this Defendant cannot say, n^r upon what Motives the said Power was so
returned, THOUGH SURE IT IS THE SAME WAS DONE, in so Secret and Private a Manner,
that this Defendant did not hear on it till some Months after, as herein before
set forth.

Impartial Reader, Consider that long Story of 24 pages, and say to what Use
can it be of, in this Cause, other than to throw Dirt at the Complainants and
others, and to increase Charges, by swelling the Proceedings to an Excessive
L^^gth; for the Facts pretended to be obviated by it, are not in the least
obviated thereby: Is the Complainants Kindness and Candidness, in telling the
Defendants of the Heir, and enquiring whether Mr. Courtland had intentions to
purchase, any thing the less, for the Defendants knowing of the Heir before
hand? No surely, for their Kindness and Candidness was the same. And this long
Story is so far from answering that purpose of Obviating these Facts, that on
the contrary, it plainly demonstrates a Tract of Unfair Dealing in the
Defendants; for 65.
the Defendant Philipse calls it undermining in the Palmers, for to have
Treated for the West-Neck, because Mr. Courtland had so great an Interest ^n it
by the Encumbrances he had on it; Though the Complainants acted so Heartily, and
with Notice, as before. Now if the Complainants Treaty for the West Neck
deserves that Name, when the Defendants confess, They had Expended no Money in
the Improvement of it, What must this Treaty of the Defendants, for the whole
Right of the Heir, and of consequence for the Great Neck, deserve the Name of?
when its confessed by the Defendants, That the Complainants had been so long in
quiet Possession of it, and Expended so much in the Improvement of it, as in
the first Charge appears, and that without any Notice to the Complainants of
such Treaty, or asking them, whether they had thoughts of Purchasing, as in the
Second Charge appears. Certainly if the Complainants Treaty for the West-Neck
deserves the Name of UNDERMINING, this Treaty of the Defendants deserves no
less.

Again, What is it to this Cause, if all that is said about Sending the Power of
Attorney home, were true? No Man of Sense will say that it affects the Cause,
but very much affects the Characters of the Complainants and Mr. Haskoll; and
were it true, shows them to be Vile Men, to be guilty of such Underhand and
Unfair Dealing (Whether it has any Affinity with giving Orders to Treat with
the Complainants Correspondents, as in the 2d Charge appears, the Complainants
leave the Reader to judge) But will it be a Reason because the Complainants (as
Mr. Philipse asserts) are Vile Men, and have dealt Unfairly by Mr. Richbell,
that therefore their Estates should be taken from them, and given to Mr.
Philipse? The Complainants think, it will hardly make a good Title to Mr.
Philipse, nor had he any thing to do with this Matter in this Cause; but if
they had Injured Mr. Richbell thereby, Mr. Richbell was the Only Person to whom
Reparation was due for the Injury. How much the Complainants have Injured Mr.
Richbell, more than the Defendants would have done, appears (in some measure)
by the Defendants dropping it out in this long Story. That they might have had
Mr. Richbell 's whole Right for Four Hundred Pounds; whereas it appears, he has
now got for it, by the Complainants means, hear double that Money.

But to consider this Matter a little closer; Should any Candid Man adventure
to attack another Reputation, upon so slight grounds as the Defendant Philipse
here sets forth, (viz. That he has been Informed, and Thinks; by one of the
Complainants, that base Means were used to cause this Power of Attorney to be
sent Home) without first making all proper Enquiry about the Matter, which he
had the means of doing, the Person empowered being upon the Spot, and might be
enquired of, as to the Truth of this Matter, at any time since? Is that
Insinuation fair, That thy Complainant Quinby could not disown, but it cost him
Money, to get the Power sent home? Mr. Philipse does not say, that ever Quinby
said any thing to that purpose; and if (as the truth is) Quinby never heard of
any such thing, till he found it in this Answer, it certainly was impossible
for him to disown; what he never heard of, or was Taxed with. How could Mr.
Philipse say, from any thing he there sets forth, and without enquiry of the
Perion having the Power, That SURE IT IS, THE SAME WAS RETURNED? The very
nature of the Thing hardly admits of any such Swearing about it; and if ten
Thousand People had told him so, it was not sufficient for him to Swear so
Positively about this Matter; Nay, if even the Person having the Power had said
so, it was not sufficient for him to Swear so.

The Impartial Reader; its conceived, cannot well escape being at a stand what
to think of this SWEARING, but the Complainants Think he will be still more so,
when they do aver, and offer to prove the following Facts to be True 50, 51.
viz. That Mr. Hask^l brought that Power of Attorney over with him from England
to this Place, in the year 1720. 52.
That in a few days after his Arrival, he gave it to Mr. Alexander to transact,
as a Person who was a Council at Law, and had some Knowledge in Land Affairs.
52, 53.
That Mr. Alexander soon after waited on Mr. Courtland with the Power, and
showed him it, who declared, He rather inclined to have the Money due to him,
than to Purchase; but however, said, he would afterward Treat further of the
Matter, either for to settle what was due to him, or to Purchase. That no
further Treaty was ever between them on either of these Heads: Never any
Enquiry whether the Power was still remaining in his Hands. That the Power of
Attorney was never sent Home again; nor was any thing ever said by Mr.
Alexander or Mr. Haskoll, to give any reason to any Body, to believe or
suggest, that it was; that they never heard of such a Suggestion till it was
found to be Sworn in this Answer; But That very Power of Attorney has ever
since remained in Mr. Alexander's Hands here. That Mr. Alexander showed it to
Mr. Murray, who is of Council for Mr. Philipse in this Cause, the first time he
had an opportunity, after he had a sight of Mr. Philipse's Answer, with much
Surprise, that Mr. Philipse should have Swore so! Has showed it to many People
since; Showed it in Court, in Mr. Philipse's Presence, at the Hearing of the
Cause, and has it now in his Hands, where it may be seen by any Body who may
doubt the Truth of these Facts.

The Complainants allow, that such of these Facts as appear not in the Answer
or Deeds confessed, they have not the Liberty of using them as Arguments before
a Court of Judicature in this Cause: Yet, as so great Liberties have been
taken, in inventing and spreading of Falsehoods and Slanders through this
Province, of the Complainants and their Cause, they claim the Privilege of
telling Truth, in Opposition thereto. And if these Truths should be hard to
bear, Mr. Philipse ought to blame the Inventers of these Falsehoods and
Clamours, whoever they be, and not the Complainants, for Opposing them with
Truth, in Self-defence.

This may serve for a Specimen of the Clouds and Colors with which the
Defendants Answer is swelled up to One Hundred and Ninety Nine Sheets, through
which he is very Bountiful in bestowing of Epithets to and of the Complainants.
And for a Taste of them, some of them shall be here set down, 75.
Shifting, Dis-ingenuous 83.
Shifting and Sinister, 84.
Shuffling and Shifting, 151.
Shuffling and Flying off, 89.
Shuffling and Disingenuously, 72.
Juggle Mannagery, 77.
Sinister and odd Dealings, 155.
Importunity Impertinence, 79.
Clumsey, 90.
Poor Scribe. The two ^ast Epithets, the Complainants acknowledge, not to be
said amiss, they being Men who support themselves and Families by the hard
Labor of their Hands, and Sweat of their Brows, and cannot be otherwise than
Clumsey and poor Scribes. As for the rest of the Epithets, they disown them,
leaving them to be bestowed by the Impartial, on those who have the best Right
to them. However, so far they must observe here, upon them, That Mr. Philipse
ought not to take it amiss, if the Complainants have used some Epithets in this
Publication, seeing he himself has Taught them the way of Using them.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE CLAMOURS,
AS to the Clamours themselves, the Complainants think it would be paying them
too much Regard, to set about to answer them one by one, in Print, being well
assured, the Propogators of them (if any Modesty they have remaining) must
Blush when any Man of Sense puts a few Questions to them, such as, How do you
know This? Is this sufficient Reasons for you to believe, and Report this
again? But in general, the Complainants say, That they think all of them, that
concern the Merits of this Cause, will appear sufficiently answered, by what
appears in the Decree, and what is before in the Appendix to it. As to the other
Clamours about this Cause, which touch not the Merits of it, they know none of
them worth Notice, that have any Truth to support them, except One, and that is
about the Height of the Costs of this Cause: As to which, it is true, that the
Bill of Costs offered for Taxation, amounted to Seven Hundred Pounds, which
Bill was moderated to and Taxed at about Four Hundred and Fourteen Pounds,
which its also acknowledged is a great deal of Money for the Costs of one Suit;
but whether the Complainants had not more reason to clamor for this, than Mr.
Philipse, the Reader will be able to judge, when he considers what follows.

The Complainants do conceive, That as Mr. Philipse did endeavor to weary them
out by Numbers of Attendances, in-order for the Settling this Controversy in
an Amicable manner, as in the 4th Charge appears; so likewise his Conduct in
this Suit, gives them sufficient reason to believe, his Aim and View was to
give Delay, and to swell the Proceedings, as much as in his Power, in order to
raise the Charge of this Suit to such a Height, as that either the Complainants
should not be able to carry it on, or to give ground for the Clamours now made
about the Costs.

For, the Bill of Complaint, in this Cause, was filed on the 24th of January,
1725, 6, and the Defendants had even much more Time than, by the (...) of the
Court is allowed to make Answer in; yet when Mr. Philipse was ashamed to ask
more Time of the Court, he prevailed upon the Complainants and their Council,
to give sundry Months longer Time, as by Letters, No. 1, 2 and 3, following,
will appear. And yet, after all that, put the Complainants, at last, to the
Necessity of taking out the Compulsory Process of the Court; by which means the
Complainants were delayed, for want of an Answer, till the 12th of July, 1726.
and then the Defendants gave in an Answer consisting of One Hundred and Ninty
Nine Sheets, whereof the greatest part could be of no other Use than to
Calumniate the Complainants, as by a Specimen of it in the Observations in
General on the Answer, before, in part, appears; in which Answer there was also
a Demurrer, which took long Time to argue, and send for Council for that
purpose. And after the Decree was Pronounced, on the 2d of May, 1727. though the
Defendants Council were often entreated Personally, and by Messengers, to
shorten the Answer, in order to take so much of it only into the Decree as was
of Moment, yet they would neither do it, nor give a Positive Denial, till the
28th of July, when they insisted on having the whole Answer Verbatim, in the
Decree. Whereupon the Complainants Council, suspecting Mr. Philipse's View of
raising a Clamor, from the Height that this would necessarily bring the Costs
to, he made that Frotest in Letter No. 4.

As to Reducing the Bill of Costs from Seven Hundred to Four Hundred Pounds,
its Notorious that the Complainants employed four Council in, this Cause,
whereof Mr. H^^ilton lives in the Province of Pennsilvania, and Mr. Kinsey in
the Province of New Jersey, and yet no Fees were ta^ed but for two Council, and
nothing allowed for these Gentlemen's coming here, who cannot be presumed to
come from these Provinces for a small matter.

Which Matters being considered, the Complainants think, the Candid Reader will
come into the same way of Thinking with them, concerning Mr. Philipse's Delays,
and swelling of the Proceedings, to wit, That they were designed by him either
to disable the Complainants from Prosecuting this Suit, at so great a Charge,
or to furnish him with a matter for Clamor, at the greatness of (...) ^harge.

And it (...) considered also, That the Sum Taxed does not amount to the one
half of the actual Charges the Complainants have been put to, in the
Prosecution of this Suit; and, how little ground Mr. Philipse has for his
Pretenses, which have occasioned this Suit; and, how much Pains the
Complainants have taken to Prevent this Suit, by Amicable means, as all through
the 3d and 4th Charges does appear; No Reasonable Man can but think, that the
Hardship is upon the Complainants, and that they had the most reason to Clamor.

Upon the Whole, Let the Reader Judge, Try and Speak as he finds the Truth is.

The Letters referred to.
Numb. I. To the Honorable Adolph Philipse, Esquire
Honored SIR;
MY Clyents, whom I formerly acquainted, that I had by Consent, enlarged the
Time given you by the Court to Answer in, to the 15th of this Month, upon your
Promise of putting in a full and complete Answer by that Time, and that they
might depend upon it at furthest by the 18th, when, they might come to see it,
and advise what was next to be done: I say, my Clyents whom I so acquainted,
are this Day come here, in full Expectation of seeing your Answer and Mr.
Courtlands, but they are Concerned to find what I told them they might depend
on, not to be so. However, I told them the Reasons which you yesterday
acquainted me with, and of your Desire of Time to the First of May, who, after
some Hes^tation, have given me Leave to acquaint you, That if you will Promise,
upon Honor, for your Self and Mr. Courtland, to give a Full and Perfect Answer
by the first Day of May, They will Delay Compulsory Process till that Time,
Otherwise, forthwith to Proceed; which if you will please to accept of, please
also to subscribe your Acceptance on these Terms, to the Copy of this Letter
here-with sent, and return it by the Bearer hereof. I am,

Honored SIR, Your Humble Servant, Ja. Alexander.
New York, April 20. 1726. I Accept of the Terms proposed.



Numb. II. To James Alexander, Esquire
New York, Friday, 22 April, 1727. SIR;
UPon the Letter you Honored me with, the 20th Instant, I am to assure you,
That I shall by the first of next Month furnish Mr. Murray not only with full
Instructions, to draw Mr. Courtland's Answer, and mine, to the Bill exhibited
by the Palmers, and others, but also with the Deeds, and other Papers necessary
for that Purpose. But whether he can perfect the same by the Fifth of that
Month, I cannot undertake to affirm, though he has promised me, to employ his
Time for that Purpose Only, unless some unfore-seen Matter might interrupt him
therein. I am

SIR, Your Most Humble Servant, AD. Philipse.

Numb. III. To Adolph Philipse, Esquire
New York, June 8. 1726. SIR;
MY Clyents, Quinby, etc. are now in Town, on purpose to see your Answer to
their Bill: To see whom, I am not in a little Confusion and Shame, on your
account; for, as I conceived you of Undoubted Honor, I did not doubt, when I,
by consent, Prolonged the Time given you by the Court, to the Fifteenth of
April, that by the eighteenth your Answer would certainly have been in; and in
Assurance thereof, they came to Town the 20th of April, and were disappointed.
I then, for the Reasons you expressed to me, prevailed on them to give you your
next Demand of Time, which was to give full Instructions, with all your Papers,
to your Council by the first of May, and that Mr. Murray should apply himself
then to it, (...) it was done, which, if possible, was to be on the Fifth. My
Clyents then came on the Fifth to see your Answer, but to their and my
Surprise, you had given but your Instructions the Night before to your Council,
and that only a part of them. My Clyents came last Week to Town, still in
Assurance that the Answer would then be finished, I sent to Mr. Murray for a
sight of so far as was done of it; he Refused it, sending me word, he had not
all your Instructions (which was a further Surprise to me, that what you
Solemnly Promised to do by the first of May, should not be done some Days in
June) and what he had done of it, he must communicate to you. I must say, that
in all my days I have not met with such Triffling, nor never less expected it.
What, to say to my Clyents, I am at a loss, other than to acknowledge, I have
been Triffled with, and that I shall no longer be so abused, but forthwith
begin to proceed, with all the Vigor the Course of the Court can allow of, to
make up for this so much lost Time: If any Objection you have against that
Answer, I shall be glad to know it immediately; for, I every Moment expect them
here. I am, SIR,

Your Humble Servant, Ja. Alexander.

Numb. IV. To Joseph Murray, Esquire
SIR,
I Wish you would have told me before, that you would have the whole Answer of
Courtland and Philipse in the Decree of Palmers against them, which would have
saved us all this Time since Pronouncing of the Decree, which we have waited,
for your pointing out the material parts you would have had in. The taking in
the whole, will be a great Charge, and will fall heavily some where: I really
believe the Charge of the Decree, and Copies that will be necessary, will not
come much short of three or four hundred Pounds, which will, perhaps, be made a
handle of for Clamor, by your Clyents; and I suspect not a little, their
desire of things at length, to be with that View, which, I hereby declare, is
your own faults, and, as much as in me lies, Protest against, and that you are
the cause of such Vast Charge.

I should be glad you would finish what you will say in the Case of (...), I am
Yours,

Ja. Alexander.
New York, July, 28. 1727.
FINIS.

