The Judgments of Providence in the hand of CHRIST: His Voice to us in the
terrible Earthquake. And the Earth devoured by the Curse.

In four SERMONS.

By Benjamin Colman.

Isaiah XXIX. 9. Thou shall be visited of the LORD of hosts with thunder, and
with earthquake and great noise; with storm and tempest, and the flame of
devouring fire.

BOSTON: Printed for J. Phillips at the Stationers-Arms on the South side of
the Town House, and T. Hancock at the Bible and Three Crowns near the Town
Dock, 1727.

Errata.
P. 6. l. 21. r. sit. p. 12. l. 6. for and r. that. p. 14. l. 11. dele and. p.
27. l. 5. r. showed. p. 39. l. 1. r. feeling. p. 41. l. 28. r. pr fane. p. 51.
l. 7. r. he went forth. p. 72. l. 25. r. the Psalm.

To the Reader.
THE late surprising and awful Event of Providence wherein the most High GOD
has passed before us, in an amazing Earthquake, of vast extent and in a degree
of uncommon terror; whether we consider the greatness of the Shock, or the
great noise that attended it; is the occasion of publishing the following
Sermons, though not of the preaching them all.

For within the month wherein the earthquake came I had preached twice to my
People from this awful Subject, The Judgments of Providence in the hand of
CHRIST: to which I added three Sermons more, in a proper and serious
Application of the Subject to so singular and uncommon a Providence; wherein I
have considered the Earthquake in the hand of CHRIST, and what his voice to us
is in that teaching and affecting Dispensation. These five Sermons I have here
reduced into three, only pointing the Reader where he may divide the contracted
double Sermons, for the use and benefit of his household.

It is only the Christian Improvement of this awakning Providence that I have
here attended to, and the Reader is desired to expect no other; leaving the
Enquiry into the natural Causes of Earthquakes, and the History of them, to a
better Hand, which has promised to gratify the Public therewith.

Something of the Scriptural history of the Earthquake is here given, and the
peculiar honor of these Discourses is their sincere Aim to render unto CHRIST
the glory of this tremendous Judgment, and of our Preservation in it.

To HIM therefore let these Meditations be sacred (however mean and unworthy to
be offered to his glorious Name) according to the Commandment and declared Will
of the FATHER to us, Who has committed all judgment to the SON, that all men
should honor the Son even as they honor the father.

Our LORD has visited us this year as he told Ariel, the City where David
dwelt, that it should be visited of the LORD of hosts with Thunder, and with
Earthquake, and with great Noise; with Storm and Tempest, and the flame of
devouring Fire.

The great noise of thunder we have often heard, I hope with trembling and
godly fear, as Elihu did in his day. And we have scarce ever heard more of it
in a summer, than in this which is now past. But we never heard the great noise
of an Earthquake till in the late calm and still night, when it came rushing
and roaring on us in hollow subterraneous thunders, the best and truest
Comparison I can make of it.

As for the flame of devouring fire we had very much of it in the sultry and
parching extreme heat of the summer, of a long continuance, for many weeks
together. This burning drought penetrated far into the earth, so that many
wells and springs of water failed that never had before. Some have been ready
to ask, Whether this might contribute any thing, as a natural cause in the hand
of CHRIST, to the Earthquake that has followed upon the rains and cold of
Autumn, which suddenly set in after so uncommon and long a heat? But when we
search (as I think we must) very deep after the probable natural Cause of so
great a shake, I am constrained to drop this burning (...) on the surface, had
it been more than it was.

In the midst of this sultry heat, and in the Evening after a very parching
day, ( August. 1.) the Heavens broke out into a continued blaze of flame and
roar of thunder, horrible to behold and hear, for two or three hours together.
The flashes of lightning were almost without intermission, and consequently the
peal of thunder perpetual in our ears; As if the heavens being on fire were
dissolving and passing away with a great noise, and the earth also with its
works were to be burnt up. Yet the lightning did little or no hurt that I heard
of.

Forty six days after this, namely on the 16th. of September, the same Almighty
power in like majesty and terror came down to us in the whirlwind and in the
storm, and the clouds were the dust of his feet; He made darkness his secret
place, his pavilion round about him were dark waters and thick clouds of the
skies. The furious wind shivered the mighty oaks and the strong elms, tore off
their vast branches as a man plucks a twig with his hand, and turned up the
wide roots of innumerable trees with all their turf cleaving to them into the
air; a new and strange spectacle of desolation in the fields and woods. Yet it
pleased GOD again to preserve our dwellings and our lives that tempestuous day
and night; Only a family or two suffered by loss of life or broken bones, who
had the due and hearty Sympathy of their spared nei'bours.

And now that after all this flame, thunder and tempest, at the end of forty
three days more, October. 29. we should be visited with a tremendous
Earthquake, has filled the year with so many remarkable threatenings of judgment
as were never known among us before in so short a compass of time. Truly the
LORD has passed by in the great and strong wind, in the flame and earthquake;
and what should follow but his small and still voice in his preached Word? if
we might be so happy and honored of him as to interpret his Providence
aright, and bring his mind and will in such a clear and strong light, as by the
blessing of the HOLY SPIRIT to make suitable and saving impressions upon our
souls.

There is but one doub, in a way of Speculation, that I would here propose, and
in a few words offer to resolve: namely,

Whence might it come to pass, that the late shock of the Earth was felt, and
the noise or roar of the earth heard, in all the very distant places to which
it reached, so far as we can yet learn, at or very near the same moment of time?

I see not how this can be accounted for, but by supposing the whole Shake to
come from one single blast or stroke, in some mighty Cavern at a vast depth in
the earth: Where let us suppose a vast body of prepared sulphurious matter,
like that from whence the lightnings and thunders in our air proceed; or if you
please compare it to that prodigious preparation of man on earth Gunpowder:
Let us imagine a quantity hereof sufficient to shake a Circle of our Earth of
five hundred miles diameter; which I take to be much within the measure of the
Circle shaken by our late Earthquake, which reached from our most northern
bounds as far southward as Philadelphia: Say now that this prodigious quantity
of prepared sulphurous matter take fire all at once, and blow up, tearing to
pieces a vast part of the Intrails of the earth, but chiefly discharging it
self into the mighty Deep below, while at the same time it must also strike
dreadfully upwards, and heave at once the earth of such a circle as is before
named, and set it all a trembling near the same instant of time: But then in
the extremities of the Circle the shake will naturally be less, and toward the
center of it more; and the noise of the blast below will naturally accompany
the shock it gives, and be heard every where in that instant that the shake is
felt, and in proportion to the shock the noise will be in one place and another.

This is my plain and short reasoning upon the point, and I am glad to find I
am not alone in it; supposing the Letter from Marblehead to mean the same
thing, when it says, I am ready to conclude that the shocks were general and at
the same time, and that their direction was from beneath upwards, and not along
the surface of the earth. That this opinion is right seems very evident from
the nature of the thing. For both the shock and sound being almost at the same
time in every place, where it was felt or heard at all, "the direction must be
from beneath upwards, and not along the surface of the earth, as our senses at
the time would have persuaded us.

And accordingly in the extremity of the Circle shaken, for instance at
Philadelphia, the shake and rumble we hear was but small. Moreover, In
proportion to the vast Circle shaken, I conclude we must conceive of the depth
below where the blow was given; and also of the force of the blow it self, as
well as of the vast quantity of matter' fired and blown up: For a shake of such
dimension and to such a degree, is most easily accounted for from a fiery blast.

Every Generation, I suppose, may look for Earthquakes in this Continent; and
in every Century some very great shocks may be reasonably expected. Sixty five
years are now passing since the Land was shook much as it was now: The pewter
fell off the shelves, the joice wro't in and out of the mortices as the houses
rocked, the lids of warming-pans were flung up; passengers on the way were
unable to keep their feet and sat down while the ground heaved them: Something
also of the like noise and rore of the earth accompanied that shake.

Many smaller shakes have been felt since. Greater and more dreadful ones may
be expected, as the Country fills more with sin. For the Great GOD foresees all
the Events of nature in its course, and the Sins of places and people in their
course and increase; and in his most wise and just Government of the World they
exactly tally one with the other, to his infinite glory and everlasting praise
from the Intellectual world.

We may conceive that every such blast from within the bowels of the Earth,
very much thins the crust between the surface whereon we live and the Abyss of
fire below. And the more this is shattered and broken by blasts within, the
nearer is the sinking of the earth, and the eruption of fire, here and there,
by shakes that are to come: The shakes that are still felt in diverse places,
with the rumbling noise accompanying them, seem to me to proceed from the fall
of certain huge pieces of the earth, which the first great shake had loosned,
and the furious flames have since preyed on and torn down. By all of which they
gain more and more upwards. At the Contemplation of these things our flesh may
well tremble because of GOD, and we should be afraid of his judgments.

The visitation by Earthquakes this year seems directed more especially to
Great Britain and its Dominions. The accounts from thence tell us of
Earthquakes there the last July, preceeded by a mighty noise like thunder at a
distance; the houses shook, the walls of gardens rocked like a cradle, the tops
of several chimneys fell; many left their houses in great fear thinking them
falling on 'em, and others were tossed in their beds. What the import of these
things may be to a sinful (otherwise happy) Kingdom, and to these Provinces;
Whether our holy Protestant Religion or our Civil Liberties are to be shaken;
as GOD only knows, so may He avert the Omen. Our part is to make supplication
to our Judge.

To be sure the great Mercy of GOD to us in our Preservation ought greatly to
affect us, and never be forgotten. I have endeavored to give this a due place
and consideration in the following Discourse; and the Subject naturally led to
it, the Judgment and the Salvation coming from the same hand of our Lord
Redeemer.

That He may sanctify to us all his Dispensations, every Mercy and every
Judgment, and bless this humble Offering to that saving effect, is the Prayer
of the unworthy Author.

B. Colman.
Boston Nov. 2^. 1727.
The Judgments of Providence in the hand of CHRIST.
Ezekiel X. 2. And he spoke unto the Man clothed with linen, and said, Go in
between the Wheels, even under the Cherub, and fill thy hand with coals of fire
from between the Cherubims, and scatter them over the City: And he went in in
my sight.


FOR the understanding these dark and awful words we must know, 1. who the Man
is here spoken to, clothed with linen; 2. who speaks to him; and then 3.
consider the meaning of the thing commanded him and done by him.

1. The Man here spoken unto, clothed with linen, is no other than the Man
CHRIST JESUS; the eternal Son of God appearing in fashion as a man; that Son of
man whom the FATHER has made strong for himself, and who is now set down on
the right hand of GOD, our High priest and King, both to make intercession and
also to execute judgment.

We read of the same Man before presiding over the executioners of the wrath
and judgments of God; Chap. 9.2. And behold six men came from the north, every
man with his slaughter weapon in his hand, and One man among them was clothed
with linen. HE was not one of the six, but they were ministers and servants
under Him, and obeyed his orders. Here are six Angels the ministers of the GOD
MAN Mediator, hearkening to the voice of his word, to do his pleasure while he
performs the whole counsel and purpose of GOD.

In the ninth Chapter this glorious Person clothed in linen is the minister of
mercy, v. 4. employed to go through the city and to set his mark on the men that
sighed and cried for the Abominations done therein. In this tenth Chapter he
appears as the minister of GOD's vengeance, as will presently be seen. And
these two are indeed the sum of those Offices which CHRIST executes as
Mediator between GOD and man: He effectually saves the Elect of GOD from sin
and wrath, and then he executes judgment on all the rest, who will not be saved
from sin by him.

CHRIST appears here in his priestly Office, clothed in linen; for the Priests
of old were so clothed; the white linen being significant of purity and
holiness; their profession thereof, and their bonds to it. The spotless
holiness and shining righteousness of CHRIST is the thing here represented. As
we read, Revel. 19.8. The fine linen is the righteousness of the saints. But
here the linen clothing is the righteousness of the Holy JESUS himself. He
clothes believers in his own righteousness, and makes them priests to GOD, and
they shall walk with him in white.

CHRIST is here a priest upon his throne, the judge and the priest together.
This is the Man, the sinless man, more than a man.

2. This Man is spoken to: HE spoke unto the Man clothed with linen and said.
It is God the Father, the supreme Majesty, who here speaks to CHRIST, as his
Servant whom he upholds, his Elect in whom his heart delights. The voice and
words came from the Throne, says the first verse. Then I looked (says the
Prophet) and behold in the firmament that was above the head of the Cherubims,
there appeared over them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the
likeness of a THRONE; and HE spoke unto the man clothed in linen, etc. That
is, the enthroned MAJESTY in the heavens, HE spoke: GOD THE FATHER Almighty he
spoke to his Only begotten Son, the Man CHRIST JESUS. And now

3. Let us hear the things said, and let him that hears understand: Go in
between the wheels, even under the cherub, and fill thine hand with coals of
fire from between the cherubims, and scatter them over the city.

You must know that the day of the destruction of Jerusalem was now at hand,
even the burning of the City and Temple by the army of the king of Babylon.
Zedekiah was now king of the remnant of Judah, his reign was short and his
ruin at hand; and the destruction of the city by fire is the thing here
represented and foretold. Burnt it was by Nebuzaradan captain of the guard, but
who did it? why CHRIST the king and judge of the church and of the world. The
Man the ordained judge, he goes in between the wheels; for he turns them all,
high and dreadful as they are; He filled his hands with coals of fire from
between the cherubims, for they had profaned his altars and his temple; and
then he scattered the coals over the defiled city and sanctuary, which was once
Holiness to the LORD.

It was CHRIST's own hand did it: The flaming brands in the hand of the
Chaldeans were the coals in his hand: They did but perform His holy word and
will and dreadful pleasure. They were the staff of his indignation.

Finally observe, how readily and fully CHRIST executes the will of the FATHER
in them whom he saves, and in them that perish. Has the FATHER said to Him, "
Go set a mark on such and such to save them? He does it: Ezekiel. 9.11. And the
man clothed with linen reported the matter, saying, I have done as thou have
commanded me. Or does the FATHER say to CHRIST, "Go set the city in flames? He
does it; The Prophet saw him go; He went in (says he) in my sight. See also the
6 and 7 verses.

Now the thing to be remarked is, That the burning coals, the dispensation of
Judgments, are put into the hand of the Man clothed with linen, and scattered
by Him: Which teaches us this Doctrine -- "That the present Judgments of
Providence are put into the hand of CHRIST, and come forth from his hand.

But when I say the Judgments of Providence, it cannot be meant in exclusion of
the dispensations of Mercy and Grace; which as they do equally belong to the
kingdom of Providence, so the administration of them is equally in the hand of
CHRIST. Nor when we say that the dispensation both of mercy and of judgment is
from the hand of the LORD JESUS, can this be understood in exclusion of, or
derogation from the FATHER and the HOLY GHOST, as if the kingdom of Providence
were not always in their glorious hand: For the glorious Persons in the GODHEAD
are one in essence and in operation. And although there is a special Mediatorial
Kingdom committed to the SON, which takes in the whole Administration of the
kingdom till the consummation of all things, when the whole mystery of GOD
shall be finished; yet the FATHER works hitherto in and by the SON, and so
does the HOLY GHOST with and from Him; and this in a way of Sovereign dominion.
1 Cor. 12.11. All these works that one and selfsame SPIRIT, dividing to every
man severally as He will.

The SPIRIT of GOD is therefore represented as guiding all the motions of
Providence, together with the SON OF MAN, in the visions which Ezekiel had of
the living creatures and of the wheels, Chap. 1.12, 19, 20. The living
creatures (i. e. the Cherubims or Angels, ministers in the executing of the
Divine will) went straight forward whither the SPIRIT directed them; and the
wheels (the course of nature) followed them: Whithersoever the SPIRIT went,
they went; for the SPIRIT of life (so the Hebrew is) was in the wheels. So that
we do not exclude the agency, power and sovereign influence of the HOLY SPIRIT,
in the judgments or mercies of Providence, when we say that these are put, into
the hand of CHRIST; For the Man clothed with linen is in the midst of the same
Wheels together with the SPIRIT of life; And while the SPIRIT lifts up the
wheels, and the Cherubims act under his immediate direction; lo above the
firmament appears the Throne, and the likeness of a Man upon it, with a
rainbow over his head, and fire from his loins down-ward. Ezekiel. 1.27, 28.

Having premised this guard on the sacred Truth before us, I come now to the
proof and illustration of it, in the plainest manner I can. And because it is a
Truth known only by Revelation, and capable only of Scripture proof, I shall
therefore argue 1. from Scripture affirmations, 2. from Visionary
Representations, 3. from Instances or Facts related, 4. from other great
Doctrines of Christianity which infer the Truth I am upon; scil, "That the
judgments of Providence are put into the hand of CHRIST, and come forth from
his hand.


I. I argue from plain Scripture affirmations. And such I take the following
places to be: Psalm 2. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion: I will
declare the decree; the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my SON, this day have
I begotten thee: Ask of me and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession: Thou
shall break them with a rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a
potters vessel. Be wise now therefore O ye kings, be instructed ye judges of
the earth: serve the LORD with fear and rejoice with trembling: Kiss the SON,
lest he be angry and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a
little: Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. The sum of this Psalm
is CHRIST's dominion over the kingdoms of men and his judgments on them. In
vain do the rulers or people of them take counsel together, and rage against
the LORD, and against his ANOINTED: He shall speak to them in his wrath and vex
them in his sore displeasure.

The like to this is the 110. Psalm: The LORD said to my LORD, set thou at my
right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool: The LORD shall send the
rod of thy strength out of Zion; rule thou in the midst of thy enemies: -- Thou
art a priest and king for ever, at my right hand, and shall strike through kings
in the day of thy wrath; shall judge among the heathen, and wound the heads
over many countries. Here the judgments of Providence are put into CHRIST's
hand, in words as plain and full as can well be uttered.

At his first manifestation to Israel, John the baptist told them that his Fan
was in his hand: Matthew. 3.12. And He himself said to them For judgment am I
come. Luke 12.49. I am come to send fire upon earth; and what will I if it be
already kindled? In what a sovereign manner is this said? as indeed having the
coals of fire in his hand, to scatter them where he would. Agreeably he said
again, All power is given to me in heaven and on earth. This power must take in
that of all the present judgments of Providence. As he told the Jews, John.
5.22, 27. That the FATHER had committed all judgment to the SON, and given him
authority to execute judgment, now and hereafter, because he was the Son of
man. The same thing is in effect said over and over to the Christian Churches
in the second and third Chapters of the Revelations of St. John. All these are
plain Affirmations that the judgments of Providence are in the hand of CHRIST,
and come forth from his hand.

II. We have visionary Representations of this in the Book of God. My text is
such, wherein is represented to the Prophet under the form of a Man clothed in
linen with his hands full of burning coals, the burning of Jerusalem by the
power and vengeance of CHRIST. And in the first Chapter of this Prophecy we
have the same Vision of a Man upon a Throne, over and above the Cherubims and
the wheels, with a rainbow of peace over him, and yet from his loins downward
a burning fire. The fire is as much the token of judgment and wrath, as the
rainbow is of grace and mercy: And the MEDIATOR cannot be truly represented to
us but by both together; being equally glorious in his holiness and mercy. He
is clad with zeal as with a cloak, while he is arrayed in the garments of
salvation. The fire about the loins of the Son of man is alike significant of
his executing judgment, as the coals in his hand.

Nebuchadnezzar saw him in the form of a Stone cut out of the mountain without
hands, which smote the Image of Idolatry and brake it in pieces, and it self
became a great mountain and filled the whole earth. Dan. 2.44.

Zechariah saw a Man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle
trees which were in the bottom, and behind him a troop or host of horse, red
speckled and white: i. e. Angels the executioners of God's purposes, whether in
a way of judgment, noted by the red, or in a way of mercy signified by the
white, or of a mixed nature, noted by the speckled.

But these visionary representations of the Son of man with the judgments of
Providence in his hand are more abundant in the Book of the Revelations. So
John saw him in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, his feet as if they
burned in a furnace, and his voice as the sound of many waters, and out of his
mouth a sharp sword.

In the 19. Chap. of that book, John saw a Man upon a white horse, and in
righteousness he does judge and make war: His eyes were as a flame of fire, and
on his head were many Crowns, and he was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood,
and his Name is called the WORD OF GOD: And the armies in heaven follow him,
clothed in fine linen white and clean, -- Lo the livery of CHRIST, which the
heavenly hosts wear, the executioners of his judgments upon men, such as
becomes his righteous and spotless administration. As He himself is clothed
with linen, so his armies follow him in fine and white linen. Did you ever
hear of an Army so clothed before? an army of Angels and holy ones! of pure and
spotless Spirits, the ministers of his holy judgments!

III. I come now to give you some Scripture Instances, or Facts related, in
which CHRIST has appeared unto men with the Judgments of Providence in his
hand. And I will take these sacred Stories in their order, as they ly in the
Book of GOD.

The first is the Judgment of GOD on wicked Sodom: With respect to which we
read of three men (i. e. two Angels attending CHRIST their Lord and ours) who
appeared to Abraham in the plains of Mamre, as he sat in his tent-door, in the
heat of the day. Genesis 18.1. Abraham as soon as he saw them ran to meet them,
bowing himself to the earth; and perceiving that One of the three appeared much
the Superior of the other two, he addressed himself in a particular manner, and
with a more especial reverence to Him, and said, My Lord, If now I have found
grace in thy sight, pass not I pray thee from thy servant. It was this Chief of
the heavenly Guests that said to Abraham, v. 10. I will certainly return unto
thee according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a Son: At the hearing
of which when Sarah laughed, it is said v. 13. And the LORD said to Abraham,
Why did Sarah laugh? So that this Person was the LORD himself, in fashion as a
Man; and the other two were Angels, his servants and ministers, who waited on
him in this his descent to our earth.

But there was a more special reason of His coming down, and theirs with Him,
than this visit to Acraham; as it presently appeared. For as Abraham bro't them
on their way after their courteous visit was over, the LORD sent the two Angels
on their way to Sodom, to deliver righteous Lot and to burn up the cities of
that polluted plain; But he stopped short Himself, and told Abraham how great the
cry of the sin of Sodom was before him. Then Abraham stood before the LORD, and
drew near to him, and made, that most awful and reverend Intercession for mercy
on the wicked place, which will be famous in the Church for ever; And the LORD
granted him his petition till he could not presume to ask further. And then the
LORD went his way, and Abraham returned to his place.

The mean while the heavenly Messengers reached Sodom, and found as we all
know, and the next morning the LORD rained brimstone and fire from the LORD out
of heaven. Genesis 19.24. The Lord the SON rained the fire from the Lord the
FATHER, who works by the Son. It was not the two Angels that rained the fire;
No, It was the LORD who stood with Abraham when these went on their way. It was
the Lord CHRIST, and He did it from the FATHER, who has committed all judgment
to him.

Here now was my Text exemplified in the very letter of it. Those burning coals
of fire which were scattered over the cities of the valley in Abraham's time,
came from the hand of the SON OF GOD, the Man CHRIST JESUS. That fiery judgment
and desolation, the image of the devouring eternal fire and everlasting
burnings, came from those gracious arms which had just before embraced Abraham,
and all his spiritual Seed in him. -- Go, said the FATHER to Him, go in between
the wheels, the high and dreadful wheels of my all-governing Providence, and
fill thy hand with fire and brimstone, and scatter it down in a rain of furious
flames upon the accursed cities, and burn them up together: And it was done.

The same hand that burnt Sodom, the Alient from his Covenant, did afterward
burn Jerusalem, the holy City.

This instance alone is a sufficient Illustration of my text, and a
Demonstration of the Truth before us, That the Judgments of Providence are in
CHRIST's hand, and come from Him.

But I come to a second Instance, which is the Judgment of GOD upon the wicked
Cananites, the Nations which GOD rooted out by fire and sword before the
Children of Israel. I might have named the plagues that destroyed Egypt; for it
was CHRIST who appeared to Moses in the bush on fire and sent him to Pharaoh.
But the latter instance of his appearance to Joshua before Jericho may suffice,
because the vision which he then had sufficiently tells us from whose hand the
destructions of Egypt, and all the Judgments on Israel in the wilderness, had
come. For to be sure the same hand that destroyed the Cananites executed also
the other judgments.

Now the story of CHRIST's appearing to Joshua with the judgments of Providence
in is hand, you have in the 5. Chap. v. 13, 14, 15. And it came to pass when
Joshua was by Jerico, that he lift up his eyes and looked, and behold there
stood a MAN over against him, with his sword drawn in his hand, and Joshua went
unto him and said, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? And He said, Nay,
but as Captain of the Host of the Lord am I now come. And Joshua fell on his
face to the earth and did worship, and said unto Him, What says my LORD unto
his servant? And the Captain of the Lord's Host said to Joshua, Loose thy shoe
from off thy foot, for the place whereon thou stand is holy: And Joshua did
so.

Here was a Man in form, but more than a man, the mighty SON OF GOD himself,
who afterward took our flesh, and took the name of Joshua, JESUS, a Savior,
the Captain of our salvation. He is the Captain of all the Lord's hosts, in
heaven above and on earth below; the King of Israel, and Joshua's Lord. He
appeared here with a drawn sword in his hand, for the defense of his Church and
for the slaughter of their enemies.

Joshua fell on his face and worshipped him, as Abraham had done in his day
with fear and trembling. And because he permitted this, we know certainly that
he was no mere Angel of God; for then he would have forbid it. But this Man in
appearance received the profound worship of Abraham, and required it from
Joshua, who fell prostrate before him with awful reverence, faith, love,
attention and ready obedience; and said unto Him, What says my LORD unto his
servant? It became him to fall, and say thus, before the LORD OF HOSTS and Him
only. Just as when GOD called to Moses out of the bush, the servant hid his
face, for he was afraid to look upon GOD.

It was the same GOD of Israel who now appeared to Joshua in the form of a Man,
and had appeared to Moses in the form of devouring fire. We know him to be the
same GOD, because the same word of command is given to Joshua that was before
given to Moses, Put off thy shoe from thy foot, for the place whereon thou
stand is holy.

Doubtless as soon as Joshua heard these words, he knew that it was the same
LORD GOD whom his master Moses had seen at Horeb; even the GOD of Abraham, of
Isaac and of Jacob. See Exodus 3.4, 5.

But why did He now appear to Joshua? It was to execute judgment, the wrath of
God upon the nations of Canaan, whose iniquity was now full. He threw down the
wall of Jerico, and commanded it to be burnt with fire. A sword or a coal in
his hand is the same thing. He filled his hand with judgments, and made Joshua
the dreadful executioner of them upon all the devoted nations of that goodly
Country. It is the vision of the same JESUS, Revel. 19.13. with his drawn sword
and vesture dipped in blood, who will hereafter burn the Romish Jerico; when all
the fowl that fly in the midst of heaven shall be called to the supper of the
great GOD, to eat the flesh of Kings and the flesh of Captains, and of mighty
men, and of all men, both bond and free, small and great. Then the Cananites
shall be a second time rooted out with great fury, and the Church of GOD a
second time shall enter into rest, be enlarged and edified. Even so LORD JESUS
come quickly.

Sermon II.
I Go on to a third instance or narrative of CHRIST's appearing with the
Judgments of Providence in his hand, namely to Gideon against the Midianites;
Judges 6.12, 13, 14. And the Angel of the LORD appeared unto him, and said unto
him, The LORD is with thee, thou mighty man of valor! And Gideon said unto
him, O my Lord, if the LORD be with us, why then is all this befallen us? etc.
And the LORD looked on him and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shall save
Israel from the hand of the Midianites: Have not I sent thee?

The LORD looked on him and said, HAVE NOT ISENT THEE? If it had not been for
those words, we might have taken the heavenly Appearance for a common Angel;
but from them we perceive plainly that it was the LORD CHRIST himself, the
Angel of the Covenant, the SON OF GOD, in the likeness of man.

And what came he for? but to judge the enemies of his people, and to send
Gideon to destroy them. He commissioned him in his own name; Have not I sent
thee? and inspired him with a look.

The Angel is called JEHOVAH, v. 14. Jehovah looked on him. I AM sent him: The
same Angel of the LORD who called to Moses out of the burning bush. He put a
lamp of fire into Gideon's hand and gave him the Word, The sword of the LORD
and of Gideon. -- So in all the Judgments on the enemies of the Church, in
ancient or later times, there has been the hand of CHRIST.

But I come to the New Testament, and mean only to point unto a few instances,
and not enlarge on them. -- When our LORD appeared in the flesh, he showed that
he had the power of Judgment committed to him. The devils owned his power, and
beso't him not to torment them before their time. The Gadarenes saw and felt
his power to judge them, when he permitted the devils to enter into the herd of
swine, and the whole herd ran violently down a steep place and perished in the
waters. Matthew. 8.32. It was an awful thing to behold, and and a severe judgment
they thought upon their country. The disciples were so sensible that the power
of judgment rested on CHRIST, that when some looked with disrespect on him and
would not receive him, they asked him, Lord will thou that we command fire from
heaven to destroy them? Luke 9.54. But the Son of man came not to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. It was not the time for Judgment when he was here on
earth. He used this power sparingly in the days of his flesh. He filled his
hands with mercy and scattered it about on all the miserable that came in his
way. -- He had the power of life and death while he lived here, and when he
went to die. He struck none dead, but he raised some to life. He told Peter by
what kind of death he should glorify GOD; but when Peter asked, what should
become of John? the LORD answered him in a sovereign manner, If I will that he
tarry till I come, what is that to thee?

When JESUS was ascended and glorified he showed his Church that he exercised
the power of judgment over men. The death of Ananias and Sapphira was a fearful
instance of it: And so was the blow on Elima^ the Sorcerer. Act 13.11.

To name no more, The second burning of Jerusalem was from the hand of CHRIST.
When the Romans compassed the City, it was the sign of the Son of man from
heaven. Luke 21.20, 27. Twice has the Man clothed with linen, the great
High Priest of the Church and Judge of the world, filled his hand with coals
and burnt Jerusalem.

Let this suffice for the third Illustration and proof of the Doctrine, That
the judgments of Providence are in CHRIST's hand. These are so many facts and
instances from sacred story.

IV. The sacred Doctrines of Christianity do infer and confirm this truth. I
will name two only, and but name them.

1. The GODHEAD of CHRIST infers this, That the judgments of Providence are in
his hand. For can he be GOD and this glory not belong to him? According to
those words of GOD concerning Himself; Is there any evil in the city and the
LORD has not done it? See now that I, even I am He, and there is no GOD with
me! I kill and I make alive, I wound and I heal.

I might argue from the nature, end, extent and duration of the Mediatorial
Kingdom, that CHRIST is GOD over all, and that all judgment is in his hand. The
end of it is to recover the elect of GOD out of that state of sin and misery
into which they fell by Adam's transgression, into a state of holiness and
happiness for evermore; and to execute judgment (the vengeance of a holy and
righteous GOD) upon all such as will not accept of his offered grace, and
submit to the terms of his mercy. Now in order to this the kingdom, power and
rule put into the Mediator's hand must be universal and everlasting as to this
world of ours: all things must be put into his hand and under his feet, and he
must reign till all his enemies are made his footstool. -- So that whether we
consider CHRIST in his GODHEAD, or in his Mediatorial dignity and offices, the
Kingdom of Providence and the Judgment of Providence must be in his hand.

2. The general Judgment of the world at the last day being committed to
CHRIST, necessarily supposes that the present judgments of Providence are so.
That CHRIST is the Judge of quick and dead at the great Day, is one of the
clearest Doctrines of the New Testament See Mat. XXv. 31, 32. Acts XVII. 31. 2
Cor. v. 10. 2 Thessalonians I. 7, 8.
: Then the Son of man shall come in his glory with all his holy Angels, and
before him shall be gathered all nations: The Lord JESUS shall be revealed from
heaven in flaming fire taking vengeance. The present judgments of Providence
are but previous and preparatory for this final Judgment. That is but the
period and consummation of these; the last and most eminent act of his
Regality, and display of his judicial power; at the close whereof he will
surrender the Kingdom to the FATHER. 1 Cor. 15.28.

Indeed these great and sacred Doctrines of Christianity, like Truth which is
uniform, do infer and prove one another. If CHRIST be GOD he must have the
power of Judgment, present and future. If he have this power truly he is the
SON OF GOD, and all men must honor Him even as they honor the FATHER. Again,
If the present judgments of Providence are in his hand, no doubt but he is the
ordained Judge in the last day: And if the General judgment be committed to
Him, no wonder that the present executing of judgment is so.

But this for the Proof of the Doctrine: I come to the Application and Use of
it.

And first in a more general manner I shall hint at many things, which in the
choice of the Subject I designed to have enlarged on; and then secondly I shall
enlarge on a more particular Application, which could not be foreseen and
designed, but Providence has cast it in our way, and loudly calls to it in the
late awful and threatening Earthquake.

We have seen the united Glories of Majesty and Holiness in the Person and
Offices of our LORD Redeemer. We see that He is GOD and JUDGE, who is our
Savior. We see the evil (the great evil) of sin and sinners, from the terrible
Judgments and punishments that come from the hand of CHRIST himself. We see
that though He be gracious and merciful and abundant in goodness, yet he will by
no means clear the guilty and impenitent. We see the reason of the great
patience, forbearance and longsuffering of GOD to provoking sinners; It is
CHRIST the Savior who thus waits to be gracious to them, not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. We see the safety of
believers in the power of Judgment committed to CHRIST; his Saints are in one
hand while the burning coals are in the other: As he took a most gracious care
of Lot in the day of Sodom, and as he marked out the humble and penitent for
Salvation in my context, before he took a coal in his hand for the destruction
of the wicked.

If the Judgments of Providence are in CHRIST's hand and come from his hand, He
then is the object of our fear, our trust, our prayer and praise. He is to be
feared for his power, holiness, justice and goodness. Will thou not be afraid
of the Power? He is the Minister of GOD to execute vengeance. It is a fearful
thing to fall into his living hands. The forgiveness which is with him commands
our fear, for it comes to us in the way of glorious holiness and justice. Psalm.
2. ult. Serve the LORD with fear, and rejoice with trembling; kiss the SON lest
he be angry and ye perish from the way; -- Blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.

Again, We may be sure there is as much Mercy in all the judgments of
Providence, as is consistent with rectoral Wisdom and righteous Government. So
it was in the judgment of the old World, of Sodom, of the Canaanites, and
afterward of Jerusalem. And so it is in the executions of wrath upon particular
persons, while in the afflictions of the Godly there is abundance of mercy and
love.

No wonder that afflictions are made saving to men, means of grace and holiness
to them; since the Judgments of Providence are in the hand of CHRIST. Why else
should they be put into the hand of a holy Savior, but to be made blessed and
effectual means of sanctification and salvation to souls?

And no wonder then that we are so strictly required to be patient, silent,
resigned in all our afflictions; yea thankful and joyful in our tribulations.
For can a Believer acting like himself do otherwise, when he considers every
dispensation of Providence coming from the same merciful hands of CHRIST, which
were once stretched on the cross and peirced for his salvation? He that judges
and corrects us is the LORD that has loved us and died for us; and shall we not
with Aaron hold our peace? and with Job still bless his name?

And if death comes to thee or thine, do we not know that the key of it is in
CHRIST's hand? He will order for the best all that concerns the living and the
dying of his chosen and called ones; And what should calm and moderate a
Christian's grief like this, "It is CHRIST has done it?

But while it comforts us it must also humble us, to consider that our many and
great afflictions come from the hands of CHRIST. How awful is it to a believer
on JESUS to think, -- Are the judgments of Providence in His hand, and I so
judged by him? O how my LORD convinces me of sin! how evil am I in his holy
eyes! What have I done to offend and provoke a gracious Savior? how vile and
odious are my sins to him, and should be to me! what a corrupt nature have I
that needs all this correction! that I must be saved so as by fire! O what
would have become of me long ago, if the judgments of GOD had been in any other
hand but that of my Lord REDEEMER! Therefore it is that I am not consumed!

Once more O afflicted child of GOD, think whose hand it is that corrects thee:
Is it CHRIST's? then it is more and better than any friend's, or brother's, or
father's hand: And will thou not be in a quiet subjection? shall we murmur
against CHRIST? as they of old murmured, and were destroyed by him? Alas! they
knew not the hand that proved them, as we do: They saw him in types and
shadows, but we see him in a Gospel light. The end of afflictions must be very
gracious to Believers, and the fruit of them happy. CHRIST, whose care and
charge they are, will see to this. It is the very work of a Savior to see to
it: Faithful is he that has called you, who also will do it.

The majesty and judgment of CHRIST is only terrible to unbelieving and
impenitent sinners; and to them it may well be the more terrible to see the
wrath in the face of the LAMB. For if He judge them, who shall pity or save
them? GOD has put this honor and majesty on him that his right hand may find
out all his enemies, all that hate him: He will make them as a fiery oven in
the time of his anger; He will swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall
devour them: Be theu exalted LORD in thy own strength, so will we sing and
praise thy power.

Finally, In all our approaches to CHRIST in his holy Institutions This part of
the Discourse was preached before the Sacrament of the LORD's SUPPER.
, it should strike us with exceeding awe and reverence to consider the Majesty
and power, the holiness and justice of CHRIST. Reverend is his Name! With him
is terrible majesty. He struck Nadab and Abihu with his fire from between the
Cherubims. He will be sanctified in them that draw nigh him. He is greatly to
be feared in the Assemblies of his saints. Keep thy foot therefore and prepare
thy heart, for the place where thou stand is holy.

Christ expects that we should worship him with great reverence because he is
our Judge. Psalm. 50.1, -- 5.99.1, -- 5.

Particularly in the Ordinance of the SUPPER. our Lord JESUS exhibits himself
to us with the judgments of Providence in his hand. Read the awful words of
this import, 1. Cor. 11.28, -- 32. But let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks JUDGMENT to himself, not discerning the LORD's
body. For this cause many are WEAK and SICKLY among you, and some SLEEP. For if
we would JUDGE our selves we should not be JUDGED. But when we are JUDGED we
are chastened of the LORD that we should not be condemned with the world.

You see that the Apostle is speaking here of temporal judgments, which the
LORD inflicted on the Corinthians for their strange irreverence and carnality
in their participation of the holy Supper. They eat and drank not discerning
the LORD's body; therefore they eat and drank judgment to themselves. -- But
what was the judgment? why for this cause many were sick and weak among them.
-- And yet as to some of them these judgments were not in wrath, but in mercy;
For when they were judged they were but chastned of the LORD (to humble and
reform them) that they should not be condemned with the would. -- Wherefore
here was CHRIST, even at his Table, as the King come in to see his guests, with
the Judgments of Providence in his hand. But this not to deter us from the
Ordinance, but to quicken us in our preparations for it; and to encourage the
faithful in their humility and godly fear as they are going thither. Let us
behold the Majesty of CHRIST both in his Providence and Ordinance together, and
be the more reverend in our obedience to him and worship of him. Here this
Discourse may be divided.


I come now to that particular Application of the Doctrine, which the Divine
Providence leads me into by the terrible EARTHQUAKE, which we have lately felt
with so much surprise and consternation. And a very natural Inference it is,
"That if the Judgments of Providence are in the hand of CHRIST and come forth
from his hand, Then from HIM came the awful warning and threatening of
Providence to us in the late fearful Earthquake, and to HIM we are indebted for
the gracious and merciful preservation which we then received. Both the
threatening and the preservation came to us from the holy, mighty, terrible and
merciful hand of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST. He shook the earth under us
in that awful manner, and to that fearful degree, which we lately felt; and He
kept it from rending and cleaving asunder under us, so that we and all that
appertains to us were not swallowed up quick. It should be very affecting to us
to realize such a Providence and dispensation as coming from the hand of CHRIST
himself.

HE the Man clothed with linen, with his hand full of burning coals, holds the
earth and the waters and the winds in the same hand; and this Earth of ours
never feels any shock, convulsion or rending by fires, winds or waters, from
without or from within it self, but as he orders and appoints the same. We are
expressly taught concerning CHRIST, That He upholdeth all things by the word of
his power, and that by Him all things consist. Coloss 1.14, -- 17. In whom we
have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins: For by Him were
all things created that are in heaven and that are in earth; visible and
invisible; whether they be thrones or dominions, or principalities, or powers;
all things were created by him and for him; And He is before all things, and by
Him all things consist. Hebrews 1.1, 2, 3. GOD has in these last days spoken
to us by his SON, whom he has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he
made the worlds; Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image
of his Person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had
by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.

Thus the Universe is kept together by the SON OF GOD in its proper frame,
which it received from Him. "All things subsist in their being, and consist in
their order and dependencies by his will and word. In his hand are the deep
places of the earth, the strength of the hills is his also. Our earth is held
by him in its place and motion, from falling to pieces and returning into the
Original Chaos, out of which it was bro't into this beauteous and useful order
of things. -- All the Elements are in the hand of CHRIST, and though contrary and
jarring in themselves, yet there they agree, are still and at peace. Fire and
water, vapor and stormy wind are in absolute subjection and obedience to him,
fulfilling his word.

-- And particularly Earthquakes proceed from the burning coals in his hand,
the subterraneous fires and winds belong to these; and he blows them up when
and where and as he pleases, more or less in the caverns of the earth, and puts
all within into a ferment, and the earth heaves and rolls and bursts asunder.

But let us more particularly consider, 1. The Threatening from the hand of
CHRIST, and 2. the Preservation from the same glorious Hand.


1. The THREATENING of a sudden and amazing destruction to us, in the late most
serene night (turned into a night of darkness and horror to us in a moment) was
from the hand of CHRIST our Savior.

I have proved this in the foregoing Discourse, when we little apprehended
that CHRIST was coming suddenly so very near to our own doors in a horrible
Earthquake.

I told you that it was CHRIST came down to Sodom, and rained the fire
(scattered the coals) on Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, from the LORD out of
heaven. He then also rent that ground to pieces on which those polluted Cities
had stood, and from the deep which lies under he bro't up a flood of water,
and quenched the flames that had burnt up the wicked, and turned that once rich
and pleasant vale into a standing filthy lake, or dead sea. The SON OF GOD came
down in the form of a Man, ( Abraham saw Him) and executed that judgment: The
accursed places sunk under his feet, and a flood rose and covered them from
mortal eyes for ever.

I have also said before how the same Lord CHRIST came down in the day of
Joshua, the fatal day of accursed Jerico, and produced another Earthquake, or
what was like it and equal to it. Joshua saw a Man with his sword drawn, but he
sound him to be a GOD, with the fires and winds of vengeance in his hand,
prepared against the enemies of his Church and people. The fire he put into
Joshua's hand and ordered the devoted City to be burnt as soon as he should
take it; but the subterraneous wind he kept in the hollow of his own hand, and
on the seventh day, at the seventh compassing the city, the Priests blew with
their rams-horns, and the hand of CHRIST (probably an Earthquake at his special
command) threw down the walls of Jerico in an instant; all but the house of
Rahab, who by faith had received his servants and protected them.

Thus CHRIST was in the Earthquake at Sodom, and at the falling of the wall of
Jerico; and every other shake of the earth, whether before or after those
times, have come from the same hand.

For instance, The earthquake at the time of Noah's flood (if we may so speak)
when the foundations of the great Deep were broken up, was the Judgment of
CHRIST upon the world of the ungodly. It was as much so as the Conflagration,
or the perishing of the world by fire at the last day, will be from the coals
in CHRIST's hand. The same Judge, and the same Power and vengeance which once
came by water, will hereafter be revealed in flaming fire.

The earthquake at Sinai was from the presence of CHRIST and his immediate
hand, who came down then in the glory of the FATHER, as he will do another day,
with his holy Angels, in devouring fire, and the mount quaked greatly. Exodus
20.18. The Chariots of GOD were twenty thousand (even chariots of fire)
thousands of Angels, and the LORD was among them. The mountain melted before
Him, even that Sinai. Judge. 5.5. The Apostle to the Hebrews tells us that it
was CHRIST's voice which then shook the earth, who has promised saying, Yet
once more I shake not the earth only, but heaven also. Heb. 12.26.

CHRIST was the LORD GOD of Elijah, and in the spirit of that Prophet his
Forerunner came. He came to his servant once in a whirlwind, and in an
earthquake, and in devouring fire. You have the representation of this fearful
thing, I Kings 19.11, 12. And behold the LORD passed by, and a great and strong
wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the LORD; but the
LORD was not in the wind: And after the wind an earthquake, but the LORD was
not in the earthquake: And after the earthquake a fire; but the LORD was not in
the fire: And after the fire a still small voice: And it was so, when Elijah
heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle and went out. How terrible was
this appearance of CHRIST unto his Prophet? Who without a divine support could
abide the indignation, and the tokens of so tremendous a Majesty and of the
fierceness of his anger? His fury was poured out like fire, and the rocks were
thrown down by him. (To apply here the majestic words of the Prophet Nahum.) --
But how is it said, That the LORD was not in the rending wind or earthquake?
Who was in it, but the LORD himself? -- It means not that the special and
immediate hand of CHRIST was not therein: No, it only means "That he did not
manifest his presence by any distinct voice (the small and still voice of a
Man) in that wind and fire and earthquake, as he afterward did in the calm that
succeeded. So Elijah beheld the glory of CHRIST, in all the terrors of an
infinitely holy, powerful, offended Majesty; and yet in the soft voice of grace.

And thus we have seen CHRIST in one Earthquake and another in the days of old.
And no wonder then is it that we read of the earth's quaking by his power at
his death and resurrection. Mat. 27.51. The earth did quake and the rocks rent.
Well might they at the horrid deed, and marvailous event, the Crucifixion of
the SON OF GOD. v. 54. The Centurion and they that were with him, watching
JESUS, (the guard at the execution) saw the earthquake, and feared greatly,
saying, Truly this was the SON OF GOD. Like trembling seized the guard at his
Sepulcher, Mat. 28.2. And behold there was a great Earthquake, and the keepers
did shake and became as dead men.

In such majesty and great terror did CHRIST die and rise again. The wonder was
that the reviling Soldiers and hardy keepers (or rather their masters and
rulers) were not swallowed up alive. But the Son of man came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them.

When he pleased afterward to manifest Himself to his Disciples, by shaking the
places where they were worshipping him or suffering for him, it was in token of
his favor and grace to them. So he came upon them in the day of Pentecost in a
rushing mighty wind; and again, when they had prayed, (Act. 4.31.) the place
was shaken where they were assembled together, and they were again filled with
the HOLY GHOST, and spoke the word of GOD with boldness.

So at the prayers and praises of Paul and Silas in the prison, suddenly there
was an Earthquake, and the foundations of the prison were shaken. Act. 16.30.
Happy Earthquake to the Jailor and his house! the ordained means of his
effectual conviction and conversion. The impression of that blessed fright
never wore off; we charitably think. He and all his were straightway baptized.

To add no more on this head: In the Book of the Revelations we find the great
Events of Providence and the mighty changes respecting the Church of CHRIST and
the whole World; which are yet many of them in the hand of the MOST HIGH, and
in his times to be shown who is the blessed and only Potentate, King of kings
and LORD of lords; These changes and events (I say) are represented by
earthquakes as well as by thundrings and lightnings etc. CHRIST governs in all
these concussions and revolutions, these literal or figurative earthquakes;
with an immediate hand, order and direction.

As in the first chapter of that Book, it is HE THE SON OF MAN that appears in
his majesty and great terror, in the midst of his Churches, the seven golden
Candlesticks; to show his servant the things that shall be hereafter. And he
showed him many terrible earthquakes, the emblems of the great and mighty
changes which he was bringing upon the earth.

At the opening of the sixth seal, Rev 6.12. John saw a great Earthquake; and
the sun became black as Sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood, and
the stars fell to the earth, and the heaven departed as a serowl, and every
mountain and island moved out of their place. This was but a vision; yet was it
a vision of the true power of CHRIST, in the kingdom of nature, and over the
nations of men: And it gives us a fair image of his immediate agency and rule
in all the revolutions in the natural or moral world. He that opens the seals
does all the executions that follow on them, and sends the earthquake.

In the 8th. Chap. 5. v. we have a place exactly parallel to my text: It may be
worth our while to compare them, and see if the coals of fire from the altar,
and the earthquake be not in the same hand. -- In my text the GOD-MAN,
Mediator, goes in between the wheels, and fills his hand with fire from between
the cherubims, and scatters it over the City. -- In the 8th. Chap. of the
Revelations, after the opening of the seventh seal, CHRIST comes and stands at
the Altar, having a golden Censer with much Incense, which He offers with the
prayers of all saints before the Throne. v. 3. Here is the Man clothed with
linen, CHRIST in his priestly office and intercessions. But while He is
continually doing this for his saints, so his visible Church on earth grows
earthly, worldly, formal and corrupt; And then (v. 5.) CHRIST (the Angel of the
Covenant) takes of the very same fire, wherewith he offered up his incense, and
easts of this down into the earth in his holy displeasure and indignation: And
what was the effect hereof? why immediately there were voices and thundrings
and lightnings and an EARTHQUAKE. That is to say, Such manifestations of the
wrath of GOD, and such swift and terrible judgments, as bro't on a mighty
change of affairs among men: Such a change in the face of Providence, and on
the face of the Church, as earthquakes often produce on the face of the earth,
and upon particular places of it.

I might turn you to several more places in the Revelations of St. John to the
same purpose, but I will point unto one only. We read ( Chap. 16.17.) of the
seventh Angel his pouring out his vial into the air, and there was a GREAT
EARTHQUAKE, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so MIGHTY AN
EARTHQUAKE and so great: For the great City (the Empire of Antichrist) fell
into three parts, and the cities of the nations (which have given their power
to the beast) fell; and GREAT BABYLON came into remembrance before GOD; and
every island fled away and the mountains were not found. -- A blessed
earthquake truly! Lord JESUS hasten it on! horrible and tremendous to bloody
Rome and the papal powers! more especially to Italy that seat of sodomy and
earthquakes! that land of sulphur and subterraneous fires! -- And why may not
its fall be by literal earthquakes and eruptions of sulphurous flames? The
fiery hand of CHRIST shall effect this. See the 18. Chap. of the Revelations.

Thus I have at large shown that Earthquakes, both proper and figurative, are
in the hand of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and come forth from his hand.

When therefore in the days of his flesh he spoke of this Sign, that should
foreshew the Day of his coming; whether to judge Jerusalem, or Babylon, or the
World at the last day; He then sufficiently informed us that this judgment was
in his hand among others. Mat. 24.7. There shall be earthquakes in diverse
places, -- the beginning of sorrows. Luke 21.11. Earthquakes and great signs
from heaven. He will accomplish in his times the things of which he has thus
given warning.

And now to return unto the Inference I am upon: From all that we have heard we
must needs be convinced and satisfied, That the late amasing Earthquake which
visited us the last Lord's Day in the night was sent to warn us from CHRIST,
our king, our lawgiver, our judge and our savior.

It was He himself who threatened to derstoy us, as in a moment. The earthquake
was from his hand, whatever might be the natural Causes of it; all which are
also in the hand of CHRIST, and he works by them as he pleases with infinite
foresight of men and things, and with an unerring direction. We need not, we
should not look any further, (in a Christian and practical consideration of the
thing, and a religious improvement of it) than the will and government of
CHRIST. This becomes us as Sinners that would be awakned, and as Believers that
desire to be humbled and edified; and it behooves us to act the part of such
rather than of Philosophers. They search darkly and uncertainly (however
curiously and laudably) into the bowels of the earth and the secrets of nature;
but we have the plain Gospel of CHRIST to look into, and see as in a glass the
glory of the LORD.

Thus the threatening of a sudden and a fearful destruction coming on us in the
terrible earthquake was from CHRIST.

II. Our PRESERVATION from the threatened destruction was from the same glorious
HAND. The hand that shook the rod over us could have stricken with it; he that
threatened could easily have executed. He that set the earth a trembling, held
it together under us; the same hand is mighty to save and to destroy. The LORD
is our judge, and he saves it.

There are not two Principles or powers, as some of the foolish Heathen
conceived; the one the author of the evil, the other of the good that comes to
the children of men: No, the living and only true GOD is the author of both; A
just GOD and a Savior. Isai. 45.7. I form the light and create darkness, I
make peace and create evil; I the LORD do all these things -- And the measure
of every judgment is from him; the moderation of it and period to it. He that
says to the sea hitherto thou shall come and no further, and here shall thy
proud waves be stayed; he says the same to every overflowing scourge and
overwhelming evil. He calls to contend by one judgment and another, and again
he says -- This shall not be. Amos 7.6.

CHRIST sits upon the floods, and rides upon the winds, and reigns King for
ever; Absolute, Sovereign, irresistible and unaccountable. His blood is the
cement that binds the fabric of heaven and earth together. The earth and its
inhabitants were dissolving, but he came and holds up the pillars of it.

The ground had swallowed up Adam in the day of his fall, if it had not been
for this SEED of the Woman, this IMMANUEL, GOD with us. Our fallen parents
heard immediately why they did not instantly die, and return to their ground;
Namely, because there should a Child be born, a Son be given them, who should
be the Mighty GOD, the Prince of peace, on whom the Government should be laid.
It was for the sake of this glorious Blessing in the loins of Adam, and because
of an election of grace given to Him by the FATHER, that the Curse did not
immediately devour the sinner and his earth.

As soon as the Angels sinned the heavens rent under them, and they fell (O
mighty fall!) from the height of heaven down into the deep Abyss of hell, into
the bottomless pit. The reason was, CHRIST took not the nature of Angels, took
not hold of them as they fell. He took the seed of Adam, and therefore the
earth rent not under him; the pit did not swallow him up as it did the angels
that sinned, for whom there is no redemption.

CHRIST has been the Savior of all those that have escaped in one destroying
earthquake and another since the world began.

In the flood, when the foundations of the great deep were broken up, CHRIST
saved Noah and his family: He gave him faith, provided him an Ark, shut him up
in it, set it gently afloat, held and steered it in that boisterous sea (that
fury of the waters) without a rudder or a sail, and softly rested it (without
an anchor to cast out) on the mountains of Ararat. Well therefore did Noah
bring his sacrifices to his Deliverer, when he came forth from the Ark, so many
types of that Death from whence come all our salvations. -- Who set the bow in
the sky, and gave it to Noah as the token of his Covenant? but HE who afterward
appeared in vision to Ezekiel as a Man upon the throne, with the bow as in the
day of rain.

To go on, When Lot was saved from the fire and earthquake, it was CHRIST
himself came down, and sent his angels to his house: If he had found but ten
such righteous ones, he would have spared the place for their sakes. -- Again,
When the wall of Jerico fell, faith saved Rahab and her house. And when Babylon
shall fall CHRIST will call his people out of her. Revel. 18.4.

The same Lord JESUS saved us and our families, our lives and our limbs, our
dwellings and substance, in the day when he lately showed us his power, his
anger and our deserts. As he reached out his arm to Peter when he sunk on the
waters, and cried to him, LORD save me; so his everlasting arms were underneath
our tottering houses, and they neither sunk nor fell. The foundations of the
earth moved and were shaken, and in our distress we cried to him as our GOD; He
bowed the heavens and came down, he rode upon a Cherub and did fly, yea he did
fly upon the wings of the wind. Psalm 18.7, 10.

To conclude, The inference is strong and obvious, That if the judgments of
Providence are in the hand of CHRIST, so are the mercies thereof equally from
his all-governing hand; many and great and various as they are. All the
preservations which are new every moment, all the deliverances which we receive
in times of seen dangers and great hazards, all the supplies by which we are
sustained from day to day and fed from year to year, they all come to us from
the hand of our Lord JESUS, and we ought to receive them as from Him with our
religious acknowledgments of trust and dependence, prayer and praise.

We have our personal and family mercies, which are exceeding precious; and
there are the common and public mercies to the Church and people of GOD
together, which are greater than those; The public shares in the goodness of
Providence to every private person, and every one shares in the general
goodness of Providence to the public; the glory of all belongs to CHRIST, and
to Him we must sing both of the mercy and the judgment.

The same hand that fed Israel in the wilderness and punished them there, feeds
and judges the Church still. Believers must know and consider that it is the
death of CHRIST has purchased for them the common favors and bounties of
Providence; in which they should taste his covenant love, taste and see that
the LORD is gracious: And sinners must know that they are indebted to CHRIST,
for all that they have of present good things, which should lead them to
repentance.

Is Peter in prison, or Paul in the storm, it is JESUS that sends his Angel to
them; or if Eneas be sick, JESUS CHRIST makes him whole.

And thus we have seen both the Threatening of judgment, and the Salvation from
it in the hand of CHRIST. What both demand from us may be considered in the
next Discourse.

SERMON III.
WE have seen both the awful Threatening in the terrible Earthquake, and also
our Preservation in it to come from CHRIST. Let us then reverently and
earnestly hearken to his Voice in both. This is the proper USE which we ought
to make of the Providence and Doctrine before us. As when Joshua saw the LORD
with his hand full of judgments against the wicked Cananites, but filled with
salvation to Israel, he fell down and worshipped saying, What says my LORD
unto his servant? Truly so if we have seen the hand of CHRIST filled both with
judgments and mercies toward us, our people and families, shall we not humbly
and earnestly enquire of the LORD, and seek from his Word, what is his mind and
meaning in such a dispensation? What says the LORD to his people collectively,
and what to me and mine inparticular? -- It is a very serious, profitable and
and necessary Enquiry, and to be made in a very solemn manner before the LORD,
And to be sure,

I. The threatening in the terrible earthquake, and the preservation from a
sudden destruction by it, do both of them call aloud upon us to repent and turn
from all our sins, and that instantly and earnestly with fear and trembling.
This is the voice of the astonishing judgment and this the voice of the
wondrous mercy and deliverance.

1. Repentance, instant earnest and deep repentance, is the loud voice of
CHRIST to us in the judgment and sudden destruction, with which we were
threatened. The earth trembled under our sins, and roared under the burden and
weight of them. The shake bro't our sins quick to remembrance, and threatened us
with a swift and irresistible destruction, without giving us any space for
repentance, or the asking mercy. And if it was CHRIST the lover of souls who
threatened us in a manner so very dreadful; then surely there are very great and
dismal sins with us against our LORD REDEEMER. As Moses said in the case of the
rebels in Israel, Number. 16.30. If the LORD make a new thing, and the earth open
her mouth and swallow them up, with all that appertain to them, and they go
down quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have provoked
the LORD. And as the prophet Isaiah teaches us, Isai. 24.5. The earth is
DEFILED under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the law,
changed the ordinances, broken the everlasting covenant; therefore has the
CURSE devoured the earth: Therefore the LORD makes the earth empty, makes it
waste, and turns it upside down: v. 19, 20. The earth is clean dissolved, the
earth is moved exceedingly; the earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard,
and be removed like a Cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavy
upon it, and it shall fall and not rise again. This conviction of sin an
Earthquake brings with it, and this call to humiliation and repentance. It
cries to us, as the wall of the tower of Siloam did to the sinners of
Jerusalem, Luke 13.5. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish.

When our Lord JESUS came down from heaven, it was to call sinners to
repentance. Mat. 9.13. Mark 6.12. Luke 24.47. Acts 5.31.
When he sent forth the twelve to preach, it was that men should repent. When
he was returning to heaven, he commanded that repentance and remission of sins
should be preached in his name among all nations. And now he is exalted to the
right hand of GOD a Prince and Savior to give repentance. What then is his
voice if he come to us in fearful judgments? in a terrible Earthquake? Surely
he repeats aloud the vehement warning of the holy Baptist; who came before him
in the spirit of Elias, to turn the hearts of parents and children to GOD, lest
he come and smite the earth with a curse: Matthew 3.5 -- 12. When he saw many of
the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, O
Generation of vipers! who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring
forth therefore fruits meet for repentance: And think not to say within your
selves, We have Abraham to our father, etc. And now also the ax is laid to the
root of the tree: therefore every tree that brings not forth good fruit is
hewn down and cast into the fire. -- He that has an ear let him hear what the
SPIRIT says unto the Churches in such an awful dispensation as the Earthquake
Rev. 2.23. 3.3. 24.7.
: He says with a loud voice, Fear GOD and give glory to him, for the hour of
his judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven and earth, and the sea,
and the fountains of waters. He says -- Repent or I will come upon thee as a
thief, and thou shall not know at what hour I will come upon thee: And I will
kill thy children within thee, except thou repent.

2. This also is the voice of the gracious preservation which we have received;
the goodness and forbearance of GOD herein calls upon us to repent. Romans 2^ 3,
4, 5. And think thou O man, -- that thou shall escape the judgment of GOD?
or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering?
not knowing that the goodness of GOD leads thee to repentance? But after thy
hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day
of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of GOD; who will render unto
every man according to his deeds. The voice of CHRIST to us in his sparing
mercy is Rev. 2.21. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32, 33. Luke 19.42. Act. 5.19.
, "I give thee space for repentance: O that thou would know that at least in
this thy day the things of thy peace! Repent and be converted that your sins
may be blotted out: Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions,
so iniquity shall not be your ruin: Make you a new heart and a new spirit, for
why will you die? For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says
the LORD GOD; wherefore turn your selves, and live ye. This is the small and
still voice of Grace, after the stormy wind and earthquake: Let us cover our
faces and reverently listen to it. CHRIST says to us now as he did to the
impotent man whom he had healed, John 5.14. Behold thou art made whole, sin no
more lest a worse thing come upon thee. A worse thing cannot well come, save a
worse earthquake; or any other judgment that may bring an equal and sudden
destruction on thee.

When the jailor had felt the earthquake, and yet was not devoured by it, he
sprang in trembling and asked, What must I do to be saved? scil. from sin and
the wrath of GOD! In like fright should every spared sinner make the like
enquiry, and with his concern and earnestness. And if we do not our crime and
guilt is like theirs, Rev. 16.9. who when they were scorched by the fire of
divine judgments, yet repented not to give glory to GOD.

The destroying Angel has passed through every Town, and through every street, and
cried at every door; REPENT, REPENT! every person, every family, every age
order and degree of men! Sanctify your selves and your households to the LORD,
lest he break forth upon you! Sanctify your selves every one upon his own sins,
his most beloved sin! smite upon thy own breast, feeling the plague of thy
heart, and say What have I done! and sigh and cry for the sins of others, that
the mark of GOD may be set upon thee, before the coals of fire be scattered
down.

Thus the threatening in the terrible earthquake and the preservation from it,
call us to repentance.

II. They do more particularly mean to convict men of and deter them from those
flagrant crimes and heights of impiety which GOD has sometimes punished or
threatened to punish with desolating earthquakes. Such are the sin and
wickedness of the Old World, of Sodom and Gomorrah, of Jerusalem the holy City,
and of Babylon which now is.

1. An earthquake warns men of the sin and general corruption of the Old World;
when mankind by a universal contempt of religion, fearlessness of GOD, and
dissolution of manners, bro't the flood of water upon the earth. A deluge of
iniquity and impiety first covered the face of it, and then came the flood of
Divine wrath which tore it to pieces. Genesis 6.5, 11, 12. GOD saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the
though it of his heart was only evil continually: And it repented the LORD that he
had made man upon the earth, and it grieved him at his heart: And he said I
will destroy Man, whom I have created, from the face of the earth: -- The earth
was corrupt before GOD, and was filled with violence; for all flesh had
corrupted his way upon the earth. All manner and degrees of impiety toward GOD,
and unrighteousness toward one another, is the charge here exhibited against
every order, rank and age of mankind: A universal degeneracy into the very
dregs of all ungodliness, profaness and licentiousness. Nor was it this place,
or that, which was so vile and abandoned, but every place and people. Noah
alone was found righteous before GOD, and he only was faved with his house.
When wickedness is become general and universal, ruin is not far off: While
there is a remnant of praying people in a nation or country to empty the
measure as it fills, judgments may be kept off a great while; But when all
hands are at work to pull down the fences of sin, and none stand in the gap to
make up the breach, What can be expected but an Inundation of wrath? So Mr.
Henry.

We may observe that in the day of Sodom, and of the Cananites, and of
Jerusalem, and so of Babylon, a general corruption brings on the desolation.
This GOD warns against by every earthquake.

2. The sins of Sodom come first in order of time and degree of impiety in the
new world. The cry of their grievous sin was great before CHRIST, and an
earthquake devoured them. The fire of lust burnt among them in a rage and flame
that reached up to heaven, and bro't down fire and brimstone on them; made them
a hell above ground, and then the pit swallowed them up. Intemperance and
luxury was their sin, pride and idleness, and lewdness in such a kind and
excess as has left the name and brand of Sodomy on the unnatural lust forever.
GOD gave them up to uncleaness and then to the flames and the earthquake. Read
their sin, Romans, 1.26, 27, 28. and Ephesians. 4.19. Who being past seeking, have
given themselves over to work all uncleaness with greediness. When they saw but
a beauteous Angel in the form of a man they were for knowing him; to satisfy
their worse than brutish lust upon him. And so furious was their lust, and so
general the contagion, that before bedtime they compassed the house round,
both old and young, all the people, from every quarter, threatening Lot if he
did not render up his lovely guests to them. No like example of impurity has
been known on the earth, and therefore these are set forth for an example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Jude. v. 7. When the like promiscuous
and incestuous mixtures were found in Israel, there came an earthquake in the
days of Amos: Amos. 1.1. and 2.7. An Earthquake therefore comes to convince of
and warn against the sins of Sodom, and every tendency thereunto.

3. The sins of Jerusalem also, the holy city by profession and covenant
obligations, are bro't to mind when GOD visits his professing people with an
earthquake.

The Prophet Zechariah remembers the remnant of Israel, how their Fathers fled
before the Earthquake in the days of King Uzziah. Zech. 14.5. The Jews have a
tradition, that it happened just at the time when Uzziah presumptuously invaded
the priest's office, and went in to burn incense. 2 Chronicles. 26.16. If it were so
it would lead us also to think of the rebellion of Corah and the presumption of
his associates; Number. 16. The fire of GOD consumed the first, and the earth
swallowed up the latter. Such are named after the sinners of Sodom, Jude v. 8.
Filthy dreamers, that defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of
dignities.

But to come to Jerusalem's sin in the days of Uzziah when the earthquake
visited them, and that a horrible one which put them into a very great terror.
Isaiah and Amos were the LORD's prothets in those days. Amos dates his Prophecy
two years before the Earthquake. He warned them of it before it came. The sins
of Israel and Judah at that time provoked the LORD to send the earthquake. And
what their sins were may be gathered from these prophecies; from the whole of
Amos, and from the five first Chapters of Isaiah.

The sins of Sodom were among them: Amos. 2.7. A man and his father will go in
to the same maid, to profane my holy name. Vile and filthy incest, equal to
almost any of the Abominations of the heathen. Therefore Isaiah began his
prophecy with that severe rebuke and reproach, Hear the word of the LORD, ye
rulers of Sodom; give ear to the law of our GOD ye people of Gomorrah. Such was
the vine of Israel become, and such their grapes and clusters; and except the
LORD of Hosts had left a very small remnant, they would have been as Sodom and
Gomorrah in their punishment; overthrown like them.

Their sins were numerous, multiplied, repeated and persisted in; there were
three transgressions and four among them before the judgments came: Amos. 1.4.
They were laden with iniquity. Isai. 1.4. They sinned against great light and
many means of grace, which inhaunc'd their guilt and hastened on the judgment:
Amos. 3.2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I
will punish you for all your iniquities. They corrupted religion which they had
received pure and undefiled in the word of GOD; they confounded moral good and
evil, Isai. 5.20. and mixed the worship of GOD and the calves together. Amos.
4.4. They were worldly, panting after the dust of the earth, Amos. 2.7. weary
of their Sabbaths and new moons, and wishing them over, that they might set
forth their wheat and sell corn: Amos. 8.5. They were for joining house to
house, and laying field to field, that they might be placed alone in the earth.
Isai. 5.8. They were unjust, unrighteous and oppressive, both in their private
dealings and in their Courts of justice Amos 2.6. 3.10. 5*2. 6.12.
They sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes: they
turned aside the way of the meek: They shored up violence and robbery in their
palaces, and know not to do right: They afflicted the just, they took a bribe,
and turned aside the poor in the Gate: These were their manifold transgressions
and mighty sins: They turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness
into hemlock! They swallowed up the needy and made the poor of the land to
fail: They made the Ephah small, and falsified the weights and balances: For
these things the Land was made to tremble, and the earth was darkened in the
clear day, and their houses were smitten, the winter house and the summer house
together. Amos. 3.15. Isaiah Isai. 1.21, -- 27. 3.14, 15. 5.23.
brings the same charges against them, and mentions it as a scarlet and crimson
sin that they did not seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless and plead for the widow; but every one loved gifts, and followed
after rewards; Therefore the Mighty One of Israel said, Ah, I will ease me of
my adversaries and avenge me of my enemies.

All this was done under a form of Godliness, a profession and show of
religion, and this rendered it much the more ungodly and vile. Under a high
pretense of devotion and obedience they were thus unrighteous, prsane and
impious. Isaiah therefore asks them to what purpose the multitude of their
sacrisices were? and bids them bring no more vain oblations: for their incense
was an abomination, and their very Sabbaths an iniquity. And Amos tells them
the same, Amos 5.21. I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in
your solemn assemblies, etc. take away from me the noise of your songs, -- but
let judgment run down as water, and righteousness as a mighty stream.

This corruption was general, Isai. 1.4, 6. The nation was sinful, they were a
seed of evil deers, children that were corrupters; from the sole of the foot
even to the head there was no soundness, but wounds and bruises and putrefying
sores. They were bold and impudent in sin, declaring it as Sodom: Isai. 3.9.
They were proud and haughty in their attire, the dau'ters of Sion walked with
stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, mincing and tinkling with their feet:
but they were told that the LORD would take away the bravery of their tinkling
ornaments, and their round tires like the moon: Isai. 3.18.

They were fearless of judgments, and would not observe them when they came;
they derided GOD's threatenings, and sinned on after all his warnings: GOD
overthrew some of them as he had Sodom and Gomorrab, and they were as a brand
plucked out of the burning; yet would they not return unto him. Amos 4.11. They
rose up early in the morning to follow strong drink, and continued at it in the
evening till wine inflamed them; The harp and viol, the tabret and the pipe
were in their feasts; but they regarded not the work of the LORD, neither
considered the operation of his hand: Isai. 5.11, 12. They drew iniquity with
cords of vanity and sinned as it were with a cart-rope; They said, Let him make
speed, and hasten his work that we may see it; believing and fearing nothing of
it; They cast away the law of the LORD of Hosts, and despised the word of the
Holy One of Israel. v. 18, 19, 24. They put far away the evil day, and caused
the seat of violence to come near. Amos. 6.3.

This was the state and these the sins of Judah and Israel when they were
visited of the LORD of Hosts with the earthquake in the days of Uzziah. And the
Earthquake that has lately visited us warns us from GOD of any tendencies among
us to the same iniquities. And in whatsoever degrees they are found among us,
it calls aloud upon us to repent and turn from them with fear and trembling.
For shall I not visit for these things? says the LORD. As the sinners in
Israel fled at the cry of their sinking brethren, saying, lest the earth
swallow us up also! so ought we at the roar of an earthquake to fear and fly
from those sins for which GOD has sometimes visited his people. -- It remains
that I just mention,

4. And lastly, The sins of Babylon which now is, the Romish Babylon. She is
spiritually called Sodom, and is like to perish by earthquake and fire.
Idolatry and Blood are eminently her sins; but lust and sodomy, pride and
idleness, every abomination and filthiness, corporal and spiritual, are found
with that mother of harlots. The blood of the saints is found in her; and great
will be her fall: Even as if we saw a mighty Angel take up a great millstone,
and cast it into the sea. Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be
thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. Her sins reach to heaven, and
strong is the LORD GOD that judges her. Revel. 18. init.

By every shake of the earth GOD says to his Protestant people, Partake not of
her sins that ye receive not of her plagues. So he said of old Babylon, Jerem.
51.6. Flee out of the midst of her, and deliver every man his soul: Be not cut
off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the LORD's vengeance. So the
Angels said to Lot in the last night of Sodom, Genesis 19.12. Have thou here any
besides? son or daughter? bring them out of this place; for the LORD has sent
us to destroy it.

Thus I have briefly pointed out those sins and sinners which GOD has sometimes
punished, or threatened to punish with earthquakes. Let us be afraid of such
kind and degrees of sin. Let our flesh tremble for fear of GOD and let us be
afraid of his judgments. Let us depart from the tents of these wicked men, and
touch nothing of theirs, lest we be consumed in all their sins. Should we join
in affinity with the people of these abominations, would not GOD be angry with
us, and consume us with them? -- Yet how many of their sins are there with us
before the LORD? for which the righteous GOD has been awfully threatening us. We
remain escaped this day, and the Lord our GOD is righteous! it becomes us to
humble our selves and say with Ezra; Behold we are before thee in our
trespasses, and we cannot stand before thee because of this Here this Sermon
may be divided.
.

III. The Earthquake that visited us, and wherein we have been mercifully
preserved by CHRIST not only meant to awaken greater Sinners to repentance, but
all and every one, even the least of sinners. The shake was common to all; the
greater and the less, elder and younger, godly and ungodly; and awful to all,
awakning to all. It bro't every ones sin to remembrance, and set every one a
trembling. Every ones Conscience answered to the terrible Voice of GOD at that
instant, as speaking to him. The child's heart smote him as well as the
Parents, and his that feared GOD as well as his who feared him not.

He that is without sin let him be without fear, and stand excepted from the
call to repent. It came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance;
even as CHRIST himself came. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure
from my sin? And if not, Who then can say, The warning was not to me? Every sin
(and much more every sinner, the least of whom is guilty of many sins)
"deserves the wrath and curse of GOD both in this life and that which is to
come.

Indeed the greatest sinners are in the greatest danger, and should be in the
greatest fear: But it is not always so. Very often the least sinners fear most
under the judgments of GOD, and always the most Godly fear best, if not most,
under his awful threatenings; while greater sinners are too often fearless and
hardened. So Moses was afraid of the fierce anger of the LORD, lest it should
break forth upon the fearless sinners; and Josiah's heart was tender and he
rent his robes, when it may be his Courtiers were not a whit moved.

First then let me say, The Earthquake came to awaken greater sinners to a
great repentance for their many and mighty sins. It came to set these in order
before them, and it called upon them to rend their hearts. Did not their hearts
smite them? was not their Countenance changed, and how did their tho'ts trouble
them? Well might their joints be loosed, and their knees smite one against
another? Fearfulness and trembling came upon them, and horror overwhelmed them.
A vision passed before them which made all their bones to shake, and the hair
of their head stood up. Every hardy sinner sprang up trembling; the atheist
believed and trembled, the prayerless called upon GOD, the profane tongue
faulter'd, and the lips of the blasphemer quiver'd: The worldling felt his
earth sinking, the drunkard saw it reeling like himself, and rottenness entered
into the lewd man's bones: the liar, the thief and the false swearer saw the
flying-roll entered into their house, to consume it with the timber and stones
thereof: The Sabbath-breaker though it his soul that night required for the
profanation of the Day The Earthquake was in the night after the Lord's day.
past; and every formal, careless, irreverent and hypocritical worshipper had
that peal of woes rung in his cars, Matthew. 23.

Thus CHRIST came in the earthquake, as he will hereafter in the judgment day,
to convince all that are ungodly of their ungodly deeds and hard speeches; yet
to soften and take away the heart of stone, and to break the rock in pieces.
The wicked are harder than the earth and stones if they are not moved and
shaken and broken under such a providence; harder than the cruel hearts of the
enraged mob and magistrates at Philippi, who when they had sorely beaten Paul
and Silas, and thrust them into the dungeon, yet when the earthquake came at
night they were so terrified and convinced of their unrighteous act, that as
soon as it was day they sent and released them; yea came themselves and beso't
them and brought them out of prison. And well might " their Consciences make
furious reflections on them for what they had done, when they came to consider
that they had used the Men of GOD so barbarously only for casting the devil out
of a possessed damsel; and when GOD had shook the City, made the ground to
tremble, at their horrid deed.

But secondly, Lesser sinners should be awakned and much affected at a
terrifying earthquake, as well as greater sinners. And indeed these are more
likely to hear and fear, and receive instruction. The impression enters the
easier and deeper on a tender heart. In what a fright were our Children and
young people, many of them, when they heard and felt the Earthquake? how did
they run to the presence and arms of their helpless Parents, and attend to
their prayers in that hour of consternation? what gracious words did many of
them speak to their pious Parents at that time? And how were all that fear GOD
affected with his hand, humbled under it and the more penitent before him? The
men of GOD did, like Moses, fear exceedingly; were afraid of his fierce anger.
Like Abraham they were moved for the souls and bodies of others, for the godly
and for the wicked, for Lots house and for every sodomite. Like Ezra they rent
their hearts for their own and their people's sins. Like Josiah their heart was
tender, and they cried out -- Great is the wrath of the LORD against us. Like
Moses they ran into the gap, and stood in the breach, to turn away GOD's anger.
And like David some might open their own conscious hearts to the sword of
justice, and say, Upon me LORD let thy hand be, but spare the sheep of thy
pasture.

Every gracious heart is tender and contrite before GOD, and trembles at his
voice, whether in his written Word or speaking Providence: And to every such
person the high and lofty One will look. Isai. 66.2. Gracious Elihu could not
see the lightning of GOD nor hear his thunder (things much more common than an
Earthquake, yet awful like it) but his heart trembled and was moved out of its
place: Job 37.1. Hear attentively (says he) the noise of his voice, and the
sound that goes out of his mouth! He directs it under the whole heaven, --
after it a voice roareth: -- Hearken to it, O. Job: stand still, and consider
the wondrous works of GOD. The best of men need to be awakned, and to awake
themselves to a very humble diligent attention to the mind of GOD in his
wondrous works. And none will hearken to him with like reverence and godly fear
as the most godly. Like the Prophet Habbakkuk who heard GOD's speech and was
afraid, and prayed, O LORD in wrath remember mercy. Hab. 3.16. When I heard my
belly trembled, my lips quivered, rottenness entered into my bones. Well might
this be, had the Prophet been holier than he was; for he saw the everlasting
mountains scattered and the perpetual hills bowing before the Majesty of GOD.

So then under such a dispensation as this, of a dreadful Earthquake, every
sinner, the greater and the less are loudly called to humiliation and
repentance. Surely the greater will think the shake sent to them, and surely
not to them only, but to me also, will the least of sinners be ready to say;
Yea to me the chief of sinners will he say that is most eminent in grace and in
repentance. -- But to go on,

IV. The earthquake came and CHRIST preserved us in it to awaken us to an
instant flight to Him as the Refuge of our souls, the rock and tower of
salvation to us. The name of the LORD is a strong tower, the righteous runs
into it and is safe. Prove. 18.10. Such is CHRIST, his righteousness and the
promises in him. The name of GOD is in him, and we must flee to him for safety
from the deserved judgments of GOD. We must put our selves by faith into those
saving hands which are filled with the burning coals. No other hand can save
us. The Man clothed with linen says to us, Look unto me and be ye saved all ye
ends of the earth. The coals in his hands must hasten our flight to him. We
must flee unto him to hide us. He will cover us with his spotless robe, and not
a spark from the coals shall fall on us. How would he gather us, as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings in a time of danger! How gladly then
should we gather to him, to the covert of his wings. Psalm. 57.1. Be merciful
unto me O GOD, be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in thee; Yea in the
shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge until these calamities be overpast.
There is no safety for us now, at death, nor in the day of judgment, without an
interest in CHRIST by faith. We must count all things loss that we may be found
in him. He is our Ark when the flood comes, He our Zoar when the fire and
brimstone falls, He the rock to build on that our house may stand when the wind
and rains beat. The design of the preached Gospel, and the end of mercies and
of judgments, is to lead sinners to him. The cities of refuge of old were
figures and types of CHRIST the refuge of guilty and repenting sinners; they
have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before them. Hebrews. 6.18.
They need not fear, though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be
carried into the midst of the sea.

An Earthquake should shake Ephesians. 5.14. Genesis 19.17. Zech. 9.11, 12. Job. 22.21.
Isai. 27.4.
sinners under the Gospel out of their Security. It cried in their ears at
midnight, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and CHRIST shall
give thee life. It bid them escape for their life to the mountain, without
looking behind them. It cried to them, Turn to the strong hold ye prisoners of
hope! Come forth from the pit wherein is no water! by the blood of thy covenant
thou art redeemed from it. Acquaint now thy self with CHRIST and be at peace:
take hold of his strength and get into a state of reconciliation and peace with
GOD. How shall briars and thorns stand before devouring fire?

It would also awake drowsy Saints out of their slumbers, being as the
midnight cry too in the ears of the wise to arise and trim their lamps, because
the Bridegroom comes. Their faith should be invigorated by such a Providence;
their hope and trust actuated; My GOD, my strength, the horn of my salvation,
and my high tower. Their godly fear and reverence should be excited and
increased; as when he raised and laid the terrible tempest, they feared
exceedingly, and said one to another, What manner of man is this? It becomes us
so to fear the LORD and his greatness; the LORD and his goodness. Hosea. 3.5.
Moved with fear, like Noah, let us get into our ark.

When Jonah was in the tempest, ready to founder, he said, I fear the GOD of
Heaven, that has made the Sea and the dry land. And when Darius saw Daniel
preserved in the den of lions and taken out alive, he made a very pious Decree;
to which we and ours should be obedient with the utmost reverence and
gratitude; Dan. 6.26. I make a decree, that in every dominion of my kingdom men
tremble and fear before the GOD of Daniel; -- who delivers and rescueth, and
works signs and wonders in heaven and in earth.

Love is the next duty, and our first, to CHRIST our merciful Preserver. In
love to our souls he has delivered us and ours from going down into the pit;
and what less can we render to him than our best and highest love? To love him
with all the understanding and all the heart is more than all whole burnt
offering and sacrifice. Psalm. 18.1, 2. I will love thee, O LORD my strength,
my rock, my fortress and my deliverer. Psalm. 116.1. I love the LORD because he
has heard my voice and my supplication.

Faith fear and love will produce prayer and praises to our King, our Judge and
our Savior. Prayer is a grand part of our homage. Psalm. 18.3. I will call
upon the LORD who is worthy to be praised, so shall I be saved. Psalm. 116.4.
Then called I upon the name of the LORD, O LORD I beseech thee deliver my soul.
When CHRIST comes forth as a Judge we should meet him with Abraham's most
reverend Supplications: And when we look to him as a Savior it must be with
David's prayer; Unto thee will I pray, my King and my GOD.

To be sure Praise waits for Him in Zion who is the Savior. His name and
benefits cannot be though it of, and much less duly mentioned without Thanksgiving
and praises. Bless the LORD O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy
Name! O bless our GOD ye people, and cause the voice of his praise to be heard;
who holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved. I will
extol thee my GOD, O King, and I will praise thy name for ever and ever; Every
day will I bless thee and I will praise etc. One generation shall praise thy
works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts. I will mention the
loving-kindnesses of the LORD, and the praises of the LORD, according to all
his great goodness, and the multitude of his loving kindnesses Psalm
103.66.145. Isai. 63.7.
. When CHRIST had shown great mercy to one, and had wro't a great deliverance
for him, he bid him neturn to his house and declare what great things the LORD
had done for him: And he forth and published every where what JESUS had done
for him. Luke 11.24. Let us go and do likewise, and sing to CHRIST the 118.
Psalm, 17, -- 24.

To conclude this head, Self-dedication and the renewed solemn acts of it, is
the Offering due from us to CHRIST as our Judge and our Deliverer. As the
Egyptians said to Joseph, Thou have saved our lives, we will be Pharaoh's
servants. It is our selves, body and soul with all their powers, the devotion
of our hearts and the obedience of our lives, that we must render to our
Savior. So we are taught, Romans 6.13. Yield your selves unto GOD. So we are
besought, Romans 12.1. I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of GOD, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to GOD. The grand
reason for this duty is given us, 1 Cor. 6. ult. Ye are not your own, but are
bought with a price; therefore glorify GOD in your body and in your spirits,
which are GOD's. When the Plalmist made a record of a singular salvation which
GOD had granted him, thus he made his grateful return to his GOD and Savior;
Psalm 116. O LORD; truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant! I will walk before
the LORD in the land of the living.

Thus the Earthquake, and our preservation in it by the hand of CHRIST, should
hasten our flight to Him as the refuge of our souls; with faith, fear, love,
prayer, praise, and self consecration. We should be very solemn, fervent,
deliberate and yet speedy in this personal transaction with the great GOD.

V. FAMILY-RELIGION is a very special duty which the earthquake and our
preservation in it admonishes us of and calls us to. The threatening was to
families and the preservation was of them. Our houses were shaken, and yet
spared. They might have crushed and buried us. CHRIST's voice to us is serve me
in your houses; and our answer should be that, Josh. 24.15. As for me and my
house we will serve the LORD. Our households and our substance should be bro't
under a renewed consecration to CHRIST, and have HOLINESS TO THE LORD written
on them. The walls and stones of our houses in a manner cried to us as they
seemed falling, and they may cry out against us if the fear and worship of GOD
be not always in them for time to come.

CHRIST calls us to repent of and reform our family sins, and that we put
iniquity far from our tabernacles. Job. 22.23. And he warns us to make more
conscience of family and relative duties. For instance, FAMILY INSTRUCTION;
according to the command of GOD Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. And these words which I
command thee this day shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy children; and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy
house, and when thou lie down and when thou risest up. FAMILY WORSHIP is
another duty which the preservation of our dwellings and households demands of
us: family prayer and praise morning and evening, together with the reading
GOD's word. Shall there be any prayerless families among us, or prayerless
persons and closets in any family, after such a shake of our houses? GOD
forbid. Read the righteous and terrible Imprecation or curse that hangs over
such irreligious houses, Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the heathen, and
upon the families that call not upon thy name. Say not it means the families of
false worship and Idolatry in the heathen nations; for grant it -- yet thy
house (O Christian) is worse in GOD's sight than any heathens if CHRIST be not
daily worshipped in it. Carry thy house daily to him to be sprinkled with his
blood, the blood of the passover, that the Angel of death may not smite it. Let
our spared dwellings be Bethels, for GOD to be worshipped in, for him to dwell
in. And let the presence of CHRIST in them, with the judgments and salvations
of Providence in his hand, be awfully apprehended by us in daily family
worship. As Jacob waked in the morning and said, How dreadful is the place! it
is the house of GOD and gate of heaven. And that CHRIST may come under our
roof, and bring salvation with him as he did to the house of Zaccheus, let
FAMILY-GOVERNMENT be preserved and maintained among us. When GOD threatened our
houses lately, did he not in effect send us the message which he did once to
Eli, Tell him that I will judge his house, for that when his sons made
themselves vile he restrained them not. And now that GOD has preserved our
houses and households, should we not resolve and pray and sing with David,
Psalm. 101. I will sing of mercy and of judgment, unto thee O LORD will I sing:
I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way; O when will thou come unto me? I
will walk within my house with a perfect heart; I will set no wicked thing
before my eyes; I hate the work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to
me: -- He that walks in a perfect way he shall serve me; he that works
deceit shall not dwell within my house; he that tells lies shall not tarry in
my sight.

Moreover,

Not only should Heads of families, but children and servants also, be greatly
awed and affected with the threatening and salvation of GOD's providence. Be
subject to your parents, to your masters and mistresses, as unto CHRIST. Ephesians.
6.6. Attend the worship of the family with great seriousness and reverence, and
submit to the good order and rule of the House, for it is the Government of
CHRIST. There is a parental as well as a pastoral watch, and it is for your
souls, as those that must give an account, that they may do it with joy and not
with grief. -- In a word, We read of the voice of salvation and rejoicing in
the tabernacles of the righteous: So let it be with us; The voice of salvation
and rejoicing is in our dwellings, let them be the tabernacles of the righteous.

VI. From our own houses let us pass to the House of GOD: The threatening
Earthquake and our preservation in it loudly calls us to a more reverend regard
to his holy Sabbath and the Ordinances of his Worship. The Lord's Day, is the
religious sanctification of it, is the special season and means of holiness
among men, and of glory to CHRIST. Therefore is the observation of it so
strictly commanded, and the profanation so severely threatened and revenged
Levit. 19.30. Exodus 31.13 Jorem. 17.27. Levit. 26.31, 34. 2 Chronicles. 36.20, 21.
. ye shall keep my Sabbaths, I am the LORD: Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep,
for it is a sign between me and you through out your generations, that I am the
LORD that does sanctify you. But if ye will not hearken to me to hallow the
Sabbath day, then I will kindle a fire in the gates of Jerusalem, which shall
devour its palaces. And accordingly the coals in my text were scattered on
Jerusalem for polluting GOD's sabbaths: They burnt the house of GOD and brake
down the wall of Jerusalem, and carried the remnant to Babylon, to fulfill the
word of the LORD, until the land enjoyed her Sabbaths. As therefore it was in
the night after the Lord's Day that the terrible Earthquake visited us, so it
calls us to judge our selves for the many Sabbaths which we may have trifled
away and lost, profaned and polluted. Take it as a loud warning against the
looseness of multitudes on the Evenings of the Lord's Day; as well as for the
neglect of GOD's public Worship by multitudes among us. And let persons and
families judge themselves for their secret and family omissions and disorders.
Do they not bring wrath upon the land by profaning the Sabbath? Nehem. 13.18.

Let those that live in an easy and careless neglect of the holy Baptism of
CHRIST, for themselves or their children, remember how the Angel of the LORD
met Moses in the Inn and threatened to slay him, for his omitting to circumcise
his son. Exodus 4.24, 25. Omissions are sins, and must come into judgment, and
particularly the neglect and contempt of the seals of the Covenant; for it is a
sign we undervalue the promises of the Covenant, and are displeased with the
conditions of it. So Mr. Henry. Moses instantly humbled himself, and put the
mark of GOD upon his son, and the angel of death departed from him.

Some think Moses was struck with a mortal sickness in the Inn, and GOD let him
know that it was for his neglecting to circumcise his child. And we know the
threatening of GOD in the day when he gave the law of Circumcision to Abraham,
Genesis 17.14. The uncircumcised man-child -- that soul shall be cut off from my
people, he has broken my covenant. The threatening had like to have been
executed on the excellent parent for his omission.

Let those also fear the judgments of CHRIST who never came to his Table, or
come unworthily thereunto. Are the judgments of Providence in his hand? and has
he said, This do in remembrance of me? and will he not judge men for their
Omission of this duty? Or has he said again, Let a man examine himself and so
let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup; for he that eats and
drinks unworthily eats and drinks judgment to himself? and shall we not
judge our selves that we may not be judged? We know how the Corinthians were
judged for their irreverence, 1. Cor. 11.30. Many were sick and weak among
them, and some died. Judge then, (and surely the coals in the hand of CHRIST
call us to judge our selves) Whether there is not a general faulty neglect of
the Table of CHRIST among us? And whether there be not much unworthy eating and
drinking found with us? -- Should not the loud and terrible threatening of
judgment bring both these to a serious consideration with us? -- Surely CHRIST
calls many among us to his long neglected Table, that his house may be full;
and I hope is bringing many to it by the awful alarm which he has given them.
And surely he calls all his Churches to a more reverend observation of this,
and every other of his Inftitutions. Let us remember how Nadab and Abibu, as
well as Corah, died with their censers in their hands; and what the HOLY ONE
said thereupon, I will be sanctified in them that draw nigh me. Very awful also
is his threatening, Levit. 26.14, 15. If ye will not bearken to me, and will not
do all these Commandments; if ye shall despise my statutes, and if your soul
abhor my judgments, and you break my covenant; I also will do this unto you, I
will even appoint over you terror.

VII. And lastly, By the terrible threatening and the merciful preservation in
the late amazing Earthquake, CHRIST warns us to get ready for his Coming; for
death, judgment and eternity. Is it not a sign to us of the Son of man, how
quickly and suddenly he may come? Is it not a warning to us to get ready for
it? Mat. 24.42. Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your LORD does come:
Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as you think not the son of man
comes: Blessed is that servant whom his LORD when he comes shall find so
doing. Luke 12 35, 36. Let your loins be girded about and your lights burning,
and be ye as men that wait for their LORD, to open unto him immediately. Is not
this the meaning of his threatening, "Or I will come upon thee quickly? and this
the language of his sparing mercy, "Blessed is he that watches and keeps his
garments.

Surely CHRIST meant to give us a very sensible conviction of the vanity and
emptiness of this world and all the enjoyments of it; and to raise our
affections to and fix them on the things that are above, where He is at the
right hand of GOD? O what did this world and life and all the things of it seem
to us, while the earth was shaking and as it were sinking under us! So let us
always look on it as a perishing thing, and far from being any portion for an
immortal Creature. 1. John. 2.17. The world passes away and the lusts thereof,
but he that does the will of GOD abides for ever. Col. 3.3. Set your
affections on things above, and not on things upon the earth; for ye are dead
and your life is hid with CHRIST in GOD; When CHRIST who is your life shall
appear then shall ye also appear with him in glory Mat. 6.19. 1. Cor. 7 29, --
31.


Let us realize it, that there is a more terrible shake before us, than that
which so lately terrified us; even DEATH! which with a cold but strong hand
will shake our souls out of our bodies. And what will it avail us that we have
been delivered from an Earthquake now, if a few days hence the pit below, the
bottomless pit, open its mouth upon us and swallow us up? What will it avail us
that CHRIST grants this space for repentance, if after a hard and impenitent
heart we only treasure up wrath against the day of wrath! When it shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than for us; and they that went down quick
into the pit shall rise up in judgment against us and condemn us! What will it
signify to us that the Earth did not swallow us up three weeks ago, if the day
is coming upon us hereafter when we shall cry to the rocks and mountains to
fall upon us and hide us from the face of the LAMB!

The sinners of the Old world, on whom the Long, suffering of GOD waited in the
days of Noah, though they perished by a flood of water for their impenitence,
will fare better in the day of judgment than Gospel sinners. And the wicked
Sodomites, who rejected the warnings of Lot's righteous and grieved soul from
day to day, though they perished by fire here, yet will hereafter find a more
tolerable place in hell than Gospel sinners. And the sinners of Jerusalem, that
had such a Vengeance taken of them in the first and second destruction of that
famous City, yet will be less miserable than we in the day of judgment, if we
perish in their sins. For the records of their sins and of their Judgment is
written for our warning; and a Greater than Noah or all the Prophets has spoken
to us from heaven; and we have seen Him with the judgments of Providence in his
hand and with the eternal Judgment also committed to Him; and at the same time
he invites us to repentance by all the tenders and arguments of Grace that can
possibly be made to us; Wherefore of how much sorer punishment suppose ye must
we be though it worthy, both in this world and in that to come, if we go on
impenitently in those sins for which they perished? Hebrews. 10.26; -- 31.

Let these things sink deep into our hearts Philip. 4.5. 1 Peter 4.7.2.3.10, --
15.
Let your moderation be known to all men, the LORD is at hand. The end of all
things is at hand, be ye therefore sober and watch unto prayer. The Day of the
LORD will come as a thief in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the
earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up: Seeing then that
all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in
all holy conversation and godliness? looking for and hasting unto the coming of
the day of GOD, wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the
elements shall melt with fervent heat? Never the less we according to his
promise look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness:
Wherefore, Beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye
may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless: And account that the
longsuffering of GOD is Salvation --

The Earth devoured by the Curse.

A SERMON Preached at Boston Novem. 2.1727.

On a Day of Prayer and Fasting, four days after the EARTHQVAKE.

Amos I. 1, 2. The word of Amos, -- which he saw concerning Israel, in the days
of Uzziah king of Judah, -- two year before the Earthquake: And he said, The
LORD shall rore from Zion, etc.

BOSTON: Printed for J. Phillips at the Stationers-Arms on the South side of
the Townhouse, and T. Hancock at the Bible and Three Crowns near the Town
Dock, 1727.

The Earth devoured by the Curse.
Isaiah XXIv. 6. Therefore has the Curse devoured the Earth.


THIS Chapter is filled with lamentation and mourning and woe. The burden of
the whole earth it may be called. For though it doubtless refers more immediately
to the ravages and desolations made far and near by the sword of the Assirian,
or the Babylonian armies; yet it may seem also designed to represent and bewail
the general Curse which sin has bro't upon the world of mankind.

It begins thus, Behold the LORD makes the earth empty, and makes it waste,
and turns it upside down; -- the land shall be utterly emptied and utterly
spoiled; -- the world languisheth and fades away; -- the earth is defiled
under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the law, changed
the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant: Therefore has the Curse
devoured the Earth.

It is GOD's curse that is here spoken of; what He has uttered, and which he
inflicts. The subject of this curse is the Earth whereon Mankind dwell: That
etc its inhabitants are under the curse. The cause of the curse is Sin, and the
holy wrath of GOD which it provokes. The curse is the threatening of the law,
the righteous punishment of sin. The nature of the curse is described here from
the terrible effects of it, its devouring the Earth. This makes the Curse,
namely, its devouring and destructive nature.

This is according to the threatening of GOD and his Judgment passed on Adam,
Cursed is the ground for thy sake. This became the glory and holiness of the
infinite GOD, the Maker and Sovereign of the Universe.

Doct. That the Curse of the great GOD is come upon the Earth for Man's sin,
and has devoured it.

1. There is the Curse of the great and holy GOD. Behold the LORD makes the
Earth empty, etc. He only has a right to curse, and he alone has power to do
it. To Him it belongs to curse and to bless, and whom he blesses are blessed
indeed, and his curse is effectual and takes place. Psalm 94.1. O LORD God to
whom vengeance belongs.

He made the earth good and blessed it: he made man holy and happy and blessed
him. The curse is of our selves, we bro't it on the earth. GOD is the same
blessed, holy, good and wise Being, when he curses as when he blesses. There
is no shadow of change in Him. The change is in us: We constrain the infinitely
pure, wise and righteous ONE to judge thus.

What then is the Curse of GOD? It is the holy Anger and Wrath of ALMIGHTY GOD
threatened against and inflicted on sinful creatures.

1. There is the Anger, wrath and vengeance of GOD in the Curse. Nahurn 1.2.
GOD is jealous and the LORD revengeth; the LORD revengeth and is furious; the
LORD will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his
enemies.

2. GOD's threatened wrath in his Word, that is the Curse to man. The law
works wrath. We had not known the curse but by the law, which curses every
one that continues not in all things written in it, to do them. Gal. 3.10. The
threatening belongs to the Law, and contains the curse. Deuteronomy. 11.26, 28. Behold
I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; a Blessing if ye obey the
Commandments of the LORD your GOD; a Curse if ye will not obey.

3. The threatened wrath of GOD inflicted is the Curse. The curse has devoured,
says the Text. GOD has performed, and is executing the Threatenings of his
Word. It is the Execution that gives force and terror to the Law; this makes
the curse seen and felt and feared. Mal. 4.6. I come and smite the earth with a
Curse. So ends the Old Testament, the ministration of the Law. -- Thus the
Curse is GOD's righteous and terrible wrath, threatened in his word and
inflicted by his power.

II. The curse is come upon the Earth for Man's sin. The subject and cause of
the curse is pointed to in the text, Therefore has the curse devoured the
earth. It was threatened by GOD in case of sin, it was inflicted upon the sin of
man. Sin provokes GOD to curse, sin highly deserves his curse, and only sin
merits and procures it. Sin bro't it on the head of Angels, and they beguiled
man into it.

There was no curse upon the Earth till man had sinned: No, but it was full of
blessings. It was all a Paradise, crowned and filled with the bounties of GOD.
Every thing on it was very good, and the LORD blessed it. It was a seat of
happiness, a garden of pleasure, while it remained a place of holiness. But as
by one man sin entered into the world, so Death by sin. Romans 5.12. The ourse is
a train of dreadful evils preceding death, and consequent upon it.

The earth belonged to the sinner, and therefore is the curse come upon it. GOD
made the earth for the sake of his Creature Man, and gave it to him for his
possession and dominion. And for man's sake GOD cursed the earth, because it
belonged to the sinner. See Genesis 3.17, 18, 19. He yet gives particular places
up to the curse, for the iniquity of them that dwell therein.

The paradisaic face of the earth passed away with man's innocence and
integrity. It was not fit that the sinner should remain in Eden: No, he must be
driven out with a flaming sword. If he be still continued upon earth that must
be changed, to become a place of affliction and pain to him. By sin he
forfeited the good, with which GOD had filled the earth, and he was deprived
thereof. By sin he deserved pain, grief and vexation, and the earth was made to
minister it unto him. So he came by the knowledge of evil after the Good, by a
sad sense and feeling of it. He saw and felt the change without, as well as
within himself; and that it was an evil and bitter thing that he had sinned.

GOD valued not the Earth in comparison of Man, the owner of it, and his
obedience. GOD had made him in his Image, with much solemnity and a divine
pleasure. GOD had prepared and stocked the earth for him, before he made him.
GOD put it under man's feet, but reserved man's heart and soul for Himself and
for heaven. The ruin of Man was therefore more to GOD, than if the whole earth
and all the creatures in it could have perished without him. A soul in the
likeness of GOD, an immortal spirit capable of knowing, loving, serving and
enjoying GOD for ever, is more than seas and lands, fish and fowl, beasts and
all cattle. What shall be given to GOD, what has not he given, in exchange for
a soul?

The Inhabitant is greater than the house he dwells in. The things that are
made, however great in themselves, are yet less at last than the Persons for
whom they are made. The earth may well dissolve with its inhabitants.

But at last, the Glory and honor of GOD is in value infinitely beyond Man and
his Earth together. Pereat mundus, sed fiat justitia: Let GOD be glorified,
though the earth perish and man with it. GOD has cast down Angels, and he will
burn up Worlds, rather than bear with sin, or let it go unpunished.

III. The Curse has devoured the Earth. To devour is to eat up, consume,
destroy, lay waste and desolate. It is meant 1. of the Inhabitants of the
Earth, 2. of that it self, and 3. of the good and happiness, peace and comfort
that would have been, or that is yet in the world.

1. The Curse is now devouring, and through every generation of man has been
devouring, the Inhabitants of this earth in that one vast and comprehensive
part of it, Mortality and death. This is the very letter of the Curse, in the
first and short (but O how extensive!) compendium of it; In the day when thou
eatest thou shall surely die. That is to say, become mortal and miserable.

Number if you can the families and generations of men that have proceeded from
the loins of mortal. Adam: Where are they? what is become of every person that
have belonged to them? The Curse (that is Death) has slain and devoured them
all! the grave has eat 'em up! Unsatisfied death, and the insatiaable grave,
which never says it has enough.

How many millions of people die in every age of the world? not one of these
had died but for the curse! What is become of all these buried bodies? Death
and the worms (that is, the Curse) has devoured them; into dust they are
consumed away. Like a thing devoured they are turned into corruption.

They that have lived to fifty or sixty year old have almost seen that
Generation devoured which filled the earth when they came into it; and this
dragon stands ready to devour every child of man that is yet to be born.

We read of death as the devourer, Psalm. 49.14. Like sheep they are laid in the
grave, death shall feed on them. Prove. 1.12. Let us swallow them up alive as
the grave, and whole as they that go down into the pit. Hab. 2.5. Death cannot
be satisfied, but gathers unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all
people. Thus Death is the Curse which devoureth the earth.

II. There are many Plagues which belong to death and the curse, by which the
earth has been and still is devoured. The curse is a quiver full of deadly
arrows, some whereof are ever on the string, and flying every moment, directed
at the heart of one or other of the sons and daughters of men. It is a vast
collection of many woes, and every one of them makes vast destructions. You
have them in part enumerated in the 28. of Deuteronomy; All these curses shall
come upon thee and overtake thee; Cursed shall thou be in the city and cursed
in the field; cursed shall be thy basket and thy store; cursed the fruit of thy
body and of thy land, the increase of thy kine and of thy sheep; cursed shall
thou he when thou come in and when thou go out.

The world had an Epitomy of the Curse in the plagues of Egypt, those ten
plagues which devoured that serrile Country. Again we have the branches and
terrors of the Curse in the seven last plagues, the vials of the wrath of GOD:
Revel. 15.1. And I saw another sign in heaven great and mavelous, seven
Angels, having the seven last plagues; for in them is filled up the wrath of
GOD. 16.1. And I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the seven
Angels, Go, pour out the vials upon the earth. Here is the vision of the Curse;
beyond the words of men and beyond their fears.

I will single out and name some of these plagues and curses, which devour the
Earth; whereof how little a part is known by us, and how little can the least
part be described by us.

1. War is one part of the Curse; one cruel and woeful thing whereby it has
devoured the earth. From the days of Nimrod it has been ravaging and devouring;
slaying its thousands and ten thousands, laying waste Cities and Provinces. One
devouring Beast and another have been the true Images of war. So the successive
Monarchies and Tynannies are represented in the book of Daniel. Such a
devouring beast was the Assirian first; and then the Babylonian Empire; and
such the Grecian Victors, Alexander and his Captains; and then the Roman Empire
which swallowed up all in its turn; till at last it preyed upon it self and
became a morsel to barbarous nations. And thus the sword goes on devouring for
ever: The destructions are perpetual and never like to come to an end. Death
and the curse have even subsisted upon the wars, which have murdered the
nations of men. The labors and fruits of the field are the least part of its
devouring; It makes its arrows drunk with blood, and the sword devours flesh.
Would you see the Earth devoured? you have it, Dan. 7.23. And the fourth beast
shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down and break it in pieces.

2. The pestilence, that invisible sword of death, which walks in darkness,
is another form of the Curse which devours the earth. If war has slain its
thousands, Diseases have their ten thousand. Who can number the hosts of the
various kinds of mortal sicknesses and distempers, to which our bodies are here
liable? How many millions of lives do they silently sweep away every day and
week. The plague in the camp of Israel carried off in an hour 14700 souls; and
in one night the Angel of death slew in the Assirian Camp 184000. In three days
pestilence GOD can kill as many, as in three years famine, or in three months
flying before an enemy. Deuteronomy. 28.22. Every sickness and every plague shall he
bring upon thee, until he have consumed thee. I suppose that threatening to be
more than literally fulfilled from age to age, Ezekiel. 5.12. A third part of thee
shall die by the pestilence: i. e. by sickness of one kind and other. So the
wrath of the Almighty in the destruction of the lives of men is represented,
Hab. 3.5, 6. Before him went the pestilence and burning coals (i. e. Fevers) at
his feet: And he stood and measured the earth: i. e. gave over such a
proportion of the lives upon it to the pestilence: I heard (adds the Prophet)
and my belly trembled, and rottenness entered into my bones.

3. Famine and the causes of it are another part of the curse which devours the
earth. The numbers that die of famine are not equal to those that die in war,
or by sickness. It would be dreadful if it were so: for better it is to die of
these than of that. There are troops of plagues to introduce a famine; the land
is devoured before it comes. The lean kine and the blasted ears, devouring the
fat and the rank stalk, is the rueful image of this plague. Drought or sweeping
rains devour the earth and leave no food. The fire devours the pasture, and the
flame burns up the trees of the field. Joel. 1.19. Again the seed rots under
the clods by excess of rain, and the garners are laid desolate: Alas for the
day! for as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come! how do the beasts
groan, and the cattle are perplexed! If GOD send the locust, or the
caterpillar, or worms of various kind, they ear up every green thing. These he
calls the devourer: Mal. 3. II. A most proper name truly, and very formidable.
Psalm. 105.34.35. He spoke and the locusts came, and caterpillars without
number; and did eat up all the herbs of their land, and devoured the fruit of
their ground. 2. Chron. 7.13. If I shut up heaven and there be no rain, or if I
command the locusts to devour the land. A very signal part of the curse, Famine
in all the causes of it.

4. Earthquakes, storms and inundations belong to the Curse which devours the
earth. The LORD has his way in these, and they are dreadful executioners of his
wrath and holy vengeance. They are irresistible destroyers, before which there
is no standing and opposing, and from which there is no flying. The earthquake
swallows up all before it, and the fierce wind bears down all before it, and
the inundation rolls over all that stands in its way. Nahum. 1. init. The LORD
has his way in the whirlwind, and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of
his feet: -- The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is
burnt at his presence; yea the world and all that dwell therein: Who can stand
before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his
fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him.

The earth was devoured in the days of Noah by earthquakes and inundations; The
earth sank, and the fountains of the great deep were broken up. In like manner
the plains of Sodom were turned into a standing water. This overflowing Scourge
is ever in the hand of GOD, Psalm. 18.7, -- 12. Isai. 29.6. And every year
almost we hear of some threatenings or executions of the Curse after this kind,
which should GOD increase and multiply how soon would the earth be devoured by
it? -- Thus there are many plagues which belong to the curse, and which devour
the earth.

III. The curse has once already devoured the whole earth by a flood of waters,
and will devour it again by fire, in the Conflagration at the last day. Twice
will the Curse effect a universal dissolution of the earth. One woe is past
long since, and the other comes quickly.

1. The Flood devoured the Earth in the days of Noah, and it was the Curse of
GOD for the sins of mankind that did it. So it is at large related to us in the
sixth and seventh Chapters of Genesis. It is computed by learned men, that
there might then be living on the earth as great a number of people as are
alive upon it at this day, by reason of the Longevity before the flood: But
however that were, yet we must suppose many Millions of men women and children
then drowned together. They sank by shoals innumerable. At the same time the
waters tore the ground to pieces, and left it a mighty ruin, as its shores do
show at this day. Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of
the world were discovered; at the rebuke of the LORD, at the blast of the
breath of his nostrils. He made darkness his secret place, and his pavilion
round about him were dark waters and thick clouds of the sky. Psalm 18.

My context, as well as Psalm now quoted seems to point us to this very
Instance, the flood; for then indeed it was that the LORD made the earth empty
(a kind of second Chaos) and perverted the face of it: It was moved
exceedingly, and was clean dissolved: It reeled to and fro like a drunkard, and
was removed like a cottage: It sank under the transgression of men which was
heavy upon it. Yet it rose again by the power and patience of GOD; but bears
the unsightly and mortal marks of the Curse.

2. The Curse will once more devour the earth in the last Conflagration, when
the heavens and earth that now are shall be burnt up.

The Philosophers and the Poets, both Greeks and Romans, have in their writings
preserved the tradition both of the flood which has once devoured the earth,
and of the fire that will again do it. But it is the Holy Scripture which has
taught us to believe it; more especially those famous words of the Apostle
Peter, 2 Pet. 3.7, -- 12. But the heavens and earth which are now, are reserved
unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men: -- The day
of the LORD will come as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat;
the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. Here the end
of the earth by fire is positively declared, and it will be a deluge of fire.
The means of it are to us unknown, and after our best reasonings about it
altogether uncertain. Whether the LORD will rain down fire and brimstone as he
did on Sodom, or whether the fires within the earth shall break forth and pour
out mighty streams of flaming sulphur, or whether some awful Comet, like that
which some of us saw in the year 1680, passing (as that did they say) into the
flames of the Sun, may come blazing down upon this wicked Earth of ours, and
set it in a flame at once. GOD only knows the time and means of this Event, and
has them in his power; but the thing is decreed, and in its time will be
performed; and the earth will be devoured, melted and dissolved by the fire of
the Divine jealousy. Zeph. 3.8. The Day will burn as an oven, and all that do
wickedly shall be as the stubble. Mal. 4.1. "The flames will drink up the very
sea, says a learned Author, and run down the mountains and rocks into burning
Oar." And then the Curse will have devoured the Earth a second time; and there
shall be no more Curse for ever Here this Sermon may be divided.
.

IV. The latent hidden Curse is at last in men's Souls, their vitiated minds and
wild passions, their wicked and ungodly lusts, whereby they become plagues and
curses to one another now, and will be (without repentance) devoured by the
Curse of GOD in the Judgment of the great Day.

One sinner destroyed much good, spoiling himself and all about him of all the
comfort, happiness and peace that the Earth has to give. From whence come wars
which devour the earth? come they not of men's lusts that war in their members?
their pride, ambition, covetousness, hatred and revenge? What devouring beast
of prey is there in the woods, like to a Sennacherib, or a Nebuchadnezzar among
men? -- Or what is it that devours the private good of persons, towns, families
and provinces, like men's private gains and interests, their envies and
emulations, hatreds and wraths? they defraud and oppress, bite and devour one
another, and so are consumed one of another. The plague is in the heart, though
few feel it in themselves, whereby they become a curse to themselves and others.

And for this the Day is coming when the Wrath of GOD will devour souls; the
day of the perdition of ungodly men. In that fearful day the Curse will devour
all that have ever lived upon the earth, save a small remnant according to the
election of Grace.

The spiritual and eternal part of the Curse is eminently the Curse. The
outward and temporal plagues, how many soever they be and dreadful, are as
nothing to that. A body liable to a devouring grave is nothing, in comparison
of an Immortal Soul in a state of spiritual death and liable to the second and
eternal Death. That devours soul and body too, with an everlasting destruction,
and therefore is infinitely terrible. Mat. 10.28.

The last and full execution of the curse is that fiery indignation which shall
devour the enemies of GOD after the day of Judgment. Then death and hell, lost
souls and damned devils, shall be cast together into the lake of fire, and the
smoke of their torment shall ascend for ever and ever. The Curse is finally
that, Mat. 25. ult. Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels.

O how few out of the world of mankind will escape this devouring fire, these
everlasting burnings? Lord! are (...) few that shall be saved from it! How many
thousands of millions will sink down together into hell under the heavy wrath
of GOD in that terrible day! And when these perish from the earth and from
under these heavens, compared with whom Those that shall he redeemed from the
earth are but a small number, then the Earth will be devoured by the Curse in
the most woeful sense: For what is the whole Earth to these Souls?

USE. I come now to some brief Improvement of this awful Doctrine. And

1. Let us see the hideous, ugly and detestable face of sin and of satan in the
devouring Curse.

1. Of sin: What a cursed thing is it? and what a dreadful Curse to Man and to
the Earth? SIN is the devourer of both: That is the parent and cause of the
curse: That bro't forth the Dragon. Whatever the Curse has done, or hereafter
shall do, to the bodies or souls of men, must be all charged on their accursed
sins.

Hence we must estimate the great Evil there was in the first sin of man, by
which death and hell entered. For in Adam all die, and by the offense of One
judgment is come upon all men. Well said the holy Judge to the woman, who was
first in the transgression, What have thou done? It may seem to some of her
foolish children but a small sin, to take and taste of the forbidden tree as she
did: But the Curse consequent thereon gives us a terrible proof that it was a
great transgression.

We see Original sin in the Curse devouring the earth; that we are by nature
children of wrath. The curse devours Infants in the womb, and the pains and
death of the new born babes shows that they are shapen in iniquity and
conceived in sin. Yet these seem to have known least of the Curse: Job. 3.10.
Because it shut not up the doors of my mother's womb, nor hid sorrow from my
eyes.

In all the bitter sorrows and grievous afflictions of our lives we feel the
Curse. The effects must lead us back to the cause, and we see GOD judging us
for our sins Levit. 26.41. Lam. 1, 14, 18.
: The yoke of my transgression is bound by his hand: The LORD is righteous, for
I have rebelled against him. We may not say of this or that particular person,
at least very rarely, that GOD visits them for these or those particular sins;
or that they are sinners above others: But we may and should every one judge
himself before GOD when we are under his judgments; And as for a particular
place or People judged by the LORD we may freely say, Thy way and thy doings
have procured these things unto thee; This is thy wickedness and it is bitter.
Jer. 4.18.

2. Let the Curse show us the ugly and detestable face of satan. In this his
own glass see the accursed fiend; his enmity to GOD and GOD's hatred of him,
his cruel hatred to man and malice against him. He the tempter is the Abaddon
and devourer. He maliciously seduced Eve into sin, to bring the curse of GOD
upon the earth and on all her posterity. For this GOD will never forgive him,
nor should we. He was a murderer from the beginning, and still goes about as a
roaring lion seeking whom he may devour. This is the great red dragon, whose
tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven after him; and the Manchild on
earth he stands ready to devour. Rev. 12.4. He is the Original of sin and
misery in both worlds. What a horrid face is this? Draw this likewise, That he
can never repent. Let him bear the curse for ever, has the righteous GOD said,
who bro't it on the earth, and on the loved race of Men. The utmost curse of
man is, to depart accursed to him. He must answer in the day of Judgment, as
for his own apostasy, so for all the sins and woes that have filled this earth
of ours. The Son of man will judge him in the great day, and revenge upon him
this implacable and unpardonable enmity to GOD and wrong to man.

II. See the Grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and the mercy of GOD through him. O
the height and depth of redeeming love! how unsearchable is it? Contemplate it
in the following things, and be rapt in holy astonishment and thankfulness.

The SON OF GOD has in our nature been made sin, and born the curse, that he
might save us from the curse. 2. Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. Great is this mystery of
Godliness, this triumph of Holiness and Grace united! the Angels of heaven
desire to look into it! they look and worship (and so must we) before the
Mercy-seat.

To CHRIST it is owing that the earth is not utterly devoured by the Curse. It
stands by his merits; and through his obedience and death we sinners are under
the care and bounties of Providence. The covenant of Providence is built upon
the covenant of Grace, and the rain bow covers the throne of the Redeemer. All
the forbearance of GOD to us, and all his salvations from day to day, are from
his great propitiation. Therefore day and night, summer and winter, seed time
and harvest do not fail.

Nay our Lord JESUS has destroyed the devouring curse as to all that believe in
him; and he will finish the destruction of it at his second Coming, and in the
resurrection of the Just. Then he will swallow up death in victory.

He delivers souls from the curse now; from the power of sin and from a state
of condemnation. He delivers also from the wrath to come.

The glory of CHRIST and of redeening Grace is at last this, That to believers
in him there is no more curse. They may have sorrow and grief, pain and
torment, they may be sick and die; Earthquakes may swallow them, and the grave
devour their bodies; but the Day is coming when there shall be no more curse.
Revel. 22.3. There are remains of sin and of the curse here in the body, but
out of it not the least remain of either for ever and ever.

III. Is the Curse devouring the earth for man's sin? see the lamentable
hardness of sinners in their impenitency. Although men see the earth they live on
devoured by the curse, yet they will not repent. As Pharaoh saw his kingdom
destroyed by one plague and another, and yet hardened his heart. GOD highly
resents this in his own people, Amos. 4.10, 11, 12. Yet have ye not returned to
me says the LORD! though I overthrew some of you as I did Sodom and Gomorrah!
Wherefore thus will I do unto you, and prepare to meet thy GOD O Israel! This
is the Iniquity that is not purged, but men persist in it till they die.

Men are and act as if there were no curse, no sin or misery, upon earth. They
spend their days in mirth, and in a moment go down to the grave. This is deeply
resented by GOD, with just anger and from his tender compassions to us: Ezekiel.
21.9, 10, 11. Son of man, A sword is sharpened and furbished: It shall be upon
my people: Terrors shall be on them: Smite thou on thy thigh. So our LORD wept
over the insensible City, nigh unto destruction.

Every impenitent sinner is under the Curse. Hell is open before him, and the
wrath of GOD abides on him. Destruction upon destruction must be cried in his
ears. And O that sinners under the Gospel would consider how nearly the curse
concerns them, how dreadfully it threatens and hangs over them more than
others! and how heavy it will ly upon them for ever if they die impenitent and
unpardoned. -- You that have heard and known the curses of GOD's law, and have
been warned and persuaded by the terrors of GOD! You that have seen the flying
roll as it is spread abroad in the Book of GOD; seen the length and the breadth
of it, as it goes over the face of the whole earth! how should you fear its
entering into thy house and thy soul!

Be exhorted therefore to an instant earnest and deep repentance. Think who
has warned you, how GOD has warned you, to flee from the wrath to come! Ly no
longer securely and profanely in a state of sin and misery, quiet and at ease
under the curse of GOD. Will thou not fear under this Condemnation? O turn and
look unto the crucified JESUS, that he would remember thee from his Kingdom!
See how he bore the Curse to save thee from it!

May I not say, This is the voice of GOD unto City and Country in the late
fearful and terrible Earthquake, which but four nights ago ran through the Land,
and threatened every Town, every Family and ever Person with a sudden
destruction. When the hollow trembling Earth roared so in our ears, when the
ground shook to a fearful degree under us, and our houses over our heads; when
the earth threatened in a moment to open its mouth and swallow us up, and our
houses threatened to fall upon us and crush us to death; when we feared that we
might instantly go down, we and our children and households, our neighbors and
friends together into the pit; buried in the ruins of our fallen dwellings;
the Godly like the pious Sons and Daughters of Job on whom the house fell, the
wicked like Dathan and Abiram whose tents and families the earth swallowed up
at once. What the voice of GOD then was to every impenitent sinner let his own
Conscience tell him! Conscience, which was a swist witness in that amazing
minute; and bro't thy sins to remembrance, set thee to the bar of CHRIST, and
cast thee at the foot of mercy. What were thy instant cries for sparing and
pardoning mercy in that trying moment! Speak Conscience, and tell sinners again
GOD's voice to them in that astonishing Dispensation.

I call it not a Judgment, but a Threatening and loud Warning of deserved
judgment; a mid night cry to awaken us out of a sleep in sin, the sleep of
death: And then it will eventually prove a Mercy, the greatest mercy, the
happiest minute, of our whole life.

GOD from the bowels of the earth preached a startling Sermon to us; we heard
and quaked; as when he spoke from the shaking Mountain of old unto his people;
so we heard his voice and were afraid. O might the impressions be saving on us,
sanctifying and lasting, and never wear off!

Our GOD has shown us his greatness and power, his holiness and justice, his
great goodness and tender mercies: Say unto GOD how terrible art thou in thy
works! through the greatness of thy power shall thy enemies submit themselves
unto thee. All the earth shall worship thee and shall sing unto thee; they
shall sing to thy name. Come and see the works of GOD: He is terrible in his
doings to the children of men. He rules by his power for ever; his eyes behold
the nations: Let not the rebellious exalt themselves. O bless our GOD ye
people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard: which holds our soul in
life, and suffers not our feet to be moved. Psalm. 66.4, -- 9.

What a singular thing is it and very extraordinary, that there is scarce a
person now through the whole land, but has heard the terrible voice of GOD in a
dreadful earthquake? that as was said to Israel, Out of heaven he made thee to
hear his voice, so I may say to you, From the bowels of the earth he has made
us to hear it, and that a mighty voice! the earth cried out to us of our sins,
as a heavy burden, too heavy to be born; it groaned and travailed in pain, as
wanting to be delivered.

The call of GOD in such a Providence is general and universal, to every
person, (man, woman and child) and every family, in every part of the land. The
blow was immediately at every ones life, at every sinners heart, and at the
life of his soul; This night, this instant shall it be required. -- At the life
of all thine with thee was the sword pointed, those that are dearest to thee
and as thy own soul: As at the perishing of the rebels in Israel, their wives
and little ones went down together, and all Israel fled at their cry. In what
confusion did they die? without time for one regular cry to GOD for mercy.

Nothing is like terrible, take the Judgment in all its parts together, as to
be swallowed up alive by an earthquake. Indeed death in some other form may be
as sudden, and so as awful to him that dies; but this is to many, to hundreds,
to thousands together, as GOD orders it. -- The cry of fire is frightful to us;
but what is a Nei'bour's house on sire, or our own, to our houses falling on
us, or sinking with us, in an instant? In storms and inundations the winds and
waters usually rise gradually, but an Earthquake gives no notice of its
approach; nor is there any means of escaping as in most other judgments, nor
time to call upon GOD.

And yet let me tell you, There Is a day coming upon every one of us, more
dreadful than an earthquake to impenitent sinners; I mean the day of Death and
the day of Judgment.

Are not the convulsions of death within the body of a sinner equal to the
quaking of universal nature round about him? when the the earthly bouse of this
Tabernacle is dissolving, and his soul rending from his body! when the grave
opens to swallow up his body, and hell is open before him to devour his soul!
Suppose you could see an earthquake coming on at a day or two distance of time,
but you knew that you and your household must then be swallowed up: Death is all
this to persons, families, towns and provinces. It dashes the fathers and the
sons together, nor pities, nor spares, nor has mercy: As the Prophet speaks
Jer. 13.14, 15, 16. Wherefore hear ye and give ear; be not proud, for the LORD
has spoken; Give glory to the LORD your GOD before be cause darkness, and your
feet stumble on the dark mountains; and while ye look for light he turn it into
the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.

But the day of Judgment is the day of terror; when the graves shall open at
the voice of CHRIST, and the seas too, and throw up their dead, spue out the
vile bodies of the wicked; which would be glad then if the earth would kindly
open again, and cover them for ever from the face and wrath of the Lamb. Then
the most fearless and audacious sinners that are or have been on earth, the
Captains and the mighty men, with all their ungodly train of dependents, every
bond man of the same character for impiety and impenitence, shall fly to the
rocks and mountains and call on them to fall on 'em and bide them. Rev. 6.15.

Was the sudden noise of the Earthquake terrible the other night? much more will
the day of the LORD be so which comes as a thief in the night, wherein the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise. 2 Pet. 3 10. What will the noise of
a dissolving world be? -- O realize it, sinner! there is something infinitely
worse before thee than the worst of earthquakes except thou repent.

But I said that I did not call it a Judgment, but a warning and threatening of
judgment, and a call to repentance. It had been a terrible judgment if GOD had
suffered it to go further, as he easily could, and was eno' provoked by our
sins. And the wonder was that it went no further. If our houses had fallen and
buried us; if many had sunk together into the earth or been crushed to death,
as in our time it was at Jamaica, and lately at Palermo a great City in Italy;
how dreadful had the judgment been?

But O the mercy! the wonder of mercy! that after such a shock we do not hear
of one house fallen, nor of a single life lost, nor of a broken bone! GOD has
only shook his rod terribly over us, and we must say -- to us Goodness! while
we think of the severity to others, who were not greater sinners than we, when
we compare our light and means for repentance with theirs.

And I trust GOD means this Providence in mercy to many, and of great glory to
Himself in their conversion and salvation. So it may be among the greatest
favors of Providence that the land ever saw. And if it be not thus, it will be
a dreadful spiritual judgment, as the rod of Moses was to Pharaoh.

The present Impressions on the minds and hearts of all sorts of Persons by
this shake, on young and old, godly and wicked, is a token for good. What
prayers, with praises and thanksgivings, have been going up to heaven from
persons, from families, and from crowded Assemblies and Congregations; with
eager eyes and hearts, and from many a fervent and gracious one! It looks as if
GOD had ordained to himself praise and strength from the mouths of babes and
sucklings for the present: But O how soon may the fearful minute be forgotten,
and this sudden impression wear off? It will certainly do so if GOD do not
graciously fasten it by the power of his SPIRIT on our hearts; which we must
earnestly beg of him with incessant supplications, and be often looking back on
that night of trembling, and call to mind what our apprehensions, pravers and
tho'ts then were; and often put our households on thinking over their sober
tho'ts and fervent holy desires and purposes (by the grace of GOD) at that time.

Indeed such extraordinary things are not the ordinary means of conversion to
sinners. They may be so, and they ought to be so; but the impressions of sudden
frights and surprising terrors are apt as suddenly and strangely to wear off.
If men hear not Moses and the Prophets, the preached Gospel, neither will they
be persuaded though one should come to them from the dead. The congregation of
Israel lay quaking before the burning and shaking Mountain, but how few of them
were suitably or savingly affected with what they saw and heard? Yea though they
had a Moses with them, to teach and warn and entreat them.

Again, One day the sinners in Israel fled at the cry of sinking Dathan and
Abiram, but the very next day they fell a murmuring again, and called Moses and
Aaron the murderers of the LORD's people.

Yet in the hand of the SPIRIT, and by his blessing on the Word and Prayer,
this Providence may become an effectual means for convincing and converting
sinners, and for the building up of saints in faith and holiness to eternal
life. GOD of his infinite mercy grant it may be so.

He has used one more Means with us, if we will be wro't upon by things
extraordinary; and the Year has been filled with many such means, even thunder
and tempest and the flame of devouring fire. O that there were such an heart in
us! this was GOD's own wish respecting his trembling and promising people
before the burning mountain; but it strongly intimated to them how deceitful
their hearts were, and how little would come of their sudden promises and hopes
of a perpetual future obedience.

If great terror and great goodness together will affect us and work on us, we
shall be wro't upon. But these united will effect nothing without GOD's
powerful hand.

Did ever any people see or hear or feel such a shock of the earth, from one
end of the Land to the other, and yet no hurt done to man or beast? They that
have been in earthquakes in other places, in Jamaica and in Italy tell us, that
they never felt, heard and saw the like. It is the LORD's doing and mavelous
in our eyes.

Who of us is there that can now wish GOD had not done this! It was terrible
for the time, may it be joyous in the fruits and remembrance of it. Every one
is ready to say, LORD that I may never forget it! Ask this of GOD humbly, and
beg of him an experience of saving good from it.

If it have not a sanctifying effect on us, (as was hinted before) it will have
a bad one, which GOD forbid! If it be not for the better to us, it will be for
the worse; like the other means that GOD uses with men for their spiritual
good. If we do not improve this call and warning of GOD from below to us, after
the many we have had from above; it will aggravate our guilt now and our
condemnation hereafter. We must answer for this also in the day of Judgment,
That after the public Instructions of the last Lord's day, GOD came at night
to every family and to every person, and spoke to them from the Deep that lies
under; and if yet we repent not to give him glory and to save our selves from
wrath and ruin, we shall receive the greater damnation.

I now close my Discourse, as it has pleased the HOLY GHOST to do the
Scriptures of the Old Testament: Words worthy of our most serious attention and
consideration: Words full of terror to the wicked and impenitent, and as full
of comfort to the penitent and obedient: Words full of proper warning and
instruction unto both: Mal. IV. For behold the Day comes that shall burn as an
oven, and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly shall be stubblc; and the
day that comes shall burn them up, says the LORD of hosts; that it shall
leave them neither root nor branch. But unto you that fear my name shall the
Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth and
grow up as calves of the stall. -- Behold I send you Elijah the Prophet before
the coming of the great and dreadful day of the LORD: And he shall turn the
heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their
fathers, lest I come and SMITE THE EARTH WITH A CURSE.

FINIS.

