Mr. Colman's SERMON On the Accession of King George the Second. To the Throne.

Fidelity to Christ And to the Protestant Succession IN THE Illustrious House
of HANNOVER. A SERMON Preached at Boston in New England, the Lord's Day after
the proclaiming of King GEORGE the Second; August 16. 1727.

By Benjamin Colman, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Prove. XXIV. 21. My Son, fear thou the LORD, and the King.

BOSTON, in N. E. Printed by T. Fleet for T. Hancock, at the Bible and Three
Crowns near the Town Dock, 1727.

TO THE Loyal Protestant READER.
IF I had not been persuaded that the Text, and and this short Discourse upon
it here presented to thee, breaths the heart and soul of the Churches in
New England, both Pastors and People, I should not have bro't the one into the
pulpit upon the present occasion, nor have permitted the other to go into the
press at the desire of those who heard it. But as I am conscious of no motive
in the choice of the Subject, but I trust a sincere and fervent zeal for the
Religion of Christ and the Protestant Succession in the Royal Family; so I am
confident that the Gentlemen who have asked this copy of what they heard, did
it on no other motive. And if it may in any measure help to confirm and
increase a dutiful and loyal affection to CHRIST, his truths and spiritual
worship; and to our rightful King as the Defender of them; I shall not repent
the making so minute an offering at the Temple on so great an Occasion.

The Name of the great King William was ever dear to these his loyal
New-English Colonies, and that beyond expression; but there is no one thing by
which his Immortal Memory is more endeared to us, than the wise and just
provision by Him made for the Succession of the Crown in the Protestant Line.

When we saw it take place in a manner so peaceful, after so much reason to
fear the contrary, our mouths were-filled with laughter and our tongues with
singing. Our Churches rang with the high praises of God, and with continued
prayers for the life of the King and of his Son. We trusted in God that he was
building a sure House for the Protestant cause, and speaking of it for a great
while to come in the Person of His ROYAL HIGHNESS and his numerous Illustrious
Offspring; as the Lord gave to David a Lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his Son
after him and to establish his people.

But we were soon struck with horror and just detestation at the hellish plots
and rebellions, formed by a restless party in the Nation, whom no oaths could
bind, nor clemency conquer, nor the rebukes of a righteous Providence deter:
Nor were we from time to time less affected wiah a sincere and dutiful joy, to
hear how God brought their wicked devices to light, and covered the abetters of
them with infamy; while at the same time the fame of the felicity of the Nation
under the Kings wise administration reached us, and of the vast influence of
his Majesty's Counsels and power upon the grand affairs of Europe.

When some of the Clergy, doubly sworn to the King and the Faith he defended,
appeared to head the vile attenpts to disturb a Protestant Reign, we readily
took the Occasion given us to declare our astonishment at and abhorrence of the
perfidy and impiety. For what were those Englishmen and Protestants, falsely so
called, plotting to introduce, but the two transcendent plagues of popery and
slavery upon the Nations? With amazement and disdain the protestant Dissenters
beheld the villainy, and cried to the God of Heaven against the men, his enemies
more than ours. The mean while it was their humble trust in the mercy of God,
that while his Majesty was asserting the rights of Conscience, and restoring to
God his Throne in the Soul of man, God would not fail to defend his Servant on
the British Throne. God answered the faith and prayer of his people, and
returned the wickedness of the Kings enemies on their own head.

This was the language of the Addresses from the Ministers of the Province at
their annual Conventions; and I have presumed to transcribe a paragraph or two
of them, for an abiding Testimony of their servent loyalty to Christ and the
Protestant Royal Family.

Thanks be to God the Protestant Succession lives in his present Majesty King
GEOROE the Second; and accordingly the tide of Joy has run as high among us in
the happy Succession of the Son, as it did on the Accession of the great King
his Father.

May the Clemencies of his Majesty's Government extend always to these American
Churches, which know not of one single person in their Communion that is not
loyally affected to Him and to his House. May he shine long at the head of the
Protestant Interest, its powerful Friend and Protector; and reign always in the
hearts of all his protestant Subjects, being ever to them as the light of the
Morning, and as the breath of their Nostrils.

Benjamin Colman.
Boston, N.E. August 26. 1727.
Fidelity to Christ And to the Protestant Succession.
1 Chronicles. XII. 18. Then the Spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the
Captains, and he said,

Thine are we David, and on thy side thou Son of Jesse: Peace, peace be unto
thee, and peace be to thine helpers; for thy God helps thee.


OUR faithful zeal for and adherence to the Protestant Succession in the House
of Hannover, is our fidelity to CHRIST and his holy Religion. Upon the death of
the first Protestant King of that illustrious House, and the succession of his
Son to the Throne over us, my Tho'ts have fixed upon the words read as proper
to direct and excite our Allegiance, first to Christ and our holy Religion, and
then to the Royal Protestant Family, which is to us as the House of David was
under God to Israel, the bulwark and defense of the Word, worship and truth of
God. And if it may be pleasant to us as Britons and Protestants to make before
God our solemn protestations, through Grace, of an inviolate Loyalty to the House
of our King, and to pour out our prayers to God for his long and peaceful Reign
over us; How much more ought it to please and delight us as Christians to have
an higher Application of the words in our view? I mean a cordial and fervent
profession of our duty to Christ, who is David our King; by whom Kings reign,
and to whom in coming up to worship we do in effect always say, Thine are we,
thou Son of David! and on thy side thou root of Jesse! Peace, peace be to thy
Church and kingdom, cause and interest among men, and unto all its helpers, for
thy God has helped it and will do so.

THE form therefore into which I shall cast the present Discourse, is this; 1.
I will consider the words a little as they stand here spoken by Amasai to
David. 2. I will apply them to our selves in the House of our Protestant King,
And then 3. I shall apply them to our Lord Jesus Christ and that bond and
profession of Fidelity to Him, which we are all under by our Baptism.


1. I will consider the words as they were spoken by Amasai unto David. And so
I shall consider Who this Amasai was? the Occasion on which he spoke; the
Spirit by which he spoke, and the Words themselves.

As to the first we can only say with certainty, that he was of the children of
Benjamin or Judah, and one of the chief Captains, a Colonel or General Officer
that had Captains under him. But I judge he was not that Amasa who afterward
sided with Absalom, and was made the General of his Army.

AS to the Occasion of his coming to David and speaking as he did, the Chapter
gives this plain account of it: "That before and after the death of Saul many
Persons of distinction, and men of war fit for the battle, appeared openly for
David and went over to him; to assert his right to the Crown, and to bring
about a Revolution in God's time. Among these were some of Judah and Benjamin
with this Amasai at the head of them. Upon the notice of their approach David
went out to meet them; either to show them the more respect and do 'em honor,
or rather in some fear and jealousy of their design: For he had lately met with
many treacheries from his own Tribe, and his caution now was wise and just.
Wherefore he met them on his guard, and said to 'em, If ye be come peaceably to
me to help me, my heart shall be knit to you; but if ye be come to betray me to
my enemies, seeing there is no wrong in my hands, the God of our Fathers look
thereon and rebuke it. What could be said with more piety, probity and prudence
on such an occasion? The wisdom and honesty of the man equally shine forth in
this divine sentence, worthy the mouth of a King. My text is the answer of
Amasai unto these words of David; a noble and heroic Answer.

WHEREFORE in the next place let us note the Spirit, wisdom and fortitude with
which he spoke: The spirit came upon Amasai and he said. The Spirit of God came
upon him: not the spirit of Prophecy Mr. Henry.
, but a spirit of wisdom and resolution suitable to the present occasion. Words
were put into his mouth most proper to satisfy David, and to animate himself
and company. Nothing could be said more fine and great on a sudden. His words
breathe the spirit of love, and power and of a sound mind. The man spoke as one
inspired on the occasion. He was carried away in the Spirit, and spoke above
himself, to the surprise of all that heard him. Here was the spirit of wisdom
and might, the spirit of courage and of the fear of the Lord. The sincerity and
zeal, the vehemence and eloquence are equal; and so the loyalty to David and
the devotion toward God. It was spiritus audaciae et fortitudinis, a spirit of
fortitude and boldness, as became a religious Soldier and a chief Captain.
David's words to him and his company were very moving and engaging; and no
doubt but Amasai's heart was full before, what and how to speak when he came
into David's presence; but he seems to drop all that he had premeditated, and
answers under a sudden impulse of Spirit, and as in an ecstasy of love and joy;
Thine are we David, and on thy side, thou Son of Jesse! etc.

AND so I come to the Words themselves, wherein we have 1. A profession of
Allegiance to David. 2. A Prayer to God for him and his. 3. An assurance to him
of help from God.


1. HERE is a cordial and open profession of true faith and allegiance to
David; Thine are we David, and on thy side thou Son of Jesse.

THE heart manifestly went with the mouth in these words. Here is nothing of
mere compliment, flattery and daubing; but an honest and zealous heart laid
naked and open. A thousand words artfully put together would not have expressed
so much of the Soul. Tecum sumus: A partibus tuis stamus et stabimus. We are
with thee, and will stand by thee.

THEY choose him for their Prince and King; own his right to be over them, and
voluntarily subject themselves to him as their ruler and leader. Thine are we
to command us, thine to serve and obey thee: Thine to be protected and defended
by thee; and thine to assist and serve thee, wherein we are able, in all thy
rights and interests; thine in a particular manner to fight for thee, against
all thine enemies. Thine upon the terms and covenant now proposed, which were
-- that they came peaceably to help him, and that his heart should be knit to
them. Thine are we David.

2. HERE is a prayer to God for David and for all his; Peace, peace be unto
thee, and peace be to thy helpers. A familiar prayer and form of salutation
among the Jews; Peace be to thee. A comprehensive prayer for all manner of
prosperity and happiness. Peace comprehends every thing, temporal or spiritual,
from God and with men. All the blessings of goodness for body and soul, for
time and eternity, are contained in this single and short word, Peace.

PEACE to David in the text was to wish him all safety, defense and security
from Saul and all his enemies; the protection of God upon his person, the
presence of God with him in his councils and all his enterprises, and that
success and victory might ever attend him. They wish him a peaceable accession
to and enjoyment of the Throne of Israel in God's time.

THE wish is doubled peace, peace! twice peace; to express the ardency of their
desire, and to assure him the more of their sincerity.

AND Peace be to thy helpers, to all thy friends and followers, to all who are
on thy side, and favor thy righteous cause; to all that wish thee well, and
are the helpers of thy peace, secretly or openly; to all that seek the peace of
Jerusalem in thy Accession to the Crown: For the peace of the Church and people
of God was bound up in David's peace.

3. AMASAI gives him a very good reason both for the profession and prayer made
by him, and a happy assurance of peace to him and his: for thy God helps thee.

THINE are we, and on thy side, for we see that God is with thee and for thee;
and shall not we be on his (the Lord's) side? Nay, but whom the Lord God of
Israel is with and for, we will be with and for him also. Abimelech for this
reason visited Isaac, and took his chief Captain with him, to make a league of
amity; and he did wifely, Genesis 26.28. We saw certainly that the Lord was with
thee, and we said -- let us make a covenant with thee, for thou art the blessed
of the Lord.

Again, THY God helps thee, therefore peace be to thee and thine, peace must
and shall be to thee: For if God be for us who shall be against us? They whom
He helps are helped indeed: Great peace have they and nothing shall offend them.

WE may understand Amasai here, 1. That he remembers and owns how God had
chosen David, and sent Samuel to anoint him in his Fathers house. 2. How he and
others had observed Gods being with him and helping him from that day.
Before he came to Court or Camp, it was observed of him, that he was valorous
and prudent and the Lord was with him. 1 Samuel 16.18. When he first came to the
field of Battle, they had seen God wondrously with him in the slaughter of
Goliath. Afterward he went out and came in wearing the royal Commission, and his
conduct, courage and success was the envy of Saul and the talk of all the
Kingdom. God prospered him in all his ways. 1 Samuel 18.14. In his Exile God
marvellously led and guided him, covered and protected him, and twice delivered
Saul himself into his hand. All that observed him saw the justice and prudence
of his Councils, and the generous part he acted from time to time; and they
could not but own and say -- Thy God helps thee. They did well therefore to
go over to his help against the mighty, and to predict and wish peace to him
and to all his helpers.

FOR Amasai seems to prophecy as well as pray; to predict, foretell, promise
and assure peace to David and his helpers. He strengthens his hands and
encourages his heart in the Lord his God: Thy God helps thee, and will still
help; he has hitherto delivered thee, and will deliver thee from all thy
enemies: He has thus far assisted thee toward the Crown before thee, and he
will bring thee to the Kingdom, and establish thee on the Throne of Israel.

THY God helps thee, we come to be helpers under Him, workers together with
him; in the hand of his Providence, Spirit and Grace. His peace be to thee, and
in thy peace we shall have peace.

THEY do but pray for themselves, in their good wishes to David and his cause.
They come in for a share in the peace they wish him, putting themselves among
his helpers.

Finally, THEY pray believingly, Thy God will help thee; peace will be to thee:
They believe upon experience, Thy God has helped thee, and does help thee.

BUT this for the first thing proposed, which was to open the words, as they
are here spoken by Amasai to David.

II. I come now to apply them unto our selves in the House of our King, the
Protestant royal Family.

AND thanks be to GOD that we can apply them thus. Thanks be to God that there
is the Protestant House of Hannover on the Throne over us, who are unto us as
the House of David; the cause interest and kingdom of God among us depending so
much on the peace and establishment thereof.

AND thanks be to God none is more ready than the Governor, the chief Captain
over us, to make this profession and prayer of Amasai; and none more heartily
inclined than the people of God in this land to accompany him in it. How
ardently, God knows! there not being a disloyal heart known to us, nor
suspected in our Churches. We can all say to our King and to his House, Thine
are we, and on thy side: We can all freely and heartily pray for Him and His,
Peace, peace be to thee and to thy helpers. We also can look back on the late
years, and say with thanksgiving to God, Thy God has helped thee. And let us
humbly hope and trust that He will yet help.

I. THE House of our King is unto us as the House of David, chosen and raised
by the God of Heaven as the present bulwark against Popery, and for the
security of the true knowledge and worship of God among us. And may he be as
David a man after Gods own heart, ever on the side of true Religion and zealous
for it, a lover of God's house and worship, a true defender of the faith, the
high Patron of Godliness, and valiant in the cause of God to fight the Lord's
Battles. May He like David be endowed and spirited for the day and time wherein
Providence has cast his Reign, and have a great Name and Influence among the
Nations. May he be wise as an Angel of God, and ever brave and open in a good
Cause. May he be just, ruling in the fear of God, and so be to his people as
the light of the morning, and as the showers upon the grass: Yea as the breath
of our Nostrils. May he enjoy and reign in the hearts of his People, as David
did in the hearts of all Israel. May he inherit and exhibit the more than royal
Virtues and graces of David, and fall into none of his Sins. May he be owned,
protected, prosper'd and established by the Lord God of Israel as David was,
and his name be terrible to his enemies, and his arms victorious over them as
David's were; and both be always comfortable to the Church and people of God.
And after a long and happy reign like David's, may he be helped by Grace to
finish his course and die like him; leaving his earthly Dominions in peace, and
a Son to build up the House of God for future generations, while He shall go to
reign in life by Jesus Christ. So may the King and royal Family be to us as the
House of David.

2. SO let our Israel be to Him; loyal, faithful, dutiful and obedient; and
those that shall rise against him, be as Absalom, Shimei and Sheba the son of
Bichri.

HIS we are in the relation and bonds of Subjects. We profess it and swear to
it. And we are his by inclination and choice as well as Oath. We are his and on
the side of true and pure religion.

WE wish and pray peace, peace to Him and his serene House. We can do little
but pray for him and his: Let us do that servently and uprightly, and none
shall do more or better than we.

THE Day calls for this prayer, and hitherto it has done so, and it has been
graciously answered. Let this excite us to pray on; and we must be ready to add
our united small endeavors, in our respective places, and be among the
peaceable in Israel.

AND to move, animate, confirm and strengthen us in these our dutiful
resolutions, professions, prayers and endeavors, let us consider how God has
appeared hitherto for the help of the Protestant Succession. We must set up our
Ebenezer, our Stone of help, and say, Hitherto the Lord has helped.

LET us give all the glory to God, and thankfully remember to his praise the
mavelous Operations of his Spirit and Providence, first in the Act of
Parliament which limits the Succession to the Imperial Crown of Great Britain
to the Protestant Branches of the Royal Family; And then in the restraints that
have been upon the Enemies of that Succession, confounding them in their
counsels, and defeating all their conspiracies and enterprises, turning them
all into foolishness.

AND then let us implore always the continued help of God, and the watch of his
merciful and tender Providence our the Person and Family of our King;
beseeching God to establish his throne, and to build him a sure house; to bless
all his helpers and blast all his enemies; to sling out their Souls, while the
life of the King shall be bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord his God.

BUT I hasten in the third and last place,

III. TO consider and improve the Text in an Application of it to CHRIST, who
is David our King; and to that bond and profession of fidelity and love to
Christ which we are under by our Baptism. "Thine are we, and on thy side thou
Son of David: Peace, peace be to Thee and thine; for thy God helps thee.

DAVID and his kingdom were but Types of the Kingdom of Christ, the Son and
Lord of David. HE is God's King upon his holy hill of Zion; the King of the
Church and of the World; our Lawgiver, our Judge, and our Savior. We have no
King but JESUS; that is to say, none but in Subordination to and under Him the
supreme King of the Earth and of the Church. By Him kings reign, and to Him
every knee must bow: All kings must fall down before him, all nations must
serve him. We must cry before him Hozanna, blessed be thy kingdom. We must pray
for the peace of his people, and bless God for all the help and protection
granted to it. God has helped it, and will help it for ever. Amen.

IN us, in our worship and obedience is fulfilled that word of the Prophet
Hosea, 3 Chap. 5 v. They shall seek the Lord their God and David their king,
and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days. Jerem. 30.9. They
shall serve the Lord their God and David their king, whom I will raise up untto
them. Our Allegiance to Christ must be our first and chief care; on this our
eternal Salvation depends. It is our first duty and interest. Our reverence and
loyalty and fidelity to our earthly Prince is of little price in the sight of
God, and will turn to little advantage to us, if we do not first come into a
religious subjection to the Son of God, as Prince and Savior. In obedience to
Him we obey Caesar. It is Christ's Law, Let every soul be subject unto the
higher powers. In all the duty we render to Men we serve the Lord Christ, and
must do it as his Subjects and Servants; in obedience to his Precept, in
submission to his Providence, and for the sake of his people, cause and kingdom
in the World.

First then, let us say to Christ, and say it heartily, Thine are we, Thou Son
of David. We have said so in our Baptism, we say so in our open Profession. We
have said so in our solemn Self-dedications to the Lord that died for us,
whether in secret or in public: We say so in all our prayers, in every act of
worship, and in a special manner every time we go to the Table of Christ. Our
professions and declarations are those, O my Soul, thou have said to the Lord,
thou art my Lord! I am thine, save me! The Lord, whose I am and whom I serve.

THINE are we, O thou Son of David! Thine by absolute propriety and unalienable
right, made by thee and for thee, and having our being in thee; for thou art
One with the Father! Thine by purchase, for thou have bought us with thy blood:
1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are nor your own, for ye are bought with a price. Thine by
Covenant, by sacred promises and religious vows; thine by choice and thine by
contract! Thine by conquest, for thou have saved us from our enemies and from
the hand of them that hate us, that we should serve thee without fear in
holiness and righteousness before thee all the days of our life. Thine truly
and indeed if subdued by thee, and made thy willing people in the day of thy
power! For then we may know also that we are Thine by the donation of the
Father; for all whom the Father has given thee shall come unto thee! And
whosoever does so is thine to be saved by thee; eternally and unchangeably
Thine, to be blessed in thee for ever and ever, and that thou may be
magnified and admired in them through the ages of Eternity.

THIS is the Covenant of Grace made with us in Christ Jesus; Ezekiel. 34.23, 24. I
will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them; even my servant
David, He shall feed them and shall be their shepherd: And I the Lord will be
their God, and my servant David a prince among them; I the Lord have spoken it,
and I will make with them a Covenant of peace.

THUS every way, and by all possible bonds, we are Christ's: His to serve him,
his to enjoy him; his to glorify him on earth, and his to be glorified by him
and with him for ever: His and on his side; his People our People and his God
our God. We are his and for none else; none in comparison of him, none in
competition with him; We call no Man Master on Earth but in subordination to
him; for one is your Master, even Christ. Mat 23.10.

AND as this is our Christian Profession, Thine are we David! so secondly this
is our prayer for his Church and people, kingdom and interest, Peace, peace be
to it and to its helpers. So has God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into the
hearts of the true members of his Church, the Spirit of grace and supplication,
teaching and inspiring them to pray for the peace of it. Every devout Soul, man
woman and child can do this, and are ready to do it; they abundantly owe it to
the House of the Lord their God; to Him whose the House is, and to them that
belong to it; and for the sake of both they are heartily inclined to pray
always this prayer. Psalm. 122. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: They shall
prosper that love thee: Peace be within thy walls and prosperity within thy
palaces: For my brethren and companions sake I will now say, Peace be within
thee: Because of the House of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.

What less can we wish and ask for the whole Israel of God than this? Grace be
with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity! Peace be to the
Brethren, and love with faith from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!
The Lord of peace bless his people with it; give them peace always by all means.

THE reign of Solomon was a type of the kingdom of Christ, his spiritual reign
in and over elect Souls. Peace was the blessing of Solomon's reign, and this is
the blessing of Christ's kingdom, who is the Prince of peace, who is our peace,
whose kingdom is righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.

WELL then may we wish and cry peace, peace to this Kingdom of the Son of
David, in whom righteousness and peace have met and kissed each other; that
glory may dwell in our land.

GOD has spoken peace to the Church and kingdom of his Son, and therein
directed us to pray for it. Isa. 66.12. I will extend peace to her as a river,
and the glory of the Gentiles as a flowing stream. Psalm. 72.3, 7. The mountains
shall bring peace to the people, and the little hill, by righteousness; in his
days the righteous shall flourish, and abundance of peaee so long as the moon
endures. These promises of a gracious God we must turn into prayers, and make
pleas of them in our prayers. Gal. 6.16. Peace be on them and mercy, and upon
the Israel of God. 1. Pet. 5. ult. Peace be with all that are in Christ Jesus,
Amen.

AND now in the third and last place, let us consider the assurance we have of
being heard in this prayer, and put our Amen to it, -- It is so and it shall be
so; Peace will and must be to the Church and kingdom of Christ, -- for his God
helps him.

HE who established the Throne of David, will much more build up and establish
the Kingdom of his dear Son. The promises to David and his kingdom were but
typical and prophetical of the glory and perpetuity of the Kingdom of Christ,
and in him they are fulfilled in their utmost extent. I need only turn you to
that famous place, Psalm. 89.20, -- 29. I have found DAVID my servant, with my
holy oil have I anointed him: with whom my hand shall be established, my arm
also shall strengthen him; I will beat down his foes before him, and plague
them that hate him; My faithfulness and mercy shall be with him, and in my name
shall his (...) be exalted: I will set his hand in the sea, and his right hand
in the rivers: He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father, my God and the rock of
my salvation; Also I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the
earth: My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand
fast with him; His seed will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the
days of heaven.

MANY like promises of peace and success to Christ's kingdom, under the type of
David, we find in the Book of God. And he must reign till all his enemies are
put under his feet. Nebuchadnezzar saw this in his dream: He saw a stone that
smote the Image of jealousy, Idolatry and and all false worship and impiety,
and the stone became a great mountain and filled the whole earth: As Daniel
interpreted the matter, so we have seen it, The God of heaven has in these
latter days set up a Kingdom never to be destroyed, which shall break in pieces
and consume all these, and it shall stand for ever. Dan. 2.35, 44.

THE Churches help stands in the Name of the Lord; and if He help, the Church
must stand and prevail. Our Lord Jesus bids his weak and timorous Flock not
fear, for it is the Father's good pleasure to give them the kingdom. If he help
who shall withstand and oppose? On this rock he has built his Church, God shall
help her and that right early; God is in the midst of her she shall not be
moved: The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved; he uttered his voice, the
earth melted. Psalm. 46 5, 6.

NOW this is a sufficient reason 1. for the profession we make to Christ, Thine
are we, for thy God helps thee: And 2. for the prayer, Peace, peace be to
thee and thine, for thy God helps thee. This assures peace to the Church,
this the rock of salvation to it; thy God helps thee.

THE Lord lives, and blessed be my rock, and let the God of my Salvation be
exalted. He creates peace, peace. Faithful is He that has promised, who also
will do it. The Lord sits upon the floods, the Lord sits King for ever:
The Lord will give strength to his People, the Lord will bless his people with
peace.

AMEN! blessed God and Savior! It is so, it has been so, and so it shall be!
We wish it, we believe it, we pray for it, and do as thou have said; And let
the house of David (which is the Church of the living God) be established for
ever.

We would join the multitudes that attended Christ with their joyful
Acclamations, on his descent from the mount of Olives: Luke 19.38. Blessed be
the king that comes in the name of the Lord! peace in heaven and glory in the
highest.

WE would join in the loud voice of those out of all nations and kindreds, and
people and tongues; Rev. 7.10.12. Salvation be unto Him that sits upon the
throne, and to the Lamb! Amen: Blessing and glory and wisdom and thanksgiving
and honor and power and might be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

