A SALUTATION TO THE BRITAINS, To Call them From the Many Things, to the One
Thing needful, for the Saving of their Souls; ESPECIALLY, To the poor unlearned
Tradesmen, Plowmen and Shepherds, those that are of a low Degree like my self,
This, in Order to direct you to know God and Christ, the only wise God, which
is Life eternal, and to learn of him, that you may become wiser than your
Teachers.

By ELLIS PVGH.

Translated from the British Language by Rowland Ellis, Revised and Corrected
by David Lloyd.

They have forsaken me, the Fountain of living Waters, and hewed them out
Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no Water,

Jer. ii. 13. Philadelphia: Printed by S. Keimer, for W. Davies, Bookbinder, in
Chesnut-Street. 1727.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE AUTHOR.
To the READER,
ELlis Pugh was born in the Parish of Dolgelle, in the County of Merionith, and
Dominion of Wales, in the Sixth Month, 1656. His Parents were religious People,
and he was left Fatherless and Motherless, like a Sparrow alone upon the
Housetop. His Father dyed before he was born, and his Mother a few Days after:
And when he was in his Youth, going with the Multitude into Folly, it pleased
God by his Judgment, to stand in his Way, and caused him to consider the Things
that belonged to his Soul's everlasting Peace. And in the Eighteenth Year of
his Age the Lord visited him more eminently, kindling a Zeal in him to serve
his Creator more diligently, 1674, when those People suffered Persecution.
having been also reached by the Testimony of John-ap-John, one of the People
called Quakers.

GOD, who promised to be a Father to the Fatherless, took Care of him, and
endued him with his Grace; and about the Year 1680, gave him a Part of the
Ministry of the Gospel of Christ, (notwithstanding he was not one of the wise
of this World, nor had humane Learning;) yet he was made, a profitable
Instrument to turn diverse from Vanity, and to exhort and strengthen many in
their Spiritual Journey in his Native Land, and also in this Country, where he
finished his Course.

IN the Year 1686, He and his Family, with diverse of his Acquaintance began
their Journey to Pennsylvania, and whilst they stayed for the Ship to be ready,
there came great Trouble and Exercise upon him, so that he was sick for some
Days; and in that Strait the Lord showed unto him, that they should meet with
Troubles and Exercises in their Journey, and that he had a Work for him in that
Country, and that he must return there again. After they sailed, they met with
Storms, Straits and Troubles; and having been upon the tempestuous Sea all
Winter, they arrived in the First Month at Barbados, where they were joyfully
and lovingly received by their Friends, and the Summer following, in the Year
1687 they arrived in Pennsylvania. After he had lived there till the Year 1706.
a Concern remained upon him to visit the Inhabitants of his Native Country,
according to what the Lord revealed unto him before he came from thence. And
after he had performed that Service, which was beneficial and acceptable to
many, he returned to his Family in the Year 1708. and a Concern came upon him
to write the following Book, to direct the unlearned Britains of low Degree, to
know God and Christ, the Life eternal; which he wrote for the most Part in his
last Sickness.

HIS Conduct in his Family, in his Neighborhood, and in the Church was meek,
loving, and peaceable; and his Ministry living, profitable, and to Edification,
and his Conversation innocent, chaste and coupled with the Fear of God,
honorable among his Friends, and of good Report among all People generally;
and being patient in his tedious Sickness, contented to wait the Lord's Time,
he slept with his Fathers on the Third Day of the Tenth Month, 1718. in Favor
with God, giving him the Glory.

Courteous Reader,

THOU have here some Account concerning the Author, who was a Man fearing God,
and eschewing Evil. Read without Prejudice, consider impartially, and God
direct thee in the Way that pleases him, that thou may in the End obtain
the Crown of Life, which the Lord the righteous Judge will give to all that
love his Appearance, 2 Timothy iv. 2.

Farewell
The Testimony of the Monthly Meeting at Gwynedd, in the County of
Philadelphia, in Pennsylvania, concerning our Friend, Ellis Pugh, the Author of
the following Treatise.
THE Lord, out of his great Mercy has long forbore, and often called after us,
and in some Measure opened our Eyes to see the Emptiness and Vanity which we
followed, and at that Time in a Concern for our Souls, endeavored to seek the
Way to please God. And in the Beginning of our assembling together in this
Condition to wait upon the Lord, it pleased him to prepare our Friend and
Countryman, Ellis Pugh, to be a serviceable Instrument in his Hand, to cherish
and instruct us in Meekness, and Tenderness, to obey that which God made known
unto us of his Will, and to follow and understand the Operation of his Spirit,
discovering to us the Snares of the Enemy of our Souls, his good Will, and
loving Care (among others tha were fitted for the same Service) has been a
more profitable Means in the Hand of the Lord, toward directing and edifying
of us in the Way of Truth, than the Ministry we had been under from our Youth;
for by the Tenderness and Influence which came as Dew upon our Souls, while we
sat under his Ministry, we believed his Doctrine was of God. He continued with
the same Diligence in his Service, until he found in his Heart to visit his
Country People in his Native Land.

WE believe his Visit was acceptable, where there was an open Door to receive
it. After his Return, his Service and often Visits to us were profitable.

IT is with us to make some Mention of the Lord's Dealings with him, concerning
which, we have observed, that the Lord was near unto him in the Time of his
Trial. After his Return home, three of his Children, in the Flower of their
Age, dyed within One Month, who from their. Youth walked orderly and hopeful.
He mourned not as one without Hope. Strength was given him to bear his
Affliction. He said, If he could bear his Affliction acceptable in the Sight of
God, it would be as Marrow to his Bones. Which Testimony was public, to the
Comfort of the Hearers, in a public Meeting, amongst several other Things,
which was to Edification. His Residence was then nearer to us than before,
which rendered his Life and Conversation more conspicuous, and his Fellowship
more known unto us. He was of a meek and quiet Spirit, considerate and solid in
his Judgment, of few Words, and his inclination was to support Love and Unity
amongst all, more especially in the Household or Faith; honest and careful in
his Calling, les^ he should give just Cause to make any uneasy, which induced
several to speak of the good they received by his chaste Conversation; and his
loving and comfortable Expressions while he was amongst them, in their several
Families, his Memory will not soon wear out.

AT the Time we had Notice of the Departure (out of this Life) of our Friend
Griffith Owen, (a Man worthy of being remembered in the Church and Country,
whose Name is of good Savor in the Public Place where he lived, because o^
his religious Behavior in his Calling among, the People of every Rank) at that
Time he was taken sick, which by Degrees proved his dying Sickness. This
Sickness continued about a Year and three Months, so that he was not wel^ able
to follow his Calling. In the mean Time, his natural Life grew weaker: But his
Candle ( to wit. the Light of his Soul) shined brighter as the impartial Reader
may see, and feel his Love and Good Will in the following Treatise, as his last
Will and loving Salutation to his Country People the Britains, in his native
Country, which he wit^ his own Hand wrote in hi^ own Language, in the Time of
hi^ long Sickness, when the Object o^ ^is View was toward that which ^ertains
to Eternity, more especially ^o those, or for the Sake of those ^o whom the
Salutation of his Life ^eached over Sea and Land, for the Encouragement and
Instruction of them that were seeking the Way ^o Sion, the New Jerusalem, the
Ci^y of the Great King, whose Walls and Bulwarks are Salvation.

THERE are many among the ^rofessors of Christianity, tha^ ^peak and write
concerning her Glory by ^tudy and Premeditation, to gather ^hro' the Strength
of humane Learn^ng and Wisdom, to hold forth the Beauty and Excellency of her,
even ^he Lamb's Wife. Thou slalt see, if ^hou read impartially, what he
^sted and felt of the good Word of ^ife, and of the Way that leads to ^he
Father, in which (we believe) ^e rested, and laid down his Head (...) Peace.

IN the Time of his Sickness while he could walk about, near his End, he
visited us, to wit, the last Meeting he was among us, weak in Body, but servent
in Spirit, with a great deal of Love and Tenderness, as one taking his last
Leave saying that the Lord granted him his Desire to come and visit us once
more; often putting us in Mind to keep in Love and Unity, and to keep out from
amongst us, as much as we could, all Strife and Discord; and when any Thing
appeared, which had a Tendency thereunto, that Hands should be laid without
Delay, to end it. And that none should depend upon his own Hand, Eye or
Balance in Judgment.

HE was fitted to counsel others because his Life and Conversation was
answerable to his Testimony amongst his Family tender and careful to counsel
them to live in the Fear of God.

WE looked upon him, and our Thoughts were concerning him, that he was as one
who had finished his Work and that the Time of his Dissolution drew nigh: And
that he might say, in the Words of Paul, according to his Measure, I have
fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give me at that Day: And not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his Appearance.

Signed in the Behalf of the said Meeting by John Hugh, Edward Foulk, John
Humphrey, Edward Robert, Hugh Griffith, Meredith David, Thomas Pugh, Rowland
Ellis, David Meredith, Thomas Evan, Robert Evan, Owen Evan Cadwalader Evan,
Robert Jones, Evan Evans, John Evans.


A SALUTATION TO THE BRITAINS, etc.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Creation, Fall, and Redemption of Mankind.
IN the Beginning God created all Things according to his own Pleasure, and Man
after his own Image (superior to all the Creature^) in a pure State, fit to
serv^ and glorify his Creator: ^ut the Serpent, the envious subtle Spirit
deceived Eve, and she saw that the forbidden Fruit was a desirable Thing; so
Adam and Eve broke the Command, by yielding Obedience to the Wicked One, and
Disobedience to God; so Sin and Transgressio^ took Hold upon Mankind: But their
merciful Father visited them in the Cool of the Day, to chastise and take Care
of them, saying, that the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head.

SO a Stream of Corruption, Si^ and Disobedience followed the Children of Men
like a Leprosy: Bu^ the Seed of the Woman was the Help and Defense God gave
them, to the End they might overcome Satan which Seed is Christ, the same tha^
(by Corruption in the Hearts of People) was slain from the Foundation of the
World, and was ordaine^ also, in the Fullness of Time, to lay down his Body to
redeem People, and to bring them home, and reconcile them to their Father. For
he was given as a Light to the Gentiles, and Salvation to the Ends of the
Earth, Isa. xlix. 6.

AND although Satan and Corrupttion made People unfit, and not able of themselves
to perform any acceptable Service to their Creator, yet by the Assistance of
the Eternal Word, and Light which enlightneth every one that comes into the
World, the Holy Men of God in former Ages worshipped God according to his Will.
And the Religion which the Lord commended was Job's Religion; for He said unto
Satan ^wor^ (...) thou set thy Heart on, or con^ my Servant Job, that there is
(...) like him in the Earth, a perfect and (...) upright Man, one that fears
God and escheweth Evil, Job i. 8. And as the wise Man said, (the Conclusion of
the whole Matter that has been heard, is,) Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man, Eccl. xii. 13.

BUT all Manner of Sins and Iniquities grew up among People, when at the same
Time they acknowledged there was some Service due to the Lord, required at
their Hands, and Satan taught them to invent some Form, some Image of Service
and Worship, some after one Manner, and some after another, seeking to please
God, not in his Fear, nor yielding Obedience to him, all setting up their own
Idols, and bowing thereunto: So the World was filled with Superstitions and
Opinions; and thus the Devil did set People at work to hate one another, and to
make War, and to shed the Blood one of another; so he made the World a
Wilderness, and Darkness ruled therein: Therefore he was, called the Prince of
this World, John xiv. 30. also the Prince of the Power of the Ai^, the Spirit
that works in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. ii. 2.

AND as Satan brake into every Vineyard, so the Lord by his Prophet complained
against the Children of Israel, saying, They have forsaken me the Fountain of
Living Waters, and hewed them out broken Cisterns that can hold no Water, Jer.
ii. 13. For Men in the State of Nature did, and yet do rather love their own
filthy Waters than the Water of Life which Christ is giving to those that come
unto him, which Water washes and heals the Soul; but the Enemy sets People at
work, to (...) for dead and poisonous Water which he makes sweet and desirable
to the Concupiscence of Flesh and Blood.

BUT for all this, God continue^ in his Love and Mercy toward the Workmanship
of his Hands, sending his Prophets, rising up early, to call and invite them,
causing the Covenants of Peace to be made known unto them, if they would return
unto him, from their evil Ways, as may be seen, Isa. lv. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8. H^!
every One that thirsleth, come ^e to the Waters! He that has no Money, come
ye, buy and eat, yea, come buy Wine and Milk, without Money and without Price.
Wherefore do ye spend Money for that which is not Bread, and your Labor for
that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
good, and let your Soul delight it self in Fatness. Incline your Ear, and come
unto me: Hear, and your Soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting
Covenant with you, even the sure Mer^ies of David. Seek ye the Lord while he
may be found, call ye upon him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his
Way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.
For my Thoughts are not your Thoughts, neither are your Ways my Ways, says the
Lord.

AND the Testimonies of the true Prophets are full of the like Invitations,
upon the same Conditions; That is, to turn unto the Lord, from Falsehood; but
People choose their own Ways, their own Thoughts, and their own Prophets,
rather than the Lord's. Because the true Prophets pronounced Woes and
Destruction against them for their Sins, if they would not return to the Lord,
from their evil Conversation; but the false Prophets cried Peace to the
Ungodly, saying, Is not the Lord amongst us? Evil will not come upon us; the
Sword and the Famine will not be in this Land. AND as it is natural for Flesh
and Blood to believe the best of themselves, and the worst of those that speak
against them, therefore they hated and persecuted the true Prophets, by putting
them to Death as false Prophets. So it was in the Days of Ahab: The Children of
Israel, after they had forsaken the Covenant of the Lord, and thrown down his
Altars, and slain his Prophets with the Sword, and heaped unto themselves
Companies of false Prophets, so not without Cause the Lord complained, saying,
Hear, O Heavens, and give Ear, O Earth; for the Lord has spoken, I have
nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me. The Ox
knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib; but Israel does not know, my
People does not consider, Isa. i. 2, 3.

NEVERTHELESS God, (slow to Anger, and of great Kindness) sent his only
begotten Son to the rebellious Vine-dressers to be killed; he was willing to
die for Sinners, to redeem them from their Captivity; who when he was born at
Bethlehem Judea, the Lord sent his Angel to inform the Shepherds; not the wise
and learned, full of their own Righteousness; but to the poor, mean,
illiterate, and those of low Degree; such as were keeping Watch over their
Flock by Night: And lo the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and the Glory of
the Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid. And the Angel said
unto them, Fear not, for behold, I bring you good Tidings of great Joy, which
shall be to all People; for unto you is born this Day, in the City of David, a
Savior which is Christ the Lord. This shall be a Sign unto you; ye shall find
the Babe wrapped in Swaddling Clothes, lying in a Manger, and suddenly th^^e was
with the Angel a Multitude of the Heavenly Host, praising God, and saying,
Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace, good Will toward Men. And as
the Angels were gone away, into Heaven, the Shepherds said one to another, Let
us go even unto Bethlehem, and see this Thing that is come to pass which the
Lord has made known unto us. And they came with Haste, and they found Mary and
Joseph and the Babe lying in a Manger. And when they had seen it, they made
known abroad, the Saying that was told them, concerning this Child; and all
they that heard it, wondered at those Things which were told them by the
Shep^erds: But Mary kept all these Things, and pondered them in her Heart. And
the Shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God, for all the things that
they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them, Luke ii. 8, 9, to 21.

THESE are such People as preached Christ at his Birth, to the ^dmiation of
their Hearers: These believed and received the Heavenly Message, and made Haste
to see him; when they saw him, they believed in him, and returned glorifying
and praising God. The Shepherds were not offended at his Appearance,
notwithstanding it was low; laying in the Manger, in Swadling-Clothes, but that
was not such a King as the wise and great Men sought for.

WHEN the Time came, for Jesus to fulfill his Ministry, to preach and work
Miracles, the World could neither receive nor know him, because their Way was
not his Way. But who received him? The poor illiterate Fishers, and Men of low
Degree. These also he has chosen to be his Disciples: These were not filled
with Self-Righteousness, nor high Thoughts of themselves, nor of their own
Religion: They had Place to receive God's Kingdom, therefore they left all, and
followed Christ, who came to put an End to the many Offerings, Sacrifices and
Traditions which were Shadows and Signs of his coming, who is the great
everlasting Sacrifice which puts an End to all, fulfilling the same by the one
Sacrifice of himself, with which he bought all Mankind, by bringing in the New
Covenant, and a more Heavenly and more Spiritual Ministry.

AND although the High Priests and Scribes, and Pharisees were reading and
waiting for the Coming of Christ, yet they did not know him nor receive him,
nor believe, because he did not please them; for he testified against them, and
their false Ways; and though he wrought heavenly Miracles among them, as healing
all Manner of Diseases and raising the Dead, yet his Word had n^ Place in them;
for they were full o^ human and earthly Wisdom; they would not come unto him,
that they might have Life, but more and more hated him, and became his Enemies:
And in Truth, this is the Stone which the Builders in every Age have rejected;
This is the Word that was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, (that is the poor
unlearned Fishers of low Degree) and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the
only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, John i. 14.

BUT some will say, How came these unlearned Men to know Christ, and the
Learned Men not know him? The Answer is, because the Fishermen were poor in
their Spirits: Therefore, the Kingdom of Heaven was to be theirs; the Poor that
know a Hunger and Thirst after Righ^eousness, the Promise is to them, they
shall be filled, Mat. v. 3, 6. These ^ow their Savior, by his Grace, Virtue,
and Heavenly Inspiration: ^or God revealed himself unto them: ^or when Peter
said, Thou art Christ, ^he Son of the living God, Jesus answered, Flesh and
Blood has not re^ealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven, Mat.
xvi. 17.

THESE were empty, and in a Sense of their Want and Thirst of their Souls, they
were ready to come to the Fountain, and to drink of the living Water, which was
sweet unto them: And therefore they loved Christ, and adhered unto him, and he
also knew and perceived who were sick, and who wanted a Physician: Therefore he
called them, and after they knew the Preciousness of him, they would say, T^
whom shall we go? Thou have the Words of eternal Life, John vi. 68.

BUT the wise Men and learned, they were full, and had no Room to receive; they
were whole, and wanted not a Physician; neither did they enquire for so mean a
Thing and so contemptible as Christ w^ in their Sight; therefore because (...)
outward Appearance was not more glorious to answer their Minds, they rejected
him who was the Stone that was to be the Head of the Corner, and was the
Fountain of Living Water, and the Light of Life, Psalm cxviii. 22. Mat. xxi. 42.
Rev. vii. 17.

NEVERTHELESS Christ had Followers, whom for their Spiritual Poverty (as
abovementioned) he made Choice of, and they made Choice of him. Unto such he
taught the Law of the New Covenant, which exceeds that of Moses, preaching unto
them the Gospel of God's Kingdom, setting himself forth to be a Way, a Light, a
Spirit, a Life, a Leader, a Fountain, a Vine, and a Shepherd to them in such a
Way as the World could not, nor can receive him; but rather reject and gainsay
him, as may be seen at this Day among the Professors of Christianity.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Scriptures, and our Savior's spiritual Appearance.
CHRIST said, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: No Man comes to the
Father, but by me, John xiv. 6. But some say, the Scripture is the Way which
leads us to the Father, and the Scripture is the Truth, which is to teach and
guide us, and to declare unto us the Will and Commands of God, and so we hope
to have Life. But what Scriptures tell us, that Life stands in the Treatise, or
in the Writing? Do not the Scriptures direct, and call People to Christ, and He
calls to himself: He said unto the Jews, that strove against him, Search the
Scri^tures, for in t^em ye think to ^a^e eternal Life; they are they that
testify of me, and ye will not come to me that ye may have Life, John v. 39, 40.

AND are not the Professors of our Age exactly of the same Mind with those
^ro^essors? They would have Li^e in the Scriptures; but they will not have
Christ, who is the Life. Jesus said, I am the Light of the World; he that
follows me, shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life,
John viii. 12. But they say the Scripture is the best Light, which every one
ought to follow; which (they say) is sufficient to bring People to Salvation.
Is not this Darkness, B^asphemy and Error, That is, to put the Scriptures
before and above Christ, and render it more sufficient to lead to Salvation?
which they cannot make out, for Christ was given a Head to the Church about
every Thing.

BUT bear with me, to expostulate a little in the Defense of Truth, in
Scripture-Words. In the first Place, I do believe there is none will deny but
every one that is under the Name of Christ^an must acknowledge Christ is the
Word that was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst his Apostles: What then? Was not
this the Word which was from the Beginning with God, John i. 14. And God was
the Word; all Things were made by him. In him was Life, and the Life was the
Light of Men. There was a Man sent from God, whose Name was John; the same came
to bear witness of the Light. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear
witness of that Light, John i. 1, 3, 4, to 12.

BUT why may it not be said in like Manner, the Scriptures were sent from God
to bear Witness of the Light? But the Scripture is not the Light; but it was
sent, that it might bear witness of that Light; but was the true Light which
lights every Man that comes into the World: Which cannot be said of the
Scriptures, for there is but a small part of the World that received the
Scriptures, and many of those have not as yet received the true Light which
lights every Man, shining in the Darkness of Men's Hearts, and the Darkness
not comprehending it. The World knew him not, nor received him; but as many as
received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe in his Name; but Experience tells us, that People may receive the
Scriptures, and read them, and not receive Power to become the Sons of God; for
the Power and Life is in Christ, who is the true Light, and those that receive
this Light, and walk (...) they have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood
of Jesus Christ his Son c^eanseth them from every Sin.

BUT the Professors of Christianity. who in Contentions one against another,
set up the Scriptures above Christ; they also forsake the Fountain where they
may be washed. Is not this he whom the World hates? And this is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men loved Darkness, rather
than Light, because their Deeds were evil; for every one that does Evil hates
the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved: But
he that does Truth, comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest
that they are wrought in God, John iii. 19, 20, 21.

HERE the Reason is manifest why Men love Darkness; because it is easier for
them to sin in Darkness, and they hate the Light, because it makes manifest all
their evil Deeds, and reproves them in their own Hearts; and in as much as
they neither know it, nor its Virtues, any further than something reproving
them, and that they do not intend to return at the Reproof thereof, but to
gather Reasons to say and plead against it, that it is nothing but a natural
Light, and that it is not sufficient to lead to Salvation.

BUT o^ a Truth, if Christ, as he is God, and has all Power in him, and as he
is the eternal Word, the holy Spirit, the Life, and the Light and all true
Wisdom and Knowledge treasured up in him, is not sufficient to lead to
Salvation, I know not what is sufficient, if he is not: The Spirit that guides
into all Truth, concerning whom Christ said, the Spirit of Truth whom the ^orld
cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye know him,
for be dwells with you, and shall be in you I will not leave you comfortless,
I will come unto you; at that Day you shall know that I am in the Father, and
you in me, and I in you, John xiv. 17, (...)

BUT the Professors of this Age will not have Christ to be in his People; how
then are they Christ's? Now, if any Man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his; and if Christ be in you, the Body is dead because of Sin, but the
Spirit is Life because of R^ghteousness, Romans viii. 9, 10. For when Christ
comes to take Possession in the Hearts of People, he sets up his Kingdom, Law
and Government; that is, the Law of the Spirit of Life which sets free from the
Law of Sin and Death; then the Devil loses his Kingdom, and loses his
Subjects and Government in the Hearts of People when Christ comes to cast him
out, and take the Possession.

THEREFORE the old subtle Enemy sets all his Crast to work to keep the Children
of the World in his dark Kingdom, granting them all outward Means to deck
themselves to appear religious, and make them bold and confident of their being
in the Way: They may have as many Church-Traditions and Customs as they please,
they may read the Scriptures, and what Books they will, and they may talk of
Christ that he died for them, and rose, and ascended into Heaven, and that he
sits at the right Hand of the most High; for Satan is fully assured that all
this is not sufficient to carry his Servants out of his Hands, therefore he
will allow them every Thing but the Knowledge of Christ within, the Hope of
Glory.

THE Apostle said, Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith, prove your
own selves, know you not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except
ye be Reprobates, 2 Cor. xiii. 5. Satan knows this, but he is not willing his
Subjects should know it, therefore People will reckon themselves to be in the
Faith, and acceptable enough, though they know not Christ in themselves a Light
to shine upon them, and to show them their Condition, as he is the Spirit of
Truth, to guide them into all Truth, as he is Life eternal, to quicken and heal
the Souls that are wounded, weary, and heavy laden, and to remove them from the
Kingdom of Darkness into his, own Kingdom, to be under his Government, that so
he may dwell in them, and they in him; Here Satan loses the Field, and his
Subtilties come to be manifested.

FOR if a Man had all Books and all Knowledge that may be in the World, and
knew the Principles of every Profession; and treasured them up in his Head, yet
except Christ takes Hold and Possession of his Heart, there will be for all
That, Room for Satan to make his Abode, and to work and keep Possession; for
where Christ has not Place to work on the Hearts of People, it is most certain
that Satan works there; for he is the Spirit that works in the Children of
Disobedience, and he leads them into all Wickedness.

BUT the Rule which Christ promised to give his Followers, to walk by, and to
be with them to the End of the World, was his own Spirit: Lo I will be with you
to the End, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you forever, even the Spirit of Truth, John xiv. 16, 17.
who was to abide with them and to be in them; the Comforter, the Holy Spirit,
who was to teach and guide them into all Truth. Is not this the one thing
needful, without which it is in vain for Man to think that he can do any thing
toward the Work of his Salvation?

HE is also sufficient of himself to lead his Followers in the Paths of Life;
he gives them Power to be Sons of God, for whosoever are led by the Spirit of
God, these are Children of God, Romans viii. 14. But the Dark People will say,
Whosoever are led by the Scripture, are Children of God.

AGAIN, if ye through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live,
Romans viii. 13. But they say that through the Scripture the Deeds of the Body
are mortified; but God through his Spirit did reveal to his People what Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man, the
Things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. ii. 9. So the
Things of God no Man knows, but the Spirit of God.

THEREFORE there are too many of the Professors of Christianity, because they
will not receive the Spirit of God, they neither know nor understand the
Scriptures, nor the Things which he has prepared for them that love him: But,
says the Apo^stle, we received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit
which is of God that we might know the Things that are freely given us of God.

BUT the natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God, for they
are Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. ii. 12, 14. And as Christ said, It is the Spirit
that quickneth, and it is Life eternal to know the Father and the Son, Joh. vi.
63. xvii. 3. And how is he to be known but by the Revelation of his own Spirit
in the Inward Man? for his Saints and Followers know him inwardly, to be a
Light to enlighten their Paths, and Life to their Souls, a Fountain of living
Water, springing up to everlasting Life, John iv. 14. to drink thereof that
they may never thirst: And inwardly he refreshes and comfort the Souls that
are weary and faint in the Way of their Pilgrimage. This is the Life Eternal,
which is freely given to as many as open the Doors of their Hearts, to take in
the King of Glory.

THIS Living Water is to be freely given, to the poor unlearned Tradesmen and
Plowmen, Shepherds and Fishermen, if they but turn their Minds inwards, and
there humble themselves before their God, in a Sense of his Mercies and
Deliverance, his Love and Long-Suffering toward them, even waiting to be
gracious unto them: For the Lord is near to them that seek him while he may be
found, and call upon him while he is near. Therefore is not the Privilege of
knowing the Fountain of Living Waters in our selves made sure to us, the
Shepherds and poor Tradesmen, rather than to the Men of Learning (who have
filled themselves with the Knowledge that puffs up) or to the great Men? for
it is a great Work for them to come down so low, to be taught by that which is
so little in their sight, as is the Seed of God's Kingdom; for it is too common
in them the least of all Seeds.

SO it is possible for the Shepherd following his Flock, and the Tradesman at
his Calling, to come to this Fountain, and drink thereof, to comfort and
refresh their thirsty Souls; for the Lord fills the Hungry with good Things,
and the Rich he sends empty away, Luke i. 53. but to the poor and contrite
Spirit will he look, and God dwells with him that is of a contrite and humble
Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble, and to revive the Heart of the
contrite ones, Isa. lvii. 15. So the Prayer of the poor Publican went up to the
Lord with more Acceptance than that of the Pharisee.

OF a Truth, when those poor come to be acquainted with spiritual Visitations
in their Hearts, their Souls come to be revived and renewed, and have a godly
Zeal kindled in them to serve the Lord; these come to know Christ within, to
give Life to their Soul^; these can be true Witnesses that in him there is
Life, and as John the beloved Disciple said, He that believes on the Son of
God, has the Witness in himself, he that believes not God, has made him a
Liar, because he believes not the Record God gave of his Son, and this is the
Record that God has given to us, Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son, 1
John v. 10, 11, 12.

THEREFORE they who hold Life eternal to be in the Scriptures, and in the
Sacraments, these do not believe God's Record of his Son, but seek to make him
a Liar; because they do not believe that Life eternal is in his Son: Again, He
that has the Son, has Life, and he that has not the Son of God, has not
Life. See here the Apostle did not mention any Thing to be put with Christ to
make up the Life; but he that has the So^ has life; because every Thing
necessary to Life and Salvation is treasured up in the Son. Again, He the has
not the Son of God, has not Life.

AND of a Truth, those that are without Life, they are yet dead in Trespasses
and Sins, without being made alive with Christ. Whatsoever they have; they are
but dead Things to them, this agrees well with the old British Proverb, Heb
dduw heb Ddim, and Duw a digon: But some poor Ignorant People will say, we know
nothing, we must believe what learned Men tell us, because they read and know;
but that is not the Way for thee to become one of Christ's Sheep; because if
the Fishermen and unlearned in the Days of old had believed the learned Men,
they had never believed in Christ, nor became his Followers.

AND although there are Teachers in this Age who do profess that they believe in
Christ, yet if thou follow their Doctrine, thou will never come to seek the
Spirit of God to lead thee, that thou may become a Child of God, nor ever
receive Jesus the Light of Life, who gives Power to such as receive him, to
become the Sons of God, by being born not of Blood, nor of the Will of the
Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God, John i. 12, 13. Therefore it is much
better for thee to take the Apostle's Advice, If any of you lack Wisdom, let
him ask of God that gives to all Men liberally, and upbraideth no, and it
shall be given him: Every good Gift, and every perfect Gift is from above, and
comes down from the Father of Lights with whom is no Variableness nor Shadow
of Turning, Jam. i. 5, 17.

BUT when the Lord begins his Work on the Hearts of People, showing their
sinful State, and raising Fear in them concerning their Souls, and a Desire to
know the Way to get Peace with God in their Conscience diverse will incline to
advise with their Teachers, or such as they look upon to be wise and able to
give them Counsel, and it is very rare but they meet with a Remedy much worse
than the Disease, for Want of the Physician's knowing the Work of God upon
their own Souls; they will be like to advise them to shun melancholy Thoughts,
lest Satan tempt them (...) Despair, and to lose themselves; p^^swading them
they need not be afraid of their Souls, if they live like their Neighbors, or
else to invite them to take the Sacrament, and cry Peace to them, and throw
some Water to quench that Fire which God has begun to kindle by his Judgments
against Sin in their Hearts. For Si^ shall be redeemed with Judgment.

BUT what shall a Man do when he comes to be afraid of his Salvation, and his
Sin becomes a Burden to him, and knows not how ^o get Ease? But was it not upon
such that Christ himself called? saying, Come, unto me all ye that labor, and
are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest; take my Yoke upon you, and learn of
me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart, and ye shall find Rest to your Souls,
Mat. xi. 28, 29. and those that know Christ, by the Spirit of his Grace,
teaching and guiding them into all Truth, these know, that there is no Teacher
like unto him, for he is t^ Anointing, to whose Teaching alone the Apostle
directed the Saints, at the Time when there were many Antichrists gone forth to
deceive and beguile the true Christians, 1 John ii. 20. Therefore he said unto
them, Ye have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. If that
which ye have heard from the Beginning, she remain in you, ye also shall
continue in the Son, and in the Father, Ver. 24.

AND to establish them on the immovable Rock, that they might be able to
withstand all Tempests, Winds and Floods, and also re-mind them of their strong
Tower and Fortress, he said, The anointing which ye have received of him
abides in you, and ye need not that any Man teach you: But as the same
anointing teaches you all Things, and is Truth, and no Lie; and even as it
taught you, ye shall abide in him, Ver. 27. So the Unction remains in the true
Christians, and they in him, and thereby ^^ntinue in the Son, and in the
Father. These are the Branches which are g^fted in the true Vine, to whom he
says, Abide in me, and I in you: As the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self,
except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me, John xv. 4.

WE see here how needful it is for every true Christian to know himself grafted
in Christ the true Vine, and after he is so grafted, to abide in him, (that is)
in his Grace, Spirit and Inspiration, in his pure Nature, Virtue, Love, and
Fellowship in the inward Man. This is the living Sap that the Vine is full of,
which ascends up to the Branches, causing them to grow, flourish, and bring
forth sweet Fruit, well pleasing to the Husbandman, which naturally springs
forth from the incorruptible Root. Such Fruits no Man can bring forth. Although
he makes Use of all his Understanding and Strength, endeavoring to form his
Actions to answer the Scriptures, and break off his Sins that naturally sprout
from the Root of the wild Vine, which will spring out through the Branches, let
Man do what he will, until he be cut off from the wild Vine, and be grafted in
the true Vine.

BUT after some Men strive, and labor against Sin, and fail to get Victory,
they are forced to yield, and drop Anchor in the Quicksand, and Place of
Despair, believing there is no Power to be obtained to overcome Sin; but that
the Saints and People of God must live in it all the Days of their Lives; and
this Mistake is by Reason of their not coming to Christ in themselves, to have
his Spirit that leads unto all Truth, which will be a Rudder and Compass for
them to steer the Course of their Pilgrimage; for those that are led by him, he
brings them to their desired Port, where he gives them Ease and Rest, that is
in himself, who is the true Vine, of whom, it was said, Whoso^ver abides in
him, sins not, 1 John iii. 6.

AND again, he says, I am the Vine, ye are the Branches; he that abides in
me, and I in him, the same brings forth much Fruit, for without me ye can do
nothing, John xv. 5.

BUT is it not Pity that this Doctrine must not go into the Pulpits in
Christian Churches, to enlighten People and show them the Way of Salvation? But
the Devil is careful to keep it out, lest he should lose his Kingdom and
Government; for as the Lord said by his Prophet, If the Prophets had stood in
my Counsel, and had caused my People to hear my Words, then they should have
turned them from their evil Wa^ and from the Evil of their Doings, Je^ xxiii.
22. But the Voice of Christ and his Prophets and Apostles runs consonant and
agreeable the same Way like a Stream, but the Voice of the World is in it self
full of Confusion, and quite contrary to the Voice of the true Shepherd; but it
is the Voice of a Stranger, therefore the Sheep run away from it, because they
know not the Voice of Strangers, John x. 5. He is the Door of the Sheep; they
that enter in by him, shall have Life, but such as climb up another Way, they
are Thieves and Robbers. And he said, My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them,
and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal Life.

IS not this the Sum of the Religion of a true Christian, and the Substance of
Salvation, the one thing needful? That is, to know the Voice of Christ within,
who is the true Shepherd, and follow him in all Things, and have of him eternal
Life. This is also the Grace that appeared, even the Grace of God that brings
Salvation to all Men, teaching us to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to
live soberly, righteo^sly, and godly in this present World, Tit. ii. 11, 12. We
see that this was he that taught the Apostles. It may be also seen, that such
as take upon them to learn by the Scriptures, are not able to deny Ungodliness
and Worldly Lusts: They also confess their Lives and Conversations are not like
the Lives of the Holy Men of Old, of whom the Scripture tells us, that they
were led by the Spirit and Grace of God; but the Reason of that is, the Want of
their coming to accept of being led by the same Spirit, and taught by the same
Grace, for the same Sap in the true Vine causes the Branches to bear the same
good Fruit. There is the same Virtue in the Grace to teach a godly Life, and
the same Power in the Holy Spirit to guide into all Truth. And it is given to
the Sons of God, to be with them to the End.

BUT great is the Deceit of the old subtle Enemy, to keep People in his dark
Kingdom, by making them believe, that the Spirit of God is not to be had to
lead his People in these Ages. Therefore what may be thought of that? If the
Spirit of God does not lead any in these Days, then God has no People nor
Children upon the Earth: It is true enough, that the Devil would have it so.
For if the Spirit of God does not lead a Man, he will be led by his own fleshly
Lust, and the Spirit of this World, that is the Spirit of Satan, which leads
into all Falsehood and Iniquities; for the Spirit of Man is subject to be led by
some Spirit, and there are but two Spirits, and two Natures, to wit, Good and
Evil, to govern the Hearts of People.

THEREFORE the Enemy knows, that there is nothing draws a Man out of his Reach,
but the Spirit of God, for which Cause he darkens and bewitches the Inhabitants
of the Earth, who are made drunk with the Wine of Babylon's Fornication, by
putting Examples before them, of other Ways to be Children of God, besides
being led by his Spirit: But these Ways are so void of the Cross, that after a
Man comes at them, he may sin as much as he will, to satisfy his fleshly Lusts,
and to serve the Devil: And although he allows them to have the Scripture to
read, yet he will never grant them to come to that which the Scripture calls
unto: For the Scriptture (as was said before) calls all to Christ, and to the
Knowledge of him as he is to his Saints, a Spirit, Life, Light, Grace,
Fountain, Vine, Shepherd, to work the new Birth.

IT is true, that the Scriptures were given forth by the Inspiration of God,
and sprung from his Spirit, which was in the Holy Men and Prophets, Christ
himself and his Apostles who were in the Spirit, and through the Spirit gave them
forth, and their Testimonies are true and profitable, for Counsel and Comfort,
and Edification to every Traveller, that has his Face toward New Jerusalem:
But it is possible, that a Man in a State of Nature (who is for fulfilling his
Lusts) may sin at his Pleasure, notwithstanding he has the Bible, which he
could not do, if Christ by his Spirit had taken Hold and Possession of his
Heart and Soul.

BUT some may say, If the Scripture had taken Hold of the Heart of Man, it
might help him to forbear Sinning. Yet who will open the Heart to receive the
Scripture, if not the Lord? He opened the Heart of Lydia, to receive what was
spoken by Paul. In him alone is Power to open People's Hearts. For where Satan
keeps Possession, no good Thing shall come in, until he come that is stronger
than he, to cast him out, and take Possession, and open the Heart to receive
in, all the Goodness which God is pleased to vouchsafe to his People for their
Edification.

FOR of a Truth, when Christ, by the Spirit of his Grace, takes hold on the
Hearts of People, the Fear of God comes to take Place in them, causing them to
tremble and cry for Help to depart from Iniquity. And the Lord is near, and
ready to stand by them, against; the Temptations of Satan: And as they stand
faithful, he distributes to them of the Spirit of his Grace, to leaven, change,
and make them new Creatures. These come more and more, to be Partakers of the
Divine Nature which is in the true Vine, to change their Nature and Affections,
teaching them to love God, and love all Good, and love all Men, love their
Enemies, and pray for them, and do good to all Men.

HE likewise teaches them to hate all Evil, and flee from it, as from a mortal
Enemy, who is for breaking their Peace with the Lord; which Peace they value
above all other Things: Unto such the Cross of Christ is easy, and his Burden
light; and it is easier for them to keep God's Commandments, than break them;
for to break them, is to break their Peace.

AND of a Truth, this is the Religion which the God of Heaven did and does
commend, and highly own, as has been said before. Have tho^ considered my
Servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright
Man, one that fears God, and escheweth Evil. Is not this the Conclusion of
all that was heard, and the whole Duty of Man? And he that has this Religion,
what Part soever of the World he may dwell in, of what Language, Tribe, or
Kindred soever, or of what Profession soever he may be, this is the Man whose
Lamp will shine at his latter End, and will find the Door of the Kingdom open.

BUT the Man that neither fears God, nor keeps his Commandments, nor
eschewe^ Evil, though he makes high Profession of Christianity, and boasts of his
Faith, Belief, Religion and Works, with great Boldness and Presumption, when he
looks Death in the Face, his Lamp will be out, and his Confidence will fail,
for the Sting of Death torments him, and Sin gnaws the Conscience, and his Robe
is filthy and not washed, nor made clear in the Blood of the Lamb, Rev. vii.
14. that so the Soul might have been fit to stand before the Throne, with the
Saints in white Raiment.

BUT now, O sinful Man, it is lamentable for thee to remember thy Ways and
Works, and also to remember how Jesus has been knocking at the Door of thy
Heart, while the Day of thy Visitation lasted, calling for Repentance and
Amendment or Life, and thou did not hearken unto him, but followed thy
lascivious Desires, which drown thy Soul in the bottomless Pit.

CHAP. III. Showing what is Saving FAITH.
VErily great is the Presumption which Satan works in the most abominable
Sinners, making them believe they are in the right Way, and in the true Church,
where there is no Danger of losing Salvation: Therefore we may hear the
Dru^kards, Adulterers, and all manner of Evildoers boasting of their Religion
and boldly pleading for it, the they have no Religion at all.

IT is very common, the more er^nious, the more is their Presumption and false
Confidence; for the more sinful, the more blind they are; less is their Love to
their Fellow Creatures, and the more severe are their Censures against all
other Professions, and without Mercy sacrificing all but themselves to Hell
Fire.

THIS is very apparent in the Members of the Church of Rome, and by corrupted
Nature creeps into other Professions, making Sinners insolent; for though there
are too many People unregenerated, yet nevertheless they will pretend to have
Religion, and set up some Structure, under which they shelter and promise
Heaven to themselves, though they are Servants to Corruption, lulling themselves
to sleep easy in Sin and Iniquity.

THEREFORE, some will boldly say, We have Faith in Christ, who dyed for us, and
bought us by suffering on the Cross, and he took our Sins upon himself, and
they were reckoned Sins to him who was without Sin. So it will he counted that
we shall be Partakers of his Righteous^, though there is no Righteousness (...).

IS not this a Doctrine full of Presumption, to make People more bold and
confident to multiply their Sins freely at the Lord's Charge, throwing all
their Filth and abominable Sins upon Christ, who died for Sinners, to deliver
them, and to wash and cleanse them from their Sins? For he is the Fountain that
sprung up to the House of Judah, and to the Inhabitants of Jeru^lem, to wash
away Sin and Iniquity.

BUT by this Doctrine Christ did not come to wash People from their Sins, but
rather to justify them therein; that so they may sin as much as they will with
Boldness, and without Fear, and cast it upon Christ, who said to Peter, If I
wash ^hee not, thou have no Part in me: Yet it is possible a Man may be ready
to say, though I am an unclean Sinner, yet I believe in Christ, (...) that he was
conceived by the ^^ly Ghost, born of the pure Virgin his Miracles and
Sufferings, his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, to sit at the right
Hand of the Majesty on high.

ALL these Things are real Truth in themselves, and the Follower of Christ
enjoy the Salvation which he has prepared through his Sufferings; but Satan
knows all this, and the Devil did confess, that he was the Son of God, though
they had. n^ Part in him, but sought to fly from him, Mat. viii. 29.

BUT the Man will say, I believe Christ has ransomed me by his Death, and paid
the Price for me^ It is true enough that the heaven^ King did buy all Mankind,
an^ paid for them, to the End the^ might be set free from Sins, (...) drawn
from the Kingdom of Sa^^ and out of his Chains, and tra^ into his own Kingdom
that they (...) be there under his Banner, ^aw and Government.

BUT what Portion have thou in this King or his Kingdom, whilst thou live in
Disobedience to him and his Government, any more than the Pagan, Indian, or
Barbarian, purchased with the same Blood, and paid for? But he will soon
answer, I have heard or read of my Redemption, and how Christ suffered for me,
and believe it all.

THEN I may also say, I have heard there is a King France, in Authoriry,
governing and putting forth Laws amongst his Subjects, and they, fight under
his Banner, in Obedience to the King and his Commands: But though I believe all
this (...) be true, yet I have no Mind ever to be one of his Subjects, nor to
come under his Banner, to be obedient to him: Therefore what Right have I in
that King, or in his Kingdom, Laws or Government because I am engaged under
another King, who (possibly) may be h^ greatest Enemy? And therefore I have no
Part nor Portion in that King, nor in his Kingdom, nor Government.

BUT the Man may say, the Scripture says, He that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved: Therefore I do believe. Is not this some Part of the Work of my
Salvation? To believe Christ in Reality, is the true saving Faith and
Groundwork of Salvation, to which the true Baptism is joined. If thou do
believe in Christ, thou must give Credit to Christ; otherwise how can thou
say that thou believe in him? For when he preached on the Mount, setting
forth the Law of the New Covenant, which was to be a Law to every true
Christian, and also the spiritual Fruits they were to bring forth, so that all
should be known by their Fruits; for Fruits ^d, and do distinguish between the
and false Christian.

THERE were false Christians, false Prophets, and false Teachers to come in
among the true Christians; therefore he made appear how to distinguish them. Ye
shall know them by their Fruits: Do Men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thistles? (...) very good Tree brings forth good Fruit, but a corrupt Tree
brings forth evil Fruit: And to corroborate, and confirm the Testimony, he
said again, a good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, neither can a corrupt
Tree bring forth good Fruit: Every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is
hewn down and cast into the Fire, Mat. vii. 16, 17, 18, 19, 21.

BUT what will the irreligious Man (that talks of believing in Christ) say to
these Things? If thou do believe in him, thou must also believe in these
Things; and if thou believe these Things, (...) must come to an Amendment
(...) Life, and pray to God for Grace break off thy Sins, and bring forth Fruit
meet for Repentance; without which there is here no Promise, but to hew thee
down, and cast thee into the Fire, where the Devil and his Angels are.

^EE here farther, what Christ ^h. Not every one that says unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that does the Will of my
Father which is in Heaven: And toward the Conclusion of his Sermon, after he
had set forth his heavenly Law, he said unto them, Every one that hears these
Sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish Man, who
built his House upon the Sand, which House fell when the Wind and Storm came:
Thus will the Hope of the ungodly fail in the most needful Time. When mortal
Sickness, Oppression and Hardship come, then (...) will call upon him, Lord,
Lord, have not we confessed thy Name? but this will be the Answer, I never knew
you: Depart from me ye that work Iniquity, Mat. vii. 23.

BUT of a Truth, those that truly believe in Christ, have chosen him to be to
them a God, a Father, a Prince and Shepherd; a God to be feared, and to be
honored, and to be bowed before; and to give him the Glory, Reverence, and
Obedience, and to love him with all the Heart, with all the Soul, and with all
the Mind; for this is the greatest Commandment: There such a one can believe in
the Lord, and trust in him, and depend upon his Mercies, that he will hear his
Prayer in the Day of Distress, and keep him from the Hour of Temptation, which
shall come upon all the World, to try them that dwell upon the Earth, Rev. iii.
10.

AND he is unto them a Father and takes Care of them, and (...) them to partake
of all Things necessary for their Bodies, and Souls; and they, as obedient
Children, do receive those Mercies from his Hand with Humility and
Thankfulness, accepting the same as Obligations upon them, to bless his great
Name for all his Mercies.

HE is unto them a Prince to put on them the spiritual Armor, even the Word of
God, which is the Sword of the Spirit, the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of
Salvation, that they may overcome the Devil, and all his Wiles. The Lord also
goes with them to every Battle; and these by fighting under his Banner, do
receive Faith, and Belief of their Conquest and eternal Reward.

THESE are Servants under their Master, earnestly purposing to be obedient and
faithful in their Service to him, that he may order and govern (...) them, and
put every one upon (...) appointed Business; and they keep their Places, they
believe and depend upon their Lord, that he will plentifully reward them beyond
their Deserts.

AND they take him to be their Shepherd, to hearken to his Voice and follow
him, departing from all their carnal Desires, and choose to bear the Cross: For
those that believed in him, left all Things to follow him.

IS it not in vain for the ungodly Man to make mention of his Faith in Christ,
and yet refuse Christ to be his Lord, and rebel daily against him, choosing to
serve the Devil?

FOR Faith is wrought by Love, and Love by keeping God's Commandments: As
Christ said, If ye love me, keep my Commandments: He that has my Commandments,
and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be
loved of my Father, and I will love (...) and I will manifest my self unto him
If a Man love me, he will keep my Words, and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our Abode with him, John. xiv. 15, 21, 23. So all
the Servants of Christ do love Christ, by keeping his Commandments; and he
loves them, and gives them Faith, and Strength for a spiritual Armor,
whereby they may withstand their carnal Desires, and the Temptations of S^nd.

BUT the Man that makes a Talk of his Faith, Belief and Christianity, but does
not come under the Law of the New Covenant, all is in vain to him; and as the
Apostle says, concerning those of the Circumcision, how they were bound to
keep the Law, but if thou be a Breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made
Uncircumcision, Romans ii. 25. So it may be said to the irreligious (...) if thou
art a Transgressor of Christ's Law, thy Christianity is become Antichristian.
Again, if the uncircumsised therefore keep the Righteousness of the Law, shall
not his Uncircumcision be accounted for Circumcision.

SO the Nations who have had little, or no Knowledge by Reading, or Preaching,
and yet know God writing his Law in their Hearts, and by the Assistance of his
Grace, come to lead a godly Life, will not their Unchristianity be counted
Christianity? But some Professors of Christianity will not grant that any can
be Partakers of the Salvation which Christ has prepared for them, but such as
have heard of his Sufferings: How then came all People through all the Corners of
the World, to be made Partakers of the Death which came by Adam, who never had
any Knowledge of Adam, nor his Fall?

THE Serpentine Seed went (...) to bruise, and to wound; but the Seed of the
Woman (even Jesus Christ) was given to heal, and relieve; and many were healed
in former Ages, before he appeared in the Flesh, and became Partakers of the
Salvation which he prepared for them, through his Sufferings. Job knew that his
Redeemer lived, and that he should stand at the latter Day upon the Earth, Job
xix. 25. so he bemoaned himself in the Time of his Affliction, concerning the
Days that were past, saying, Oh! that I were as in Months past, as in the Days
when God preserved me, when his Candle shined upon my Head, and when by his
Light I walked through Darkness. As I was in the Days of my Youth, when the
Secret of God was upon my Tabernacle, when the Almighty was yet with me, Job.
xxix. 2, 3, 4, 5. So Job had Faith in Christ, whom he knew to be his Redeemer,
and a Light shining (...) him, to inlighten his Ways; at he might walk through
Darkness, and also know him to be a Rock, which poured him out Rivers of Oil,
Job, xxix. 6.

THIS is the Rock of Ages, of whom David spoke, O Lord, my Rock, and my
Redeemer, Psalm xix. 14. It was Abraham's great Joy, to see the Day of Christ,
and he saw it, and was glad, John viii. 56. And of a Truth, the Godly in all
Ages, and in every Corner of the World were and are made Partakers of Christ;
for they are washed from their Sins, and do receive the Benefit of what he did
for them, in that they witness him in themselves, to be a Light to enlighten
their Paths; Life, to quicken their Souls; Grace, to teach them to live godly;
and a Fountain of living Water, for the inward Man to drink, and to wash their
Garments.

BY these Means, thousands were Christ made Partakers of the Benefit (...)
Christ, and his Sufferings, and Redemption, before he appeared in the Flesh, to
perform what his Father had ordained him: That, is to offer himself a Sacrifice
for all Mankind, and to reveal his own spiritual Ministry the more clear,
bright and shining, drawing it from under the Shadows and Types which figured
out his Coming, to set up the Law of the New Covenant, and to write it in the
Hearts of People, and to teach them himself.

BUT it is true, that the same Light is to enlighten, the same Spirit to lead
and to quicken them, the same Grace to teach them, the same Fountain to drink
of, and the same Faith that Abraham (the Father of the faithful) had, which he
received from God, for his Faithfulness and Obedience, when he was yet
uncircumcised. So Christ had Sheep in all Ages and Corners (...) the World, yet
not gathered to the one Fold; nevertheless they knew Voice, leading them into
the Waters here and there in the World, and they hear the Shepherd's Voice,
leading them to be washed.

FOR John saw in Heaven a great Multitude which no Man could number, of all
Nations, Kindreds, People and Tongues, standing before the Throne, and before
the Lamb, Clothed, with white Robes, and Palms in their Hands, glorifying God
and the Lamb, Rev. vii. 9. And one of the Elders said to John, these are they
which came out of great Tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them
white in the Blood of the Lamb; therefore are they before the Throne of God,
and serve him Day and Night, in his Temple, and he that sits on the Throne,
shall dwell among them, Ver. 13, 15.

LET us observe here the Reason, why these were come to obtain so high a
Dignity, as to stand before the Throne; was it not because they had washed, and
made white their Robes, in the Blood of the Lamb? For this Washing makes a Man
a Christian; giving him a Part in Christ, and making him fit to praise God for
ever. Therefore let every Soul be humbled before God, and put his Mouth in the
Dust; let him lay aside all Presumption: See that thou art fearing God and
eschewing Evil, and that thy Heart and Soul become subject to his Law, so that
thou cannot commit Evil which displeases him and breaks the Peace of thy own
Conscience: This was the Law that bound Joseph to be the Servant of God, and
could not give way to gratify sinful Lusts, to do the Devil's Will, and offend
his heavenly Father, when his Master's Wife upon all Occasions, importuned him
to lie with her, which Joseph looked upon to be Death to his (...): Therefore
said, how can I do ^his great Wickedness, and sin against God, Genesis xxxix. 9.

O, let us observe how much Joseph exceeded the Professors of Christianity in
this Age? For many of them would be glad of such ^n Opportunity to commit Evil,
and to gratify their carnal Desires, without much Thought of the Soul; not Fear
to offend the Almighty, (who daily feeds them with his many Mercies, by
nourishing and preserving them.) But indeed the unregenerate State is the broad
Way that leads to Destruction, let People profess what they will: And as the
Apostle said, Of a Truth, I perceive that God is no Respecter of Persons; but
in every Nation, he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted
with him, Act. x. ^4, 35. So by the Means here before mentioned, our Redemption
comes to be complete Salvation to us: This also is the Cup of Sal^tion which is
offered; whosoev^ drinks not of this Cup cannot (...) healed; but the Man
that has these Things, has Christ; and the same can truly say, I am my
belov^^^, and my beloved is mine.

CHAP. IV. Showing a Remedy against SIN.
PURE and holy is the Almighty God, who has no Pleasure in Wickedness, neither
shall Evil abide with him, who hates all the Workers of Iniquity, Psalm. v. 4.
Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord and who shall sit in his holy (...)
He that has clean Hands and a Heart, Psalm, xxiv. 3, 4.

THEREFORE he calls for Purity, Service and Obedience, from his People;
affording them Ability to perform that which he requires at their Hands; who
is making his Children new Creatures, by purifying of them, and destroying in
them the Work of the Enemy, which is Sin, even the only Cause of Separation
between, Mankind and their Creator.

BUT there are many that love Sin, and delight to live in it, and do not seek
Help from God to overcome it. Some others would fight with it in their own
Strength, and (...) fail of overcoming it: Therefore the greatest Part fall
into one Judgment; That there is no Victory to be had over Sin; but that the
Saints and true People of God, must be Sinners all the Days of their Life: But
this is no Evangelical Doctrine ^ut the Evidence of Sinners: They likewise say
that the best World of the Saints are Sin.

BUT it belongs to us here, in the first Place, seriously to consider what is
Sin, and from what Root, Spirit and Nature it springs, and is brought forth.
Must not Sin be some Evil? If it is not Evil, how can it be called Sin? But if
it is an Evil, it must spring from an evil Root, Spirit and Nature, and is, in
some Measure, the Fruits of the Devil's Kingdom, which are all unacceptable to
God.

WHAT then must we think of this Doctrine? To wit, that the best Works of the
Saints and People of God, are Sin: By this their best Deeds must be evil; this
is a Doctrine unscriptural, sensual, dark and hurtful. They throw Dirt on the
Gospel, to defile the Work of God, and the heavenly Fruits of his Kingdom,
which sprung out through his Saints, Prophets and Apostles, and all the godly,
and those that were grafted in the Vine, to wit, Christ, and their Words and
Actions springing from the Root and Spirit of the divine Nature; so that their
Waters were clean, issuing out of the Rock where there is no Impurity.

BUT it is possible they will confess, that the Words and Works of the
Prophets, and Apostles, and holy Men of old, did proceed from the Spirit of
God, and Pure Root: And if they will acknowledge that, then I shall say, is not
God the ^ame to his People? Is not Christ the same, the Rock of Ages? The Water
out of the Rock is the same; the Vine and the Sap thereof is the same; and the
same Spirit to lead into all Truth, which is to be with the Followers of Christ
to the End of the World: Also Christ's Sheep are the same, and the same
Shepherd they follow: The same God ^eacheth his People himself under the New
Covenant, and is to be with them to the End; that they may know him from the
least to the greatest, a God and Teacher to them, Jer. xxxi. 34.

THEREFORE I demand, how can the best Works of the Saints, be Sin, since they
must spring out of the same Rock and same Fountain? But perhaps some may say,
all the Things of God are good in themselves, but we are corrupt, and our
Vessels turn the Taste of the good Things poured thereinto, and make them
corrupt and sinful. This may be granted as to the old dirty Vessels, the
unregenerated Men, who are yet in the State of Nature, without being born
again; but Christ makes his Saints and Followers new Vessels, fit to receive
and keep the new Wine of the Kingdom of God; for, said he, No Man puts new
Wine into old Bottles, else the new Wine does burst the Bottles, and the Wine
is spilled, and the Bottles will be marred, but new Wine must be put into new
Bottles, Mar. ii. 22.

BUT of a Truth, those that plead for Sin (which is the Devil's Service, and
the Fruits of his Kingdom) must drop their Anchor in his Doctrine, which
Doctrine has darkened the Christian World, and made drunk the Inhabitants of
the Earth, by making them believe that the Spirit of God, in these Days, does
not lead the Children of God, and that Christ is not in his Saints, nor have
they his Spirit; and that it will not avail People to wait for the Knowledge of
Christ in themselves, a Life to quicken them, and a Light to enlighten them, a
Leader to guide them into all Truth, nor a Fountain to wash and refresh the
Souls; therefore here is no Help for People, but to live in Sin all the Days of
their Lives.

THE End and Design of the Devil, by this Doctrine or Sermon, i^ to wash
Christians away from on the Earth, and to shut out Christ and his Kingdom, and
Reign, and Government, from amongst and out of the Hearts of People, that so he
may set up himself, and establish his own dark Kingdom, Reign, and Government,
in the Hearts of People. And indeed he has carried on his Work to a large
Degree, in the Night of Darkness which he brought in over the Professors of
Christianity, by making them Strangers to Christ and to his Work in their own
Souls; teaching them to dig Wells for dead Waters; despising and neglecting the
Fountain of living Waters, and sowing among them all manner of false Doctrine;
making them believe that they must serve him (that is, Satan) and live in Sin
all the Days of their Lives, promising them Heaven after Death.

SO some will allege, that it is the Will of God that Sin remain in the
Saints, to keep them humble: This is not only unscriptural, but clear contrary
to the Nature of God, and against all good Reason; for Sin is the only thing
that makes Separation between Men and their Creator; and God, through all the
Scripture, calls his People out of Sin, to Holiness, Perfection, Cleanness of
Hands and Purity of Heart, that they may stand with him in his Holy Place.

SO the Nature of God is pure and holy, hating all manner of Iniquity, Sin and
Transgression, which cannot dwell with him, how then is it that God desires
that Sin should dwell with him in his Saints? Is it not the Will of God to
sanctify his People? 1 These. iv. 3. But the Will of the Devil is to keep
People Sinners, whilst they are upon the Earth, for every Sin is some Degree of
Service to him, and inclines to please him; and so far it is against God, and
tends to make him angry and displeased. But is it not a great Mistake, that is,
to take the Will of the Devil instead of the Will of God?

THESE do manifest themselves to be Strangers to God and his Divine Nature, who
is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; and where God dwells, his Presence is
a Consuming-Fire to destroy all the Dross and Filth: For he sits as a Refiner
of Silver in the Hearts of his Saints, to purify and to wash them from all Sin.
And the Debate is not, That Sin is in me, or, that Sin is in thee, but the
Cause of it is for want of Christ's having his perfect Work in us, whose Blood
cleanses from all Sin.

BUT where they say, It is necessary for the Saints that Sin be in them, to
keep them low and humble; This is but Ignorance: For it is contrary to all
Reason that Sins make People fit for the Kingdom of God; and it is a poor
Defense to put one Sin to help out of another Sin. But surely it is the
circumcising Spirit of Christ that teaches his People to deny themselves, and
bear his Cross. And the nearer they are to the Spirit and Nature of Christ in
themselves, the more humble they are, the more mild, the lesser in their own
sight to do any thing of themselves; for they know it will not avail them to
strive in their own strength against the Power of Iniquity to break off their
Sins, without they have Christ with them a present Help, and be clothed with
his Spirit and heavenly Armor, that they may withstand the Snares of the Devil.

AND as they are taught by Christ, who said, Take my Yoke upon you, and learn
of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart, and ye shall ^^nd Rest to your Souls;
Mat. xi. 29. so he teaches his Followers to walk humbly, denying themselves,
making them little and low in their own Eyes: But Sin and Satan make or teach
People to be proud, high and lofty in their own sight, great and better than
any body else.

AGAIN, where they say, The Saints and true Children and People of God daily
sin, in Thought, Word and Deed; it would be well for such to consider what
Hope, what Promises, what Security they have that they are God's Children,
further than that they presume to call themselves so. How can these think they
love God, or gain his Love to their Souls, while they are daily sinning against
him, in Thought, Word and Deed? For where Sin daily breaks out in Word and
Deed, that Man always serves the Devil, and he cannot love God, nor keep his
Commandments, because none can serve God and Mammon. Christ said, If ye love
me, keep my Commandments: He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it
is that loves me; and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I
will love him, and will manifest my self to him, Joh. xiv. 15, 21.

WE see here the Mark which Christ put on his Sheep: So it is Life Eternal to
know him and hear his Voice, follow him, love him and keep his Commandments;
and the Man that comes to know these Things to be carried on in his Heart, he
comes to have Assurance of his Inheritance. Was not this the Hope the Saints
had in the primitive Church, as John the beloved Disciple said, Hereby we do
know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments: He that says, I know him,
and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him; But
whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is the Word of God perfected; hereby know
we that we are in him, 1 John ii. 3, 4, 5. But how can a Man think he is in
God, or the Love of God in him, or that he is his Child or Servant, while he
serves Satan (the Enemy of Christ, and the Enemy of all Good) and sins
daily against the Lord in Thought, Word and Deed?

AND Christ said again, If a Man love me, he will keep my Words, and my Father
will love him; We will come unto him and will make our Abode with him, Joh.
xiv. 23. We see here from the Truth's own Mouth, that those who love him must
keep his Word and Commandments. Then there is a comfortable Promise to such an
One, that he shall obtain the Love of God to him, and that God and Christ will
come to abide with him in his Heart; and when the Father and the Son come to
dwell in the Heart of the True Christian, how can the Devil have Room there? He
must turn out, because a stronger than he has taken Possession, and is come to
govern the Heart.

THEN the Child of God comes to be led by the Spirit of God, who leads none to
do Evil, nor to sin against him, but guides them into all Truth, setting them
at Liberty from being Servants to Sin, Joh. viii. 32. Therefore they know they
are of God, because he has given them of his Spirit, that works Hatred in them
against all manner of Wickednedness (which is the Work of Satan) and teaches
them to love God, and love one another, and desire the Good of all, engaging
them to serve their heavenly Father, and keep his Commandments. Therefore the
Apostle said, He that keeps his Commandments, dwells in him: And hereby we
know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John iii.
24. So the true Children of God that are born of his Spirit, he abides in them
and they in him; that is, in his Spirit, in his Grace, in the undefiled
Condition and pure Nature of his heavenly Father.

AND while the true Christian remains in this Spiritual State, his Words and
Actions are begotten in that good Condition and Nature, and are carried forth
by the Leadings of God's Spirit, and of a Truth, none of these are Sin, but
these are the good Fruits which every good Tree and every Branch of the Vine
are to bear, under the Pain of being cut off; for a good Tree cannot bring
forth evil Fruit, neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit. Either
make the Tree good, and his Fruit good, or else make the Tree corrupt, and his
Fruit corrupt, for the Tree is known by its Fruit, Mat. vii. 18. xii. 33.
Therefore God's Trees (that is his Children) bear good Fruit.

WHAT then? Is not here a fit Place for the Reader to enquire, Do not God's
Children Sin at all? or does he cut them off when they sin? Indeed it must be
granted that the Children sometimes do sin, and their Father does not cast them
away: For to sin at sometimes upon Provocation, which comes surprisingly, and
to an unsavory Purpose suddenly breaking out in Word, or Action, this
displeases the Father, and wounds their own Conditions: But these are not the
Children's best Works, but their worst Works; and indeed there is great
Difference between this, and sinning daily, in Thought, Word, and Action, and
that their best Works are Sin.

FOR where are those Children, though they dwell in their Father's House, and in
his Service, but at some Time, and in some Things, they displease their Father,
and receive the Reproof of Instruction to make them the more careful not to do
so again: So the Children of God learn daily of God, and they grow in Grace,
Knowledge, and spiritual Gifts, and they go further and further from Sin, and
nearer and nearer unto God, by witnessing the Blood of Jesus Christ the Son, to
cleanse them from all Sin.

BUT such as do plead, and hold that the best Works of the Saints are Sin, they
endeavor to come to the Scriptures to verify their Doctrine by bringing the
Words of the Prophet Isaiah when he was praying for the Sons of Israel; and as
it is common, when God's Servants are praying for the Congregation to put
themselves with them in interceding for them, though they are yet Sinners; or as
those People were, when they had departed from the Lord: Therefore he
complained, We are all as an unclean Thing, and all our Righteousnesses are as
filthy Rags, and we all do fade as a Leaf, and our Iniquities like the Wind
have taken us away, Isa. lx 4.6. See here how these were fallen, and their
Iniquities had carried them away from the Lord. There is none that calls upon
thy Name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee; for thou have hid thy
Face from us, and have consumed us because of our Iniquities, Ver. 7.

SO their Sins displeased God, and made him hide his Face from them and their
Righteousnesses, which were as filthy as Rags; and the Lord was weary with
them, such were their Offerings, and Sacrifices, their New Moons and Sabbaths,
their appointed Feasts and outward Ceremonies, by which they thought that they
pleased the Lord, heaping unto themselves Offerings without Obedience, upon
which he would not look, but rather weary of bearing them, and complaining
against them, as may be seen by the same Prophet, saying, To what Purpose is
the Multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord, I am full of the
Burnt-Offerings of Rams, and the Fat of fed Beasts, and I delight not in the
Blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of He Goats: When ye come to appear before
me, who has required this at your Hand, to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain
Oblations; Incense is an Abomination unto me, the New Moons and Sabbaths, the
calling of Assemblies I cannot away with; it is Iniquity, even the Solemn
Meeting. Your New Mons and your appointed Feasts my Soul hates; they are a
Trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them: And when ye spread forth your Hands,
I will hide mine Eyes from you; yea, when you make many Prayers, I will not
hear, your Hands are full of Blood, Isa. i. 11, 12, 15, 14, 15.

ARE not these the Righteousnesses which were, and are in the Sight of the
Lord, as filthy Rags, abominable and unsavory, upon whom he does not look?
Those People intended to please the Lord with their Traditions and outward
Ceremonies, which they accounted Service to him, and their Duties to perform:
But because they were a sinful Generation, a People laden with Iniquities, and
had backslidden, and refused the Lord, and grieved the holy One of Israel;
therefore the Lord did not look favorably upon, nor accept of their Offerings,
but rather hated them, and was weary to bear them.

AND though these were their best Works, and the Righteousnesses which they
trusted in, yet none of them were acceptable with God: Therefore he hid his
Face from those People, for that their Iniquities had carried them away from
him, to rebel against him, and to displease him daily; so when they prayed
much, he did not hearken unto them; for their Hearts were evil, and their Hands
full of Blood: But what are these Righteousnesses to be likened to the
Righteousness of Christ, who justifies his Followers under the New Covenant, by
washing, cleansing, purifying and sanctifying of them, by his Grace and Spirit,
and fitting them to serve God in Newness of Life? Also what are the best Works
of the Children of the New Birth, Sheep and Lambs of Christ, Branches of the
true Vine, which Bears Spiritual Fruit, springing from the sweet Root, pure and
uncorrupted, such as Christ by his Spirit, leads into all Truth?

BUT they have another Objection, which they think is strong, and impossible to
answer, and that from the Words of the Apostle John, who spoke the most, and
the clearest of all the Saints (whose Testimonies we have) against Sin, If we
say that we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us, 1
John i. 8. But what of that? did not the Apostle in this Place, put himself
among others, even all those who had received the Christian Faith? And it is
very possible that diverse of them were young, and weak, and did not know their
Sins, or were not come to acknowledge them: Therefore he said, If we confess
our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us
from all Unrighteousness, 1 John i. 9.

SO the Design of the Apostle was to bring them to confess their Sins by
Repentance, that the Lord might forgive them, and cleanse them therefrom, and
not live therein all their Days; as he said before, If we walk in the Light, as
he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin, Ver. 7. So he was for having them
washed, cleansed, purified, and sanctified. Therefore I cannot see any Reason
to grant John the beloved Disciple himself to be a Sinner, any more than James
was a Curser, notwithstanding he did put himself among others when he spoke
concerning the Tongue, Therewith bless we God, even the Father; and therewith
curse we Men, which are made after the Similitude of God: Out of the same Mouth
proceeds Blessings and Cursings, Jam. iii. 9, 10. My Brethren, these Things
ought not so to be.

THEREFORE who can think otherwise, but James was clear of that Sin which he
was judging in his Brethren? And without Doubt John was washed and cleansed
from his Sins, though they, unto whom he wrote, were not then thoroughly purged,
some in a large Degree cleansed, others in a less Measure, some being young and
weak, beginning their Pilgrimage; therefore he said, the Blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanses us. So he goes on in the second Chapter, My little Children,
these Things write I unto you, that ye sin not: And if any one sin, we have
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John ii. 1.

WE may see here what wrong Use People make of John's Words, that he wrote to
his Friends, to persuade them against Sinning, which these take for an Occasion
to live in Sin, and plead for it; but if any through Temptation sinned, he showed
them the Help and Preservation which they might have; even to walk in the
Light, that the Blood of Jesus Christ might cleanse them from all Sin: So he
goes on, Whosoever commits Sin, transgresses also the Law; for Sin is the
Transgression of the Law, 1 John iii. 4. By this it is plain; and who can deny
that Sin breaks the Law of God, that he writes in the Hearts of his People?
which every true Christian is bound to keep, and perform, under the Penalty of
being cut off.

AND ye know, that he was manifested to take away our Sins, and in him is no
Sin, Ver. 5. So that this is the End of Christ's Appearance in the Flesh, and
also by his Spirit in the Hearts of his People, even to take away their Sins,
and deliver them therefrom, and to make them in their Measures to be like
himself in whom there is no Sin.

AGAIN, Whosoever abides in him, sins not; whosoever sins, has not seen
him, neither known him, Ver. 6. That is, whilst a Man abides in the Spirit of
Christ, even in the good Condition and Nature, he sins not; but those that
are contenting themselves to abide daily in Sin, these do not know nor come
unto him who is to wash them: O little Children, let no Man deceive you; He
that does Righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous, Ver. 7. He that
commits Sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the Beginning. For
this Purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil, Ver. 8.

SO as Satan sins daily from his Beginning to his End, and the People that
do so, they are like him, to whom they are Servants and Subjects; but the Work
of Christ is to destroy his Works, and to set People free from his Prisons and
Servitude. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin, for his Seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God, Ver. 9.

SO every true Christian is in some Measure born of God, and the Seed or God
remains in him, and he in God; and whilst a Man remains in him, he cannot
sin, as Christ himself says, He that does Truth, comes to the Light, that his
Deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God, Joh. iii. 21. And the
Works that are wrought in God, they are all pure; for no Evil can be brought
forth in him; therefore a Christian in the Spirit, and in the Power and Nature
of God, cannot sin.

BUT inasmuch as there are many of several different Opinions, and all
Societies in general conclude themselves the true Church, and every body else
in Darkness and Error; and that the Ordinances and Traditions of [their] Church
only, is the true Service and Duties which please God, therefore they are ready
to say, Because we the Saints an^ People of God do fail of getting Victory over
Sin, it is vain for all others to speak of Perfection.

AND some are so bold and shameless as to say, None were ever perfect upon
Earth. These do inconsiderately give God the Lie, who said concerning Job, That
he was a perfect Man. And if Job was perfect, as without doubt he was, and
diverse others before Christ came in the Flesh, how much more therefore does the
God of Heaven call for and expect Perfection under the New Covenant, when he
po^s forth of his Spirit more plentifully into the Hearts of his People, and
writes his Law there.

HOW then is Perfection become impossible under the new Covenant? Shall we say
that Christ lays upon his Followers Burdens impossible for them to bear, who
said, My Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light, Mat. xi. 30. So he commanded
them, Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is
perfect, Mat. v. 48. So that Perfection is possible for the Children of God to
attain in this Life, Because greater is he that is in them, than he that is in
the World, 1 John iv. 4.

GREATER and stronger is the Power of God, who helps his Children and People to
overcome all Sin and Iniquity, and to give them Ability to follow and serve him
in Obedience, Perfection, Sanctification and Cleanness of Hands, than is the
Power of the Devil, who leads and brings his Followers into Sin and Iniquity.

BUT People, by pleading for Sin, that they must remain in it, (which is the
Enemy's Work, and the Flesh's Lust, whereby they rebel against God, and sin
against their own Souls) they clearly deny the Covenant which they came under
at their Baptism; where the Man promises to deny the Devil and all his Works,
the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh, and keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the
Days of his Life.

IS not this the highest De^^^^ of Perfection that any speak of? And for the
Confirmation of the Matter, the Man says, (...) Help I will do so: Thr^^ (...)
it is possible for thee (...) that it is impossble: But (...) thy Faith now
fail, and (...) of gaining the Battle against (...) Enemy of thy Soul come
(...) End? Art thou doubting (...) cannot help thee to keep his Commandments,
and to deny the Devil and thy worldly L^sts? Indeed the ten (...) and merciful
Father puts no Commandments nor Burdens upon his children, or Servants but what
they can easily perform by taking his Help, for he will do the Work in them,
which they cannot do, nor any other but he alone.

DO thou not say in thy Catechism, that the inward Spiritual Grace is a Death
unto Sin, and a new Birth unto Righteousness? O that People would keep to the
true Principles, and earnestly seek Grace from God to break off, and slay their
Sins. But because the Professors in this Age do not know Christ through the Sp^^^
of his Grace, and divine Au^^^^^ to sit upon his Throne in their Hearts, to
judge Sin to Death, therefore Flesh sits on the Judgment. Seat, and saves Sin,
and pleads for it.

BUT when Man comes to hearken to his Conscience, he will feel that Sin breaks
his Peace (...) same Witness is within (...) of him, that (...) God is able to
help (...) and Wickedness: This good Belief the Poet had, who said by Way of
Prayer,

'Rwi 'n bwriadu, rhag di gas,
And cael die Ras i am helpu,
Lle bu'm i in pechu am gwar in Sith,
Na wnelw if byth and hynny,
Ni's gallai ddim o'm rhan fie hun
And fell y Mochyn eil-waith,
Ymdroi 'n y dom, Duw gwared fi,
O bob drygioni Diffaith.
I do intend, through awful Dread,
If with thy Grace thou wilt me restore,
Where I stiff-neck'd have sinned, to tread
Those Paths of Wickedness no more.
But of my self no Good I do,
Swine-like, my Feet return to Mire;
God, cleanse my Heart thy Ways to view,
That from foul Sins I may retire.
SO this Man believed, if he had God's Grace to help him, it was possible for
him to overcome Sin, and forbear committing Iniquity again; and likewise he
could do nothing of himself but backslide daily, unless the Lord would deliver
him out of all Wickedness.

BUT there are some People that seem Religious by setting themselves at Work to
lop the Tree of Iniquity, endeavoring to cut away the Branches as they grow;
This is the hopeless Labor and Striving which they esteem profitable for them
to be at all their Days, and leave the Tree alive, and to bear Branches, that
they may be daily employed to lop them.

WHAT then? Do they think if the Tree dies, that they have no more to do
toward the Work of their Salvation? But of a Truth, the Salvation of the Soul
is to know the inward spiritual Grace to mortify the Tree, by killing the Root
of it, so that there may be Room for the Tree of Life, even the Truth, Christ
within, to grow in the Soul, and to bring forth his own good Fruits.

THEREFORE let every true. Christian lay down his own Axe, and pray to God for
Grace to mortify and slay all his sinful Lusts, and to give him Victory over
the Devil and all his Temptations, Sin and iniquity; but I believe that some
People have sought Help from God against all Iniquity and sinful Lusts, and
that he heard them, and distributed unto them a Measure of his Grace and
Spirit, so that their Words and Actions, in Degree, sprung from the Spirit of
God, and from a good State and Condition.

BUT for all That, their Principles oblige them to account all their Actions
(let them be bad or good) altogether Sin; and in that they wrong the Lord, and
injure themselves; because their Rudiments do not allow them to make a
Difference between Bad and Good, and become as the Mouth of the Lord: For when
a Child of God offends, he soon knows Chastiseme it from his Father, as a Cloud
coming over him, with Guilt and Trouble, because his Father hides his Face; but
when he does well, his Father smiles upon him, rewarding him with Consolation
and Joy, and speaking Peace to him; so the Child knows, that it was not Sin he
committed at that time.

CHAP. V. Concerning BAPTISM.
CHRIST said to Nicodemus* Verily, verily, I say unto thee* Except a Man be
born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of Heaven; for God is a Spirit, therefore
the Children of God must be born of the Spirit; That which is born of the Flesh
is Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit; Marvel not that I
say unto thee, Ye must be born again, Joh. iii. 3, 6, 7,

BUT this is the Birth, which People, in a State of Nature, cannot know, or
comprehend no more than Nicodemus, until the Lord begins to work in their own
Souls: For by Spiritual Means God works the New Birth in the Hearts of his
People. Yea, as he is the eternal Word, so he is as a Fire and a Hammer to
break and open the hard Hearts, and molify them. He is also the Fountain of
living Waters which People reject: And the Virtue of that Water is to wash and
to heal.

BUT th^se Things the Natural Man cannot comprehend, because they are
spiritually discerned. And Flesh has no Room to set it self at Work. Therefore
unconverted People must have all Things carnal and outward, that Flesh and
Blood may comprehend them, and, with Conjectures and human Reason, debate and
labor in them.

BUT the Lord, in Condescension to his own People, the Children of Israel,
delivered to them diverse Ordinances and Usages, to wit, Washings, Purification,
Offerings and Sacrifices, which were outward Things, to signify the Substance
which was to be revealed in the Fullness of Times. And those Shadows and Signs
were to remain and stand until the Time of Restoration; that is, till Christ
came to set up a more substantial and spiritual Ministry and Worship: And their
Washings went under the Name of Baptism.

BUT next after all those Signs and Shadows, the Lord, for preparing the Way to
Christ, sent John to baptize the People in Jordan, confessing their Sins; and
then John said, I indeed baptize you with Water unto Repentance, but he that
comes after me, is mightier than I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear, he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, Mat. iii. 11.

SO there was a Difference between the Baptism of Christ, and the Baptism of
John, because they were not of one Nature nor of one Matter: For the one
baptized with outward Water, and the other baptized with the Holy Ghost and
with spiritual Fire; the one washed the Body, the other washed the Soul. So
Christ commanded his Disciples, that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but
wait for the Promise of the Father, which, said he, ye have heard of me: For
John truly baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost
not many Days hence, Acts i. 4, 5.

THESE two Testimonies do well agree with each other, and both make the Baptism
of Christ, and the Baptism of John, to be two Baptisms. The Baptism of John was
an outward Shadow signifying, but the Baptism of Christ was the Substance, and
saving. The Baptism of John and his Ministry stood only in Force at the Time
when Christ walked upon the Earth; therefore Christ went to his Baptism for the
Fulfilling of his Ministry: But John endeavored to hinder him, saying, I have
need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? And Jesus answering, said
unto him* Suffer it to be so now; for thus it becomes us to fulfill all
Righteousness. Then John suffered him, Mat. iii. 14, 15.

AND as John and his Ministry and Baptism was to decrease, and pass by, so
Christ and his Baptism and Ministry was to increase, and to be set up and stand
to the End. So that the Baptism of Christ was the only Baptism which did, and
does deliver and save the Souls; therefore the Apostle said, One Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. iv. 5. And since there was but one Baptism to remain,
no more than but one Lord and one Faith and one God, doubtless it is, that
Christ's Baptism was that one Baptism.

BUT Jesus suffered his Disciples to baptize with Water, to accomplish John's
Administration, until the Time came to baptize with the Holy Spirit; and as the
Disciples loved John, and esteemed his Administration, and being natural to it
by the Jewish Ordinances, so they made Use thereof in their Freedom among those
that believed; but they knew it was not the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, as Peter
observed, when he preached at the House of Cornelius, And the Holy Ghost fell
upon the People, saying, then remembered I the Word of the Lord, how that he
said, John indeed baptized with Water, but ye shall he baptized with the Holy
Ghost, Acts xi. 16.

BUT when Darkness came in amongst the Christians, and they lost Sight of
Christ within, and the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, then there was Nothing but
extolling the Sign instead of the Substance, and set it up as the Horn of
Salvation, and give it a great Name in the Church, accounting it to be the
Means by which a Man is made Christian. But some use the Way of Water Baptism
as the Apostles did, without depending thereon, but to fulfill it, because they
think it their incumbent Duty: I do not judge such.

BUT the Hurt is, when People set up some outward Tradition depending upon it
for Salvation, their Zeal goes much for it, and the more their Zeal is, the
more they make it their Idol, and then they cannot bear so much as to ask from
whence it came, what Scripture is for it: There is in this dark Zeal, Gall,
Blood and Revenge; and such Zeal as this has been the Cause for the Martyrs of
Jesus frequently to lose their Blood; because the Message of the Ambassadors
which God sent was to bear Testimony against all Manner of Idols.

AND when Chrifstians came to be fully persuaded, that Water Baptism was
necessary to Salvation, they judged it needful to baptize little Children, lest
they should die before they had Baptism, and be damned; but when they saw it
was hurtful for some little Children to be dipped over Head in Water, then they
invented another Way to baptize, which is corrupt and unscriptural.

AND altlho' the Protestants have testified that Water Baptism was not
necessary to Salvation, and as the friendly and considerate People of the
Church of England will acknowledge, that Water Baptism does Nothing for the
Soul, yet the same, in the like corrupt Way, has crept in among them from the
Church of Rome so far, that the dark People among the Protestants are of the
same Tone as the Papists, Oh! Oh! the holy Baptism: Oh! make the Man a
Christian; so that when a Child is born into the World, they must make haste to
go with him (as they say) to make him a Chriftian.

NOW therefore, O thou inconsiderate Man, can thou bear us to take a View of,
and handle this Matter a little, to see if there is Life in it, and how far it
is agreeable with the Scriptures. They say, that Christ ordained two Sacraments
in his Church, when we do not read that Christ ever spoke of a Sacrament; nor
is there any such Word as Sacrament in all the Scripture: But they will say,
the Thing does not consist in the Name, but what we mean by this Sacrament is
Baptism; what then? Is this Way of Baptism which we now speak of more agreeable
to the Scriptures than the Word Sacrament? That is not yet made out.

AGAIN, they will say, we are all by Nature born Children of Wrath, and by
Baptism are made Children of Grace: I utterly deny, that little Children
newborn, are Children of Wrath; and also, that, by such Baptism (which we are
now speaking of) any are made Children of Grace. Are not newborn Children
without Sin? Truly before Sin came, God looked on all that he had made, and the
same was good in his Sight: But they say, when Adam transgressed, he brought in
Sin upon all his Offspring, and they are Partakers of his Transgression, and
that the Children of Adam are by Nature become Sinners. That is granted; but
that they are born Children of Wrath, and that God imputes Sin to them before
they do sin, That is denied

FOR the Apostle said, Where no Law is, there is no Transgression, Romans iv. 15.
Since that the States of newborn Children do not apprehend, nor can they reach
to come at any Law; therefore Iniquity is not laid to their Charge; For Sin is
not imputed, where there is no Law, Romans v. 13. So where there is neither
Transgression nor Sin, how can we think there is Damnation? But those that hold
forth the Damnation of little Children, they imagine they have a Foundation for
it from the Words of the Prophet, who said, I was shapen in Iniquity, and in
Sin did my Mother conceive me, Psalm. li. 5. Is not this Sin rather to be
imputed to the Parents than the Child? For he does not say, my Mother conceived
me a Sinner, but in Sin did my Mother conceive me.

AND the Scripture says, The Soul that sins, it shall Die: The Son shall
not bear the Iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the Iniquity
of the Son, Ezekiel. xviii. 20. But for the Iniquity the Man himself commits, he
shall die. O, I would think that Christ's own Words are sufficient to give
Satisfaction to every considerate and impartial Man, and put this Controversy
out of all Doubt, who extolled the State of little Children, saying to his
Disciples, Except ye be converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. xviii. 3, 4, 10.

WE may see here, how Christ owns the States of little Children above the
States of his Disciples, when they inquired who should be the greatest in the
Kingdom of Heaen, And he having called unto him a little Child, and setting him
in the Midst of them, he further said, whosoever therefore shall humble himself
as this little' Child, the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven; take
Heed that ye despise not one of these little Ones; for I say unto you, that in
Heaven their Angels do always behold the Face of my Father which is in Heaven.
Here is the Judgment of the King, who knows better than Men, who is fit to
enter into his Kingdom.

HE also is the Door of the Sheep, and he knows his own, and those that go in
by him: If any be so ignorant to think, that those Children whom Christ so much
owned, were baptized, there was no bapti^ing of little Children in those Times;
and there is no Cause to think, that the Condition of little Children is worse
now, than in those Times: So the Command of Christ was, Take Heed, that ye
despise not one of these little Ones, whose Angels behold God's Face.

BUT dark People take little Notice of what Christ said; but the Rudiments
which they have received by Tradition, from the Leaders of their Churches,
those they believe, and will have to be Truth: Therefore they are not afraid to
disesteem the State of little Children, who are newly come into the World, from
under the Hand of their perfect Creator, who made all Things good, and
according to his own Pleasure; but they reckon the Child a Jew, or some
unacceptable Stranger, 'till they go with him to the Priest, to be made (as
they judge) a Christian, and acceptable.

AND if the Child dies before he be baptized, they deem it not fit to bury him
like a Christian, after the Order of the Church; but when the Child has been
under the Priest's Hands, if he happens to die before he sins, there is no
Doubt of his Salvation: What then shall be thought of these Things? Did not God
know how, or was he not able to make the Child according to his own Mind? But
the Priest does know how, and is able to make him according to the Lord's Mind;
so that it is Time to go with the Child to the Priest, where Sureties must be
had, to engage for him: First, That he should deny the Devil, and all his
Works, the Pomp and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh. Secondly, That he should believe all the Points of the Christian
Faith. Thirdly, That he should keep the blessed Will of God, and hi^
Commandment's, and walk in the same all the Days of his Life.

AND although they themselves judge, that they are not able to perform these
Promises, yet it is easy to get those Sureties; but if they were to be bound by
Promises concerning Things of this World, they would take more Care before they
become engaged, how they might perform their Promises.

SO after having a little Water, the Priest goes and prays to God, that he
would sanctify that Water, so that it may wash away Sin; then the sinful Man
goes to wash the innocent from his Sins: But what is this good for? There is no
Reason, nor Scripture, nor any Proof, but Part of the dead Traditions of the
Romish Church, for such a Thing.

THEN the Priest calls the People to be Witnesses how that the ^ame Child is
made a new Crea^re, and that he is grafted into the Body of the Church of
Christ, and so gives Thanks to God for the Child, that he is born again by the
Holy Ghost, and received to be his own Child by Adoption; and then they
profess, that the Child from henceforth, is made a Member of Christ, a Child of
God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

BUT this is a great Work, if it were but done indeed, where there is a
Necessity for a Change, and Newness of Life: But this may be allowed, to wit,
that the Child at first, is a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an
Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, and that he is yet no worse, nor in a State
to be made better: But if neither the People, nor the Priest know no better
than these Things, the Lord enlighten them.

BUT I do believe, there are many of them know, that all this is but the Use,
Custom and Tradition of the Church, and therefore they do judge it a Duty upon
them to perform: But the Traditions and outward Customs become corrupt in the
Using, as the Apostle Paul said to the Colossians, Wherefore if ye be dead with
Christ from the Rudiments of the World, why, as though living in the World, are
ye subject to Ordinances (which all are to perish with the Using) after the
Commandments and Doctrines of Men? which Things have indeed a Show of Wisdom in
Will Worship, Col. ii. 20.22, 23.

WHAT then? Is not this Way of baptizing little Children not only corrupt with
the Using, but also formed in the Dark, and set up after the Commandments and
Doctrines of Men, and carried on in WillWorship, after the Ordinances and
Rudiments of this World, and not after Christ?

NOW therefore shall we consider a little, what Necessity there is for outward
Water in the Baptism? But those that are for John's Baptism, they have Need of
Water to dip the People; but as many as come to Christ to be baptized by him,
he baptizeth with the Holy Ghost: For the Baptism of Christ is the Baptism of
the Holy Ghost, which is the Substance: but the Baptism of John (to wit,
Water Baptism) was the Figure or Shadow thereof.

BUT there are many in these Days that would tie the Baptism of Christ and
John's Baptism together, and make them one Baptism, saying, the outward Water,
which is the Shadow, is one Part, and the spiritual. Grace within, is the other
Part, which is knit to it. Is not this Way cunningly devised to beguile the
ignorant or the Salvation or their Souls? For it must be believed, if they but
receive, or have the Shadow, they also have the Substance, even the Baptism of
the Holy Ghost, though they know not how, but only believe they are knit together.

SO of a Truth, all this is but to please the Flesh and self-End of Man, who
has been asserting, that he had a Part in Christ, though he lived in the Flesh,
where none can please God, and in such Pomp wherein he cannot receive the
Spirit of Truth: And where they say, that the Substance is tied to the Shadow;
The Face of the present World is as Clouds of Witnesses to the contrary, seeing
that the Life and Conversation of Thousands of those who profess Christ, and
have been baptized with Water, are worse than the Lives and Conversations of
Turks, Indians or Pagans, who were not baptized with Water.

BY which we may see, that the ungodly and irreligious Professors have not yet
been baptized into the Baptism of Christ, which is the Baptism o^ the Holy
Ghost, that cleanses from dead Works, and makes Man a new Creature, to live a
godly Life; whereby it is evident enough that the Baptism of the Holy Ghost,
and the Baptism of Water are two distinct Things.

SO that it is possible for a natural Man to be baptized with Water, and know
Nothing of the Baptism of the Holy Spirit: But the Followers of Christ are
baptized by him with the Baptism of the Holy Spirit, without elementary Water;
and yet some will say, that the Baptism of John was to follow the Baptism of
the Holy Spirit, because the Apostles baptized with Water, and that Christ had
given it them in Command.

THAT the Apostles baptized with Water is granted: But that Christ gave it them
in Command, is nor yet made out: But they are ready to say, has not Christ
commanded his Apostles? Go ye therefore teach all Nations, baptizing them into
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. xxviii. 19.
But I would think, that in as much as there is no Mention of Water, we have
Room to examine what one did Christ command? Was it his own Baptism, which was
the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, or was it the Baptism of John, which was Water
Baptism?

AND in as much as, then was the very Time, wherein the spiritual Ministry of
Christ was to be set up in Authority, being taken from under the Shadows and
Signs; and that to baptize with the Holy Ghost, was the Work of Christ, and
that he at that Time was to pour forth of his Spirit on his Ministers, to send
them on his own Work: What Reason therefore will tell us, that he set his
Ministers upon John's Works (which was not but an outward Shadow passing by)
instead of sending them on his own spiritual Work, after he had filled them
with his Spirit, and clothed them with Power from on High, fit for performing
that spiritual Work?

BUT the Opposer will say, It was the Work of Christ only to baptize with the
Spirit, and the Apostles could not do it, because they were but Men. It is true
enough that it is the Work of Christ to baptize with the Holy Spirit: What
then? was it impossible for Christ's Servants to do any of his Works,
notwithstanding they received of the Spirit of Christ, even the Holy Ghost
which did baptize? But without Doubt the Servants of Christ did his Work, by
his being coworking with them; for when they taught and preached where the Lord
had sent them, they were Instruments in his Hand to do a great Work; that is,
to turn People from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God,
through his Co-working to open the Hearts of People.

AND for this End Paul was sent, and not to baptize with Water: As we read when
the Lord was converting and calling him, he said unto him, Rise, and stand upon
thy Feet; for I have appeared unto thee for this Purpose, to make thee a
Minister and a Witness both of these Things which thou have seen, and of those
Things in the which I will appear unto thee, delivering thee from the People,
and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, to open their Eyes, and to
turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that
they may receive Forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them which are
sanctified by Faith which is in me, Acts xxvi. 16, 17, 18.

LET us therefore see the great Work which Paul was sent to labor in, which
was the Work of the Salvation of the Souls of People, and the thing he was
employed about, even to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan unto God, to obtain Forgiveness of Sins, and a Portion amongst those that
are sanctified. Here is the Work of the New Birth, even Christ's Work upon the
Souls of Men: Here also is the Baptism of the Holy Ghost.

AND as the Apostle Paul was an Instrument in the Hand of the Lord, sent upon
this Work; so by preaching of the true Gospel he performed the Commandment, by
baptizing them into the Name of the Father, who is the strong Tower, and
turning them unto him who is the Light; and baptizing them into the Name of the
Son, who is the Rock of Ages, Jesus the Savior, Christ the Anointed, the
Fountain of Living Waters; which Water does wash away Sin and Iniquity, that
they may receive Forgiveness of Sins; by baptizing them into the Name of the
Holy Ghost, who sanctifies and gives them Faith in Christ Jesus.

SO Paul taught the Gentiles, and they were baptized with the Holy Ghost under
his Testimony. After this manner was the Commandment fulfilled, Go teach all
Nations, baptizing them into the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. And this Apostle that was sent to turn the Nations, was not sent to
baptize with Water, as he himself testified when he saw that the Corinthians
were corrupted, by making a wrong Use of Water Baptism, and that Contentions
were among them; and, as it may be supposed, some said, I am owned by the Man
that baptized me, and, I am owned by the Man that baptized me; which gave the
Apostle Occasion to say, I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus
and Gaius, lest any should say that I had baptized in mine own Name; and I
baptized also the Household of Stephanus, besides, I know not whether I baptized
any other; for Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor.
i. 14, 15, 16, 17.

AND in as much as this was the Apostle that was most absolutely sent to teach
and convert the Nations, and was not sent to baptize with Water; and that
Commandment said, Go ye, and teach all Nations, baptizing them into the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, therefore it was not outward Water that was
here commanded to go with the Testimonies of the Apostles, but the Living Water
and Eternal Word, which is the Sword of the Spirit that is as a Fire, and as a
Hammer to break in pieces the hard Hearts.

THUS Life and Virtue went along with their Preachings: Therefore whether God
works upon the Hearts of People by Instruments, or without Instruments, the
Work is the Lord's. And sush as know his Work to be carried on in their own
Souls, they see no Necessity for Signs and Shadows, that were to pass away, or
do perish with the Using. So that God's Work upon the Soul of Man is the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, which makes a Man a true Christian.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Communion, or Nourishment of the Soul.
FORASMUCH as the Work of God upon the Souls of Men, is the Work of
Regeneration, and it belongs to every Birth to have Nourishment suitable to its
Condition and Nature, so it belongs to the Children of the New Birth, that are
born of the Spirit, to have Spiritual Food to nourish their Souls, as the
natural Body is fed with outward Food: This spiritual Food the Children of Adam
in the Fall, cannot know or apprehend, nor be Partakers of, till the Lord, in
some Measure, lays hold on their Hearts, and enlightens them, and lets them see
their Conditions, and makes them sensible of the Necessity and Want of their
Souls, and lets a Man see how he is gone from home, as the Prodigal Son, into a
far Country, a Stranger to his Father's House, where is Bread enough, and he
ready to die for Hunger: Then the poor Soul, having a Sight of his Condition,
cries for his Father's House; because he is got into a Belief, that there is
B^ead enough to feed his hungry S^ul ^est he should die for ever.

SO the Soul that comes to hunger and thirst after Righteousness, the Promise
is, That such shall be filled, Mat. v. 6. For the Lord prepares pleasant
Dainties for the Poor in Spirit that turns to him with his whole Heart, and
waits upon him in Truth. So when a Man comes to witness these Things, he is in
some Degree to be counted a Child of the New Birth, because he cries for Food,
and Food belongs to him; and he is ready to open unto Christ, who knocks at the
Door, saying, If any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to
him, and will sup with him, and he with me, Rev. iii. 20.

SO that Christ is ready to communicate, and the hungry Soul ready to receive
Nourishment: And this is the Supper which gives Life, Nutriment and Growth to
the Souls of the Children of the New Birth: Therefore what sort of Suppers
soever Men may make without Opening unto Christ, and receiving him into their
Hearts to sup with them, their Supper is not Christ's Supper, nor of any
Benefit to their Souls; for He is the Bread of Life which comes down from
Heaven, and gives Life to the World, John vi. 33.

THIS is the Food which God communicates to his Children, who are born of the
immortal Seed, through his Word, and have received the Holy Ghost to lead them
into all Truth; which consolates, and makes glad, and gives Nourishment and
Increase, to the afflicted and returning Souls. Therefore those that have
opened their Hearts, and received Christ to take Possession, and govern in them
with Power, such as these come to be graffed into the true Vine, and their
Souls are fed with the Fruit of the Vine, which is the same thing as the Bread
of Life, which comes down from Heaven, that he who eats thereof may live for
ever, John vi. 51.

THE Fruit of this Vine is also the Spiritual Wine, and Living Water, or
Heavenly Blood, which the Branches drink of, so that the Spiritual Birth may
grow and increase, by feeding upon Christ, and dwelling in him, who said, My
Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed; He that eats my Flesh,
and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him, John vi. 55, 56.

LET us see here, Those that are feed on Christ, they dwell in him, and he in
them. Not in his Body, but in his Spirit, and his Spirit in them; and the Unity
and Communion between Christ, and his Followers, not in outward Things, as he
said to his Disciples, who were offended at the hearing of spiritual Things;
but he interpreted it to them, It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh
profits nothing; the Words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they
are Life, John vi. 63. So they that dwell in the Vine, the Fruit and Virtue of
the Vine is Life and Support to them.

SO he likewise said, as the living Father sent me, and I live by the Father,
So he that eats me, even he shall live by me: And as the earthly Part
nourishes it self on earthly Food, outward and perishing, so the spiritual
Part is fed with spiritual Food, even the hidden Manna, invisible and eternal;
and such as feed upon it, know where they obtain it; not in any Thing that is
outward, but in a spiritual Fellowship with the Father, and with the Son Jesus
Christ, knowing their Savior to be their Shepherd, to lead them into the
fruitful Pastures, by the still Waters, out of the World in themselves, and out
of all carnal Reasonings, and Conjectures of Flesh and Blood.

HE is also the daily Bread which is a Support to the true Christian, and the
living Soul cannot be one Day without it, but he will feel a Hunger, and it is
not enough for him to receive outward Bread and Wine once a Year, instead of
Life to his Soul, and spiritual Food, which comes down from Heaven, Day by Day,
to the hungry and thirsty ^ouls of those that wait upon him: So the poor in
Spirit secretly receives it, when there is none but he and the Lord.

BUT such as spend their Money for that which is not Bread, and their Labor
for that which satisfies not, they come to the Priest, to eat every one a Bit
of Bread that perishes, and every one a Sup of Wine, and their Principles
oblige them to believe, that by taking so much, their Souls are fed, though they
know not how. Oh, how easily do People suffer themselves to be deceived
concerning their Souls eternal Life, which is to know the Father and the Son to
dwell in the Heart, and to have gained the Man to love God, so as to be his
Meat and Drink to do his Will!

FOR to do the Will of God is the only Thing that makes up the Peace, and works
the Unity and Communion between the true Christian and Christ the beloved of
his Soul, So they that are joined to the Lord are one Spirit, 1 Cor. vi. 17.
And this is the Communion which makes the Saints to be one Bread, and one Body,
by being Partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor. x. 17. which the eating of Bread
and Wine cannot do: For People eat it before they go to spill one another's
Blood.

SO also great has been the Strifes and going into Parties, which broke out
into Malice and Revenge, Wars, and spilling of Blood, amongst Professors of
Christianity, about the Bread and Wine, how to order it, and when to take it.
Here was the cunning Device of Satan, even to drive People to kill one another,
about a dead Tradition; for thereby, he drew them further and further from God,
into his own dark Kingdom, alienating them more and more from the Life and
Substance, even the Bread from Heaven, which gives Life to the World, John vi.
33.

BUT the wife Men hunting after Opinions concerning these dead Things, and
never could agree, because they were Strangers to the Spirit and heavenly Life;
They judge, that by receiving the Bread and Wine, they must eat the Flesh of
Christ corporally, even he that was born of Mary, and suffered upon the Cross,
and was raised again, and ascended into Heaven, to sit on the right Hand of
Majesty.

BUT as to that, they broke out into three Opinions. The first is, that of the
Papist, who say concerning the Bread and Wine; that after the Priest
consecrates them (as they call it) the same is no more Bread nor Wine, but the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, in the Substance, which was crucified by the Jews.
Here is a grievous Error; Men taking upon them to make Christ corporally upon
Earth, out of corruptible Matter, and give People the same to eat for their
Money, [See R. B. 498.]

THE Second Opinion is, that of the Lutherans, who say, That the Substance of
the Bread remains after it is consecrated, but that also that Body is in the
Bread, and with it, or under it; so that there is the Substance of the Bread,
and the Flesh and Blood of Christ are mixed together, to be given the People to
eat for their Money. The Difference here is, That the First take upon them to
make Christ bodily upon Earth, out of Bread and Wine, that is perishable; the
others take upon them to bring him down from Heaven to be mixed with the Bread
and Wine.

THE Third Opinion is that of the Calvinists, who deny both the the former,
saying, That Christ is not corporally in the Bread and Wine: But yet the
Faithful receive him by taking of the Bread and Wine; But how, or which Way he
is there, they know not, nor can they tell, but only we must believe he is
there, yet so that it is properly in Heaven, [ R. B. p. 498.] But of a Truth,
though this Opinion may in some Things be born with, yet it is very uncertain: It
is nothing; but we must believe.

AND if we must believe that our Souls are fed with the Bread of Life, and that
we are Partakers of Christ's Supper, though we do not know him come into our
Hearts, to sup with us, and we to sup with him, this is the Way for us to
deceive ourselves. This is also a Sign of Death: For the living Souls know,
like David, when they receive the Joy of their Salvation, and when the Lord by
his free Spirit upholds them, and their Souls are by the Holy Ghost comforted,
and they can set their Seal to the Words or the Apostle, Do not err, my beloved
Brethren; Every good Gift, and every perfect Gift is from above, and comes
down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no Variableness neither Shadow of
Turning, Jam. i. 16, 17.

BUT in the Night of Darkness, where Satan wrought amongst the Professors of
Christianity, his Work and Cunning has been, and is, to deceive People, and
set them at Work to deceive one another, to the End and Purpose to keep them in
Ignorance, and wholly Strangers to the true Shepherd, who gives enternal Life
to his own Sheep, who know and follow him.

WHEN he was, with his Disciples, eating that Supper, or the last Passover
before he was betrayed, he said unto them, With Desire I have desired to eat
this Passover with you before I suffer; for I say unto you, I will not any more
eat thereof until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, Luke xxii. 15, 16. The
Fulfilling of that Passover, and that which it signified, together with other
Signs, was the Coming of the Kingdom of God, that is, God to dwell in his
People, to teach them himself. For the Kingdom of God is within, and Christ
within, a Comforter, supping with, and nourishing the Souls of the Children of
the New Birth.

AND when he took the Cup and gave Thanks, he said, Take this and divide it
among your selves; for I say unto you, I will not drink of the Fruit of the
Vine until the Kingdom of God shall come, Luke xxii. 17, 18. And the Kingdom of
God is not (...) and Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy
God, Romans xiv. 17. And he took the Bread, and gave Thanks, and brake it, and
gave unto them, saying, This is my Body which is given for you, this do in
Remembrance of me, Luke xxii. 19.

CHRIST by doing this, was showing his Disciples that he was going to give his
Body to suffer for them, and that they when they did eat and drink, were to
remember him. And the Apostle Paul said farther, Do this as often as ye do it
in Remembrance of me; for as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye
do show the Lord's Death till he come, 1 Cor. xi. 26.

SO all that can be gathered from these Things, is that when the Disciples
should come together to break Bread, they were to think of, and remember Christ
and his Death, and his Departure from them that Night, and this in Reverence to
his Name, until the Kingdom of God came to be enlarged in their Hearts, and the
King to sit in his Kingdom, after a spritual Manner, to sup, and give himself
to be Life and Nourishment to their Souls.

WE read also concerning the Apostles, how they continued daily with one Accord
in the Temple, and breaking Bread from House to House, eating their Meat with
Gladness and Singleness of Heart; and they eat in a religious Way, having made
a joint Preparation for coming to eat together; and this did signify their
Unity and Love one to another: They also did eat to satisfy their bodily Wants;
what then? Did not the Apostles, when they came together in that Love and Unity
find the Lord near unto them, to comfort them, and make them ^ejoice, and edify
their Souls? Yet it was not in the Meat that they found the Lord, but in their
drawing near in their Spirits to his Spirit, and to one another in his Love.

THIS Way of Tradition was soon corrupted in the Use of it by Men, as may be
seen in the Church of Cor^nth, where the Apostle complains against them, When
they came together to eat that Supper which they called the Lord's Supper,
instead of performing it unto the Lord in an acceptable Manner, they were in
Danger of eating and drinking Damnation to themselves, 1 Cor. xi 17, 29.

SO they that met together for the worse, did not attain to the Knowledge of
the spiritual and invisible Food, which comes from Heaven, to renew and comfort
the Souls of the Saints, in their Meetings together; neither did they
accomplish that Supper outwardly, but in a corrupt Manner: And as Corruption
came into the Churches, the People went more and more after outward Traditions,
making of them more and more corrupt, by setting them up instead of the
Substance, and instead of the Kingdom of God; the Coming of which was to put an
End to them.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Reprobation.
THE Mercy of God Almighty has been, and is in a great and large Measure
extended toward the Children of Men, by sending his Messengers to offer unto
them Covenants of Peace, though they daily rebel against him: And the Message
which he did put into the Mouth of his Prophet was, As I live, says the Lord
God, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn
from his Way and live; Turn ye, turn ye from your Evil Ways, for why will ye
die, O House of Israel, Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11. For God so loved the World, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting Life. For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn
the World, but that the World through him might be saved, John iii. 16, 17.

SO the Apostles had received the Ministry of Reconciliation, testifying that
God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
Trespasses unto them; and has committed unto us the Word of Reconciliation:
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. v. 19, 20.

BUT contrary to these Things, there are some hold forth, That God ordained the
most Part of Mankind to Damnation, and the other Part to Salvation, even from
the Beginning, or before the Creation; so that there is no Possibility for any
one of them to be lost, that are so secured, nor any one of those that are so
lost, shall ever be saved.

IF this were true, it would overturn all the Promises and Covenants of Peace
which God sent his Messengers to publish throughout all the Scriptures, and
would deny the Reconciliation, which God offers unto the World through Christ:
This intimates also, that God has not sent his Son into the World, to save the
World, but to damn it.

THIS also renders God unmerciful, (whose Mercies excel all his Works) if he
ordained the most Part of Mankind to be damned, not giving them one Talent, nor
any Grace, nor Day of Visitation; but ordained them to Sin, and work all
Unrighteousness, that he may punish them eternally for doing that which he had
ordained them to do: By this there is no Room to extend Mercy to the greatest
Part of Mankind.

THIS is contrary to all the Promises, Invitations and Counsel^ which the
Scriptures are full of from the Beginning to the End, by calling People to be
converted and return to God from their evil Ways, and that under sure Promises,
that a Door is opened for them in Christ their Redeemer, who died for all: But
they say, Christ died not but for the Elect, that is, those few that were
ordained to be saved from the Beginning.

THIS contradicts the Scriptures, which declare, that Christ died for every
one, as may be seen, to wit, that God will have all Men to be saved, and to
come unto the Knowledge of the Truth. For there is one God, and one Mediator
between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus: Who gave himself a Ransom for all,
to be testified in due Time, whereunto I am (said Paul) ordained a Preacher,
and an Apostle, 1 Timothy ii. 4, 5, 6, 7.

SO the same Apostle says, that Christ died for all, and tasted Death for
every Man, Heb. ii. 9. And is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John ii. 2. So likewise, the
Angel proclaimed to the Shepherds, the Coming of Christ to be good Tidings of
great Joy, which shall be to all People; and there was with the Angel a
Multitude of the heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the
highest, and on Earth Pence, good Will toward Men, Luke ii. 10, 13, 14.

AND truly, my Paper is too short to contain but few of the many Calls and
Invitations, which God tenders to Sinners, Come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest, Mat. xi. 28. This is the Message
which God does and did in all Ages, send his Ministers upon, to call Sinners to
be reconciled to him, through Christ, who is the Light, which lights every one
that comes into the World, and tasted Death for every Man, and he was given to
be a Light to the Gentiles, and Salvation to the Ends of the Earth.

HERE is the Door of Salvation opened to all Mankind; those who ask, and seek,
and knock, they shall come in, and be received with Joy: Also the Grace of God,
which brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men.

BY these Things we may believe, that a Day of Visitation from God, through his
Grace and Light, is ordained to all Mankind upon the Face of the whole Earth:
For there is no Man so far in any Corner of the World, but God is near unto
him, if he will seek him: And where is there any Sinner that knows not, at
Times, Reprovings from the Light in his own Heart and Conscience, calling for
Repentance and Amendment of Life, assuring Peace to him, if he will do Good,
and likewise threatening some Punishment for his Wickedness?

YEA, whilst the Light shines, and Grace appears, and God by his Spirit strives
with the Sinner, it i^ possible he may be saved, and that by the Lord, and
through his great Mercy: For Grace and Light is all-sufficient to save and
deliver every Man that yields Obedience thereunto, whatever outward Knowledge
he wants, The Grace that brings Salvation teaches every Man his whole Duty,
Tit. ii. 12. For by Grace are ye saved, Ephesians. ii. 8. Also the Light, which is
Christ, lightneth every one that comes into the World, as he himself said, I
am the Light of the World: He that follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but
shall have the Light of Life, Joh. viii. 12. He is all-sufficient to lead into
Salvation every one that hearkneth to him while he knocks, and those that turn
at his Reproof, he promised to give them of his Spirit, and make known his
Words unto them.

BUT those that reject these Visitations, the Lord leaves them, and their
Blood is upon their own Heads. Because I have called, (said Wisdom) and ye
refused, I have stretched out my Hand, and no Man regarded, Prove. i. 24.
Therefore the Lord gives up Sinners to take their own Ways; then the Day of
their Visitation passes over their Heads, and the Lord leaves them, and so
there is none that will deliver them in the Day of Distress.

THIS is agreeable to the Words of the Apostle Paul, in the Place where those
that plead for Reprobation would fasten Something, What if God, willing to show
his Wrath, and make his Power known, endured with much Long-suffering, the
Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction? Romans ix. 22. The Word
(Long-suffering)shows that they had a Day of Visitation, but they rejected it;
wherefore Christ wept over Jerusalem, saying, that she was to be destroyed, and
laid even with the Ground, because (said he) thou knew not the Time of thy
Visitation, Luke xix. 44.

THEREFORE Man's Destruction is of himself, but his Salvation is from the Lord:
In Christ does the Election stand, and such as are graffed in the Vine, and
overcome the World, and Satan and his Temptations, they shall eat of the hidden
Manna, and a white Stone shall be given them, and in the Stone a New Name
written, which no Man knows saving he that receives it, Rev. ii. 17. Here is
the heavenly Inscription, and the Names of the Elect, which are written in the
Lamb's Book of Life, Rev. xxi. 27.

ARE not People presumptuous and selfish? Nothing takes more Hold on them than
what they received from their own Church by Tradition, let it be as erroneous
as may be; they will have it to be a Gospel Truth, let God, Christ and the
Scripture say what they will; but the Thing said by the Churchmen and Society,
which the Man owns he will believe and follow, and judge it erroneous in all
others, if they believe not the same Things, as may be seen by diverse wrong
Rudiments, which crept in amongst Christians in the Night of Obscurity, when
the Church went into the Wilderness, and the false Church, even the Whore
Babylon, sat upon the People.

SO in this Case, God says, I have no Pleasure in the Death of him that dies,
Ez. xviii. 32. But these Men say, that God has willed and ordained the
greatest Part of Mankind to sin and die for ever. God calls the wicked, saying,
Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die, return therefore and live, Ezekiel. xliii. 11.
But they say, that God holds the Wicked under his Order of Reprobation, that
they can do no less than sin to their Damnation.

THE Apostle says, God will have all Men to be saved, and come to the
Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy ii. 4. But they say, God would have, yea, he
willed and made the most Part to Destruction, and that he witholdeth from them
all true Knowledge, and all Means of Salvation, so that they may not lay hold
thereon.

IF I were to go on after this Manner, I might gather a great Part of the
Scriptures to show how opposite this Doctrine is against God, against his
Mercies and Love and Good Will toward all Mankind; it is also against Christ,
by making his Coming his Death and Redemption unprofitable to the greatest Part
of Mankind, but rather adds to their Damnation.

THIS denies the Reconciliation, which God offers to the World, through Christ:
It denies the Gospel, which is glad Tidings of great Joy to all People: It
makes Men of Opinion, that it is in vain to ask, to seek and knock, in
Contradiction to the Words of Christ, when he preached to the Multitude, Mat.
vii. 7, 8.

THESE also say, that Sin cannot be a Means to lose any of those that are
elected, and that the Reprobate cannot do any Thing that may be a Means to save
them: By this it is in vain for Man to mention Religion. Oh! how cross this is
to the Words of the Lord, by his Prophet in the Chapter before mentioned, from
the Beginning to the End, Behold, all Souls are mine, the Soul that sins, it
shall die: The Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, Ez. xviii. 4.
See from the twentieth Verse to the End of the Chapter close to the same
Purpose; and also in Chap. xxxiii. from the Eleventh Verse to the Nineteenth,
where it plainly appears, that Sin separates between People and their Creator,
and their Return to him makes the Reconciliation.

LET it be our Belief therefore, that it is possible for the ungodly Man, through
Mercy, to return unto the Lord, whilst he calls, invites and presses, showing
forth his Hands, and knocking at the Door of the Heart. Here is the Law that
was given to Ca^n in the Morning of the Creation, If thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted? And if thou do not well, Sin lies at the Door, Genesis
iv, 7. These Terms follow through the Scriptures, from the Beginning to the End.
The Spirit and the Bride say, come: And let him that hears say, come. And let
him that is at (...), come. And whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life
freely, Rev. xxii. 17.

THEREFORE let us trust in the Lord, and believe his Promises, hope in his
Mercies, depend upon Christ and his Offering, who has redeemed us, and paid
the Ransom for us, by giving himself a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole
World; also let us yield Obedience to the Grace and Light which is given us,
for a Manifestation to lead us into that Salvation which he has prepared for
us by redeeming us.

FURTHERMORE these hold forth, that the Lord ordained Adam to fall, and it is
he that drives and causes the Wicked to sin, and keeps them in their Sins,
that he may have just Cause to punish them eternally for their Sins, and also
that God ordained all Things that come to pass.

WE may here see, that these make God the Author of all Wickedness and also
more unjust, cruel and unmerciful than the cruellest of Men as ever we heard
of: For where is, or has been any King or Prince, who would bind his People
with Chains of Iron in dark Prisons, before they did any Thing to displease
him, and there keep them, under such Locks and Bolts, that it would never be
possible for them to come forth, yet come at Times, and call them into the
Field to work his Harvest, and because they come not forth, then chastise them
with the most cruel Punishment? O, who would impute this to God, who is slow to
Anger, and great in his Mercy, and repents of the Evil.

Where then does this erroneous Doctrine allow the Devil to have any Hand in
the Destruction of People, seeing that he cannot deceive, nor gain any, but
such as God has ordained and prepared for him? what shall we say to this? Did
not Peter know what he said, or was the Devil foolish and mad, who was so busy
like a roaring Lion, walking about, seeking whom he might devour, 1 Pet. v. 8.

BUT Satan, no doubt, is well assured that God does not make People on Purpose
for him; and that he has none, but such as he catches in his Snares and Netts,
by his Deceit and Baits; he is the Enemy of Men, and the Enemy of Truth; he
sowed the Tares in the Field; he deceives and corrupts People, making them
Children of the wicked one, as Christ said, But the Tares are the Children of
the Wicked One. The Enemy who sowed them is the Devil, Mat. xiii. 38, 39. This
Enemy deceived People at first, to sin against the Will of God, and his
Commandments, and he works in the Children of Disobedience, and holds Sinners
Captive at his Will, in his dark Prisons.

BUT Christ was sent by the Father, and anointed to preach good Tidings unto
the meek, to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim Liberty to the Captives,
and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound, Isa. lxi. 1. Luke iv. 18.
Satan is gone out to deceive the Nations, which are in the Four Corners of the
Earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to Battle, the Number of whom is
as the Sand of the Sea, Rev. xx. 8. But Christ was given for a Light to the
Gentiles, and Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, Isa. xlix. 6. to open the
blind Eyes, to bring out the Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in
Darkness out of the Prisonhouse, Isa. xlii. 7. to reconcile God and Men, to
destroy the Works of the Devil, which made the Separation.

THIS is the general Salvation, which Christ has purchased to all Mankind, by
his own precious Blood, and the Help which he gave them, ^hen he promised, that
the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head, and as the deadly Wound
came by the Sin and Disobedience of Adam, and overran the whole and every Part
of the World; so through Christ and his Sacrifice, who was ordained to die from
the Beginning of the Creation, he is the Physician that was given to heal the
Wound so far as it is gone.

TO the eternal God, whose Mercies are over all his Works, be Honor and
Obedience, Reverence and Glory, who is worthy for ever and for evermore.

THERE is another Branch of the same Doctrine, where they say, that those who
once receive Grace from God, it is impossible for them ever to fall from Grace,
or lose their Salvation.

THIS is likewise contrary to the forementioned Scriptures, where i^ is said
at large, that when the Righteous turns away from his Righteousness, and
commits Iniquity, his Righteousness shall be no more remembered to him, but
for the Sin he has committed, he shall die: Also Christ himself says, That he
is the true Vine, and his Father is the Husbandman, every Branch in him that
bears not Fruit, he takes away, Joh. xv. 1, 2. And says Christ, If a Man
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a Branch, and is withered; and Men gather
them, and cast them into the Fire, and they an burned, Ver. 6.

SO it is possible that Branches once graffed in the Vine, may be cut off,
because of Unfaithfulness: This is likewise truly answerable to the Apostle's
Words, when he was writing to those whom he accounted the Elect, and were
graffed into the true Vine; he warns them saying, Behold the Goodness and
Severity of God: On them which fell, Severity: But toward thee, Goodness, if
thou continue in his Goodness: Otherwise thou also shall be cut off, Romans xi.
22.

THIS runs agreeable with the Stream of Scriptures, to warn the Christian to
keep on his Watch, lest in any wise, as the Serpent beguiled Eve, he himself
might be deceived: for the same Apostle says, For it is impossible for those
who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were made
Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and the
Powers of the World to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
Repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, Heb. vi.
4, 5, 6. See Chap. x. 26.

THEREFORE he admonishes the Saints among the Galatians, saying, Stand fast
therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and he not
entangled with the Yoke of Bondage, Gal. v. 1. And the Apostle Peter fully
testifies to the same Purpose, 2 Pet. ii. 20, 21, 22 I do not see any great
Occasion to collect many Scriptures to prove that it is possible for People to
slip and fall away from a State of Grace, and after they are washed, to wallow
in the Mire, in as much as I know not where any Scripture says or verifies
that the same is impossible.

FOR some of the Angels fell, having left their Habitation. Adam fell, and many
Thousands of the Pilgrims fell into the Snares of Satan, after they had the
Knowledge of the Spirit of God to lead and enlighten them, 2 Pet. ii. 4. Jud.
i. 6. This is a Warning for all God's Servants to be careful, faithful and
watchful, lest when their Lord comes, he find them asleep, and their Work
undone.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning Persecution.
OF a Truth, great is the Mystery of Ungodliness, which has wrought, and is
working in the Darkness of Men's Hearts, in all Ages of the World, the old
Satan, the crafty and dark Spirit which works in the Night, turning many
Vineyards which God had planted, to bear sour Grapes: And he began to work in
the Church in the Morning of Christianity, appearing like an Angel of Light:
And as Christ sent his Apostles, so Satan likewise sent Apostles, who
transformed themselves to be Apostles of Christ, and Ministers of
Righteousness; yet for all that, God carried on his Work, and the true Church
and Ministers prospered and Christians multiplied.

THEREFORE the Devil envied, and appeared again in his own Color, a devouring
Lion, and entered into the Heart of Nero, to persecute and imprison, to kill, to
burn and stone the Lambs and Sheep of Christ; and for all this, the Blood of
the Christians was the Seed of the Church; though many were martyred, yet the
Christians multiplied; so there followed Ten heavy Persecutions under the Pagan
Roman Emperors, and yet they increased in Number.

BUT the Way Satan overcame most, was by cooling of Love, and suffering People
to receive a Profession of Christ and Christianity, and from Age to Age
Darkness thickened, Iniquity increased, Schisms and Conventions coming in; less
of the Spirit and of the Grace, and of divine ^spiration; but Ordinances and
Customs were more and more set up, and more Stress laid upon them, and then
fell out concerning them, how to use and order them; some would have one Way,
and some another Way; then they broke out into Forks and Branches, in diverse
Schisms and Opinions, destructive Heresies, Fighting and spilling one another
Blood, persecuting and killing Christians about Religion.

HERE Satan got the Victory, by making Christendom Darkness and a Wilderness,
and the Church a false Church, that is, a Whore to sit in Authority upon
People, and Multitudes, and Nations and Tongues; she also sat upon the Beast
having Heads and Horns, that is the earthly Power, which was an Enemy to the
true Church, And the Woman was aray'd in Purple and scarlet Color, and decked
with Gold and precious Stones and Pearls, having a golden Cup in her Hand, full
of Abominations and Filthiness of her Fornication, Rev. xvii. 3, 4.

THUS the Whore was decked with outward Traditions and Customs and Church
Ordinances, being transformed gloriously in the View of the People upon whom
she sat, and deceiving them, holding forth a golden Cup, that is, a Profession
of Christianity, and every false Appearance, Deceit and Dissimulation, but all
Filthiness within; and yet John saw upon her Forehead a Name written, Mystery
Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth; and he
saw the Woman drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, and he wondered with great Admiration, Rev. xvii. 5, 6.

THE Spirit of Enmity, which was in the Pagans in persecuting Christ and his
Church, entered in^^ the People that held a Profession of Christianity; so the
Church of Rome became bloody and persecuting, to kill, to burn, and to martyr
them whom the Lord sent unto them, or raised amongst them, to bear Testimony
against their Corruption, evil Conversations and Superstitions.

AFTER they had thus left the Truth, and lost Sight of Christ, who was the Head
of the true Church, and Governor in his Saints and Followers, the Bishop of
Rome was set up to be Head of the false Church, and then it was not what Christ
said was to be taken Notice of, but what the Pope and the Church said; the Lord
of the Harvest said to his Servants, pull not the Tares, let them grow together
with the Wheat until the Time of Harvest: But the Pope and the Whore, who call
the Wheat ( to wit the Children of Grace) Tares, say, pull them all up, so
Satan would root up Truth and pure Religion from among Men.

THE Spirit of Persecution is a dark, angry, revengeful and Unchristian Spirit,
in what Man or People soever it appears; it is an Enemy to Truth, and of that
stubborn cursed Nature, which began to appear in the Time of Cain: And that
great City, to wit Babylon, began to lay her Foundation in the Hearts of People
in the Morning of the Creation; for it was said of her, that in her was found
the Blood of the Prophets and Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth.

SO the evil Spirit and Nature were the Cause of killing of the Prophets, and
of persecuting the Righteous in every Age; for there was, and is an Enmity in
the Serpentine Spirit against Christ and his Saints: So the Lord sent his
Messengers as Lambs amongst Wolves to be persecuted and brought before
Judgment-Seats to be killed, to be martyred for his Namesake, whom the World
hated.

THEREFORE the Devil, the old Enemy of all Good, moves his Servants to
persecute the Innocent; and it belongs to Persecutors to have two Things to fit
them for Persecution; their Eyes must be hoodwinked with thick Darkness, so
that they may not see what they are doing; for Christ said to his Disciples
They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea the Time comes, that whosoever
kills you will think that he does God Service, Joh. xvi. 2. It belongs to
them also to have their Consciences seared with a hot Iron, lest she should
grieve and bleed when they kill and butcher the innocent Lambs.

BUT in this Blindness and Cruelty, the Persecutors consult together; come, we
the Lambs and Sheep of Christ, let us destroy the Wolves. Where did we hear
that Sheep killed Wolves? There is neither Scripture, Example nor Reason that
will tell us any such Thing; but Persecutors show themselves to be Wolves, and
those they persecute to be the Martyrs of Jesus.

SO Blindness, Ignorance, Cruelty, Malice, Envy and Hatred of all Goodness will
sit Judges in Babylon's Trib^nals, when the Followers of Jesus are judged to
suffer for his Name: and in these Courts it is to no Purpose to ask, what Evil
has this Pilgrim committed? But away with such a one, hang, burn, crucify
him! This was the Treatment Christ himself had in the Babylonish Tribunal; it
was in vain for Pilate in his own Court to argue for Jesus; their Complaint
against him was, that he perverted the People, and was teaching through all
Judea, therefore they would have him crucified.

BUT Pilate said, I find no Fault in this Man, and argued again, that he had
examined him. And Herod having examined him, and had found no Fault in him, nor
any Thing worthy of Death, he would therefore chastize him, and let him go:
Then the whole Multitude cried out at once, away with this Man, and release
unto us Barrabas, who for Murder was east into Prison: Pilate therefore willing
to release Jesus, spoke again to them; but they cried out, saying, crucify,
crucify him: but Pilate reasoned saying, why, what Evil has he done? I have
found no Cause of Death in him, I will therefore chastize him, and let him go:
And they were instant with loud Cries, requiring that he might be crucified,
and the Voices of them and of the Highpriests prevailed, Luke xxiii.

THIS is the Treatment the Master had, who left Footsteps for his Saints and
Martyrs, showing them divine and evangelical Examples, how to follow him through
Persecution, by demonstrating his Doctrine and pure Nature in his Sufferings,
who said, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that
hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you, Mat.
v. 44.

SO when he was led to be crucified, and his cruel Enemies drove Nails through
his Flesh, he pitied them: Here is the heavenly Nature that is in the Lamb, and
the Evangelical Spirit, which he makes his Followers Partakers of in their
Sufferings; Then he prayed for them, saying, O God forgive them; for they know
not what they do.

AND the first that followed his Master in Martyrdom was Stephen, who had
received of the same Spirit, Grace and Virtue, to fit him to suffer for his
Testimony. When the People were cruel and devilish, stoning him to Death, he
kneeled down, and cried with a loud Voice, Lord lay not this Sin to their
Charge, Act. vii. 60. This is that Evangelical, merciful and forgiving Nature,
which hates none, envieth none, nor desires the Harm of any, but the good of
every one. The Testimony of God's Messengers in all Ages, was the Truth; and
for declaring the Truth, they were hated and persecuted.

MICAIAH for telling the Truth, was put in Prison, to be fed with the Bread of
Affliction, and with the Water of Affliction, 1 King. xxii. 27. Jeremiah for
speaking the Truth, was cast into the deep Dungeon, Jer. xxxviii. 6. It was for
declaring the Truth, that the Followers of Jesus were hated and persecuted by
the cruel Spirit in all Ages of the World: It was in vain for the Christians in
the primitive Church to plead their Innocence before the Pagans; there was
Nothing but Martyrdom for the Testimony, and for not worshipping their false
Gods.

IT was to no Purpose for the Protestants and diverse others, when they were
restoring Religion, to plead their Innocence in the Courts of the Bishop of
Rome, nor ask, what Evil have we done? But for their Testimony against the
Corruption and Superstition of the Papists, there was nothing but to destroy
them by every cruel Death. It was in vain for the Quakers in New England,
before that Tribunal, to ask, what Evil have we done? What Law have we broken?
but because they came there to bear their Testimony against Corruption, there
was nothing but Hanging for them: So for the same Cause Christ and his Prophets
and Apostles, and all his Messengers in every Age suffered, that is, for their
Testimonies to the Truth, which the World could not receive, For they did not
speak in the Words which Man's Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches, 1 Cor, ii. 13. And the Teachings of the Holy Ghost are out of Esteem
among the wise Men of this World; for it is Foolishness in their Sight.

CHRIST is the Stone which the Builders rejected in all Ages, even the Wise of
this World: Therefore God accounted the Wisdom of this World to be Foolishness;
because they prefer human Wisdom and Learning before the spiritual, and because
they reject the precious Stone, the Rock of Ages, the Fountain of living water,
and hate him and his Ambassadors and their Message: O! what is the Message then
that Christ and his Ministers declare among the Children of this World, to make
them angry and envious toward them? Is it not the Gospel of Salvation, which
calls People from Satan to Christ, from the Kingdom of Darkness to the Kingdom
of the Son of God, and to his Light? They also call the People of the Lord out
of Babylon, that they be not Partakers of her Sins, and receive not of her
Plagues; inviting all to the Waters, to buy Wine and Milk without Money and
without Price.

SATAN is disturbed at this, lest he loses his Subjects, and he moves the
Inhabitants of the Earth, who have been made drunk with the Wine of the great
City's Fornication; as also her Merchants, lest they lose their Gain; and her
great Men who lived deliciously in her, feeding their Lusts; these will agree
to war against the Lamb, and against his Saints: But the Weapons of the Warfare
of Christ's Servants are not carnal, but spiritual; and in the meek Spirit
(after they have known the Fear of God) they persuade others, exhorting them in
Love and good will to their Bodies and Souls, beseeching them to be reconciled
^o God, showing them good Conversation and Examples, Patience and Forbearance,
in order to gain them, as the Apostle James said, Who is a wise Man and endued
with Knowledge amongst you? let him show out of a good Conversation his Works
with Meekness of Wisdom; But if ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your
Hearts, glory not, and lie not against the Truth; this Wisdom descends not
from above, but is earthly, sensual and devilish: For where Envying and Strife
is, there is Confusion and every evil Work: But the Wisdom that is from above,
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy
and good Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy, Ja. iii. 13, 14,
15, 16, 17. This is the Wisdom that gains upon the Hearts of People in order to
turn them to God; not to drive them by Oppression and Strength of Arm, and
carnal Weapons.

IT is very possible that Numbers of the true Church may be deceived by Satan,
to hold forth some erroneous Points which the Church cannot bear, what
therefore shall be done to such, but after Persuasion and Advice, if they
cannot be gained, then turn them out of the Unity of the Church, and there
leave them amongst the rest of Mankind, to stand or fall to their own Master?
But what if the Church is in Authority, and the Rulers and Officers are Members
thereof, Is it not then lawful for the Officers to use Chastisement, as Fines
and Imprisonment, in order to turn the Erroneous into the Way?

OF a Truth, it is not Persecution, (that is, to rob and imprison) will ever
bring People to love the Religion of those that persecute them; but it gives
them an Advantage to confirm and strengthen them in their way, and count
themselves suffering Persecution for the Sake of Christ and their Conscience,
looking upon their Persecutors to be cruel and unmerciful; for Persecution is
heinous in the Sight of all that suffer under it: But it is natural, and too
often happens among the Professors of Christianity, when they get into Power,
to raise Persecution against those that cannot join with them in Religion. This
is also contrary to the Nature of Christ, and his Commandm^^ts, Law and
heavenly Kingdom, which is not of this World; neither are his Servants to war
for it with carnal Weapons, as may be seen by his Doctrine, when the Village of
the Samaritans would not receive him and his Disciples. James and John seeing
it, they said, Lord, will thou that we command Fire to come down from Heaven
and consume them, even as Elias did? but he turned and rebuked them, and said,
Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of, for the Son of Man is not come to
destroy Men's Lives, but to save them, Luc, ix. 54, 55, 56.

LET us observe how far it was from Jesus to return any Revenge, though Power was
in his Hand; and how he reproved that Spirit in his Disciples, and utterly
disowned it, as a thing contrary to his Nature, Kingdom and Gospel. And since
it is unlawful, and contrary to the way of Christ to call for Fire from Heaven
to destroy those that would not receive him, how much more unlawful is it to
kindle a Fire on Earth, to destroy such as believe in him, because they cannot
for Conscience sake, pin their Religion exactly to the Sleeves of the
Magistrates, and believe and say every thing like them? And if People must
follow the Religion of those that are in Authority, it is in vain for them to
search the Scriptures, and endeavor to try what is good, in order to follow
it, because they must receive the Magistrate's Religion, or leave the Country,
or else resolve to die for their Religion.

THE Persecutors by carrying on and pleading for their Work, do justify all the
cruel and cursed Persecutors, who in all Ages afflicted God's People: But it is
possible they may say, Those in Times past were wicked, and those whom they
persecuted were good; but it is not so at this Time, because we are the godly
People who are in the Way, and we endeavor to bring them that are gone astray
to the Right, and to return to us.

IS not this the Plea and Excuse by which all the Persecutors in Ages past, did
seek to excuse and shelter themselves, and justify their Cause? Therefore since
the Persecutors of every Age have been of one Voice, how much greater Truth can
be in these Excuses in the Mouths of latter Persecutors, more than in the
former? It is in vain for them to say, we are the Lambs, let us persecute the
Wolves, because till this Time of the World, the Lambs have suffered, as the
Apostle says, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
Persecution, 2 Timothy iii. 12.

WHEN a true Christian is fully resolved to keep the Commandments of God, and
the Magistrates command the contrary, the faithful must suffer for his
Religion, let come what will come, and say, as Peter and John, Whether it be
right in the Sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye,
Acts iv. 19, These latter Ages verify the same Things. It is reproachful to
relate, how much the People called Quakers suffered in England and other
Places, because they could not swear, for the Sake of keeping the Command of
Christ, who said, swear not at all; and yet they (the Magistrates) said, swear.

BUT Christ gave forth the Commandment so clear and full, that all the
corrupted Sons of Adam cannot make it void. When Christ was showing the
Difference between his own Law, even the Law of the New Covenant, and the Law
of Moses, he said, Ye have heard, that it has been said by them of old Time,
thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Ouths;
But I say unto you, Swear not at all. Here in the first I lace he forbids
Swearing to the Lord, which under the old Law was commanded; yea further,
Neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne; nor by the Earth, for it is his
Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King; neither
shall thou swear by thy Head, because thou can not make one Hair white or
black; But let your Communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay; for what soever is
more than these, comes of Evil. We see here, that Christ has forbidden all
manner of Oaths, and also commanded not to swear at all, Mat. v. 33 34, 35, 36,
37.

BUT there are many of those that take upon them to be good Christians in these
Times, do not see a Necessity of keeping the Command of Christ; therefore they
strive to gather many Reasons, seeking to cast down and abolish this
Commandment and Doctrine of Jesus; But the more a Man, that is wise in his own
Sight, gathers for Argument and Reasons to oppose Christ, the more he makes
himself an Enemy and Resister of him: For he is the Author of the New Covenant,
the true Lawgiver, the great Prophet, whom every one is to hear under the Pain
of being cut off; then where will a Man go to hunt for, or gather Arguments, to
stand for his Act of Swearing? If he goes to the Law of Moses, Christ has
changed that; thou have nothing there unless thou will be a Jew.

BUT if thou come to search the New Testament, thou will find there the
Apostle James of the same Mind with his Master, because he gives a manifest
Command, that they should not swear, saying, But above all things, my Brethren,
Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath;
but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation,
Jam. v. 12. See here how both these Testimonies of Christ and his Apostles meet
each other, so agreeable to shut out all manner of Swearing. This Apostle also
commanded it above all things, because it came from his great Master, even the
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and likewise under such Danger, lest they
should fall into Condemnation.

AND yet People would hold forth, that neither Christ nor the Apostle did
forbid Swearing before Magistrates, in a Way of bearing Witness in Causes; but
of a Truth these Testimonies of Christ and his Apostle, are wrought into a Ring
so entirely strong, that there is no Room for Time nor Cause to break in upon
them: But when any of those who are for observing this Command, come before
Magistrates to be Witnesses in a Cause, what will they answer? Has not Christ
told them, and put Words in their Mouths? to wit, let your Communication be
Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay; whatsoever is more than these comes of Evil: And the
Apostle likewise, Let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay; lest you fall into
Condemnation. Of a Truth, great is the Difference between the Voice of the
Apostle, and that of the present World, where he says, Above all things, Swear
not at all; but they say, Above all Things you must Swear. They will not allow
any to be a Minister in the Church, without he is first sworn, which is a
Breach of the Command of Christ; as if they deemed that a Man is not fit for
any Service in the World, without he first Swears.

IT would be but reasonable for People that confess Christ, if they could not
forbear Swearing, to be easy with those that would forbear, because of keeping
the Commandment. O everlasting Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, enlighten thou
the Children of Men, draw them out of Babylon, that dark City, where is Envy
and Malice, Pride and Contention, Revenge, Wars and Spilling of Blood; Remove
them to the New Jerusalem, where there is Light, where there is Love, where is
Tranquillity, Peace, Unity, Quietness and Fellowship one with another, and with
the Father, and the Lamb, among all the Citizens.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Antichrist, the Fall of Babylon, the Beast, and False
Prophet.
THE Message which the Servants of God received of him, and declared unto
others, That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all; and the Work which
God set them upon, was, to turn People from Darkness to Light, and from the
Power of Satan unto God, even from the dark Kingdom, (where the Devil, the dark
Spirit, does govern) to the Kingdom of Light, whereof the Lord God is the
Light, and to that City which has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to
shine in it, for the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light
thereof, and the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the Light of it,
Rev. xxi. 23, 24. The Sun shall be no more thy Light by Day, neither for
Brightness shall the Moon give Light unto thee; but the Lord shall be unto thee
for an everlasting Light, and thy God thy Glory, Isa. lx. 19.

THIS is the Work of the true Apostles, even to call People to God, who is
Light, and has enlightened every Man, and calls them to Christ who is the Light
of Life; and this Light (which is the Father and the Son) has lighted every
Man that came into the World; And this is the Condemnation, that Light is come
into the World, and Men loved Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds
were evil: For every one that does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to
the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved; but he that does Truth, comes to
the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God,
Joh. iii. 19, 20, 21.

SO they that hate the Light in themselves, they hate God, because he reproves
them for their Sins; and where they love Darkness in themselves, they love the
Devil, who speaks Peace to them, though they walk after their own Hearts Lusts.
Thus the Ministers which God and Christ send, are hated by the World, because
they speak against Evil in Men. Therefore Jesus comforted his Disciples,
saying, If the World hate you, ye know it hated me before it hated you: If ye
were of the World, the World would love his own; but because ye are not of the
World, but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you,
Joh. xv. 18, 19.

AND in as much as the World ^ould not receive, nor be pleased with such
Ministers as Christ sent; therefore the World did and does provide and
accommodate themselves with Ministers to their own Content, who will say what
may please them: So they, having itching Ears, heap unto themselves Teachers,
who will have their Persons in Admiration because of Advantage, Jude 16. The
World fitteth its Ministers by its own Spirit and Wisdom, and, as John said,
They are of the World, theresore speak they of the World, and the World hears
them. And as ye have heard that Antich^^st shall come, even now are there many
Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last Time: They went out from us,
but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us; but they went out, that they might be made manifest that
they were not of us, 1 John iv. 5. ii. 18, 19.

THESE are the false Prophets of whom Christ spoke, that they were to come
among them in Sheep's Clothing, whom they were to beware of, and know them by
their Fruits, Mat. vii. 15. And these false Teachers crept into the Church in
the Days of the Apostles, who bore their Testimonies against them, as may be
seen, 2 Cor. xi. 12, 13, 14, 15. Jude iv. 8, 10, 11, 12, 16, 19. and several
other Places.

SO Corruption grew among the Teachers of the Church: The Bishops came to be
great and honorable in the World; then went to co^et after Reverence and
Prehemi^ence, high Place, Authority and Dominion over the Church, and over one
another: Then great Gain and Riches must be had to support them in Honor; also
they must learn in the Schools, Degrees, La^guages and human Wisdom, to fit
them to be Minister, in the Church.

SO by this Corruption, increasing from Age to Age, those that were poor,
illiterate and unlearned have been debarred from having any Share in the
Ministry: Then the Spirit of Jesus and his Authority was excluded and shut out
of the Church; but humane Rule, Wisdom and Honor, were set up instead thereof,
presuming Authority to make their Ministers according to their own Wills and
Way, setting upon them the Riches and Glory of this World; then every one was
to countenance his own Way, and to look after his Gain from his Quarter, and
Place where it was ordered him. Lo here! such Watchmen as were of old Time, who
were ignorant, yea, they were greedy Dogs which can never have enough, and they
are Shepherds that cannot understand, Isa. lvi. 11.

THESES So^r of Shepherds God proclaimed Wo^ against, Who fed themselves, and
not the Flock, saying, ye at the Fat, and ye cloth you with the Wo^, ye ^ill
them that are fed^ but ye feed not the Flock; The diseased have ye not
strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound
up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven
away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with Force and with
Cruelty have ye ruled them, Ezekiel. xxxiv. 2, 3, 4.

THE same Complaint was by the Prophet Jeremiah against the Prophets of
Jerusalem, who strengthened the Hands of Evildoers, that none returned from
their Wickedness: They say still unto them that despise me, the Lord has said,
ye shall have Peace; and they say unto every one that walks after the
Imagination of his own Heart, no Evil shall come unto you; I have not s^nt
these Prophets, yet they ran. I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied.
But if they had stood in my Counsel, and ^aused my People to hear my Word ^
then they should have turned them from their evil Way, and from the Evil of
their Doings: And they cause my People to err by their Lies, and by their
Lightness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them; Therefore they shall not
profit this People at all, says the Lord, Jer. xxiii. 14, 17, 21, 22, 32. Also
by the Prophet Micah, Thus says the Lord, concerning the Prophets that make my
People err, that bite with their Teeth, and cry Peace, and he that puts not
into their Mouths, they even prepare War against him. The Heads thereof judge
for Reward, and the Priests thereof ^reach for Hire, and the Prophets thereof
divine for Money: Yet they will lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord
among (...) none Evil can come upon us, Mic. iii. 5, 11.

AND in Truth, though there be false Teachers in this latter Time that are decked
with the Whore's Jewels, and although they hold the golden Cup, yet the same Root
brings forth the same Fruit; and as Christ marked them, the are ravening
Wolves, ye shall know them by their Fruits, Mat. vii. 15, 16. So did the
Apostle Peter set the same Marks on the false Teachers, saying of them, They
are to come among the Christians, and through Covetousness shall they with
feigned Words make Merchandise of you, whose Judgment now of a long Time
lingreth not, and their Damnation slumbreth not; having Eyes full of Adultery,
that cannot cease from Sin, beguiling unstable Souls; an Heart they have
exercised with covetous Practices, cursed Children, which have forsaken the
right Way, and are gone astray, following the Way of Balaam, who loved the
Wages of Unrighteousness, 2 Pet. ii. 3, 14, 15.

THIS covetous Spirit entered into the Hearts of some in the Church of Corinth,
which caused the Apostle to be so strict, that he would take Nothing from any
of them to answer his Necessities, lest he should give them Occasion, as he
testifies at large, how he had been in Want, whilst he preached to them the
Gospel of God freely, 2 Cor. xi. 9, 12, 13. And those covetous Ministers he
reckoned to be false Apostles, deceitful Workers, being transformed into the
Apostles of Christ.

AND of a Truth, great is the Difference between the Ministry and Ministers of
Christ, and the Ministers and Ministry of Antichrist; they are as unlike as
Water is to Fire, or Light to Darkness: Christ called his Disciples from
unlearned Men, and fitted them by his Grace and Inspiration; but Antichrist
must have Scholars fitted with human Wisdom. Christ communicated freely to them
of his spiritual Goodness, commanding them to give as they had received freely;
but the Ministers of Antichrist receive not freely: it is great Pains and
Labor to them, and Expense of much Money; therefore it is costly to any that
receive of them. The Messengers of God called People to Christ the Fountain of
living Water, that they might drink of the Water of Life freely, and buy Wine
and Milk without Money and without Price: But the Merchants of Babylon call
every Body to their Shops after this Manner, Come to us and buy, and if you do
not buy, pay; and if you do not pay, we will make War against you. But the
Apostle Paul says, I have coveted no Man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel: Yea,
you your selves know, that these Hands have ministered unto my Necessity, and to
them that were with me, Acts xx. 33, 34. But these Merchants are too great to
work with their Hands: They will have Gold or Silver, Corn, Wool and Lambs,
with Part of all the Increase of the People's Goods.

THE Apostle said, a Necessity is laid upon me to preach the Gospel, yea, Woe
is unto me if I do it not: But there is no Necessity upon these to preach any,
but where they have the most Wages. The Apostle did not bid them believe Men,
but God; saying, Do I seek to please Men? For if I pleased Men, I should not be
the Servant of Christ, Gal. i. 10. But these are for pleasing of Men; therefore
they are not the Servants of Christ. Again, the same Apostle says, I certify
you, Brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, is not after Man; for
I neither received it of Man, neither was I taught it, but by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, Ver. 11, 12. But these preach Doctrine (which they call Gospel)
after they receive it, and learn it of Men, and not by the Revelation of Jesus
Christ; for they deny spiritual Revelation in these Days. Also the same Apostle
says, We have received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of
God; that we might know the Things that are freely given us of God: Which
Things also we speak, not in the Words which Man's Wisdom teaches, but which
the Holy Ghost teaches, 1 Cor. ii. 12, 13.

BUT these do not profess, that they have received the Spirit of God; nor is
what they preach freely given them of God, neither do they speak the Words
which the Holy Ghost teaches, but those that Man's Wisdom teaches.

NOW it is high Time for People to be awakened out of Sleep, and endeavor for
their Lives to come out of Babylon: For a Voice from Heaven calls, Come out of
her my People, that ye be not Partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of
her Plagues: Fo rher Sins have reached unto Heaven, and God has remembered her
Iniquities: Therefore shall her Plagues come in one Day: Death and Mourning and
Famine; and she shall be utterly burnt with Fire; for strong is the Lord God
who judges her: And the Kings of the Earth who have committed Fornication, and
lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they
shall see the Smoke of her burning, standing afar off for the Fear of her
Tor^ment, saying, alas, alas, that great City Babylon, that mighty City! for in
one Hour is thy Judgment come: And the Merchants of the Earth shall weep and
mourn over her; for no Man buyeth her Merchandise any more, the Merchandise of
Gold and Silver and precious Stones and of Pearls, Rev. xviii. 4, 5, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12.

HERE is the Gayety the Whore has been decked with, even by all Manner of
gilded Appearances, all the Shows of Religion, all Sorts of Shells and Husks,
all Manner of Traditions Customs and Ordinances, every Form of Worship, Service
and Duties; as also by adorning her Ministers with Gold and Silver, Rewards and
great Gain, Honor, Pre-eminence and Authority to govern throughout all the
Streets of the great City: Thus they were enriched by these Merchandises.

BUT of a Truth, the Time is at Hand, when the Lord will bring to pass this
Proph^cy, to wit, the Downfall of Babylon: And then those that trade in these
Things, and they that have been made rich by her, will stand afar off from her,
fearing her Torment, weeping and mourning; and it will not be without Cause
that these shall weep and mourn, but for losing their Riches and Honor, and
for that none will buy any more of their Merchandise; and likewise for Fear of
her Torments and everlasting Burning, because they have lived deliciously in
her, and were Partakers of her Sins; therefore her Plagues are to fall upon
them.

BUT the Voice says, rejoice concerning her, O Heaven, and you the holy
Apostles and Prophets, because God is avenged of her for your Sakes; for when
the Lamb opened the fifth Seal, John saw under the Altar the Souls of them that
were slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony which they held, and they
cried with a loud Voice saying, how long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not
judge and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth? And white Robes
were given unto every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should
rest yet for a little Season, until the Number of their Fellow Servants and
their Brethren that should be killed as they were should be fulfilled, Rev. vi.
9, 10, 11.

AND indeed the Saints Heaven, and upon Earth do jointly cry to him who sits
upon the Throne, that he may hasten on his Journey against the Power of
Darkness, and overwhelm Babylon, the Beast, and false Prophet, and to exalt his
great Name; and their Cry enters the Ears of the Almighty, and he makes ready
to stretch forth and make bare his powerful Arm to avenge the Blood of his
Saints and Prophets upon the great City, on her Inhabitants, her Merchants and
great Men, who committed Fornication with her, and those that dwell upon the
Earth, and have been drunk with the Wine of her Whoredom.

NOW the Day begins to dawn, and the Lord sends, and has sent his Messengers
to preach the true Gospel; and though there are many People that it have been
enlightened in a large Degree to behold the Pretense and Likeness of Worships
that are among the Children of the World, who are yet in the Flesh fulfilling
the Last thereof: Nevertheless the Power of Darkness and the Sprit of the great
World are too strong for them to resist; therefore it is necessary that the
Lord should again send one Army of valiant Soldiers against Babylon, who will
stand in the hottest Fire, and before the sharpest Arrows, and the most cruel
Enemies which Satan owns, and that without turning their Faces to Assistance or
Defense, but altogether trust in the Lord, and stand in the heavenly Armor, as
Lambs among Wolves, until the Number of the Martyrs be fulfilled; and then when
the Number of the Fellow Servants and Brethren of those that are under the
Altar staying for them is made up; then the Blood of the Saints and Prophets
shall be no more spilt by the Whore.

For the Lord will make bare the Arm of his great Power to appear with his
Servants to quench the Violence of Fire, to stop the Mouths of Lions, to wear
away the Strength of Archers, to smite the Camp of the Assyrians, to open the
Prisons, and break their Bands in Pieces: So the Lord will cast down and
demolish all the Castles and Bulwarks of Babylon, and he will blow his mighty
Winds upon all her Woods, and all her fair Trees, to wither and consume them.

INDEED the spiritual Purposes and Prophecies which God revealed to John (when
he was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day) are in a great Measure come to pass:
The Church is coming up out of the Wilderness, and the Gospel is freely
preached in diverse Countries, the spiritual Sun begins to shine; and is not the
One Thousand two Hundred and Sixty Days fully expired since the Church fled
into the Wilderness? And is not the Forty and two Months, even the Time wherein
the Beast had Power given him to work, near expiring? For the Number mentioned
before is within a little of the Forty and two Months.

BUT some my interpret thus, the Pope is the Beast; and by the Time he came,
and by this Number, he has yet about one Hundred and Fifty Years to reign: But
it is easier for me to think, that the Devil and Satar was the first Beast that
John saw rising out of the Sea, to wit, out of the Fullness and Depth of
Corruption, which had the Wound by the Sword in the Time of Christ and his
Apostles, but now is revived, and has Authority from the Dragon to work Forty
two Months, and Power over all Kindreds and Tongues and Nations; and that the
Pope was the second Beast which came up out of the Earth to do the Service of
the first Beast, and to cause them that dwell on the Earth to, worship the
Devil, and to make Images to him, and reverence him, and receive his hellish
Marks in their Hands or in their Foreheads, that they might buy and sell, Rev.
xiii. 4, 5, 7, 11, 12, 16. And so the Downfall of Babylon is at the Door, and
all her Glory to be laid in the Dust, and all her Shops, Riches and Merchandise
to be burnt with the fiery Indignation of him that sits upon the Throne, and
lives for ever.

AND of a Truth, the Lord has raised Witnesses for himself in these latter
Ages to preach the true Gospel, and to proclaim against Babylon, but not in the
Place where was the strongest Defense, and most cruel Soldiers of the Beast:
But after they had suffered in England and other Places, Spoil and
Imprisonment, and some the Loss of their Lives, God was pleased to soften the
Hearts of the chief Men, and the Hands of Persecutors grew weak, and Liberty of
Conscience in a large Measure was granted; and then the Work in P^rt stood.
Therefore there must be one Commotion again, and one fiery Battle between the
Lamb and the Dragon; and I do believe that some of the Soldiers of that Battle
are already born: Therefore let every true Christian pray to his heavenly
Father, that he may hasten on his Journey, to exalt his great Name, and to
deliver Men out of Babylon's Darkness, and bring them to the New Jerusalem, to
live there under his Wings, and in his Light, in Peace and Holiness, Amen.

CHAP. X. Showing the true Worship.
THE Almighty God who made Man in his own Image and Likeness and has endowed
him with Knowledge, and Understanding, giving him Authority to rule over all
the Creatures, it is his Due to have Reverence and Obedience and Humility, as
being the Substance of true Worship; for Worship is a Thing which the World
makes a great Noise about, and much Strife concerning it; many set Ways are
invented by the Conjecture (...) Man, and by the Reasonings of Flesh and Blood,
to the End they may seek to please the Lord without Obedience: But God requires
of his People a spiritual Worship. Where therefore is this Worship to be
performed, but in the Spirit? As Christ said, God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth; Here is the Worship the
World knows not, nor the Place to worship.

BUT Men will say, we must worship God in the Church; yet many are so ignorant,
that they know not what the Church is, nor where she is; whereas the Church is
the People of God, who worship in Spirit even in God, who dwells in his
People, and makes them a Temple for himself.

AND though there is but one Church, yet she is in a two fold State in the
outward: For the Woman that John saw flying into the Wilderness from the Face
of the Serpent, was the Church, which God feeds there. These the Persecutors
cannot spy out, these are dispersed through all the World, some of all
Professions, some of all Kindreds, Tribes and Languages, who fear God, and
depart from Iniquity; for John saw an Angel flying in the midst of Heaven,
having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, and
to every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People; saying with a loud Voice,
fear God, and give Glory to him; for the Hour of his Judgment is come, and
worship him that made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and the Fountains of
Water, Rev. xiv. 6, 7.

AND of a Truth, the Voice of this Angel has reached to the utmost Part of the
World; and there is a Witness in every Man that tells him, he should fear God
and give him Glory; for his Judgment is within upon the Heart of the Sinner, by
Reason of his Wickedness. Also the Heaven and the Earth, the Sea, Fountains of
Water, and all the wonderful Works of the Creation are in the Sight of People,
to show them the Greatness and Power of him that made the whole: This shows
them, that Man ought to bow before the Creator of all Things, and yield
Adoration and Obedience to him: Also they have been illuminated with the Light
which lights every one that comes into the World. This is the Light of Life,
and the Grace that brings Salvation has appeared unto them to teach them to
^ear God and forsake Wickedness, that they may be acceptable.

BUT in what Place, or after what Manner do th^se worship, inasmuch as they are
not yet gathered to worship by themselves? It is probable there are some of
these belonging to all Sorts of Idol. Worships which are among the Children of
the World; but their Worship does not stand in what their Eyes see, nor in the
Things which their Ears hear; but in the Bowedness of their Hearts, Souls and
Spirits in the inward Man, before the Almighty God. And though this Worship is
not tied to Man, nor to Place, nor Time, but when they turn inwardly into
themselves, and the Lord breaks in upon their Hearts, in the Consideration of
his Mercies and Deliverances, his Protection and Love toward them. And in this
Lowliness and spiritual. Poverty, their Hearts are softened, and their Souls
and Spirits tendered together. And this is the Worship that God receives
acceptably from every one in particular, when the Person is without any Body
but him and the Lord This is the State of the scattered Church and her Worship,
which is in the Spirit, out of the Sight of Men: Of this Sort was the seven
Thousand which the Lord had in the Days of Ahab.

BUT the Place and Time when these shall come to know each other, and the Lord
gather some of them together to join in Worship; the Worship is the same, and
they in the same Spiritual Poverty do worship. Yea, it is poor Worship that God
looks upon: For blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for there is is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. v. 3. Because the Lord will visit such, even the poor and needy,
and the contrite in Spirit, who tremble at my Word, says the Lord, Isa. lxvi.
2. For his Promise is, Where two or three are gathered together in my Name,
there I am in the midst of them. Mat. xviii. 20.

THIS Worship is poor, because these needy Ones have nothing designed or
prepared beforehand to speak nor act, but wait near the Lord, for him to
prepare them an Offering that will be acceptable in his Sight; for he has
promised to give of his Spirit unto his People, and teach them himself, and to
make manifest unto them, what they shall say and do.

AND here is the Difference between the true Church, which Christ is the Head,
Captain, and Prince of, and the idolatrous Churhes which have decked themselves
with a Set Method, Service, and Worship. When they come together, every Thing
is made ready: There is Plenty or Old Prayers to be read to fill the People's
Ears, and which of them belong to be read this Day, and which to the next Day
of Worship. And how little of the Scriptures is to be read on every Day or
Worship? There is also a Sermon designed, and by humane Wisdom set is Order
beforehand; so that they want nothing from the Lord; they have all Things
ready; there is nothing but going upon the Service, in their own Time, and in
their own Will, and in their own Power, without waiting upon the Lord for Help
and Assistance: nor for the Holy Spirit to refresh and comfort them, and to be
with them a Life and a Light, to lead them and guide them in their Service; for
without the Light [that is Christ] we can do nothing that is acceptable.

BUT the true Worshippers, when they come together, the Business and Concern of
every one in particular is to turn inward, and give his Heart and Mind to wait
upon the Lord, for his Presence, to refresh their Souls: And their Prayers are
in secret to their Helper, that he may appear in his Temple, to drive out the
Buyers and Sellers, that they may witness true Silence in the inward Man, from
all carnal Sounds and Reasonings of Flesh and Blood, that they may in Quietness
and Patience possess their Souls, and resign themselves into the Hand of their
heavenly Father, even as Clay into the Hand of the Potter, to the End that he
may fit every one to the Service he has prepared for him.

SO in this silent Waiting their Strength is renewed, and as it is written,
They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their Strength, Isa. xl. 31. In this
true Silence, they sit under the Teaching of that Anointing which they receive
from the Holy One, who is the Spirit of Truth, that leads into all Truth; and
as this abides in them, they need not that any one teach them, but as the same
Anointing teaches them all Things, 1 John ii. 27. And when God sees meet to
put a Word into the Mouth of any one of them, he is to speak what the Lord has
revealed and taught him, 1 Cor. ii. 4. So is he to give it forth in
Demonstration and Power, and in the Virtue and Life of the Spirit, that it may
be to Edification in the Church; for Deep calls unto Deep, and Life reaches
unto Life, and the Congregation go together to the Waters to drink freely,
Psalm. xlii. ^. And if any Thing be revealed to one that sits by, the first is
to be silent; for that Stream of the spiritual Gift is turned to the other
Man's Wheel; because that spiritual Liber^y i^ in the true Church, for every
one to speak as they are moved by the holy Spirit; and as the Lord pours upon
them the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, they are to pray with the Spirit,
and in the Spirit, as God reveals to them the Wants and Necessities of the
Congregation.

SO here is the Church that comes up from the Wilderness, leaning upon her
beloved, Cant. viii. 5. Here also are the Worshippers and their Worship; and as
the Spirit of Jesus Christ is their Leader in their Worship, he likewise is to
order them in their Lives and Conversations, and all their Affairs, teaching
them to love one another, and to take Care one for another, that every Member
may keep his own Place, and learn of his Master to do the Service he has fitted
him for, and puts him upon, and that every one may live a clean Life and
Conversation in Innocence and Simplicity of Heart, with his Eye to his Master.

IT is not the Place of any to push or drive another forward in any of the
Lord's Business, before he has fitted him for the Work, and shown it to him,
and held his Light before him to enlighten his Paths: Therefore as every true
Christian is ordered and led in every Thing by the Spirit of Truth, so Nothing
ought to rule in the Church of Christ, but the Spirit of Christ.

AND in as much as no Man is ^ true Christian, nor owned by Christ, but he that
has his Spirit, there is no Congregation can be a true Church nor his Sheep,
but those that know him, hear his Voice, and follow him; unto such he is Head
and Shepherd, King and Ruler, to order them at his Command, and lead them into
fat Pastures, and make them drink of the Water of Life, that they may live for
ever, with the Father and the Lamb, and walk in white Robes, before the Throne
to sing Hallelujah to him that lives for ever. To whom Obedience, Reverence and
Honor is justly due; to whom be it returned from henceforth for ever and
^^^^more.

FINIS.

