AN ENQUIRY INTO THE REASONS OF THE CONDUCT OF Great Britain, With Relation to
the Present State of AFFAIRS IN EUROPE.

Published (here) for the Information of the Inhabitants of New England.

BOSTON: Reprinted by T. Fleet, for B. Eliot, just below the Townhouse, 1727.

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE REASONS OF THE Conduct of Great Britain, etc.
THE whole Face of Affairs in Europe is, within the space of the last Year, so
much altered, that it is almost impossible for the most unconcerned Spectator
to prevent his Thoughts from running out into Questions and Suppositions about
it. Curiosity it self, the lowest Principle of all our Enquiries, will force
its Way into such a Scene: And will expect, or invent, some Account of so
surprising a Change; from a Calm hardly paralleled by any past Prosperity, to a
sudden Gathering of Clouds; which, if not soon dissipated, must burst, and
discharge themselves some where or other.

But when Self-Interest is joined to this natural Curiosity, and it becomes a
personal and National Concern, to know the main Causes and Springs of such
Events, as All are interested in; there seems then to be a Right, strictly so
called, to demand and receive all the Satisfaction the Nature of such Affairs
can permit to be given. In a free Nation especially, where no Resolutions can
be effectual without the Consent and support of the Community, every Man, who
can think at all, will think it an injurious Treatment, if, at a proper Time,
and in a proper Manner, some Light be not held forth to him; and some
satisfactory Solution given of such Appearances, as must otherwise very much
perplex and disturb him. And one Thing Governors themselves are sure to find,
That unless they show such a Regard to Those who justly think they have a Claim
to it, this Evil will come to pass, that Mankind (always disposed enough
toward Dissatisfaction, either through a sort of natural Ill Will to Those
above them, or through a Weariness under the Continuance of the same
Administration, or through an affected Popularity, or real Patriotism not
sufficiently instructed) will take that Side of the Prospect to dwell upon,
which will af^^^d them most Matter for Satyr at Home; and lay all the Load upon
the Conduct of Those, in whose Time of Power such a Crisis of Political Affairs
appears in the World.

All this was never more true, than in this Nation, and at this Time. Every
Briton who, either by his Treasure or his Blood, by his Vote or his Interest,
by his Person or his Representative, has in Time past bor'n any part in
procuring the common Peace, and establishing the several Interests of Europe:
Every such Member of the British Nation, who, by this Time flattered himself
with Hopes of enjoying the Result of all our Toil, and Taxes, and Blood, in an
Universal Peace, and an extended undisturbed Commerce, has a Right to ask, --
How comes this Face of Things to be again overclouded? -- All Europe once more
in Agitation -- Three Fleets from Britain fitted out at a Great Expense, and
with the utmost Expedition sent to several parts of the World: -- And, what is
most unaccountable, the Emperor and Spain, Powers that could hardly be kept
within the Bounds of common Decency, toward one another, by all the Address of
two powerful Mediators in a public Treaty, abandoning that Mediation; and, in
the middle of it, privately running into one another's Arms, and uniting, in
Designs destructive to the Commerce and Rights of other Nations, with all the
Marks of Cordial Affection, and a Resolute Friendship.

Is not This, the King of Spain -- of that Country, which has always felt the
Want of the Friendship of Britain, more than of That of all other Nations
besides; to such a Degree, that it has passed into a Proverb throughout the
Kingdom, Paz con Inglaterra, con todos otros la Guerra: Peace with England, and
War with all the World besides? -- of that Country, which reaps more Advantage
from the Trade with England, than from that of all its other Neighbors put
together? -- And, Is not this the same King, whose Engagements to the Interests
and Possessions of Britain in his Country, are as solemn and strong, as the
most express Treaties can make them? -- The same, who just before the Opening
the Congress at Cambray, owned and ratified them all, by acceding in Form to
the Quadruple Alliance; and accepting, by That, the Mediation of Britain and
France?

And above all, if we turn our Eyes to the Emperor; Is not This the Prince,
whom we once bore upon our Shoulders, out of the Reach of all his Enemies, and
supported by our Strength, in the Time of his own greatest Weakness? -- The
Prince, whom our Zeal, and our Fleets, and our Treasure, labored to six upon
the Throne of Spain, at a Time when Difficulties and Dangers surrounded the
whole Imperial House at Vienna? -- And now, Vested, as we always wished Him to
be, with the High and August Dignity He enjoys; Is not this the Emperor, who
may justly be said to owe the Preservation even of all his Hereditary
Countries, and of his Imperial Crown it self, (if we may have liberty to say
so,) to that hazardous and unequalled March of the Confederate Army into
Germany, and to the happy Consequences of it? To that Victory, in which the
British, Dutch, Hanoverian, Prussian, and Hessian Troops bore so great a part;
and, in a particular Manner, to that British General, who projected and
conducted the Whole? -- And the same Emperor, who, as He was throughout the
last War, the chief Object of the Love and good Wishes of this Nation, so, at
the End of it, was established in the Possession of Flanders; and owes Ostend
it self to those victorious Arms, which had before supported his Person, and
preserved the Empire for him? And all this long Scene of Service and Toil,
entered into and prosecuted by us, We must own, against the repeatad
Remonstrances of many, that We were hastening apace to make Him a Power too
great and too formidable; and that we should find in Him at last, the Enemy we
then dreaded only in another.

It is natural for every Briton to look back, and to ask these and the like
Questions. And the next Thought which succeeds, is almost as natural; That it
is hardly to be supposed, that these Powers should take such Steps, without
something to justify them. We can hardly imagine it possible, That, without
some real and high Provocation, the Emperor could throw any the least Indignity
upon the Crown of Great Britain; or act any injurious or even hard Part toward
a Nation who had sacrificed so much Treasure and so much Blood to his Service.
And therefore we are apt enough to conclude, (and have Reason to do so, till we
find it otherwise) That some great Mismanagement on the Part of Britain; some
unjustifiable Partiality toward Others; some Breach of Faith; some Outrage or
other in Politics, has been committed against his Imperial Majesty: Or, that
some unpardonable Behavior on our Part, with Regard to his just Interests,
must have been the Occasion of a Conduct that so far exceeds the Common Maxims
of Princes and States toward one another.

And indeed, I shall be very free to own, If this be the Case; if either solemn
Treaties, or any Engagements, with the Court of Vienna, have been broke
through; if either Affronts, or even Neglects, inconsistent with the Duty of a
faithful Ally, have been Part of the Conduct of the present Court of Great
Britain toward his Imperial Majesty; former Appearances ought not be spoken
of; all past Obligations ought to be as nothing in the present Account: The
Emperor has a Right to guard and strengthen himself by Treaties contrary to his
former Treaties, and to act the Part He judges best for his own Honor and
Security: And we of this Nation have no Right to tax Him, either with
Ingratitude unprovoked, or with Breach of Faith without the Appearance of a
Justification; but ought to turn all our Zeal against Those, whose Counsels,
and whose Behavior, upon this Supposition, have made such a Conduct on his
part, wise, just and necessary. And the same must be acknowledged with Regard
to Spain also; if any such Excuse can justly be alleged on that Side.

We will now, therefore, enquire What has been the Behavior of the King and
Nation of Great Britain, since his present Majesty came to the Throne, toward
the Emperor particularly: And, as we pass, toward Spain also. And I will put
the Account of this into two Periods. The first shall be, from his Majesty's
Accession to the Crown, to the Opening the Congress at Cambray: The Second,
from the Opening of that Congress to the Signing of the Treaty of Peace at
Vienna between the Emperor and Spain.

At the Time when his Majesty came to the Throne of Great Britain, several
Points of great Importance remained to be adjusted, before the Peace of Europe
could be esteemed as a Thing fixed upon any lasting and solid Foundation; in
particular, some Things very uneasy to the Emperor, and others very much
desired by Spain. In consideration of this, his Majesty, after other previous
Treaties and Conventions, entered directly upon these necessary Points, which
were fixed in the Treaty of London, July 22. 1718. entirely to the Enperor's
Satisfaction: who was himself a Party in that Treaty, and confirmed with his
own Hand what his Ministers had before signed in his Name. His Italian
Dominions, always dear to him, He justly thought not very secure, without the
Possession of Sicily; upon which the Preservation of Naples very much depends.
This great and important Point, the King of Great Britain fixed, as a main
Article of this Treaty: and engaged, in Concert with France, that, Sardinia
being delivered up to the Emperor by Spain, the King of Sicily should accept of
that Island in lieu of Sicily, which He should yield to the Emperor.

On the Part of Spain, a Favorite Point was likewise settled. Don Carlos, Son
to the present Queen, was established in the Succession of Tuscany, Parma, and
Placentia: And This consented to, by the Emperor, who alone was capable of
disturbing it; and effectually guaranteed by the Powers of Britain and France.
I will at present name no other Particulars, but these two principal ones. Some
other Points, Circumstances, and Incidents, in order to perfect the Peace
between the Emperor and Spain, remained to be settled in a Congress, under the
Mediation of Britain and France: And this Mediation made a Part and an express
Article of this Treaty of London, to which the Emperor long ago, and Spain
afterward, set their Hands, and gave their solemn Consent. The former of the
two Articles now mentioned, viz. That relating to Sicily, did not long subsist
in Words only; but was soon actually put in Execution; and the Emperor put in
Possession of that Kingdom.

Hitherto, Nothing but Friendship appears: And perhaps Friendship to Excess.
What the Emperor exceedingly desired, is granted to Him: And nothing granted to
Others, but what the Emperor himself had previously consented to, as a
reasonable and fitting Equivalent. Neither had the King of Spain any Reason to
complain, when the Succession of Don Carlos in Italy was put in so sure a Way
of taking place at the Time appointed. So far indeed, was He from it; That,
before the Opening of the Congress, He himself acceded to the Treaty of London,
and consented to all the Allotments made in it.

The Congress was at length opened at Cambray, Jan. 26. N. S. 1723-4. in order
to settle all remaining Uncertainties, under the Care of the two mediating
Powers, Britain and France. This will be a Second Period; from this Opening at
Cambray, to the opening of another Scene at Vienna. And through the whole
Management of this Congress, the Part the Mediators acted, was so impartial, so
equitable, so agreeable to the Treaty of London, which was the Basis of this
Congress; that the most solemn Appeal may be made to Both the contesting
Powers, Whether any one Step was taken, which could give any the least just
Ground of Complaint. No Appeal is, indeed, necessary. The Imperial Court would
loudly have complained of any Conduct; if there had been any toward that Court
which could have deserved it. But there never was any Complaint of that Sort
from thence: Nor indeed could there have been any made, without discovering at
the same Time that there was nothing to complain of, but the too great Equity
and Justice observed by the Mediators between the two contending Powers; and
their resolute Adherence to all Treaties; and particularly to that of London,
to which this Court itself had consented. Nor did Spain make the least
Complaint against the Behavior of the mediating Powers, through the whole
Progress of the Mediation; but what arose from the constant Justice of the
Mediators, in keeping within the Bounds of their Duty and Honor, and their not
giving into any new and exorbitant Demands of that Court.

Thus, therefore, stands the Case. Whilst a Mediation was happily going on,
under the Sanction of a solemn Treaty, appointing this Mediation; and this
Appointment signed, and consented to, by these contending Crowns; without any
apparent Dissatisfaction, or even the least Pretense for it, a private Treaty
is entered into, carried on, and finished at Vienna; in plain Contradiction to
that Article relating to the Mediation, by which They had solemnly obliged
themselves to settle the Points in Difference, under the Eye and Influence of
Great Britain and France: And the whole conducted with the highest Disrespect
to the mediating Powers, and without the least seeming Desire of keeping the
common Measures of Decency with them. Considering, therefore, only the Manner
and Circumstances attending this Transaction between the Emperor and Spain, at
Vienna; as it was a Violation of an express Article of a former Treaty signed
by Themselves, and an high and unprovoked Indignity offered to the Mediators;
these were alone enough to justify the Mediators, in any public act of due
Resentment of such Usage.

But so far were They from showing any such Resentment; so far from making this
open Affront, the Occasion of an open Rupture; that, when the Signing of this
Treaty was first, in Form, notified to the two Courts of Britain and France;
and it was declared to be no other than a Defensive one, with Regard only to
the mutual Satisfaction of the Emperor and Spain; and not contradictory, but
perfectly agreeable, to the Treaty of London: So far were They from improving
such Usage into a public Quarrel, that both at Home, and by their Ministers
every where Abroad, They expressed a great Pleasure that the Two Powers, whom
the Mediators at Cambray could not bring even to Terms of common Civility
toward one another, had found the happy Means, without the Ceremony and
Assistance of any Mediator, to get over Difficulties that had been declared
almost insuperable; and to link themselves in the Bands of Friendship, upon
Terms, not inconsistent (as it was affirmed) with the Repose of Europe. This
was the great End of the Congress itself: And, if this End were answered; the
Mediating Powers were not sollicitous about the Means used in compassing it;
but could pass over the great Disregard shown toward Themselves, in
Consideration of the solid and common Good obtained by this Agreement.

But in how decent a Manner soever, the Courts of Britain and France treated
this Affair: Those of the Emperor and Spain saw very well that such a Step
could not but be very shocking to the Mediators; and stood in need of the best
Apology They could make. And very luckily (as They or their Agents thought) for
Themselves, the Behavior of the Court of France, in sending back the Infanta
to Spain; joined with his Britannick Majesty's not accepting the sole Mediation
at Cambray; furnished them with One as good as they could have wished. And
therefore, the Imperial Ministers at Cambray, at London, and at Paris, were
very ready at first to put it all upon this; and to declare that, the Reason of
this extraordinary Step was, that the Court of France having affronted his
Catholic Majesty in so high and so unpardonable a Manner, that Spain could not
in Honor any longer act with the Most Christian King, as a Mediator; and the
King of Great Britain having declined to act as sole Mediator, when it was
proposed to Him to do so by the Crown of Spain: This broke off all Hopes of any
Effect from the Congress at Cambray; and left his Catholic Majesty nothing to
do, but to fly to Vienna; and, out of a due Resentment of so great an Injury,
and the Necessity of his Affairs, to throw himself entirely upon the Honor and
Equity of that Court: And, more particularly, that his Imperial Majesty, upon
Ripperda's first Applications, showed a great Unwillingness to move the
Negociations out of their Course at Cambray; but at last prevailed upon
himself, out of Love to the Public Tranquillity, to consent to the carrying
them on at Vienna, after he found it more and more plain, that the Resentment
of Spain against France, and his Britannick Majesty's Refusal of the Sole
Mediation, made it impossible to proceed at Cambray.

Such was the Language of the Imperialists, upon the first Notification of the
Vienna Treaty, when they thought it needful to make an Apology for it. And though
it cannot be affirmed that the Court of Spain did itself expressly offer this,
as the first moving Reason of that Piece of Conduct; yet (accorning to the best
Accounts from Spain) upon the first public News of the Vienna Treaty at
Madrid, the Discourses of many were taught to run that Way, and to dwell upon
that same popular Topic. And without Doubt it was thought a very cunning Part,
thus to attribute such a Conduct to sudden Rage and Passion; that this might
afford some Color for a Treaty in Appearance so detrimental to Spain, and a
little palliate the low Terms accepted by that Crown; and by this means, as
they flattered themselves, remove all Suspicion of any pernicious and
unjustifiable Secret behind the Curtain, till the due Time came for revealing
it.

But as Facts and Dates are stubborn Things, not to be shaken by the Sound of
Words and plausible Speeches; this itself proved the most unlucky Pretense
possible: and only opened a Door to the best-grounded Suspicions, that
something very bad, too bad to be owned, was at the Bottom of such a Behavior.

The Courts of Great Britain and France were not so idle Spectators of the
Affairs of Europe, but that they had long before this the most evident Proofs
in their Possession, that this Account of that Transaction was impossible to be
true. The Resolution of the Court of France, relating to the Infanta, did not
come (no, not in Suspicion) to Madrid, till March 8. N. S. 1724-5. Ripperda,
who conducted the new Treaty, had been sent to Vienna above three Month before
that: and even his full Powers for making this clandestine Treaty were signed
Novem. 22. 1724. And soon after the Treaty of Peace was signed in form at
Vienna, the public Language at the Court of Madrid, was, That they had looked
upon the Peace with the Emperor, as a Thing sure ever since the preceding March
29. on which Day a Courier was known to come from Vienna to Madrid, with the
Nows of all the principal Articles being adjusted, i. e. twenty one Days only,
from the Day of the first News at Madrid, of the King of France's Resolution of
annulling his Marriage with the Infanta.

This is so evident a kind of Demonstration, that Persons of the lowest
Understanding cannot but conclude from it, how absurd it is, to make this
Resolution of the Court of France, the first Step toward an excuse for what
was resolved on, and set on foot, with full Powers signed for the Purpose,
above three Months before it. For who is there, that cannot immediately see,
That a proceeding authorized, November 22. could not be owing to an Affront
which was not heard of, till March 8. following? And that a Treaty thoroughly
adjusted, in its main Articles, at Vienna, so early in March, as to be known at
Madrid, the Twenty ninth of that Month, could not be so much as facilitated, or
modelled by what was not known at Madrid till the Eighth of the same March: And
which therefore, could not in so few Days be sent to Vienna, to operate there;
and the News of that Operation be returned to Madrid?

But, if possible, it was still more unaccountable to draw an Excuse from his
Britannick Majesty's not taking upon himself the sole Mediation at Cambray:
which it was well known he could not have done without an open Affront to
France; and a manifest Violation of the Quadruple Alliance; besides other
Inconveniences. For it was not till March 9. 1724-5. that the Court of Spain
moved this. -- The Motion was then to be transmitted to London; and the Answer
to it, to be sent back to Madrid. This Answer did not arrive till about April
24. following: and therefore I need not say, could not have the least Part in a
Treaty set on Foot above four Months before, and signed in Form April 30. 1725.
at Vienna, i. e. about a Week after his Majesty's declining the sole Mediation
was known at Madrid; and when it was impossible to be known at Vienna. These
therefore, were Pretenses entirely foreign from the true Reasons of that
Conduct. The Treaty of Vienna was authoritatively begun, and going forward,
long before the Provocation from France could possibly palliate that
clandestine and dishonorable Proceeding. And it must have been brought to
perfect Maturity, before the Motion was so much as made to his Majesty to take
on him the sole Mediation; because it was even signed in Form before the
Intelligence of the King's Resolution against the sole Mediation could, with
any Certainty, arrive at Vienna. And from such an Apology at the first
Appearance of the new Alliance, the Courts of Britain and France had a Right to
be jealous; and to suspect some Secrets of a very pernicious Nature still
behind.

But we have not yet done with this first Scene. It is proper to observe, that
during this whole Proceeding, and for the Space of above three Months after the
News of sending back the Infanta was come from France to Madrid, the
Expressions of Friendship toward the British Court, ran as high as possible at
the Court of Spain, viz. to this Purpose: That his Catholic Majesty was
resolved to separate himself for ever from France, and place his entire
Friendship and Confidence solely in the King of GreatBritain: -- That to this
End he now desired to enter into the most strict Engagements for the rendering
that Friendship perpetual. -- That it was hoped, his Majesty would suffer the
Negotiations at Cambray to go on under his Mediation only, INTO WHOSE HANDS HE
WAS DESIROUS TO PUT ALL HIS INTERESTS, etc. whilst all this Time Ripperda was
acting with full Powers at Vienna, in contradiction not only to this Mediation,
and the Measures by which it must have been conducted, had his Majesty accepted
it; but, as we shall soon see, to all subsisting Engagements, and in Violation
of the Laws of Friendship and Amity between Nations. Nay, whenever that
Negotiation of Ripperda's at Vienna happened to be touched upon, as a Piece of
common Talk only, the Language of the Court of Spain was, That he was an
enterprising Man, and loved to make a Noise in the World: insinuating by this,
that That Court had no Part in what Ripperda was doing at Vienna.

When his Majesty's Reasons for not taking upon himself the sole Mediation were
represented at Madrid, the Force of them was acknowledged by that Court: and at
the same Time a great Willingness was expressed to accept even of a Reparation
from France, for the Indignity offered to Spain, so it might come through the
Hands of the King of Great Britain, and the Pleasure that Court would have,
upon such a Reparation, in the Prosecution of the Negotiations at Cambray IN
THE MANNER IN WHICH THEY WERE BEGUN; His Majesty being a common Friend to both
Parties, and One of whose Affection Spain had so often, and particularly upon
this last Occasion, received the most essential Proofs. I hardly need to
observe, that at this very Time Things were so ripe at Vienna, that the Treaty
of Peace was signed in Form, April 30. about seven or eight Days after this
Language of Friendship at the Court of Madrid; and after these earnest Desires
expressed, of the Continuation of the Negotiations at Cambray in the Manner in
which they were begun

But this Way of Speaking did not cease yet: For after May 21. on which Day a
Courier arrived at Madrid, with the News that the Treaty of Peace between the
Emperor and Spain, was signed on April 30. After this public Intelligence of a
Treaty signed at Vienna, the Language of the Court of Spain was full of Excuses
for not having communicated the Steps of this Negotiation at Vienna to his
Britannick Majesty; and full of the usual Professions of a particular Regard
for his Friendship, and a sincere Desire of cultivating the strictest Union
with him; together with all Assurances, That nothing had been stipulated in
this Treaty, in any wise prejudicial to the King, or to the Interests of his
Subjects, or in the least contrary to any of the Engagements entered into with
him, either separately or jointly with France; and Expressions of a deep Sense
of the great Obligation that Court had to his Majesty for the Proofs he had so
often given of his Friendship and regard for the Interest of Spain; always
accompanied with the Hope, that what had happened would in no wise lessen his
Majesty 's Friendship, which this Court entirely depended upon, and desired to
cultivate by all the Ways possible.

There were indeed Tokens and Symptoms of Evil continually, during this whole
Scene of Civility, showing themselves; fully sufficient to guard against all
Trust in any such Professions, either of the Court of Madrid, or that of
Vienna: and these, succeeded by worse and worse Appearances; and at last, by
such certain Proofs as can leave no doubt of a Secret Treaty of the most
dangerous Consequence between the two new Allies. And I will now mention some,
in the Order of their Time.

1. On May 1. O. S. 1725. the Emperor's Minister at London notified in Form to
the Court of Great Britain, the Signing of a Treaty of Peace at Vienna between
his Master and the King of Spain: and communicated a Copy of that Treaty at the
same Time. After Assurances that this Treaty was made upon the Foot of the
Quadruple Alliance, with strict Regard to all former Engagements, and the like;
He expressed his Imperial Majesty's Hope, that his Britannick Majesty would
accede to this Treaty; and by virtue of that Accession be Cuarantee to the
Succession to the Territories of the Emperor, as settled in his Family by a
late Constitution: and before he concluded, said, That, after the signing of
the Vienna Treaty, Ripperda acquainted the Emperor that there remained still
some Things to regulate between the King his Master, and the King of Great
Britain; and that the King of Spain requested the Emperor to make use of his
Mediation, for the settling them: That the Emperor had answered, that if these
Affairs had any Relation to the Treaty of London, or arose in consequence of
that Treaty; and if it should prove agreeable to his Britannick Majesty, he
would employ his Mediation; but otherwise, He would not concern himself with
them.

To all this it was answered, That, as for the Signing of the Treaty at Vienna,
it was no News here; his Majesty having Iready by a Courier received Advice of
it: That, with Regard to the Guaranty mentioned, his Majesty could not consent
to burden himself with new Obligations, by being Guarantee of the Succession
lately established by the Emperor; but was resolved to leave his Hands at
Liberty, in order to have it in his Power to regard, and assist, his true
Friends upon all Occasions that may arise; and that, as for what he had related
as represented by Ripperda to his Imperial Majesty, this Court knew of nothing
Britain had to settle with Spain, but some Points of Commerce, for which there
could be no need of a Mediator.

And certainly, no one can think but that it was wisely and happily judged, to
refuse a Guaranty, which might have been attended with so fatal Consequences.
For, as the Emperor's Children are now Females only; and the Influence of that
Succession upon Europe must depend upon the Marriages of these Females; and as
no one then knew, to what Princes they might be hereafter married: It was wise
in his Majesty not to oblige himself to support a Succession which might
possibly, by some future Marriages, become formidable to the rest of Europe;
and fatal in the End to Britain it self. And as it was wise, so it is already
proved to be happy, that such an Engagement was refused: For (as it will by and
by appear) the Succession is already in Prospect formidable; the Archdutchesses
are destined to the Infants of Spain, and such a Power arising from this
Conjunction, as in all humane Probability may make the rest of Europe tremble.

Nor can the Argument taken from the Emperor's Guaranty of the Succession here,
in his Majesty's Family, (which has been since urged,) be of any Force in this
Case. For, in the first Treaty between his Majesty and the Emperor, this Prince
absolutely refused to be Guarantee to our Succession; and never would hear of
it, 'till by the Quadruple Alliance his Majesty had obtained for Him the great
Advantage of the Possession of Sicily. As therefore, his Imperial Majesty
refused the Guaranty of the Succession here, in his Majesty's Royal Family, in
one Treaty, though a Treaty entered into and prosecuted with perfect Amity on
both Sides; and as He would not afterward come into it, but upon a very signal
and beneficial Acquisition to himself first settled: This cannot be judged a
good Argument for his Majesty, to accede to a Treaty entered into and finished,
not only without his Privity; not only without any Regard to his Friendship, or
any one Mark of Respect toward him; but in open Disrespect to him, as Mediator
at a Congress then subsisting; and, under these very different Circumstances,
to become a Guarantee of a Succession, of the Consequences of which, to his own
Kingdoms, and the rest of Europe, no Judgment could be made, till the Marriages
of the two Archdutchesses should come to be settled and known. But, to return
to our present Subject.

This Proposal of the King's being a Guarantee for the new established
Succession in Germany, [to which the Emperor could not in Reason expect a
Compliance] considered alone, gave Ground for a Suspicion, that some latent
Matter for Quarrel was now treasuring up. And this Suspicion justly increased,
upon the Offer of the Emperor's Mediation, coming at the same Time with this
Treaty itself. For this Offer supposed Differences between Britain and Spain:
And as these must be Differences without any real Ground, (every material Thing
being settled by Treaties between those two Nations,) this looked like a Design
to blow up a Fire where there was none; and to presume an Uneasiness between
Spain and Britain, which might be improved hereafter into an open Rupture.

It is impossible, as we pass, not to observe how very artful the Manner of
this first Proposition must now appear, since Things have opened more to the
Eyes of the World. The Offer, we see, is made for accomodating Differences,
withont naming, or hinting at, any particular one. There would be no doubt but
that the Offer was really made with Relation to Gibraltar. The Emperor's
Minister was not to name this: But some time after, the Court of Madrid openly
ovowed, that the Mediation of the Emperor which Spain had accepted, was a
Mediation for the Restitution of Gibraltar: Nay, and some time after that, the
Emperor himself, (as we shall soon see) orders his Resident here, to show the
Words in which he had obliged himself to this Mediation for Gibraltar. Again,
this Offer is made, merely as arising from a Discourse of Ripperda's; without
the least Hint of any Obligation upon the Emperor to make it, or to prosecute
it. And afterward, this Offer of Mediation appears, by Order of the Imperial
Court, as an express Article of a Treaty between Him and Spain. But, what is
still more, his Imperial Majesty by his Minister represents his Answer to
Ripperda to have been, that he would not concern himself in any Affair that did
not arise in consequence of the Treaty of London, not even so far as to use his
Mediation: and afterward (as it will presently appear) by his Resident here,
produces the Article itself, by which he had engaged himself to use his good
Offices, that is, his Mediation, for the Restitution of Gibraltar; of that
Place, the Possession of which was known to be ascertained to the Crown of
Great Britain by that very Treaty of London, confirming the Treaty of Utrecht;
and about which therefore, it was as well known, that there could be no just
Ground for a Difference.

All this sufficiently confirms, in Event, the Justice of that Suspicion of
some Secret Agreements between the Emperer and Spain, which the Offer of this
Mediation immediately raised in the Court of Great Britain: And this, before
the Treaty of Peace now delivered could be read and considered. But,

2. When the Treaty itself was read and examined; and such Friendship was seen
to be established between such Powers, upon such Terms; the Consideration of
this might justly raise yet stronger Suspicions. For thus the Case appeared.
Nothing was found in this Treaty of Peace, of Importance, or, so much as in
Appearance, Honorable to Spain: Nothing of the Order of the Golden Fleece,
which had been so much insisted on at the Congress: Nothing of the Titles to be
used by these Two Powers, but what might easily have been settled there, much
more to the Honor of Spain. And, if we come to Points of much more Importance;
the Neutral Garrison^ which, by the Quadruple Alliance, were to be the great
Bulwarks of the Succession of Don Carlos to Tuscany; and every Thing the
Mediators had proposed for his Security, and that of the Duke of Parma, were
all lost to Spain by this Proceeding: Whilst the Emperor gains every Thing, and
particularly the Guaranty of his own Succession by Spain, which the Imperial
Ambassadors had solicited in vain at the Congress.

To see, therefore, Two Powers, full of such a Rancour against one another as
had resisted the Influence of a powerful Mediation for several Years, now in so
short a Space of Time running into one another's Embraces, with so much
Eagerness and Precipitations: -- To find (upon comparing this new Treaty with
former Pretensions,) the Crown of Spain, at Cambray, so exceedingly uneasy with
the good Terms it was sure of obtaining by the Congress there; at Vienna, so
readily submitting to much worse: -- at Cambray, not to be satisfied with the
Emperor's Faith, even with the Guaranty of Britain and France together; at
Vienna, entirely depending upon the Faith of the same Emperor, without any
Guaranty present or to come: -- What could be collected from such an
Appearance, even upon the first Reading, but that this Treaty of Peace now
communicated at London, was not the sole Treaty made at Vienna; but that there
must be a secret one still behind, too unjustifiable to be yet revealed? And of
this more Suspicions followed thick upon one another. For,

3. Soon after the Treaty of Peace was signed at Vienna, which was April 30.
1725. Ripperda's Insolences toward his Majesty, and even Threatenings began;
and from that Time continued, till it was thought more politic to be more
silent. Of these, the Advices from Vienna were now perpetually full. Such, for
Instance, as these that follow, were his common Discourses.

If King George supports France, we know very well how to place the Pretender
upon the Throne. -- Alberoni was a Great Man, but committed many Blunders: One
great one was, That he sent the Spanish Fleet to Sicily, instead of Sending it
to England, to dethrone the King; which might easily then have been done: and
this once done, the Way had been made plain for every Thing else. -- King
George had best consider how to come to Terms with us; for we have it in our
Power to push the Pretender's Interest with Efficacy. And in all his Discourses
of this Sort, he always took it for granted, that the Court of Vienna would
never make the least Hesitation to enter into all the Measures of Spain.

His Conversations of this peculiar Melignancy toward his Britannick Majesty,
were without Number, and without Measure. And so far was he from seeming to
desire, they might be kept secret, that one of his Speeches to his Company was
this: I know all that I say, is told again. I am very glad of it. I say what I
say, on Purpose that it may be told. Nor did he speak with much greater Respect
of his Majesty's Allies. Particularly, upon the Mention of the Treaty of
Hanover, between the Kings of Great Britain, France and Prussia, he said aloud,
Yes, yes, We shall teach these little Gentlemen (Petits Messieurs) to make
Treaties. And I will add here that, about this same Time, a very considerable
Man in the Court of Vienna, was not much behind Ripperda himself in his Regards
toward his Majesty; when, in a Conversation, upon a Person's expressing his
Doubt about his Britannick Majesty's undertaking to be Guarantee of the
Austrian Succession, he answered with a great deal of Emotion. Then let him
look to himself; for we are well informed they begin to be weary of him in
England.

We may well think these and many more Insults and Threatenings, from Persons of
such Figure at that Time, sufficient to create new Suspicions, as well as to
strengthen Those already created. Such Usage, and such Freedom of Language,
could not arise out of nothing; but must be the Effect of some Agreements and
Resolutions, not yet appearing to the World.

4. These Suspicions were greatly confirmed by the Accounts from Vienna of
Ripperda's Expressions of another sort, immediately after the signing the
Treaty of Peace: Expressions, I mean, dropped sometimes, as it were accidentally,
upon several very important Points. He did not scruple, in proper Places, and
upon proper Occasions, to declare in Conversation, that Spain was engaged to
support the Ostend Company; and when that led the Discourse to Gibraltar, he
said, We know Gibraltar to be impragnable; but by the Measures we have now
taken here, we assure Our selves we shall oblige England to give it up. At the
same Time, he spoke of the Marriage of Don Carlos with the eldest Archdutchess,
as a Thing agreed upon; and added, the Prince of Asturias, for whom this Match
was first designed, is consumptive, and cannot live. And surely, such
Expressions must amount to the strongest Suspicions of a Treaty, as yet Secret,
of which these Three important Points must make a Part. This is the least we
can say of such Discourse, coming from a Principal Agent in this New Alliance;
though at this Time only in the way of accidental Conversation.

5. These Suspicions grew stonger, upon the Appearance of the Treaty of
Commerce: which, though signed at Vienna on the Day after the Treaty of Peace,
yet, was not communicated to the Court of Great Britain by the Emperor's Order:
nor any Notification to this Hour, made, of such a Treaty, either before or
since the Signing it. The King's Minister at Vienna procured a Copy of it, as
soon as it was printed there, and transmitted it to London. When this came to
be read; and when it appeared in the plainest Light, that, by the Express Words
of it, such Alterations were made in the Commerce of Europe, at must begin in
the Ruin of our East and West India Trade, and end in that of all the other
valuable Branches of our Commerce: What could the Court of Great Britain
conclude from such a Treaty, but that even This, bad as it is, is not all; that
there must be something yet unknown to put in the Balance, on the Side of
Spain, for all these unparalleled Advantages given, against the express Words
of former Treaties, to the Emperor and his Subjects; and that They, who were
capable of entering into such Articles as these, which now appeared, could not
hope to succeed in them, without other Articles, and another Treaty, still kept
in Darkness, till the proper Time of producing it should come?

6. About the End of July, or the Beginning of August, the D -- of Wh -- n
arrived at Vienna. The Court of London was not ignorant of his real Errand: nor
of the Sum of Money he received, in his Journey, toward his Expenses, from the
Pretender's Friends. And though he disguised his Design a little, when he first
appeared at Vienna; and pretended to his Majesty's Friends there, that his View
was only to travel for a few Years, till the Memory of his Extravagancies at
home might be a little effaced, and his private Affairs in better order: yet,
he quickly acted another Part in all his Conversation and Conduct. He soon grew
intimate with Ripperda, with whom he had frequent Conferences, and from whom he
was known to receive Money. He was admitted to the Conversation of the
principal Persons of the Court of Vienna. And during his whole Stay, both He
and Graham, the Pretender's Agent at Vienna, had a very particular Intimacy
with the Russian Minister at that Court. At first the Project was, that He was
to return to England, and do great Exploits there. But when he himself began
not to think England a very safe Place for one who had laid himself open; the
Design of his Return thither was laid aside; and another Plan was then
concerted, of sending him to Rome to the Pretender, and from thence to Spain.
And before he parted from Vienna, his intimate and Fellow Labourer Graham, had
long Conferences with a Person of great Importance at that Court: as he had
afterward several others. This Conduct of Wh -- n at Vienna, and of so many
considerable Persons whilst he was there, still increased the Opinion, that the
new Alliance could not be so innocent a Thing as the public Treaty of Peace.

7. The smooth Language at Madrid was by this Time gradually abated, and at
length quite changed. At the End of June 1725. the Court of Spain openly avowed
the Acceptance of the Emperor's Mediation for the Restitution of Gibraltar; but
at the same Time made the usual Professions of Friendship for the King of Great
Britain, and hoped that this Acceptance of that Mediation, would not offend
him. Nor did this Court make any Scruple frankly now to own that the Affair of
Gibraltar had been from the Beginning a principal Point, concerted between the
Emperor and Spain. In Consequence of this, about the Middle of July following,
M. Grimaldo, by order of his Catholic Majesty, wrote a Letter to his
Britannick Majesty's Minister at Madrid; the Conclusion of which was very
Peremptory: That the Continuance of the Alliance and Commerce of Great Britain
with Spain, depended upon his Majesty's restoring Gibraltar forthwith. And the
Language of this Court, from this Time, was of an insulting Strain, with Regard
even to the King himself, who was then at Hanover; and in Words, not very
civil, to this Effect, Let him make haste home, and call his Parliament, and
propose the Restitution immediately. This Alteration in the Language of the
Court of Madrid; this demanding Gibraltar in so peremptory a Manner, which
Britain possesses by Treaties signed by this King of Spain himself, gave
another just Ground of Suspicion of a Secret Offensive Treaty, of a very
pernicious Nature.

8. What confirmed all these Suspicions very much, was, the Reception of
Ripperda at Madrid; of the Man who had been the Maker of the Vienna Treaties,
and who had used his Majesty in so insolent and outrageous a Manner. For, as
before his coming thither, no Satisfaction was ever given at Madrid, upon
Complaint made of these Affronts and Threatenings: so, after it, all Honors,
Profits, and Trusts, were heaped upon him, in a Degree hardly ever known.

And it was but reasonable to conclude from hence, That, as the Court of Spain
had verified one Part of his Public Discourses at Vi^^na, by demanding
Gibraltar; so the aggrandizing and honoring him in so extravagant a Manner,
without so much as the least Disavowal of his Behavior, at Vienna, toward the
King of Great Britain, was a sort of Declaration, in Effect, that his whole
Conduct, of which this was so remarkable a Part, was not only not displeasing
at Madrid; but perfectly agreeable to the main Design, and Tendency of the new
Alliance, begun, conducted, and finished by this very Man at Vienna. And
indeed, daring as Ripperda was, yet, it is hardly conceivable that he would
have dared to have treated his Britannick Majesty, in that insolent Manner; had
he not known it to be agreeable to the Tenor of the New Alliance; and been well
assured he should be supported in it.

There were all Suspicions, or something stronger than Suspicions, built upon
Appearances that could have no Interpretation put upon them; and could have no
Meaning, nor Consistency in them; unless upon the Supposition of another Treaty
between the Emperor and Spain, besides that made public to the World. But we
can still carry this Matter from Suspicion to Certainty; For,

9. As there are Times and Seasons, when the Discovery of Secrets may be
thought to be of such singular Use, as to countervail all the Inconveniences
of doing it: so it happened in this Case. Ripperda, now His Catholic Majesty's
Prime Minister at Madrid, thought it of the highest Importance to use all Means
to prevent the Accession of the Dutch to the Treaty of Hanover. And when he saw
that other Methods failed of this Effect upon the Dutch Ambassador there; he
had recourse to those which he thought would terrify the States, in their
present Situation, from all Thoughts of doing it. At the beginning therefore of
February, 1725-6. With the utmost Seriousness and Positiveness, he assured both
the British and Dutch Minister at that Court, that there was a secret offensive
Treaty between Spain and the Emperor, in which They had obliged themselves
mutually to support one another in their several Demands: And of this Treaty he
told them three particular Articles. I. That the Emperor was to assist Spain,
in the obtaining Gibraltar. II. That Spain was to support the Emperor in his
new Establishment of the Ostend Company. III. And the Third was an Article, to
settle the Quotas of Money on one Side, and Soldiers on the other, for the
Purposes of this secret Treaty. This was to Influence the Dutch to judge that
it would be in vain to endeavor to alter or unsettle that Ostend Trade, which
was so resolved upon, and so grounded.

M. de Ripperda might have added another secret Engagement, into which the
Courts of Vienna and Madrid had entered; viz. to undertake the placing the
Pretender on the Throne of Great Britain, and to begin with that Enterprise,
before they proceeded to the Execution of their further Projects for involving
all Europe in War and Confusion. Of this Engagement the Court of Great Britain
received such certain Intelligence from several Quarters; that it is no more to
be doubted, than These Particulars of the secret Offensive Alliance, avowed and
declared by M. de Ripperda.

M. de Ripperda's professed Discovery of a secret Treaty, was soon farther
confirmed by what followed. An Account of this frank and open Discovery was
immediately sent to the Court of Great Britain. And, at the opening of the last
Session of Parliament, A Noble Person in an high Station, agreeably to that
Regard he owed to his Country, and to the Satisfaction due to that August
Assembly, of which He was a Member, publicly declared it, in the House of
Lords, as an undoubted Truth, and what Ripperda had owned, That there was a
secret Offensive Alliance between the Emperor and Spain, which contained
Articles in it destructive of the Rights of Britain, both with Regard to its
Possessions and its Commerce abroad. This positive and undisguised Declaration
in Parliament, made a great Noise without Doors. And, upon the Signification of
this, to the Court of Vienna, The Imperial Resident here was ordered to give
Satisfaction to the British Court, upon this Subject. Accordingly, he came to
some of His Majesty's Ministers, and read out of a Paper the Words which he
said were the Contents of the Article which His Master had entered into,
relating to Gibraltar: The which implied, that his Master had engaged to use
his Good Offices for the Restitution of Gibraltar. And this was ordered to be
produced, as a full and satisfactory Proof that there was no such Thing as a
secret Offensive Alliance between the two New Allies. One would think indeed,
that no such Effect could possibly have been intended by this Proceeding, or
expected from it. For, as upon this Occasion, it might have been naturally and
justly expected, as a Thing absolutely necessary to the Vindication of the
Court of Vienna, that the Imperial Resident here, should have been ordered to
have shown likewise what followed immediately this Article; and indeed the
Treaty it self, of which it was a part: And as neither of these was ordered or
suffered to be done; the Whole of this taken together, will prove the Truth of
that very imputation, which the Court of Vienna designed by this Step to
vindicate itself from, as from something unjustifiable and dishonorable.

If from Vienna, we go back once again to Madrid, we shall find still more
Evidences of a secret Treaty. For just about the same time that Ripperda spoke
so openly to the two Ambassadors, the King of Spain himself wrote a Letter to
the States General for the same Purpose of keeping them from acceeding to the
Treaty of Hanover: which was read in the Assembly of the States of Holland.
Feb. 8. N. S. 1725-6. In this He acquaints Them, That He stands obliged to
assist his Imperial Majesty, in case of a War, or Insult -- which He will
perform -- making it a common Cause -- holding for Enemies Those who shall be
Enemies of his Imperial Majesty. All which, as denounced to the States, who had
no uneasiness with the Emperor, but on account of the Ostend Company, must
regard only That; and can have no Meaning but this, that, if the Dutch should
act, merely in their own Defense, and in support of their own Rights, against
that Company; His Catholic Majesty had entered into an Engagement to assist
the Emperor, and support the Ostend Company by Force, if needful: as it was
explained by that King's Minister himself at the Hague, in a Declaration made
by Him, That His Catholic Majesty would look upon whatever should be
undertaken against the Ostend Company, as done against himself. This is an open
owning of a Treaty, besides That already Public; and of an Engagement in it to
support the Ostend Company by Force.

To proceed; When about two Months after the first Declaration made by
Ripperda, it was represented at Madrid how much the Court of Great Britain was
surprised at this open Discovery, made to the Two Ambassadors, of a secret
Offensive Treaty: No other Reply could be obtained, but, in general Words, That
the Court of Spain still desired the Friendship of Great Britain; and that the
Engagements entered into at Vienna, would not hinder this. Nor could any thing
that was urged, move that Court, either to own this secret Treaty; or at all to
deny it. Very soon after this, the two Ambassadors thought it proper to have a
Conference with Ripperda; in which He began a little to shuffle, and to
interpret away what he had said of an Offensive Treaty, by endeavoring to
persuade them, That it was little more than a Defensive One. But being pressed
by Both, who agreed in what He had before told them; and required peremptorily
to answer, whether he had not declared to Them expressly that there was a secret
Offensive Alliance between the Emperor and Spain, He answered, That he had told
them so; and added, that all he had told them was true. And how indeed could he
possibly deny it, since there was not a Foreigner of any Distinction at Madrid,
who had not heard him, without Reserve, declare the same about this secret
Offensive Alliance? And whom can we believe in such a Case; if not a Prime
Minister so often affirming a matter of Fact to so many; whilst neither the
King his Master, nor any of His other Ministers at that time denied it; or at
all looked as if they had any Thoughts then of denying it?

And once more, when an Application was made at Madrid, from the British Court,
with Relation particularly to the Part which Spain appeared now to take in the
Affair of the Ostend Trade; at first nothing was avowed, but an Obligation to
use Good Offices for accomodating that Affair. But, when a Proposal was
offered, which the Court of Spain acknowledged to be a very reasonable one; and
when upon this it was urged, That, since This Proposal was thought a reasonable
One; if the Imperial Court should refuse to listen to it; This could be a just
Reason why Spain should not support the Emperor any farther in what Spain it
self judged to be unreasonable; It was answered, This could not be allowed: For
Spain must stand by its Engagements with the Emperor. This was a plain
Acknowledgment of farther Engagements, and of another Sort, than those of a
Friendly Accommodation; and by just Consequence, of a secret Offensive Treaty.
For such Engagements must be entered into by Treaty; and this Treaty must be
distinct from That already published, which does not contain them; and it must
be an Offensive Treaty, because it is in support of an Invasion made upon the
Rights of others; and in opposition to Those who act only in defense of those
Rights founded upon the most solemn Treaties.

After all this, it is too late for the Court of Spain to sink the Credit of
this Discovery made by Ripperda to the two Ambassadors; or to think of
destroying the Credibility of what this Court it self has given Testimony to.
All the Circumstances of this Affair, as I have related them, make it too plain
to be now evaded: And all who know any thing of Public Affairs, will look upon
what I have now produced, as a positive and convincing Evidence of what before
was only a strong Suspicion.

This therefore, we are too sure of; That the now public Treaty of Peace, made
at Vienna, was it self entered into without the least Provocation from the
Mediators; in contradiction to an Express Article of the Quadruple Alliance,
appointing this Mediation alone for the adjusting remaining Differences;
covered all the time at Madrid with the smoothest Language, and the pretended
earnest Desire of proceeding still at Cambray; and made up of Articles so
dishonorable to Spain, that nothing can account for them, but the Supposition
of another, and this an Offensive Treaty, yet private: That this is not only
Supposition upon Conjecture; but is proved to. Us, by Arguments too strong to
be denied; the repeated Affirmation of Him who was made Prime Minister of Spain
after he had made this Treaty; the Acknowledgments in Effect of the Two Courts
themselves of Vienna and Madrid, with regard to Gibraltar, and the Ostend
Trade; and the Order from Vienna for producing at London an Article of a
Treaty, in such Words and in such a manner, as makes it impossible to doubt of
the Reality of it.

We will now see what Light we can get into the Nature of This so certain
Offensive Alliance; and the other Treaties between the Emperor and Spain: and
in what manner We Our selves are likely to be affected by Them; with regard to,
the great and only Security of all our other good Things, the present
Protestant Royal Family; with regard to the Possessions of Great Britain in
Spain; with regard to the settled Rights and Privileges of the Nation in Trade
and Commerce; and indeed, in consequence of these, with regard to our being, or
not being at all, a Nation worth existing. If after this, we extend our View
farther, We shall see what is likely to be the Fate of Europe; and what will
become of the Balance of Power, if the main Designs projected in this late
Alliance at Vienna, should be permitted to take effect. This Enquiry is the
only way to our making a true Judgment of the Steps taken by Britain, and the
Powers in Alliance with it. And when we have done this, -- Let them that are
Blind, be blind still.

I. The first Enquiry which will offer it self, upon this Occasion, to the Mind
of every True Briton, will arise from the Interest We all have, in the
preservation of our present Protestant Establishment; and our concern to find
out how This is already, or will probably be, affected by this New Alliance.

I know very well how easy and how common it is, to laugh at the Name of the
Pretender, whenever it is mentioned upon such Occasions; as a Political
Bugbear, or Scarecrow,; a mere Word of Alarm; or a Puppet to be played by
Statesmen at their pleasure, and whenever their Designs require it. But it
would be very unfortunate for Great Britain, and end in the total Ruin of Us
and our Posterity; if Those who are at the Helm, should suffer themselves, at
the Pleasure of such as wish them no good, to be laughed out of that Care and
Wakefulness which their King and their Country require of them. There is not a
Day, nor an Hour, in which the necessity of Attention to this great Point, does
not appear: Nor is there, I fear, any Crisis of Affairs in Europe possible, at
this time, without This bearing a great part in it. And therefore, when a
Breach with a Protestant King of Great Britain, who loves his Subjects too
honestly to give up their greatest Concerns to the Demands of any Power upon
Earth, is thought convenient and useful; no one can help concluding, from the
known Principles of the Courts of Vienna and Madrid, that the Moment They
resolved upon entering into an Alliance so injurious to his Britannick Majesty,
and so destructive to the Interists of Britain: The same Moment another
Resolution must also be taken: The Resolution of giving his Majesty all the
uneasiness they could, even in his highest Rights; and either forcing Him by
this Means to Their Terms; or prepairing the way for a King of Britain after
their own Hearts, from whom they may expect all Submission and Compliance. But
this is only a probable Argument. Let us come now to Facts.

I have already mentioned some Preliminaries; the Journey of Wh -- n to Vienna,
and his Conduct and Intrigues and Encouragements there; as well as Ripperda's
threatening King George with the Pretender, before he left Vienna. But
afterward the Appearances of a settled Design against His Majesty and His
Royal Family, soon began to thicken apace; and the Intelligences about it to be
very positive, from all the Friends of Great Britain, at almost every Court of
Europe.

In the first place, according to what had been before concerted at Vienna, the
D -- of Wh -- n, with Letters Recommendatory from young Ripperda, went for
Rome, directly to the Spanish Minister residing there. By this Minister, he was
introduced to the Pretender. In the Pretender's House, he was kept close shut
up for Six Days; to hide, if possible, his being there: And, after very close
Conference, was posted away to Madrid, where old Ripperda, his great and
intimate Friend, was now in high Credit and Honor.

Thither he came with Credentials from the Pretender; and, as a public Mark of
Confidence in him, adorned with a Garter, and a new Title; and was very kindly
entertained at Madrid, with these open Distinctions of Treason and Perjury upon
him. And though it was often said, and promised and sworn to, by Ripperda, that
this New Agent should be sent away in twenty four Hours time; and as strongly
sworn to, that he never admitted him, nor ever would, into his Company; yet he
still remained at Madrid, without any Mark of displeasure, and was known to be
frequently with Rpperda himself in close Conference. His intimacy with Count
Konigsec, the Imperial Minister at Madrid, and the freedom of his Visits to
him, were very remarkable, at a Time when he professed himself to come into
Spain on no other Errand but the Pretender's Service; and this, without reserve
to the English themselves at Madrid, who were in the Friendship, and even in
the Service of the Crown of Britain. This made it certain, that the Business of
these frequent Meetings with Persons of Character, both in the Spanish and
Imperial Service, could be no other, than that which brought him to Madrid. At
the same Time the late Duke of Ormond was admitted to frequent Audiences at
Court: In which no one could think that the Interests of his Master were
forgot. On the contrary, Now it was that several Projects for the Execution of
what was the sole End of Wh -- n's Journey to Madrid, were laid before the
Court of Spain, to be weighed and considered in their several Probabilities.

What can the greatest Well-wisher to this New Alliance say, in Apology for
this Conduct of the Court of Spain; as well these Audiences given now to the
late Duke of Ormond, as the Reception of the D -- of Wh -- n was favored with,
at a Time when he came directly commissioned by the Pretender, and never
attempted to hide the full intent of his Journey? What can any one say, who
will but read the sixth Article of the Peace of Utretcht? in which the
Catholic King does promise, as well in his own Name, as in that of his Heirs
and Successors, that they will not at any time disturb or molest the Queen, her
Heirs and Successors of the Protestant Line, being in the Possession of the
Crown of Great Britain, and the Dominions, subject thereunto; neither will the
aforesaid Catholic King, or any of his Successors, give at any time any Aid,
Succor, Favor or Counsel, directly or indirectly, to any Person or Persons,
who on any Cause or Pretense should hereafter endeavor to oppose the said
Succession by open War, or by any Conspiracies against such Prince and Princes,
possessing the Throne of Great Britain, by virtue of the Acts of Parliaments
made there. And since his present Majesty came to the Throne, in Article 5. of
the Quadruple Alliance, (to which Quadruple Alliance the present King of Spain
acceded, before the opening of the Congress at Cambray) his Catholic Majesty
(as the Emperor had done before) binds himself, his Heirs and Successors, to
maintain and guaranty the Succession in the Kingdom of Great Britain, as
established in the House of his Britannick Majesty now reigning; as likewise to
defend all the Dominions and Provinces possessed by his Majesty; and not to
give and grant any Protection or Refuge, to the Pretender (there described) or
his Descendents, nor any Succor, Counsel, or Assistance whatsoever, directly
or indirectly. And to observe the same, [ i. e. not to give Reception, Succor,
etc.] with regard to those who may be ordered or Commissioned by the said
Person [the Pretender] to disturb the Government of his Britannick Majesty, or
the Tranquillity of his Kingdoms, etc. Let but the late and present Conduct of
the Court of Spain, be compared with these express Stipulations; and every
Reader may be left to make his own Inferences from such a Comparison. To return,

The Evil I was speaking of, was not to rest in Words and Schemes; nor were the
Projects I have mentioned, only proposed in Theory. Preparations were actually
made in Spain, to put the determined Purpose in Execution: Of which
Preparations I will enumerate certain Particulars that could not be concealed.

In February 1725-6, a Resolution was taken to send a Body of Troops consisting
of 12000 Men, to the Coasts of Galicia and Biscay. There were at that Time at
Cadiz several Spanish Ships that were plainly designed for an Imbarkation: Two
of them were of 70 Guns, one of 64, one of 56, one of 26, and one of 24; and
all victuall'd for a hundred Days. And at Cadiz it now was, that 4800 Arms were
known to have been bought, and destined to the Pretender's Service. His
Majesty's Minister at Madrid, did indeed, upon the Discovery made to him of the
Place where they lay in Pawn for a certain Sum, take effectual Care, by first
laying down that Sum, and afterward paying their whole Price, to keep them out
of the Hands of the first Purchasers, who earnestly solicited to have them,
and frequently offered the Money which had been lent on them. For he knew from
undoubted Intelligence, the Purpose They were intended for. Besides these Ships
at Cadiz, there were likewise then in Spain, three Russian Men of War, one of
64 Guns, and the other two of about 40 Guns each, equipped some time before
from Petersbourg, which came to Cadiz in the beginning of Winter 1725, to carry
on the Pretense of Merchandise; but in December went from thence to St. Andero,
and lay there the three following Months.

As to these three Ships, the Court of Great Britain, some time after they
sailed from Petersbourg, made a full Discovery, by Letters from the Pretender's
Agent there, and others concerned in this Transaction, which fell into their
Hands; that they had been fitted out at the Expense of the Pretender's Friends,
with the Privity of the Court of Petersbourg, and sent to Spain, to be employed
in an Expedition for the Pretender's Service; and that five more had been
contracted for, and were designed to follow. And accordingly, at the Time of
their passing the Sound, so very particular a Joy was expressed at Stockholm,
by a certain Party there, that it could not but be remarked by the Friends of
Great Britain, at that place. And in their Passage, when they lay in the North
of Scotland, and afterward were driven by Stress of Weather into Ireland; his
Majesty's Officers belonging to the Customs, who, according to their Duty went
on Board, found all the Symptoms of Enmity to his Majesty; all possible Tokens
of a warlike Design; and all the Fears of a Discovery that could show
themselves. And after these Ships were safe in Spain, it was given out by one
of the greatest Men in the Court of Russia, and written by another great Man,
from his Mouth, to Stockholm, in order to influence the Swedes, That the
Alliance of Britain and France would be of the less Moment; since the Imperial
Court, and the Pretender's Measures in Spain, would now find those two Powers
full Employment. And it was likewise after the safe arrival of these Russian
Ships at St. Andero, and during their stay there, that the Motions and Projects
of the Pretender's Friends grew more and more vigorous in Spain Not only the
late Duke of Ormond admitted to frequent Audiences at this Juncture, but one
Connock, the Pretender's constant Minister at Madrid, hardly ever out of
Ripperda's House; and one Pomphilly, lately come from England, offering Money
to all the Broken Officers he could meet with at Madrid; (as several of them
freely affirmed, and particularly a Swiss Protestant, One of those to whom the
Offer was made) and this professedly upon a Design then on foot in favor of
the Pretender.

From the mention of these particular Preparations, I pass on to show what Use
was intended to be made of the whole. So early as in February 1725-6, 12000 Men
(as has been said above) were designed to be sent to the Coasts of Galicia and
Biscay, the first Project of the Court of Madrid being to make an Attempt on
his Majesty's Dominions from those Parts. But as such a Body of Troops could
not at that Juncture march thither, without giving an Alarm; the Pretense for
it, made use of by the Court of Spain, was, that they had certain Intelligence
of a Resolution taken by the Court of Great Britain to land a Number of Troops
in that part of the Country; who were to burn and destroy all before them, and
even the Shipping in all the Harbors. Under the Cover of this pretended
Intelligence, which no one in England could possibly give, and which no one at
Madrid could really believe, the March of these Forces was ordered. But his
Majesty's Minister at Madrid, representing to the Duke of Ripperda (who was
then Prime Minister, and in the highest Degree of Trust and Confidence with the
King his Master) that such Intelligence could have no Foundation; and even that
such a Design from England was impossible; Ripperda promised the March of those
Troops should be forborne, till a Declaration from the British Court, to the
Purpose of what Mr. Stanhope had said, could be obtained. But the true Reason
of delaying this March, was, that some of the Pretender's Friends had
represented to the Court of Spain, that the sending of 12000 Men to Galicia and
Biscay, without any Color of Necessity for them, in a Country where there
never used to be above two or three Battallions, would give such an Alarm to
England, as would inevitably put us upon our Guard; and therefore it would be
more eligible to order that Body of Troops to Navarre, on a very natural
Pretext of securing that Frontier against France; but when there, they would be
so near Gupiuscoa, that they might be ready to imbark on a very short Notice,
in Transports to be provided at a Port of that Province; and be convoyed from
thence by a Number of Men of War, of which those three Muscovite Ships were to
be part. They proposed at the same time, that some few Ships should be sent
with Arms from Cadiz directly to Scotland; and a Body of 6000 Men kept ready by
the Emperor at Ostend.

But the Court of Spain, being soon after perfectly informed, that such
vigorous Resolutions were taken, and such Preparations and Dispositions made,
by Great Britain, that it was in vain for them to hope for any Success at that
Time from such an Attempt; they suspended for the present the putting this
Design in Execution; the rather, finding themselves obliged to send part of
their Ships from Cadiz and St. Andero to the WestIndies: And the Muscovite
Ships returned home.

Thus in Fact stood the Case, in favor of the Pretender, at the Court of
Madrid, before the vigorous Measures of Great Britain altered it. And, who that
considers the whole of this, will be moved by any the strongest Verbal
Asseverations of that Court, against such Facts; when it is remembered, That
this whole Scene of the New Alliance, which is acknowledged to be framed
against our Trade, and our Right to Gibraltar, was begun and carried on to
perfection, under the Color of the highest Regards to his Majesty; and
accompanied all along with the strongest and most pathetick Assurances of
Friendship?

Especially, if we add here, what ought to allarm the British Court, and was
sufficient it self to justify all their earliest Precautions and Preparations;
viz. That soon after the publishing the Vienna Treaties of Peace and Commerce,
They had positive Intelligence, and Intelligence from more than one Person; and
such as could be entirely depended on; That one express Article of this
Alliance between the Emperor and Spain, contained an Obligation in Favor of
the Pretender; and a Stipulation to make the Attempt for him in England, before
opening the War in any other parts. And by as undoubted Intelligence it was
added, That the Pretender, in return, had since obliged himself to restore
Gibraltar and Port Mahon to the Crown of Spain; to be Guarantee of the
Emperor's Ostend-Trade; and lay open the Commerce, with our Plantations abroad,
to their Ships, with the fame Privileges as the English themselves enjoy. And
for this Article, entered into by the Emperor with the King of Spain, for the
Service of the Pretender, there is as certain Evidence, as of the Being of a
secret Treaty: Of which I cannot think it possible to doubt, after what has
been, and will be, said upon the Articles of Gibraltar and the Ostend-Trade.

This brings our Thoughts to the Court of Vienna; For This Article touches the
Imperial Court, equal with That of Spain; and proves the Pretender's Cause, to
be the Concern of the Former, as truly as of the Latter; and to be made so by
an express Stipulation in a Treaty. And this alone is Evidence enough of the
worst Dispositions toward a King, and a Nation, which have not deserved such a
Return from Vienna. For, This single Point being certain, it will be of small
Importance to allege the Conduct of this Court in not giving such public
Tokens of this Disposition, in Fact, as the Other has done: Which will only
show a cautious Prudence in the Execution, but not at all any Innocence, or
Ignorance, of such Designs. The Article alone demonstrates the Design; and that
is sufficient.

But indeed, if, after this, We consider the most public Parts of the late
Conduct of the Imperial Court toward this Nation, we cannot conclude less than
this, That there is little Thought or Desire there, of keeping any. Terms with
us, in any respect: I mean, that part of Conduct which regards our Trade, not
only by Consequence, but directly and immediately. At Ostend, and in the
Netherlands, the present and future fatal Effects of the New Establishment are
too visible: At the same Ostend, which was conquered and preserved by our Arms,
and those of the Dutch. In Sicily, rescued from the Spaniard by our Fleet, as
well as secured to the Emperor, by the good Offices of our King in the Treaty
of London: In the same Sicily, the Kindness was soon returned by a prohibition
of all our woollen Manufactures; and this prohibition not yet removed, but only
suspended for a while, upon the strongest Representations and the plainest
Evidence, that this proceeding was against the Faith of Treaties, which made
the British Privileges there, exactly the same, as in all other Dominions of
Spain, to which it once belonged: Those same Treaties, under which the Duke of
Savoy, at the Peace of Utrecht, took possession of this Kingdom of Sicily; and
under which the present Emperor took it after him. And lately, in the Austrian
Dominions in Germany, preserved from Ruin by the Arms and Money of Us and our
Allies, most Species of our Manufactures are prohibited. So that in every Inch
of Ground his Imperial Majesty is possessed of; even in those Countries gained
by our Assistance, and where he is as closely bound by particular Treaties, as
the most solemn and repeated Engagements can bind him: In all, He has acted the
same part toward Us, in one of our tenderest Concerns. And if the Imperial
Court be resolved to go on in these Paths; This alone must determine them to
espouse the Pretender's Interest: As They are fully assured of His present
Majesty's firm Resolution never tamely to give up the Rights and Privileges of
this Nation, in so essential a Point as that of Trade.

But I have done: And I am sure, have said enough upon this first Point, to put
it beyond all Doubt, that this New Alliance at Vienna contains in it, and will
certainly bring after it, if not vigourously opposed, the most unspeakable Evil
to Great Britain; by engaging, and attempting, to subvert our present happy
Establishment.

II. I will now say a Word or two about the Possessions of Great Britain within
the Spanish Dominions; and how They must be affected by this new Alliance.
These are Gibraltar, and Port Mahon; won by our Arms in lawful War; ascertained
to us as our Property, by all the Parties concerned in that War; and secured to
us by all the Solemnity of Alliances, and Treaties, and particularly by this
present King of Spain himself, in two express Articles of the Treaty of Peace
signed at Utrecht, 1713. For, of the great Importance especially of One of
them, (I mean Gibraltar) I would not be thought to speak as any the least
Motive to a just and brave People to value and preserve it, were not the
Possession of it founded upon the strictest Right, and the most undeniable
Maxims of Political and National Justice. But when that Importance, to which
Spain gives Testimony by the eagerness discovered to wrest it out of our Hands,
is added to the Right of Possession; No one among us, who is a true Lover of
his Country, can be easy under the prospect of an Alliance, which opened it
self to Great Britain, with the Civil Complement from Spain of demanding
Gibraltar immediately, as the Condition of the Continuance of a Friendship,
which cannot be violated without the Breach of all Faith and Trust in Treaties;
and with the Emperor's Obligation, to use His kind Help to bring Britain to a
Compliance with that Demand. I have already spoken of this Demand, and this
Obligation, as certain Evidences of a secret Offensive Alliance between the
Emperor and Spain. I now speak of this mutual Engagement between these two
Powers, for the Recovery of Gibraltar, as one of the unjust and pernicious
Conditions of their new Alliance. And, after I have before so plainly proved,
That this Engagement makes one main part of it; not only from Ripperda's
repeated Affirmation both at Vienna and at Madrid; but from the perumptory
Language used at Madrid after this Alliance at Vienna; and from the Testimony
from Vienna added to This, that there was an express Article containing the
Emperor's Stipulation upon this Head; and this Testimony given at London, by
Order of the Imperial Court, in a very remarkable manner. After the Proof of
this Fact, I need say no more than that, if the Designs of this Alliance be not
vigorously opposed, and effectually broke, the first unwelcome Evil to Great
Britain must be, To see a place of the utmost Importance to us, if we will
trust the Confession both of Friends and Enemies, wrested from us by Force, (if
it be possible) unless we will basely yield it up to the importunity of Those
who ask it; and a place, which is our Honor, and our Strength abroad; a great
Defense and Advantage to our extended Navigation; and a Convenience to our
Ships of all sorts, not to be equalled by any other Place, that can be offered
by that Crown, which would deprive us of it.

III. But indeed this Place, could it be preserved to us by all our Strength
and Prudence, would be of no Importance to us hereafter; if the other Schemes
of This new Alliance stand good. It will be a small Comfort to Great Britain,
and little better than a Ridicule, to have in possession so great a Convenience
to Shipping and Trade, as Gibraltar is; if we are to be stripped of that Trade
it self, and to be reduced to the Condition of having little or no Occasion for
any Shipping at all. And yet, This I think must be the Case with us, if the
Projects of this new Union are suffered quietly to succeed. For our Trade it
self, that Ornament and support of Great Britain, must by Degrees be so
affected, in almost every Branch of it, that it connot but naturally lessen,
Flag, and Dye, just in Proportion as this new Alliance gains Strength and
flourishes. There can be little Hope, if this Conjunction proceeds much
farther, of obtaining any Redress for the many injuries in Commerce, already
received; or of preventing many more, from the Side of Spain: and much less, if
possible, of keeping the Designs at Ostend from having Effect; which, taken
with all their extended ill consequences toward almost all the Branches of our
Trade, are enough to awaken all Britons, who have been used to esteem their
Commerce, as their darling Good: -- a Good, to the support and increase of
which, all their Treaties and Alliances have for many Years past solely tended;
and in Comparison of which they have despised, and left to Others the
Acquisition of Tracts of Land, and Territories to enlarge Dominion and Power.
Hitherto, We have always showed our selves sensible that Trade was our proper
Life; and the Encouragement of this, upon an honorable Bottom, the proper
Nourishment of that Life. Every Instance of Conduct in any Power at Home, which
has but seemed to shake it a little, or to touch it, at a Distance, in an
unkindly Manner, has been found to be so resented, as to disunite the greatest
Friends; and at once to unite those of different Views amongst us, in a
vigorous Opposition to it. And every Step, in order to defend and promote it,
has been received with universal Applause; and reconciled and enlarged the
Affections of Men to such Benefactors. And with regard to Foreign Nations;
every hurt, any of them do to our Commerce; every Breach into the Fences and
Privileges with which that is guarded and enriched; every Shadow of a Tendency
this way, has aways been viewed here, as the higest of all Injuries to this
Nation, and the natural Subject for the genuine and just Resentment of every
true Briton. And if we are not dead to all this Sense; if we still retain the
proper Life and Vigor of Britons; that is, of a Nation adorned and supported by
the most extended Commerce that can be boasted of by any People: What can we
think of an Alliance between two powerful Princes, formed, against the plain
Stipulations of Treaties, in order to deprive us of our Glory, our Riches, our
Strength, which depend all upon our Trade; and afterward, to desend and
preserve Themselves in their Acquisitions of our Rights?

These are not Words without a Meaning; nor Fears merely of Imagination set on
Work by present Resentment: But real, Substantial, and undeniable. For, if the
Union of these two Powers proceeds upon the present Foot; and be not thoroughly
broken in its terrible Parts; let any one say, what hope can remain of any
Bounds to be set to the Injuries our Trade has selt, and must feel? Will those
Depredations and Hostilities, committed in the West Indies by the Spaniards,
under pretense of their Right to guard against Clandestine Trade; Those
Violences, by which the whole Commerce of Jamaica has been well nigh destroyed,
and the Trade of that Island reduced to a miserable Condition, be now
redressed? Or, will the Remonstrances of these Grievances, which have had no
Effect before the Treaties of Vienna; now, after such Treaties are made, meet
with any better Reception at Madrid; and procure Us a more favorable Answer?
Will any Complaints, or Representations, in support of the acknowledged Rights
of the South-Sea-Company, obtain now so much as a Hearing at the Court of
Spain; when the Strength of such an Alliance is added to the former
Disinclination toward any Redress; and is suffered by the other Powers of
Europe to exert itself? Or, will They, who have been hitherto unmoved by Right
and Justice, at length voluntarily listen to their Voices? Or, will the Court
of Vienna, which has stood out, before this Alliance, against all
Solicitations, relinquish the Pretensions at Ostend, and act agreeably to
former Treaties in the Affair of Commerce; now after the Riches of Spain are to
come in, to the Aid of former Resolutions?

So far from this, that it is an express Article, stipulated in this New
Alliance, that, as the Emperor is to assist Spain in the regaining of
Gibraltar; so is Spain obliged to support the Emperor in his Ostend Company,
and his Commerce.

This Article, relating to the Ostend Company, as part of a Secret Offensive
Alliance, (as I have before shown) was more than once not only acknowledged,
but boasted of, to the British and Dutch Ministers at Madrid, by Ripperda, when
he was prime Minister in Spain. But we have not only this Evidence. For, as in
the Affair of Gibraltar, the Emperor himself, by producing an Article of a
Treaty, gave Testimony to his having entered into Engagements relating to that
Place; so, his Catholic Majesty has not scrupled to give his own Testimony,
that, by this New Alliance, He has entered into Engagements to support the
Emperor in his Establishment of the Ostend Company; not only by the Language of
his Court at Madrid; but by what he wrote himself, and ordered his Minister at
the Hague, to denounce, by way of Threatening, to the States General, upon this
Subject. of which I have given an Account before. And besides all this, it is
enough to look upon the Public Treaty of Commerce signed at Vienna, May 1st,
1725. to be satisfied, that such Privileges in Commerce are granted, by Spain,
to the Emperor's Subjects, as are contrary to many former Treaties, and to the
most manifest Rights of other Nations founded upon those Treaties.

I shall not enter minutely into all the Particulars which are of Importance,
upon this Head. The Subject has been so plainly stated, and even exhausted,
before the World aleady, that there can be no need of any Thing farther, than
to refer those who have not yet looked into the Depth of this Affair, to the
several Memorials of the States General, and of those commissioned by Them,
upon this Occasion; particularly those which were printed here, in the Daily
Courants of Dec. 16. 1725. Jan. 19. 25. Feb. 5. 8. 12, and 14. 1725-6. in which
all the Pretenses of their Enemies are completely and plainly answered; and the
Matter placed in the most evident Light. I will only just state the Dates and
Intent of the Treaties, relating to the Commerce most immediacely affected by
the new Ostend Company; and add a Word or two about the farther Consequences of
it.

So long ago as the Year 1609, the King of Spain, by the Truce then made with
the United Provinces, granted them their first Privileges of Trade in the
East Indies; by which the Dutch East India Company has been from that time in
Possession of their Commerce in those Parts. But these Privileges wanted
Confirmation: and this they fully obtained from the Crown of Spain, after long
and mature deliberation, at the Treaty of Munster in the Year 1648. by which,
the Crown of Spain not only granted the Hollanders these Privileges; but
engaged itself, to maintain and protect them, in the Enjoyment of these
Privileges. In this Treaty the Bounds were set to the several Pretensions of
the Dutch and Castillans in the East Indies; and the Limits of their distinct
Navigation and Commerce there, exactly fixed: and not only all other Subjects
of Spain were totally excluded from the East Indies; but the Castillans
themselves were for ever excluded from all Commerce and Navigation within the
Limits of the Hollanders; as These were likewise prohibited from entering into
those of the Castillans.

And, before this, the absolute exclusion of all the Inhabitants of the
Netherlands, from all Trade or Commerce in the East or West Indies, was in the
Year 1598 made an express Article in the Act of Cession of the Low Countries by
Philip II. King of Spain, upon the Marriage of his Daughter Isabella to the
Archduke Albert: The Eighth Article of which Cession is this, That The
Archduke and Arch-Dutchess themselves, and their Successors, shall not
exercise any Navigation, and Commerce in the East and West Indies, under the
Penalty of being deprived of those Provinces; and if any of their Subjects
shall act contrary to this, they shall be punished with Rigor, in some Cases
even with Death itself, etc. Neither was this at that time at all complained of
by the States of those Low Countries, even when several other Conditions of the
Reception of those new Governors were remonstrated against, as so many
Grievances upon the People of those Provinces. Neither was there afterward any
Protest made by any Persons concerned, against this Exclusion, whilst the King
of Spain was concluding the Treaty of Munster with the United Provinces. This
shows that the present Complaint of the Hardship of such Exclusion is new and
artificial; and come many Years too late, as it comes after solemn Treaties
made, and renewed, in express Confirmation of this Exclusion.

To proceed; After the Treaty of Munster, an Accident happened, which plainly
showed, how the Fifth Article of that Treaty was understood, not only by the
Dutch, but by Spain also One Bastien Brower, a Subject of Spain, either of
B^abant, or of Flanders, had obtained a Permission from the King of Spain, to
go to the Coasts of China where he carried on a very profitable Trade. When
this came to the Knowledge of the HighCouncil in India, belonging to the Dutch
East India Company, they made a solemn Resolution immediately, and sent it as
an Order to the Commanders of all their Ships, and to all their Subjects, to
take this Man Prisoner; and if he defended himself, to use force against him.
This had its Effect. The Man never appeared any more to give them farther
Trouble. Other Subjects of Spain desisted from all such Voyages. The Crown of
Spain never complained of this Conduct; and by this Silence, plainly gave
Testimony to the Justice of that Resolution, as founded upon the Treaty of
Munster.

In the Year 1667, by a Treaty between Britain and Spain, all Privileges of
Commerce and Navigation in both the Indies, were granted to his Britannick
Majesty's Subjects, in as full and ample manner, as they were granted to the
Hollanders in the Treaty of Munster. And in the Year 1713, a Treaty of Commerce
was concluded at Utrecht between the Queen of Great Britain, and this present
King of Spain: By the First Article of which it is declared, That, the Treaty
of Peace, Commerce, and Alliance concluded at Madrid, in 1667, is ratified and
confirmed by this Treaty; and it is added, that, for the greater Strengthening
and Confirmation of the same, it has been thought proper to insert it Word for
Word in this Place. Then follows that former Treaty thus ratified and confirmed.

In the Year 1724, but one Year before this New Alliance at Vienna, this same
King of Spain was so sensible of his Obligations, lying upon him from the
Treaty of Munster alone, that he presented, by his Ambassador at London, a
Memorial against the Emperor's Attempts upon Trade from Ostend; in which he
insisted, that the Assair of the Ostend Company should be brought before the
Congress at Cambray, in order to have the said Company abolished, before he
could in Conscience think of confirming the Cession of the Netherlands to the
Emperor: And urges, that, if this Confirmation should be made by Spain, without
reserving expressly to it self the exclusive Right on the Navigation to the
Indies, in general, and without Exception; the States General would be rightly
entitled to demand Satisfaction of Spain, for having thereby made a great
Infraction of the Treaty of Munster, and would be disengaged from the
reciprocal Obligation to abstain from the Navigation of the Spanish Indies.
That is, in other Words, that if he, the King of Spain, should not support the
Dutch (and consequently the English also) against the Emperor's new
Establishment at Ostend; that then, I say, he himself should be justly charged
with a most dishonorable Breach of Faith, and Violation of solemn Treaties.
Thus stands the Engagements of Spain, with regard to the English and Dutch, in
the Affair of their Trade to the Indies, and the Emperor's new Attempts at
Ostend. Let us now consider the Obligations and Engagements of the Emperor
himself.

The Grand Alliance 1701, between the Emperor Leopold, King William, and the
States General, is built upon this very Fountation of the English and Dutch
Trade to the Indies, as upon a main Ground of that Alliance. It opens itself
with reciting, that upon the Death of Charles II. King of Spain, without Issue,
the Emperor claimed the Right of Succession to his Countries, as belonging to
the Austrian Family; and, after other Particulars, it follows, so that without
some Remedy applied, the Emperor will lose his Pretensions; the Empire lose its
Fiefs in Italy; and the ENGLISH and UNITED PROVINCES be deprived of the free
Use of their NAVIGATION and COMMERCE in the INDIES, and other Places, etc.

Hence it appears, 1. That the Emperor's Family claiming by Hereditary Right
these Provinces, could not rightfully claim any Powers, but what were vested
and remained in Charles II. the King of Spain, to whom they were to succeed;
nor possess them, but upon the Conditions, upon which the deceased King himself
had possessed them: And that the Emperor neither could, nor did, claim any
thing that his Predecessors, Kings of Spain, had parted with by solemn
Treaties; and therefore neither could, nor did, claim those Countries, but upon
the some Terms and Contitions of Trade, on which King Charles II. of Spain had
enjoyed them, agreeably to solemn Treaties with other Powers. 2. That the
Preservation of the Trade in the Indies, to the English and Dutch, upon the
Foot they enjoyed it, and in the Manner it was carried on, to the Death of King
Charles II. of Spain, was one ground, and a main one, of the Grand Alliance;
and that the Emperor's Pretensions to the Low Countries were supported by the
English and Dutch, upon this, amongst other Conditions, that the Emperor should
reciprecally support their Trade to the Indies, on the Foot they had constantly
enjoyed it. 3. It having been already proved, that Holland ever since the
Treaty of Munster in 1648, and England ever since the Treaty of Madrid in 1667,
have carried on their Trade to the East Indies, to the Exclusion of the
Subjects of the Netherlands, by Virtue of those Treaties; it follows, That, in
consequence of this, and by Virtue of this Grand Alliance it self (by which the
Emperor's Claim to these Countries is allowed, and the Claim of the Allies to
their Commerce also insisted on) the Emperor did in Effect oblige himself and
his Family, whenever in Possession of these Countries, to take upon themselves
all the Obligations which the Kings of Spain, to whom they succeeded, were
under, to England and Holland, by former Treaties; and to support this main End
of the grand Alliance, relating to the Commerce of the Allies, (expressly
mentioned in it,) as well as their own Pretensions: and, instead of invading
them themselves, to defend them against all Invaders, according to the
Obligations of those former Treaties. Nay, it was likewise expressly
stipulated, in this grand Alliance, supposing it to end successfully; That the
Spanish Netherlands should be (not the Property of the Emperor absolutely, and
without any Conditions; but) a Barrier to the United Provinces. So that we see,
the Emperor, in the grand Alliance itself, considered his own Right to the
Netherlands, with a View to the Trade of his Allies; and that the Spanish
Low Countries were established in that Alliance, as a Defense and Guard to
those Allies, whose Trade is now going to be ruined from them.

But these Obligations are not only the real Intent and Consequence of the
grand Alliance: But it is declared in express Words, in the Barrier Treaty
concluded at Antwerp, in 1715, between his present Britannick Majesty, this
present Emperor, and the States General, Art. 1. That the Emperor (this present
Emperor) should enjoy the Spanish Netherlands, as they were enjoyed, or ought
to have been enjoyed, by the late King Charles II. conformably to the Treaty of
Ryswick. That is, with the same Privileges, and the same Obligations, neither
greater nor less.

After all these solemn Stipulations and Treaties here recited, is it
conceivable, what has now been done in the Face of the World? -- That Emperor,
who was under all his Father's Obligations: who could not succeed, even by his
Title of Hereditary Right, to these Low Countries, but under the same
Engagements with those Kings of Spain to whom he succeeds: Who himself, in his
own Person, has declared, in a solemn Treaty, that He enjoys these Countries no
otherwise, than as they were enjoyed by the late King of Spain; that is, under
the same Restrictions and Obligations to which that King was engaged: That same
Emperor, instead of protecting the Commerce of the English and Dutch from the
Invasions of others, himself openly invades it; instead of punishing any of his
Subjects in the Netherlands for Attempts of Trade to the East Indies, or
restraining them, as he is strictly obliged to do, He has himself erected a
Company, and endowed it with great Privileges, on purpose to Trade thither;
and, instead of yielding to the just Remonstrances of injured Neighbors, he
has set them at Defiance, and strengthened himself with a new Accession of the
Power and Riches of Spain, to back this unjustifiable Seizure of those Rights
of Commerce, which are the established and peculiar Privileges of other
Countries. Such has been the Conduct of the Emperor.

And the part which Spain has acted, with regard to Ostend, and the Spanish
Netherlands, is, if possible, still more extraordinary; and more out of the
common Road of dealing with Treaties and Alliances. For thus it is, -- That
King of Spain, who enjoys his Kingdom under the Stipulations of the Treaties
made by his Predecessors: -- who has confirmed them all himself, in his own
Person: -- He, who in one Year declared it would be a Breach of his Treaties,
for Him ever to acquiesce in the Establishment of the Ostend East India
Company: That same King, the next Year, does much more than this. He
undertakes, by this new Alliance, to support the Emperor in this very
Establishment. Not only this; but he grants to these very Ostenders, and all
other Subjects of the Emperor in the Spanish Netherlands, what he had no Right
to grant to them, had they remained his own Subjects; nay, he grants them
Privileges of his Ports and Places in the Indies, greater than are allowed to
the English and Hollanders themselves: And this, not only with respect to the
East Indies. but the West Indies also. For by the 2d and 3d Articles of the
Vienna Treaty of Commerce, a Liberty is granted to them, to frequent, and Trade
in, the Ports of the Spanish West Indies; Or, supposing this not directly
granted, in express Words, yet they are at least permitted to enter into those
Ports for victualling or repairing their Ships: which will come to the same
Thing. For if they may enter into, and remain in those Ports, till they have
provided themselves with all Necessaries, the Nature of the Bullion Trade is of
that sort, that no Precaution can prevent that Commerce.

I am sensible it may be objected here, that the Liberty granted to the
Emperor's Subjects, by the Treaty of Vienna, to enter into the Ports of Spain
in the West Indies, in case of Distress of Weather, or for refreshing
themselves, etc. is no more than what was formerly granted to his Majesty's
Subjects by the Treaty of Madrid, concluded in 1670. But it is well known, that
the Liberty granted by that Treaty, has ceased for many Years; and that, in
order to prevent the Abuses that might be committed from such a permission, and
that one Nation might not be more favored than another on any Pretext
whatsoever in the Trade to the West Indies, sufficient Care was taken of that
Matter in the 8th Article of the Treaty of Utrecht, by which it is expressly
stipulated, and declared in the following Words: Whereas among other Conditions
of the general Peace, it is by common Consent established, as a chief and
fundamental Rule, that the Exercise of Navigation and Commerce to the Spanish
West Indies, should remain in the same State it was in the Time of King Charles
II. of Spain, and that therefore this Rule may hereafter be observed with
inviolable Faith, and in a Manner never to be broken, and thereby all Causes of
Distrust and Suspicion concerning that Matter may be prevented and removed; it
is especially agreed and concluded, that no License, or any Permission at all,
shall at any Time be given to the French, or any other Nation whatever, in any
Name, or under any Pretense, directly; or indirectly, to SAIL, Traffic, etc.
to the Dominions subject to the Crown of Spain in America; except what may be
agreed by the Treaty, or Treaties of Commerce, (there referred to) and the
Rights and Privileges granted in a certain Convention called, El Assiento de
Negros. And the same Condition is likewise stipulated in the 34th Article of
the Treaty of Utrecht, between the King of Spain and the States. And there
needs no other Argument to prove, that it was always understood by the Court of
Spain itself, in the Sense of not suffering any Ship to enter into any Port of
Spain in the West Indies, on any Pretext whatever, but to observe, That the
English and Dutch are never permitted, though under the greatest Distress of
Weather, or want of Provisions, to put into any of those Ports; but their Ships
if they come in, are constantly confiscated: and upon this very Account, that,
if once Entrance were permitted, the Traffic could not but follow. Yet
notwithstanding that this is a fundamental Rule of the Treaties of Utrecht, and
an Article of the general Peace, which is strictly observed with regard to all
other Nations; it is notoriously violated, in Favor and Preference of the
Emperor's Subjects.

It is further to be observed, that with regard to the Articles of Commerce
between Spain, England, and Holland, the Liberty to the English and Dutch of
entering into the Spanish Ports, was always expressly restrained to the Ports of
Europe. But no such Restriction is once mentioned in the late Treaty of Vienna,
with regard to the Emperor's Subjects. Nay, all the Privileges allowed to
Britain, are in express Words allowed to these; without so much as an Exception
to the South-SeaShip, and the Assiento Contract: Whereas in the Treaty of
Utrecht with the Dutch, that Exception was expressly made. Thus has the King of
Spain granted all our Privileges, and greater, to the Subjects of the Emperor;
and instead of protecting Great Britain, and the United Provinces, in their
Rights of Commerce, according to former Treaties, he has now declared himself
to be obliged and determined to protect, by Force, the Emperor and his
Subjects, in their Invasion of those Rights. And, from all this put together,
it must be as evident, as Words and Facts compared can make any thing, That the
Two Courts of Vienna and Madrid have founded their New Alliance, as far as it
respects Trade, on the Destruction of all public Faith, the Infraction of
Treaties, and the Violation of all that can hold together Nations in Peace, and
mutual Benevolence.

After so plain a Proof of the great Injustice of the Attempt of the Imperial
Court upon Trade, from the Spanish Netherlands; and of the King of Spain's
determined Encouragement of it: It would not be improper here, to consider at
some length, the Importance and Consequence of this Conduct to our selves; were
it not that This has been set in so strong a Light already, as to make it much
less necessary; and particularly, in a short Treatise, Entitled, The Importance
of the Ostend Company considered. Yet, before I pass from this Subject, I must
mention some few particular Consequences of this new Establishment at Ostend,
and of the new Treaty of Commerce (by which so large Privileges are granted to
the Subjects of the Netherlands) with regard to our Trade; and in the end to
our Liberties, and our Religion, themselves.

The United Provinces, it is plain from their whole Conduct, esteem themselves
undone in their main Concern, if this Company be supported. And if They are
undone in their Trade, it is well known to all, who are acquainted with the
Track of Merchandise, that the Gain of their Loss in Trade will not accrue to
England, but fly to those Countries where this Evil began. As to the EastIndia
Trade particularly; the same Rival, which ruins That in Holland, must by the
same Methods inevitably ruin it in England. Nay, it must ruin it sooner and
more effectually here: Not only because Holland has the sole Property of the
Spice Trade, besides other Advantages; but because the Dutch Merchandises are
free from the Burden of Customs; whilst our Customs give the greatest
Encouragement to the Ostenders to run, and put off, a multitude of their Goods
in England. The Damage and Ruin must be the same, as to our West India Trade,
from the Privileges granted by the Vienna Treaty of Commerce to the Emperor's
Subjects: The Privilege of entering into the Spanish Ports in the West Indies,
and by unavoidable Consequence, of trading there, where neither English or
Dutch are ever permitted to enter upon any pretense; and the comprehensive
Privilege of enjoying all Rights which Britain enjoys, without any Exception;
and, by Consequence, of interfering with, and hurting, not only our Assiento
Contract, but every Instance of Commerce with Spain, which we have a Right to
by repeated Treaties.

Nor can the Evil stop here, but must of Necessity insinuate it self into many
other of the most important Branches of our Trade, which have a mutual and
indossolvible Connection one with another. The convenient Situation of the
Spanish Netherlands between the North and the South of Europe, for all the
Purposes of an extended Trade: -- The Advantage of the Ports of Ostend and
Newport, which, though none of the best, yet may vye with those of Holland; and
will be as convenient Harbors for Privateers, as ever Dunkirk it self was,
when the time shall come for an avowed and forcible Interruption to Our Trade
and that of Holland: The Goodness of their Rivers for communicating all
Merchandises, at the most easy Rates, from Town to Town, and the later Addition
of several large Canals and Causeways, where the Rivers are wanting: -- The
Fruitfulness of the Country, and the easy Price of all Provisions, very
advantageous to all Manufacturers: -- The Liberties and Privileges of the
Towns, which still subsist; very inviting to the same Manufacturers: -- The
Genius of the People, very well fitted for all the Improvements of Trade and
Manufactures: -- And, to animate them, the Experience and History of past
Times, which will show them, that they have formerly, with a little
Encouragement from their Governors, flourished in Manufactures both Woollen
and Linen, besides those many which they still retain) the Woollen now again
reviving to a Degree of Goodness at Limbourg, so as already to under-sell the
Dutch themselves; and the Linen more easily revived by the Advantage of the
great Quantity of Flax growing in these Countries: -- And this Experience of
former Days, pointing out to them likewise the Possibility and Probability of
their carrying their Navigation to a greater Pitch, in the Number and Strength
of their Shipping, increasing by degrees, as it always does, in proportion to
Manufactures and Fisheries; and the faster, as these Countries lie nearer and
more convenient for enticing Fishermen and Sailors, as well as Manufacturers
themselves, from hence, upon all Occasions; and also for the clandestine
Importation of Wool from England and Ireland, to carry on their Designs.
These, and many more Particulars show, that, as one Branch of Trade leads to
another, and one Trial encourages another; and as all Commerce is of a
spreading and communicative Nature, where it meets with proper Materials, and
proper Encouragement; so this must probably be the Case, if the Beginnings of
Evil be not looked after: That not only our own East and West India Trade, and
that of the Dutch, will be ruined by the Ostend Company, which will be the
immediate Effect of it; (or rather is so already in a great Degree) but also,
that the Contagion will spread to many other Branches of the British and Dutch
Trade; and convey along with it the Riches, the Strength, and the Naval Power,
to the same Spanish Netherlands.

But were it so, that Holland alone would be the Sufferer by the Ostend Trade
(which is far from being the Case) yet the Ruin of Holland must carry along
with it, in the end, the Ruin of Britain. For, as these two Nations, remaining
United, are indeed the Turn of the Balance of Europe, whenever they join
themselves to any other great Power of Europe; and Both of them together, but
barely sufficient for this Purpose: Whatever ruins the Trade, that is, the
Riches and Strength of these, destroys at the same time the Evenness of that
Balance, which alone can keep Europe in any tolerable Order. And whatever
Ruins any One of these Powers, does as truly destroy the sufficiency of that
Strength, by which alone that Balance is preserved. And what then must be the
Consequence? Where the Trade and Riches of these, or either of these, settle,
there settles the Power with them; and that Power removed from them, must be
the Destruction of the Balance; and the Destruction of that Balance, must be
the loss of the Liberties of the rest of Europe, and particularly, as Occasion
shall offer, of the Liberties of Great Britain.

And I need not add, that the same Popish Power, which will gain all this
Strength, (for it is in a Popish Power that all this must Center,) will have
the same Strength, and a greater Will, to extirpate every Appearance of
Protestantism, of what Denomination soever, out of Europe; without Exception to
any one Church above another: Only with the fatal Exception of a more sure and
quick Blow to that Church, a great part of whose Revenues, as well as the
Riches of a Multitude of its Members, arise from the Dissolution of
Monasteries, and the Alienation of Abbey-Lands; and whose unpardonable Crime it
will be, to have been the great Support of the Reformation, and the Bulwark of
the Protestant Cause against Popery. For where can that Church, or where can
the Protestant Religion, hope, I will not say, for Countenance, but for
Sufferance; when the whole Protestant Power in Europe, which in its present
Condition, is little better than a Creature with Pain and Difficulty struggling
for Life, shall be broken to Pieces by Acquisitions, made by other Powers, of
Riches and Force: Acquisitions, which will be a double Strength against it, as
they are taken from Those who alone have a Will to protect it, and added to
Those who have a Zeal to hurt and oppress it. And that this must be the End of
such Beginnings, suffered to proceed with Success, and gathering Strength every
Step they go, is as plain, and as true, as, That proper Food will give Strength
gradually to the weakest Man, capable of receiving it; too great to be resisted
at last by the strongest Man, who suffers it to be taken from himself; and who
by that Loss of Nourishment grows weaker and weaker, as well as by the Strength
added by it to the other.

I will now say a Word more peculiarly relating to Great Britain; and the
Concern this Nation has, in its present Circumstances, in the Fate of its
Trade, or of any of the Branches of it. The two last Wars abroad, upon which
not only our own Safety, but that of the Liberties of all Europe, depended, and
by which they were preserved; together with the continual Attempts of our
Enemies, since the general Peace, to load us with the Chains of Popery and the
Pretender, have run Great Britain into a vast Expense: and this Expense has
left behind it an immense Debt; and this Debt, so justly due to the Creditors
of the Public, must be paid, both out of strict Duty, if there be any such
thing as public Justice, and out of Interest, if we have a Mind ever again, in
any Extremity, to be trusted. This lies as a great and heavy Burden upon the
Minds of all true Lovers of their Country: And, I know, that for the sake of
this single Point, and from their earnest desire of seeing so great a Good
accomplished, without any Interruptions, Many of the best Friends to the
Public are ready to regret any Opposition made to the Designs of this New
Alliance, as the first Step to a War; and to ask, How much better, to bear the
Inconveniences mentioned; to submit to the Loss of Gibraltar; to be contented
with all the Consequences of the Ostend Trade; to connive at all the Designs of
such Powers united; than to put any Stop to our Prospect of a gradual Payment
of our Debts? -- Our main Business, they argue, is to free our selves from that
Load. The sinking Fund is a good Beginning; and, if not hindered by Quarrels
with Powers abroad, must go on to diminish our Debt. This Payment of our Debt,
we should look after, as our Strength in future Times, and our greatest Force
against our Enemies; and not show our selves so concerned about the Points just
now mentioned.

On the other Side, I cannot help entirely differing from all this. Nay, I
cannot forbear to urge this very Opposition to the New Alliance, as the only
certain Method of taking any one Step farther toward this great Good; as so
absolutely necessary, that without it, there is an End of all Hope of it. And I
contend for the most vigorous Opposition to the Designs of this New Alliance,
for this very Reason, because we are in Debt; and must be for ever in Debt; and
shall never probably have it in our power to pay any Part more of that Debt, if
those Designs go on unopposed and unresisted.

For in the first Place, They who argue against it, from this Consideration,
leave out a main Point; and a Point which comprehends all other Evils in it and
that is, the continued Attempts of putting the Pretender upon us: Which must
succeed, unless we show our selves determined to oppose any Power engaged in
Support of such Designs. And if this one thing succeeds, it is of small
Importance to our Debt, what our Trade will be after this is effected. Every
one can see that a Debt, contracted in order to keep out Him and his Family for
ever, will never be paid, but by one universal Blot spread over the Face of the
whole Account; if He should ever be settled here, against whom this Debt has
raised Armies, and manned Fleets, and faught many successful Battles. What Good
therefore, toward the Payment of our Debt, will a supine Negligence do? or
what Account can the Creditors of the Public hope to find, from not opposing
an Alliance which may otherwise too probably end in the establishing a King
here, under whom the least Evil will be this, That the Creditors of the Public
will be sure of losing at once their whole just Debt, and the Interest of it?

But, putting the Pretender wholly out of the Question, as a Person not in
Being; Or, supposing our selves secure from every future Attempt in his Favor:
yet, the Case with Respect to the Payment of the Debt, must very soon be the
same; (however it may happily differ in many other Particulars) if the
Conditions of these New Treaties at Vienna, both Public and Private, are,
through our supine Negligence, suffered to be fulfilled. For, what is the
sinking Fund from which we hope for Relief? It is the Surplus of the Produce of
the Customs and Excises, after the Payment of the Civil List, and of the
Interest of the National Debt. These Customs are the Appurtenances of Trade and
Commerce. Take away any Part of this Trade, or diminish it in any Branch; just
so much in Proportion you diminish or take away from these Customs. The first
thing therefore, that must feel the Diminution of our Trade, is the Produce of
our Customs; and the first thing that must feel the Diminution of our Customs,
is the Sinking Fund: because the Civil List and the Interest of the National
Debt must first be paid, before any Surplus at all can be laid apart for the
Payment of the Principal. Let therefore your Trade decay; permit the New
Company at Ostend, to make your own East and West India Trade utterly
impracticable; and suffer your own Commerce to be by Degrees transplanted, and
to flourish, in the Netherlands, under the Advantages and Encouragements in
those Parts just now mentioned; besides the Prohibitions upon your own
Manufactures every Day increasing upon you: and this alone will immediately
prevent any such Surplusage from remaining. For what Need of Words? As Customs
are the Appendages of Trade, they must decay with it: As the Sinking Fund
depends entirely on the Abundance of Customs, this must first vanish upon their
Decrease. What then must immediately become of he principal Debt? And indeed,
very soon after his, what must become even of the Interest of it: when the
Customs, which are the Fund for the Yearly Payment of that Interst, are
themselves ^anish'd away? And I will add, never after this to be recalled again.

For here is the real Difference between the two Methods of proceeding, now
under our Consideration. First, as to that of vigorous Opposition (...) the
Measures of the New Alliance; if we should allow to Those who thus argue
against it, that it may possibly bring on, in its natural Course, an
Interruption to Trade, and a Diminution of Customs; and consequently a Stop to
that Payment of the National Debt which depends upon the abundance of these
Customs: Yet, this is but a Temporary Stop. If these vigorous Measures meet
with Success, and the Blessing of Providence attend upon them, the Course of
Trade opens itself again with Vigor; and, the Customs reviving in Proportion,
the Sinking Fund must of Necessity do so too. And if this Method of Vigorous
Opposition should not be successful; the Case could not be worse than it must
be without it. For in ^^te other Method; That of Supine Negligence, ^ad of
yielding to all Demands without the Attenpt of any Relief; our Conduct has but
one cetain Event possible, as to the Point now before us. The Sinking Fund
must, with the Decrease of the Customs, vanish immediately: and so must, soon
after it, the Annual Interest of our Debt. And then, the longer the Ostend
Company continue; its Commerce, the stronger and more extended must it grow;
and the more extended that is, the more confined must our East and West India
Commerce be, in all their Branches, till they dwindle into nothing; and the
more the Sweet of Trade are tasted in the Spanish Netherlands, and the Austrian
Countries too, the more improbable or rather impossible it will be, ever to
recall it into these Parts, upon any such Terms as can make the Customs, once
ruined, revive in England. In a Word, in one Way, the Diminution of the
National Debt may be interrupted by a vigorous Opposition to the Measures
abroad: but then will revive again, and go on in its proper Channel^ In the
other Way, the same Diminution, and Loss of the Means of paying the Debt, and
even the Interest of it, will be the Fate of this Nation and that, with this
unhappy Aggravation; that if the Loss comes this Way, it is never to be
retrieved; nor any Hope left of that Payment so the future.

As others therefore are moved by a Regard to this great Good to the Nation, to
be averse to a Methods of vigorous Opposition; I cannot help being moved by the
same Regard, the very contrary Way: and what They fear, because we have such a
Debt upon us, which ought to be paid; that I wish, for the same Reason, because
we are in Debt; and that Debt ought to be paid; and that Debt cannot be paid
without such an Oposition as may preserve our Commerce upon a Fandation granted
to it by the most solemn Treties, the only Purchase of the Toil and Expense of
Britain; and such a Foundation, as alone can enable us to go on in a gradual
Justice to the Creditors of the Public.

And in such a Method of proceeding, This ought to be our great Support and
Confidence, that it is not an arbitrary Contention against the Rights of any
other Nation in the World; nor a Contest of our Trade, merely as our great
Advantage, or as the Instrument of paying the National Debt, and securing the
National Happiness; but really and truly a Contention for our strict Right and
Due, invaded with an high Hand by other Powers, against the Faith of Treaties,
as well as the Force of the highest Obligations. Nor can we conceive a more
abject Servility of Conduct, than for a People so long famed for Commerce and
Bravery, to see their Darling Good, and peculiar Glory; the Pledge of their
Liberty, and Life of all their Property, just going to be forcibly and
unrighteously torn from them; and tamely to look on without one Struggle for so
great a Blessing, or one hearty Effort against the Invaders of it. What can we
become, if we give our Consent to such Ruin by our own supine Indolence and
Insensibility; and suffer our selves to be stripped of our boasted Strength and
Ornament at once; but a Nation, the most despicable of all Nations under
Heaven; exposed to the Contempt and Insults of the World about us here below,
and rendered utterly unworthy, by our own Conduct, of the Care of Providence
above us?

IV. After all this said upon the Consequence of this New Alliance, with a
particular Respect to the Protestant Establishment, the Possessions, and the
Commerce, of Great Britain; it will be very proper now to touch upon another
Article of the Secret Part of it, in which, not only Britain, but all Europe in
general, is extremely concerned: I mean the Marriages agreed upon, between the
Emperor and Spain; which, added to the comprehensive and extended Trade now
likely to be transplanted into the Netherlands, must constitute a Power in one
Family beyond all that we have known, Formidable and Irrisistible. The
Marriages I speak of, are those of the two Arch Dutchesses, Daughters to the
present Emperor, with the two Infants of Spain, Sons to the King by his present
Queen. And that these are agreed upon, as a main and essential Point in this
New Alliance, We have the following Proofs.

1. Immediately after the Signing the Public Treaty of Peace at Vienna,
Ripperda very freely talked of the Marriage of Don Carlos, the eldest Son of
the present Queen of Spain, with the eldest Arch Duchess, as a fixed Matter;
and that the Prince of Asturias was disregarded in this Alliance, because of
his ill Health, as he pretended at that Time: and a little while after, he
spoke as openly and positively about the Marriages, both of Don Carlos and his
Brother. One of his Conversations was very Remarkable, and full of such
Circumstances as will not let Us doubt of the Truth of the Subject of it. The
King's Ministers in Spain, and the whole Spanish Nation, ( says He) are bitter
against me: but I laugh at all that. The Queen will protect me. I have done her
such Services that she cannot abandon me: for thus the Matter stands. The
Proposals of the Imperial Court were of a Marriage with the Prince of Asturias,
and my first Instructions from Spain were for the Prince of Asturias; but it
was I, who got that Destination changed. I wrote to the Queen to engage the
Prince of Asturias, without Delay, to a Daughter of Portugal, that he might not
stand in the Way of Don Carlos: And it was I that found the Way of turning all
this Affair to the Advantage of her two Sons. And do you think I have much to
Fear after such Services?

2. This agrees exactly with the Language of the Court of Madrid: Where, after
the Treaty of Peace was known to be Signed at Vienna, this Alliance with the
Emperor was freely spoke of, as the Queen's own Transaction entirely; entered
into, and conducted by herself; and the Marriage of Don Carlos spoke of, at
first, without reserve or Appearance of Secrecy, as a Matter agreed upon. Nor
did any one Person, who frequented the Court of Spain, make the least Doubt of
it.

3. This will help us to Account for other Parts of the Conduct of Spain:
which, without this, will be wholly unaccountable, and out of the Road of all
Policy. For instance, Suppose only these Marriages, or That alone of Don Carlos
with the eldest Arch Duchess; and this will show us, Why that Court could be
brought to discard the Neutral Garrisons, and all other Securities furnished by
the Quadruple Alliance for the Establishing her Son, the same Don Carlos, in
Italy; and to trust to the Emperor's naked Word in so great a Point: viz.
Because by this Marriage it would come about, that the Emperor, by securing
those Dominions in Italy for Don Carlos, would secure them, at the same Time,
for the Issue of his own Daughter; and so must of Necessity, for the Sake of
his own Interest, and the aggrandizing his own Family, be sincere and zealous
in this Affair. On the other Side, the same Supposition of this Marriage gives
a reasonable Solution, Why the Court of Spain has consented to, what the
Spanish Ministers at the Congress would not hear of, the Guaranty of the
Succession in Germany, as lately established in the House of Austria: viz.
Because it comes about by this Marriage, that being Guarantee to the Emperor's
Succession in his Austrian Dominions, is no more than being Guarantee for the
Queen's own Son Don Carlos, the future Husband of the eldest Arch Duchess; and
that Self Interest must make Spain, under its present Administration, sincere
in this Guaranty. And upon any other Bottom, we may safely defy the World to
give a Solution of these and several other Appearances, in this New Alliance.

I need not go farther, and appeal to any Words that may have been dropped in
Confidence, at the Court of Vienna itself, upon the Subject of these Marriages;
and that, with a particular Pleasure and Satisfaction expressed in them, Since
we have so much, and so strong, Evidence of the Reality of it, from the Mouth
of Ripperda, who made the Treaty; and from the Language of the Court of Spain
itself; as well as from the utter Inconsistency and Unaccountableness of the
proceedings of that Court, without this Supposition.

I acknowledge indeed, That at Vienna, when it began to appear that what had
been said upon this Head had alarmed Europe; and when, in particular, the
great Aim was to keep the Dutch from acceding to the Treaty of Hanover; which
might be hastened by so terrible an Appearance: Then, the whole Affair of these
Marriages was utterly disowned; nay, in Order to deny these Marriages, it was
absolutely denied that there was any such Thing in Being, as a secret Treaty
between the Emperor and Spain. I am not afraid of relating this, after all the
Proofs before given of the Reality of a secret Treaty, and of this Article in
it; nor at all unwilling that it should work as much as it can, and have all
the Weight it ought to have: For I am confident, that, as this Conduct
convinced not one Person at Vienna; and made not the least Impression upon the
Dutch Minister, or his Masters; so it will make no Impression upon Any who have
read what I have before laid down, unless it be this, That they who can act an
unjustifiable part, can, without Scruple, and with the same Ease, bring
themselves to a peremptory and absolute Denial of it, till the proper Time
comes for their open Avowal of it.

But as this Article of these Marriages must remain undoubted; we cannot help
spending a few Thoughts upon the Consequences of them, or of the first of them
only. There is but one Life, that of the Prince of Asturias, between Don Carlos
and the Crown of Spain, after the Death of the present King. There is only the
same Life between Don Carlos and the Crown of France; should the present King
there dye without Issue Male; and the Renunciations not take place: both which
Events may happen.

And as to the vast Hereditary Dominions of the House of Austria, Don Carlos
will come to them by Right of his Wife. And as Experience has shown us, for
many Ages, that whoever is Master of these Dominions, and the Power that
attends them, has been, and must be Emperor, notwithstanding its being an
Elective Crown: Don Carlos, by marrying the eldest Arch Duchess, cannot sail
of being Emperor. So that Don Carlos may possibly be at once, Emperor, King of
France, and King of Spain: and have the vast Strength and Riches of all these
Powers united and centered in him.

I have thus sufficiently shown the many and complicated Evils of this New
Alliance between the Emperor and Spain; and the just Apprehensions, and
well-grounded Fears, which the Court of Great Britain could not but entertain,
from all Appearances and all Advices, about the Nature and Tendency of it, with
Regard to the present Establishment of the Crown of Great Britain; to our
Possessions; our Commerce; our Religion; our Liberties, and those of all
Europe; and, in a Word, to every Thing that ought to be Dear to Us. And now,
Let any Persons amongst us, who know how to prize these inestimable Goods,
which alone make Life itself valuable, survey this New Alliance in every Part
of it: and judge, Whether ever hitherto any one Scheme has appeared in Europe,
of a Destruction so universal, and of a Ruin so extended, as This (taking the
whole together) appears plainly to be.

It is time now for us to enquire, What has been the Conduct of the Court of
Great Britain, upon the View of all these Evils.

1. The first step they took was to renew, by a Treaty, the Defensive
Engagements subsisting between Great Britain, France, and Prussia. But this
Treaty was not set on foot till some Months after the New Alliance between the
Emperor and Spain; and after the best Intelligences, and most mature
Consideration, of the Tendency of that Alliance. And as this Treaty, made at
Hanover, has long been public in the World; I need not observe that it is a
Treaty entirely Defensive between Britain, France and Prussia, for the mutual
support of each other, against Injuries; and not at all for the invading, or
injuring, any Nation under Heaven.

2. Particular Regard was shown to the States General, in the framing of the
Treaty of Hanover: to which they have since acceded. The next care was to
invite the Crown of Sweden into this Alliance; that Kingdom having so often and
so successfully appeared in Defense of the Protestant Religion, and of the
Liberties of Europe. And the Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel, whose Family has done
such signal Service to the Protestant Cause, readily offered a good Body of
Troops, in support of this Alliance.

These are the Steps which the Court of Great Britain thought fit to take as
soon as possible, after the Danger we were in, appeared evident beyond all
contradiction.

3. As the Parliament of Great Britain found their Country immediately
threatened in its greatest Concerns from these Treaties of Vienna; Both Houses
gave his Majesty all Assurance of support in whatever He should think fit to do
in the present critical Conjuncture. And accordingly it was necessary now to
consider in earnest, what was most proper to be done. The Court of Great
Britain had evident Proof that nothing could influence the Two New Allies to
Terms of Reason, but to show a vigorous Spirit against every pernicious or
suspicious part of such an Alliance. And as all Appearances, in all parts,
convinced them, That nothing could so effectually guard against approaching
Evils, as the dispatching sufficient Squadrons of Ships to several Places; and
as they were sensible that our Fleet, now the best in the World, could never be
of any Account, either toward our Glory or our Safety, but upon such an
Occasion; They did, with all possible Diligence, fit out Three Squadrons of Men
of War: One for the West Indies, One for the Coasts of Spain, and One for the
Baltic.

It will now be asked, as it has been indeed already, What beneficial Effect
has this Method had? What Good have we gained, or what Evil have we prevented,
by these Grand Appearances of our Fleets abroad? And if an Answer may be
reasonably expected, by Those who ask these and the like Questions; so is it
also a just Expectation, That, They should be as ready to receive a Reasonable
Answer to them, as they are to ask them.

As to the Treaty of Hanover; I will suppose, no Apology can be expected for
That, after such a surprising and formidable Conjunction of the Two Powers of
the Emperor and Spain; the Design, and the Articles of which Conjunction
appeared every Day more and more terrible to their Neighbors. The Contracting
Parties in the Hanover Treaty must have been taxed with Infatuation and
Insensibility, beyond the common Pitch of Those Evils, if They had not entered
into a strict and hearty Concert for their own Self-Defence, in such
Circumstances, of present Invasion of the Trade of some of them; and of
Forebodings of future Evil to them All.

But as the Question here at home, chiefly, if not solely, refers to our Naval
Armaments from England; What have They produced, or, for what Reasons were they
sent? The Answer is very plain. As to the Squadron sent to the WestIndies; I
believe there is no one who has an Estate in those Parts, or is concerned in
any Trade thither, who did not think it highly necessary to have a Strong
Squadron in those Seas, for securing our Commerce; which must otherwise have
been inevitably ruined, by the Depredations and Violences committed by the
Spaniards for several Years past without Redress. And if the sending of the
said Squadron has prevented the Return of the Galleons: no Man who is in the
least conversant in the Affairs of Europe, can make any doubt but that this
Incident has been the only Thing that has hitherto prevented a War in Europe,
by depriving the Courts of Vienna and Madrid of the means of putting in
execution the dangerous Schemes they had projected.

The Squadron sent to the Coasts of Spain, was sent to prevent any Attempt from
that Country, to disturb Us at Home: The Court of Great Britain being assured,
beyond all doubt, as I have before particularly related, that an Offensive
Treaty was concluded at Vienna; and that an Attempt was designed from Spain,
and preparations making for it, at that Time, in Favor of the Pretender.

And the Squadron sent to the Baltic was sent to prevent very great Evils in
those Parts; there being no room to doubt, that the Czarina's real View was to
go with a Fleet directly to Stockholm, and under a Pretense of demanding the
Use of the Ports, and the Assistance of Sweden for the Recovery of Sleswick to
the Duke of Holstein, actually to dethrone the present King of Sweden, and make
that Nation absolutely dependent on Muscovy. It was therefore judged of the
utmost Importance to prevent this, by sending a strong Squadron into the
Baltic; not only as it was the preserving a Friendly Power, and a Power
Necessary to the Balance of the North: but particularly, because Sweden could
not but be considered in the Nature of a Frontier and Barrier to Britain
itself, to such a Degree, that if that Ringdom were once either made subject to
Russia, or Dependent upon it, Britain itself must be in Apprehension of
Attempts from the Russian Ravagers, coming with their Fleet from Gottenburg to
our Northern Coasts: an Evil not to be guarded against, after the Subjection of
Sweden, but by the Expense, either of a constant Fleet upon those Coasts, or an
Armed Force in those Parts of our County, which lie most open to such Attempts.

The Designs and Views in sending out these Squadrons being so unexceptionably
Good; supposing that, through the Dispositions of Providence, and the
Opposition of Winds and Weather, Success had not attended upon any One of these
Squadrons; nay, that Great and Extraordinary Misfortunes had followed them all:
yet, They who are not so weak as to argue from Success alone; They who know the
Uncertainty of Seas, and Winds, and Weather, and have too much Understanding to
think the Event only to be the true Criterion of Judging about the Wisdom of
any Project; all Persons, I mean of good Sense, should, methinks, have been
ready, even in such a Case, to have applauded what was done upon so good
Grounds, and with Views so much for the Honor and Safety of their Country.
But, God be thanked, this is not the Case. Every one of the Armaments has had
Success equal to the Goodness of the Errand they were all sent upon; and even,
beyond Expectation. For, as to the Squadron in the West Indies; it has not only
protected the Trade of His Majesty's Subjects in those Parts from the
Depredations of the Spaniards; but also the Galeons with their Stores of Money,
the Strength of the New Alliance, and the like of all the Projects concerted in
it, are kept back: and those Attempts disappointed which would have been made,
and perhaps succeeded, had such Riches come to their Aid. The Execution of the
Schemes laid in Spain for an Invasion of Great Britain, in Favor of the
Pretender, was, at that Time, prevented by the Appearance of a British Fleet
upon the Spanish Coasts: and all the Evils and Disorders, as well as Expense,
avoided, which an Attack of that Sort must have occasioned, even supposing it
repulsed from hence; and the utter Ruin and Destructon, that must have ensued,
had it succeeded. And by the Squadron in the Baltic, the Czarina's whole Force
of Ships and Galleys was kept in, within the Bounds of Safety to themselves and
their Neighbors; Her destructive Designs against Sweden, with all their ill
Consequences to Britain and to other Countries of Europe, prevented from
Execution in every Instance: and, after all the boasted Strength of the Ships
and Seamen in the Service of that Crown, Russia itself, and all Europe
convinced, that twenty British Men of War can, upon any Occasion, make them
disappear as if they were not, and shelter themselves in their own Ports as if
they had no Views but those of Quiet und Security.

But here is the great Advantage to Those who make such Enquiries as these we
have been now considering, without a Disposition to be satisfied: That Evils
prevented, go for no Evils; and because they were not visibly perceived by our
Eyes, nor sensibly felt by our Nerves, before we find them at a greater
Distance from us, therefore, They who are in the Disposition of Satyr (so much
easier than Praise) will probably think themselves at Liberty to deny this
Freedom from such Evils to be at all the Effect of the Measures taken; and to
presist in it, that no such Evils would have come, or could have been justly
feared, if these Methods had not been taken. And in this Manner, I own, They
may talk for ever against all possible Light; if the whole Scene which I have,
in the former Part of these Papers, laid before them, be not of Force enough to
work another Persuasion in them. Yet, one Thing, I will affirm, That we, and
other Nations are, at present, actually free from the Evils and Attempts I have
mentioned, since these vigorous Measures have showed themselves in the View of
Europe; and that They themselves cannot say it was certain, (as others will not
say, it was in the least probable) that We should have been free from those
Evils and those Attempts, had not these Measures been taken.

Thus therefore, stands the Affair of these three Squadrons. They were sent
upon Designs of the last Consequence, and exceedingly Honorable, to Great
Britain: And they have had the Success of fully answering the Ends proposed.

It was not, we see, to assert the Sovereignty of the Seas, merely by showing
themselves in several Parts of the World in a Form superior to that of other
Nations, that these Armaments were fitted out. The asserting our Sovereignty of
the Seas, as a Point of mere Speculation, at a great Expense, and without any
other View, may, perhaps, be a Subject fit for Men of Wit to be pleasant with,
and to entertain themselves and their Friends upon. But to assert the
Sovereignty of the Seas, as a Point of Action, upon a just Occasion: -- To show
this Sovereignty in the Sight of those Nations, who are making their own
Strength at Sea the Instrument of Ruin to their Neighbors: -- To show it, in
Opposition to those Nations who are contriving to convey Mischief to ourselves,
and Assistance to our Enemies, by the Sea itself: -- If this be not the proper
Business, and the peculiar Glory of Britain, as the greatest Maritime Power now
in Europe; then our Navy is itself a Ridicule upon ourselves; an Ostentation
only, kept up at a vast Expense; and a Piece of Vanity, unworthy of a Grave and
Wise Nation. But no more upon this Part of the Subject.

Another Question will be asked, What has been, and must be, our Expense upon
this Occasion? And it will be added, Are we alone to bear such Burdens,
without a Proportion of Expense from those who are our Allies; whilst Those
whom we are opposing, seem to be at little, or none at all? To the first Branch
of this Question, What is our Expense? It is certainly enough to answer in
General, Let it be what it will; if it be necessary for our own Security, and
that of Europe; if it be incurred for the Preventing the greatest Evils, and as
the only Means of procuring a better State of Things: it may justly be said, to
be not at all comparable to the Necessity for it; not to be put in the Balance
against the Mischiefs which might have arisen from the Want of it; and very
much beneath the Good which has and will come from it. The whole Point to every
true Briton is, Whether it was necessary, fitting, and reasonable: -- They that
think it probably so, must be pleased with it. They that think it a mere Piece
of Gaiety in Those who preside; or an hasty Blunder in the Dark; will have
other Resentments about it: But they must first think them mere Madmen, or mere
Idiots, before they can come to this. In the mean Time, till something of this
Sort appears, we cannot but think, That, if the attempting to guard ourselves
and our Neighbors from very great and comprehensive Evils, be laudable; and if
the preventing the Beginnings of those Evil can make an Expense necessary,
fitting, and reasonable; then the Expense upon the present Occasion is
certainly so.

But as (...) in general is Satisfaction enough, of whatever Sort or Degree the
Expense is; provided is be a Lesser Evil than what it has hitherto kept off: so
it will not be disagreeable to remark, That the Expense upon these Naval
Armaments is of such a Nature, and accompanied with such Circumstances, as to
make it much the more tolerable in the Eyes of every Briton. The Expense is
chiefly an Expense amongst ourselves; and such as only circulates Money from
one Hand to another. The Victualling so many Ships is the Advantage of our own
Farmers and Graziers. The Rigging out and equipping them, gives Money to our
own Builders and Workmen. The putting them into Motion when they are so
repaired, is known to be of Service to the Ships themselves: which otherwise
lie still, and often receive such Damage, as at the End it costs more to
rectify. The Employing so many Seamen is still employing our own Subjects; and
giving our Money to our own Countrymen: besides the great future Benefit
arising from this Necessity itself; as they are kept in Action by it, and
inured to the Service of their Country, and the more fit to defend it upon all
Occasions to come. So that the Expense of our Naval Defense, which is the true
and natural Defense of Britain; though it, indeed, must be a Burden to those who
pay toward it, as all Payments are: yet it is a Burden with this Advantage to
the Public, that it sends not our Money abroad; it loses it not to the Nation;
it removes it indeed out of one Pocket into another, but it is still our Money,
and remains among ourselves. The Community and Body of Subjects taken together
are not the Poorer for it; though the Persons paying it to others, are so: and if
it be for their own necessary Defense, and for the Safety of all the Rest of
their Possessions, All honest Men among them will be glad, They are so.

But then our Expense, though great, is not alone. The Dispositions made by
France, ever since the Signing of the Treaty of Hanover, have more than kept
pace with us, in the largeness of the Expense. The first Step taken by the most
Christian King was, to augment his regular Troops with Twenty five Thousand
Men; and this in such a Manner, that they were presently ready for Action upon
any Occasion. At the same Time he ordered a Levy of the Militia, to the Number
of Sixty Thousand Men: and appointed these to be commanded by the Ancient
Officers reformed of his old Troops; not to mention Twelve Thousand Invalids,
put into good Order, and double Officer'd, for the Defense of such of his
Cittadels and Forts as they are proper for. These, and other Dispositions,
which have been made to put France into a Condition to support a War, if it
should be necessary, amounted, for this last Year, by a certain Calculation, to
fifteen hundred and sixty thousand Pounds Sterling; and if the Militia should
be obliged to march out of their Provinces to the Frontiers, it will amount to
a far greater Sum. And by this Method it comes to pass, That these sixty
thousand Militia, and twelve thousand Invalids, remaining in Garrisons and
fortified Places, as the Service shall require; That King can send into the
Field, without Inconvenience, 165000 Men of his Regular Troops. Such has been
for some Time the Disposition there, in Order to show the New Allies, that
France is not only in earnest, but in a well disposed Condition of disputing
any Attempts against itself, or its Allies.

The United Provinces indeed, came but lately into the Alliance, from the Frame
of their Constitution, naturally begetting Delays and prolonging their Debates;
and not from any Want of the Sense of their Dangers, and the Necessity of their
acceding to the Treaty of Hanover. For from the Time of their Accession to that
Treaty, they have shown a Warmth and Vigor worthy of the Occasion. They have
agreed unanimously upon such Augmentations of their Land Forces, as by next
Spring will make them above 50000 effective Men: And the necessary Measures are
taking for their having a Fleet at Sea of Twenty Men of War. Besides which
Expense, relating to these Augmentations, They have been at a very great Charge
in providing their Magazines, and putting their Barrier and Frontier Places
into a good Posture of Defense. But whoever reads the late Resolutions and
Representations of the States General; and sees with how deep a Concern, and in
how pathetical a Manner, they speak of the Calamities now threatening
themselves, and the rest of Europe; declaring their Ruin must lie at their own
Door, if all the Provinces do not, in a Case of such Necessity, consent to act
the Part of Men in a vigorous Defense of themselves, and readily concur in
What, in the Opinion of their High Mightinesses, is indispensably necessary to
the common Safety and Preservation; and without which the Well-being, Liberty
and Religion of the whole Republic, will be put to the Venture. Whoever reads
this, and much more said and inculcated by Them with a particular Vehemence,
will not think, that They are not determined to defend themselves by all
necessary Measures against the Dangers now hanging over their Heads.

At the same Time, those Powers, which have raised this Allarm, and occasioned
this defensive Expense to their Neighbors, cannot stir one Step in their own
offensive Designs, without a very considerable one to themselves. His Imperial
Majesty, besides the many Promises of another Sort, which He has bestowed
around Him, has entered into real Obligations which cannot be performed but at
a very great Expense. To the Elector of Cologne he has engaged to pay 600,000
German Florins a Year, for two Years; to the Elector of Bavaria, the same; to
the Elector Palatin and of Treves the same; and to the Duke of Wolfenbuttle
200,000 Florins; besides what is stipulated to others. Add to these his own
great Expenses, in recruiting and in refitting his whole Army, and preparing
every thing of all Sorts, necessary for Action: An Expense in the whole so
great! that nothing but the vast Advantages It is to receive from his new
Alliance, and the Expectation of Remittances from Spain, could have induced him
to think of it. And what then must the Expense of Spain be; which has not only
it is own Army to put in Order and augment; not only it is own Towns and Coasts
to guard; but the Emperor's Demands to answer? And what a State of things must
the Necessities of Spain it self, together with the Demands of the Emperor,
bring that King, and his Country into; even if his Flota with it is usual Cargo
of Money should come Home safe: when it is well known, that, before these new
Expenses, (the Effect of the New Alliance) all the Civil and Military Officers
belonging to that Crown, and their whole Army, were in great Arrears; and all
the Royal Revenues anticipated for a Year and a Half; and that the whole Nation
was in a State of very great Poverty and Distress? And if such immense Expenses
can be run into with Zeal, for the the Injury and Oppression of other
Countries: surely, an Expense, much smaller in itself; and directed solely to
the Defense and Preservation of ourselves in the Rights and Properties we are
justly in Possession of, cannot be thought unworthy of the British Nation; nor
unjustifiable in Those who have already begun it, only because they thought it
absolutely necessary. But still other Questions arise upon this Subject.

It may be asked, Could not the Court of Great Britain all this while have
tried other Methods, than allarming Europe with Fleets? The Methods of a
friendly Congress, or Proposals of a more peaceable and amicable Nature? Was
there no Way of proceeding, but demanding of the Emperor, the sole Propriety of
Trade; and engrossing it to Britain and Holland: as if other Nations had no
Right to the World, besides our selves? In which Way of talking there is
something very right, and something very wrong. For certainly it must be
granted, that we ought to prepare ourselves with Vigor to oppose Injury; as
well as to be ready to propose, or receive, any reasonable Methods of
Accommodation. To do the first, without a Dosposition shown to the latter, I
acknowledge, would have been unjustifiable. To do the latter without the first,
had been Weakness and Folly: and could have proceeded from nothing but a Total
Ignorance of the plainest Rules of political Conduct; which have long ago
established It as a certain Maxim, that the best Way to Peace upon such
Occasions, is with the Sword prepared for the Day of Necessity; and that those
Powers, who can suffer themselves to invade or demand the Rights of others,
will laugh at all Accommodations offered, when they see them unaccompanied with
such Appearances as show the Resolution of Those others to defend their Rights
by Force, if Reason cannot prevail.

I answer therefore, to these and the like Questions. 1. It never could have
been justified, in the Court of Great Britain, to have made Proposals of
Accommodation, without the most vigorous Measures taken, which alone could make
them effectual. 2. In some of the Pretenses and Demands of this new Alliance,
no Equivalent, no Accommodation, could be proposed. In the Case of the Demand
of Gibraltar; whilst the Nation seems universally to concur, that no Sum of
Money, nor any other Place of Strength abroad, can be any Equivalent to it:
what could be proposed, but a Resolution to defend the Nation in its just
Possession of it; especially, since the whole present Conduct of Spain may
assure us, by a fresh Evidence, that it is of the utmost Importance; and that,
if that Place were once gone out of our Hands, we should have still less Hope
of seeing Treaties observed, or of hindering ourselves from being more and more
injured, on that side, in our Commerce? 3. In the other great Case, that of the
Emperor's new Establishment at Ostend, the Court of Great Britain never went
upon such an arbitrary Maxim as, That other Nations ought not to be permitted
to begin and extend their Commerce wherever they rightfully could, as well as
ourselves; or that we had any Right to oppose such Attempts: But upon these
undoubted Maxims of Truth and Right, -- That Treaties are to be observed; --
That, when any Country is excluded by Treaties from any particular Branch of
Commerce, it is not to be authorized and supported in carrying on the said
Branches of Commerce in violation of the said Treaties; and -- That those
Powers which have, by repeated Engagements, obliged themselves to defend and
support the British and Dutch Trade, are justly to be opposed when they
themselves come to be the Invaders and Destroyers of it. Agreeably to all this,
4. As the Court of Great Britain has taken such vigorous Measures as show the
Resolution of Self-defence: so, has it never been wanting either to propose, or
to receive, any reasonable Method for the Accommodation of this Matter, to the
Emperor's Satisfaction; if He could be satisfied with any thing, but a Trade in
open Contradiction to all Treaties.

In particular, It was sufficiently intimated to the Court of Vienna, that the
British Court pretended to nothing in this Affair, but to defend the Right of
Trade belonging to Britain by Treaties; far from assuming to themselves any
Right of controlling the Emperor, or his Subjects, in any Attempts, not
contrary to those Treaties: That therefore, if the Emperor would remove this
Company, and the Seat of Trade, now at Ostend, to Trieste, or any other Place
in his Dominions, which did not heretofore belong to the Spanish Monarchy;
Britain was ready quietly to acquiesce. And the same was offered to the Court
of Madrid, in the form of a Proposal, when his Catholic Majesty had just begun
to espouse the Emperor's Interest, in this Affair of Ostend.

But though the Court of Spain not only acknowledged the Reasonableness of the
Proposal; but made great Professions of Hope that it would be accepted; yet, at
the same Time, it was declared, That Spain was under Engagements to stand by
the Emperor, even supposing his unreasonable Refusal of it. And at Kienna, the
Intimation made no Impression at all: The Resolution there, by this appearing
plainly to be, The Support of the Ostend Company, and Trade from the
Netherlands, against all Stipulations.

But however this ended at Vienna and Madrid; It must have this Effect at
London, to convince all Persons, that no one, either real or pretended,
Provocation from Britain, gave the first Occasion for this new Alliance; (one
End of which was the Establishment of the Emperor's new and unwarrantable
Designs in Trade:) So the Court of Great Britain, in the midst of all
Preparations for the Defense of this Nation's Rights, has not neglected to try
other Methods of a peaceable and amicable Nature; but shown a readiness to do
any thing, even for present Peace, except to give up the Advantages, Rights and
Privileges of Britain, of more Importance than present Peace: and these
Advantages founded upon Treaties; which therefore, They who preside are obliged
to guard and defend, as a sacred Depositum, not only out of Love to their
Country, common to Them with all others, but out of peculiar Duty and
Obligation; as they are entrusted with this Guardianship and Defense, by the
Public; and as an Account of this Trust may justly be demanded of them.

If then, nothing reasonable, in the Way of Accommodation, has been wanting on
their Part; They will not easily be blamed, (it is to be hoped rather, they
will be highly commended) for This, that They have not permitted themselves to
be misled by any smooth Words without Meaning; or to be hindered from taking all
necessary Precautions, by any Amusements of Congresses, or Embassies, or
Negotiations, only thrown in their Way to gain Time to others, and to lose it
to themselves: Since it is evident, that irreparable and irretrievable Evils
might have come from the not taking these necessary and timely Precautions. And
were it so, that They had spent their whole Time in sending and receiving
fruitless Messages backwards and forwards, in such a critical Conjuncture; we
may venture to say, we know the Persons who would have been the first to
charge, (and very deservedly too) the Ruin of this Nation upon them; and to
have demanded Justice against them for such a Conduct, in such a Time of Danger
to their Country.

And indeed, supposing this to have been the Case; supposing the Court of Great
Britain, in such a Situation; with such repeated Advices from all Parts; with
such Demonstrations of Danger from abroad, as put out of all Doubt the true
Nature and Designs of so formidable an Alliance as that of the Emperor and
Spain: I say, supposing this Court, surrounded with all these Evidences, to
have entered into no Measures of Defense with any neighboring States and
Princes; to have taken no Steps toward preventing the Mischief threatened; to
have sent out no Naval Armaments, either to preserve any friendly Powers, or to
quash any Attempts of others; Who would not rise up, and demand an Account of
such a Conduct from Those who alone are to answer for it? Who would not join in
saying, Is this the Usage fit to be given to a brave and considering People? Is
this the watchfulness of Those, whose Duty it is to attend to every distant
View of Danger? Or, do They think so meanly of us and the whole Nation, that we
can see nothing but what we feel; and that we have a Sense of no Evil, but what
is present: Or, that we are so made, that a little Expense would affright us
from preserving our all; or, reduced to so low a Condition of Poverty, that we
cannot purchase or furnish out even Self-defence to our selves? Were not other
Princes and States threatened by the same Danger; and ready to unite with us?
Must our Fleet, the Glory (as it is called) of this Land, lie still and decay,
rather than be made our Bulwark? Our Fleet, falsely called our Glory, but indeed
our Shame, whilst it is laid aside as useless, at a Time when That alone might
make us look too formidable in Europe, to be insulted or affronted? Or, does
even this Expense which circulates chiefly amongst ourselves, appear too
formidable to a Nation which those around it envy, as the Center of Riches and
Plenty? But why do we speak of Expense? It is this Method of Indolence, and
Inactivity upon such an Occasion, which must bring after it an Expense much
greater in it self; and much more hazardous in its Effect; as Time shall add
Strength to the Danger threatened: an Expense, which must increase our Debt,
and at the same Time diminish the Hope of paying it. What Account can we give
of such a Treatment of this Nation? As we can find none in all the known
Measures of Political Prudence; we must search for it somewhere else. -- There
must be secret Reasons for such a Conduct; and perhaps these may lie in the
Riches of Spain, suffered to come safely home, to strengthen and consolidate
the most dangerous Conjunction that ever yet appeared in Europe. -- This and
much more might justly be urged, upon the Supposition of a negligent and
unactive Conduct in this Crisis of Danger. And what Reply to make to it, I
profess I think it utterly impossible to tell.

But this is not the Case. The Court of Great Britain has acted quite another
Part; and entered into that Method of vigorous Selfdefence, by which alone, in
all human Wisdom, there can be the least Hope of preventing or repulsing any
dangerous Attempts against all our highest Concerns: And a Method, to which No
other Principle could possibly have directed Those who have chosen it, but That
of an honest Regard to the Possessions, the Trade, the Rights, the Well-Being,
and the Being itself, of this now happy and envied Nation.

FINIS.

