Mr. Sewall's DISCOURSE Delivered The Evening after the late Terrible
EARTHQUAKE, Which was Between the 29th and 30th of October, 1727.

THE DUTY of a People TO Stand in Aw of GOD, And not Sin, When under His
terrible Judgments. A SERMON Preached at the South Meeting House in Boston, the
Evening after the Earthquake, Which was in the Night between the 29th and 30th
of October, 1727.

By Joseph Sewall, M. A. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

Isai 119.120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments. Isai 29 6. Thou shall be visited of the LORD of hosts with Thunder,
and with Earthquake, and with great Noise with Storm and Tempest, and the flame
of devouring Fire. BOSTON: Printed for D. Henchman over against the Brick
Meeting House in Cornhill. 1727.

Stand in awe, and Sin not.
PSALM, IV. 4. Stand in awe, and Sin not --.


GOD Calls upon us this Day to Stand in awe of Him; for He has terribly shaken
the Earth under us, and threatened to send us down quick into the Pit. At the
same time, He also encourages us to Hope in His Mercy. We might have been
suddenly destroyed, and that without remedy. Yesterday might have been the last
Sabbath, and the last Opportunity of hearing GOD speaking to us in His Word;
but Adored be the divine Patience and Long-suffering! Our gracious LORD has
chosen rather to Warn us by a very awful Providence, and then to give a further
space for Repentance. O that His Goodness might lead us to (...). We are now
Assembled in His Name and Fear, to humble our selves under GOD's Mighty Hand,
to Cry to Him to turn from the Fierceness of His Angery, and to Praise Him for
his wonderful Deliverance O that I could speak, and you Hear under the deep
impression of those Things!

The Penman of this Psalm was David; the Occasion of it is uncertain. It seems
to have been made when he was dissress'd either by Absalem, or Saul or by some
other great and powerful (...) The Opening of the Text was omitted in the
Preaching
The words of my Text are rendered and understood by learned Men with some
variety. The Word, says a worthy Divine signifies any moving of the Heart; the
Septuagint render it, Be angry, and Sin not. Which Words being used by the
Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4.26. are supposed by some to (...) a Quotation from this
Psalm. Others render it by word which signifies to tremble or shake for fear
Piscator gives the sense thus; Be moved with fear of the anger of GOD. Which is
agreeable to our own Version, Stand in Awe. There is also some difference among
Expositors respecting the Persons to whom these words are directed. Some think
they are directed to his Enemies, that they should fear GOD and not Sin against
Him by their opposition to David's Person and Government, who was anointed by
GOD's especial Direction and Command. Others rather understand the words as
directed to his Friends, that they should stand in awe of GOD's terrible
Majesty under their distressing troubles, and not sin by murmuring against GOD,
or taking any forbidden Courses to Extricate themselves. However it is plain,
that these words are spoken to a professing People in a time of Calamity, and I
may from them observe this Doctrine,

DOCT. IT is the Duty of particular Persons and of a Professing People in times
of great Distress, to Stand in Awe of GOD, and not Sin. IT is our Duty at all
times to fear that glorious and fearful Name, the LORD our GOD, and especially
when He displays his terrible Majesty in awful Judgments, we should then look
above Second Causes, and obey that word which GOD spoke to his People in a time
when their Hearts were ready to fail them for fear, Isa. 8.12, 13. Say ye not,
a Confederacy, -- Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your
fear, and let him be your dread. We must at such a time Sanctify the Lord of
Hosts -- We must have our minds impressed with an holy awe, a reverential fear
of his terrible Majesty, and give him the Glory of his infinite Power, Justice,
Holiness, Faithfulness and Mercy, and other admirable Perfections which shine
forth in his judicial Dispensations; and in that seasonable help which he
affords his People under them; Instead of being Slavishly afraid of Evil, which
fear brings a snare. We should Exercise a religious filial fear of GOD as Job
said, Job 23.15. When I consider, I am afraid of him. We should be deeply
concerned, and afraid at the tokens of GOD's displeasure, Even when his Wrath
is kindled but a little, and begins to burn; when he gives us to sing both of
Mercy and Judgment. And being moved with fear of GOD's displeasure, we should
put away our Sins which stir up his Anger, and are the ground of the
Controversy between GOD and us. We should be afraid of offending GOD by
breaking his Commandments, and accordingly should Repent of, and put far away
those Sins wereby we have transgressed his Law. Surely it is meet to be said
unto GOD at such a time, I have born Chastisement, I will not offend any more.
That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done Iniquity, I will do no
more, Job 34.31, 32. It is the Duty of a Person or a People thus to stand in
Awe, and not Sin; to Fear the Lord and depart from Evil. Here, I would in a
practical way, and with a particular Application to our selves, Consider
several Sins which a Person or People under threatening Judgments should put
away in the Exercise of an holy Awe of GOD, and dread of his righteous
Displeasure.

1. WE should stand in Awe of GOD, and not Sin by Impenitency and Unbelief.

THIS is a very comprehensive Head, however I shall give it a distinct
Consideration. When GOD is coming out in Judgments against us, We should humble
our selves under his mighty hand, loath our selves for our iniquities, and
repent in dust and ashes. Thus GOD said to his People of old, Jer. 2.19. Thine
own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee:
know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter that thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God
of hosts. Afflictions should teach us the evil of Sin, and make that most
bitter which is the procuring cause of them. When GOD is threatening us we
should open our ears to discipline, and from an affecting sight and sense of
the evil and danger, the filthiness and odiousness of Sin, heartily grieve
because we have offended GOD by breaking his Law, and putting away our Sin,
should turn to him. As Ephraim bemoaned himself thus, Thou have chastised me,
and I was chastised, Surely after that I was turned I repented; and after that
I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded,
because I did bear the reproach of my youth, Jer. 31.18, 19. Again, we should
stand in awe, and not Sin by Unbelief. This is a very heinous Sin, 1 John 5.10.
He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself: he that
believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the record
that God gave of his Son. And it is highly displeasing to GOD, and upon the
account of it GOD is provoked to bring terrible Judgments upon a professing
People. Thus when the Son of God was manifest in the flesh, and came to his
own, they received him not. The Body of the Jewish Nation rejected the true
Messiah, and then GOD cast them off, and poured out his Wrath upon them in a
most terrible manner, Romans 11.20. Because of unbelief they were broken off --.
When GOD is come out in terrible Judgments against us, we should therefore be
convinced of Sin, particularly of this great Sin of not believing in Jesus
Christ, and take heed there be not in any of us an evil Heart of unbelief. We
should give glory to GOD by receiving the record he has given of his Son, as a
faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, and rest upon Christ and his
righteousness as revealed and held forth in the word of the Gospel, for
Justification and Eternal Life. Let us then stand in awe of GOD, while under
the tokens of his displeasure, repent and turn from all our transgressions; so
iniquity shall not be our ruin. Let us, being moved with fear fly to Jesus
Christ who is the hope of his Israel and the Savior thereof in times of
trouble. Let us not give our gracious Lord reason to complain as of Jerusalem,
Matt. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children
together even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would
not. But let us now fly to Christ and trust under his Shadow, who is an hiding
place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest: Isa. 32.2.

WE should stand in awe of GOD, and (...) by Neglecting, Corrupting, or
Profaning GOD's Worship and Ordinances.

THE Second Commandment strictly forbids (...) Neglect and Contempt of GOD's
Worship; and (...) the Corrupting it by the mixture of humane (...). And here
GOD declares himself to (...) Jealous GOD, visiting the iniquities of the
(...) upon the Children. -- GOD's Covenant People are joined to Him in the bond
of an holy Covenant and he Expresses his Indignation against all false
Worship, as against spiritual Whoredom, being the Violation of this Covenant.
Ezekiel. 16.26. -- And have increased thy whoredoms, to provoke me to anger. We
should then when under GOD's afflictive Hand, stand in awe of Him, and take
heed we do not use or approve any Religious Worship not Instituted by GOD
Himself: That we use not any Visible Signs, as Means of Worship which GOD has
not appointed, lest GOD pour out his anger and his fury upon us, as He
threatened, Jer. 7.20. Therefore thus says the Lord GOD, Behold, mine anger and
my fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon man and upon beast, and upon
the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shall burn,
and shall not be quenched. And then let us take heed we do not neglect any of
His Ordinances and Institutions: But look to it that we be in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the LORD blameless. Let us Pray to GOD daily in
the Name of CHRIST, Read and Meditate on his Word, and carefully improve the
Opportunities we have for Public Worship. When GOD gives such, Let us not make
light of them, as they who went one to his Farm, and another to his
Merchandise, Matt. 22.5. Lastly, let us manifest a high esteem for the Seals of
the New Testament. If there be any that have not been Baptized, let them obey
that Word, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in (...) name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins, -- (...) 2.38. If any neglect to seek
Baptism for their (...), Let them awfully consider of his anger (...) Moses,
for not Circumcising his Child, Exodus (...) 25. -- The Lord met him, and sought
to kill (...). Or if there are any who live in the neglect (...) Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, who do not (...) and show forth the Lord's Death at his
(...), as GOD's Word requires. Let them be Exhorted to prepare for, and come up
to that Ordinance, Being moved with fear; for you may bring GOD's Judgments
upon you by living in the neglect of this duty, as well as by attending it
Unworthily.

Again, LET us stand in awe, and take heed we do not offend the glorious GOD,
by a profane irreverent use of his Name, or any of his holy Ordinances; for GOD
assure^^^^^, He will not hold such guiltless, Thus when (...) and Abihu were
slain by fire. GOD said, Lev. 10.3. -- This is it which the LORD spoke, saying,
I will be sanctified by them that come nigh me, and before all the people I
will be glorified. If we would not have GOD to be a consuming fire to us, We
must glorify Him in the Manner of our Attending on holy Ordinances. Heb.
12.28, 29. -- Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with
reverence and godly fear. For our God is a consuming fire. If we allow our
selves to come into GOD's presence without a due sense of the Majesty and Glory
of GOD, and of our own meanness and vileness; without a due solemnity of
Spirit, in a heedless customary manner; we provoke GOD to Sanctify himself upon
us by breaking out against us in terrible Judgments. 1 Cor. 11.29, 30. For he
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks or Judgment.
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. For this cause many are
weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.

3. WE should stand in awe, and not Sin, by Profaning the Lord's Day.

THE Keeping of a Weekly Sabbath, or Day of holy Rest to the LORD is of Divine
and Perpetual Obligation, as the Fourth Commandment declares. The First Day of
the Week since CHRIST's Resurrection on that Day, is the Sabbath; as appears by
the Practice of the Apostles who were divinely inspired, with respect to those
Matters which were of general concern to the Church: Act. 20.7. And upon the
first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break bread, 'Paul
preached unto them --. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. -- Upon the first day of the week, let
every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him --. And this is
agreably called, The Lord's Day, Rev. 1.10. Now GOD requires his People, to
whom He gives his Sabbath as a Sign, to Sanctify it by Resting from all
Unnecessary Worldly Business, and from Recreations lawful at other times, And
then by spending the whole time, unless when works of Necessity or Mercy take
us off, in the Secret, Private and Public Worship of GOD. It is our Privilege
that we have the Sabbath, and very strong are our Obligations to Remember, and
keep it Holy: unless we do it, Religion will languish, and GOD will be provoked
to bring terrible Judgments upon us. Jer. 17.21, 24, 27. Thus says the LORD,
Take heed to your selves, and bear no burden on the Sabbath Day, nor bring it
in by the gates of Jerusalem. And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently
hearken unto me, says the Lord, to bring in no burden through the gates of
this City on the Sabbath Day, but hallow the Sabbath Day, to do no work
therein. But if ye will not hearken unto me, to hallow the Sabbath Day, and not
to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the SabbathDay:
then will I kindle a Fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces
of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched. Let us then take care and Sanctify
the Lord's Day. Blessed be GOD the strict observation of the Sabbath has been no
small part of the glory of NEW ENGLAND, and of BOSTON: O let us take heed and
beware of every thing that would stain this glory! Let us therefore remember
the Sabbath, and bear it in mind, especially when it draws nigh, that we may be
disintangled from all Worldly Cares, and ready to enter into this holy Rest.

In the Scriptural Account of the Creation, the Darkness is reckoned before the
Light of the Natural Day. And the Evening and the Morning were the Second Day,
Genesis 1.8. Agreeable to this the Jewish Sabhath was from Evening to Evening, Lev.
23.32. And Nehemiah commanded the Gates to be shut when it began to be dark
before the Sabbath, Neh. 13.19. which by reason of the Mountains round about
and near Jerusalem, seems to have been about Sunsetting at furthest. The
Christian Sabbath is the first Day of the Week. And it must begin as other
Days. As to the exact Time of CHRIST's Resurrection, it is not set forth in
Scripture.

LET us then dispatch our Worldly Business toward the Evening, before the
Sabbath Day. Such as are in Trade, should take Care that their Shops be shut
seasonably. Such as have Meat or any other things to buy, should take Care to
do it before Night. Or whatever Secular Business is to be done, we ought to
finish it so that we may not be cumber'd about it, when we should be keeping an
holy Rest to the Lord. On the Lord's Day Morning, we should rise early, if our
bodily Health will allow it, and take Care that we and our Households separate a
whole Day for the Service of GOD; and that we do not through Covetousness allow
them in any unnecessary worldly Labor. There must be no Burden born on the
Sabbath, No! not so much as to setch or carry any wearing Apparel: yea on this
Day the Beasts must Rest from Labor (...) Thou shall not do any Work, thou nor
thy Cattle partly to teach us to exercise Mercy toward the brute Creatures,
partly because the use of Cattle must have drawn along with it the Attendance
or Employment of Men. The Rest of Man and Beast must not be interrupted without
weighty Cause. We must look to it that it be a Work of Necessity or Mercy, or
else we may not employ Men about it.

Again, As we must take Care that our Children and Servants be not Idle at
home; so that they attend the Public Worship. GOD requires that we and ours
appear before him to do him Homage on this Day, and we must take Care to go up
to the House of the Lord; and we must not neglect the Assembling our selves
together on this Day: We must see to it that our Seat be not Empty; and that
our Children and Servants do not absent themselves; unless when Sickness, the
necessary Occasions of the Family, etc. require it. And though it be true, that
the Sabbath is but one Day in the Week: yet there is Prudence to be used on the
Evening after the Sabbath Day, that we do not lose what we have wrought or got
on the Lord's Day, by going Abroad into vain Company, by visits of mere
Ceremony, etc. but rather Employ the Time in Catechizing our Children and
Servants, etc.

LET us then be Exhorted to Keep the Sabbath holy. Let us turn away our foot
from the Sabbath, from doing our Pleasure on GOD's holy Day. Let us call the
Sabbath our delight, the holy of the Lord honorable, and honor him, not doing
our own ways, nor finding our own pleasures, nor speaking our own words. And
let us be awakened to great Diligence and Care herein from the Warnings GOD
has given us, and by the shakes of his Rod over us. GOD lately Visited us with
a terrible Storm on the Evening before the Sabbath Daylight; And (...) with an
amazing Shock of an Earthquake, on the Evening after it. O let it not be said
that GOD spoke once, yea twice, and yet we regarded it not!

4. WE should stand in aw, and not Sin by the Neglect of Family 'Duties.

IT is our Duty to resolve with Joshua, As for me and my House, we will serve
the Lord, Josh. 24.15. And with David, Psa. 101.2. I will walk within my House
with a perfect Heart., We must walk as in the fight of GOD, and approve our
Hearts to him by a conscientious discharge of Family Duties, particularly when
his Judgments have an especial threatening Aspect on our Houses. We should be
moved with an holy Fear to put all Iniquity far from our Tabernacles, and to
serve GOD in them. For GOD threatens the Wicked, Job 27, 28, 29. The heaven
shall reveal his iniquity: and the earth shall rise up against him. The
increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow away in the day of
his wrath. This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage
appointed unto him by God.

Now then, that GOD has caused our Houses to shake under us, and threatened to
bury us in the Ruins of them; let us be excited to Worship GOD constantly in
and with our Families. Let us offer to him the Morning and Evening Sacrifice of
Prayer. For surely, If it be a Duty, to Pray always in every thing, at all
times, and with all Prayer, we cannot neglect Family Prayer without great Sin.
Let us not then practically deny that GOD who sets the Solitary in Families, by
refusing this part of Social Worship, for which we have daily Occasion as well
as Opportunity. Let us with David, Bless our Household. Let us thus Fear God
with all our House, and express our religious Fear by Praying always, as
Cornelius did Acts 10.2. Lest we provoke GOD to Consume us in his Wrath
according to that dreadful Imprecation, Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy Fury upon the
Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families that call not upon thy Name.
If the word Family be here taken in a large sense, it includes particular
Households. O let us join together in asking GOD's Protection and Blessing on
our Houses, in seeking the Pardon of our Family Sins, and in Praising GOD for
Family Mercies, lest we provoke GOD to consume us together. Again, Let us Read
the holy Scriptures in and with our Houses, and teach our Children and Servants
the good knowledge of the Lord. Let us as 'twas said of Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
Command our Children and Household after us, -- that they may keep the way of
the Lord. Let us set them Examples of Sobriety, Righteousness and Godliness:
and then use our Authority to Restrain them from all Sin. GOD threatened Eli,
that he would judge his House, i.e. Condemn, Punish it -- for the iniquity he
knew, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not, etc. 1 Samuel 3.13. O let us then take heed we do not connive at Sin in our Children or
Servants; but do our utmost by seasonable Admonitions and Corrections when
needed, to Reclaim them, left GOD be provoked to enter into Judgment with us,
and Punish us for the Sins of our Houses. Let us bring up our Children in the
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. And let us do our Duty toward our Servants
also, even the meanest of them, considering we have a Master in Heaven, and
there is no respect of persons with him. Job 31.13, 15. If I did despise the
cause of my manservant, or of my maid servant, when they contended with me:
What then shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I
answer him?

BEFORE I dismiss this Head, I would say, We must stand in aw, and not Sin by
being Unjust in our Family Business, or by taking any indirect Courses to
Provide for our Families. We must take heed there be no Fraud, Unrighteousness
or Oppression in our Trading; the Eighth Commandment requires Justice in
Commerce between Man and Man, our rendering to every one his due; and forbids
"whatever may unjustly hinder our own or our Neighbor's Wealth and outward
Estate." There is a flying Roll which is called the Curse, and GOD says, it is
for every one that Steals, and threatens to bring it into the House of the
Thief, and that it shall consume it, Zech. 5.2 -- 4.

5. WE must stand in aw, and not Sin by Quarrelling and Contending one with
another. When there is reason to say, What means the heat of GOD's Anger? Then
GOD's People should avoid all unchristian Heats, Heart-burnings and Animosities
one against another, and endeavor to unite as one Man, in seeking to turn away
GOD's Anger from them. It Is dreadful indeed for Men to be casting fire Brands,
Arrows and Death. For them to seek in their Wrath, in any sort to hurt and
wound their Neighbor, either by bitter Words, or injurious Actions. Instead of
this, we should do our utmost to extinguish the Fire of Contention; that we may
lift up pure hands to GOD without Wrath in servent Supplications, and unite
hearts and hands in the great Work of Reformation. Let us then obey that word,
Ephesians. 4.31, 32. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and clamor, and evil-speaking be
put away from you, with all malice. And be ye kind one to another, tender
hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

6. WE should stand in aw, and avoid the Sins of Drunkenness and Uncleanness.

I put these together, and indeed they often go together, the former being an
especial Provocation to the latter, and therefore forbidden in the seventh
Commandment. Prove. 23.31, 32. Look not thou upon the wine when it is red --. At
the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. Thine Eyes shall
behold strange women. Now that GOD has fulfilled that word, Isa. 24.20. The
Earth shall reel to and fro like a Drunkard; let us avoid this Sin, and obey
that word, Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine -- but be filled with the
Spirited. Let us take the Warning, and not inflame our selves with strong
Drink: Let us not indulge this Sin in our selves, or connive at it in others;
but avoid all Temptations to it, and be ready in our several Places to bear our
Testimony against it. Let the Civil Authority be entreated to take Care that
Taverns, and other Houses for Retailing strong Drink, do not grow so numerous
as to become a public Scandal and hurt to the Religion, and the Morals of our
People: And then to keep a strict watch over them, that good Orders may be
maintained in them. Let such as sell Strong Drink, take heed and beware of
being partakers with others in this Sin, by suffering Persons to drink to
Excess. O do not make a gain of the Sins of others, lest you be drowned with
them in Perdition. In a word, Let the Inhabitants of the Town be Exhorted to
avoid all needless frequenting of Taverns! O do not accustom yourselves to go
to such Places when you have no Call to it! O do not spend your precious Time,
and your Estates there! O do not tarry long at the Wine, to the dishonor of
GOD and the hurt of the Religion and good Order of your Families; lest GOD be
provoked to make your Houses desolate.

Again, LET us stand in aw and not Sin by burning with Unclean Lusts, and
gratifying our carnal Inclinations.

SODOM was infamous for the Sins of Uncleanness, and the Lord rained upon them
Fire and Brimstone from the Lord out of Heaven, Genesis 19.24. Yea they suffered
the Vengeance of eternal Fire, Jude ver. ^. As Sodom and Gomorrah giving
themselves over to Fornication, etc. are set forth for an Example, suffering
the Vengeance of eternal Fire. O let us then fly all degrees and kinds of
Uncleanness, all Temptations and Provocations thereunto! For Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13.4.

7. WE should stand in aw, and fly the Sin of Pride.

EVERY one that is proud in Heart, is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 16.5.
Pride, whereby Men entertain too high tho'ts of themselves, and seek to exalt
themselves above their Fellow Creatures, yea above GOD himself, is a very
provoking Sin, which GOD threatens with terrible Judgments, Isa. 3.5. -- The
Child shall behave himself proudly against the Ancient. -- ver.8. Jerusalem is
ruined, and Judah is fallen. ver. 16. Moreover, the Lord says, Because the
daughters of Zion are haughty. ver. 17. Therefore the Lord will smite --. Let
us then bring every proud Imagination into subjection to the Will of GOD. Now
that GOD threatens to level us with the ground, yea to lay us under it, let us
lie low in deep Abasement before him. 1 Pet. 5.6. Humble yourselves under the
mighty hand of God. Has not this Sin been declared by many, in their high
Looks and haughty Carriage, in their ambitious pursuits of the great things of
this World, and the Excess of their Apparel and the like, whereby they have
sought to make a greater Appearance than their Estates would allow? The Lord
subdue this Lust, which is set first where the Sins of Sodom are named, Ezekiel.
10.49. GOD now speaks aloud, and says to us, Romans 11.20. Be not high-minded,
but seer.

THUS I have in weakness and fear, mentioned some of those Sins from which an
holy Aw of GOD, should deter us.

APPLICATION.
USE, I. LET us all be Exhorted to stand in aw of GOD, and not Sin against Him.
To sear GOD, and keep his Commandments.

LET us now fear before the Lord, and say as Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembles
for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. There Is the Voice of GOD
crying to us in the inflicted and threatened Judgment. Amos 3.6. Shall a trumpet
be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid? shall there be evil in the
city, and the Lord has not done it? No surely, this terrible Judgment is the
Work of GOD, and he speaks aloud to us by it, as Joh. 5.24. Sin no more, lest a
worse thing come unto thee. GOD seems to say to us in his Providence, I have
given you fair Warning, do not further provoke me. Or, as Hos. 11.8. How shall
I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make
thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me,
my repentings are kindled together. Let us then relent under GOD's Hand, and by
an hearty Repentance turn unto him. Turn ye, turn ye why will you die, O house
of Israel. Let us fear the Lord and his Goodness; and not after our hardness
and impenitent Heart, treasure up to our selves wrath against the day of wrath,
by abusing the Riches of it. O that we could each of us, with an heart broken
for Sin, fly to JESUS CHRIST, who saves his People from their Sins! O that we
could as a People, Repent, and turn from our evil ways unto the Lord, our
Covenant GOD! Then we might Hope that GOD would turn from the fierceness of his
Anger: But if after all that is come upon us, and GOD has given us such
Deliverance as this, we remain incorrigible, and again break his Commandments,
will he not be angry with us till he has consumed us, so that there shall be
no remnant, nor (...). Ezra 9.13, 14.


In the Prosane, the Covetous, the Unjust and Unclean be so still Here is some
Enlargement.
. (...) our Case be like that of Jeruzalem, which is compared to a boiling Pot,
whose Scum went not out of it, Ezekiel. 24. i. e. The Filthiness of their
abominable Vices was not cast out, though GOD's fiery Indignation burnt against
them. I say, If this be our Case, we shall have Reason to fear the fulfillment
of that awful Threatening upon us, ver. 13. Because I have purged thee, and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I
have caused my fury to rest upon thee. Let the Terrors of the last Night then
convince us of the Necessity of Reformation, and quicken us to fly our
provoking Sins, as we would hope to escape the amazing Judgments of GOD, yea
the Wrath to come. And here though I have already mentioned several Sins which an
holy Aw of GOD should excite us to forsake, and put far away from us; yet I
would further say; Let this terrible Judgment of GOD teach us the great Evil
and folly of a covetous worldly Spirit, which alas dreadfully prevails in this
Land. Our Lord and Judge says to us this Day, Take heed and beware of
Covetousness. O let us not then immoderately Crave, and with greediness pursue
this world's Goods: Let us not Trust in uncertain Riches, when GOD has caused
the Earth to shake and tremble under us. O do not now pant after the Dust of
the Earth? Do not practically say, Your Houses are for ever, when the
Foundation on which they stand is moved! Lest you, your Houses and Estates
perish together in the Day of GOD's Indignation.

Now is it not one sign of the prevailing of this Evil that the weekly Lecture
in this populous Town, is often so poorly attended? I cannot but fear, My
Brethren and Nei'bours, that this Omission is provoking to GOD. Certainly we
might have a full Aulitory, and yet give large Allowances for the urgent
Affairs of the Town, which require present Dispatch. Let us not then be so
careful and cumbred about many things as to neglect this precious Opportunity.
Let us in this particular, Seek first the Kingdom of GOD, and other things
shall be added. I am satisfied this would not hinder but promote the Success of
our Secular Business, through GOD's Blessing. And O that we might be quickened in
every Instance of Piety toward GOD, and Charity toward our Neighbor, to lay
up our Treasures in Heaven, and to seek that Kingdom which cannot be moved!

Again, Is not profane Swearing and Cursing become dreadfully Common with some
sorts of People? Now this is an heaven-daring and heinous Iniquity, which GOD
is wont severely to Punish. Jer. 23.10. Because of swearing the Land mourns
--. Zech. 5.1. -- Behold, a flying Roll. -- ver. 3. Every one that swears
shall be cut off on that side. O let not any for the Time to come, dare thus to
set their Mouths against Heaven; but let the dread of GOD fall upon you; Fear
an Oath, and do not take GOD's sacred Name into your Mouths upon every light
and trivial Occasion; do not Call him to Witness to a lie, lest he appear as a
swift Witness against you, and stop your Breath in a moment. Don't imprecate
Curses on your selves or others, lest the Curse of GOD fall upon you, and you
be suddenly sent down to the Place of Torments, where is wailing and gnashing
of Teeth for ever.

Again, ARE there not such as set light by Father and Mother; who Refuse to
give that Honor which is due to their Parents, their Civil Rulers, Pastors and
the like? If there be any such, be warned to fly this heinous Sin. Honor thy
Father and thy Mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord
thy God gives thee. Remember the Fate of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, that with
others of the Children of Israel, gathered themselves together against Moses
and against Aaron, ( Numb. 16.) and fly this Sin.

Again, ARE there not Evil Customs prevailing among us, in which we are
conformed to the present Age? Though GOD forbids this, Romans 12.2. Be not
conformed to this world. Let us search them out, and Reform them, lest we be
condemned with the World another Day.

BEFORE I dismiss this USE, I would ask leave to Address several sorts of
Persons particularly: I take liberty to insert these particulars, though they
were not delivered at that time


(1.) LET such as are yet in their Sins, be convinced of their extreme hazard;
and being moved with Fear, fly to CHRIST for Refuge.

WE read of a great Earthquake at Midnight, while Paul and Silas Prayed --,
after which the Jailor came trembling -- and said, Sirs, What must I do to be
saved? Acts 16.25, 26, -- 29, 30. An inquiry very needful for those to make who
are yet under the Guilt and Dominion of Sin, now that GOD reveals his Wrath in
this amazing Judgment. Knowing the Terrors of the Lord, we pray you in Christ's
stead, be ye reconciled to GOD. O do not go on obstinately in your Sins, lest
GOD send you down to the bottomless Pit (...) O make haste, make haste to
CHRIST! Lay hold of GOD's strength, and make Peace with him. Do not rest secure
in a State of Enmity against this GOD who can Arm any of his Creatures against
you for your Destruction, and after he has killed, (...) power to cast into
Hell, Luke 12.5. Now make Supplication to your Judge, and cry for Mercy while
He is seated on a Throne of Grace, and says, Come unto me -- Look unto me, and
be ye-saved --. And if there be any awakned, as I hope there are not a sew, and
bro't to cry out, What must we do to be saved? The Answer given to the Jailor
is ready, ver. 31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and then shall be saved.
Go out to him, trust in him, and submit to him in all his Offices, and your
Souls shall live. Here Is a City of Refuge, make haste to it, lest you be
destroyed. Who can tell, but GOD designs to make use of this surprising and
extraordinary Providence to prepare you to receive and obey the Calls of his
Word? O don't neglect this remarkable Day of Grace! You are never like to enjoy
such another. To Day then while it is called to day, Hear GOD's Voice, and
harden not your Hearts. Now! Now! Work out your Salvation with fear and
trembling, crying to GOD to work in you to will and to do. If you now reject
the Offers of the Gospel, there will be great reason to fear that this Judgment
will prove a forerunner of unavoidable Destruction. And woe to you if after all,
you Perish because you will not come to CHRIST that you may have life. It will
be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment than for you.
The Lord speak to your hearts, and make you willing in the Day of his Power!

(2.) LET this rouse up GOD's Children, and awaken them out of their sleepy
Frames.

THE Wise Virgins may slumber and sleep, Matthew. 25.5. But what a Cry is now
heard to awaken you? Behold, The Lord arises to shake terribly the Earth.
Arise then, and trim your Lamps; Prepare to meet the Lord in the way of his
Judgments. Know it, Your Sins may help to pull down Judgments upon GOD's
People. Aaron's and David's did so. Pray therefore, as Psalm. 143.2. Enter not
into Judgment with thy Servant --. Live in the continual Exercise of Faith and
Repentance, and Cry to GOD to spare his People. Stand in the Gap, and make
Intercession to the Lord of hosts for your People. You may do much to turn away
wrath, while you Exercise a strong Faith in the Redeemer, and plead his Merits
before the Lord. GOD said to Moies, Let me (...) that my wrath may wax hot
against them, Exodus 32.10. But then you must Watch as well as Pray, and use
your best Endeavors to promote the necessary Work of Reformation, according to
the Place you are in, and in the faithful Improvement of the Advantages GOD
puts into your Hands. You must have no fellowship with the unfruitful Works of
darkness; but rather reprove them. O look to GOD then for fresh Influences of
his Spirit, and stir up the Grace of GOD in you. Be zealous and active in GOD's
Service, and Exemplary in all holy Conversation. Such Persons are under GOD,
the Strength and Safety of a People. Had there been ten Righteous in Sodom, GOD
would have spared it, Gen: 18.32. I hope there are many hundreds in in this
Land. The Lord increase their Number, and pour out the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication more abundantly upon them.

(3.) LET our Young People Fear the Lord, and flee youthful Lusts.

HERE is a loud Call to you, to Remember your Creator in the days of your
Youth; for you lie as much exposed to this threatened Judgment as the Aged, and
can no more escape it. O turn at GOD's Reproos then, lest he laugh at your
Galamity, and mock when your fear comes, when your fear comes as desolation
-- Prove. 1.26, 27. You are apt to presume of many days; but now GOD teaches
you that sudden 'Destruction may come upon you. Do you then hear and fear and
turn to the Lord. Seek CHRIST early; Receive him without delay, That you may
have power to become the Sons of GOD, Joh. 1.12. Then you may go to GOD as to
your reconciled Father when in distress. But if you now despise the Son of GOD,
and neglect his great Salvation, there will be dreadful Reason to Fear, that
GOD will utterly forsake you in the evil Day. Be entreated therefore, O young
People, to consider of your ways, and turn your feet to GOD's Testimonies. GOD
in his Word and by his Providence speaks to you as, Eccl. 11.9. Rejoice, O
young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth,
and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know
thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment. It is at
your utmost Peril if you go on in the ways of Sin, after such loud Calls and
fair Warnings. Now then, forsake the foolish and live; hearken to the Lord,
that you may dwell safely, and be quiet from fear of Evil, Prove. 1.33.

IN a word, LET us all be quickened to make ready for the Coming of our Lord.

WE learn from this surprising Providence that we know not how suddenly our
Lord may come to us by Death, and call us to appear before Him. Let us not then
be at rest till we can in some measure say with the Apostle Paul, Acts 21.13. I
am ready to die. And who can tell how near the glorious Appearing of the SON OF
GOD may be? Earthquakes are named among the Signs of our Lord's Coming, Matthew.
24.7.29, 30. Great Events have been attended with them; as our Savior's
Crucifixion, Matthew. 27.51, 54. Upon which they said, Truly this was the Son of
God. His Resurrection, Matthew. 28.2. And are we not directed to expect terrible
Convulsions in Nature before our Lord's second Coming, 2 Pet. 3.10, 12. And
that it will be very sudden and surprising to a secure World. Matthew. 24.36, --
39. O let us then stand with our Loins girt, and Lamps burning, as they that
wait for the Coming of the Lord! Let us be diligent that we may be found of our
Judge in Peace, without spot and blameless.

AND now, LET us Cry to GOD to pour out his Spirit upon us, that we may Obey
his Voice, and make an holy Improvement of this awful Dispensation.

THE most extraordinary Means will be ineffectual without GOD's Blessing
communicated by his Spirit. And surely, It is time to seek the Lord, till he
come and rain Righteousness upon you, Hos. 10.12. We are undone without this;
for we shall grow worse and worse under the most awakening Judgments, till we
are ripe for Ruin. Let us then thirst after this comprehensive Blessing, and
ask it of our Heavenly Father, who is ready to bestow it upon diligent Seekers,
Luke 11.13. And let us offer up our Requests to GOD in the Name of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, who has received the Promise of the Holy Ghost. We read, Acts
4.31. When they had prayed the Place was shaken where they were assembled
together: and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. O that this shaking we
have felt might be followed with a plentiful Effusion of the Spirit, to
convince us of our many heinous Transgressions, to Convert and Reform us! This
would take away the ground of the Controversy, and give us good reason to
expect all needed Salvation from the light of GOD's Countenance. Ezekiel. 39.29.
Neither will I hide my face any more from them: for I have poured out my spirit
upon the House of Israel, says the Lord God.

USE, II. LET us bless GOD who has not bro't upon us the Destruction we
feared, but delivered us from going down to the Pit.

THIS amazing Judgment has in a great measure destroyed other populous Towns.
They have sunk under the weight of GOD's Anger, and been swallowed up. When as
we are shaken indeed and terrified; but without any great Damage. Let our
Hearts then be deeply affected with this wonderful Deliverance, and our Mouths
filled with the high Praises of the great GOD our Savior. But let us not grow
secure, as if the bitterness of Death was wholly past; for GOD can easily cause
the Judgment to rise up again, and as an overslowing Scourge that shall bear
down all before it, and make the Land desolate. O let not our Ingratitude under
so distinguishing a Mercy, provoke Him; but let us render to the Lord according
to his Benefits.

USE, III. LET such as stand in Aw of GOD, Encourage themselves in him, and
hope in his Mercy. Psalm. 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear
him, in those that hope in his mercy. You that dread GOD's displeasure, and fly
from Sin as the worst of Evils, should fear nothing with amazement; but should
have your hearts fixed trusting in the Lord, Isa. 41.10. Fear thou not, for I
am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea I
will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness. GOD is your Father; and your Redeemer is mighty, having all
Power in Heaven and Earth. Do you therefore receive and obey that Command, Joh.
14.1. Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me.
Trust and Rejoice in CHRIST JESUS, who saves to the uttermost. Depend on his
watchful powerful Providence, who is the Head over all things to the Church.
And then, Let your Hearts be in tune, to sing the 46th Psalm. God is our refuge
and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though
the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the
sea. For GOD will help you, and that right early. You that fear the Lord should
Trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon your God, Isa. 50.10. Even in your
darkest Hours; for he is a present help in Trouble. Thus you may Live in holy
Security and Peace, without being tormented with anxious Cares and Fears, and
may say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 4.8. I will both lay me down in peace, and
sleep: for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety.

FINIS.

