Mr. Sewall's Two SERMONS From JER. XVIII. 7, 8.

Occasioned by the EARTHQUAKE.

Repentance The sure Way to Escape Destruction. Two SERMONS On JRR. 18.7, 8.
Preached December 21st. on a Public Fast occasioned by the Earthquake the
Night after the Lord's Day October. 29th. And on the Lord's Day December 24th.
1727.

By Joseph Sewall, M.A. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

Published with some Enlargement.

Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto them, As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure
in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live:
turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel.

BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN, at the Corner Shop over against the Brick
Meeting House in Cornhill. 1727

GOD will not Destroy a Penitent People.
JER. XVIII. 7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will repent of
the Evil that I thought to do unto them.


IN this Chapter, 1. We have a Declaration of God's Sovereign Power to deal
with a People as He pleases, under the Parable or Similitude of a Potter and
his Clay, ver. 1, -- 6. If the Potter has power over his yellow Clay to
fashion it as he will; surely that God, who has given being to us and all
Creatures, may dispose of us as seems good in His sight, Romans 9. 20, 1. Nay
but O man, who art thou that reply against God? shall the thing formed say
to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power
over the clay --? 2. God shows that in his Dealings with Nations, He acts as a
righteous Judge; yea as a God gracious and merciful, ver. 7, -- 10. At what
instant -- God speaks against a People when He threatens to bring desolating
Judgments upon them, and it is implied that this is for their Sins, whereby they
transgress His holy Laws: This is the ground of the Controversy.
Notwithstanding, we are here assured that though a sinful People give God cause
to come out against them, so that if He should mark iniquity they could not
stand; yet He is not wont to deal with them in a way of rigorous Justice; but
first threatens and warns, before He comes out against them to destroy them:
Yea, that if they take the Warning, and turn from the Evil of their Sins unto
unto Him; God will also repent of the Evil of Punishment He threatened to bring
upon them, and stay His Hind. Not as if God changed His Mind, or altered His
Decree. No! He is the Almighty, All-wise, and Unchangeable God. I am the Lord,
I change not -- Mal. 3.6. God is of one mind, and who can turn Him? God can do
nothing but what is worthy of His infinite Perfections, and therefore He cannot
Repent in a strict and proper sense, 1 Samuel 15.29. The Strength of Israel will
not Repent -- He is not a Man that He should Repent. However, God is said to
Repent, speaking after the manner of Men, when He changes His way, and the
Course of His Providence toward a Person or People, Genesis 6.6. Jon 3.10.
Agreeably, the Expression here used intends that God would not execute the
Judgments denounced, nor bring the threatened Evil upon them; but e c. would
return unto them in a way of Grace and Favor. On the other hand, God shows
that His Promises of prospering and establishing a People are Conditional, ver.
9, 10. If it do Evil, I will repent of the good -- God will stop the Course of
His Mercies, and walk contrary to them. Now the due Observance of these Rules
would help us to understand the Justice, Truth and Equity of God's Providential
Dispensations toward His ancient People, and others. 3. We have the
Improvement of the foregoing Discourse with an especial Application to God's
Covenant People the Jews, ver. 11, -- 17. In which the Prop et is commanded to
declare to the Men of Judah, that God was framing Evil against them; and then
to call them to Repentance and Amendment of life, ver. 11. But their obstinacy
in siuning is foretold, and they are upbraided with their folly in forsaking
their Covenant God, ver. 13, -- 15.4. We have an account of the People's
desperate resolution to plot mischievous Devices against Jeremiah, because he
faithfully delivered God's Message to them, ver. 18. ad sin. And then an
Imprecation of Judgment, in which the Prophet was not acted by an evil spirit
of personal Revenge: He desired not the woeful Day; but by the Spirit of
Prophecy.

BUT to return to the Text, from which, and as related to the Context, I shall
observe these Doctrines.

1. GOD is wont to Threaton a People, and give them Warning before He brings
Destroying Judgments upon them.

II. IF they Repent of the Evil of their Sins, and turn from them to the Lord;
God will also Repent, and not bring the threatened Evil of Punishment upon them.

III. BUT if a People when thus Threatened go on obstinately in their Sins, they
may expect that God will bring His Destroying Judgments upon them till they are
made Desolate.

DOCT. I. GOD is wont to Threaten a People, and give them Warning before He
brings Destroying Judgments upon them.
AT what instant I speak, to pluck up -- God utters His Voice in dreadful
Threatenings before He gives the fatal blow. He causes the Woe-Trumpets to
sound before He pours out the Vials of His Wrath. Thus God threatened the
Sinners of the Old World, and yet spared them One Hundred and Twenty Years
before He brought the Flood upon them to destroy them, Genesis 6.3, -- 7 In which
time Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness, and the building the Ark a sign. Yea
the great Prophet and Teacher, our LORD JESUS CHRIST, is said to Preach to
those Sinners, whose Spirits are now in Prison, 1 Pet. 3 19, 20 By which also
he went and preached unto the spirits in prison: Which sometime were
disobedient, when once the long suffering of God (...) in the days of Noah,
while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is eight souls were saved by
water, In or by which -- i. e. His God Head, which is an eternal Spirit. Noah
was but an Instrument in His Hand. God early denounced dreadful Threatenings
against the Israelites upon Condition of their Revolt and Apostasy, Lev 26.14.
-- 34. -- If ye shall despise my statutes -- I will set my face against you,
and ye shall be slain before your enemies. ver. 21. And if ye work contrary to
me -- I will bring seven times more plagues upon you -- your Land shall be
desolate etc. And thus God sent the Prophet Jonah to the Ninevites, though they
were not his peculiar Covenant People, with that Message, Chap 3.4. -- Yet
forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown Notwithstanding which, God had
spating Mercy in reserve for them. Now, God does thus threaten, and speak
against a People,

1. IN and by His Word. Herein God's Wrath is revealed from Heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of Men. God threatens His degenerate People by
His Word in the mouths of His Ministers, Hos. 6.5. I have hewed them by the
prophets, I have slain them by the words of my mouth. Though Men were the
Instruments in Writing, or Pronouncing these Threatenings; yet they wrote and
spoke as moved and inspired by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. And therefore this
Word is to be received not as the Word of Men; but as indeed it is the Word of
God. Thus faith the Lord. And this Word of God abides in full force and virtue
throughout all Generations, 1 Pet. 1.24, 5. All flesh is as grass -- But the
word of the Lord endures for ever. It not only concerns those to whom it was
nextly directed; but all to whom it comes, and they may assure themselves that
if their Case be the same it will take place on them. Romans 15.4. Whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were written for our Learning. And thus the
Punishments recorded in Scripture, are said to be our Examples, -- 1 Cor. 10.6.
In them we do as in a figure behold the truth and faithfulness of God in
fulfilling His Word. Sinners must therefore realize it that the Threatenings of
God's Word are denounced against them as truly as if their Names were
mentioned. Thou art the Man. And if they continue impenitent they shall find it
so in the Day of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, when as many
as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law, i. e. the written Word.
Romans 2.12. All must hear what the Spirit faith to the Churches, Rev. 2.7.

2. GOD speaks against a People by His Providential Dispensations. When
together with the Threatenings of His Word, He stretches out His Hand to smire
them. There Is a Voice in the Rod, and by it God says, Turn at my Reproof, Mic.
6.9. The Lord's Voice cries unto the City -- hear ye the Rod -- When God in
His Providence threatens to bring desolating Judgments on a backsilding People,
and then stays His Hand; or when He brings lighter Chastisements, and in
Judgment remembers Mercy, so that they are not concerned; He then gives a
People warning, and says, Prepare to meet thy God --. Or as Lev. 26.23, 4. And
if ye will not be reformed by these things, but will walk contrary unto me:
then will I also work contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times
for your sins. By such jud cial Dispensations, God calls to a People to strand
in Awe of Him; to Repent and turn to Him, when His Wrath is kindled but a
little, and begins to burn. The Voice of Christ, to whom all Judgment is
committed, is that, Joh. 5.14. Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto you.
Don't go on to provoke me, lest I bring utter ruin upon you.

USE. I. LEARN from what has been said, The Mercy, Patience and Forbearance of
God. Surely. He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men, Lam
3.33. Judgment is his strange Work. Isa. 28.21. And he does not usually proceed
to it, till he has tried other means, and given his People fair Warning. Neh.
9.17. Thou art a God ready to Pardon, Gracious and Merciful, slow to Anger. --
and for sookest them not. God endures with much long suffering, even the
Vessels of Wrath -- Romans 9.22. He is the God of Patience. Romans 15.5. And when
he proclaims His Name, one Letter in it is that, Long suffering, Exodus 34.6,
Sometimes when His Hand has been lifted up ready to give the deadly Blow, His
Bowels of Compassion have moved Him to stay His Hand, Hos. 11, 8, 9. How shall
I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee
as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me -- I
will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy
Ephraim; for I am God, and not man, -- O let us then give God the Glory of
these Divine and amiable Perfections! Let not us despise the Riches of His
Goodness and Forbearance and Long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of
God leads to Repentance. Let us not after our hardness and impenitent Hearts
treasure up to our selves Wrath against the Day of Wrath, Romans 2 4, 5. But,

2. LET us take the Warning God gives us, and Turn unto Him. Let not any of us
encourage and harden our selves in Sin because God may have threatened again and
again, and yet has not brought the deserved Destruction. Sinners are very
prone to this pernicious and provoking Evil, Eccl. 8.11. Because sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily; therefore the heart of the sons
of men is fully set in them to do evil. O take heed of this Presumption and
Secu^^^y! It is often a presage of Ruin. Prove. 29.1. He that bring often
reproved, Lardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy. O take the warning then which God gives you in his Word and Providence,
and turn to Him without Delay. Now that God says to us, as Ezekiel. 33.11. Say
unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye
from your evil ways: for why will you die, O house of Israel; Let us relent,
and without delay make our Peace with God through Jesus Christ. Let us as a
People take the Warning; Hear and obey God's Voice in His inflicted and
threatened Judgments. Let us Repent, and put away the Evil of our Doings, that
God may Repent of the Evil, and not bring it upon us. Which leads me to the

II. DOCT. IF a People, when thus Threatened, Repent of the Evil of their Sins,
and turn from them to the Lord; God will also Repent and not bring the
threatened Evil of Punishment upon them.
1. What is implied in a People's Repenting of the Evil of their Sins, and
turning from them to the Lord.

2. IF they Repent. God will also Repent of the Evil which he thought to have
done unto them.

WHAT is implied in a People's Repenting of the Evil of their Sins, and turning
from them to the Lord?

Answ. 1. IT supposes, That they are truly and generally Convinced of the Evil
and Danger of their Sins. Sin is the worst of Evils: the wages of it is Death,
Romans 6.23. But alas! Such is the Power of deceitful Lusts, to blind Men's minds,
that they flatter themselves in their own Eyes. Psalm. 36.2. Agreably there is a
woe denounced against those that call Evil Good, and Good Evil; that put
Darkness for Light -- Isa. 5.20. Wicked Men whose understanding is darkness,
have wrong notions of God, of Sin, etc. For in their Practical Judgments, they
prefer the gratification of their Lusts before the enjoyment of God. The old
Man is Corrupt according to Deceitful Lusts; so that while a Person or People
are under the governing influence of Sin, they do not make a right Judgment
concerning the Nature and pernicious Consequences of this Deadly Evil. But when
God gives them Repentance, he sends his Spirit to Convince them of Sin, making
them to see and know that it is, an evil and bitter thing that they have
forsaken the Lord their God. Such a people, are brought to consider and realize
it, that they have Dishonored God, and Wounded themselves, by their
Iniquities. God says to them. Thou have fallen by thine Iniquities, Hos. 14.1.
Thou have destroyed thyself; and his Word is quick and powerful, carrying Light
and Conviction with it, when set home by his Spirit. So that they are brought
to say, as Job 33.27. I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it
profited me not. Yea, they are convinced that this is the procuring Cause of
the Calamities they suffer, and are brought to determine it must be forsaken,
or it will be their ruin. Before they might be ready to attribute their
Miseries to other Causes; but now God makes them know that their Iniquities
have separated between them and their God, Isai. 59.2. His Voice to them is
that, Jer. 4.18. Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee,
this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine
heart. And they are made sensible that Sin is the accursed thing which
troubles them. Such a Conviction as this is given by the Spirit of God,
commanding the Blessing on the Calls of His Word and Providence, when a People
attend to this great Duty of Repentance. The saving Convictions made on God's
Children are revived; so that they awake out of their sleepy frames, and become
active and vigorous in promoting the necessary Work of Reformation. Others have
good Impressions made upon them, which the Spirit of God fastens and makes
preparatory to saving Conversion. And though there may be many at such a time
that fall short of this; yet even of these there are not a few who are so
convinced in their Consciences of the evil and danger of Sin, that they
outwardly Reform, and do many things Mark 6.20.
. Destruction from God is such a terror to them that they dare not commit those
gross Sins which they before allowed themselves in 2 Pet. 2.20.
, nor omit those Religious Duties they before lived in the neglect of.

2. IT supposes that they inwardly grieve and mourn for their Sins whereby
they have dishonored and provoked God. In true Repentance, Sin which was
before loved and delighted in, is loathed and hated; and inasmuch as it is an
evil present, this hatred is expressed in hearty Sorrow upon the account of it,
2 Cor. 7.10. Godly Sorrow works Repentance. The true Penitent mourns heartily
because he has offended so great and glorious, so good and gracious a God, by
his Iniquities. He looks unto Jesus his Compassionate Savior, considers how
his Iniquities have pierced Him, and kindly relents, yea mourns bitterly.
Agreably it is Prophesied, that when God would pour out the Spirit of Grace
upon the House of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem; They should
look upon him whom they had pierced, and mourn, as one mourns for an only son
--, Zech. 12.10, 12. The Land shall mourn --. And this is what God calls his
backsliding People to, Joel 2.12, 13. Therefore now says the Lord, turn ye
even to me with all your heart, and with weeping, and with mourning. And rent
your heart and not your garment, and turn unto the Lord your God. Agreably,
when a People are bro't to Repentance, there is a general Mourning and Sorrow
upon the account of their Sins; they are affected with grief, and their Souls
are wounded within them under the terrible Apprehension of the evil and danger
of Sin. And though all do no not mourn after a godly sort, because they have
offended God, and vexed. His Holy Spirit; yet there are many who do thus sigh
and cry for all the abominations done in the midst of them, Ezekiel. 9.4. And
others have Sin so imbittered to them, that they cannot take pleasure in it, as
they used to do; but abstain at least from the outward Commission; so grievous
are the pains, and so sore the wounds of their Consciences.

3. WHEN a People are Penitent, they Confess their Sins before the Lord, and
solemnly engage to forsake them. Such a People do not seek to cover and
extenuate their Sins; do not go on to justify themselves, and complain of God,
as if he dealt hardly with them. As they, Ezekiel. 18.25. Ye say, the way of the
Lord is not equal. But they justify God in all the Evils He brings upon them,
and acknowledge that they are punished less than their Iniquities deserve. Thus
they give Glory to God, when they Repent, taking shame and blame to themselves.
Accordingly, this is named as one ingredient of Repentance, Lev. 26.40. If they
shall Confess their Iniquity, and the Iniquity of their Fathers --. And we find
that God's ancient People attended this duty when brought to Repentance, Judge.
10.10. And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, saying, we have sinned
against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Baalim.
And thus the Seed of Israel stood and confessed their Sins, -- Neh. 9.2. When
this good Spirit prevails among a People, they will be ready to confess with
Ezra, Chap. 9.6. O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to them,
my God: for our iniquities are increased over our head. And with Daniel, Chap.
9.5. We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and
have rebelled by departing from thy judgments. ver. 7. O Lord, righteousness
belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as at this day. ver. 8. O
Lord, to us belongs confusion of face: to our kings, to our princes, and to
our fathers, because we have sinned against thee. Their Petitions for Pardon
and Favor will be accompanied with such penitent Confessions: yea, they will
solemnly engage to forsake their Sins whereby they have dishonored and
provoked God. When God is pleading the Quarrel of His Covenant with them, they
will not only confess their Violations of it; but also, as they may be called,
be ready afresh to enter into God's Covenant and Oath, that they will forsake
those Sins which appear to be the Sins of the times wherein they live. Thus
God's People did on a solemn Fast, Neh. 9.38. We make a sure Covenant, and
write it, and our princes, levites, and priests, seal unto it. Chap. 10.29.
They clave to their brethren, their nobles, and entered into a curse, and into
an oath to walk in God's law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and
to observe and do all the commandments of the Lord our God, and his judgments,
and his statutes. And in particular, they engaged to watch against some
Iniquities that had prevailed among them. Agreeable to this, A Venerable Synod
of our own have observed, We seldom read of any Solemn Reformation, but it was
accomplished this way, as the Scripture does abundantly declare and testify
Result of Synods, p. 112.
. I would here ask leave with all humility to express my desires that this Duty
might be again solemnly attended by these Churches. But to return, All I shall
further say under this Head is, that where Repentance is sincere, our
Confession of Sin will be free and ingenuous, flowing from an afflicting sense
of the dishonor done to God, and an hearty desire to give Glory to Him. The
Confession of such is not extorted, as Judas, when under the rack of a
tormenting Conscience, said, I have sinned, Mat. 27.4.

4. A Penitent People humble themselves under God's Threatenings, and Submit to
Him. The pride and stubbornness of their Spirits are subdued, that they dare no
longer contend with God, being convinced of the truth of that Word, Woe to him
that striveth with his Maker, Isai. 45.9 They now fall down at God's foot, and
resign themselves to His Sovereign Will, being ready to accept the punishment
of their Sins, and willing to be reconciled to God upon His own terms, Lev.
26.41. -- If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept
the punishment of their iniquity. Such a People are of a broken and contrite
Spirit under the Tokens of God's displeasure against them, submit to Him, and
are more concerned to have their Sins and God's Anger removed, than to be
delivered from outward Calamities. Before they might refuse to receive
Correction; but now they can say with Ephraim, Thou have chastised me, and I
was chastised --, Jer. 31.18. They submit to the Yoke God lays upon them, and
humble themselves under His mighty Hand.

5. A Penitent People Turn from their Evil Ways, and Return to the Lord their
God. Thus a People's Repenting is expressed in the Text by turning from their
Evil, i. e. the Evil of Sin, which is the worst and the only Evil that stirs up
God's holy displeasure against a Person, or Nation. The true Penitent not only
confesses, but also forsakes his Sin. Prove. 28.13. There Is a turning from Sin
in inward Aversion to it, and an hearty endeavor to put it far away as the
abominable thing he hates. Agreably, Repentance is called Repentance from dead
works, Heb. 6.1. i e. Sins, which are dead Works; for they proceed from the
body of Death in us, and if persisted in, end in Death. Sin when it is finished
brings forth Death. Accordingly, it is not enough that a degenerate People
sanctify Fasts, confess their Sins, and promise Amendment. No! they must
forsake them and reform, or they do not Repent, Ezekiel. 14.6. Say unto the house
of Israel, Thus says the Lord God, Repent and turn your selves from your
idols, and turn away your faces from all your abominations. There must be a
fixed Resolution, by the help of God, to abandon our Sins, and this must be put
in execution: The Wicked must forsake their Thoughts, and evil Ways. As the
Children of Israel, put away the strange gods from among them, and served the
Lord: and His Soul was grieved for the misery of Israel, Judge. 10.16. We must
not hold fast our Iniquities, refusing to let them go; but must break off our
Sins by Repentance. We must in our several Places seriously engage in the Work
of Reformation. Civil Rulers in their Places must lead in this necessary Work,
improving their Authority to suppress those Evils which threaten the
Destruction of their People, as they provoke God to depart from them; they must
endeavor to turn away Wrath, by being a Terror, not to Good Works, but to the
Evil. Thus King Josiah, put down the Idolatrous Priests, etc. 2 King. 23.4, 5.
The Ministers of the Gospel must in their Places bear due Testimony against the
Sins of a backsliding People, Isai. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not; lift up thy
voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of
Jacob their sin. lieads of Families must endeavor to put all Iniquity far from
their Tabernacles; and put Joshua's Resolution in practice; As for me, and my
House, we will serve the Lord. Particular Persons must be sensible of the
Plague of their own Hearts, and seek to God their Savior to convert and heal
their Souls. In a word, the Body of a People must hear and obey God's Voice, in
Isai. 1.16, 17. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your ways and
doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, Learn to do well --. It was
said even of Nineveh, Jon. 3.10. God saw their works, that they turned from
their evil way --. I would hope some of them were so taught the knowledge of
the true God, and of the only way of Salvation by the promised Messiah, that
they sincerely repented, and were eternally saved. However there must be, as
there was among them, an outward prevailing Reformation of those heinous Evils
for which God threatens Destruction. And upon this, we find God has spared a
finful People; as the Nenevites; and His Covenant People Israel, delivering
them from those public Calamities which threatened their ruin; though it appeared
afterward by their speedy Apostasy, when the Judgments were removed, that the
generality of the People were not thoroughly reformed, not sted fast in God's
Covenant. Upon the account of which, God again and again turned against them,
and punished them seven times for their Iniquities. So that in order to a
People's obtaining lasting Peace in the enjoyment of God's especial Favor and
Blessing, it is needful that they be generally sincere in their Repentance, and
through in their Reformation. In which there is an hearty Turning from all known
Sin, as it is contrary to the revealed will and declarative Glory of God, and a
returning to that One God, who is the Father the Son and the Holy Ghost, as to
our highest End and chief Good; as to our Lord and Portion; to walk in His
Ways, and keep all His Commandments, 1 Kin. 8.48. And so return unto thee with
all their heart, and with all their soul. There must be such a Repentance
toward God, Act. 20.21. Such a turning to the Lord, Chap. 11.21. if we would
hope, as a People, to enjoy the continued shines of God's face, and the
peculiar Tokens of His favor. The Power of Godliness must take place among us
in the general Establishment of pure and undefiled Religion, in Doctrine,
Worship and Manners. Now, such a Repentance and Reformation as this, must be
the especial Work of the Spirit of God poured out upon a People, in His Divine
Gifts and Graces, Ezekiel. 36.26, 7. A new heart also will I give you, and a new
spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and
do them. And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers, and ye
shall be my people, and I will be your God. I will also save you from all your
uncleanness, and I will call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no
famine upon you. And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of
the field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the heathen.
Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good,
and shall loath your selves in your own sight, for your iniquities, and for
your abominations. Not for your sakes do I this, faith the Lord God, be it
known unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel.
Thus says the Lord God, in the day that I shall have cleansed you from all
your iniquities, I will also cause you to dwell in the cities, and the wastes
shall be builded. And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay
desolate in the sight of all that possed by. Chap. 39.29. Neither will I hide
my face any more from them: for I have poured out my spirit upon the house of
Israel, says the Lord God. The Spirit of God is the Dispenser of the saving
Blessings purchased by our Lord Jesus Christ. O that this comprehensive
Blessing might be bestowed on us, and the whole Israel of God! Lord save thy
People, and bless thine Inheritance, seed them and lift them up for ever.

II. IF a People thus Repent, God will also Repent, and not bring the threatened
Evil upon them.

GOD often Threatens a People and Warns them with a gracious Design of
Delivering them, by Awakening and so Reforming of them, etc. But I now proceed
to make some brief Improvement of what has been already d^^^^ered.

USE, I. LEARN that GOD's ways are equal, and his dealings with Nations, as
well as particular Persons, are Righteous. Though God is Sovereign, God over
All; yet He does not use an Arbitrary Power, and Absolute Sovereignty in
Punishing the Children of Men. No! The Judge of all the Earth does right: He
proceeds in Judgment according to known and established Rules of Righteousness,
and makes it appear that Justice and Judgment are the Habitation of his Throne.
Psalm. 89.14. God could Appeal to his People. Ezekiel. 18.25, -- 29. Hear now, O
house of Israel, Is not my way equal? Are not your ways unequal? When a
righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and
dies in them; for his iniquity that he has done, shall he die. Again, when
the wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has committed, and
does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive. Because he
considers, and turns away from all his transgressions that he has
committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die. Yet says the house of
Israel, The way of the Lord is not equal. O house of Israel, are not my ways
equal? Are not your ways unequal? Yea, when God was about to Destroy Sodom and
Gomorrah, He says, speaking after the manner of Men, Genesis 18.21. I will go down
now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it,
which is come unto me; and if not, I will know. And righteous Lot was
remarkably delivered from the Overthrow. There Is none of God's Dispensations
toward the Children of Men, but what may be fairly accounted for from a due
Consideration of the Covenant of Works which God at first entered into with
Adam, "not only for himself, but for his Posterity"; of the Covenant of Grace,
and of the State of Mankind, as the World is under the Government of our Lord
Jesus Christ, God-Man-Mediator. If there be any perplexing Difficulties to us,
these must proceed from the darkness and weakness of our own minds. God's
righteousness is like the great Mountains, even when his Judgments are a great
Deep. Psalm. 36.6. Let us then give God the Glory of his Justice and Rectoral
Holiness, acknowledging that he is clear when he judges. And let not Sinners
take up Prejudices against God, as if he dealt hardly with them; But rather
Condemn themselves, and in a believing Penitent manner, seek to be Reconciled
to him, for he is gracious and mercisul, and repents of the Evil.

Which leads me to

USE II. LET us all be Exhorted to Repent, and turn to the Lord, that He may
Repent of the Evil, and Spare us. God is this Day Calling us to Humble
ourselves under his Amazing Judgment, whereby He threatened to send us down
quick into the Pit, when he terribly shock the Earth. And what reason have we
to fear before Him, when we consider our many provoking Sins, and the Tokens of
God's Anger in the Course of His Providence? God has known us above most of
the Families of the Earth, and therefore may Visit us for our Iniquities; which
have been committed against shining Light, and Covenant Bonds. There has been
great Contempt cast on Jesus Christ, and His great Salvation, while many have
appeared to prefer the World, and their Lusts before Him: Great Opposition to
the Spirit of Grace, while formality in Religion has sadly prevailed; yea many
have been profane and vicious, God's Ordinances, His House, His Day, have not
been valued as they should have been. There have also been Scandalous
Immoralities found among us, as Injustice, Oppression, Intemperance,
Uncleanness, etc. -- And alas? we have seemed, till this late surprising
Providence, to be in a dreadful measure unconcerned under our Sins, and the
awful withdrawments of God from us. Few comparatively have appeared to lament
after the Lord, and to stir up themselves to take hold of a departing God. Nor
have we been duly Affected with the foregoing Dispensations of Divine
Providence, in which there has been a wonderful mixture of Judgment and Mercy.
I might here remind you of some of them. God has drawn the Sword of the
Wilderness to plead the quarrel of his Covenant; but now grants us a good
measure of Peace and Quietness. He has threatened and afflicted us with
Scorching Heat and Drought; and yet in a good measure spared and recovered the
Fruits of the Earth. He has sent mortal Sickness in some places, and loudly
called to us to be Ready, by Repeating Sudden Deaths in an extraordinary
manner; and yet we now enjoy general Health. The God of Glory has uttered his
Voice in Terrible Thunders, and threatened to Consume us by the Flame of his
devouring Fire; And yet the Lives of his People have been Precious in his
sight. He visited us with a violent Storm by which we sustained considerable
Damage; And yet much sparing Mercy was extended toward us, as to our Lives and
Estates, by Sea and Land. And the day following, which was the Lord's Day, God
set his Bow in the Cloud, a Token of his Covenant, that he will not again
destroy the Earth with a flood. Genesis 9.13, -- 16. And if we consider the Day,
and the fair opportunity we had of attending the Means of Grace after the
Storm, we may in some sort behold our Glorious Savior with a Rainbow about his
head, as he appeared to John in a Vision. Rev. 10.1. And thus, there appeared a
Rainbow round about the Throne, 4.3. "Whereby is fitly represented God's
Covenant of Grace with his Church, that namely, notwithstanding all the storms
and rempests of persecution and other troubles they must encounter with in this
unsteady World, yet he will never suffer them to Perish, as God spoke once of
the Waters of the Deluge, Genesis 9." Dutch Annotations.
. God might in this bright Appearance give us a Token for Good, that in
Judgment he will remember Mercy; and may we not humbly hope his Voice to us is
that, Isa. 54.9. For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn
that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that
I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. Wroth, "To wit, so as I have
been, or so as to forsake thee utterly" Pook.
. However, as we were not reformed by these Things, God has more lately
Visited us with an Amazing shock of an Earthquake, which Providence appears
still more wonderful, now that we hear there was a terrible shake of the Earth
at Barbados, near Two Thousand Miles distant from us, about Thirty Six Hours
before. God then threatened to destroy us suddenly, and yet spared us in His
great Mercy, though the Earth trembled, yet was it kept by the same Almighty Hand
which shook it, from Opening and Swallowing us up. We were perplexed, but not
in despair; cast down, but not destroyed. Or, whatever dismal Apprehensions
many might have of sudden Destruction, God's thoughts were not our thoughts
Isa. 55.8, 9.
; but as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so did he magnify his Mercy in
the Article of our extremity; Indeed in this Judgment God has spoken against
us, and yet he earnestly remembers us still, and gives a space for Repentance,
while some places are alarmed by repeated Shakes and Noise. And is not this
the Voice of God's Providence to us; If ye turn from the Evil, I will repent of
the Evil -- and that of our Lord and Judge, Luke 13.3. Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. Let us then be Exhorted earnestly and speedily to
engage in this necessary Work, Seeking to God in the Name of Christ, to pour
upon us his Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Repentance and Reformation. And
certainly, we should take Encouragement, when we hear, that God has Sanctified
these extraordinary means together with the dispensation of his Word, to make
good impressions on many. I suppose, few, if any can remember the time when
People were so generally Awakened, and brought to say with trembling, What must
we do to be saved Act. 16.29, 30.
. O let us then lift up the hands that hang down, let us continue instant in
Prayer to the God of all Grace that He would by His Spirit carry on this Work
'till a sincere Repentance and thorough Reformation be wrought among this
People. Nor should the sense of our great Sinfulness and Unworthiness
dishearten us; but excite us to have the more entire dependence on the Merits
of our Lord Jesus Christ; for Worthy is the Lamb that was slain Rev. 5.12.
. His Blood cleanses from all Sin; it is of Virtue sufficient to cleanse a
Nation, Thousands and Millions, as well as one single Person. For, It is the
Blood of God, Act. 20.28. In Christ Jesus there is a Fountain opened to the
house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for
uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. Here Is Merit and Grace eno'. Let such then as are
sensible of the Guilt of their numerous and heinous Transgressions, come and
receive the perfect Righteousness of Christ for their Justification before God.
Let such as are sensible of the power and pollution of their Sins, come, and
receive the Spirit and Grace of Christ, to renew and sanctify them. Whosoever
will let him take the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17.
. And is not the Day near when the Fountain now mentioned shall be in a signal
manner opened in the extensive Preaching of the Gospel, and the abundant
Effusions of the Spirit of Grace, so that many Nations shall be sprinkled, yea
washed from their Sins; when all Israel shall be saved; and the receiving of
them shall be Life from the Dead to the Gentiles! See Romans 11.15, -- 26. Let us
then pray and wait; believe and not make haste. The vision is yet for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie, though it tarry,
wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry, Hab. 2.3. And in
our Prayers, let us be earnest with God that He would pour out His Spirit upon
us, and His Blessing upon our Offspring. Did not our Fore fathers importunately
ask this Blessing of God? Are there not innumerable Petitions upon the File in
Heaven, if I may so speak, the Prayer of which is chiefly this, that God would
pour out His Spirit upon the Children of New England, and so Bless them with
all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Things in Christ Jesus? Has not our
Advocate in Heaven assured us that whatever we ask of the Father in His Name,
He will give it Joh. 15.16.
? Has not that God who cannot lie promised that He will show Mercy to Thousands
of them that love him, and keep his Commandments, Exodus 20.6. Yea, has He nor
begun to answer our Prayers for this great Blessing? Let these Considerations
then Excite us to Repent, lest having been lifted up to Heaven in Privileges,
we be cast down the deeper into Hell for our abuse of them: Let them encourage
us to turn to the Lord our God, with those words which He has put into our
Mouths, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, Hos. 14.2. And to
Watch unto Prayer with all perseverance; 'till the Lord come, and Rain down
Righteousness upon us.

The End of the First SERMON, Preached December 21st. 1727. On a Day of Public
Fasting and Prayer, Occasioned by the EARTHQUAKE.
SERMON II.
LORD'S DAY, December 24th. 1727. P.M.
Jer. 18.7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and
concerning a kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that
nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of
the evil that I thought to do unto them.


DOCT. I. GOD is will not to Threaten a People, and give them warning, before. He
brings Destroying Judgments upon them.

DOCT. II. IF such a People Repent of the Evil of their Sins, and turn from
them to the Lord; God will also Repent, and not bring the Threatened Evil of
Punishment upon them.

UNDER this Second Doctrine we inquired, What is implied in a People's
Repenting of the Evil of their Sins? An Answer has already been given to this
Inquiry. We therefore proceed to show.

II. IF a People, when Threatened, thus Repent, God will also Repent, and not
bring the threatened Evil of Punishment upon them.

WHEN God threatens a sinful People with Destruction, there is yet a Reserve of
Mercy. The Threatening is not so absolute as to leave no place for Repentance,
Jer. 36.2, 3. Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the words that
I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah, and against all the
nations from the day I spoke unto thee, from the days of Josiah, even unto this
day. It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose
to do unto them; that they may return every man from his evil way, that I may
forgive their iniquity and their sin. The Omniscient God could not be at a loss
about the Event; but this is spoken of the All knowing God after the manner of
Men, to show how acceptable to Him true Repentance is.

Now this Truth will appear, if we consider, and duly weigh the following
Particulars,

1. IT will appear, if we consider the gracious Promises and Declarations of
God's Word. There are great and precious Promises made to the Penitent by the
true God. Indeed God has not absolutely promised particular Persons temporal
Deliverance from this or the other public Calamity, though they truly Repent.
Job 9.22. He destroys the perfect, and the wicked. Eccl. 9.2. There is one
event to the righteous, and to the wicked. However, God often sets a visible
mark of His Favor upon such, when He is coming out against a Degenerate People
in destroying Judgments, Ezekiel. 9.4. And if at any time He bring the temporal
Evil upon them, He sanctifies it, and makes it work together for their good
Romans 8.28.
. God does not punish such as an Enemy, in a way of vindictive Justice; but
Chastises them as a merciful Father, for their profit. And no tribulation or
distress shall be able to separate them from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord ver. 35 -- 39.
. Nor may a Penitent People expect to be delivered from all kinds of Calamity:
While Sin remains, there will be Sorrow. But then, they shall not be plucked up
and destroyed, the Evil here threatened. No! They shall continue a People before
the Lord. He will dwell among them, be their God, and own them for his People.
And the Affliction they suffer shall be sanctified to separate them from their
Sins; and not be sent in Wrath for their Destruction. Isai. 27.8, 9. He stays
his rough wind in the day of the east wind. By this therefore the iniquity of
Jacob shall be purged, and this is the fruit to take away his sin. And thus God
speaks very graciously concerning them that were carried Captive with Jeconiah,
Jer. 24.5, -- 7. Thus says the Lord the God of Israel, like these good figs,
so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah, whom I have
sent out of this place into the land of the Caldeans for their good. For I will
set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them again to this land, and
I will build them, and not pull them down, and I will plant them, and not pluck
them up. And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they
shall be my people, and I will be their God: for they shall return unto me with
their whole heart. And as for the Church and People of God in the first and
purest times of the Gospel, they were persecuted indeed, but not forsaken; cast
down, but not destroyed. 2 Cor. 4.9. The Spirit of God, and of Glory rested on
them, and the trial of their Faith was more precious than Gold. The Church
flourished like the Palm tree, under her pressures, of which it is observed,
"the more it is pressed down, the more it grows." What was said of God's Israel
in Egypt, may be applied to them. Exodus 1.12. But the more they afflicted them,
the more they multiplied and grew. Thus it was in a Spiritual sense. Vast
numbers were born to God; the Blood of Martyrs being made by God the Seed of
the Church (...)
. Having hinted these things to state the point, and remove some seeming
difficulties, I shall briefly mention some of the Promises which confirm and
illustrate this Truth. Lev. 26.41, 2 -- If then their uncircumcised hearts be
humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity: Then will I
remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Abraham will I
remember; and I will remember the land. Isai. 58.6, -- 8. Is not this the fast
that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke. Is it
not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast
out, to thy house; when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that
thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Then shall thy light break forth
as the morning and thine health shall spring forth specility: and thy
righteousness shall go before thee, the glory of the Lord shall be thy re^^^d.
Hes, 6.1. Come and let us return unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will
heal us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up. Ezekiel. 33.14, 15. Acts 2.38,
39. Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. For the
promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even
as many as the Lord your God shall call. Chap. 3.19. By such good words as
these does God encourage His People to Repent and turn to Him. Now we are
assured that 'till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot or one title shall in no wise
pass from the law till all be fulfilled.

2. THIS appears from the Provision made for true Penitents in Jesus Christ,
and from the Constitution of the Covenant of Grace. God has made abundant
Provision for the Salvation of His People in Christ Jesus, who has offered a
Sacrifice of Atonement for the Congregation of His People, who look to Him by
Faith, mourn for their Sins, and turn from them unto the Lord. Agreably, Aaron
was commanded to offer a Sin-offering for the People, with the blood of which
he was to make Atonement for all the Congregation of Israel, Lev. 16.15 -- 17.
Thus on the Day of Atonement they were to afflict their Souls, and offer an
Offering made by Fire unto the Lord, Lev. 23.27. Thus, tho Congregation of
Israel were to kill the Passover, and sprinkle the Blood upon the doorposts --
that the destroyer might not come into their houses. Exodus 12. Which things did
prefigure Jesus Christ the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the World
Joh. 1.19.
. And we are hereby taught that such as do in a believing penitent manner look
unto Jesus, shall find mercy with God. God will say of them, spare them from
going down to the Pit, I have found a ransom. And though it be true, that none
shall receive the everlasting benefit of Christ's Sacrifice, but such us
heartily receive the Lord Jesus, mouthing for their sins with a godly Sorrow,
yet the Body of a People fare the better on temporal accounts, and God will not
destroy them, where such a frame of spirit is found prevailing among them.
Zech. 12.6. -- 10. And this is plain from the nature and tenor of the New
Covenant, the Covenant of Grace, in which God gives encouragement, not only to
single Persons, but also to His People to Repent, that their Sins may be
blotted out, and their Iniquities not be their ruin. Jer. 31.31, -- 36. Behold,
the days come says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of
Israel, and with the house of Judah: Not according to the covenant that I made
with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of
the land of Egypt (which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto
them, says the Lord,) But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel after those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they
shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from
the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord: for I will forgive
their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. Thus says the Lord,
which gives the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances if the moon and of
the stars for a light by night, which divides the sea when the waves thereof
roar; the Lord of hosts is his name. If those ordinances depart from before me,
says the Lord, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation
before me for ever. Compared with Hebr. 8.8, -- 12. In which there seems to be
a gracious promise of a national Conversion of the Jews, and then that they
should not as a People, be rejected any more. And may not the People of God in
New England hope for a Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace relating to them,
that shall resemble this? May we not hope that God will revive His Work among
us, and not utterly cast us off?

3. WHEN a People Repent, then God's Threatenings and Judgments have the desired
Effect. These are means God uses to purge away the Sins of His People. When
God threatens and brings lighter Judgments, it is for their Warning, that they
may be reclaimed and reformed. And therefore when these means are blessed for
this end, and the Work is in some good measure effected, God will return in a
way of mercy and favor. He will repent, and change the course of His
Providence toward such a People. Now His Word accomplisheth that which he
pleases, and prospers in the thing whereto he sent it Isa. 55.21.
. Now the Rod and Reproof gives Wisdom; His People open their Ear to
Discipline, and turn to Him that smites them. And therefore God will cast away
the Rod, and show Himself as a reconciled Father. Thus God said of His ancient
People, Isai. 10.12. -- When the Lord has performed his whole work upon mount
Zion, and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king
of Assyria. God calls the Assyrian the Rod of His Anger, ver. 5. And threatened
to send him against an hypocritical Nation, ver. 6. But then, when the Work was
done for which God sent him, then he would punish him, and deliver His People.

4. THIS appears from God's Providential Dispensations toward His ancient
Covenant People, and Others. Whatever their Sins had been, yet when they
Repented, God also Repented of the Evil, and returned to them in a way of
Favor. Thus, the House of Israel lamented after the Lord, put away Baalim,
etc. And God delivered them out of the Hand of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 7. When
Ephraim, i. e. "the Ten Tribes, or those of all the Tribes that feared the
Lord", bemoaned himself, and Repented, God said, Is Ephraim my dear Son? is be
a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still: -- I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord, Jer. 31.18, -- 20.
Yea, when the Ninevites turned from their Evil way, God repented of the Evil
that he said he would do unto them, and did it not, Jon. 3.10.

DOCT. III. BUT if a People when thus Threatened go on obstinately in their
Sins, they may expect that God will bring His Destroying Judgments upon them
till they are made desolate.
CONTRARIES have contrary Consequences ver. 9, 10. Context. Israel's forsaking
the Lord, was to make their Land desolate, and a perpetual hissing, ver. 16.
Deuteronomy. 28.13. If thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to
observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this
day; then all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. ver. 16,
36, 48, etc. And the Sacred History informs us that these dreadful Threatenings
were fulfilled upon them till they were cast out of the good Land God had given
them; deprived of their especial Privileges, and delivered up to an amazing
Destruction. The Sinners of the Old World despised the Warnings God gave them
by Noah, and resisted His Spirit. Then the Flood came and destroyed them all,
Genesis 7. Luke 17.27. There Is a destroying power in Sin persisted in, it has
ruined Nations and Kingdoms, Jer. 47. Amos 1st. and 2d. Chapters. And this
might be argued from God's Justice, Holiness, and His Truth in fulfilling the
Threatening of His Word etc. In this sense it may be said as, 1 Samuel 15.29. The
strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent. God is bound for His own Glory as
His highest End; and therefore if a People obstinately refuse to Repent and
give Glory to God, they must expect that God will glorify Himself upon them in
their Destruction, and so become fearful in Praises Lev. 10.3. Exodus 15.11.
.

FURTHER to Confirm this awful Truth, I shall briefly observe God's manner of
Proceeding in Judgment against an Impeninent People that enjoy the means of
Grace, and are in Covenant with God.

1. WHEN such a People go on Impenitently and refuse to be Reformed by God's
Word and Providence; He takes His grieved Spirit from them. While God threatens
His People, and sends lighter Judgments as Calls to Repentance, He also usually
sends His Spirit to strive with them; but assures us that His Spirit shall not
always strive with man. Genesis 6.3. Accordingly when they resist and vex Him,
quenching His good Motions, and sinning presumptuously against the Convictions
He gives them; as His ancient People did Act. 7.51.
. God is provoked to withdraw His Spirit from the Means they enjoy; and to send
His Plagues upon their Hearts; and then such as were blind are judicially
blinded, such whose Hearts were hard, are hardened, being given up to their own
Lusts, and the Temptations of Satan. Psalm. 81.11, 12. My people would not
hearken to my voice: and Israel would none of me. So I gave them up unto their
own hearts lust: and they walked in their own counsels. And now God may
threaten in His Word and by His Providence; but they will not turn at His
Reproof. Isai. 1.5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and
more. Now that message may be bro't to them, Isai. 6, 9, 10. And he said, Go
and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not: and see ye indeed,
but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy,
and shut their eyes: lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and understand with their heart, and convert and he healed. It follows, ver.
11. -- Till the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without
man, and the land be utterly desolate. And when God withdraws even the common
Influences and Restraints of His Spirit, a People grow worse and worse under
the outward means, and ripen apace for Ruin. They are as Reprobate silver,
because God bath rejected them, Jer. 6.30, All the means used to purge away
their dross become ineffectual. And now there is oftentimes an evil Spirit of
of slumber and carnal security prevailing, over such a People; so that they
will not consider their latter end, till they come down wonderfully, Lam. 1.9.
And woe will be unto them, when God takes His Holy Spirit from them. As far as
this Judgment is inflicted, so far is their Day of Grace at an end. The things
of their Peace are now. hidden from their eyes, and they will walk on in the
paths which lead to destruction, Jer. 5.3, -- 14.

2 GOD then proceeds to take away the outward Ordinances and Means of Grace
from them. These are the Visible Tokens of God's Presence with His People. Thus
God set up His Tabernacle, and dwelt among His ancient People. But when they
despised the Means of Grace, and abused them to harden themselves in Sin, as if
they were delivered to do these and the other Abominations, and might Sin with
impunity: I say, when it was thus. God removed these visible Tokens of His
Presence and Favor, Jer. 7.9, 10. Will ye steal, murder and commit adultery,
and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom
ye know not. And come and stand before me in this house which is called by my
Name, and say, we are delivered to do all (...) abominations? ver. 14.
Therefore will I do unto this house which is called by my Name, wherein ye
trust, and unto the place which I gave to you, and to your fathers, as I have
done to Shilob. The Ark was an especial Token of God's Presence; but when the
Israelites refused to repent and turn to the Lord, God gave it up into the
hands of their Enemies, 1 Samuel 4. The Temple afterward with the holy things in
it, was the great Medium of their instituted Worship; But when they boasted of
God's holy Mountain, crying, The Temple of the Lord, as if this would secure
God's Presence, notwithstanding their Impenitency, God in His overruling
Providence burnt and destroyed it, first by the Chaldeans, then by the Romans;
and cast them out of His sight. And thus God threatened the Church of Ephesus,
Rev. 2.5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen; and repent and do the
first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. And what a fearful Example
for the Confirmation of the truth before us, have we in this, and the other
Asian Churches, once highly favored with the light and privileges of the
Gospel?

3. WHEN God is thus departed, and His Covenant broken, Destroying Judgments
enter in, and make a People desolate. Now the Glory and Defense of a People are
gone; And there is a wide breach made at which desolating Judgments come pouring
in as an overflowing Scourge. They who have been thus highly savored, but
refuse to be the Lord's People, provoke Him to pluck them up, and destroy them
from being a People in the Earth. Thus God threatened that Ephraim should be
broken, that it be not a people, Isai. 7.8. And apostate Israel is forbidden to
rejoice as other People; because they had gone a whoring from their God, Hos.
9.1. Others may for a time prosper in outward respects, though God be not their
Covenant God; but when His People break His Covenant, and refuse to return unto
Him, their Civil and Religious Privileges, their Outward and Spiritual
Enjoyments have been taken away together. When Israel forsook the Lord, and he
had rejected them, their Civil and Ecclesiastical Constitution was broken, and
they were scattered abroad to the four Winds of Heaven. How pathetically did
our Savior lament over them when He saw their Ruin approaching! Mat. 23 37, 8.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together even
as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Behold, your
house is left unto you desolate.

APPLICATION.
USE. I. FROM what has been said we may infer, that there is Reason to fear
some dreadful Judgments yet to come on the Christian World. If we look into
Great Britain, what People have been more highly favored with the Light and
Privileges of the Glorious Gospel? Or experienced more remarkable Deliverances
in times of imminent Danger? Who have had louder Calls to Repentance in God's
threatened Judgments; or more faithful Warnings by His Ministers? And yet
Iniquity abounds after all, yea Crying Sins. And do not many refuse to return
and reform? How little is there to be seen of that Good Spirit which animated
the first Reformers in England and Scotland! Alas! By what we can learn, the
power of Religion is very much weakened and decayed among them, as well as
among ourselves. And may we not fear God will Visit them with terrible
Judgments? Surely we may well say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.120. My flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. I speak not these
things to discourage any that tremble at God's Word; but that we may all be
quickened to Watch and Pray, and keep our Garments. Things may seem to look
fair; and we ought to bless God for the Tranquillity enjoyed: but what settled
Peace can be expected while so many Dishonor God, Despise Christ, and reject
the Offers of the Gospel? While Rome has such Power, and they that call
themselves Reformed show so little regard to Religion in the Power and Purity
of it? The Lord grant that we may not say, Peace and Safety, when sudden
Destruction comes 1 These. 5.3.
. The Lord help us, being moved with fear, to get into the Ark, into Christ,
that whatever Evils come, we may be safe.

2. LEARN what is our great Duty and Interest this Day. To hear God's Voice,
Repent and turn unto Him. God has spoken in the Threatenings of His Word, and
by the Rebukes of His Providence. Let us then to Day hear His Voice, and not
harden our Hearts. The Lord has rored out of Zion with a Voice which may well
make us to tremble; and yet spare us from the threatened Destruction: And now
says to us, if ye return, I will Repent of the Evil --. But threatens to bring
Ruin upon us, if we go on impenitently, and refuse to be Reformed. Now then
that God sets before us Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing, let us choose
Life that we may live. O that there were such an Heart in us, that we would
fear the Lord, and keep all his Commandments always, that it might be well with
us, and our Children forever Deuteronomy. 5.29.
! O that we could as a People so consider of our Evil ways as to determine to
forsake them! that we could Mourn because we have offended and dishonored God
by our Sins, and so turn to the Lord in hearty Repentance; that we could then
heartily and successfully engage in the Work of Reformation. Our Days of
Fasting and Prayer will rise up in Judgment against us, unless we bring forth
fruits meet for Repentance: Let us therefore take heed and beware of giving God
reason to Complain of us as of Ephraim and Judah, Hos. 6.4. -- Your goodness is
as a morning-cloud, and as the early dew it goes away: Lest that threatening be
fulfilled upon us, Chap. 13.3. Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud,
and as the early dew that passes away, as the chaff that is driven with a
whirlwind out of the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.

3. LET each of us be Exhorted to Repent and turn from all our Transgressions;
so Iniquity shall not be our Ruin. This Word which is spoken of a Nation, a
People, concerns every one of us personally. We are all Transgressors of God's
Law; were shapen in Iniquity, and have been guilty of innumerable actual Sins.
And God in His Word speaks against the Sinner, and says, The Soul that sins
it shall die, Ezekiel. 18.4. Yea, assures us that the Wicked shall go away into
everlasting punishment, Mat. 23.46. And that our Lord Jesus should be revealed
from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2
These. 1.7, 8. Now the Doctrine of Repentance is a great Gospel Command. Our
Lord Himself, the great Prophet of His Church, began His public Ministry with
Preaching this Doctrine, Mat. 4.17. From that time Jesus began to preach and to
say, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. The Apostle Peter preached
this Doctrine to the Jews, Act. 2.38. And the Apostle Paul informs us that he
restifyed to the Jews and Greeks Repentance toward God, Act. 20.21. He
declared that this was their duty, and urged it not only upon the Jews, but
also upon the Greeks; i. e. the Gentiles. This Command is published to all that
live within the Sound of the Gospel, Act. 17.30. God now commands all men
every where to Repent. And the Gospel gives us encouragement to attend this
Duty, how many and great soever our Sins have been, assuring us that Jesus
Christ is come to call, not the Righteous but Sinners to Repentance; that He
has purchased Pardon for all penitent Believers, and is exalted to be a
Prince, and a Savior, to give Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of Sins
Act. 5.31.
. The Word of God also assures us, that whosoever confesses and for saketh his
sins, shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13. And that the chief of Sinners have found
Mercy, when they have thus besought the Lord, and turned to him, 2 Chronicles.
23.12, 13.1 Tim. 1.13, -- 16. Let us then be encouraged to ask of God His Holy
Spirit to work this and all other Graces in us; Let each of us smite on our own
Breasts and say, What have I done? Let us offer to God that humble Request,
Lord, be merciful to me a Sinner. Let us be sensible of the Plague of our own
Hearts, and bitterly bewail the dishonor we have done to God, and the wrong we
have done our own Souls by our Sins: Let us abhor our selves upon the account
of our Sins, and turn from them in inward hatred and aversion. For, a broken
and a contrite heart God will not despise Psalm. 51.17.
. Let us return to the Lord as to our God, with holy Resolutions to cleave to
Him, and walk in His Commandments. Let us look unto Jesus, and by Faith rely
upon Him to heal and cleanse our Souls, whose Blood purges the Conscience from
dead Works, and cleanses from all Sin, Hebr. 9.14.1 Job. 1.7. Thus we shall be
of those blessed ones whose transgressions are forgiven, whose Sins are
covered, and to whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity. Psalm. 32.5. I acknowledged
my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: and said I will confess my
transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

4. THE last USE may be of Consolation to the Penitent. Be you Comforted: God
will repent of the Evil, and not bring it upon you: His anger is turned away,
and He will Comfort you. For thus says the high and lofty One that inhabiteth
eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the bumble,
and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. For I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and the
souls which I have made, Isai. 57.15, 16. There Is Joy in Heaven over such, and
God will give them the joy of His Salvation. Sometimes God sets a mark upon
'em, when He is coming out against a sinful People in destroying Judgments, and
spares them in His great Mercy, Ezekiel. 9. And if they are at any time cast into
the Furnace, the Son of God will be present with them, so that they shall not
be consumed, but come forth as Gold out of the Fire. You that truly Repent, do
also trust in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall find Rest to your Souls in
Him, whom God has sent to heal the broken hearted, Luke 4.18. He has
purchased the Consolations of the Spirit for such as you, and knows how to
speak a Word in Season to your weary Souls. And He will speak Peace to His
People: But O take heed then, and do not turn again to folly! To Conclude;
Blessed are they who thus mourn; for they shall be Comforted: God will give to
these Mourners in Zion the Oil of Joy for Mourning, the Garment of Praise for
the spirit of Heaviness, Isai. 61.3. And in due time He will present them
faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy.

THE END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THERE is now in the Press, and will quickly be Published, A Sermon from Luke
XI. 13. By the same Author, Entitled, GOD will give His Holy Spirit to them
that ask Him. Preached on a Day of Prayer, set apart for Imploring the Great
Blessing, of the Pouring out of the Spirit on the Rising Generation.

In a few Days will be Published Mr Prince's Two Sermons on the Earthquake, The
Second Edition, with some Entertaining Enlargements.

There is also in the Press Four Sermons. By the Rev. Mr. Gookin of Hampton,
Occasioned by the Earthquake, with an Historical Account of it as it was in
that Town. Also some Remarkable Preservation from Lightning there in the Summer
past.

Sold by D. Henchman at the Corner (...)


