A DISCOURSE ON THE Transcendent Glory OF THE GOSPEL. Delivered at the Lecture
in Hingham.

By Ebenezer Gay, M. A. Pastor of a CHURCH there.

Haggai ii. 9. The Glory of this latter House shall be greater than of the
former, says the Lord of hosts.

Col. i. 26, 27. Even the mystery which has been hid from Ages, and from
Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints, to whom God would make
known what is the Riches of the Glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which
is Christ in you, the Hope of Glory.

BOSTON in New England: Printed for D. HENCHMAN, over against the Brick
Meeting House in Cornhil. MDCCXXVIII.

To the People of my Charge.
Dearly Beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ,
IT was very pleasing unto me, to observe so general a Desire amongst you, that
a Monthly-Lecture might be preached in this Town: I was glad when ye said unto
me, let us go into the house of the Lord. And your Attendence of such a
religious Exercise, has been hitherto uncommon and exemplary. I hope that you
find Godliness to be profitable for all things, having the promise of the life
that now is, and of that which is to come. It is at the Request of many of you,
and with an aim at the Good of all your Souls, that these Discourses are made
so public. I am very sensible, that they are far below the dignity of the
Subjects treated of; and if they should (as most probably they will in this
critical Age) be censured as weak and mean, I shall not blame any for being of
my Opinion: But I trust that you, to whom these Sermons were acceptable when
preached, will read them with Candor, and a suitable concern that ye may be
edified thereby. I send them abroad in a plain Country-Dress, it being such as
I could afford them, and which will be most agreeable to those on whom I depend
to give them Entertainment. You receive them from the Press, in the same words
that you had them from the Pulpit. -- The seasonableness of these Discourses,
cannot (I think) be justly excepted against. The Contempt of the glorious
Gospel is doubtless the most provoking Evil of the Times, and is comprehensive
of all those Sins, for which the righteous GOD has a Controversy with our
Land: An Essay therefore to raise in us due Tho'ts of the Excellency of the
Gospel, will not be judged needless. While we are contemplating and adoring the
Glory of GOD, which he has discovered in his late remarkable and amazing works
of Providence, we should not overlook, nor be unaffected with that brighter
Display of it, which there is in the Gospel. GOD's saving manifestation of
himself, is not to be expected in his providential Dispensations, ordinary or
extraordinary, nor in the Terrors of the Law, but in the Glass of his Gospel.
The Lord was not in the wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but in
the still small voice, 1 Kin. 19.11, 12.

THE Voice of GOD, which is full of majesty, from the deep places of the Earth,
has awakened many to give the more earnest Heed to his sweet and gracious
Voice, speaking from Heaven in the Gospel of CHRIST; and by the latter more
than the former, is their Conversion (which we hope is real) effected. There
are many excellent Sermons lately published, to teach and excite us rightly to
consider and improve the terrible Works of GOD: and a Discourse concerning the
Glory of the Gospel, may also, by the divine Blessing, serve to promote the
Reformation, which is so earnestly prayed and labored for. -- Although, to our
shame and sorrow it must be said, there has not been that noise and shaking
among the dry bones here, which there has been in other places under the late
awful Dispensations, yet some (I hope) have been awakened to flee from wrath:
and that they might continue to run well, and not look back, I have put them in
remembrance of Lot's Wife.

THESE Sermons I dedicate unto you, my beloved People, and wish they might be
profitable to your Souls, for which I will very gladly spend, and be spent.

I rejoice in the Lord, that your Care of me has flourished, in the provision
ye have made for my outward Support, ever since I have been in the work of the
Ministry amongst you. And I speak it to your praise, that I have not been
necessitated to ask for any maintenance; but what ye have done toward it, ye
have done of your own accord, as sensible that a Minister is not to live on the
Alms of his People, but that the Labourer is worthy of his Hire. -- There is
one thing I need, and do now ask of you, to wit, Your more fervent Prayers unto
GOD for me, that he would make me an able and faithful Minister of the New
Testament; and that after I have preached to you in Christ's Name, I may not
(as there is great danger that I shall) perish eternally in his wrath. --
Brethren pray for me, that the Word of the Lord may have free Course amongst
us, and be glorified.

E. G.
Hingham, Feb. 8. 1727, 8.
THE Transcendent Glory OF THE GOSPEL Displayed.
2 COR. III. 10. FOR even that which was made Glorious, had no Glory in this
respect, by reason of the Glory that excels.


THE Sovereignty and Power of divine Grace were marvellously displayed in the
Conversion of Paul, who before was a furious Persecutor of the Church of
Christ. And the Grace of God which was bestowed on him, was not in vain; for He
labored more abundantly than all his Fellow-workers unto the Kingdom. And GOD
highly honored Him, in propagating and promoting Christianity in the World,
more by his Ministry than any other Man's. The shining Gifts and extraordinary
Success of this great Apostle, drew upon him the envious Hatred of false
Teachers; who maliciously endeavored to blast his Reputation, and obstruct his
Usefulness. This obliged him to speak much in his own vindication: which He
did, not out of Arrogance and Ostentation, but a sincere respect to the Glory
of GOD, and the Good of the Church. Do we begin again (says he in the first
verse of this Chapter) to commend our selves? or need we as some others,
Epistles of commendation to you, or Letters of commendation from you. The
Apostle speaks in the plural Number, because He wrote not only in his own, but
also in Timothy's Name to the Corinthians. He had begun again in the preceding
Chapter to commend himself, by declaring his faithfulness, as he had done in
his first Epistle to them. But here he seems to Check himself for it; and tells
them, that he needed, not as others (meaning false Apostles and Teachers)
commendatory Letters to them or from them: For they themselves, in regard of
the Success of his Ministry amongst them, were a living Epistle, that might
sufficiently recommend him to them, and to all other Churches. Ye are our
Epistle written in our hearts, known and read of all men. As if he had said,
You that have been Converted by my preaching, are a commendatory Epistle, which
I carry about in my heart, having always a thankful and dear Remembrance of
you, and which may satisfy all that have heard of your Faith and Obedience,
that I am a true Apostle and faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST. And he thus
strongly proves that they were such an Epistle. Forasmuch as ye are manifestly
declared to be the Epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with Ink, but
with the Spirit of the living GOD, not in Tables of stone, but in fleshly
Tables of the heart. Their holy Conversation declared them to be the Epistle of
CHRIST. By them CHRIST signified his Mind and Will to others, as a Man does his
by a Letter. They were a living Rule, showing by their Actions how all ought to
walk. JESUS CHRIST with his Spirit, that accompanied the Apostle's Ministry,
did make saving Impressions on their Hearts; wrote his Law, not on Tables of
Stone, but fleshly Tables, the Hearts of Believers. And such Trust have we
through Christ to Godward. The Apostle was humbly confident, that GOD had thus
blessed his Ministry to them. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think
any thing as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God. Paul acknowledges
that He was so far from being the Author of the good Work in the Corinthian
Christians, that He could not of himself so much as think. A Man cannot think
any thing without the Influence of divine Providence, and he cannot think a
good Thought without the Influence of divine Grace. Every Act is from GOD, as
he is the GOD of Nature, and the Goodness of any Act is from Him, as He is the
GOD of all Grace. The Apostle was very careful not to exalt himself, when he
was magnifying his Office. Our sufficiency (says he) is of GOD: who also has
made us able Ministers of the New Testament. i. e. The Gospel, called a
Testament, because it is a free and firm Disposition of the Mediator's good
things unto the Heirs of Salvation, to be possessed by them according to his
Will; and the New Testament, in regard of the ancient Promises of those good
things under the Law. The Apostle having thus ascribed unto GOD, the Praise of
all his Ability for and Success in the Work of the Ministry, He proves the
Dignity of his Office by drawing a Comparison between the Law and the Gospel,
and showing how the latter did exceed the former in Glory. By several Arguments
he demonstrates the surpassing Excellency of the Gospel; and in our Text
declares that the Law, although glorious in it self, and the manner of it is
delivery, yet compared with the Gospel, has no Glory at all: like as the Glory
of the Stars disappears at the rising of the Sun. For even that which was made
glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excels.

THE DOCTRINE from the Words is this, viz.

DOCTRINE, THAT the Gospel is incomparably more glorious than the Law.
BY the Law, we may understand the Revelation which GOD made of himself, his
Mind and Will before the coming of CHRIST in the flesh; and by the Gospel, the
Revelation which GOD has granted since that Time: The former is contained in
the Scriptures usually styled the Old Testament, the latter in those of the
New. By the Law is sometimes meant the Decalogue only, or ten Commandments,
called the moral Law; sometimes the Ceremonial Institutions, the Law of
Commandments contained in Ordinances; sometimes all the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, the Writings of Moses and the Prophets. The Law, taken in either of
these Senses, has comparatively no Glory, in respect of the Glory of the
Gospel that excels. The Law is in our Context, said to be glorious, and the
Gospel is styled the glorious Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.4. The Law is in the verse
preceding our Text, called Glory it self and the Gospel is so termed, 1 These.
2.12. But although the Law be very excellent and glorious, yet the Gospel far
exceeds it in Glory. Compared with the Glory of the Gospel, the Law has none.

WHEREIN, and how far the Gospel exceeds the Law in Glory, is now to be
considered by us.

I. THE Gospel is more Glorious than the Law, in regard of the first Publisher
of it.

THE Law is, in our Text, said to be that, which was made Glorious: Besides
it is intrinsic Glory, there was some additional Glory made to it, by GOD'S
sending of it to his People, by the hand of so excellent a Person, as He did:
But the Glory which the Gospel has in respect of the transcendent Dignity of
the Lord's Messenger, who first published it, far exceeds that. The Law was
given by Moses, but Grace and Truth (i. e. the Gospel, called Grace in
opposition to the Severity of the Law, and Truth in opposition to the Types and
Shadows of the legal Dispensation) came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17. Moses, whom
GOD employed to deliver the Law to his ancient People, was a glorious Saint and
extraordinary Prophet: but the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the Gospel at first
began to be spoken, did infinitely excel Him. The Messiah was promised of old,
as a Prophet like unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15. He did in many respects signally
resemble Moses: but this don't imply that he was not in all superior to him.
CHRIST was not only like to Moses in Moses's chiefest Excellencies, but He also
infinitely surpassed him. Heb. 3.3. This Man was counted worthy of more glory
than Moses. Moses was but a Man, Christ was GOD as well as Man: Moses was not
without Sin, but Christ was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners:
Moses was only a Servant, Christ was also the Son of GOD. When Moses came down
from Mount Sinai, bringing the two Tables of Testimony, his Face shone with a
dazzling Glory, Exodus 34.30. When Aaron and all the Children of Israel saw
Moses, behold, the skin of his Face shone, and they were afraid to come nigh
him. This is mentioned in our Context, v. 7. as one thing which made the Law
glorious; The ministration of Death written and engraven in stones, was
glorious, so that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the Face
of Moses, for the Glory of his Countenance. The Luster spread on the Face of
Moses, was an evidence to the Jews, of the GOD of Glory's sending him to
publish the Law unto them. But Jesus Christ far excelled Moses in the visible
Glory wherewith his Face did shine, when GOD, by a voice from Heaven, declared
him to be his Son, by whom he would speak, and unto whom Men should hearken.
Moses in all his Glory, was not arrayed with such Splendour as Christ was, at
his solemn Investiture into his Office. When Jesus was baptized, Heaven was
opened to pour down it is Glory on him: and the holy Ghost descended in a bodily
shape, like a Dove upon him, Luke 3.21, 22. The holy Ghost is incorporeal, but
he then assumed a bodily visible Shape, and doubtless one that was very bright
and glorious. Some think, that it cannot be concluded from what the Scripture
says concerning the holy Ghost's Descent on Christ, that he appeared in the
form of a Dove: But suppose that he assumed a Body of Light, or Fire, and
therein came down, in such like manner as a Dove, with it is Wings spread forth,
and gathering about our SAVIOR'S Head covered and crowned it with a visibly
Glory. But why may we not, according to the Letter of the Scripture, conceive
that the bodily Shape in which the holy Ghost descended on Christ, was that of
a Dove, intimating the Dove-like Disposition of the harmless JESUS? And yet, we
have reason to believe that it was in some luminous form, some extraordinary
appearance of Light, that the holy Ghost came down on our Savior. Justin
Martyr speaking of Christ's Baptism says, that there was a Fire lighted in the
River Jordan. "By which it appears, that it was an early Tradition in the
Church, that the Water, immediately after Christ was baptized in it, seemed to
be all on Fire by the Reflection of that bright and flaming appearance, in
which the holy Ghost descended upon him". And at his Transfiguration on Mount
Tabor, His Face did shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was white as the Light,
Mat. 27.2. His Face did shine as the Sun in it is meridian Brightness, and his
Raiment was like the whitness of a flash of Lightning. The three Disciples that
were with Christ on the Mount, were afraid and astonished at the sight, as
Aaron and the Israelites were at the sight of the Glory on Moses's Face. The
Honor and Glory which Christ received from GOD the Father, at his Baptism and
Transfiguration, was too great to be communicated to any but the Son of GOD; It
was therefore the Sign, by which John the Baptist knew him to be the true
Messiah; and upon which he grounded his Testimony concerning him, Joh. 1.33,
34. I know him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water; the same said
unto me, upon whom thou shall see he Spirit descending and remaining on him,
the same (...) which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. And I sa^ and (...) record
that this is the Son of God. The visible Splendour with which Christ was
invested at his Baptism and Transfiguration, was so great, that all who beheld
it might rationally conclude that he was the Son of GOD: Such Glory would not
be imparted to any other. John the Evangelist, who was an Eyewitness of the
Glory shed on Christ at his Transfiguration, and probably of that at his
Baptism also, does partly with reference thereunto say, Joh. 1.14. We beheld
his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father. The Glory was such
as became him, who was the only begotten Son of GOD: It was questionless
therefore a Glory far surpassing that on the Face of Moses, when he brought
down the Law from Sinai. Jesus Christ must be infinitely more glorious than
Moses, being the Brightness of God's glory, and the express Image of his
Person, Heb. 1.3. In him dwelt all the fullness of the infinite Godhead bodily,
and from him did it shine forth in the Days of his Flesh, he being the
Effulgence of his Father's Glory. Moses was not more than a Prophet, John the
Baptist was, and among them that are born of Women, there arose not a greater
than John; yet he counted himself not worthy to do the meannest Office for
CHRIST, to be the least and lowest of his Attendants, Luke 3.16. -- One
mightier than I comes, the latchet of whose Shoes I am not worthy to unloose.

THUS, in respect of the Glory which the Law and Gospel receive from the
shining Excellencies of the first Publishers thereof, the latter does
abundantly exceed the former in Glory.

II. THE Gospel is more glorious than the Law in regard of the Circumstances
which attended the Promulgation of it.

THE Law was made glorious by the manner of it is delivery. When the LORD came
down on Mount Sinai, holy Angels were the Chariots of his Glory, He rode upon
Cherubims, and there was an illustrious Appearance of Myriads of them, Psalm.
68.17. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: the
Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the holy place. The Mount was altogether on
a smoke, because the LORD descended upon it in Fire: and the smoke thereof
ascended as the smoke of a Furnace, and the whole Mount quaked greatly: Sinai
was moved at the Presence of the GOD of Israel. There was the sound of a
Trumpet, long and loud; the noise of Thunders, and the voice of Words, very
terrifying. The glorious manner in which GOD gave the Law on Sinai, is
elegantly set forth by the Prophet, Hab. 3.3, 4. GOD came from Teman, and the
holy One from Mount Paran, Selah. His Glory covered the Heavens, and the Earth
was full of his Praise, or Splendour. And his brightness was as the light, he
had horns, or bright Beams, coming out of his hand: "Rays of Glory were darted
forth around Him" With such Tokens of Majesty was the Promulgation of the Law
attended. But, although there was less Terror, yet there was not less Glory in
the Circumstances which accompanied the first Publication of the Gospel. It was
ushered in, by Angel's declaring and celebrating the Birth of JESUS, that Horn
of Salvation which GOD promised to raise up unto his People, in the House of
his Servant David. The poor Shepherds at Bethlehem, saw as great Glory there,
and as bright an Apparition of Angels, as the Israelites did at Sinai, and
heard more glorious Words, Luke 2.9, 10, 11. Lo, the Angel of the Lord came
upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them; and they were sore
afraid. And the Angel said unto them, fear not, for behold, I bring you good
tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all people, for unto you is born this
day in the city of David, a Savior; which is Christ the Lord. ver. 13, 14. And
suddenly there was with the Angel, a multitude of the heavenly host, praising
God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth peace, good will
toward Men. -- A glorious Lamp was lighted in the aetherial Heaven, an
extraordinary Star appeared, to give notice to the World of the Approach of the
Sun of Righteousness, Matthew. 2.1, 2. Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of
Judea, in the days of Herod the king: behold, there came wise men from the East
to Jerusalem, saying, where is He that is born king of the Jews? for we have
seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship him. -- Was there not more
Glory derived on the Gospel, from what was done and said at Christ's Baptism
and Transfiguration, than there was on the Law, from all that Majesty and awful
Pomp that Mount Sinai was covered with? What a glorious Scene was it, for
Heaven to open, and the holy Ghost visibly to descend on Christ to array Him
with a dazzling Splendour, and such a voice to come from the excellent Glory,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye Him? Was there any
Brightness at Sinai, comparable to that on Mount Tabor? or any Voice so
glorious? -- And in order to the more full and extensive Publication of the
Gospel, by the Apostles of Christ, the Descent of the holy Ghost upon them, at
the Feast of Pentecost (the same time of the Year, that the Law was given at
Sinai) was a thing which equaled, if not exceeded in glory, any Circumstance
which attended the Promulgation of the Law. There was indeed no Trumpet, nor
terrifying Voice, no Thunder, Darkness nor Tempest, but a sound from Heaven, as
of a rushing mighty Wind, and it filled all the House where the Apostles were
sitting; and there was the Appearance of bright flames of Fire, cleaving
asunder; and in the form of Tongues resting on the Heads of the Disciples, and
they spoke all Languages to the astonishment of multitudes who were then
present, Act. 2. So that the publication of the Gospel was graced with as
remarkable and glorious Circumstances, as that of the Law. It might also, under
this Head, be shown, How the Miracles which attended the publication of the
Gospel, through Christ's and his Apostle's time on Earth, did, both in number and
greatness, far exceed those which accompanied the Promulgation of the Law.
Moses and the Prophets did not, all of them do, so many, nor such mighty Works,
as JESUS of Nazareth did. How great must that Salvation be, how glorious that
Gospel, which at first began to be spoken, and was thus proved by the Lord, and
was afterward confirmed likewise by them that heard him; GOD bearing them
witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles, and gifts of
the holy Ghost, according to his will?

III. THE Gospel is more glorious than the Law, in respect of its revealing the
Glory of GOD so much more clearly and fully, than the Law does.

THE Gospel exceeds the Law, not only in an accidental or adventitious, but
also an intrinsic Glory. The Law was not only made glorious in the Eyes of the
Children of Israel, by the dignity of the Person and luster on the face of
Moses, by whom it came, and the manner of its delivery, but it was glorious in
it self; being a Revelation from GOD of his Excellencies to his Creatures, and
his Will concerning them: But the Gospel is more glorious in it self, being a
clearer, and more complete Revelation of GOD'S Glory. This is hinted by the
Apostle in our Context, where he is showing how the Gospel exceeds the Law in
Glory, v. 18. But we all with open face, beholding as in a Glass the Glory of
the Lord. Moses put a Vail over his Face, when he came down from the Mount,
that so all the Glory of his Countenance might not be seen, might not this
represent GOD'S concealing from the Jewish People much of his Glory, which was
afterward to be manifested? v. 13. Moses put a Vail over his face, that the
Children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is
abolished. They had but an obscure View of the Mystery of CHRIST, which was
veiled under the Types and Shadows of the Ceremonial Law; like as the Glory on
the face of Moses was veiled. v. 14 But their Minds were blinded: for until
this day remains the same vail untaken away, in the reading of the Old
Testament: which vail is done away in Christ. The vail of outward Shadows and
Types was removed, by Christ's coming into the World: for then the
Prefigurations, Prophesies and Promises of the Messiah were fulfilled, and the
Glory of GOD in our Redemption by Christ was to be clearly seen: But the vail
of spiritual Blindness on the Minds and Hearts of the Jews, which was also
mystically signified by the Vail upon the face of Moses, remains to this day in
their reading the Old Testament, which hinders them from discovering the
Messiah to be already come, and that the Types and Prophesies are accomplished
in him. But we all with open face, all we who believe have the Vail removed
from us, so that with open face we behold the Glory of the Lord as in a Glass,
i. e. in the Gospel, which is as a Glass, not a Perspective through which things
afar off are darkly seen, but a Looking-glass fully representing the face as
near. The Glory of the Lord, which was veiled and covered under the Types and
Shadows of the Law, is now by the Gospel clearly revealed. And how Christians
do in the Gospel, as it is a Glass, see the Glory of GOD, the Apostle tells
us, 2 Cor. 4.6. For GOD who Commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our (...), to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of GOD, in
face of Jesus Christ. By the face of Jesus Christ, in which the Glory of GOD is
seen, the Apostle seems to allude to that divine Luster with which the Face of
Moses shone, when he came down from Mount Sinai: So that his meaning may be
this, That as the Children of Israel with their bodily Eyes saw something of
GOD'S Glory shining in the Face of Moses; so they the Disciples of our Savior,
did more clearly with the Eyes of their enlightened Understandings behold the
divine Glory in Jesus Christ, whose Face the Glass of the Gospel represented to
them. Christ is the brightness of God's Glory, and the express Image of his
Person. There is no Perfection in GOD, which is not in Christ, for Christ is
GOD. And in that Glass wherein we see the Face of Christ who is thus the Image
of GOD, we behold the Glory of GOD; and in the Gospel of Jesus Christ is more
clearly revealed. By the Law Men might discern, as it were GOD'S Back-parts. As
He said unto Moses, who beseeched the LORD to show him his Glory, Exodus 33.23.
Thou shall see my back-parts: but my Face shall not be seen: But in the Gospel
we may see the Face of Jesus Christ, and so the Face of GOD; for CHRIST is the
adequate and essential Image of GOD. The knowledge of Christ, and so of GOD'S
Glory, which could be obtained by the Writings of Moses and the Prophets, was
small, compared with that which the Gospel affords; and did not the New
Testament expound the Old, would not the Vail on the face of Moses, as to us,
remain untaken away.

Particularly,

1. THE Glory of divine Mercy shining in the Face of Jesus Christ, it clearly
displayed by the Gospel.

GOD'S Goodness is his Glory; and this is most clearly and fully revealed in
the Gospel; the sum of which is, that God is in Christ, reconciling the World
unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them. The moral Law discovers
nothing of GOD'S Mercy toward sinful Creatures: and the ceremonial Law had only
a shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image of the things: It
contained a dark and imperfect, not a lively and full Representation of those
good things, which the Mercy of GOD designed for miserable Sinners. The Mystery
of Christ, which the Gospel reveals, was under the legal Dispensation wrapped
up in Types, Ceremonies, and obscure Prophesies and Promises. The Gospel, the
Preaching of Jesus Christ is the revelation of the mystery, which was kept
secret since the world began, Romans 16.25. The Riches of Grace, the unsearchable
Riches of Christ were, in a great measure hid, before the Gospel opened them;
so that as the Prophet, and after him, the Apostle said concerning the same,
Eye had not seen, nor Ear heard, neither had entered into the Heart of Man, the
things which God has prepared for them that Love him.

2. THE Glory of divine Wisdom, shining in the face of Jesus Christ is
eminently displayed in the Gospel.

WHEN the Bowels of GOD'S Mercy were troubled for us, the Mouth of his Justice
was opened against us miserable Sinners. Justice demanded the everlasting
Destruction of Guilty, and therefore defervedly accursed Creatures; and backed
it is Demand with powerful Arguments, taken from the Holiness of GOD, and his
Veracity in his Threatenings: And Mercy's Pleas for the Salvation of the
miserable Children of Men, were so importunate, that GOD would not reject them.
Therefore he employed his infinite Wisdom in the Counsel of Peace between the
Father and the Son, to contrive a Method of Redemption, in which these
Attributes should harmonize, Justice and Mercy kiss each other, and be
glorified together. And this adorable Wisdom the Gospel reveals; Wisdom, which
was before hidden, 1 Cor. 2.7. Wisdom, which the blessed Angels discovered
nothing of by their immediate Views of the divine Glory in Heaven; They always
behold the Face of GOD, yet they saw not this Wisdom till the Gospel exhibited
the Face of Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 3.10. To the intent that now unto the
Principalities and Powers in heavenly places, might be known by the church the
manifold Wisdom of God.

THUS the Glory of GOD, especially the Glory of his Mercy and Wisdom is most
clearly discovered in the Gospel, Joh. 1.18. No man has seen God at any time;
the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father; he has declared
him. The Bosom is the Seat of Love, and Repository of Secrets: Jesus Christ who
is in the bosom of God the Father, has by the Gospel made known his tender
Compassions and mysterious Counsels. The Gospel being such a Revelation, the
Glory of it far surpasses that of the Law

IV. THE Gospel exceeds the Law in glory, inasmuch as it is a general
Revelation, designed for the use and benefit of mankind.

AS it is a clearer and more complete Revelation of GOD, his Mind and Will, so
it is intended and granted for the Instruction and Advantage of more than the
Law was. The Law was a Revelation directed to the Jews peculiarly, and not
vouchsafed to other Nations, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob,
his statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any
Nation: and as for his Judgments, they have not known them. The Legal
Despensation was restrained to that People, whom the LORD Chose to be a special
People unto himself, above all that were upon the face of the Earth. To the
Israelites pertained the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the
giving of the Law, and the service of GOD, and the 'Promises, Romans 9.4. The Law
of Commandments contained in Ordinances was a Wall of Partition, that fenced
the Jewish Nation, and severed, them from others, making them GOD'S Sacred
Enclosure, into which the Gentiles should not come, to partake of the
Privileges of the Church. The Ceremonial Law is styled the Enmity, being the
cause and sign of Enmity between Jews and Gentiles, keeping them at a distance
from one another. Thus the Law was confined within narrow Bounds; was directed
and restrained to the Use of one Nation, and that the fewest of all People. But
the Gospel is a Dispensation, in it is Nature, and in it is Author's Design,
general: or such as respects Mankind, without any distinction of Nation. There
is no Monopoly of it is Privileges. It is proportioned to the need, and ordained
for the benefit of Men of all Nations and Conditions. The Gospel is (as the
angelical Preacher said) Good tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all
people, Luke 2.10. The Grace of God, i.e. The Gospel that brings Salvation,
has appeared to all Men, Tit. 2.11. Christ has broken down the middle wall of
partition between Jews and Gentiles; Having abolished in his flesh the enmity,
even the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances: and came and preached
Peace, i. e. The Gospel of Peace, to them which were afar off, and to them that
were nigh. The Gentiles therefore are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but
fellow Citizens with the Saints and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2. Now a
general Revelation intended and granted for the benefit of all, is more
glorious than that which was particular, or restrained to one People. That
Glory excels, which is not only in it self brighter, but also in it is extent
spread further, than another Glory; and such is the Glory of the Gospel,
compared with that of the Law. The Law was as a Lamp which illuminates one
Room: The Gospel is as the Sun, whose going forth is from one end of the
Heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it, diffusing a universal Light. And
surely the glory of the Sun, in this respect, far surpasses that of a burning
Lamp, and as much does the Glory of the Gospel that of the Law.

V. THE Gospel is more glorious than the Law, because it is the ministration of
the Spirit.

THE Gospel is in opposition to the Law, called the Spirit, and the
ministration of the Spirit, Context, ver. 6.8. Because the Spirit of GOD
accompanies the Dispensation of it, much more than it did that of the Law. By
means of the Gospel Persons receive the holy Spirit; Gal. 3.2. This only would
I learn of you, received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the
hearing of Faith? By the works of the Law, we are here to understand the
doctrine of Justification by the Works of the Law, which the Judazing Teachers
preached: and by the hearing of Faith, is meant the Doctrine of the Gospel;
hearing being put for the thing heard, and Faith for the Doctrine believed: By
the hearing of Faith, and not by the Works of the Law is the Spirit received.
It is true, that under the Law GOD bestowed his Spirit on his Servants, Neh.
9.20. Thou gave also thy good Spirit, to instruct them. But the holy Spirit
is more plentifully granted under the Evangelical, than it was under the Legal
Dispensation. The gift of the Spirit, in the largest measures of it, was
reserved for the Glory of Gospel Times. GOD often promised, that in the Day of
Gospel Light he would pour out his Spirit: This Phrase imports his bestowing of
it plentifully. It is with an eye to Gospel Times, that GOD'S giving his Spirit
is expressed by his pouring of it forth. The Spirit was more sparingly given
under the Law, than it is under the Gospel; It then came down from Heaven, at
it were, in a few drops, but now, as it were, in a full Stream. Under the
Gospel, that Promise, I will pour out my Spirit on all Flesh, is fulfilled,
Acts 2.16, 17. "There were some sprinklings of it under the law, and confined
to a separate Nation, but now showers are poured down upon all Nations, to make
them fruitful in good Works". On this account the Gospel is far more glorious
than the Law, as the Apostle argues in our Context, Ver. 7, 8. If the
ministration of death (i. e. the Law) written and engraven in stones was
glorious -- How shall not the ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious?

VI. THE Gospel is far more glorious than the Law, in regard of the wonderful
Effects produced by it.

THE glorious Things which have been, and still are effected by the Gospel,
accompanied with the Spirit of GOD, declare it is surpassing Glory. -- I might
here Instance in those great and mavelous things which were done by it in the
World at the first Preaching thereof, and in those also which it still
performs in the Souls of Men; equal to which, in number, or Glory, were never
accomplished by the Law.

1. THE Effects produced by the Gospel in the World, at the first Preaching of
it, were admirable and glorious.

THE Blow that was given to Satan's visible Kingdom on Earth, by no other
Weapon than the Gospel, shows the Excellency of it; and may well make us to
say concerning it, as David of the Sword with which he slew Goliath, There is
none like it. The Rulers of the darkness of this World never had a more
extensive Dominion, nor exercised a more Tyranical Power over the miserable
Children of Men, than about the time that the Gospel began to be preached. The
Devil was then seated and strengthened in the Government of the Nations; was
worshipped as a God: He almost every where had his Temples, Altars and Oracles,
that were much frequented and consulted. The People brought their Offerings
unto him; he did eat the fat of Sacrifices, and drink the blood of
Drink Offerings; yea the Blood of his cruel Votaries Sons and Daughters, whom
they barbarously sacrificed unto him. Idolatry and Superstition every where
prevailed. But by the Preaching of the Gospel, the Devil's Kingdom was shaken,
and he lost that great Power which he before had in the World. Luke 10.17, 18.
The seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the Devils are subject
unto us, through thy name. And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as Lightning
fall from Heaven. Our Savior in this Expression, might allude unto Satan's
first Fall from Heaven; when of an Angel of Light he became a Spirit of
Darkness, and was in a moment cast down from his glorious Seat in Heaven: So by
the Preaching of the Gospel he should be turned out of the Throne which he had
usurped on Earth, and fall from his great Power in the World, as Lightning
flasheth and vanishes away suddenly and irrecoverably. When the Gospel was
first published by Christ, and Those sent by him immediately to preach it, the
Kingdom of darkness was soon weakened, and did apparently go to wreck. The Devil
was beaten out of his Territories, his Temples were demolished, his Altars
thrown down, and his Oracles silenced. With that Rod of his Strength which
Christ sent out of Zion, he destroyed the Works of the Devil, 2 Cor. 10.4. The
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling
down of strong Holds. The Apostles Warfare against Principalities and Powers
was spiritual, the Weapons they used were not carnal, yet mighty through GOD:
They achieved glorious Conquests, but not by the edge of the Sword, or
stratagems of War: The Gospel was, through GOD the mighty and effectual Weapon,
with which they battered the Devil's Fortresses, and over-turn'd his Dominion.
The Gospel prevailed against the Learning of Philosophers, and Power of Earthly
Kings, and gloriously triumphed over all the Opposition which it met with from
the Gates of Hell. Dagon fell before the Ark of GOD; and the Magicians Serpents
were devoured by Aaron's Rod; so the Gospel was too hard for all the Strength
and Wisdom of the World. The Walls of Jericho fell down at the Priests blowing
of the Rams Horns; so when the Trumpet of the Gospel was sounded by the
Ministers thereof, down went the Images, Idolatries and Superstitions of the
Gentiles, and the Religion of Christ took place, and his Kingdom was set up on
the Ruin of Satan's. In a few Years the Gospel (like Leaven which soon
leaveneth the whole Lump) spread into almost all parts of the known World. Col.
1.6. The Gospel is come unto you, as it is in all the World. The great Change
wrought in the World, by means of the Gospel, at the first Preaching of it,
speaks it glorious.

2. THE Effects which the Gospel still produces in the Souls of Men are great
ana glorious.

IN regard of those things especially, which the Gospel, accompanied with the
holy Spirit, effects in the Souls of Believers, the Apostle does in our Text
and Context so magnify it above the Law.

1. THE Gospel works effectually to the Conversion of Souls.

NOT only was Satan's visible Kingdom in the World marvellously destroyed by
the Gospel, at the first Preaching of it, but also his invisible Empire in the
Hearts of Sinners is continually broken by this Rod of Christ's strength, which
he has sent out of Zion. This dasheth in pieces the Works of the Devil within
Men, as powerfully as it did those without them. The strong Holds which he has
erected in the Souls of Men, blindness of Mind, hardness of Heart, stubbornness
of Will, and the like, are demolished by the Gospel, as gloriously as were the
false Religions, Idolatries and Superstitions, which he had set up in the
World. Luke 11.21, 22. When a strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods
are in peace. But when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome
him, he takes from him all his armor wherein he trusted, and divides his
spoil. Satan is the strong Man armed, the Heart of every unconverted Sinner is
his Garrison which he keeps shut up, and barred again CHRIST, by unreasonable
Prejudices, carnal Inclinations and worldly Interests; but the King of Glory,
by his Spirit in the Gospel, comes upon, and casts out the strong Man armed,
storms and takes his Fort, and converteth it into a holy Temple. Upon the white
Horse of the pure Word of Truth, the mighty Redeemer still rides forth
conquering, and to conquer, Rev. 6.2. By means of the Gospel Persons are turned
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. The Gospel, and
not the Law, is the Instrumental Cause of saving Conversion, Cont. ver. 8. The
Letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. The moral Law revealing Man's Duty,
and denouncing GOD'S Wrath against Him for not performing it, kills: It makes
Sin to revive in the Conscience, and the guilty to dye. It only shows Sinners
that they are dead Men, being condemned already; and discovers to them no
possible way of escaping the Curse, and offers no Grace, no supernatural
Strength unto them to enable them to get out of the State of Nature. But the
Spirit gives Life: The Gospel which is called the Spirit quickens those who
are dead in Trespasses and Sins. Spiritual Life is infused by means of the
Gospel: The holy Ghost uses it as his Instrument in quickening of dead Souls,
Converting of sinful Men, Joh. 5.25. Verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is
coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and
they that hear shall live. CHRIST'S voice in the Gospel raises the spiritually
dead. The beginning and progress of Conversion is by means of the Gospel; the
whole conformity of the Soul unto Christ is wrought thereby; as the Apostle
shows in our Context, Ver. 18. We all with open face, beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image; from glory to glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord. The fight of the LORD'S Glory in the Glass
of the Gospel, is transforming; Changes the Soul into the Image and likeness
of CHRIST. The Spirit of GOD works a saving Change in the Heart of a Sinner,
by giving him a clear view of CHRIST'S Glory, as the Gospel represents it. And
the holy Ghost carries on the work of Sanctification in Believers, by enabling
them to see more and more of the LORD'S Glory in that Glass: They are changed
into his Image, from Glory to Glory; that is, from one degree of Grace to
another, until they arrive to the perfection of Holiness. All the Degrees of
our conformity to CHRIST are styled Glory; the first and lowest degree of Grace
is Glory begun, and the highest is Glory perfected. Believers see the Glory of
the Lord in the Gospel, and are changed into the same Image, from Glory to
Glory; that is, (as one conceives from the allusion to a Glass) "The Glory of
the Lord shining upon the Gospel, and from the Gospel shining upon our Hearts,
does Change them into the Image of the same Glory; even as the Glory of the Sun
shining upon a Glass, and from that Glass reflecting on a Wall, does therein
produce an Image of it is own light." Thus it is by the Gospel that a saving
Change is wrought in the Soul. This Glory is peculiar to the Gospel. It is said
indeed, that the Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul, Psalm. 19.7.
But by the Law here, as in many other Texts of Scripture, is meant the whole
Word of GOD, comprehending the Promises of Salvation by Christ. The moral Law
is not the Instrumental Cause of Conversion. It prepares a Soul for Conversion,
inasmuch as by it is the knowledge of Sin: It convinces the Sinner of Guilt,
and deserved Damnation, but leaves him shut up under the fearful Curse, without
the least hope of escape. Did not the Gospel reveal that God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, the awakened Sinner would pine away in his
Iniquities. It is not the Terror of the LORD, which (...) in the Law, but his
Glory shining in the Gospel, that produces a saving Change in the Heart.

2. PEACE of Conscience is an excellent Effect of the Gospel.

BY Peace of Conscience, I mean that rest and comfort which the believing Soul
enjoys in the expectation and persuasion of GOD'S Mercy through CHRIST, to
pardon and save it. This is the product of the Gospel of Peace. The Law is in
our Context styled the ministration of Condemnation, because it passes the
Sentence of Death upon the Transgressor of it, and gives Conscience it is
Authority to condemn the Sinner: But the Gospel is called the ministration of
Righteousness, because it exhibits and offers a Righteousness sufficient for
our Justification: Therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith, Romans 1.17. The Gospel revealing that perfect Righteousness, which GOD
graciously imputes without the Works of the Law, to those who believe in
Christ, is the means of settling an happy Peace in the Conscience. Now, as the
Apostle says in the verse immediately preceding our Text, If the ministration
of Condemnation be glory, much more does the ministration of Righteousness
exceed in Glory. The Gospel far excels the Law in that it is the ministration
of Righteousness, and so of Peace. It is true, there is some mention made of
this Righteousness in the Writings of Moses and the Prophets; hence it is said,
Romans 3.21, 22. Now the Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested,
being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets; even the Righteousness of God
which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe.
But by the Law here the Apostle does not intend the moral Law, for that is
wholly silent concerning an imputed Righteousness: But he means the Law of
Commandments contained in Ordinances, the ceremonial Law; and it is certain,
that the Sacrifices under the Law did typify the Death of CHRIST, by which we
have now received the Atonement; and there were also many Prophesies and
Promises of Christ, as the Lord our Righteousness; and yet the glorious Mystery
of Justification by Faith in Christ, was in a great measure kept secret until
the Gospel manifested it. In the Tabernacle were offered both gifts and
sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining
to the conscience, Heb. 9.9. They indeed prefigur'd a Sacrifice sufficient to
pacify Wrath, and quiet Conscience, yet those Sacrifices, and also the Promises
and Prophesies which the Old Testament Church enjoyed, were but an obscure
exhibition of that Righteousness which is the foundation of Pardon and Peace,
Heb. 10.1. For the Law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very
image of the things, can never with those sacrifices, which they offered year
by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect. "The Jewish Ordinances
were rather a Bond acknowledging the Debt, than an Acquittance showing the
Discharge; therefore called, The Handwriting of Ordinances against us." But
the Gospel clearly revealing the Righteousness of CHRIST for our Justification,
makes those who receive it perfect as pertaining to the Conscience.

3. A glorious Liberty is another Effect of the Gospel.

THE glorious Liberty of the Children of GOD is spoken of, Romans 8.21. It is by
the Gospel that Men are made Partakers of it. Where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is Liberty, Cont. v. 17. By the Liberty of the Children of GOD, we may
understand such an ingenuous Disposition as that Men do look upon, and act
toward GOD as a gracious Father, in and through JESUS CHRIST. The Law, the
Covenant from Mount Sinai gendreth to Bondage, Gal. 4.24. Those who are under
it, are in the Condition of Slaves, not of Sons. It produces such a Temper and
Spirit toward GOD, as Slaves usually have toward their Masters; being
influenced to their Duty only by Fear, or an apprehension of the Severity of
their Masters, and the smart of the Rod. But the Gospel produces a Child-like
Temper in the Souls of Believers. By it they receive, not the Spirit of bondage
again to fear, but the spirit of adoption, whereby they cry, Abba, Father, Romans
8.15. It gives a filial Freedom, so that Believers may come unto GOD at all
times, as Children to a Father: They may come to the Throne of Grace, in every
time of need, with greater boldness, than the High Priest under the Law could
once a Year enter into the Holiest of all.

THUS the Gospel in regard of the Effects produced by it, is more glorious than
the Law.

VII. THE Gospel is far more glorious than the Law in respect of the Duration
of it.

THERE is verily a disannulling of the commandment going before, for the
weakness and unprofitableness thereof, Heb. 7.18. An end is put to the Legal
Dispensation, but the Evangelical shall continue to the End of the World,
Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you
always, even unto the End of the World. Had there been no defect in the Legal,
GOD would not have introduced the Evangelical Dispensation: The Change is to
the better: GOD will not alter or abrogate the present Dispensation, because
there is not a better to succeed in the room of it, Heb. 12.26, 27. Whose voice
then shook the Earth, but now he has promised, saying, yet once more I shake
not the Earth only, but also Heaven. And this word, yet once more, signifies
the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that
those things which cannot be shaken may remain. The LORD'S voice shook the
Earth, when he delivered the Law at Sinai; the whole Mount quaked greatly: but
he shook not the Earth only, but also Heaven, the Jewish Church State, at the
bringing in of the Gospel. And he removed the Types and Ordinances of the Law,
as things never designed by him the Appointer and Founder of them, to continue
always; and so made way for the Introduction and Establishment of the Gospel
and the Ordinances thereof, which are things that cannot be shaken, but shall
remain to the End of the World. The Gospel-state is that Kingdom which cannot
be moved. The Angel which John saw flying in the midst of Heaven, (which might
denote the speed and diligence of Christ's faithful Ambassadors) had the
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, Rev. 14.6. This
proves the transcendent Excellency of the Gospel. For (as the Apostle says in
the verse following our Text) if that which was done away was glorious, much
more that which remains is glorious.

IN these respects the Gospel exceeds the Law in Glory, and so far that even
that which was made glorious, had no Glory, in comparison of the Glory that
excels.

HAVING thus Illustrated and Confirmed the Truth, I proceed to Apply it.

1. IS the Gospel so much more glorious than the Law? We may hence infer the
great Dignity of the Evangelical Ministry.

IT is consistent with the Humility that should cloth the Ministers of the
lowly JESUS, to assert the Dignity of their sacred Employment. The holy Apostle
Paul, who counted himself less than the least of all Saints, is, in the Chapter
wherein our Text is, magnifying his Office; and he strongly proves it
honorable from the transcendent Glory of the Gospel. His genuine Inference
from his large Discourse concerning the Excellency of the Gospel is that in
Ver. 12, 13. Cont. Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness
of speech, and not as Moses, who put a vail over his face. As if he had said,
The Gospel being in so many respects more glorious than the Law, and especially
since, according to our certain Expectation, it shall continue to the End of
the World, I am not ashamed of my ministration, but do thus boldly vindicate my
Apostleship, and do not, as Moses vail the Glory which the LORD has put upon
me. The more excellent a divine Revelation is, the more noble is their Office,
who are sent with it to the Children of Men. It was glorious to be a Minister
of the Law, it is much more so to be a Minister of the Gospel. John the
Baptist, CHRIST'S Harbinger and Herald, was more than a Minister of the Law,
more than a Prophet: The Law and the Prophets were until John: But in his Time
Christ was actually exhibited, and he declared the Messiah to be already come,
pointing him out, as it were with the Finger, saying, Behold the Lamb of GOD.
So that John's Ministry excelled any that was before; yet when our Savior was
speaking of John's greatness, he showed that under the Evangelical
Dispensation, when the Gospel should be fully preached, the least Minister
thereof would, in respect of his Office, be greater than John, be a more
honorable Officer than he, Matthew. 11.11. Verily I say unto you, among them
that are born of women, there has not risen a greater than John the Baptist:
notwithstanding, he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, is greater than he.
The more glorious a Kingdom is, the more honorable is an Office in it: The
Gospel Kingdom is termed the Kingdom of Heaven; the Glory of it exceeds that of
all the Kingdoms of this World: To be a Minister therefore of CHRIST'S
spiritual Kingdom on Earth, is no mean Preferment. No Man takes this Honor
unto himself, without horrid Usurpation, but he that is called of GOD to this
high and holy Office, should be very humble and thankful; saying with the great
Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me, who am less than the least of all Saints, is
this Grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable
Riches of Christ: And, 1 Timothy 1.12. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who has
enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry. --
And they unto whose Trust the glorious Gospel of the blessed GOD is committed,
should be careful to support the Dignity of their Office, which they can do in
no such effectual way, as by discharging faithfully the Duties belonging to it
-- And let every Man so account of them, as the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the mysteries of God: and this is to count them worthy of double
honor, and to esteem them very highly in Love for their work's sake. That is
spoken of, and in the New Testament is directly applied to the Ministers of the
glorious Gospel, which we read in Isa. 52.7. How beautiful upon the mountains
are the feet of him that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that
brings good tidings of good, that publishes salvation, that says unto Zion,
thy God reigns.

2. DOES the Gospel exceed the Law in Glory? then the Sin of Despising it is
very great.

NOTWITHSTANDING the Gospel is so incomparably glorious, yet there are
multitudes that despise it. When it was first published to the World, the
generality of Men looked upon it as a very mean or ridiculous Doctrine, and not
worthy to be regarded by Rational Beings: They called the Preaching of it
foolishness. And the most of Men do not entertain a better Opinion of it, at
this Day: Some despise it so as to reject the Knowledge of it; they have no
desire and take no pains to understand the glorious Truths contained in it.
Some are ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST, ashamed to profess it; and how light
do Sinners commonly make of the Overtures of Grace therein? All who believe not
in CHRIST, and walk not according to the Rules of the Gospel, are guilty of
despising it. He that breaks the Law despises it, 2 Samuel 12.9. Wherefore have
thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? So all who
disobey the Gospel despise it; and the greatness of their Sin and Folly appears
from the Glory of the Gospel. The more excellent any thing is, the more vile is
the Contempt of it. As much as the Gospel exceeds the Law in Glory, so much
worse is it for Men to despise the Gospel than the Law, and exposes them to so
much heavier Punishments. Heb. 10.28, 29. He that despised Moses Law, died
without mercy, under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified,
and unholy thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace? Contempt of
the Gospel is treading the Son of GOD underfoot, as if he were really a Worm
and no Man, much less GOD: It is setting of him at naught, as truly as Herod
with his Men of War did, when they made a mock-King of him: It is trampling the
Redeemer's Grace, as if it were nothing worth: And it is counting his precious
Blood, which is the Blood of the Covenant, an unholy, a common thing; such as
pollutes rather than purifies the Soul. Despising the Gospel is doing Despite
unto the Spirit of Grace, the holy Ghost, which accompanies the Gospel to
persuade Men of the Truth and Excellency of it, and to make it of saving
Efficacy to them. So great is the Sin of Gospel-Contempt that Christ said
concerning those who were guilty of despising the Law and the Prophets, Joh.
16.22 -- 24. If I had not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin: but
now they have no cloak for their Sin -- If I had not done among them the works
which none other man did, they had not had Sin: but now they have both seen,
and hated both me and my father. The righteous GOD punishes this Sin with the
greatest Judgments, temporal, spiritual and eternal. Wrath came not upon the
Jews to the uttermost, until they despised and persecuted the Gospel, Mat.
22.7. When the King heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his Armies,
(the Romans) and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their City. The sorest
outward Calamities are brought on a People, who enjoy the Gospel, for their
Contempt of it. GOD is provoked by Men's despising the Gospel, to smite them
with Judicial Blindness, so that they never shall see the Glory of it, Joh.
12.40, 41. They who contemptuously shut their Eyes against the light of the
Gospel, GOD often Judicially closes their Eyes, and delivers them to the Power
of Satan to blind them, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them
that are lost: In whom the God of this world has blinded the eyes of those
that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the
Image of God, should shine unto them. The Despisers of the Gospel shall be
punished with everlasting Destruction: And it will be more tolerable, not only
for Sodom and Gomorrah, but also for the Despisers of Moses Law in the Day of
Judgment, than for them, 2 These. 1.7, 8. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- Now
consider this, ye that contemn the glorious Gospel, and beware lest that come
upon you which is spoken of in the Prophets: Behold, ye despisers, and wonder,
and perish.

3. LET what has been said, raise our Esteem of the Gospel.

THAT which is glorious ought to be valued by us, and according to the degree
of it is Excellence. The Display of the transcendent Glory of the Gospel should
excite and confirm in us a due Esteem of it. -- What has been said concerning
the Glory of the Gospel, disparageth not the Law, and will not justify the
Contempt of it. The Law is glorious, and deserves esteem. It was a most
suitable Revelation for the People to whom, and the Time wherein it was
granted. Infinite Wisdom judged it fit that the discovery of GOD'S Mind and
Will concerning the Salvation of fallen Man, should be like the dawning Light,
which shines more and more unto the perfect day. A meridian Brightness was not
proper for the Morning of the Church Times. Under the Law the Church was, as it
were, in her nonage; and the Instructions GOD gave were suited to her
Capacity. Believers were then Children, and the Law was their Schoolmaster, to
teach them the Elements, the Rudiments, the first Principles of divine
Knowledge: Gal. 3.24. The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ: It
was to prepare the Church for the University of the Gospel, in which the
Knowledge of Christ is more fully taught. GOD vouchsafed further light to his
People by extraordinary Prophets which he sent unto them: He at sundry Times,
and in diverse manners, spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets, who predicted
what the Law prefigur'd, and gave many Promises of the Messiah. Yet it was not
perfect daylight until the Sun of Righteousness arose; then the shadows fled
away, "and the whole Horizon of heavenly Truth was disclosed." So that although
the Law was glorious the divine Revelation before the fullness of Time came was
excellent, and to be greatly esteemed, yet the Gospel is far more glorious, and
to be more highly valued. The Instructions of the Law were beggarly Elements,
mean Rudiments, in comparison of the deeper and more full Instructions of the
Gospel. That is a notable Prophecy concerning the Evangelical Dispensation,
Jer. 3.14, 15, 16. I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I
will bring you to Zion. And I will give you Pastors according to mine heart,
which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. And it shall come to
pass when ye be multiplied and increased in the Land; In those days, says the
Lord, they shall say no more, The Ark of the Covenant of the Lord: neither
shall it come to mind, neither shall they remember it, neither shall they visit
it, neither shall that be done any more. The days of the Messiah are here
intended, in which GOD'S People should be fed with Wisdom and Understanding, by
faithful evangelical Pastors, in a way different from the Jewish Institution.
And their prizing the Gospel Dispensation above the former, is expressed by
their not remembering, mentioning, nor visiting the Ark of the Covenant. The Ark
was called, The Glory; it was very much the Glory of Israel: It was an eminent
Type of Christ, (the Glory of his People;) and a Symbol of GOD'S Presence with
his ancient Church. The Old Testament Saints had it in high account; nothing
was more precious unto them: yet it is here foretold, that when Christ, the
Antitype of the Ark, should he come, and a more spiritual Worship erected, then
there should be no mention made of the Ark, it should not be remembered, nor
come into mind, neither shall that be done any more in it, or, as the Margin
renders this, It shall not be magnified any more, It shall not be had in honor
or respect, or be made much of. The whole ceremonial Law is not to be valued in
comparison of the glorious Gospel; nor the carnal Ordinances of the former, to
be mentioned in the same day with the spiritual Ordinances of the latter. The
moral Law is to be highly esteemed. GOD will magnify this Law, and make it
honorable. It is truly excellent and honorable in it self; and the things of
it are great things, and should be so in our account. But the moral Law is only
a Revelation of GOD'S Will concerning Man's Duty, not of his Good Will
concerning Man's Salvation. It shows us what we ought to do, and condemns us
for not doing it, and leaves us without hope of escaping it is dreadful Curse.
It is a perfect Rule of Obedience, but affords no strength unto impotent Man to
walk according to it. Now the Gospel does not make void the Law, as it is a
perfect Rule of Life and Manners, but re-inforceth it, and farther shows how
the Sinner may be freed from the Curse, revealing a Righteousness that answers
the Demands of the Law, and offers Strength to enable us sincerely and
acceptably to keep the divine Precepts. All the intrinsic Glory which the moral
Law has, the Gospel has, and much more: We should therefore give the Gospel
the preference to the Law in our esteem. GOD'S Law was more desired by his
Saints than Gold, yea than much fine Gold, It was better to them than Thousands
of Gold and Silver. How then ought we to prize the glorious Gospel? It is an
inestirnable Pearl we should be willing to part with all things rather than to
be without it, Matthew. 13.4^, 46. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a
merchant-man, seeking goodly Pearls: who when he had found one Pearl of great
price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought it. How were the ancient
Promises valued by those who looked for Redemption? Heb. 11.1^ These all died
in Faith, not having received (...) Promises ( i. e. The Accomplishment of them
in the actual Exhibition of the Messiah) but having seen them afar off, and
were persuaded of them, and embraced them. As good old Simeon took up CHRIST in
his Arms, so the Patriarchs by Faith embraced the Promises, "saluted and hugged
them," as the original word imports. When they meditated on the Promises, did
they not cry out, Oh dear precious Promises that will in time yield the
Messiah! How then ought we to value the Gospel, which is the completion of
those Promises? Shall we not embrace the glorious Gospel: count it worthy of
all acceptance? worthy to be received with all readiness of Mind, and strength
of Affection.

4. LET us all be solicitous that the Gospel may produce it is glorious Effects
in our Souls.

WE have seen that the Gospel is far more glorious than the Law in regard of
those wonderful Effects produced by it in the Souls of Men: We should be
anxiously concerned that this Glory of the Gospel be manifested and magnified
in our Conversion and Salvation. There must indeed be first a Work of the Law
on our Hearts, convincing us of Sin and Wrath, to prepare us for a Work of the
Gospel, in Changing our Hearts, and encouraging us to believe in Christ We must
seek, that the Commandment may come with power on our Souls, to revive the
sense of our Guilt and Misery, and to slay us; to make us see that we are
condemned Malefactors, dead in Trespasses and Sins: and then that the Gospel
may come unto us in Power, and in the holy Ghost, to give us life. We must look
for a saving Change to be wro't in us by the Gospel, as a fit Instrument in the
Hand of GOD'S Spirit. The moral Law was never designed for this use. If ever we
be spiritually begotten, it must be through the Gospel. The Children of Promise
the Heirs of Salvation are not born of the Bondwoman, Gal. 4.22, etc. All the
Terrors on Mount Sinai will not drive a Sinner out of his natural Estate, home
unto Christ. There must be a Hope set before him, or he will not fly for
Refuge. It is not the sight of GOD'S Glory in the Glass of the Law, but of the
Gospel that is transforming. The Glory on the Face of Moses, which was such
that the Israelites could not steadfastly behold him, is not sufficient; there
must be a discovery of the Glory of GOD in the Face of JESUS CHRIST, in order
to a saving Illumination. The Glory of divine Mercy and Wisdom in our
Redemption by CHRIST, must be seen by him that believes in CHRIST, and is
transformed into his Image. Let us therefore give earnest heed to the Gospel,
as the Instituted ordinary Means of through Conversion. Let it be our great
Care, vehement Desire and constant Prayer, that the Gospel may work effectually
in us, as it does in all them that believe -- May be the Power of God unto our
Salvation. How sad is it, if we who now speak, and hear so much of the Glory of
the Gospel, experience nothing of it is Power on our Hearts, changing of them,
and carrying on a Work of Grace in them! How dreadful is it, to have the
glorious Gospel prove a savor of Death unto Death! Let us pray that it may
come to us, not in Word only, (for then it will eventually be a killing Letter,
as well as the Law) but also in power, and in the holy Ghost; that so it is
Glory may be exemplified and displayed in our Salvation.

5. FROM what has been said, Let us be incited to a more diligent Study of the
Gospel.

THE Glory of GOD is more fully and clearly revealed in the Gospel, than it is
in the Law: But we cannot see it, nor be affected with it, unless we apply our
Minds to the study of the Gospel. The Mysteries of the Gospel afford the most
delightful Entertainment to inquisitive Minds. The ancient Prophets, who
foretold something of the Glory of the Gospel, used to study their own
Prophecies concerning it, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. Of which Salvation the Prophets
have enquired, and searched diligently, who prophesied of the Grace that should
come unto you: searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ
which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of
Christ, and the Glory that should follow: Unto whom it was revealed, that not
unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things which are now
reported unto you by them that have preached the Gospel, with the holy Ghost
coming down from Heaven, which things the Angels desire to look into. The holy
Prophets with great diligence and delight searched into those unfathomable
Mysteries of Grace, that were in dark Expressions spoken of by themselves, as
moved by the Spirit of GOD, and which are more fully and clearly declared in
the Gospel: Which Things (says the Apostle) the Angels desire to look into.
This Expression is allusive to the Cherubims which were over the Ark, a Type of
Christ, looking down earnestly upon it, as if they would pry into it. The
blessed Angels, who behold the Face of GOD in Heaven, do as it were turn their
Eyes from viewing his Glory in the upper World, and bend down their sacred
Heads to look into the glorious Mysteries of the Gospel. The manifold Wisdom of
GOD made known to the Principalities and Powers in heavenly Places, by the
Dispensation of his Grace toward the Church, is wonderful and ravishing to
them. And shall not we study those things, which the glorious Angels think so
worthy their Contemplations? Let us faithfully improve all Means, that are
proper and appointed for our Information in the great and important Truths of
the Gospel. Let us, with the very learned Apostle Paul, Count all things but
loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus, our Lord. -- And as
David prayed unto GOD, saying, Open thou mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous
things out of thy Law; so let us pray that GOD would open our Eyes, that we may
behold more wondrous things out of his Gospel.

6. LET Christians be Exhorted to adorn the glorious Gospel, the Doctrine of
God our Savior in all things.

WE cannot add to the intrinsic Glory of the Gospel, but we should testify and
declare it is Excellency by having our Conversation in the World as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. It is a Reproach to the glorious Gospel, and brings it into
Contempt, when those who profess it walk not according to the holy and
excellent Rules of it, Romans 2.23, 24. Thou that make thy boast of the Law,
through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? For the name of God is blasphemed
among the Gentiles through you. So when Professors of Christianity disobey the
Precepts of it, they darken the Glory of the Gospel, and dishonor the Name of
Christ. We receive the Grace of GOD the Gospel in vain, as to our own Souls,
unless we conform our Lives to it: as it is shown they had as good have been
without the Law, who did not keep it, Jer. 8.8. How do ye say, we are wise, and
the Law of the Lord is with us? Lo, certainly in vain made he it, the Pen of
the Scribes is in vain. And we render the Gospel unprofitable to others also by
our unsuitable Lives: We increase and confirm their Prejudices, which hinder
their seeing the Glory of the Gospel. -- But the Luster of a godly Conversation
is an Ornament to the glorious Gospel, which we profess. The regular Practice
of all the duties which the Gospel requires, sets forth the Glory of the Gospel
to best Advantage, and recommends it to those, before whom our Light shines,
and may convince even Infidels that the Gospel came from the GOD of Glory.
Christians of the lowest Rank are obliged thus to adorn the Gospel, Tit. 2.9,
10 Let our Conversation therefore be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil.
1.27. 1 These. 2.11, 12. As ye know how we exhorted, and comforted, and charged
every one of you, as a father does his children; That ye would walk worthy of
God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and Glory.

7. LET us be very Thankful to GOD for the Gospel.

WHAT has been said concerning the Glory of the Gospel (though one half has not
been told) may well excite our thankful Praises unto GOD for it. What Advantage
had the Jews above the Gentiles? Much every way, chiefly because that unto them
were committed the Oracles of God. And Christians have a vast advantage above
the Jews, in that the glorious Gospel of the Blessed GOD is committed unto
them. GOD has provided some better thing for us, that they without us should
not be made perfect. The Gospel is a greater Glory unto a People, among whom it
is dispensed in the Power and Purity of it, than the Ark was to Israel; and
more Glory is due therefore unto GOD from those who enjoy it. How glad would the
Patriarchs and Prophets of old have been, to have seen and heard what we do
under the Evangelical Dispensation? Matthew. 13.16, 17. But blessed are your
Eyes, for they see; and your Ears, for they hear: for verily I say unto you,
that many Prophets and righteous Men have desired to see those things which ye
see, and have not seen them: and to hear those things, which ye hear; and have
not heard them. They indeed by the Perspective of Faith saw the promised
Blessings; but they saw them afar off, had but an obscure View of them to what
is now granted. With the Eagle-Eye of Faith Abraham saw the Day of Gospel Light
at a great distance, and the remote Prospect which he had of it, made him to
rejoice greatly, Joh. 8.56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he
saw it, and was glad. Should not those who live in that day, much more rejoice
in, and be thankful for the Light and Glory of it? GOD'S (...) People devoutly
praised him for his distinguish (...) ^^vour to them, in giving them the Law,
Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation: And as for his
judgments they have not known them. Praise ye the Lord. Should not we much more
praise him for sending the glorious Gospel unto us, when so many Nations in the
World are as yet destitute of it? Luke 10.21. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in
spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto
babes: even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

A Pillar of Salt To Season a Corrupt Age. A SERMON TO bring Lot's Wife to
Remembrance. Preached at the LECTURE in HINGHAM.

By Ebenezer Gay, M. A.

Psalm. cxix. 52. I remembered thy Judgments of old, O Lord.

1 Cor. x. 11. Now all these things happened to them for Ensamples: and they
are written for our Admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come.

Uxor Loti in salis Statuam conversa fuit, ut nobis quoddam praestaret
Condimentum, quo sapiamus aliquid, unde illud caveatur Exemplum.

Aug. Poena ejus dat Condimentum Sapientiae Poenitentibus.

Lyr. BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN, 1728

A Pillar of Salt to Season a corrupt Age.
LUKE XVII. 32. Remember LOT'S Wife.


OUR Blessed SAVIOR speaking to his Disciples of the calamitous Destruction
which should be brought on Jerusalem, warned them to flee out of it, when they
should see the Abomination of Desolation standing in the holy Place: i. e. The
Roman Army besieging the City. In the verse immediately preceding our Text he
said, In that day, he which shall be in the housetop, and his staff in the
house, let him not come down to take it away: and he that is in the field, let
him likewise not turn back: As if he had said, Let every one of my Servants
make all possible haste to get out of Jerusalem, when the Judgments of GOD
shall be irresistibly breaking in upon it. And to press this Advice, and excite
them to flee with the greatest speed, He added these words, Remember Lot's
Wife. -- And what he said to them, he now says to us all, whom he is warning
to flee from Wrath, Remember Lot's Wife. We should remember her, not for our
Imitation, but for our Admonition and Awakning. -- We should remember her Sin,
and her Punishment, and may receive much Instruction and spiritual Profit
therefrom.

I. WE should remember the SIN of Lot's Wife.

THIS is recorded, Genesis 19.26. His Wife looked back from behind him. In her
flight from Sodom she looked back. But how was this a Sin? Wherein consisted
the sinfulness of her so doing? What fault was it for a poor distressed Woman
to look back upon the City where she had dwelt, and where her Friends and
Acquaintance were, and from whence she was taking her final Departure? Might
she not without offense turn her Eyes upon Sodom as she was escaping from it?
Might she not see it once more before it was utterly consumed? Might she not
cast an Eye of Pity toward, and Weep for her miserable Neighbors in flames of
Brimstone?

HER looking back was sinful,

1. BECAUSE it was contrary to a divine Prohibition.

SIN is a Transgression of the Law. Lot's Wive's looking back on Sodom was the
Transgression of a particular Law, the breach of an express Order given them,
Genesis 19.17. It came to pass when they had brought them forth abroad, that he
said, Escape for thy Life, look not behind thee. Lot's Wife, as well as he, was
solemnly Charged not to look behind; so that she did that which was expressly
and plainly forbidden her. And to act contrary to the least Commandment, or
Prohibition of the great GOD, is no small offense, no petty fault. Lot's Wive's
Disobedience may be illustrated by that of Readiness, in sparing the best of the
Amalekites Sheep and Oxen for Sacrifice; This was very offensive to GOD,
because contrary to an express Order given him to slay them all: The Prophet
thus set his Sin before him, 1 Samuel 15, 22, 23. Has the Lord as great delight
in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold,
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams. For
rebellion is as the (...) of witchcraft, and stubbornness it is as iniquity and
idolatry. Readiness rebellion in that matter, which was in it self small, was as
really a Sin, and Provocation of GOD'S Wrath as Witchcraft or Idolatry. It was
a Contempt of the great Lawgiver's Authority. And so was Lot's Wive's looking
back. Abraham the same Morning looked toward Sodom, and saw the smoke of it is
Torments ascending, Genesis 19.27, 28. This was no Sin in Abraham, for he was not
forbidden to look toward Sodom: But it was a great Sin in Lot's Wife to look
back upon it, for the Lord had said to her, Look not behind thee.

THIS teaches us, to measure Sin by the Commandment; and so it will appear
exceeding sinful. Persons are ready to make light of many evil Actions, and to
stroke them with a gentle Censure, because they are not so gross and crying as
others. But the matter in which we Sin is not so much to be regarded, as the
Authority which is thereby despised. What is in it self small and
inconsiderable is a great offense, if the Lord has forbidden it. The first
Woman took of the fruit of a certain Tree in Eden, and eat it. Could so small a
thing as the eating an Apple be very offensive to GOD? Yet the Lord God said
unto the Woman, What is this thou have done? Genesis 3.13. What an heinous Crime
have thou committed? Because GOD had expressly said, Of that Tree thou shall not
eat. GOD'S Authority is contemned, his Will resisted by our doing the least
thing which he has forbidden; therefore no such Act must be accounted by us a
small offense. We should not say of it, as Lot did of Zoar, which he desired
might be spared to be the City of his Refuge, Is it not a little One? Sometimes
the smaller the matter is in which we transgress, the greater is the Offense;
as when the Prohibition of it is very plain and peremptory, the Temptation unto
it slight, and it be a thing which might easily be left undone. Whatsoever we
do contrary to the declared Will of GOD, is a horrid Indignity offered to his
Majesty and Authority: It is Rebellion, which in every case is as the Sin of
Witchcraft and Idolatry.

2. IN Lot's Wive's looking back upon Sodom there was a Contempt of GOD's
Omniscience.

SHE not only despised the Authority and Commandment of GOD, but also
practically denied his Omniscience: for it is said, that she locked back from
behind Lot. She committed this Sin secretly. She was behind her Husband; and
since his Eye was not upon her, she ventured to look back; thereby expressing a
Contempt of GOD'S all-seeing Eye. She was afraid that if righteous Lot saw her
he would be angry with her for disobeying the Lord; but not afraid that a
Righteous GOD would see her, and be displeased at her Sin. This is an
aggravation of secret Sins, that the Omniscience of GOD is especially contemned
thereby; as if the Eye of GOD was not to be so much regarded and reverenced as
the Eye of Man.

3. LOT's Wive's looking back on Sodom proceeded from an evil Heart of Unbelief.

THE Angels which came to Lot's House, told him, and his Wife, that swift
Destruction was coming upon Sodom: Lot informed his Sons in-law of it, and said
unto them, Up, get ye out of this place, for the Lord will destroy this city:
but he seemed unto them as one that mocked. Although his Wife did not reject the
Warning with such scorn, as they did, yet it seems, that she questioned the
Truth of the Threatening, and therefore looked back to see whether it would be
Executed or not. It was said to her, Look not behind thee, lest thou be
consumed. But she did not believe she should be consumed for looking back. It
is said in the Book of the Wisdom of Solomon, chap. 10. v. 7. That a standing
Pillar of Salt, is a Monument of an unbelieving Soul. -- Not to believe GOD, is
to make him a Liar: It is a great Sin, to doubt of his Veracity in his Menaces,
as well as Promises. Such Unbelief is the Root of Disobedience. Men despise the
Commandments of GOD, because they do not believe his Threatenings, Heb. 3.12.
Take heed, Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God.

4. THERE was the Lust of the Eye in Lot's Wive's looking back upon Sodom.

"IT was a look of Covetousness". Sodom was a rich and pleasant place: It was
even as the Garden of the Lord, Genesis 13.10. Lot's Wife was very loath to go out
of it; she lingered in it, (as indeed Lot himself did) after she was warned to
flee; the Angels laid hold on her hand, and brought her forth, and set her
without the City, plucking her as a Brand out of the Fire: and she went not far
from Sodom before her Love to her worldly accommodations there, made her look
back, with uneasy Desires to return to it, there to enjoy the Wealth, Pleasures
and Friends which she had left. So that her Sin was great: her Rebellion was as
the Sin of Idolatry, for Covetousness is Idolatry: It is loving and serving the
Creature more than the Creator. We cannot obey GOD, so long as this Lust
remains unmortified: We may seem to hearken to his Call for a time, and to flee
from Wrath; but if we love the World, and the things of it, we shall look, and
draw back unto Perdition, 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved
this present World. We should remember Lot's Wife, that we may take heed and
beware of Covetousness.

5. LOT's Wive's looking back on Sodom implied a Contempt of the Mercy of GOD
in delivering her out of it.

WHEN the Lord was about to rain "Hell out of Heaven" upon Sodom, and the
Neighboring Cities, he sent his Angels (and one of them was the blessed Angel
of the Covenant, for he is styled Jehovah, Genesis 19.24.) GOD sent them to bring
out Lot, and his Wife and Children, that they might not be consumed in the
Iniquity and Overthrow of Sodom. The Lord being merciful did this: Lot spoke of
it with Admiration, saying, Behold now, thy Servant has found Grace in thy
sight, and thou have magnified thy mercy which thou have showed unto me in
saving my Life. But his Wife despised so great a Mercy; she had low Thot's of
it: she did not accept the miraculous Deliverance with Thankfulness: she was so
unsuitably affected with the Kindness GOD had shown her in saving her Life,
that she looked back on Sodom with a discontented Eye, because she was (...)
from her worldly Enjoyments there. This vile Ingratitude made her Sin so
heinous in GOD'S sight. When Mercy is despised, Wrath is exasperated: Sins
committed after signal Deliverances, are exceedingly aggravated. Ezra 9.13, 14.
-- Seeing that thou our God have given us such Deliverance as this, should we
again break thy Commandments? The gracious GOD has sent the chief of those
Angels which he sent to Sodom, the glorious increated Angel, the Lord Jesus
Christ into the World, to deliver us from the everlasting Burnings of Hell: Let
us not imitate Lot's Wife in despising this great Mercy.

THUS we should remember and improve the Sin of Lot's Wife.

II. WE should remember the PUNISHMENT of Lot's Wife: the terrible Judgment
which GOD inflicted upon her.

THIS is recorded for our Admonition, Genesis 19.26. She became a Pillar of Salt.
When she looked back, she was struck dead upon the spot, and was turned into a
Pillar of Salt. By her becoming a Pillar of Salt, some I think, understand no
more than her being made a lasting Monument of GOD'S severe Justice; as a
perpetual Covenant is styled a Covenant of Salt, Number. 18.19. But why the
literal Sense of the words should be rejected, I can see no Reason; but do
believe that she was really turned into a Pillar, a Statue of Salt, a kind of
rocky, mineral Salt, which will endure all Weathers and not waste away.
Naturalists write of Salt which is hard enough for Buildings. -- Josephus, who
lived since Christ was on Earth, says that the Pillar of Salt was standing in
his Time, and that He himself had seen it. And the like is affirmed by others
since his time. -- We are now called to look upon it with the Eyes of our Minds.

1. WE should remember the Punishment of Lot's Wife, because it represents to
us the evil Nature, and infinite Demerit of Sin.

LOT's Wives Punishment was severe and dreadful, yet it did not exceed the
desert of her Crime, for looking back upon Sodom, she was turned into a Pillar
of Salt. -- By this we may learn, That there is more Evil in every Sin, than
Men are aware of: It is more displeasing to the holy GOD than we can imagine it
to be: GOD'S Thot's of Sin are not as Man's; his account of it and Man's are
very different. The Infinite Being against whom Sin is committed, and who only
knows the Malignity and Demerit of it, does not make light of the smallest Sin.
The Wages of every Sin is Death. And the righteous GOD, to show his Hatred of
Sin, and what a heavy Punishment it deserves, sometimes in this World
remarkably executes Vengeance upon Men, for those Faults, which to a common Eye
appear small and inconsiderable. He that turned Lot's Wife into a Pillar of
Salt, for looking back on Sodom, struck Uzzah dead, for touching the Ark; and
smote the Men of Bethshemesh Fifty Thousand, threescore and ten, for looking
into it. Behold therefore the severity of God: on them which fell severity,
Romans 11.22. -- Jer. 2.19. Know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and
bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in
thee, says the Lord God of hosts. -- On the Pillar of Salt is engraven the
Desert and Doom of every Sinner amongst us, and He that runs may read it. Lot's
Wife is thus set forth for an Example, showing to us what we deserve for our
Rebellion, Atheism, Unbelief, Covetousness, and Contempt of GOD'S Mercy. Was
Lot's Wife a greater Sinner than You, or I? They are not always the greatest
offenders, on whom GOD inflicts the most visible Judgments in this World, See
Luke 13.1, 2, 3, etc. We should look upon the Pillar of Salt, that our Flesh
may tremble for fear of GOD, and that we may be afraid of his Judgments. The
Desert of Sin is still the same, and GOD is immutably and impartially Just;
what he has done to others, he may do to us. It is certain, that unless our
Repentance prevent, GOD'S Wrath will fall upon us, if not in such a manner, yet
as terribly as it did upon Lot's Wife: and as it will be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrah, so it will for Lot's Wife in the Day of Judgment, than for
us, if we continue to neglect and despise the great Mercy of GOD in sending his
Angel, the Lord JESUS, to deliver us from the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone.

2. WE should remember the Punishment of Lot's Wife, and be convinced of the
Folly and Danger of sinning in Secret.

SHE looked back from behind Lot, so that he could not observe and reprove her;
but she was before GOD, did that Evil in His sight, and He rebuked her in His
Anger. GOD'S Judgments will sooner or later find Men out in their most secret
Sins, Zeph. 1.12. I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that
are settled on their lees; that say in their heart, the Lord will not do good,
neither will he do evil. There is no darkness, nor shadow of Death, in which
the workers of Iniquity can hide themselves from his Eyes, which are as a flame
of Fire. If we are Religious and Pray in Secret, our gracious Father in Heaven
will reward us openly: But if we are Wicked, and Sin in Secret, our righteous
Judge will punish us openly; if not in this World, yet sadly in that which is
to come. Woe unto their Soul, who declare their Sin as Sodom, and hide it not:
Woe also unto theirs, who conceal their Sin as Lot's Wife, for GOD will reveal
it, and reckon with them for it.

3. WE should remember Lot's Wive's Punishment, and not desire, nor delight in
the forbidden Society of vicious Persons, lest we be involved in their Ruin.

LOT's Wife lingered in, and looked back upon Sodom, wishing (most probably)
that she might enjoy the Company of her Friends and Acquaintance there; and
therefore she suffered with them. GOD's exemplary Vengeance was poured down on
her at the same time, that it was on them; and it is probable in the same
manner. Fire and Brimstone might be rained on her, as well as on them. A
judicious Divine thus expounds that Text, Genesis 19.24. The Lord rained upon
Sodom and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and fire; that is, He consumed them by
Thunder and Lightning. Which (says he) some of the Pagans had notice of, for
Tacitus tells us, that those Cities were set on fire and burnt up by the stroke
of Thunder. He adds, The Saline Pillar which Lot's Wife was turned into, was
probably the Effect of this wonderful Meteor; for from several Examples it
appears, that Persons struck with Thunder have continued in the same Posture
wherein they were when they were alive, and their dead Bodies are stiffned by
the sulphurious Vapors penetrating them. But whether Lot's Wife was struck
dead with a flash of that Fire which burned Sodom or not, yet she was destroyed
with that wicked People; and as Sodom was turned into a Lake, Heaps and Pits of
Salt Genesis 14.3. Deuteronomy 29.23. Zeph. 2.9.
, so Lot's, Wife was turned into a Pillar of Salt. She partook of the same
Curse. This is a Warning to us, not to hanker after the forbidden Society of
lewd and wicked Persons, lest we be destroyed with them. If we have fellowship
with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, we shall be led forth with the Workers
of Iniquity. If our Life be now among the Unclean, we may expect soon to have
our part with them in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev.
18.4. I heard another voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her, my People,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

4. WE should remember the Punishment of Lot's Wife, that sudden Destruction
from GOD may be a Terror to us.

WHEN Lot's Wife looked back, she immediately became a Pillar of Salt: She was
struck dead in a moment. This instance of GOD'S Wrath should make us sensible
how obnoxious we are to sudden Destruction. The Long-suffering of GOD waited
upon Lot's Wife, while she lingered in Sodom; but when she looked back, his
Wrath made quick work. GOD has exercised great Patience toward us, yet he may
bring swift Destruction upon us, Isa. 42.13, 14. The Lord shall go forth as a
mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea,
roar; he shall prevail against his Enemies. I have a long time held my peace, I
have been still and refrained my self, now will I cry like a travailing woman,
I will destroy and devour at once. While we are in our Sins, we have no
Security, no, not for one moment, from the destroying Judgments of GOD.
Vengeance which has been hitherto delayed, may overtake and surprise us in the
next Act of Sin. If we proceed a step further in an evil Course, our feet may
stumble, and we fall headlong into Perdition. We should remember Lot's Wife,
and other Examples of sudden Destruction, and stand on (...), and nor sin. Let
Unclean Persons remember Zimri and Cozbi, on whom vengeance was executed in the
very Act of their Uncleanness, Numb. 25.8. When any one is tempted to that
wickedness, let him think of the Dart that strikes through the Liver, Prove.
7.23. Let proud and arrogant Sinners remember Herod, whom the Angel of the Lord
smote immediately, Acts 12.23. Let Riotous and Profane Persons remember
Belshazzar, who was slain in that Night, when his Heart was merry with Wine,
and no Vessels but those of the Sanctuary would serve him for a drunken
Frolic, Dan. 5. -- Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your
hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this
Life, and so that day come upon you unawares. Let all careless, sensual and
worldly Wretches remember the Sinners of the old World, and of Sodom, who gave
up themselves wholly to their secular Business and carnal Delights, till the
Flood and the fiery Storm came and destroyed them all. Let us not put the evil
Day far from us. "The Prophet gives us the Alarm like one that awakens a Family
with the cry of Fire, Fire," Zeph. 1.14. The great day of the Lord is near, it
is near, and hastes greatly. Peals of Warning are now sounded in our Ears both
from the Word and the Providence of GOD, and if our stupid Hearts are not moved
with fear, and we do not flee from Wrath, we may look for sudden and inevitable
Destruction, Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

5. WE should remember the Judgment inflicted on Lot's Wife, and fear lest we
bring on our selves a strange Punishment.

THIS was a strange Punishment, a Woman turned into a Pillar of Salt. Not only
the suddenness, but also the strangeness of a Punishment is to be dreaded. The
common Calamities of Mankind are apt to be looked upon by too many, as the
Effects of natural Causes only, or to be ascribed to Fortune: GOD therefore
sometimes goes out of the beaten Road of his Judicial Dispensations, and
inflicts some rare, extraordinary Judgment, to awaken the drowsy World to take
notice of his Hand. Numb. 16.29, 30, 31. If these men die the common death of
all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men, then the Lord
has not sent me. But if the Lord make a new thing, and the Earth open her
mouth, and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go down
quick into the Pit: then ye shall understand that these men have provoked the
Lord. And it came to pass as he had made an end of speaking all these words,
that the ground clave asunder that was under them: and the Earth opened her
mouth and swallowed them up. We should fear and tremble, lest GOD should visit
us with some such unusual Judgment, Job 31.3. Is not destruction to the wicked?
and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? Destruction will certainly
be their Portion, unless they Repent, and it may be brought upon them in some
extraordinary and dreadful manner, Isa. 28.21. The Lord shall rise up as in
mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his
work, his strange work; and bring to pass his act his strange act.

6. WE should remember the Punishment of Lot's Wife, and be deterred from Sin
by the Shame which is the Fruit of it.

IT was a disgraceful Punishment that Lot's Wife suffered. The Pillar of Salt
into which she was turned was a lasting Memorial of her Sin and Folly, and
perpetuates her Shame. Men always dishonor GOD by sinning against him; and
sometimes in punishing of them in this World he sets a mark of peculiar Infamy
upon them, and causes their Sins to be remembered to their Disgrace in
after-Ages. His Judgments inflicted upon them are monumental Pillars, on which
their Sins are written to their great reproach and perpetual shame. Some
Punishments are like Pillars of Salt, not to keep Sinners Names from stinking
in the nostrils of Posterity, but to preserve the Memory of them to their
everlasting Disgrace. In some Executions of divine Justice, GOD does, as it
were hang up Malefactors in Chains, and make them "Spectacles of public Shame".
Ezekiel. 5.14, 15. I will make thee a reproach among the Nations that are round
about thee, in the sight of all that pass by. So it shall be a reproach and a
taunt, an instruction and an astonishment unto the Nations that are round about
thee, when I shall execute Judgments in thee in anger, and in fury, and in
furious rebukes.

THUS in the Judgment inflicted on Lot's Wife, there is much Instruction and
Warning given unto us. It may therefore be very profitable for us to remember
her Punishment.

HAVING spoken thus distinctly, first, Of the Sin, and secondly, Of the
Punishment of Lot's Wife, and shown how we should remember and improve each of
them, -- I would under a third general Head,

III. CONSIDER them TOGETHER, and show what the Instruction and Warning is,
which they jointly afford us: and it is this, viz. That in our flight from
mystical Sodom, we should not look back.

THIS is the chief and comprehensive Benefit designed us by the great Lover of
our Souls, in calling upon us to remember Lot's Wife, namely, That we might be
detered from looking back, when we are flying from Wrath. CHRIST said to his
Disciples, In that Day (meaning the day of GOD'S vengeance against Jerusalem)
let not him that is in the field turn back. Remember Lot's Wife. As if he had
said, You must flee out of Jerusalem with all possible speed, and beware lest
you imitate Lot's Wife, who as she was escaping from Sodom looked back upon it,
and for so doing was immediately turned into a Pillar of Salt. And what CHRIST
said to them is applicable, and is now directed to us all in this solemn
Memento and Caution,

REMEMBER Lot's Wife, and in your flight from spiritual Sodom take heed that ye
look not back, lest ye also be Consumed.

THAT this Admonition may be set in a clear Light before our Understandings,
and come with power on our Hearts and Consciences, and have a good Influence
into our Behavior, I would observe to you,

I. THAT while Men are in the Corrupt State of Nature, they are mystically in
Sodom.

THEY are in such a Condition as Sodom was an Emblem of. They are so both in
respect of the gross Pollution which they are wallowing in, and the dreadful
Destruction which they are exposed to. Sodom was a very polluted and dangerous
Place; the State of Nature is such a State: All that are in it, are in as deep
Pollution and great Danger, as those who dwelt in Sodom. -- Let this twofold
Resemblance betwixt Sodom and a State of Nature be considered by us,

1. UNCONVERTED Sinners may be fitly said to be in Sodom, in regard of that
Pollution which they wallow in

SODOM was a Sink of moral Pollution, in which the People like Swine did
wallow: and so it represented the Corrupt State of Nature, in which the
Children of Men are altogether filthy.

IT is said, Genesis 13.13. That the Men of Sodom were wicked, and sinners before
the Lord exceedingly. And this may be truly said of all that are in the State
of Nature: Though they are not all in respect of actual Sins, so wicked as the
Men of Sodom were, yet they are in respect of the habitual (...) and
Perverseness of their Nature. Original Sin is greater than all the actual
Abominations that were committed in Sodom. Sodom was a Sink, but corrupt Nature
is a Fountain of moral Defilements: And there is more filthy Water in this
Fountain, than ever issued forth in the impure streams of Sodom. The Fountain
did not cast out all it is dirty Waters, even in that so defiled Land. Although
that People did draw iniquity with cords of vanity and sin as it were with a
rope, yet they did not draw the Fountain dry. But as the Streams discover what
the Fountain is, so the abominable Wickedness in Sodom, shows to us what the
Corruption of our fallen Nature is. And those who are in the State of Polluted
Nature, are in respect thereof more filthy and desperately wicked, than the
People of Sodom, were in respect of the actual Abominations which prevailed in
it. They dwell amidst greater Impurities, than those which were visible, and
did openly abound in Sodom.

THERE is this remarkable difference between Sodom and a State of Nature; It
was possible for a Man to be Righteous in the former, but it is not so in the
latter. Indeed, there were not ten righteous Persons to be found in Sodom, when
the LORD came down to see whether the People had done altogether according to
the Cry that went up to him; yet there was One good Man that lived in it at
that time; Just Lot, vexed, and so not corrupted, with the filthy conversation
of the wicked there: For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and
hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds, 2
Pet. 2.7, 8. It was possible, though very difficult for one to live in Sodom, and
not be infected with the Sins of that Place; but it is impossible for one to
abide in the State of Nature, and to be free from the Pollutions of it, Job
15.14. What is man that he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman,
that he should be righteous? It is impossible for him to be so, till he is born
of GOD, and there be a Change of his Heart and State.

IT is true, that many who remain in their natural Condition, do appear
righteous in the eye of the World; but they are not so in the sight of GOD:
They may be outwardly clean; may wash the outside of the Cup and Platter, and
garnish the Sepulcher with specious shows of Devotion; but are inwardly
defiled, full of all Uncleanness, spiritual Putrefaction, Hypocrisy and
Iniquity, Luke 16.15. He said unto them, Ye are they which justify your selves
before men; but God knows your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed
amongst men, is abomintion in the sight of God. Further, As all unconverted
Sinners are, in respect of the Pollution of their Nature, in spiritual Sodom,
so many of them may be fitly said to be so, in regard of the actual Defilements
which they wallow in. The Soil of corrupt Nature yields the Fruits of Sodom,
Deuteronomy. 32.32. Their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah:
their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter. Such are addressed
as Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, who practiced the Sins which abounded
there, Isa. 1.10. Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto
the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah. The Rulers and People of Israel had
made themselves in respect of Sin, like those of Sodom and Gomorrah, therefore
the faithful Prophet gave them this Title: They deserved no better. Rome is
called Sodom for it is resembling it in Whordom, and all filthiness both of
Flesh and Spirit, Rev. 11.8. Their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the
great (...), which spiritually is called Sodom. What Multitudes are there who
live in the Practice of the abominable Sins of Sodom, Pride, fullness of Bread,
( i. e. Excess in Meats and Drinks,) abundance of Idleness, Uncharitableness
and Oppression? How many, like the People of Sodom, give themselves over unto
Laciviousness, to work all Uncleanness with greediness? How many declare their
Sin as Sodom, and hide it not? Their Foreheads are steeled with Impudence, they
boast of their Wickedness, and glory in their Shame. How wretchedly secure are
the most in the State of Nature, as the People were in Sodom? They are settled
on their filthy Lees, quiet and undisturbed in their Sins, giving themselves up
wholly to secular Business, and sensual Delights. As it was in the days of Lot;
they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded,
not fearing Destruction till it was brought upon them: Even so it is also in
the days of the Son of Man.

THUS in respect of original Corruption, and actual Abominations, Sinners,
wherever they dwell on the face of the Earth, are the people of Sodom. In a
spiritual sense they live in Sodom. GOD may justly say concerning all who are
in the State of polluted Nature, as in Jer. 23.14. They are all of them unto me
as Sodom, and the Inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah.

2. ALL unconverted Sinners may be fitly said to be in Sodom, in respect of
that Destruction to which, they are exposed.

THE State of Nature is like Sodom, not only in regard of the Pollution but
also of the Punishment of those who continue in it. GOD'S exemplary Vengeance
on Sodom is mentioned in our Context, ver. 29. The same day that Lot went out
of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all.
Agreeable to the Account given of it, Genesis 19. 24, 25. The Lord rained upon
Sodom and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and fire from the Lord out of Heaven. And he
overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the
cities. Now this was Emblematical of the utter Destruction of all those who
finally remain in the State of Nature; so the Scriptures inform us, 2 Pet. 2.6.
Turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an
overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly.
The Ruin of the People of Sodom shows to all who live ungodly, what they must
expect, and what their End will certainly be, if they remain in a State of
Nature, viz. to be burned. The Fire which consumed the Inhabitants of Sodom,
was a Type of Hellfire, which shall consume all the Adversaries of GOD, Jude
v. 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them in like manner
giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh are set
forth as an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. The Fire which
destroyed them is said to be Eternal, either because of the still continuing
Effects of it, or rather, because it was a Type or Representation of the Fire
of Hell, and to those miserable Sodomites the very beginning of it, they being
brought by those temporal Flames into everlasting Burnings Pool's Annot.
. The terrible Destruction of the Sinners in Sodom, by Fire and Brimstone, was
a lively Representation of the sad and eternal Ruin of all impenitent Sinners.
Upon the wicked God shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest: this shall be the portion 'of their cup. The Heavens and the Earth
which are now, by the same Word which created them, are kept in store, reserved
unto fire, against the day of Judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. -- Then
shall the King, the righteous Judge, say unto them on the left hand, Depart
from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting fire. And they shall be cast into a lake
of fire, burning with brimstone. Thus, as the Inhabitants of Sodom were all
destroyed by Fire and Brimstone, so the Scriptures speak of the final
Destruction of all impenitent Sinners, as that which shall be by Fire and
Brimstone, whether properly or metaphorically, I shall not dispute: But only
say, that if we take these Scriptures in a figurative sense, they represent the
Pains of the Damned to be at least as exquisite and intolerable, as those which
Fire and Brimstone can produce. How did the poor tormented Wretches in Sodom
run screaming about, when showers of flaming Brimstone came down upon them, and
their Bodies were so many blazing Torches! Alas, How then will miserable
Sinners roar out, gnash their Teeth, and gnaw their Tongues for Pain and
Anguish, when they shall be thrown into the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone, which is the second Death, far worse than the first! -- Now let
Sinners in Zion (who are also in spiritual Sodom) be afraid, let (...) take
hold on Hypocrites; for who among (...) shall dwell with the devouring Fire?
Who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting Burnings?

THUS we see in what respects the State of Nature may be spiritually called
Sodom.

Obs. II. THAT the Children of Men are warned to Flee out of spiritual Sodom.

LOT's Wife, and others in Sodom, were forewarned of the burning Tempest which
GOD would rain upon it, and were compassionately advised and urged to get out
of Sodom, that they might not be involved in it is overthrow. GOD sent Angels
from Heaven, to give them notice of the approaching Ruin: yea, the Messenger of
the Covenant was sent on this Errand. Those Ministers of GOD called upon Lot,
his Wife and Daughters, to make haste, and get out of the accursed City; And
while they lingered in Sodom, being; loath to leave their commodious Dwelling,
rich Estate, and worldly Conveniences, the Angels laid hold on their hands,
and brought them forth, and set them without the City and charged them to
escape for their Lives, and not to stay in all the Plain, but to escape to the
Mountain, Genesis 19. In like manner the gracious GOD deals with the Children of
Men, who are in spiritual Sodom. He warns them to get out of the polluted,
dangerous Estate of Nature: He sends his Ministers, the Angels of the Churches,
who cry aloud, and show unto Sinners their Danger, Duty and Interest; calling
earnestly upon them to forsake their Sins, and part with all which is
inconsistent with the Safety and Salvation of their Souls: yea, the glorious
increated Angel does by the Ministry of the Word come, and warn Sinners to
escape out of mystical Sodom. 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, Be
ye reconciled to God* -- By awakning Dispensations of his Providence, and
strong Convictions of his Spirit, the LORD does, as it were, lay hold on the
hands of lingering Sinners, and pull them out of Sodom; making them leave off
the practice of their gross Abominations, and to use some Endeavors to reform
their Lives, and save their Soul. -- Thus graciously is the Long-suffering GOD
pleased to warn those who are in spiritual Sodom, to hasten out of it, and flee
to the City of Refuge, which he has appointed and prepared for them, lest they
be consumed with his fiery Indignation, which he will pour out on all who
remain in the corrupt and accursed State of Nature. Matthew. 3.7. O Generation of
vipers, who has (...) you to flee from the wrath to come? -- When the GOD of
Hosts is coming forth in his Judgments against his Enemies, he observes that
Law of Arms which he gave the Israelites; which was, to offer Terms of Peace to
a City before they assaulted it, Deuteronomy. 20.10. When thou come nigh unto a city
to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it. So the LORD, who is a Man of
War, sounds a Parley with the Trumpet of his Word, and monitory Providence,
before he discharges the Cannons of his destroying Judgments: He Summons his
Enemies to a Treaty of Peace, [Prepare to meet thy God O Israel] before he
falls on them with the Artillery of his Vengeance. He gives Notice to Sinners
of their approaching Ruin, that so by their Repentance they might prevent it,
Jer. 18.11. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a
device against you: return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your
ways, and your doings good -- Hear now the word of the Lord, ye men of Sodom;
Give ear, Ye people of Gomorrah, all that are in the polluted dangerous Estate
of Nature: -- Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well -- Come now and let us
reason together, says the Lord: Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land: But if ye refuse and
rebel, ye shall be devoured -- O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the word of the
Lord: O ^^^^less, stupid Sinners, who mind earthly things, ye are again and
again warned and entreated, to get out of spiritual Sodom, lest Fire and
Brimstone be rained upon you. Zech. 2.6. Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the
land of the North, says the Lord. Ye are now earnestly called upon, to come
forth, and flee from the Land of the South, as well as from the Land of the
North -- from mystical Sodom, as well as Babylon. Will you still linger, when
the Clouds of GOD'S Displeasure are visibly hanging over our Heads, ready to
burst with Thunder and Lightning; and the Earth under us is sensibly heaving to
vomit out Fire and Brimstone, to consume us? O Sinners, make haste, delay no
longer to get out of the State of Nature, and to keep GOD'S Commandments. --
Escape for your Lives, -- the Lives of your precious Souls. -- Escape to the
Mountain, the Mountain of the LORD'S House: -- Flee to CHRIST for Refuge. --
Flee as Men pursued with the greatest Danger. -- Flee with all possible speed
-- Yea, Flee like as they fled from before the Earthquake, in the days of
Uzziah King of Judah.

LET me not seem to any of you, as Lot did to his Sons in Law, even as one that
mocked.

Obs. III. THAT in their flight from spiritual Sodom, Persons are apt to look
back.

LOT's Wife was brought without the City, and she fled with him and her
Daughters a while toward Zoar, and was in a fair way to escape the Ruin, which
was then coming on the People of Sodom; But she slackened her Pace, lingered
behind, and looked back. This Sin of Lot's Wife is imitated by many in their
flight from spiritual Sodom: They are so far awakened and wro't upon, that they
abandon their vicious Practices, and seem to be brought out of the State of
polluted Nature; they turn their backs upon Sodom, and set their faces toward
Zion, and are in a fair way to escape the wrath of GOD: they run well for a
time; take considerable Pains in Religion, strive to enter in at the strait
Gate of Repentance and Faith, labor to get into CHRIST: perform holy Duties
with much seriousness, and apply themselves to the Work of their Salvation with
fear and trembling; and they are not far from the Kingdom of GOD: But they do
not hold on, their Heat is soon spent, and they flag: Their dread of GOD'S
Wrath, and concern for their Souls abate; good Impressions wear off; and they
meeting with Difficulties in the way of Salvation, grow weary of the Christian
Race, stand still, and look back --. They are tempted to think, there is no
need of so much Care about their Souls, that they were in no such Danger as
they apprehended them to be; that the Fire and Brimstone which they were told
of, and affrighted with, will not be rained upon them: The Love of the World
and the things of it, revives in them; and they fancy it was never better with
them, than when they were quiet and undisturbed in the Enjoyment of their
outward Comforts, and sensual Delights; and so through Unbelief, and Love of this
World, they (as Lot's Wife did) look back with Desires of returning to their
former Pleasures. The State of spiritual Pollution and Bondage appears not so
bad to them, as when they were first awakened to get out of it; nay, better
than that of Holiness, which they have been striving to get into: As the
Israelites, in their Journey to Canaan, thought that it was better with them in
Egypt, and said one to another; let us make us a captain, and let us return
into Egypt, Numb. 14.4. -- They who seem to have escaped out of spiritual
Sodom, and to have made considerable Progress toward Zion, do not ordinarily go
back at once, but by degrees. They first look back; they grow weary of Prayer,
and other Duties, are less frequent and fervent therein: They say, Behold, what
a weariness is it? and they bring the torn, the lame and sick for an offering
to the Lord; Their Minds hanker after their former Company and Delights:
Temptations increase upon them daily, and they are more and more inclined to
resume their abandoned Lusts, and to renew their fellowship with the unfruitful
Works of darkness. Having thus looked back, they commonly (unless prevented by
sudden Destruction) go back to Sodom; revert to their old Abominations. Prove.
26.11. As a Dog returns to his vomit, so a Fool returns to his folly. This
is cited by the Apostle, and applied to the Apostates in his time, [O that it
were not verified in many of us!] 2 Pet. 2.22. It is happened unto them
according to the true Proverb, The Dog is turned to his own vomit, and the Sow
that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.

Obs. IV. AWAKNED Sinners, in their flight from spiritual Sodom, should
remember Lot's Wife, that so they may be detered from looking back.

PERSONS may imitate the Sin, and incur the Punishment of Lot's Wife, though they
do not attempt an Escape out of mystical Sodom: may be guilty of Disobedience,
Contempt of GOD'S All-seeing Eye, of Unbelief, Covetousness and Ingratitude for
the Mercy of GOD in offering to save them from the flames of Hell; and thereby
may expose themselves to sudden and shameful Destruction: But such as have
begun their flight from spiritual Sodom, (as I hope, some here present have,)
if they look back, they especially do imitate Lot's Wives Sin, and may expect
as terrible a Punishment as Here Is: It is therefore peculiarly seasonable, and
may be very profitable for those who are endeavoring to get out of spiritual
Sodom, are sollicitously asking the way to Zion, with their faces thitherwards,
and are flying from Wrath to come, to remember Lot's Wife. Look not behind you,
lest ye be consumed -- Will it not be as great a Sin in you, to look back, as
it was in Lot's Wife? And may you not well be afraid of as great a Judgment, as
that inflicted on her? If you look back, ye may become Pillars of Salt,
Monuments of GOD'S severe Justice, Spectacles of Shame and everlasting
Reproach. If GOD does not immediately consume you, he may righteously smite you
with Judicial Hardness; seal you up to Ruin by final Obduration, letting you
stand a few Years more in this World, only as occasions to glorify his Power
and Wrath upon you in the next. Theophilact says, Lot's Wife remained
obstinate and impenitent, and her Heatt was hardened, and that this is the
meaning of her being turned into a Pillar of Salt: Although his Interpretation of
the Text is not to be embraced, yet it may be improved by those who are in
their flight from spiritual Sodom, to deter them from looking back, lest in his
sense they become Pillars of hardened Salt.

Zeph. 1.6. I will stretch out my hand, and cut off them that are turned back.
In the days of Josiah, wherein this Threatening was denounced, the sinful People
of Judah were greatly awakened, and outwardly Reformed: But they soon revolted:
Many that began well, set out with Zeal in the good ways of the Lord, turned
and looked back: GOD threatened them particularly, that he would stretch out his
hand, and cut them off, would be quick and severe upon them. -- Remember the
words of CHRIST, Luke 9.62. No man having put his hand to the plough, and
looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God. Go through with the work that ye
have begun, or ye shall never enter into the Kingdom of God. Oh! Consider the
Danger and Mischief of looking back. If ye return to your former Abominations,
the unclean Spirit will have a stronger Possession of you, than he had before,
Matthew. 12.43, 44, 45. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a man, he walks
through dry places, seeking rest, and finds none. Then he says, I will return
into my house from whence I came out, and when he is come, he finds it empty,
swept, and garnished. Then goes he, and takes with himself seven other
Spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the
last State of that man is worse than the first. This is well Expounded by the
Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the
world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein, and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than the
beginning. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment
delivered unto them.

IF ye should be entangled again in your Lusts, and return to the Mire of your
Sinful Pollutions, your Escape, if ever it be attempted by you, will be far
more difficult than it was at first; your Deliverance out of Spiritual Sodom,
will be almost despaired of. -- Ye having begun in the Spirit, be not so
foolish as to end in the flesh. -- If any of you have slackened your pace, and
are turning and drawing back, be convinced of your folly and danger, and
quickened in your flight to CHRIST, by what ye now hear, -- Gal. 5.7. Ye did run
well, who did hinder you, that you should not obey the truth? -- Renew your
Resolutions against Sin, and for Holiness and Heaven: Lay aside every weight,
and the Sin that does so easily beset you, and run with patience and
perseverence the Race set before you: -- and as ye run, Remember Lot's Wife.

IN fine,

LET such as are really brought forth out of spiritual Sodom, and have fled for
Refuge to lay hold on the Hope set before them, Remember Lot's Wife, to deter
them also from looking back. Indeed, those who are escaped out of mystical
Sodom, ought to look back thereon, with an admiring Eye at the infinite Mercy
of GOD, in plucking them as Brands out of the Fire. They should reflect on
their former polluted and miserable Estate, to excite their Thankfulness unto
GOD for delivering them out of it; laying hold on their hearts by his
omnipotent Grace, when they lingered in spiritual Sodom, and effectually
bringing them out of it. There is a looking back, which may serve to abase
them, and exalt divine Grace, Isai. 51.1. Hearken to me, ye that follow after
Righteousness, ye that seek the Lord: look unto the Rock whence ye are hewn,
and to the hole of the pit whence ye are dug. But they must not look back on
spiritual Sodom with any Regret for their leaving it, nor desire of returning
to it. -- They are not, it is true, of them who draw back unto Perdition, Heb.
10.39. GOD'S electing Love, Covenant-faithfulness, almighty Power, and CHRIST'S
continual Intercession shall prevent the total Defection of the Saints. But
they are prone to look back, and to go back also a considerable way toward
Sodom. Declensions are very common among the sincere People of GOD. They
frequently slacken their Pace in the good ways of the LORD; grow Cold in
Religion, remiss in holy Duties, do abate much of their Zeal for GOD, and
back-slide into many Sins. Although they shall not draw back unto eternal
Perdition; yet they may to their spiritual Loss, and temporal Destruction: They
may provoke GOD to inflict such Judgments on them, as to make them Monuments of
his righteous displeasure against the Sin of looking back. Dr. Edwards says,
Theol. ref. v. 1. p. 257.
That it is not improbable that Lot's Wife, who was turned into a Pillar of
Salt, was saved notwithstanding this Judgment sent upon her by GOD. We have
(says he) no ill Character of this Woman in the Scripture: [he might as truly
have said, that we have no good one:] we cannot (says he) gather from any
thing that is said in the sacred History that she had been a wicked Person:
[neither can we that she had been a righteous Person:] But this we know, says
he, that she was the Consort of a pious Saint, and beloved of GOD: [we also
know that a wicked Woman is sometimes the Wife of a godly Man:] And we know,
says he, that she was mercifully delivered out of Sodom, as well as her
Husband: [so might Lot's Sons in Law have been, had they not laughed at the
warning given them.] Though I perceive not the strength of those Reasons which
the Doctor gives, why it is not improbable that Lot's Wife was a good Woman,
yet I am disposed to be of the most Charitable Opinion, if there are as
probable Grounds to support it as the contrary. And if she was a good Woman,
the Punishment inflicted on her may the more deter the Saints from looking
back: for it shows how the Jealous GOD resents this Sin in his own Children.
-- Let them remember Lot's Wife, and not imitate her Sin, but Paul's Example;
Phil. 3.13, 14. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended, but this one
thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things which are before; I press toward the mark, for the Prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. -- Let them remember Lot's Wife, that so
they may resist and vanquish all Temptations to Apostasy: and if they do so,
they shall become glorious Pillars in the heavenly Temple, bearing the most
honorable Inscription; Rev. 3.12, 13. Him that overcomes, will I make a
Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write
upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God, which is new
Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God; and I will write upon
him my new Name.

HE THAT HAS AN EAR, LET HIM HEAR WHAT THE SPIRIT SAYS UNTO THE CHURCHES.

THUS I thought it meet to stir you up, by putting you in Remembrance of Lot's
Wife. And if you are Careful to improve what has been said, You shall find
that that Pillar of Salt has not to this day lost it is Savor; but that your
Hearts are seasoned thereby with such Caution, and holy fear, as will be of
unspeakable and eternal Advantage to you: Wherefore, Be not forgetful Hearers,
but Remember Lot's Wife.

FINIS.

