An ARGUMENT for AND PERSUASIVE unto the great and important DUTY OF Family
Worship: WITH Rules and Directions for the due Performance of it.

By Benjamin Colman Pastor of a Church in Boston.

2 Samuel vi. 20. Then David returned to bless his Household.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed by Gamaliel Rogers, for THOMAS HANCOCK at the Bible and
Three Crowns near the To^^ Dock. 1728.

An Argument for AND Persuasive unto the great and important Duty OF FAMILY
WORSHIP.
IT having been no small part of the Honor and Glory of my Country, from the
beginning of it, that it has been famous for the practice of FAMILY WORSHIP, to
which under the Grace and Blessing of GOD the Virtue, Religion and Prosperity
of it must be (if I judge right) very much attributed; I am therefore moved and
inclined to look over the Arguments and Motives unto, and the Reasons for this
great and important Duty, and leave them (as they have occurred to me) with the
Children of my People, that this GLORY may still dwell in our Land.

The Method, in which I shall dispose my Tho'ts on this Argument, shall be
this: 1. To say what I mean by FAMILY WORSHIP: 2. To prove it to be a Duty, and
show our Obligations to observe it. 3. To lay down Rules for the due
Performance of it. And 4. To urge the Duty with some proper Motives.


I. By FAMILY WORSHIP I mean, That standing religious Order, and Usage in a
Household, wherein the Head of the House does ordinarily every Day, at stated
and appointed Times, call the Family together for the performance of such holy
Exercises, as are proper to them in their worshipping GOD together.

This is a distinct kind of Worship from solitary and secret, which is a
Persons retiring by himself alone (into his Closet, Matthew. vi. 6.) to meditate,
read, pray to and praise GOD. It is also a distinct thing from public Worship,
in Church Assemblies and Congregations, for the Administration of Instituted
Ordinances. So likewise it is diverse from the private Meetings of religious
People at one another Houses, occasionally to pray together and hear the Word.

There are parts of Instituted Worship, that do by no means belong to Family
Worship. GOD never meant the Sacraments of the New Testament to be administered
by Masters of Families in their houses. These belong to the public Ministry of
Religion in the Churches of CHRIST. And excepting Cases of necessity, or in
times of persecution, there can be no pretense for the Administration of
Baptism or the Lords Supper, in private Houses. And then the Administration
should be by a Minister of CHRIST, and to more than a private household.
Wherefore Sacramental Administrations are no part of Family Worship. -- Nor is
there any Argument from the Sacraments of the Old Testament to those of the
New. Circumcision and the Passover were in their Institution a kind of Family
Ordinances; but so were not the Baptism of CHRIST and his Supper.

Only the Exercises and Duties of natural Worship are proper to Families, as
such. Natural Worship is that which the Consideration of the Being and
Perfections of GOD dictate to the Reason and Conscience of Man. This also
belongs both to public and secret Worship.

Prayer and Praise; Adoration and Thanksgiving; Confession, Supplications and
Intercession; are proper and necessary parts of Family Worship. So is reading
the Word of GOD to our Households Deuteronomy. vi. 6, 7. 1 Timothy iv. 5.
. Also the singing of Psalms Ephesians. v. ^9. Col. iii. 10.
: Catechizing the Children; and a religious asking GODS Blessing on our daily
Food, with hearty Thanksgiving for it 1 Timothy iv. 4, 5.
. These are the principal religious Exercises, that do properly belong to the
Worship of GOD in our Houses.

II. Now to show our Obligation thus to worship GOD with our Households, I shall
argue 1. from the light of Reason, and natural Conscience, 2. from Scripture
Revelations.


1. As to the light of Reason, and natural Conscience, it is indeed very hard,
for us who enjoy the Gospel to say, What the bare light of Nature and Reason,
in this our fallen state would teach us. We are so alienated from the Life of
God through the Ignorance that is in us, by reason of the Blindness of our
hearts, that probably no one of us would have had a though it of worshipping GOD
with our Families, had we been born and bred Pagans and Salvages. But yet I am
confident, that Reason duly exercised, and natural Conscience hearkened to
thereupon, would soon lead and bring Men to worship GOD both in secret and with
their Families. At least our Reason under the common Illuminations of
Scripture, is fruitful of Arguments for so plain a Duty.

The light of Nature teaches us that there is a GOD, and that he ought to be
worshipped by us, and if singly and apart by our selves, why not socially and
together? And if socially, why not in Families, which are distinct Societies?
And why not firstly in Families, which are the first Societies that Mankind
came and comes into? For Families are the Original of all Societies, and
consequently the first social Worship was of necessity in a Family. This is
plain and easy Reasoning, level to the Capacity of every Child: But how
strongly and irresistibly does it conclude for the Worship of GOD in Families?

To let in a gleam of Revelation here: Who but GOD is the Institutor and
Founder of Families? He made at first but one Pair; He put them together and
blessed them. He could have made many Families at once, placed them together,
and ordained the first Act of Worship to have been from an Assembly of men. But
it pleased the GOD of the Spirits of all Flesh to make at first one only Family
out of which all the Families of the Earth have sprang. And why did He this?
seeing He had the residue of the Spirit, and could as easily have made a
million Families at once? Why may I not be allowed to say -- That He might seek
a godly Family, a religious Household! that this might be his First Fruits from
the Earth, among men! that Families might be sanctified unto Him for ever, by
the rendering of the first social Worship in them; and that this sacred Dignity
might be put and entailed upon Households, that for the first Ages of the World
the whole Worship of GOD was in them. And should not his solemn Worship
continue in them to the End of the World?

All the Nations of the Earth own that Families are distinct Societies, and
that they have a Government of their own; Laws and Rules proper and peculiar to
themselves, for their own weal and good Order. Witness the famous LAW of King
Ahasuerus, directed to every People after their Language, both to great and
small, That every Man shall bear Rule in his own House. Esther i. ult. Say
then, shall he not rule for GOD? and acknowledge HIM in his House with constant
daily Devotions? Shall these primary, necessary, universal, perpetual Societies
of Men be without the Adoration, Confession and Praises of GOD in them? Has the
great GOD nothing to do with these Societies, nor they with Him? No? though He be
the Author, Preserver, Feeder and daily Benefactor of the Family? the Health of
it, and its GOD? Is not the Family what it is by his Providence? can it subsist
a day without Him? And yet no Worship of GOD in it from day to day! no Prayer?
as if it had no Dependence on Him! Does it indeed want no Benefit or Blessing
from Him? nor expect any? that it craves none! And does it receive none from
day to day? that there are no daily Offerings of Praise in the House! Or does
GOD indeed keep and feed the Family from year to year; and has He no Altar, no
Sacrifices in it? but the doors of the House are shut against Him! He shut out
of it! This profaness, this Atheism is implied in the want of Family Worship;
in defiance to Reason and Conscience.

At the same time, Can a Society be more adapted and engaged to worship
together daily, than a Family is? Is any other Society framed and formed like
this for daily worship? living together under one Roof, and united in mutual
and near Relations to each other! and tied together by those bonds of Love and
Endearment, which should bind them to GOD, whose all Souls are, the Souls of
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants! -- O with what a sacred Pleasure
should a Man call the Family of his Love together, to worship GOD? Can he own a
GOD, and love his Family, and not love to pray with them and for them? Does not
even Nature teach this? -- Methinks he must be willingly ignorant, who
questions it, not liking to retain GOD in his knowledge; his Disaffection to
his MAKER (horrible to speak) overthrowing even his natural Affection to his
Family!

Again, Let Nature and Reason judge of the special Need and Occasion of Worship
in our Families. Are there no Family Mercies daily wanted, which GOD only can
give? nor any received from Him every Morning and Evening, for which
Thanksgiving ought openly to be rendered? And are there not sometimes Family
Sins, for which the Household have reason to humble themselves together before
GOD? And are there not at times Family Afflictions, the Rod of GOD upon our
House, which call the Household to mourn together, under the mighty Hand of GOD?
-- Surely there is the same Reason why Families should pray and give Thanks
together, in the case of Family Mercies needed and received; as there is why
single Persons should do so in the case of personal Needs and Receipts. And
there is the like Reason for Family Humiliation and Supplication in case of
Family Sins and Corrections, as why a Person or People should humble themselves
and pray under personal and public Sins and Judgments.

I will close this Argument from the light of Reason, by remembering You of the
Household Gods, and Family Religion (if I may so call it) of the Heathen;
however brutish and abominable it sometimes was. The Learned know well that
they had their Penates, which were placed (we are told See the History of the
Heathen Gods.
) in penetralibus Domi, in the innermost places of the House, as the Guardians
and Protectors of it, and its sacred Treasure. They had also their Lares Lar is
in our Dictionaries D^^^ familiaris. and Lararium was the private Chapel for
the Household Deity Labans Teraphim seem to have been Images for a religious
Use, and consulted as Oracles
, another kind of Domestic Gods, on which they bestowed the figure of a dog, to
express Watchfulness and care of the House.

Now however they prostituted their Reason, and debased Religion, vilely acting
like fools and beasts in these Idolatries; yet we may piously and justly reason
thus with our selves therefrom; That the Remains of natural light, and
Tradition, taught these miserable Families of Men, that there ought to be
religious Worship in their Households. For though they changed the Truth of GOD
into a lie, yet their Consciences bare a Witness to the Truth before us, and
showed the Work of the Law written in their Hearts. How vain soever these their
Imaginations were, and how grossly soever their foolish heart was darkened; yet
their Household Idolatries may rise up in Judgment against the more profane
Christians and condemn them.

2. But I come to argue from Scripture and revealed Religion. Only let me
premise, 'That there are some things, and those some of the most important in
Religion, both of Doctrine and of Practice, which are so plain from the light
of Nature, and such evident Deductions from the first and more general
Principles of Religion; that the Scripture rather supposes them and takes 'em
for granted, than particularly teaches or requires them. And such a Doctrine
and Duty I take this of FAMILY WORSHIP to be.

Revelation would not suppose Mankind so ignorant or profane, as to need a
direct and positive Law for Family Worship. A GOD, a Family, and Law for
Worship, must imply and infer Family Worship. -- And bear this in mind, That
right Deductions and true Consequences from the Scripture, are just and proper
Scripture proofs. Witness our SAVIORS Argument for the Resurrection of the
Body. Luke xx. 47.

This being promised, I shall now gather up some of the Notices and Intimations
of the Mind of GOD from his Word about Family Worship; amounting to a plain
Revelation of his Will in the matter; and then go over some Scripture Examples
for the Duty: In both of which I shall keep to the Order of Scripture.

The first Family was sanctified to GOD in the day wherein it was formed and
constituted. When the LORD GOD bro't Eve to Adam he blessed them together, and
thereby set them apart for Himself to be a holy Pair, a religious devoted
Family. And the first thing we read of in Adam's Family is his Sons worshipping
the LORD in his appointed Way. And though it be true, that this was their open
worshipping apart, yet it leads us into the certain knowledge of Adam's
worshipping with them, and of his instituting them as well by Example as by
Instruction and Precept in the appointed Worship of GOD.

When Noah and his Sons came out of the Ark the preserved Family made their
solemn Thank-Offering of every kind. This was indeed as much an Act of public
Worship as could then be rendered to GOD, yet it is as true that it was, and
could be, no other than a Family Worship.

Afterward the pure Worship of GOD was preserved in the Household and Family of
Abraham, who as he journeyed from place to place built Altars unto the LORD,
and called on his Name Genesis xii. 7, 8.
. His praise and honor in the sight of GOD was the religious Order of his
Household xviii. 19.
. I know him that he will command his Children and his Household after him, and
they shall keep the Way of the LORD. GOD gave him the Covenant of Circumcision,
which was a Family Ordinance, for the Consecration of the Household to GOD; and
indeed of all the Heads of all the Families that should descend from him.
Doubtless express and solemn Worship accompanied the Act of Circumcision, that
Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. Every Family therefore from the loins of
Abraham were hereby put in the way of Family Worship. For were the Children
holy? And must not the Parent see the mark and sign of GOD'S Covenant put upon
them? And yet afterward might he bring up the devoted Seed without praying with
them?

But to pass to the Law of Moses: The Passover was the other Seal of GOD'S
Covenant from his time, and it was a Family Ordinance. The Master of the House
had this Care laid upon him. Exodus xii. 3. There was a Lamb for a House: They
eat it as holy Societies, in religious manner; it was a Feast to the LORD
throughout their Generations. The Family renewed their Covenant with GOD, and
were anew sanctified to him, in their celebrating this Ordinance of Worship.

Or let us look into the Law of the Holy Sabbath, and it seems to cast a
special eye on the Religion and Worship of the Household, laying the Head of the
Family under the Charge of GOD in that matter; Thou, thy Son and thy Daughter,
thy Manservant and thy Maidservant. -- Look also into the Laws for the Feast
of Weeks and of Tabernacles, and they are given in like manner; Deuteronomy. xvi. 10,
14. Thou shall rejoice before the LORD thy GOD, thou and thy Son and thy
Daughter, etc. Or look into the Rule for solemn Mourning, as on the day of
Fasting and Supplication, and it runs thus, Zech. xii. 10. Every Family apart,
and Person apart. Truly it is the Will of GOD that on the Sabbath Day, and upon
all days of public Fasting or Thanksgiving, there be special Exercises of
Religion performed with our Families, as well as in our Closets or in public
Assemblies.

Pass we now to the Scriptures of the New Testament, and we find there many
Precepts and Directions of GOD our SAVIOR, which do more plainly imply and
infer the Duty of Family Worship. Such are those Words of the Apostle, Ephesians.
vi. 18. Praying ALWAYS with ALL Prayer, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance. "All Prayer must mean all kinds of Prayer; public, private,
secret; solitary and social. But Family prayer is one kind of Prayer, and
therefore to be attended always, and watched unto with all perseverance.

Another Text that seems to look to Family Prayer is that, Philip. iv. 6. Be
careful for nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and Supplication let your
Requests be made known to GOD. Men are in a special manner apt to be careful
and anxious how to provide for their Households, how to feed and clothe their
Families; But let Family Prayer and secret Prayer be the Antidote and sovereign
Remedy against this sickly and painful disorder of our Minds. Carry the care of
your Families to GOD in daily Prayers. But shall this be only in Secret? Why
not also in Prayers with them?

Another place that has a fair Aspect on Family Worship is Col. iii. 17. And
whatsoever ye do in word or deed do all in the Name of the LORD JESUS, giving
Thanks unto GOD and the FATHER by Him. In the verse before the Exhortation is,
Let the Word of CHRIST dwell in you richly, teaching and admonishing one
another in Psalms etc. And in the verse after Wives are exhorted to submit
themselves unto their own Husbands as is fit in the LORD. Whatsoever therefore
is done in the Household, in word or deed, is directed to be done in the Name of
CHRIST, with continual Thanksgiving to GOD. -- And then in the beginning of the
next Chapter, Masters of Families are required to continue in prayer, and to
watch in the same with Thanksgiving. These Precepts are directed to Householders
by name, to continue in daily Prayers and Praises with their Families. This
seems the most fair and easy, natural and genuine sense of the Precept in this
place.

Again we are taught and commanded, I. These. v. 17, 18. to pray without
ceasing, and in every thing to give Thanks. If in every thing, then surely in
our Families, for all Family Mercies. -- A like Precept we have I. Tim. ii. 8.
I will that Men pray every where, lifting up holy Hands without Wrath. If every
where, then surely in our Houses, and with our Households. This is one of the
first places that occur to us. And the Caution of holy Hands, without Wrath, is
peculiarly proper to Households, where Angers and Wraths do especially unfit for
holy Prayers. -- It follows, Let the Women adorn themselves with Sobriety and
good Works, and let the Woman learn in Silence with all Subjection; for Adam
was first formed and then Eve. Which seems to determine the Apostle's meaning
in foregoing Discourse to Family Prayer.

Moreover, That our Houses should be places for Prayer, and that there should
be occasional Prayers with the Household, is plain from the Commandment and
Direction of the Apostle James, v. 14, 15. Is any sick among you? let him call
for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him --. But is this the
only Occasion that there is for social Prayer in Families? Should there be
Prayer on this Occasion with the Household, and on no other? Or if the Elders of
the Church must be called on this, or the like Occasion, is not the Master of
the Family to pray and give Thanks with it on many other Occasions? And are not
such Occasions frequently and daily returning on us? And if on greater
Occasions there should be more solemn and formal Supplications in the House and
for it, should there be no prayers in it and for it on lesser and more ordinary
Occasions, returning every day? Or if one of the Family be taken dangerously
Sick once in the year, or in several years, and this be a loud Call for the
Prayers of the Household; Is not the continued Health of all the Family from day
to day, and it may be from year to year, as loud a Call for the united daily
Thanksgivings of the Household?

But to look into the Epistles of Peter and close with him. How applicable to
Families and Family Worship are his Words, I. Epist. ii. 5. A spiritual House,
an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to GOD, through
JESUS CHRIST. The Church of GOD is a spiritual House, and so should our
Families be also. Believers in CHRIST are a holy Priesthood, but in a special
manner to their Households; to offer up with them (as well as by themselves in
secret) the spiritual Sacrifices of Praise and Prayer. -- See also I. Peter
iii. 7. Let the Husbands dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honor
to the Wife as to the weaker Vessel, and as being Heirs together of the Grace
of Life, that your PRAYERS be not hindered. The several Relatives in a Family
should live together as Heirs of the Grace of Life; therefore they should pray,
both together and apart, for one another: But especially the Care about the
Prayers of the Household lies on the Head of the Family. It is supposed that
there be Prayers in the Family; that the Husband pray for and with the Wife;
and why not the latter as well as the former? And the Husband is wisely
directed to treat the Wife with Tenderness, to bear with her Infirmities, and
by governing himself well toward her to keep up love and peace in the Family;
That so their Prayers, and those of the Household, whether together or apart, be
not hindered.

These are some of the Notices and Intimations of the Mind of GOD in his Word
about Family Worship; amounting (as I judge) to a plain Revelation of his Will
in the matter, and so to a Precept and Injunction concerning it.

I conclude this Head with the Words of the venerable Mr. Baxter on this
Argument; "Let me tell you (says he) that it is Ignorance to call for
particular and express Scriptures that require praying in Families, as if we
though it the general Commands were not sufficient, and did not comprehend this
particular.

I come now to consider the Scripture Examples for Family Worship: By which I
mean what we find related and recorded concerning one Person and another,
bearing a favorable Aspect on this Practice.

I might name Adam, Noah and Abraham, but forbear, having hinted at them
before. Jacob was a like godly Worshiper with his Household, having learned it
of his pious Ancestors, and inheriting the Spirit with the Blessing of Abraham.
He died, as he lived, worshipping with his Sons around him, pouring out Prayers
for them, and blessing them, one by one, in the Name of the LORD.

Job was a like devout Worshiper of GOD with his Family. GOD gave him seven
Sons and three Daughters, and as in their Childhood he had daily worshipped with
them, so when they were adult, and settled in Houses of their own, he frequently
called them together to worship with him: He sent for them and sanctified them,
offering Burnt-Offerings, according to the number of them all: Thus did Job
continually. These were his Family Sacrifices, and he was very constant and
solemn in them.

Joshua gave his sense of Family Religion, the Devotion and Worship of the
Household, in that famous and noble Resolve, Josh. xxiv. 15. As for me and my
House, we will serve the LORD. He resolved for himself and his Household, those
that were his immediate Charge and Care, living under his roof. Himself and his
house he joins in the Worship, for they daily joined in it. "I and my
Domestics, I with them and they with me; I and they together and apart. He
spoke as the Master and Head of a Family.

Jesse, the Father of David, was a religious Householder and worshipped GOD with
his Family. David speaks of occasional Sacrifices in his Fathers house. 1. Sam.
xx. 6. They had their annual or monthly Sacrifices, and why not the daily?

David had learned of his pious Father, and was taught of GOD to bless his
Household; i. e. to pray and give thanks with them, to GOD, for his Blessing on
them. This became so great a King, and so illustrious a Saint, the Man after
GOD's own Heart. Who would wish for a better Pattern or Teacher? Would to GOD
that all Kings would learn of him, all Rulers imitate him, in the Devotions of
their Households. To be sure all Saints will gladly follow his more than royal
Example. The least and lowest among us may have a Household to rule and bless,
and has this Authority in his own House, as much as the Prince has in his. II.
Sam. vi. 20. Then David returned to bless his Household. From an extraordinary
Act of solemn public Devotion, from blessing the Congregation of Israel, both
as a Prophet and their Prince, he came home and blessed his Family in the Name
of the LORD. He blessed and praised GOD with them that day, and implored his
Blessing on them. Every Man is a King and a Priest in his own House, to rule
for GOD and to lead in his Worship. He returned to bless his House: It seems to
speak his Custom and Use to bless it. Was this the only time? or the first or
last time that David returned from GOD's House to bless his own? No, it seems
to have been no new thing to Him or them. He was wont to do so on Sabbaths and
other Festivals. His Household no doubt expected Him; and were in waiting to
receive his Blessing. Michal alone was out of frame, but not so the Maids of
Honor attending her.

I will name but one more Example from the Old Testament: It is Daniel. Three
times a day he worshipped GOD openly and solemnly in his House. How else should
his Enemies have known his Practice, or been able to have convicted him as they
did? Had it been the Worship of his Closet, the Rule ever was and is to shut
the window and the door, and pray to Him that sees in Secret. But Daniel's
daily Prayers were open in the sight and hearing of his Enemies. Doubtless it
was the Worship in his Chapel, or of his Household together.. Dan. vi. 10, 11.
Now when Daniel knew that the Writing was signed, he went into his House, and
his windows being open in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his
knees three times a day, and prayed and gave Thanks before his GOD, as he did
aforetime: Then these Men assembled, and found Daniel praying and making
Supplication before his GOD. Judge if this be not meant of Daniel's Worship
with his Household, rather than his retired Devotions by himself. Neither
Morning nor Evening prayer were wanting in Daniel's house. They that pleased
might make themselves Witnesses of the Worship of his House, nor would he
change the Order of it for the Kings Decree. The door of his Chapel stood open
for his Brethren of the Dispersion and others. He chose to die rather than
cease his Family Worship for thirty days.

From the Scriptures of the New Testament I shall only name our LORD Himself,
and Cornelius the first-fruit of the Gentiles.

JESUS is the great Pattern to his Church; the pattern of Prayer and Devotion,
alone by Himself and with his Disciples. The Families of the Earth are blessed
in Him, with respect to his Example in this point. He has taught them to pray
both together and apart. JESUS had a Family. He chose and ordained the Twelve
to be with him. Mark iii. 14. They attended him wherever He went, as his proper
Domestics. Though He had not where to lay his Head, yet there was a Family
Relation between Him and the Twelve, of Master and Servants, Teacher and
Scholars. They left all and followed Him. He called them his Household, and
Himself the Master of the House. Matthew. x. 25. And as such he fed them from day
to day, and eat the Passover with them. Mark xiv. 14. He often taught them in
private, and prayed with them in private, as his Domestics. Luke ix. 18. As he
was alone praying, his Disciples were with him i. e. He was praying with them,
by themselves only. He was not alone by Himself, for the Disciples were with
him. It was a Family Prayer. It was neither public nor secret Prayer, but
private with his Household. And such we may call his wondrous Prayer just before
his Passion, John. xvii. What a famous and glorious Instance was this of Family
Worship, on an extraordinary Occasion? wherein therefore our LORD was the more
enlarged and affectionate. Thus JESUS is the Pattern for Family Worship to all
Worshipers.

And whom shall we name after Him? Which of the Household? Peter, or James, or
John? Neither of the Twelve, though doubtless they followed the Example of JESUS
in this Duty; But let CORNELIUS (a Gentile Worshiper, a Centurion of the
Italian Band) have this Honor; as a good Soldier of JESUS CHRIST. We have his
excellent Character, Acts x. 2. A devout Man, and one that feared GOD with all
his House, and prayed to GOD always. As he was praying in his House, he had a
Vision of an Angel of GOD; behold a Man stood before him in bright clothing.
The best Expositors take it for a pregnant Instance of Household Worship. And if
so, it was a good Beginning, a good and leading Example, among the Gentile
Converts. He prayed always, with all his House. It was at the ninth Hour, the
time of the Evening Sacrifice. If it was a Family Prayer, GOD put a double
honor on it; By one Vision he directed Cornelius to send for Peter, and by
another he prepared Peter to go. But above all, He poured out the HOLY GHOST
upon these Gentile Worshipers, while Peter preached to to them. Thus did the
HOLY ONE own and honor the Prayers of Cornelius and his Household. Let it
encourage and confirm all believing Householders in the practice of
Family Prayer.

Methinks the elect Lady and her Children were such a Family of Devotion; and
Lydia and her House; and so Priscilla and Aquila, Nymphas and Philemon, with
the Church in their House. Probably their Christian Neighbors might meet for
Worship at these Houses on Lord's days and at other times. But doubtless the
Families were as little Churches, and worthy to be so called because of the
good Order and daily Worship of GOD in them. "It is fit (says Calvin) that all
the Families of the Faithful should be so ordered as to deserve this Honor.
"It rests upon every Head of a Family (says Bp. Davenant) so to exercise his
Household in the true Religion, that it may d^^^rvedly obtain the Name of a
Church". A reli^^^^^ Family is a holy Community; like the House of ^^^aham and
Jacob; or as the House of Obed-edom, wh^^ the Ark rested in it. "Religion in
the pow^^ of it, reigning in a Family, turns a House into (...) church". --
Such a Family had an Epistle directed to them; namely that to Philemon: To
Philemon, our dearly beloved and Fellow Laborer, and to the Church in thy
House. Other Epistles were written to the Churches in such a City or Province;
but this to a godly Person and his religious Household: Like one of the Epistles
of John, to the elect Lady and her Children. "It was the Aggravation of the
Fault of Onesimus (as One observes) that he left such a Family, and ran away
from such a Master, where he had been well taught both by Word and Example. All
Families should be Nurseries of Religion, as Philemons was; i. e. Societies in
which GOD is daily called upon, where he is daily praised, where his Word is
daily read, and the Sabbaths of GOD are rested on, and kept religiously in the
private and public Duties of them: Where GOD's Law is in the Heart of Parents,
Masters and Mistresses, and is diligently taught unto the Children. Such
Families are Nurseries for the Church and Table of CHRIST, to fill them with
worthy Communicants. Onesimus upon his Repentance was restored in this Family,
as a sinning Member is in the Churches of CHRIST, above a Servant, a Brother
beloved.

And thus I have gathered up the Voice and Sense of Scripture, as truly and
briefly as I could, on this important point of Family Worship; and have kept
very much to the Order of Scripture in doing it. From hence have the Godly in
all Places and Ages of the Church, gone into the practice of this Duty. And all
that uprightly practice it have the pleasure, comfort and profit of it. None
ever repented of it, or are like to repent of it. These are the footsteps of
the Flocks, and thus the Sheep feed, and their Lambs with them, besides the
Shepherds Tents.

III. I come now to give Rules and Directions about the Duty of Family Worship.

1. We must be frequent and constant in the Duty. Let no day pass without
secret and family Prayer, reading GOD'S Word, and solemn Thanksgiving to Him
for personal and relative Mercies. Let GOD have his Dues in thy House, his
morning and evening Sacrifices. Psalm xcii. 1 It is a good thing to give Thanks
unto the LORD, and to sing Praises to thy Name, O MOST HIGH! to show forth thy
Loving kindness in the Morning, and thy Faithfulness every Night. Psalm v. 2.
My voice shall thou hear in the Morning, O LORD! in the Morning will I direct
my Prayer unto Thee, and will look up. Psalm cxli. 2. Let my Prayer be set
forth before Thee as Incense, and the lifting up of my hands as the Evening
Sacrifice. These stated Exercises should never be omitted, without a plain
Necessity constrain to it; but in extraordinary Cases, as those of great
Affliction and Sorrow, the Family may need to be prayed with three and four
times a day: And Days of Prayer may be called for in them.

It was Mr. Baxter's declared Judgment, That the Master of a Family ought
rather to omit secret Prayer in his Closet, than private Prayer with his
Household. Family Prayer (says he) is of greatest Necessity, because each Person
is concerned in it. You must rather take up with Family prayer alone, than with
secret alone. -- Let us not on any little pretense, or small occasion, omit
this Duty. Let us walk before GOD in our houses in this daily Course. Let us be
constant and steady in it, like the Sun in its Circuit, as Day and Night in
their return. As the Sun arises let us get up to worship and serve GOD, the
Father of Light; And as it knows its going down, so let us know and keep our
Hour of Evening Prayer.

2. Let us be seasonable in Family Worship. It is doubly beautiful, pleasant
and profitable in its Season. Out of season it very much loses its beauty,
pleasure and profit. Yet the Occasions of Families may cause some Variety here.
One and the same Time will not sure all Families, nor always the same Family.
The Rule in general is, When the Household can be best and most together.
Another is Not too late in the Morning, nor in the Evening.

The first looks too slothful, and often comes by drowsing too long in Bed. But
let GOD and our Souls have the first and fresh Tho'ts of the Morning. Let us
not stay to do a good part of the Mornings Work before we wait upon GOD. Fresh
and fasting may be a good Rule; healthful to the Soul and honorary to GOD.
First let us serve GOD with our Household, and then serve our selves of them. So
let all the Work of the Day be sanctified early, by the Word and Prayer. Let
GOD'S Work be done before our own. Psalm cviii. Awake up my Glory, awake early.
The Letter here agrees to a Morning Song, from an early Riser. Such have a
great Advantage both for secret and private Worship.

But more especially let not the Evening Prayers be late and drowsy, dreamed
over half asleep. It is best for Families to be early in bed, and much more to
be early in the Evening Worship. Late Visits necessarily cause late Prayers in
our own and others Families. Staying late at the Tavern is yet a worse
Disorder, where the Heads of Families too often keep one another till the
Season is past for the Evening Worship, and they are unfit for either private
or secret Prayer. But if we loiter and trifle away the Evening in our own
Houses, till it grow late and the Household are half asleep, it comes near to
the same thing. -- It is therefore a special Rule in the Case before us, that
we keep Time and Season in praying with (...) Families. And truly it might have
been even better sometimes to have omitted the holy Service, than to have
attended it in the disorders of Sleepiness and Yauning. The Oblation is vain,
and the Incense becomes an Abomination. Both GOD and Man is weary to bear them.

3. We should neither be too long, nor too short, in Family worship. An Error
on either hand is hurtful. Prolixity should be carefully avoided; much less
should it be affected. It makes the Duty tedious, and is the way to b^^ak in
upon the commanded Labors of the Day, or necessary Rest of the Night. -- On
the other hand, T^ be cursory and slighty in Family Worship is to make nothing
of it, or worse than nothing. Let us not grudge to GOD the Time and Pains of a
suitable Supplication and Thanksgiving.

Family prayer should be rather short than long. But let it be long eno' to
answer the Intention and design of it. It is neither to be crowded into a
single Petition or two, nor should it be drawn out into a great length. In all
social Prayer the Rule and Caution to us is that, Mat. vi. 7. Use not vain
Repetitions, nor think to be heard for your much speaking. Yet at some times we
are called by Providence, and directed by the SPIRIT of Grace, to be longer
than other. Wisdom is profitable to observe and direct. At times again we may
and should shorten our Prayers. But see (says Mr. Baxter) that formal
Affectation be not the lengthener of your Prayers at any Time, nor carnal
Weariness the shortner of them.

There are times of Family trials and afflictions, especially when Sickness and
Death come into our Houses, which call us to enlarge our Supplications, with
Confessions to GOD, and Humiliations before Him: Again there are times of
Family mercies, which call us to abound in Praises and Thanksgivings to GOD:
Let Providence lead us, and a Spirit of sincere Devotion act us, and let the
Glory of GOD and the Edification of our Household direct and govern us.

4. Let us be sure that we be serious and sincere, and also reverend solemn and
fervent in the Exercises of Family worship. Let us take heed that we be not
formal and customary, cold and careless, dull and lifeless in the Duty. Let it
not be a mere Form and round of Worship. This cannot be too earnestly warned or
watched against. GOD looks to the Heart and Spirit in all our Worship. The same
Exercise of Grace he requires from us, in the Closet, in the Family, or in the
Church. We have to do with the same GOD in all places and at all times, and
unto Him we must lift up our Souls, and call upon him in Truth. The Precept and
Rule to us is, Heb. xii. 28. Let us have Grace whereby we may serve GOD
acceptably, with Reverence and godly Fear. He is greatly to be feared in a
Family of Worshipers, as well as in the Assembly and Congregation.

And as we must sanctify the LORD in our Hearts, so we should be grave,
reverend and solemn in our Voice, Gesture, Deportment and Behavior, while we
worship GOD in our Families. Indeed we should beware of being noisie and
ostentatious in it, not affecting Show or the Observation of Men; but yet
neither let us be afraid of being observed, seen or heard by others, but desire
to have our Light shine before them; if they may be excited hereby to glorify
our FATHER which is in Heaven. Aim at the pleasing and honoring GOD, and the
Salvation of thy Self and Family; and by thy reverend Example constrain the
Reverence of thy Household; and by thy Earnestness and Affection endeavor to
move their Affections, and make them in earnest: And by thy Authority command
all in thy House to show Seriousness and Reverence. Humility and godly Fear,
Faith Love and earnest Desire, with holy Pleasure and Satisfaction, is the Life
and Soul of Worship; all in all in it; whether it be in secret, in private or
in public.

5. Tie not your Self to a Form, nor yet indulge too much Liberty of Speech, in
Family Worship. A good Form may be useful and needful for some, but it is not
to be advised or chosen without Necessity. The modesty and bashfulness of some
understanding Christians is not Reason eno' for such an Indulgence. It were
rather fit for some more bold and conceited Persons. A small Gift may suffice
for suitable and pertinent Family Prayer. Let us covet the best Gift in it, and
do our best; and then the least will be accepted of GOD. But if any use a Form,
let him not be formal in it, but still pray with the Spirit and with
Understanding. To such I would recommend the Forms prepared by the Rev. Mr.
Henry in his Book called, A Method of Prayer.

Some by taking too great Freedom in Family prayer, have but spoilt the
Devotion of the Household, and exposed the Duty to contempt. It had been much
better if such had used some good Form of sound Words. The wise Householder must
think soberly, what will most honor GOD and edify the Family.

Both Ministers in public, and Householders in private, should take heed what
Liberties they allow themselves in Prayer. And yet, both Families and
Congregations must make Allowances, at Times more especially, for Infirmity and
Weaknesses in those that lead in Prayer. Solomon's warning and caution is
needful to be kept in mind, Eccless. v. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let
not thy heart be hasty, to utter any thing before GOD: For GOD is in Heaven and
thou upon Earth; therefore let thy Words be few: "well considered and digested.
That wise Proverb of Solomon is of great Use, as well in the religious as
common Use of Speech; In the multitude of Words there wants not Sin, but he
that refraineth his lips is wise. "It is not eno' (says Mr. Henry) that what we
speak comes from the Heart, but it must come from a composed Heart. As the
Mouth must not be rash, so the Heart must not be hasty. We must think twice
before we speak, either from GOD in Preaching, or to GOD in Prayer.

Let us be careful and reverend in our coming boldly to the Throne of Grace.
Let us take with us Abraham's Words and Frame, Behold I have taken upon me to
speak unto the LORD, who am but dust and ashes!

6. On the LORD'S- day we should ordinarily be more enlarged in Duties of
Worship, both in the Closet and in the Family. The Day is holy for this End and
Use, that we should spend it in the "public and private Exercises of GOD'S
Worship. As we must needs attend the public Assemblies, on the Lord's Day, for
it is a holy Convocation; So it is the Sabbath of the LORD in our Dwellings.
This is no Judaizing, but as it was from the Beginning, is and ever shall be.
So we call the Sabbath our Delight in the best manner, and find not our own
Pleasure on it; think not our own Tho'ts, nor speak our own Words. As the
Sacrifices under the Law were doubled on the Sabbath Day, so it is fitting
under the Gospel that our Family Sacrifices of Praise and Prayer be enlarged
and doubled on the LORD'S- day. If on other days the Word of GOD should be read
in our Houses, on this more. If Prayer and Praise be requisite every day,
surely they are more on the holy Sabbath. Then especially we should remember
the LORD our Sancitifier, and be found in all the Means of our Sanctification,
whether more private or public. And what is the fruit of the neglect of Family
worship on the LORD'S-days, but sports and pastimes on them, and open profaness
and debauchery. Hence comes the loss of all serious Religion, and the growth of
all manner of Irreligion. Let us therefore be the more abundant and solemn in
Family Worship on the LORD'S day. Secret and private Worship thereon prepares
for the public, and that again should enlarge us for the other: As David
returned from the most solemn Exercises of public Devotion, to bless his own
Household. These had not tired and unfitted him, but the more prepared him for
his Family Thanksgiving in the Evening.

7. In our Family prayers let it be a Rule with us, that there be much of
Thanksgiving and Praise in the Duty. Indeed GOD sometimes puts our Families
into Mourning, and calls them to solemn Humiliations, Confessions and
Supplications; as has been said before. Nor ought Confession of Sin, with
Supplications for Grace and Mercy, to be ever missing in Family prayers. But we
are too apt to be wanting in the part of Thanksgiving and Praise, in our daily
Devotions, by our Selves or with Others; which is a very ill and ungrateful
thing

Our personal and Family Mercies are many and great from day to day, and they
call for a religious notice every day. In the days of our Afflictions and
Mournings, the darkest days that pass over our Houses, our Mercies are new
every morning and evening, and ought never to be forgotten or overlooked. How
much less in the Months that GOD preserves us, and while his Candle is shining
on our Tabernacles: Then should the Voice of Rejoicing and Thanksgiving be loud
in them, every Morning and Night. -- This likewise makes the daily Service
pleasant to the Household, and tends to raise and fix the hearts of the Family
in the holy Duty; Praise being comely for the Upright, and the joyful Work of
Heaven and Eternity. We should never be weary in it now, as we hope never to
cease from it hereafter. Psalm civ. ult. I will sing unto the LORD as long as I
live, I will sing Praises to my GOD while I have my Being. My Meditation of Him
shall be sweet, I will be glad in the LORD.

The first Petition in the LORD'S- prayer is, Thy Name be hallowed, and
Doxology closes it, For thine is the Kingdom, Power and Glory: So let us be
evermore awaking up our Glory, to give Praises and not be Silent.

Let no Family afflictions unfit us and put us out of Tune for this; no
Bereavement or Death in our Houses: But in this Case let us learn of the
excellent Example of Job, who when his Family and Estate were destroyed
together, fell down in his House and worshipped, saying, The LORD gave, and the
LORD has taken; blessed be the Name of the LORD! Shall we receive Good at the
Hand of the LORD, and shall we not receive Evil?

8. Let no leven of Wickedness be found in our Dwellings. This is a necessary
and special Direction for the effectual and fervent Worship of GOD in our
Families. For if we regard Iniquity in our hearts, the LORD will not hear our
Prayers, Psalm lxvi. 18. Sin spoils all our Worship, of every sort; mental or
oral, solitary or social. The Sacrifice of the wicked is Abomination. Most wise
and necessary is Zophar's Admonition to us, Job xi. 13, 14, 15. If thou prepare
thy Heart, and stretch out thy Hands to GOD; if iniquity be in thy hand put it
away, and let not Wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacle; for then shall thou lift
up thy face without spot. It is the Rule and Law in all Prayer, and at all
Times, James iv. 8. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye
double-minded! draw nigh to GOD and he will draw nigh to you. The Man that had
been blind from his birth knew this, that GOD hears not Sinners; but if any
Man be a Worshiper of GOD and does his Will, him He hears. Spoken like a
Child of Light. As therefore the Jews were to search their Houses and purge
them from Leven, in their Preparation for the Solemnity of the Passover; so we
must wash our Hearts from wickedness when we go to pray to our FATHER in
secret, and cleanse our Houses from it, when we go to bless them in the Name of
the LORD; who will not else bless them at our Prayer. Prove. iii. 33. The Curse
of the LORD is in the House of the wicked, but he blesses the Habitation of
the Just.

9. In a particular manner watch against Anger, Strife and Wrath in thy Family,
that the Worship of GOD in it be not hindered. This old Leven spoils the Prayers
of Households, and makes them become Sin. There is no greater hindrance either
of secret or family Prayer. It takes away the heart and face for the Duty. The
Law to us is, I. Tim. ii. 8. I will that Men pray every where, lifting up holy
Hands, without Wrath. A wrathful Mind cannot lift up a holy Hand to GOD. The
disorder of the Heart pollutes the Prayer. The GOD of Peace and Love can never
endure the Prayers of a House where there is Anger and Strife, Confusion and
every evil Work. The hearts of such a Household cannot join in Prayer, and how
should GOD accept it? The Rule is, Live in Love, and the GOD of Love and Peace
shall be with you. Only such Relatives can pray as Heirs together of the Grace
of Life, I. Pet. iii. 7. GOD would not hear Job and his Friends pray together,
or for one another, after their angry and quarrelling Disputes, till they were
reconciled: Job xlii. 8. Take with you seven Bullocks and seven Rams, and go to
my Servant Job; he shall pray for you: And the LORD turned away the Captivity
of Job, when he prayed for his Friends. Near Relations are most of all bound to
love and pray for one another; but if they fall in the Love, they will also in
the Prayers which they owe to one another. Families should be of one Heart and
Soul, as they are of one Blood; and then there is Harmony and Power in their
Prayers when they make one Voice to GOD. If two of you agree on Earth (said our
LORD) it shall be done for you of my FATHER which is in Heaven. When we stand
praying we are required to forgive our very Enemies, and to bless them that
curse us. How then can Families, which are Societies more especially under the
Law and Bonds of mutual Love, unite in Prayers, if Love be wanting in them?
This is my Commandment (said our LORD JESUS) that ye love one another: How then
can two or three be together in his Name, if it be not in the Spirit of Love?
There is neither Church Communion, nor Family Communion, without the Law of
Kindness and Love ruling in the Hearts of the Members. I. John iv. 7. Beloved,
Let us love one another; for Love is of. GOD, and every one that loves is born
of GOD, and knows GOD: He that loves not knows not GOD, for GOD is Love.

10. "Watch your worldly Business, that it do not eat out the Life and
Seriousness of daily Worship". This is one of Mr. Baxter's Rules and a very
good one. For as the Friendship of the World is Enmity to GOD, so nothing is
more Inimical to vital Piety, to secret or family Religion, than the Spirit of
this World; the Cares of it and the Deceitfulness of Riches. These choke the
Word, and it becomes unfruitful; and these choke and drive away the Spirit of
Prayer.

-- Some are so taken up with their worldly Cares and Businesses, that they can
find no Time or Leisure for Family Prayer. They rise early, sit up late, and
eat the Bread of Carefulness; but neither seek to GOD for it, nor thank him for
it, as they ought in their Families, while he daily feeds 'em. One goes to his
Farm, and another to his Merchandise, but they desire to be excused from the
Prayers of the Closet and the Family, day by day. They are cumber'd with many
things, and neglect the One thing needful; which is to sit at JESUS feet, and
hear his Word, and come in his Name to the Throne of Grace. -- Family prayer is
not of the World, even as CHRIST is not of the World. It is of the FATHER, and
spiritual, and the World hates it. -- Let the Object and Manner of Worship be
wrong and false, and the World goes after the Beast: Let it be an Idol that is
worshipped, in a corrupt and carnal manner, only with bodily Adoration, and
every Family shall have its Houshold-God, of Wood or of Gold; but go to set up
the spiritual and pure Worship of GOD in a Family, and the Spirit of this World
rises against it, and cannot endure it, cannot admit of it; but finds a thousand
Objections against it and Excuses from it: Then Time cannot be found for it, or
Inability for it shall be pleaded, or the Necessity of the thing shall be
questioned; whereas all the while it is only the Spirit of Demas possessing the
Person, even the Love of the present World. So necessary is the Apostle's
Prohibition and Dehortation, I. John ii. 16. Love not the World, nor the things
of the World; if any Man love the World the Love of the FATHER is not in him. A
spiritual Mind, abstracted from this World and the things of it, is absolutely
necessary to a Life of daily spiritual Worship. This is the Victory that
overcomes the World, even our Faith. It is true, that Diligence in our worldly
Callings must accompany our daily Prayers in our Families; else we tempt GOD
and put our selves out of the way of his Blessing. That gives us our daily
Bread, and we must ask it of GOD. And the Rule to us is that, Philip. iv. 5, 6.
Let your Moderation be known unto all men, for the LORD is at hand; Be careful
for nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving
let your Requests be made known unto GOD.

11. In the choice of your worldly Callings, in putting out your Children, and
in making Marriages for your Selves and Them; have a due Respect unto this Duty
and Privilege of Family Worship. Choose not to settle in such a Way as will not
well consist with this Duty. Prefer that Business, and way of Living, which
will best agree with the Religion of the Closet and of the Household. For this
Advantage think it worth while to abate something of worldly Gains. Choose not
to put your Children into such Families where the Worship of GOD is not upheld;
and much less be willing to marry them to such Persons who are like to be
disinclin'd thereunto. So let us endeavor to preserve and propagate Family
Religion from Generation to Generation.

12. And lastly, Let all our Family Sacrifices be presented to GOD in the Name
of JESUS, in Whom all the Families of the Earth are blessed. Carry thy Household
daily, and all thy Family Worship, to the Blood of the great Sacrifice, CHRIST
our Passover. Get all the Souls of thy House, and all thy Prayers for them,
sprinkled with the blood of the LAMB. That shall secure thy House from deserved
Wrath, and procure for it all the Blessings it needs. By Faith in a sacrificed
Savior, the Lamb slain, we may plead, and wrestle, and prevail for our Selves
and Ours, as Jacob did. He wrestled with the Angel of the Covenant for his
Household, and was named Israel. Go thou, in the Name and Strength of CHRIST and
do likewise. He is a merciful and faithful High Priest, to pray for thee, to
breathe in thee, and to bear away the Iniquity of thy holy Things. If He wash
not Us, our Offspring, and our Offerings, how shall we be accepted by the Holy
GOD? If he put the Incense of his Merits to thy Prayers, they shall come up
before GOD a sweet Odor.

And thus I have given Rules and Directions about the Duty of Family Worship.

IV. An Exhortation, with Motives to the Duty, do yet remain. Let us be
exhorted to the Practice of this Duty, in that wise and religious Manner which
has been directed to. Let such as are in this holy Practice in their Houses, be
exhorted to continue therein, in the Fear of GOD. And let those that are
Strangers to the Practice be admonished and warned in the Fear of GOD to come
into it. And to move both the one and the other, let me plead with them, for
GOD'S sake, for the sake of their Families, for their own sake, and for the
sake of the Public, both in Church and State. -- These are plain Motives and
powerful Arguments, and should sink down into our Hearts; both to convince
those that do not daily read the Word of GOD to their Household, and pray with
them, of their Sin in this Omission and Neglect; and to encourage and confirm
Others to persevere in this Duty by the Grace of GOD.

First then, For GOD'S sake, for the Glory of his Name; from Love to Him and
from Fear of Him; to please Him, to obtain his Favor, and to avoid his Wrath;
let us all come into and continue in this religious Practice of Family Worship.
The Honor of GOD should be ever uppermost in our Hearts, and ly with weight
there; it being the chief End of Man: And all our Endowments, with all the
Advantages which GOD puts into our. hands, should be made to subserve
thereunto. In like manner, Nothing should come with more force and power on us,
to deter us from living in the Allowance of any Evil, or in the Neglect of any
commanded Duty, than the Dishonor we bring thereby to the Name of GOD.

Now what does the Glory of GOD call for from us in our Families? Let us put it
to our own Consciences, and let our Reason and Understanding impartially
answer. Is it not for the Honor of GOD, and for our glorifying Him together,
that we daily and devoutly worship Him with our Household? And is it no
Dishonor to the Great GOD if he is not so worshipped, day by day? though He be
the Founder of the Family, its Preserver and dully Benefactor! though It is HE
has formed the Head and every Member of the Family; has brought them together
and built them up into a Household? His Secret has been on the Tabernacle; his
Candle shining on it, his Eyes watching over it, his Hands supplying it
plentifully; though it is HE that has girt it with strength, blessed the small
Beginning of it, and increased the latter End of it. Or if it be afflicted, its
Afflictions come not out of the Dust, nor does its Troubles spring out of the
Ground; but it is the Rod of GOD upon it, which he only can remove; or
sanctify, which is far the better. How then can GOD be glorified in the House,
if in every Case he be not religiously regarded in all his Ways toward it; and
that by all the Household together, as well as every Member apart? -- As our
Father Jacob in all his Family Mercies, and in all his Family Afflictions, gave
the same Glory to GOD; in all his Fears concerning them, and in all his Joys in
them. When he looked upon his Substance, his Word was, The LORD has given me
these Flocks: When he looked upon his Household, he said, I passed this Jordan
with my Staff, and GOD has made me two Bands: When he feared for his Family he
carried them to GOD and wrestled in Prayer for them; O GOD of my Father!
deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my Brother; for I fear him, lest he
come and sinite the Mother with the Children.

This is to give Glory unto GOD as the GOD of our Families. And thus we teach
our Children and Servants to glorify GOD with us; to know Him, to love him, and
to fear him, to pray unto and praise Him by themselves alone. This is better
done by Example and Practice before them every day, than any other way we can
think of. Not that other ways should be omitted, but this to be sure observed.
So Eleazar, the Servant of Abraham, learned to acknowledge the LORD GOD of his
Master in all his ways; to depend on Him, to seek him and give him Glory, in
every Affair and Concern of the Family; and more especially in the greater and
more important ones: When therefore he stood by the Well he prayed, Genesis xxiv.
12. O LORD GOD of my Master Abraham! I pray thee send me good speed this day,
and show kindness to my Master Abraham: Behold I stand by the Well etc. And
when GOD had given him the Token of his Favor which he had prayed for, the Man
wondering at the Thing bowed down his Head and worshipped, and said, Blessed be
the LORD GOD of my Master Abraham, who has not left my Master destitute of his
Mercy and Truth; I being in the Way, the LORD has led me to the House of my
Masters Brethren.

Thus Children and Servants learn to honor and reverence GOD by living in
Worshipping Families. And so GOD has Glory not only from the Head of the House,
but from many a Branch of it; the higher and lower Members of it. So it seems
to have been in the happy House of Cornelius, who feared GOD with all his
House, and prayed unto GOD always. -- In a word, By Family Worship we train up
our Families for the Worship both of the Closet and of the Temple; and teach
our Households to pray both in secret and in public. And so the Glory given by
Ours unto GOD in both, may be very much owing to the Worship in the Family.

For GOD'S sake therefore, and for the Glory of his Name, let us be found in
the holy Practice of Family Worship: which is the first Motive.

Secondly, For our Family and Houshold's sake, for our Children and Servants
sake, let us not live without Family Worship; but in the daily and devout
practice of it. Let me plead with such as neglect this Duty, for the precious
Souls committed to their Care by GOD the Father of Spirits; which ought to dear
to them and for whom they must give Account to GOD. Be prevailed on by the
natural, strong and tender Love which you bear to your Offspring; and by that
Care and Concern which you are bound to have for the Servants in your House, to
keep up the Worship of GOD therein.

The Apostle tells us, That if any man provide not for those of his own House
(meaning their Bodies) he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel.
I. Tim. v. 8. What an infidel House then is that, wherein the Souls of the
Household are utterly neglected; and the Children and Servants are trained up in
Ignorance of GOD, in Irreligion and Profaness; without reading GOD'S Word to
them, and without Prayer to Him for them, from day to day? How should such
Children learn the Fear of the LORD, without which they perish? O destroy not
those Souls for which CHRIST died; and which should be to thee as thy own
Bowels, and more than so. While you are far from hating their Flesh, why should
you not tenderly care for their better and immortal Part, their living Spirits?
Can you pretend that you love your Family, without a religious and godly Care
for their Souls?

How did Abraham's Love work toward his Household? GOD tells us how he loved his
GOD and his Family; Gen xviii. 19. For I know Abraham, that he will command his
Children and his Household after him to keep the Way of the LORD. So Job's Love
to his Sons and Daughters wro't by his fearing for them, lest they should sin
against GOD, and by his calling them to his solemn Sacrifices, which he offered
for them. So David's Love wro't, to his Household; even in his blessing them
from time to time in the Name of the LORD; and also in teaching and charging
them, I. Chron. xxviii. 9. And thou S^^^mon, my Son, Know thou the GOD of thy
Father, and serve him with a perfect Heart etc. Every religious Parent feels
within himself the moving Words of the great Apostle to the Elect Lady
concerning her Children; I have no greater Joy than to hear of thy Children
walking in the Truth.

In a word, How can Masters be just to their Servants, as knowing that they
have a MASTER in Heaven? or how can Parents train up their Children in the
Nurture and Admonition of the LORD; if they do not lead them into the Fear and
Worship of GOD from day to day? But indeed they wickedly neglect the private
Means of their saving Illumination and effectual Calling, Conversion and
spiritual Edification. For surely, Parents and Heads of Families are the
Ministers of GOD for this within their own Walls, and are to attend continually
on this very thing.

But does this seem to be so much as aimed at, while Worship, the Means of
Grace, is neglected in thy House? How know thou, O Man, but that thou may
save thy Household, by the reverend Worship of GOD among them? Have you never
heard of any that have dated their Conversion from such a Prayer in a Family?
The excellent Lady ASHURST (of whose Piety and great Devotion I was once a
Witness for many Weeks together) was an Instance of this Mercy See the Friday
Evening Lectures in Eastcheap on the Duty of PRAYER. p. 303.
. And thousands there are and thousands, both living and deceased, who are
blessing GOD, and will bless Him for ever, that his Providence disposed of them
into such Families of Religion. -- On the other Hand, How know thou, O Man,
but the want of Family Worship in thy House may turn to the loss and eternal
perdition of thy Soul, and of the Souls of thy Household! And then, How will
they and thy own enraged Conscience rise against thee in the Day of Judgment,
and condemn thee? Which leads me to the third Motive,

Thirdly, For thy own sake, for the sake of thy own Soul; for thy Comfort and
Peace in Life and Death, and for thy Safety in the Day of Judgment; maintain
the Worship of GOD in thy Family. On thy doing thy Duty to GOD, and to thy
Family, depends thy own eternal Salvation. If thou do not consult the
glorifying GOD in thy. House, and the Saving thy Household, thou destroyest thy
own Soul.

You must watch for the Souls of your Family, as one that must give an Account
for them to GOD: But what Account can you give of the Neglect of Family
Worship, and therein of the Neglect of the Souls committed to thy Care? Will
not GOD require them of thee another Day? And say to thee as in I. Kings xxvi.
39. Thy Soul shall go for these Souls if they perish: Or as it is in Ezekiel xvi.
20. Thou have taken my Sons and my Daughters, and have sacrificed them to
Satan, to the World and thy Lusts. And thus you and yours may perish together.

Not that Family Worship will save a Man or his House; but it is a Means of
Salvation that is by no means to be neglected. Nor that all must necessarily
perish, who are so unhappy as to live in prayerless Families; but the loss of
eternal Salvation is endangered hereby. And if a prayerless Householder, and
some of his Household, perish hereby, his Condemnation will be the greater,
because of his profane Ingratitude to GOD, and his unnatural Neglect of his
Family. He shall be judged as a profane Wretch toward GOD, and an unnatural
Father to his immortal Offspring, and a despiser of his own Soul and Ways. His
Offspring and Servants will rise up in Judgment against him, and accuse him,
that he never instructed them by Word and Example in the Worship and Fear of
GOD, nor in the Care of their own Souls. And how will he ever look them in the
face? and much less GOD who put them under his Care? His Guilt will fly in his
face, and his own Heart rise and condemn him. The blood of Souls, even of his
Wife and Children, may cry against him from the Earth before he die, as the
blood of Abel's body did against wretched Cain. This punishment will be greater
than he will be able to bear, nor will he be able to say, Was I their Keeper?
Abel's Soul was not destroyed with his Life; but verily a murdered Soul
(whether thy own or another) will be found a more horrid and hideous Guilt,
than any mere murder of the Body, and to deserve eternal Death.

And if the Guilt of prayerless Householders may be found such in the Day of
Judgment, what Pain and Terror may their Sin give them in the day of sore
Affliction, or in the day of Death? Suppose this Man upon his Deathbed, and
his Household gathering about him in that dark hour; how will he take leave of
them whom he has never prayed with? How will he do then to bless them, or they
him? How shall his dying lips pray for them, as Jacob poured out Blessings on
his Sons, sitting up in his Bed? O it must be a melancholy parting, from a
Family that you have never prayed with! Pray consider it, and let not another
Evening or Morning pass without a Family Prayer For they or you may die before
to Morrow: This Night may their or your Soul be required or called away: And
can you think of dying and going into Eternity, without having prayed together
as a Family? How do you think to meet in Heaven, and live praising and blessing
GOD together for ever and ever? Or how can you think of being cast together
into Hell, and for never blessing GOD together in this Life, come to blaspheme
him for ever, and curse one another eternally, in the World to come?

But before Death comes, how miserable are such Families, such Relatives, in
all their Afflictions? What Comfort can they find from one another under them,
who have never been used to worship and pray together? What miserable
Comforters are such like to be to each other? How can they pray for one another
or speak of the Consolations of GOD to one another, in the days of their
Trouble and Distress?

On every Account therefore, present or future, for the sake of thy own Soul
pray with thy Household daily; for thy happy and holy Living here, and for the
eternal Well-being and Happiness (if it please GOD) both of thy Self and Family.

Fourthly and lastly, The last Motive may be taken from our Duty to the Public,
both in the State and in the Church. No Man is born for Himself alone, nor yet
for his own House. We have our Nei'bours Good, the good of our Nei'bourhood, of
the Place wherein we dwell, of the Country we belong to, and of the World
wherein we sojourn, to act for. The Good of all these we may promote or hurt,
by having or not having the Worship of GOD upheld in our Families. Yea the Good
is unknown, and so the Evil, that comes to the Public, by Peoples doing or not
doing their Duty in their private Relations. Family Worship and Government make
Places happy, and the want of it makes them miserable.

1. The Good is unknown that the Public receives; unknown is the Benefit to a
People both in Church and State, by the serious Worship of GOD in Families.
There we may ordinarily suppose the best Family Watch and Government. The
Householder that resolves by GOD'S Grace to sing of Mercy and Judgment in his
House, is most like to proceed and (like David, Psalm ci.) walk within his
House with a perfect Heart, setting no evil Work before his Eyes, nor suffering
Pride or Frowardness to dwell with him, nor him that tells lies to tarry in
his Sight. And it is from Families so taught and ruled that the State, and
Church is most like to be supplied with worthy Persons, from one Generation to
another. Religious Families are the Nurseries for the Churches of CHRIST, to
supply them with worthy Members and Communicants. These may be most looked for
from praying Houses. And it is happy for a People when the State also is
supplied with Judges and Counselors from such Households; who will be like to
be Patrons of Religion and Examples of it in their Generation. Without THESE
the Earth and all its Inhabitants dissolve, but these bear up the Pillars of
it. Religion and Virtue, Piety and Devotion, Temperance and Honesty, Frugality
and Diligence, Justice and Righteousness, Humility and Charity, and every thing
of good Report, are like to be propagated from such Families. And the Blessing
of GOD, which makes a People prosperous, is like to attend a Place for the sake
of such Households. We may bless them in the Name of the LORD and say, The LORD
bless thee, O Habitation of Righteousness! As Godliness has the Promise of the
Life that now is, so the Remains of it in a wicked World are very much owing to
the Religion and Government and good Order of Families. There is the Rice and
Foundation of Rule and Subjection in the State, and so of the public Peace and
Tranquillity.

2. Unknown is the Mischief and Woe to the World, to Church and State, from the
Want of Family Worship and Government. The profaness and corruption that fills
the Earth is very much owing to the Neglect and ill Education of Children. It
would be very much more than it is, if there were not many religious Households,
here and there. Family Worship is a mighty Restraint upon the Lusts of many,
and prevents abundance of Sin. But where Family Religion ceases, the fountains
of the great Deep break open, and Wickedness comes on as a Flood. Surely the
fear of GOD is not in that Place, and they live as without GOD and CHRIST in
the World. Salvation, in the Means of it, is far from those Houses, and they
count themselves unworthy of CHRIST'S coming under their Roof. They say to the
Almighty, depart from us; and Woe unto them if He depart from them.

Irreligion is propagated from such Houses, and their Posterity (that come of
them) are like to be prayerless and graceless like their Ancestors. So they
become a Curse to the World, and bring down the Wrath of GOD upon the Places
where they live. As it is written, Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen that know
thee not, and upon the Families that call not upon thy Name. Woe to the World
for this Offense against GOD, which if it were universal would soon bring on
the Violence that filled the Earth before the Flood, and the Corruption of
Sodom after it; and so the Wrath and Vengeance of GOD to the uttermost; as it
was in both those Cases.

If therefore we have any Regard to GOD, to our own Souls, to the Souls of our
Households, and to the Good of the Places where we live; to the Weal of Mankind
and to the Welfare of the Church of CHRIST; let us earnestly come into and be
steadfast, immovable and abounding in this great and important Duty of Family
Worship.

Consider how much you owe it to GOD, to your Selves, to your Families, and to
the World. Let the Love of GOD, and of your Nei'bour, of your Households, and of
your own Souls, constrain you to this necessary and reasonable Service: Wherein
the Honor of GOD, the temporal and spiritual Advantage of those that are your
own Bowels, and your good Account in the Day of CHRIST, as well as the Good of
your Country and Posterity, are all so nearly interested.

How can you say that you love, honor or fear GOD if you do not worship Him in
your Households? Or how can you say that you love your Families, while you
neglect this? At least, How can you say that you love and care for their
precious and immortal Souls, which should have your first Love and chief Care?

But let those that are found in this religious Course and Practice be greatly
encouraged and confirmed in it, by what has been said. The LORD increase You
more and more, You and your Children. This is the Generation of them that seek
Him; that seek thy Face, O GOD of Jacob! This godly Seed the LORD seeks; He
seeks, and forms and finds them in this Way. The LORD loves these Dwellings of
Jacob, loves to dwell in them. These are his Bethels, Houses of Prayer. As the
Ark in the house of Obed-edom bro't down the Blessing of GOD on it, so let the
Worship of GOD in thy House do on thee and thine. The LORD bless thee and keep
thee, make thee fruitful and multiply thee. GOD has given you the Heritage of
those that fear his Name; the LORD is your Inheritance. Your Houses shall be
called his Houses of Prayer, among all People. The Churches of CHRIST and his
Ministers salute you much in the LORD. The LORD, the Keeper of Israel watch
over your sprinkled Houses; for the bunch of Hyssop with the atoning Blood on
it hangs at your door: May he ever cleanse and water you with the heavenly
Influences of his SPIRIT and Grace! And may the Voice of Rejoicing and
Salvation be ever with you, as in the Tabernacles of the Righteous..

We thank GOD that there are so many praying Families in the Town, and through
the Land; and so many Families of Distinction among us that are Exemplary for
this Duty. We are sorry that there are any, so many Houses, in the Town, or in
any part of the Land, where GOD is not daily worshipped. If there were not a
prayerless Household known among us, this would be our Glory and Safety.

Yet to Those that keep up the solemn Worship of GOD in their Houses, let me
say, -- Rest not in such a Course of holy Duty as your Righteousness; that be
far from you. Neither look on the Person or Family of thy prayerless Nei'bour
with any Eye of spiritual Pride, as if thou were holier than he or his; but
walk humbly with GOD and lowly before Men. Live every day agreeably to thy
Family Devotions, and daily perform thy Vows. Be thou in the Fear of the LORD
all the day long; that thy Prayers may not become Sin, and be cast back as dung
in thy Face. -- Walk daily with GOD in Secret: It may be some pray with their
Families, who do not pray in their Closets: But GOD has strictly required
secret and retired Prayer, by our selves alone. -- Neither content thy Self
with secret and family Worship, but walk thou and thy House in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the LORD blameless, in all his Instituted public
Worship. For the LORD loves the Gates of Zion more than (...) the Dwellings of
Jacob. He loves the Worship of the Household well, but that of his Temple more.
-- (...) an especial manner let the Sabbaths of the LORD be sanctified in thy
Dwelling, by the Word of God and Prayer. -- And finally, To Worship add Family
Instruction and Government. When you have prayed with your Household, then watch
over them in the LORD. So be unto CHRIST a King, as well as a Priest, in thy
House: to rule for Him, as well as to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices.

APPENDIX. From the Whole Duty of Man: CHAP. V. SECT. xii.
A Second sort of public Prayer is that in a Family, where all that are Members
of it join in their common Supplications: And this ought to be very carefully
attended to, first by the Master of the Family, who is to look that there be
such Prayers; it being as much his part to provide for the Souls of his
Children and Servants, as to provide food for their Bodies. Therefore there is
none, even the meanest Householder, but ought to take this care. -- What choice
soever they make of Prayers let them be sure to have some; and let no Man that
professes himself to be a Christian keep so heathenish a Family, as not to see
GOD be daily worshipped in it. But when the Master of the Family has done his
Duty in this providing, it is the duty of (...) Member of it to make use of
that Provision, by (...) constant and diligent at those FAMILY PRAYERS.

FINIS.

