THE Wisdom of GOD IN THE REDEMPTION OF Fallen MAN, Illustrated in SEVERAL
DISCOURSES, From EPHESIANS. I. viii.

By NATHANAEL APPLETON, M. A. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Cambridge.

With a PREFACE of the Reverend Mr. BEN J. WADSWORTH, President of
Harvard-College.

Rom xi. 33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of GOD!

I. Cor. i. 24. -- Christ -- the wisdom of GOD.

Jude 25. v. To the only wise GOD our Savior be glory, and majesty, dominion
and power, now and ever. AMEN.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green for D. Henchman, at his Shop in Corn Hill.
1728.

PREFACE.
THE King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, is the only wise GOD. There is but One
only living and true GOD, and infinite Wisdom is essential to Him. He is the
light, and in Him is no darkness at all. Wisdom in general is reckoned to
consist, in pitching upon some suitable and proper end, and then taking the
best method to obtain that end. The highest and best end (according to our
conception) that GOD Himself can pitch upon, is His own Glory. He has made all
things for Himself. Of him, through him, to him are all things, to whom be glory
for ever. GOD glorifies Himself, in exerting and manifesting his Perfections of
Power, Holiness, Goodness, etc. and so far as the marks or signatures of GOD's
perfections appear in his works (whether Men duly observe them or not) so far
they show forth His glory. Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare the glory of GOD,
and the firmament shows his handy work. And the Wisdom of GOD very
particularly appears, in so contriving, directing, or attempering (if we may so
express it) the manifestation of the divine Attributes, that there shall be no
Inconsistence or Jarring, but the most beautiful consent, harmony and agreement
between them. This Harmony is apparent in all GOD's works, (Psalm. 104.24. O
Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all,) but very
brightly and conspicuously shines forth, even in the most lively colors, in
the great affair of Redeeming Sinful Men, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Psalm.
85.10. Mercy and Truth are met together; Righteousness and Peace have kissed
each other.

This truth is well illustrated, demonstrated, and applied in the following
Sermons, composed (as I think is very evident) with much diligent study, and by
the gracious assistances of the Spirit of Christ, who is the wisdom of GOD, and
the power of GOD; and in whom are bid, all the Treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. As these Sermons must needs have cast the Reverend Author much study
and labor in composing them, so they tend directly (by the divine blessing) to
yield great profit to serious and diligent Readers; being well adapted and
suited, to instruct the Ignorant, and alarm the hardened, to rouse and awaken
the stupid and secure, to guide the doubting, to unhinge self-confident
Hypocrites, to comfort the feeble-minded, to support the weak: Indeed to
animate to the Mortification of every corruption, and to the exercise of every
Grace, and practice of every Duty. As these Sermons evidence, that the Author
studies to show himself approved unto GOD, a workman that need not be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth, and faithfully dispensing the mysteries of
GOD; so also do his other ministerial performances public and private: so that
I have often thought, it is a great favor not only to the Church and Town of
Cambridge, but also to the College (and therein to the whole Province) that he
is fixed in that public Post and Station, assigned by Providence to him. I
pray GOD long to continue his Life and Health, and make him more and more a
blessing to all he is concerned with. Though he is but Young, yet his labors are
very Instructive and Profitable.

And here I would take occasion to say, it is with great pleasure and delight,
that I Have read the printed Discourses of many of the Younger Ministers in the
Province. They so plainly teach, and urge the belief of Scripture-truths; so
earnestly press a compliance with what the Gospel requires, in the most
Important Articles of Repentance of Sin, Faith in CHRIST, and Obedience to Him;
so zealously dissuade from all Wickedness, and exhort to all Holiness in Heart
and Life; that I Have taken great satisfaction in reading of them. To me it looks
like an hopeful symptom, that GOD yet has Mercy in store for this poor, sinful,
degenerate People (among whom the Power of Godliness is much decayed) in that
He raises up (as others are taken off by Death) so many able and faithful
Ministers among them. The LORD greatly increase the Number of such, and
multiply the Gifts and Graces of His Spirit to them! May it please the LORD
more and more to assist and succeed His Ministers, and make them Instrumental
of saving good, to vast multitudes of Souls.

And as our College and Schools have hitherto been great blessings to this
Land, in training up able and faithful Ministers to dispense the Mysteries of
GOD; so, may the divine smiles long continue those Seminaries, even to latest
Posterity, that there may proceed from thence, streams making glad the city of
GOD, even many Sons of Renown, who shall take this People by the Hand, and lead
them in the right ways of the LORD!

B. Wadsworth.
CAMBRIDGE, Jan. 18. 1727, 8.
Advertisement.
THE Reader is desired to pass over literal Faults, and other lesser Mistakes
of the Press and to correct the grosser Errata, as follows.

PAge 7 line 3 read greatest. p. 22. l. 2, 3. r. to ask or receive. p. 23 l.
12. r. can not, l. 17. r. Brightness. p. 31 l. 18 r. of the Saints. p. 35. l.
22 dele in. p. 56 l. 1. r. others to be. p. 109 l. 4. for interrupted r.
Intercepted. l. penult. d. this. p. 135 l. 7. r. for. p. 136 l. 8 r. he. p. 150
l. 17 r. to bring so much. p. 153 l. 25 r. this. p. 159 l. 17 r. most. p. 165
l. 28 f. Redemption r. Justification. p. 168 l. 28 r. And so, p. 169 l. 3 f.
Chose r. Christ. p. 202 l. 19 f. influence r. inflame. p. 211 l. 27 r. that. p.
225 l. 3 r. whenever. p. 231 l. 7 f. they would not have r. that would have. p.
246 l. 31 r. Seek. p. 249 l. 23 r. that it. p. 271 l. 11 r. you to, for to you.
p. 307 l. 29 d. is. p. 309 l. 18. r. into. p. 346 l. 11 f. them r. us. p. 364
l. 8 f. fervent r. frequent. p. 387 l. 10 f. Cause ^ Circumstances. p. 389 l.
20 r. he has ^. 409 l. 23 f. offer ^. affair. p. 411 l. 16 f. Influence r.
Inflame.

THE Wisdom of GOD IN THE Redemption of MAN.
Sermon, I.
EPHESIANS 1. 8. Wherein he has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence.


WISDOM is one of the perfections, and ^lories of the divine Nature and because
it is ori^^^ally, essentially and infin^^^^y in GOD; which, it is no^ (...) any
other Being; he is c^^ed God Only Wise, Romans ^6. (...). And this Perfection is
in such an infinitely higher degree in GOD than in any Creature; that the very
Angels who excel in Wisdom as well as Strength, he charges with folly, Job.
4.18. GOD has made very bright and clear discoveries of this Perfection in all
his Works. There are visible marks, and Characters of it in every Creature that
he has made; and if we would but take pains to view the World, and observe the
wonderful contrivance there is in every part of it, how they are suited to one
another, and how they are all accommodated to answer their various intentions;
we should all break forth in holy admiration with the devout Psalmist, Psalm.
104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all.
But now in none of the Works of GOD does this Perfection appear more Glorious
than in the Work of our Redemption by Jesus Christ. In this, says the Apostle
in the Text, He has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence.

The holy Apostle, in the foregoing Verses of this Chapter, we find Blessing
and Praising GOD for all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ;
which GOD had blessed his People with. And here he Instances, First, in their
Election and Predestination, as the spring and fountain of all other Blessings;
and then in their Regeneration, and Sanctification, their Adoption, their
Acceptance with GOD, and their Pardon. And now all these benefits and blessings
of Redemption, he tells us, are in and through the Lord Jesus Christ. Thus they
were chosen in him, that is in Christ, that they should be holy and without
blame, v. 4. So they were Predestined to the Adoption of Children by Christ
Jesus. v. 5. And they are said to be accepted in the beloved, that is, the
beloved Son of GOD, v. 6. and to have Redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of their Sins, v. 7. And now as our Redemption is ascribed to
Christ, as what he had purchased by his Blood: so is it at the same time
ascribed to the free rich and sovereign Grace of GOD. Thus we are said to be
Adopted by Christ Jesus; but it is according to the good pleasure of his Will.
And we are said to be accepted, in the Beloved, but it is to the praise of the
glory of his Grace. And although we have Redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of Sins: Yet this is according to the riches of his Grace. As in
the fore mentioned verses. And now the Apostle considering how our Redemption
was purchased by Christ, and so Divine Justice satisfied, and at the same time,
and by the same act, Divine Grace, and the riches of it magnified; he observes,
as in our Text, that herein GOD had abounded toward us in all wisdom and
prudence. That is, in this work of our Redemption he has not only abounded
toward us in Grace and Mercy, but in all Wisdom and Prudence.

And therefore from these Words I propose to consider something of the Infinite
Wisdom of GOD in our Redemption. I say, Something of this Wisdom: for it is
impossible for us to search into the depths of Divine Wisdom in this grand
affair. There are such Depths of Wisdom, and such Unsearchable Mysteries in it,
that the Angels those bright Intelligences, with the greatest earnestness and
intensness are looking into them; yet they cannot fathom them: much less can it
be expected from such shallow short sighted Creatures as we. However a serious
Meditation of these things, may serve to enlarge our thoughts of GOD in this
Wonderful Contrivance, and may raise our Hearts in the highest Admiration and
Adoration of what we cannot comprehend. And therefore this is the Doctrine that
by Divine Assistance I propose to speak to from the words, viz.

DOCT. In the Method GOD has taken, for the Redemption of Mankind, there are
Glorious Manifestations of Infinite Wisdom, and Prudence.

Our Text tells us that herein GOD has abounded toward us, in all Wisdom and
Prudence: there are abundant riches, unfathomable depths of Wisdom, in this
wonderful work.

What I propose for the clearing this Doctrine, is, --

I. Briefly to explain the Nature of Wisdom; and show what it is, and wherein
it consists.

And then,

II. Prove the Doctrine: and show there are Glorious Manifestations of Wisdom
in the Method GOD has taken for the Redemption of Man.

I. I am to explane the Nature of Wisdom; and show what it is, or wherein it
consists*

Now in General; Wisdom consists in proposing the most Noble Ends: and then in
projecting and prosecuting the most proper, and suitable Means for the
accomplishment of them.

1. Wisdom consists in proposing the most noble Ends.

Wisdom belongs only to National Beings: only to such as are capable of actual
design, and intention: of aiming at, and proposing something as their end in
what they do. And now the Wisdom of such a Being partly consists in proposing
such ends, and having such things in view, that are the most Excellent and
worthy of the aims, and designs of such a Being. Thus Wisdom, as applied to
Man, consists in his considering his own Nature, the dignity and capacity of
it; and in aiming at those things that are suitable to, and worthy of such a
Nature. And now considering what GOD is in himself; and the relation he stands
in to us; the glorifying and the enjoying of him are the highest and the
noblest ends we can propose for our selves. Accordingly for a Man to aim at
these things, principally, and at other things only in a Subordination and
Subserviency to these; is so far a point of Wisdom. Whereas on the other hand;
he that is thoughtless, and unconcerned about these things, and has his
thoughts and designs carried no higher than to the gratifications of his lusts,
and carnal desires; is guilty of folly, and is looked upon as a fool in the
sight of GOD, and of every truly wise Man. But then Wisdom don't altogether
consist in the bare aiming at something that is great and excellent; for a Man
may oftentimes have very good aims and designs; by which although he may obtain
the Character of an honest, yet not of a wise Man. For

2. Wisdom consists in pitching upon the most proper means, for accomplishing
the ends proposed.

When a Man proposes any thing that is worthy of a Man, to propose and aim at:
and when he is able to lay all things together in his own Mind, to see the
difficulties, and inconveniences on one side; and the dangers on the other: and
is able to pitch upon the most direct, the most easy, and the most effectual
methods, to accomplish his purposes; so as to steer clear of all the
inconveniences, or difficulties that attend either side: I say, in thus fixing
upon the best rules and methods for the accomplishing any affair, lies a great
part of Wisdom. But

3. It consists in prosecuting these Methods, for the accomplishing the end
proposed, with such vigor, diligence, and constancy, as the nature of the
thing requires.

Wisdom is not merely Speculative: but Practical. He is not the wise Man that
aims well; or projects a good Scheme, for the accomplishing his end: but he
that practices upon it, puts his Scheme into execution, and prosecutes his
designs in proportion to the necessity and importance of them. When he pursues
things of the greatest Moment and Importance, and wherein there is the greatest
danger of miscarrying, with the great care, watchfulness and assiduity; while
he pursues matters of an inferior Nature in a more slack and moderate manner.
Such an one may be justly termed a Wise Man, a Man of Prudence.

But then Wisdom appears more or less conspicuous, according to the nature, and
circumstances of the Affair about which it is exercised. Thus if it be a plain
and easy case; attended with little or no difficulty in the contrivance, or
management of it: if it be a case that Men are acquainted with: and the way
wherein it must be managed, lies plain before us, without any study or deep
thought about it; this Wisdom wont appear very conspicuous. But when the case
is difficult, and greatly perplexed, when almost every one that thinks of it,
is posed and puzzled about it, and knows not which way to turn, but there
appears insuperable difficulties in the way; then for a Man in such a case, to
see clearly into it, to contrive and pursue a way wherein he may steer clear of
all the difficulties that seem to lie in it, and accomplish his end; this makes
his Wisdom to shine, and appear glorious in the eyes of others. So that it is
in perplexed, and difficult cases, that Wisdom is to be tried, and exercised,
and the fullest proofs, and manifestations given of it. -- Now these hints may
serve to give some Idea of the Nature of Wisdom in general, and wherein it
consists. And so I proceed to the Second thing proposed, which was,

II. To Prove the Doctrine; and show that in in Method GOD has taken for the
Redemption of Mankind there are Glorious Manifestation, of Wisdom and Prudence.

And this truth will appear, if we consider these things, viz.

1. The End proposed by GOD, in the Redemption of Mankind.

2. The Difficulties, and seeming Impossibilities to any created eye, to
accomplish this end in the Salvation of Man.

3. If we consider how fully and effectually the end has been answered, and
accomplished, in the Method GOD has taken for our Redemption.

1. That there have been glorious discoveries of Divine Wisdom will appear, if
we consider the END proposed by GOD in our Redemption.

And in General the End proposed by GOD herein, was the advancement of his own
Glory. Not his Essential Glory: for that was Infinite from all Eternity, and so
can receive no additions to, nor diminutions from it. But it was the
Advancement of his declarative Glory (as it is sometimes called by Divines)
That is, to speak intelligibly; He did not propose to add to his Perfections;
for that he knew was impossible, but he proposed to make his Perfections appear
more Glorious and Conspicuous to all his Rational, and Intelligent Creatures,
that are capable of beholding his Works, and observing those Divine Perfections
that are Exercised, and Manifested in them. Indeed GOD's manifesting his Glory
in this manner, is what he aims at in all his Works: this was what he had in
view, in the Work of Creation; and his end was answered by it. For the
Invisible things of him, that is, his being and perfections, from the Creation
of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made:
even his Eternal Power and Godhead, Romans 1.20. And it is the same thing he had
in view, in the work of our Redemption. The main and principal design of GOD
herein was, to manifest and display the Glory of all his Perfections, and not
any one of them in particular; and make them all shine more Glorious in the
Eyes of his Creatures. It was to make known his almighty power, his unspotted
holiness, his inflexible justice, his unsearchable depths of wisdom, and
knowledge, and the immense riches of his goodness, and grace.

And now what more noble end; and more worthy of GOD than this, could he
propose? For as I said before: He could not propose to advance his essential
glory and happiness, because it is infinite. And now next to that, what could
he propose so proper and suitable, as to have this his Glory manifested, and
acknowleg'd among his Creatures? to let them see and behold more, and more of
his Greatness and his Glory? What greater, or better thing could GOD propose,
than to manifest his Glory so to all his Rational Creatures, in Heaven, and
Earth, as that they may be moved, and excited thereby, to give him the glory
due unto his Name; to adore him as the most High GOD; to love and fear him; to
obey and serve him, to submit to him; to place their Happiness in the enjoyment
of him, and to place their confidence in him! Surely if any thing, this is
worthy of GOD to aim at; in any of his Works: nay indeed, there is nothing else
worthy of the great GOD, to aim at in his works; save in a subserviency and
subordination to this. And thus so far as a good end and design will go; the
Wisdom of GOD appeared in our Redemption. For the highest, and noblest end that
could be, was proposed in it.

2. The Wisdom of GOD in our Redemption appears, by considering the Difficulty
and seeming Impossibility of obtaining the end proposed.

GOD (as I observed before) proposed to advance the glory, not only of some,
but of all his Perfections in our Redemption. He proposed not only to make
known the riches of his Mercy and Grace, but also his power, justice, truth and
holiness. But here lay the difficulty: viz. in not only maintaining the harmony
of these attributes; but in making them all appear more Glorious than ever, in
the Salvation and Recovery of fallen Man. And it was a difficulty that all the
Men on Earth, or all the Angels in Heaven, could never overcome. They could not
find out a way to reconcile them; much less to advance the glory of them in
such a work. For we must understand, that Man had wilfully sinned, and so
destroyed himself: he had broken Covenant with GOD, and turned Rebel against
him; and had thereby exposed himself to the Penalties of the Law, that were
threatened in case of disobedience: and now if GOD had without any consideration
overlooked the willful violation of his law, which was such a practical
contempt of his Authority, and abuse of his Goodness: and had pardoned and
acquitted Sinful and Rebellious Man; it would indeed have magnified and
illustrated the Infinite Grace, and Mercy of GOD; it would have shown him to be
a GOD of Infinite compassion: but what would have become of all the other
Perfections? How could the honor of them have been secured; if GOD had
pardoned and saved Sinners? How would he have secured the honor of his
Justice, which inclines and obliges him, to assert, and maintain the Rights and
prerogatives that belong unto him; and consequently to see to it, that every
Transgression recieve a just recompense of reward? And how could he have
secured the honor of his holiness, and show that hatred and abhorrence of sin,
which his holiness obliges him unto; and yet embrace the Sinner in his Arms of
Mercy and Favor? And then again, how could he have secured the honor of his
truth and veracity, when he had so plainly and positively threatened Death to
the Sinner, if he had saved their Souls from Death? Here I say, lay
difficulties beyond the brightest Angel in Heaven to have cleared up. Who could
have found out a way wherein GOD might be merciful to the Sinner, and yet just
to himself, and receive full satisfaction for all the wrong done to him by sin?
Who could have contrived a way wherein he could show infinite love to Sinners,
and at the same time, and by the same action, manifest an infinite hatred, and
abhorrence of the sin it self? Who could find out a way wherein GOD might
release the Sinner from punishment, and yet fully execute the threatening
denounced against him? Who could have pitched upon a Method wherein GOD should
exercise infinite tenderness, and compassionateness to Sinners: and by the same
act fill them with a dread of his Majesty, and with the most convincing
apprehensions of what a fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of the
living GOD? These difficulties lay in the way, when GOD entertained thoughts of
Mercy concerning us; and surely nothing but Infinite Wisdom could reconcile
these seeming contradictions: much less could any thing short of Infinite
Wisdom contrive a way that would display all the Divine Perfections: but yet
thus it is in the case before us. So then,

3. The Wisdom of GOD appears gloriously in our Redemption, if we consider how
fully he has answered the end proposed in the Method he has pitched upon for
our Redemption.

The End proposed by GOD (as I hinted before) was not only to maintain the
harmony of his perfections with each other; but to make them all shine the more
gloriously. And now this end is fully obtained in the method that GOD has taken
for it. For in this Work all the Perfections shine with a greater brightness,
and luster than ever: herein mercy and truth not only meet together, and
righteousness and peace kiss each other: but they are all magnified and become
more illustrious. That the Mercy and Grace of GOD is magnified, and displayed
herein, every one must acknowledge; who will but just consider what a wretched,
miserable, and undone condition we were in by reason of Sin; what infinite
provocation we had given to GOD, and how unworthy we were of his favor; and
how much cost and pains he has been at to redeem and save us: and what a
glorious and complete Salvation is wrought out for us. But then not only the
Mercy, but the Justice of GOD has been greatly magnified, and advanced hereby,
as does most evidently appear, by GOD's insisting upon a full satisfaction for
Sin, before ever he would pardon the Sinner: if not from the Person of the
Sinner; yet from a surety, or one in his stead. He insisted so much upon a
complete and full satisfaction, that when there was none but his own Son could
satisfy the demands of Justice; rather than forgive, before the debt was paid
to the utmost farthing, he gave him up to be Sacrificed for us. And then again,
it is certain that GOD never appeared more glorious in Holiness; than in the
Death and Sufferings of Christ when he was purchasing Redemption for us. For
what could discover a greater hatred of Sin and Indignation against it, than
the putting his only begotten, and dearly beloved Son into such inexpressible
agonies, and distresses, when our iniquities were laid upon him! And to mention
no more; as for the Truth and Veracity of the Divine Nature: He that considers
how GOD insisted upon the death of our Substitute, or Surety; (and also that
all Mankind are now brought into a mortal dying State, and that by an
irreversible, and irresistible decree, it is appointed for all men once to die;
cannot but see, that GOD has had a peculiar regard for the honor of his truth
in our Redemption. For although he redeems and saves some of the Children of Men
from the Condemning Sentence of the Law; yet in effect, yea and to all intents
and purposes, the threatening was executed: but then if to this we add the many
promises he has made in times past, concerning Christ and the Redemption to be
wrought out by him, which he has so fully accomplished; we shall be fully
satisfied that GOD has made clear manifestations of this, that he is a GOD of
truth and without iniquity, yea that it is Impossible for GOD to lie.

And thus I might go on to all the other perfections: for they are all
displayed, and the glory of GOD advanced in every article; by the method of
Redemption, GOD has pitched upon. Insomuch that the Multitudes of the heavenly
Host unite in giving glory to Him on that account; Singing as they did upon our
Savior's coming into the world to accomplish this wonderful work, Luke 2.14.
Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, and good will toward men.
Christ's coming into the world, as it brought Peace on Earth and showed good
will toward men, so it brought Glory to God in the highest.

Now, if the manifesting the glory of the Divine Perfections, be the highest,
and the noblest end, that GOD can propose: and if the obtaining this end in the
Redemption of Man was attended with the utmost difficulties; difficulties
insuperable to any created reason: and if GOD notwithstanding the difficulties,
has fully accomplished his end in the method he has pitched upon; then
according to the foregoing description of Wisdom, it follows that GOD has
abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence; and has proved himself to be
the Infinitely and the only wise GOD.

This may suffice for a general proof of the Doctrine. But as particular
Instances of Contrivance, in the grand affair of our Redemption, will serve to
give a more clear and convincing demonstration of the infinite Wisdom of GOD in
this matter; so I propose, as GOD shall enable and give opportunity, to descend
into several particular instances of the manner of GOD's carrying on the
Redemption of Man, and observe to you as I go along what Wisdom and Contrivance
there was in managing it after such a particular manner: by taking notice of
the Wise, the Great and the Good Ends that are answered thereby. But I shall
not enter on these at present; but conclude with a brief

IMPROVEMENT.
1. What we have heard concerning Wisdom in general, may serve to inform us,
Who are the truly wise Men, and how we must manage our selves, if we would
obtain this Character. Surely they are not the wise Men, who content themselves
with little mean and inferior views and designs; although they pursue never such
proper means to accomplish them. They may esteem themselves wise, and a foolish
world may call them so, who are prudent and politic in temporal Affairs; who
make their worldly interest the highest mark they aim at, and pursue this with
utmost diligence and constancy: but now such worldly wisdom will be found in
the conclusion to be egregious folly. For if we consider the dignity of our
Natures, the superior powers and faculties with which they are endowed; we
shall be sensible that it is beneath and unworthy such rational, and immortal
Souls as ours, to let our views and designs terminate in worldly objects; and
have our concerns carried no higher than the fading, perishing enjoyments of
this present life. And therefore if we would be justly accounted wise not only
in the fight of Men, but in the fight of GOD, who is the best judge of true
Wisdom; we must take off our affections from the things here below, and not fix
our eyes upon that which is not. Our grand concern must not be about the world,
nor the things of it; but we must consider there are greater things for us to
have in view: even the Glory of GOD, and the eternal Salvation of our immortal
Souls. These are the only things worthy to be the chief End, and scope of
rational Beings; and as the best and only way to accomplish these Ends, is the
keeping the Commandments of GOD revealed in his word: so if we would be truly
wise Men, we must above every thing else aim at the glory of GOD, and the
everlasting enjoyment of him. And these designs we must according to the nature
and importance of the things, prosecute with utmost speed, diligence, and
constancy, by those unerring rules laid down in the Oracles of GOD. In short,
we must be truly Religious; and then we shall be truly Wise. Job 28.28. And
unto man he said, behold the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart
from evil is understanding.

2. What we have heard of the nature of Wisdom may serve to recommend it to us,
and quicken us to a more diligent search after it. He that considers the Nature
of true Wisdom, will find it a most excellent virtue; greatly, and above all,
to be desired. This is that which inriches, and enobles a Man, and makes him
more excellent than his Neighbor. For as reason raises a Man above the level
of Beasts: so wisdom raises one Man above another, makes him really a better
Man in the fight of GOD, who is the best able to judge in such a matter. This
then is what we should all be ambitious of, and earnestly endeavoring after.
Prove. 4.7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom, and with all
thy getting get understanding. And surely, Happy is the man that finds
wisdom, and the man that gets understanding; for the merchandise of it is
better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold,
Prove. 3.13, 14.

To conclude, There are many useful and practical Inferences might be drawn
from what has been said of the Wisdom and Prudence of GOD, that has abounded in
the work of our Redemption; but I shall leave them to close the subject withal;
and shall at present only say in general: --

Since GOD, in the affair of our Redemption, has abounded toward us in all
Wisdom, and Prudence, Let us give him the glory of it. Let us acknowledge, and
adore him as the only wise GOD, who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in
working. Let us apply our selves to him, as to the fountain of wisdom, for all
that wisdom that is profitable, and necessary to direct us in all our ways;
agreeable to the Exhortation, and Encouragement given by the Apostle, James 1.5.
If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally
and up-braideth not, and it shall be given him.

Moreover, from the infinite Wisdom of GOD appearing in the work of our
Redemption; let us be convinced, that every thing is ordered by consummate
Wisdom, and Prudence: and let us accordingly acquiesce, and rest satisfied in
all the dispensations of his Providence; how dark and unaccountable so ever
they may appear to us; believing and realizing this, that although we cannot see
through many of GOD's dealings and dispensations to us; yet that he does, and
that nothing befalls us, but what is the result of infinite and unerring
Wisdom. And by a suitable submission to, and careful improvement of all GOD's
dealings, and dispensations to us, we shall be brought at length to that
blessed place, where we shall have all the Mysteries of divine Providence
unravel'd to us, and shall to our unspeakable admiration and satisfaction see
infinite Wisdom and Contrivance in every Dispensation, and in every
Circumstance of it.

Sermon, II.
HAving in the former Discourse, given a general proof of the Doctrine; and
shown that GOD in the Method he has taken for the Redemption of Man has
abounded toward us in all Wisdom, and Prudence: I proposed for the more full,
clear, and convincing evidence of this truth, to give some particular Instances
in the affair of our Redemption, and show how the Wisdom of GOD is ^^nifested
and displayed in them; by mentioning some of the wise, great, and good Ends
that are answered by them.

And here,

I. GOD's refusing to treat with Man, any other way than by a MEDIATOR, was an
Instance of Wisdom and Prudence.

Although GOD entertained thoughts, and purposes of Mercy concerning us, in our
fallen, and undone Estate; yet he did not see cause to deal with us
Immediately, and by himself: but in and by a third Person, or Mediator. Hence
the Apostle tells us, that as there is one God: so there is one Mediator
between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2.5. Since the fall, GOD has not seen cause to
reveal his mind, and will, or any way to communicate himself to us, but by a
Mediator. Nor will he allow us to come into his presence; to pay our
adorations, or make our addresses unto him, but in and through a Mediator that he
has appointed for us. Through this Mediator only have we access by one Spirit
unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. He does not allow us to come before him in our own
Name, to present our Prayers, and Praises on our own account, and therefore
does the Apostle direct us in Col. 3.17. Whatever ye do, in word or deed; do
all in the name of the Lord Jesus (who is the Mediator) giving thanks to God,
and the Father by him. And our Spiritual sacrifices are acceptable to God, only
through Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Pet. 2.5. And now in this there appears a great
deal of Wisdom and Prudence. Because,

1. This serves to set forth the Infinite purity, and holiness of the Divine
Nature.

If GOD (after we had sinned against him, and brought such a dreadful
pollution, and defilement upon our natures) had given us free liberty of access
into his presence; without the help, mediation, or intercession of another: How
would he have shown, or manifested the infinite distance between himself, and a
sinful creature? Would he not by admitting us into his presence without a
Mediator, have appeared too reconcilable to Sin and Sinners? Would he not have
thereby obscured the glory of his holiness, and have given some countenance to
Sin? If GOD had allowed an immediate intercourse with Sinners; how could it
have appeared to Men or Angels that GOD bore an infinite hatred of all Sin, as
is declared of him? And therefore GOD to maintain the honor of his holiness,
keeps Man at a distance from him. Our iniquities had separated between us, and
our GOD, and hid his face from us; and GOD would not suffer us to approach unto
him, after that, but through a Mediator, that he had appointed, to consecrate a
new, and a living way for us. But he looks upon it as daring presumption in
any, to offer up either prayers, or praises to him in their own names: and he
rejects such offerings with utmost detestation and abhorence. By which it
plainly appears that he is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, and that the
wicked shall not stand in his fight.

2. GOD's treating with Man only in and by a Mediator, serves for this good
purpose, viz. to set forth the greatness of the Divine Majesty, and to possess
our Souls with an holy awe, and reverence of him.

When GOD refuses to have any thing to do with us; or that we should have any
thing to do with him, but by a Mediator, it leads us to this apprehension of
him, that there is such infinite Majesty and Greatness with him, as cant with
any propriety admit such dust and ashes as we are into his immediate presence.
When an Earthly Monarch, keeps his Subjects at such a distance as not to permit
them to come into his presence, nor ask to receive any favor from him
immediately, but only by the mediation of the Nobility, and the great Men that
make his Court; it serves to set forth the grandeur of such a Prince, and
raises the apprehensions of his Subjects concerning the splendour and greatness
of his Majesty, and fills them with fear, and trembling at the thoughts of
coming into his presence.

Thus the King of Heaven, that we might have suitable apprehensions of his
Majesty, and his glory, keeps us at a distance; as he did the Children of
Israel from Mount Sinai, when he descended upon it, to deliver the Law unto
them: and wont suffer our approaches to him, any nearer than by a third Person,
or Mediator: who being GOD as well as Man; is able, and worthy to approach his
immediate presence, which we are not. And now as hereby GOD plainly teaches us,
that he will be worshipped with reverence, and godly fear, that he will be
Sanctified by all them that draw near unto him, and before the people he will
be glorified: so it serves to fill us with an holy awe, and reverence toward
the infinite Majesty of Heaven, when ever we are about to wait upon him: which
is a most wise contrivance. For it is highly proper that GOD's excellency
should make us afraid, and his dread fall upon us, that we should serve the
Lord with fear* and rejoice with trembling.

3. GOD's treating with us only by a Mediator was an instance of Wisdom; as it
was an act of kind condesention to our Nature.

Such is the Infinite Glory, and Splendour of the Divine Majesty, that the
Angels are represented covering their faces; as not being able to behold the
brightness of his Glory, much less are Men able to endure it. Hence the Apostle
says of him, that he dwells in the light which no Man can approach unto: whom
no man has seen, nor can see, 1 Timothy 6.16. It is impossible for us to have
access into the immediate presence of the Divine Majesty without being overcome
with such infinite Glory. And therefore when Moses desired to see GOD's Glory;
GOD tells him Thou cannot see my face, for there shall no man see me and live,
Exodus 33.18, 20. And therefore GOD has considered our frame, and remembered that
we are but dust; and so has appointed a Mediator, which although he be the
brightest of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person; yet his
Glory being veiled in our Nature, we may be able to behold him, and approach
unto him with our addresses, who will present them unto his Father: for he is
passed into the Heavens, to appear in the presence of GOD for us, which is an
instance of Wisdom as well as Grace in GOD.

II. Another instance of Divine Wisdom, was GOD's insisting upon a SATISFACTION
for Sin, in order to his Pardoning, and Saving the Sinner.

By Satisfaction for Sin, we are to understand something that will repair the
wrong done to GOD by Sin. Now GOD is wronged by Sin as his perfections are
practically denied, clouded, and dishonored by it: and consequently whatever is
done, or suffered, that will vindicate the divine perfections, and make them
appear as bright and glorious, as if we had never Sinned; is what I understand
by Satisfaction. And now, That GOD did require a suitable satisfaction for Sin,
that is, for the wrong done to him by Sin, appears from this; that GOD has
taken care that such a satisfaction should be made, and because all that are
justified, and saved from condemnation, are saved by virtue of that
Satisfaction. GOD determined that without shedding of blood to make atonement,
there should be no remission of sin, Heb. 9.22. Accordingly Christ's shedding
his blood, and all the sufferings he underwent, was to make satisfaction for
sin. And he that will attend the most plain, and obvious sense of many places
of Scripture, will be convinced of this truth. Thus we are said to be bought
with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20. And we are said to be redeemed not with corruptible
things, such as silver, and gold: but with the precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet.
1.19. And we are said to have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
our sins, in the verse proceeding the Text: which plainly teaches us there was
satisfaction made by the blood of Christ, and that upon the account of that
satisfaction it is that GOD ever pardons and saves a Sinner. And there are a
multitude of other Texts that serve to confirm this point. As where Christ is
said to dy^ for us, to be made sin for us, to be made a curse for us, and to
bear our sins in his own body on the tree. But I shall not enter into this
controversy with the Socinians; who deny the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction:
but shall take the thing for granted.

And now behold the Wisdom, and the Prudence of GOD in it! Indeed it is not for
us say absolutely, GOD could not have pardoned without a Satisfaction: he might
for any thing we can tell; by a sovereign act of Grace hare pardoned all the
World, and passed by the wrong, and dishonor done to him y Sin. But this we
may venture to say; that it was much the best that there should be a suitable
price paid for our ransom. For although GOD in pardoning without satisfaction
might have magnified his goodness, his mercy, and his grace: Yet it does not
appear to us, how the honor of his other perfections could have been secured,
much less advanced. Nay it seems to us, as if some reflection would unavoidably
have been cast upon GOD, if he had not insisted upon a suitable satisfaction.
Would not his spotless purity, and holiness been called in question, and a
doubt arisen among his Rational Creatures, whether he bore such an infinite
hatred to Sin, as was declared of him? Or would there not have been some
dishonorable reflection upon his Justice? For how could we imagine GOD to be
just to himself and maintain the rights and prerogatives that belong to him;
and yet suffer Sin to go unpunished? How could we imagine GOD to be just to
himself, and yet suffer his Laws to be violated, and thereby his Authority to
be trampled upon, his goodness abused, and all his perfections implicitly
denied; and he demand no satisfaction for it, nor take any other notice of it
than to forgive the offender and receive him into favor? But supposing GOD
should have escaped any reflection, as to his being unjust to himself; yet if
GOD had pardoned without satisfaction, would it not be said by some, as if GOD
had not wisely contrived the Covenant, that he at first made with Man; that he
had given a hard and unreasonable law, and laid too heavy a yoke upon us, or
had threatened too severe a penalty, or had given too great power to the Devil
in tempting our first Parents; which GOD being now sensible of, forgave them
without any Satisfaction.

But then to say no more: If no dishonor should be reflected on GOD on these
accounts; yet we cannot see but that he would at least be charged with
mutability, and changeableness of mind. For GOD having positively threatened
Death, in case of sin, and disobedience, what less could be said but that he
had altered his mind, if he had passed by their sin without having Death
suffered either by themselves, or by their surety, and even this would have
been no small dishonor to GOD: for this is one of the glories of the Divine
Nature, that he is not a man that he should lie, nor the son of man that he
should repent, Numb. 23.19. He is of one mind, and none can turn him, Job
25.13. And he is Lord that changes not. Mal. 3.6. All which being laid together
makes it appear how highly proper* if not necessary, it was, for GOD to insist
upon a Satisfaction for Sin; before he pardons it. And this also shows the
infinite Wisdom of GOD, that although he was infinite in Mercy, and ready to
pardon; yet at the same time took care, that Mercy should not prevail to the
damage of any other Perfections. For GOD by demanding a Satisfaction for Sin
has wisely, and impartially consulted the honor of all his attributes. For by
demanding Satisfaction for Sin, he remains as holy, and as just as ever, even
in the eyes of all his Creatures. By this, also he stands by his own Laws, that
he gave to Man at first, and asserts the holiness, justice, and goodness of
them, and that nothing hard or unreasonable was imposed upon us. Moreover by
this he shows himself to be immutable; that there is not the least
variableness, nor shadow of turning, but that he is always of one mind, by
this it appears that he has the same regard for his own honor as ever, that he
has the same sense of Sin and of his Laws that ever he had.

And then lastly, although at first view, it may seem that there is no great
Mercy, or Grace exercised in the pardoning Sinners; when there has been a full,
and complete Satisfaction made for all the wrong done by their Sin: Yet if we
consider that GOD might have refused any but a Personal Satisfaction, and
insisted upon that rule, that the Soul that sins shall die; it appears to be an
act of Grace to accept of the Satisfaction made by a surety. And if we do but
consider who the Surety was and by whom the Satisfaction for Sin was made; the
glory of divine grace and mercy will in this way shine as bright as any of the
Divine Perfections.

Which leads me to the third Instance.

III. GOD's appointing the Lord JESUS CHRIST his only begotten SON to be the
Mediator, to undertake the work of our Redemption; was another instance of
Wisdom, and Prudence.

We may suppose a grand Council held by the Sacred THREE that bear record in
Heaven; to pitch upon a proper Person to undertake the Salvation of Men, and to
be a Mediator between us. And here we may suppose the Father saying, as in
Isaiah 6.8. Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? To which we may suppose
the Son to reply in the following words, Here am I, send me. And this was
agreed and consented to: accordingly he was sent into the World to assume our
Nature into personal union with his Divine Nature. Hence we read John 1.14.
that the word, that is the Eternal Word, the word that was with God and the
word that was God and by whom all things were made, was made flesh and dwelt
among us. And now Jesus of Nazareth the Son of the Virgin Mary, was the very
person. For he was once and again declared by an audible voice from Heaven, to
be the beloved Son of GOD. And that Person is expressly declared to be the
Mediator between GOD, and us, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Now GOD's appointing his own Son, to
be the Mediator was an instance of consummate Wisdom. And that for this reason
in general; because he was the most proper, and suitable person that could be
for this Office. It is certainly an instance of prudence to choose the most
proper person for any service: and herein appears the Wisdom of GOD. For the
person he has constituted, and appointed to be Mediator, is the most proper
person that could be for that Office.

And this will appear if we consider,

1. Some of the Qualifications necessary for a Mediator.

2. How peculiarly these Qualifications centred in the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Son of GOD.

1. Let us consider same of the necessary Qualifications of a Mediator.

Now, by necessary Qualifications; I mean such as will capacitate, and enable a
person fully, and in the best manner to answer the ends of the Office; such
Qualifications as will enable him not only to keep up the harmony but to
advance the Glory of all the Divine Perfections, in the Salvaion, and recovery
of fallen Man.

And here it may be said,

1. One Qualification necessary for a Mediator is, that he should be chosen and
approved of GOD. For as GOD might have insisted upon a personal Satisfaction
from us, and might have refused whatever should be offered by another, even
although it was in it self equivalent; so it was necessary he should have the
choice, and approbation of the person whose sacrifice, and offering he would
accept on our account.

2. Another necessary Qualification for a Mediator is, that he should be
perfectly pure, and holy: free from all manner of Sin, and Guilt of his own.

For if a Mediator should have any Sin of his own, that would be enough and
more than he could satisfy for; and consequently his Sufferings how severe
soever, could be of no avail for the Sins of others.

3. It is further requisite for a Mediator, that he be one that was not under a
previous obligation to the law, he is to obey in this stead of others.

For if he should have been under obligations to fulfill the Law before his
undertaking the Mediatorship, his obedience to the law would be only doing his
duty: and so could have no merit in it for others. His obedience could not have
been a meritorious obedience and so could not have been imputed to us for
Righteousness.

4. Another necessary Qualification of a Mediator is, that he should be very
near and dear to GOD, greatly beloved of him.

It was very necessary for the illustrating the Divine Perfections in the work
of our Redemption. Thus it was necessary that the Mediator should be the
beloved of GOD's Soul, to manifest his holiness, and hatred of Sin in punishing
him, when our iniquities were laid upon him: for if it was one that GOD had no
particular regard for, it would not appear so clearly, when he should be under
the Divine Wrath, that it was all for Sins imputed to him. It might look as if
GOD punished him so severely more for want of love to him, than through hatred of
Sin. Moreover impartial, and inflexible Justice appears more conspicuous in
inflicting the full desert of Sin upon him that is dearly beloved, and for whom
we have the most tender regards, than on one that we have little or no
affection for. And then again, it was very necessary for the manifestation of
Divine Grace that the person whom GOD gives to be a Mediator to die, and suffer
for us, should be infinitely dear unto him. For if it had been one that GOD had
little or no regard for; there would not appear any great measure of Love, in
giving him for us: but the nearer and dearer the person is to GOD, that he
gives to redeem and save us, the more clearly would hiss love and grace be
manifested.

Moreover, it was necessary the Mediator should be very near and dear to GOD,
for the comfort and encouragement of such: that they might be well assured of
his interest with GOD, of the prevalency of his Intercessions, and of their
persons and performances being accepted in the Beloved. Surely when the Saints
consider that the Mediator is one in whom GOD is ever well pleased, it will
encourage their hopes, and strengthen their faith in him, and they must look
upon themselves as safe and secure with him.

5. Another Qualification requisite for a Mediator is that he should partake of
both Natures, between which he Mediates: that is, that he should be both GOD,
and Man.

That the Mediator should partake of both Natures, seems very necessary; seeing
he was to undertake for both parties. He was as a days man to lay his hand upon
us both: and by partaking of both natures; he must needs have an impartial
regard for each.

It was necessary the Mediator should be GOD to give virtue, and value to his
sufferings. For nothing less than the sufferings of him, who is truly GOD can
give such demonstrations of infinite justice, and holiness, as to secure the
honor of these perfections in the Salvation of Sinful Man.

Moreover, the business of the Mediator was such as required nothing less than
the Wisdom and the Power of GOD to accomplish it. The business of the Mediator
is to convert, and change the hearts of Sinners, to subdue, and conquer their
enemies for them, even principalities, and powers, and the ruler^ of the
darkness of this world: to overrule all things in providence for the good of
the Redeemed: his business is likewise to discern and observe the motions of
Men's Hearts, as well as their outward carriage, and to judge the secrets of
Men. Now these things require that Wisdom and Power that don't belong to any
Creature, but are Divine Prerogatives. Surely nothing less than the Wonderful
Counselour, and the mighty God could perform all these things for us.

But then it was as necessary also that the Mediator should be Man, and that in
order to his being capacitated to suffer for Sin at all; or at least in order
to his Suffering in the same Nature that offended* which must be thought highly
reasonable, if not absolutely necessary: for if he had taken any other than the
humane nature, the fallen Angels might have laid claim to the merit of his
Sufferings as soon as we, but seeing he took not on him the nature of Angels;
but the seed of Abraham; it gives the most comfortable assurances, that his
undertaking is on our account, and that he is our Mediator, and Savior. And
then as he was to teach men the way to Salvation by his Doctrine, and by his
Example; so upon these accounts it was most reasonable, yea very necessary,
that he should take upon him our nature, be made flesh and dwell among us. And
as the Apostle says, in all things, upon all accounts, it behoved him that was
to be the Mediator, that he should be made like unto his brethren; that he
might be a merciful, and faithful high Priest in things pertaining to God, to
make reconciliation for the sin of the people.

Now these are some of the necessary Qualifications for a Mediator.

2. Let us consider how peculiarly Christ the Son of God was thus Qualified for
this Office; which will show the Wisdom and Prudence of GOD, in making choice
of him for that service.

And here it must be said, that there was no person in Heaven, or Earth that
was so eminently, and peculiarly Qualified for it, as he was. For as he was the
person that GOD Chose, approved, and accepted of; so had he all other necessary
qualifications. Thus he was perfectly pure and holy: it is said of him that he
knew no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. 1 Pet. 2.22. And he was
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7.26. He was free not
only from all actual sin, but from all natural corruption: for although he was
born of a Woman; yet his Conception was in such a way, as to escape the natural
pollution; (the wisdom of which may hereafter be considered) by which means he
had nothing of his own to answer for, and therefore all his Sufferings must be
purely on our account.

Moreover, consider him as GOD, and he was under no previous obligation to obey
the Law of GOD given to Man. For although there was an exact conformity to these
Laws in the Divine Mind, they being all holy, just and good, yet it had not the
nature of obedience: for obedience ^^^ctly speaking, is a subjection to a law
from the Authority of the Lawgiver. But now in this sense, Christ as he was GOD
was under no obligation to obedience; for he was the Lawgiver himself, and was
subject to no Superior Authority; and therefore for him to put himself into
such a state, wherein he might yield obedience to the Law, as it was an act of
Infinite condescension in him; so there must needs be infinite merit in such
obedience.

And further he had this peculiar Qualification that he partook of both
natures; he was both GOD, and Man, as is most frequently, and fully declared of
him, in the word of GOD, where he is called, the great God, and our Savior,
Tit 2.13. And the only wise God, Jude 25. Where also all Divine attributes are
ascribed to him: and all Divine homage and adoration directed to be paid to
him. And we are also assured from the same Infallible Oracles, that the Eternal
Word was made flesh, John 1.14. And that he who is the Mediator between GOD and
us, is the Man Christ Jesus.

And then again, as another necessary Qualification of a Mediator was that he
should be one very near and dear to GOD; so none on this account was ever
qualified to such an high degree as the Lord Jesus Christ; for he was
infinitely near and dear unto GOD. Who can be so dear to him as his only
begotten Son? He once and again declared him to be his beloved Son, in ^^om he
was well pleased. As at his Baptism; and Transfiguration, Matt. 3. -- 17. And
he is emphatically called, THE BELOVED, Ephesians. 1.6. Intimating to us that he is
beloved above all others: on which account there was no person in whom GOD
could have manifested his impartial Justice, his infinite hatred of Sin, and
yet at the same time his infinite love to Sinners, as in the person of his Son.
Nay it may be said in that the Son of GOD seems to be the most proper of the
Sacred THREE in the glorious Godhead. It does not seem as if infinite holiness,
and justice, infinite love, and grace would have appeared so conspicuous, if
any other person in the Trinity had undertaken this work. And so the Wisdom of
GOD appears in pitching on this very person in particular, and not on the
Father, or the Hol^ Spirit: and this would appear with respect to the Father in
particular, if we might venture to form any notion of the matter, from the
Relation of a Father and a Son among Men. Now affection more naturally descends
from Parents to Children; than ascends from Children to Parents. And therefore
the highest, and strongest affection, we can imagine among Men, is that of a
Father to a Son, especially to an only Son: and consequently a Man could not
give a better manifestation of his impartiality, and justice; than in punishing
such a Son according to the demerit of any Crimes he may be guilty of; and not
spare him at all, through natural affection: nor could a Man show greater love,
and kindness to another than in giving up such a Son for his sake, or than for
such a Son to be willing to be given up. I say, considering the course of
natural affections, this appears to be a greater thing, than for a Son to deal
so by a Father. And now the Son of GOD is infinitely nearer, and dearer to him
than a first born or an only Son. And consequently it is impossible for us to
conceive of so high an instance of impartial justice, and infinite holiness; as
GOD's punishing his Son so severely, when our iniquities were laid upon him:
nor of so high an instants of love as when he gave this his Son to die for us,
or when this Son consented to give himself for us; to leave the bosom of his,
Father, to be made flesh, and dwell among us. And hence our Savior tells us,
John 3.16. That God so loved the world that he gave his ONLY BEGOTTEN SON. And
now since GOD's design was to magnify, and illustrate his justice, his
holiness, and his grace, we cannot but see and admire the Wisdom and
Contrivance, in the very person that was pitched upon for the office of a
Mediator, even the Eternal Son of GOD who was so wonderfully and peculiarly
qualified for that Office.

There are many more instances of Wisdom, in managing this affair of our
Redemption: but I must leave them to another opportunity.

And now in a word: let us admire, and adore the Wisdom of GOD; that does thus
far discover it self in this grand affair. Let us see and acknowledge the
Divine prudence in refusing to treat with Sinners any other way than by a
Mediator; in demanding, and receiving full satisfaction for Sin before he would
pardon and save the Sinner, and especially in making choice of his own Son, for
our Mediator, and Savior, so eminently, and peculiarly qualified for the
office: who is able to maintain, yea and advance the honor of all the Divine
perfections; even when he saves to the uttermost, all that come unto GOD by
him. And now since the Lord Jesus Christ is the Mediator, that GOD in his
infinite Wisdom has appointed for us; let us believe him to be the most proper
person for that Office; and let us testify our consent to it by accepting, and
imbraceing him with all our hearts, as our Mediator, and Savior. Let us
receive him in all his Mediatorial Offices; as the Prophet, Priest, and King of
our Salvation. Let us commit the whole affair of our Salvation to him, looking
upon him as able, and alsufficient. Let us depend upon him for righteousness,
and strength, and for eternal life; and for every thing that may sit and
qualify us for it. Let the life we live here in the flesh be by the faith of
the Son of GOD. Let us live a life of dependence upon him, and then we shall
find him to be an alsufficient Savior unto us. We shall then Experience him to
be the most proper person to have such an affair committed to him, and he will
appear more and more to us to be the Wisdom of GOD as well as the Power of GOD.

Sermon, III.
THE point before us is to prove the Wisdom of GOD in the Redemption of fallen
Man. And after a general proof of this truth, I proposed for a more clear, and
convincing demonstration of it, to descend into some particular instances in
the managing this grand affair; and observe the wonderful Wisdom and Prudence
of GOD that has appeared therein

And here I have in my former Discourse instanced, 1. In his refusing to treat
with fallen Man, any other way; than by a Mediator. 2. In his insisting upon
full Satisfaction for the wrong done to him by Sin, before he would come into
any terms of peace and reconciliation with us. 3. In appointing his own Son to
be the Mediator, and Redeemer of Mankind. And have shown what wonderful Wisdom,
and Contrivance there was exercised herein.

I now proceed to another Instance.

IV. The manner of GOD's promising, and publishing the NEWS of a Savior to
fallen Man, discovers a great deal of Wisdom and Prudence.

That GOD published his gracious purposes to save Man, appears from the many
prophesies, and promises of a Savior recorded in the Old Testament, many ages
before he appeared unto us. Thus Man had no sooner Sinned, and ruined himself,
but GOD promised a Savior to him, in Genesis 3 15. That the seed of the Woman
should break the Serpents head. Which although it may seem a dark and obscure
promise to us, at this day; yet doubtless they understood more by it, than we
could possibly have gathered from the words; had we not received the
fulfillment of the promise, to assist us in the interpretation. And now this
was the promise, or the Gospel, which the Antediluvian Patriarchs lived upon;
and were justified by their faith in it. But then afterward, when through
distance of time, the promise grew more dark perhaps, and unintelligible to
them or at least when they began to doubt, and be discouraged, because of the
delay of the fulfillment of it; then GOD renewed the promise with considerable
additions, to Abraham; revealing to him, that the Messiah, or Savior should be
of his seed, and that in him should all the Families of the Earth be blessed,
Genesis 12.3. And then he went on further; and declared to Jacob, of which of his
Sons, he should come, even of the tribe of Judah, and not only declared of what
tribe he should descend; but also gave a certain period of time: before which
he should come, viz before the Scepter entirely departed from Judah, or the
lawgiver from between his feet, Genesis 49 10. And then GOD went on gradually as
he found there was occasion for it to make further discoveries of the Messiah;
as to inform of what particular Family, or Lineage he was to come; and also of
the Miraculous Circumstances of his Birth, Isaiah 7.14. -- 9.6, 7. And a
multitude of particular circumstances relating to his Life, and Death were
prophesied of him; as that he should be a Man of sorrow, and acquainted with
grief; that he should be wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities, and at last pour out his Soul unto death. And much more to the same
purpose in Isaiah 53 d. Chapter, which is so very express, and particular that
it seems to be rather an History than a Prophesy of those times. And then as
the time drew nearer; GOD proceeded to reveal the particular time when the
Messiah should appear to the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks, that is
prophetical weeks, which make four hundred, and ninety years, are determined
unto thy people, to finish the transgression, and make an end of sin, and to
make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness,
and to seal up the vision, and prophesy, and to anoint the most holy.

But then, besides a multitude of promises, and prophecies concerning Christ,
in almost every age of the Church; there were certain Ceremonies instituted,
and app^inted by GOD; to typify, and keep up a lively sensible representation
of Christ to their minds: and lead them to a frequent thought, and
consideration of him, and of the promises, and prophecies relating to him.

Thus, although we have no express mention of GOD's appointing Sacrifices,
immediately after the fall; yet we have abundant reason to think he did; from
their coming so early into the practice of it: and especially if we consider
that GOD had respect unto their offerings; when they were made with suitable
dispositions of mind: as it is said he had to the offerings of Abel, Genesis 4.4.
which we cannot suppose he would, unless he had instituted, and appointed such
Sacrifices to be offered to him. But then afterward, we find them expressly
commanded; and what a vast variety of them was instituted under the Law; for
the Children of Israel, who were then the only visible Church, that GOD had in
the World. And now these Sacrifices could not be appointed, from any virtue, or
merit in themselves, to make atonement for Sin: for they were utterly
insufficient for this. The Apostle tells us, Heb. 10.4. It was not possible for
the blood of bulls, and of goats, to take away sin. And they themselves were
sensible of this: especially the wiser and more understanding part of them. As
appears from what the Prophet says, Mich. 6.6, 7. Wherewith shall I come before
the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him with
burnt offerings, with Calves of a year old? will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of Rams, or with ten thousand of rivers of oil? shall I give my first
born for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? Which
interrogations plainly intimate, that these Sacrifices although never so many,
and costly, could not make atonement for Sin; and consequently were only
typical of the great Sacrifice Christ was to make of himself, once at the end
of the World, to take away Sin. And the design of them was, no doubt, to keep
up a thought of Christ in their minds, and to lead them to a dependence upon
him alone for Pardon, and Salvation. And although the thoughts of the common and
more ignorant people might terminate with the Sacrifices before them: yet it
cant be thought but that the wiser of them, had their thought, and their
dependence, upon a more perfect Sacrifice.

And now GOD in these promises, prophecies, and typical representations; that
he made of Christ before his coming, has manifested a great deal of Wisdom and
Prudence; in as much as many great, and good ends, have been answered by them.
These things have been very much for the glory of GOD, and of great service,
and benefit to Mankind.

1 GOD's thus promising, and publishing the News of a Savior was very much for
the Glory of GOD.

Many of the Divine perfections have been illustrated, and made glorious hereby.

1. These things serve to set forth the glory of Divine Mercy and Grace.

How wonderful does the Grace of GOD to Sinful Man appear, in that first
promise he made to him, considering not only the matter of the promise it self,
but also the time and season in which it was made! Our first Parents having
acted so contrary to the positive prohibition, that GOD had given them, and
therein abused his Goodness, as well as rebelled against his Sovereign
Authority: They could expect nothing but that GOD's Anger should wax hot
against them, and that he should Immediately proceed to pronounce, and then
execute the Sentence of death upon them. But behold that which they thought
would have been the day of vengeance, became a time of love. And the blessed
GOD, instead of executing vengeance upon them, meditated mercy for them, and
promised the same unto them. And now, how could GOD have manifested his grace
to our first Parents more illustriously; than when he had called them forth,
after they had through shame, and guilt endeavored to flee from his presence:
and when they stood trembling before him, expecting every moment to have the
dreadful Sentence passed and executed on them; to have at that very juncture
the promise of a Savior made unto them! Surely that must needs fill their
hearts with the highest admirations of his infinite grace. And although GOD did
proceed to denounce the Sentence of Death for their Sin, and did actually turn
them out of Paradise: yet how gracious did he appear when he gave them the
promise of a Savior before hand, to be a cordial to support and comfort them?
How wonderful did his grace appear, that before he dispossessed them of their
earthly Paradise, he gave them the comfortable hopes and prospects of an
Heavenly one! But then as that first promise was a wonderful manifestation of
grace, and mercy to Men: so was it a surprising discovery of divine grace to
all the Angels in Heaven. They had some time before, seen their fellow
Creatures that rebelled, actually turned out of Heaven; without any promise or
prospect of Mercy. But now to hear GOD making a promise of a Savior to fallen
Man; must needs fill them with Surprise and Wonder at the Sovereign distinction
of Divine Grace: and instead of the least murmur against GOD for passing by
their Brethren that fell, or envious thought at Men, whom GOD thus
distinguished by his grace, they were filled with raptures of joy at the
unexpected manifestation of grace and mercy, and no doubt broke forth in Songs
of praise, as they did when the Savior, the mercy promised, actually appeared,
Luke 2.14. Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men!

And now as the first promise, being thus contrived, with regard to the Time of
it, was a surprising manifestation of Grace to all the rational Creation: ^^^ll
the other promises that followed, relating to Christ, served very much to
illustrate the Grace of GOD. How kind and gracious and condescending did GOD
discover himself to be in the frequent renewing the promise of a Savior to his
Church and People? That when one promise had been so long made, and not
accomplished, and the people were ready to be discouraged, and say, Where is
the promise of his coming? That then he should renew his promises; and that he
should always, or for the most part do it, with some considerable additions:
giving further light and knowledge in that matter, which served mightily for
the strengthening the faith of the Saints, and for their support and comfort in
every age. Here was the Grace of GOD (...) that indeed these promises were a
constant manifestation of Divine Grace and good will to Man.

2. These Promises and Prophecies served to show forth the glory of Divine
Truth and Faithfullness.

Indeed there seems to be no other way, or at least no such effectual method,
for GOD to manifest the infinite truth, and veracity of his nature, as by
foretelling things to come, and then by bringing them to pass exactly as he
foretold them. And thus GOD to manifest the glory of his truth, for many ages
and generations before hand promised a Savior, and foretold by the mouth of
his Prophets, many particular instances relating to his coming. And now all
those being accomplished to a tittle when he came, it gives a clear
demonstration (to all, that have ever read the Prophecy, and the History) of
the infinite truth, and faithfulness of GOD, it plainly shows that he is not a
man that he should lie, nor the son of man that he should repent: but that when
he has said, he will certainly do it, and that heaven, and earth shall sooner
pass away, than one word that he has promised, or foretold.

3. They serve to set forth the Foreknowledge of GOD, and so his Providence,
and Government of the World.

GOD's promising the seed of the Woman ^o be the Savior of the World; and his
foretelling so many remarkable circumstances relating to his Birth, his Life,
and Death, many hundreds, nay thousands of years before hand; and every thing
coming to pass exactly as he foretold them; this plainly demonstrates that he
knows things future, and at a distance as well as those that are present. And
then he that has this prescience, or knowledge of things future in and of
himself, must needs have the absolute government of all things in his hands.
For it is impossible for a Being to have the certain knowledge of things
future; especially if they depend upon moral Agents for the performance of
them; without having the government of all things in his hands, whereby he is
able so to overrule, as to accomplish what he has decreed, and predicted.
Accordingly GOD's foretelling so many things concerning Christ, so many ages
before his coming; plainly demonstrates that he is a GOD that knows all things;
and that his providence, and government is as extensive as his knowledge: which
serves yet further to show forth the glory of GOD. But then as these prophecies
and promises served much for the Glory of GOD. So did they,

2. For the benefit of mankind. And that both of those, that lived under the
promises, and Prophecies; and of those that have lived since the accomplishment
of them.

1. They were of great service to those that lived in the time of the Promises
and Prophesies.

They were of vast service to them in those days, as they discovered GOD^s
purposes, and designs of mercy concerning them: which prevented their sinking
into utter despair; as otherwise they must have done. For without the promises,
there would have been no foundation for any hopes: and then the repeating, and
renewing the promises in the several ages, served mightily to strengthen the
faith, and hope of the Saints in every age. But then the daily, and constant
representations that were made of Christ in sacrifices, types, and ceremonies,
were of great benefit, and comfort to the Church and People of GOD. For although
we should suppose that the generality of them, had not their thoughts carried
particularly to what these things were designed to prefigure, and shadow
forth; yet they considered them as genearl signs and pledges of the pardoning
mercy of GOD, and so received unspeakable comfort from them.

2. But then these things are of vast advantage to the Christian World: to
those that have lived Since the fulfillment of them.

1. As they serve to point out the Messiah to us, and give us convincing
demonstrations that Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ. As the Savior of the
World was to be acknowledged, and believed in by all such as should be saved by
him: so it was necessary that there should be some certain proof, and evidence
of his being the Christ when he came: for there might, and there did at that
time many false Christ's arise; and unless there was something to distinguish
the true Christ from the mere pretenders; how should we know who to pitch upon,
(...) accept of for the Christ? And therefore GOD in his great Wisdom and
Prudence did for many ages before his coming, give certain marks, and
characters of him; by which he might easily be knows, and distinguished when he
appeared. And he that should be found with all the marks and characters upon
him, that were foretold of the Messiah, must needs be the very person. For
there are so many particular, and remarkable circumstances foretold of him,
that it was impossible that any but the true Messiah should have them all
concurring in him. And now as these did all exactly concur in Jesus of
Nazareth, and only in him: it affords the most convincing demonstration that he
was indeed the Christ. And what more effectual way could GOD have taken to
convince the World of his being the true Messiah? For although Christ when he
came, gave other evident proofs of his being the Son of GOD, and the Savior of
the World; yet it must be said that this was one of the most convincing
arguments, and served mightily to strengthen all the rest.

2. They are of great benefit to these ages of the World, as they serve to
strengthen our faith in the Promises, and Prophecies that are as yet
unaccomplished.

GOD's having accomplished many promises, and prophecies already relating to
Christ, is a very good argument, that he will accomplish all the rest of them.
And this is the advantage which we enjoy, on whom the ends of the World are
come; even a very convincing argument, that all that GOD has foretold, he will
certainly accomplish. For when we see so many prophecies fulfilled so exactly
already, we may be sure that others shall be accomplished also in due time.
Indeed if GOD had never as yet fulfilled a prophecy, or promise, but all of
them had been yet delayed; our fears and doubts would have prevailed, and the
Church and People of GOD without a Miracle would have sunk into Infidelity. But
seeing so many, and those as strange and wonderful as any of the prophecies,
have been accomplished already, we may be sure the others will not fail. For
there is nothing more difficult to do, than what he has done already. He
promised a Savior to be of the seed of the woman, and he has according to his
promise, in the fullness of time sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under
the law; and so a multitude of particular circumstances, that were foretold of
him were all accomplished in him. And now this may confirm unto us that all
that has been foretold concerning the Church of Christ in the World, the
glorious things spoken concerning the City of God, and especially what is
foretold of Christ's Second coming to judge the World, shall as certainly come
to pass in due time. And although GOD delays, yet he is not unmindful of his
promises. Christ was promised four thousand years before he came: and it is not
half that time since he was among us. And therefore the length of time gives
not the least reason to doubt of these things being accomplished.

And thus we see some of the wise and good ends that are answered by the manner
of GOD's promising and publishing the news of a Savior, so long before his
personal appearance among us: which shows the wisdom and contrivance of GOD
herein.

Let us now proceed to another Instance.

V. The MANNER of Christ's assuming the Humane Nature, was a further Instance
of Divine Wisdom.

I showed in a former discourse, that it was necessary for the Mediator to be
Man, as well as GOD: to qualify him for suffering in our stead, and that he
might be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; that he might deliver his
Doctrines and precepts to us in the most easy, and familiar manner, and that he
might give a perfect pattern of them in his own Life. It was therefore agreed
upon in the infinite Councils of GOD; that the Son of GOD or the Eternal Word
should be made flesh and dwell among us, which was accordingly accomplished; as
we find, John 1.14.

But now although he assumed the Humane Nature; yet it was not in the common, and
natural course, by ordinary generation. For he was conceived by the power of
the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin Mary: without having any natural
Father after the flesh. A particular account of this miraculous conception we
have in Luke 1.31, 34, 35. The Angel being sent to the Virgin, says to her,
Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb and bring forth a son, and shall call
his name Jesus: to which she replies, How shall this be, seeing I know not a
man? To which the Angel answers: The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the highest shall overshadow thee. And so instead of being with Child
by any man, she was as the Evangelist Matthew declares Chap. 1.18. With Child
by the holy Ghost. And now the Wisdom and the Prudence of GOD appears in this.
For,

1. By this action he has manifested the glory of his Power.

It is most certainly a miracle, and altogether beyond the power of nature, for
a Virgin to conceive: and nothing less than the power of that GOD, that is
above nature, could accomplish it And now this almighty power has GOD made
known in the conception, and birth of our blessed Savior. By this GOD makes it
plainly appear to all his Creatures, that he can do whatever he pleases, and
that nothing is too hard for him. By this he lets us know, that by his almighty
Spirit he can work in and upon us, according to his good pleasure; that he can
convert and change our hearts; which is beyond the power of nature, and cause
us to be born again of the Spirit. And as he prepared the womb of the Virgin
for the reception of the Son of GOD, so he can prepare a room in our hearts for
him, and set open the everlasting doors of our Souls for this king of glory to
come in, and make us the habitation of God through the Spirit.

2. Christ's assumption of the Humane Nature in such a miraculous manner, was
an instance of Wisdom, as it appears to us, the only way to escape the Taint of
Original Sin.

If he had been begotten after the ordinary way, the guilt and the corruption
of our first Parents would have descended to him; as much as to the rest of
their Posterity. Therefore GOD, to prevent this, took care that he should be
conceived in another manner, whereby he should wholly escape the pollution that
cleaves to all the natural descendants of Adam: and by the manner of his
conception he did entirely escape. Hence the Angel calls him that holy thing
which should be born, Luke 1.35. And now the taking effectual care for his
escaping the guilt and pollution, that was natural to man, was an instance of
Wisdom and Prudence, Because,

1. Hereby the Divine Holiness was made very conspicuous.

For by this GOD plainly shows, that rather than his Son, in taking our nature,
should be tainted with our corruption, he would prepare a body in a miraculous
manner for him. By which it plainly appears that GOD will have nothing to do
with Sin, but only to punish it: that he will keep it at the greatest distance
from himself: that although he was willing to condescend so far, that his Son
should take our nature upon him with its natural infirmities; yet Sin must by
all means be excepted; and that he could have to do with any thing but Sin.
Surely by this it plainly appears that he is of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity, and that it is the abominable thing that his Soul hates.

2. Hereby Jesus Christ was (in this respect) qualified to be a Mediator; which
he could not have been, had he been guilty of Original Sin.

Perfect holiness was absolutely necessary for a Mediator: and therefore if
Christ had been under the guilt of original Sin, he would have been utterly
unqualified for his office. He would then have had his own sin to answer for;
and so could not have made satisfaction for our Sins; nor could he ever have
appeared in the presence of an holy GOD for us; nor could he have wrought out a
perfect Righteousness to cloth and cover us withal: and so indeed the whole
affair of our Redemption by him would have been frustrated, and come to
nothing. Now GOD wisely considered this matter, and so sent him into the World
in such a manner as to have no Sin of his own; but to be perfectly pure, and
holy: which abundantly accomplished him for the office of a Mediator, and
rendered his sufferings infinitely meritorious for the pardon, and
justification of every Sinner, that repents and believes in him. Thus much may
suffice for the fifth Instance.

VI. GOD's sending his Son into the World at that PARTICULAR TIME and SEASON,
to purchase Redemption for us, was another Instance of Wisdom and Prudence.

Although GOD promised a Savior to our first Parents, quickly after they had
destroyed themselves, yet he did not presently appear to them. And although they,
and all the Saints of old, were justified, and saved by virtue of what he has
undergone and suffered in our stead, yet he did not make his personal
appearance in the World to offer up himself a Sacrifice for Sin, till about
four thousand years after the fall of Man: and then as the Apostle says, Gal.
4.4. In the fullness of time God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made
under the law.

And now in this appeared the Wisdom of GOD. For as there is a great deal of
Wisdom in timing a matter well, and doing it in the fittest, and most proper
season: so this Wisdom appears in Christ's coming into the World at that
particular time in which he came. For it was the fittest time, the best time
that could be; no time so proper, and suitable as that particular season in
which he appeared. No other time whether sooner or later would have answered
the end so well.

Thus for Instance, Supposing he should have come quickly after the fall of
Man; and the first born of Eve should have been the promised seed, (as she her
self imagined when she said upon the birth of Cain she had gotten a man from
the Lord, Gen 4.1. or a man the Lord, as the words properly signify, i. e.
God-man, or the Messiah, says Mr. Pool) I say supposing this, yet it would not
have answered the end so well: because,

1. There could not have been those particular descriptions of him, in
prophecies, and promises, types and shadows as now there are: and so one of the
best arguments we now have for the proving him to be the Messiah, the chosen of
GOD, would have been wanting. And then,

2. There would have been only our first Parents to hear his Doctrines, and to
attest unto his miracles: which would have been a very slender evidence for
matters of such importance, matters of fact, upon the truth of which our
Religion is established.

One good Argument that the miracles Christ wrought (for the confirmation of
his Doctrines) were real and no delusion, is that they were not done in a
Corner, but in the sight of Multitudes, who as they were able to attest to the
truth of them, so they were able to discover it, if there had been any cheat in
them. But now this argument would have been wanting in the beginning, quickly
after the fall, when there was no other than our first Parents.

And although we may suppose, these inconveniences would have been remedied in a
few ages after, when men had multiplied, and replenished the Earth, and that
then GOD might have sent forth his Son as well as when he did: --

Yet in answer hereto it may be said; that this would not have corresponded
with some other wise purposes, and designs of GOD. Thus as GOD intended to
honor some particular persons, by Christ's descending from them, according to
the flesh; as that he should be of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Judah,
of the Lineage of David; so these men must be themselves, before Christ could
descend from them. And many others he designed for eminent Types of Christ, and
others so far favored as to prophesy concerning him, and to give some
particular description of him: Now th^se men must be born, and live in the
World, and prophesy of Christ before he could come. Furthermore as GOD had
wisely determined to choose ^ut a particular Nation, for his own peculiar
People, and visible Church in the World, and among them to have Christ
typified, and shadowed forth by certain Sacrifices and Ceremonies: So there
must be this Nation and People offering up these Sacrifices, and attending
these Ceremonies, before Christ the great Sacrifice, and Antitype should come.
So that he could not come sooner than he did.

Neither would it have done to have tarried longer before he came: for that
would have been inconsistent with other wise schemes, and purposes of his: and
would also have been a great discouragement to Men, and they would have been
ready to say in despair; Where is, or what is become of the promise of his
coming?

So that all things considered, the time he actually came in, was the fittest
season for it: and that because it was the exact time that was prophesied he
should come in. And if he had come sooner, or tarried longer, the prophesies
would not have been fulfilled so to a tittle as now they are. And thus neither
the truth of GOD, nor the knowledge of GOD would have appeared so conspicuous,
as now they do. And some doubts, and scruples would necessarily have arisen
about him, whether he was the Christ or no.

But then again, according to the prophecies, there was a general expectation
of him among the Jews, and as Historians tell us, among the Gentiles also; that
is, of a mighty King, who should be born in those days: which served very much
to prepare the people to receive him, when he came among them.

Furthermore, there was at that time a great decay of Piety, and of true
Religion: so that there wanted a more than ordinary Prophet to revive it, and
none less then the Son of GOD, was able to give a revival to it. The professing
People of GOD had sunk so deep in the mere Ceremonies of their Religion, to the
gross neglect of the weightier matters of the Law, that it was high time to
have them abolished: Which could be done no otherwise than by the coming of
Christ, in whom they all had their accomplishment.

And then to mention no more, it being a time of universal Peace (as has been
observed by Historians) throughout the World; this made it a very proper time
for the Prince of Peace to enter. For as a time of Peace gave them leisure, and
opportunity to think, and discourse of these things; so it created a general
Commerce, and Correspondence in the World, which very much facilitated the
carrying the Gospel, or the News of a Savior into all parts of it. Now these
considerations being laid together, make it very evident that our Lord came
into the World in the most proper season for it; and consequently the Wisdom
and Prudence of GOD appears in sending him at that very time to be made flesh
and to dwell among us.

There are many other Instances of Divine Wisdom in managing the affair of our
Redemption. But I must leave them at present, and conclude with a hint or two
by way of,

APPLICATION.
Inf. 1. How thankful should we be for the Promises, and Prophecies of the Old
Testament!

For however useless some may imagine them to be now since Christ is come, and
the Gospel set up and established; yet they are really of vast service to the
Christian World: and are some of the chief supports of the Christian Faith. It
is certainly a matter of great importance to have it sufficiently, and
satisfactorily proved unto us that Jesus of Nazareth is the Christ, the true
Messiah, the anointed, and chosen of GOD: and we should be thankful for any
arguments to strengthen, and confirm us in the Faith of this grand fundamental
Doctrine of Christianity. And now as the Promises, and Predictions of the Old
Testament afford most convincing arguments in this matter, we should be
thankful for them. We should search the Scriptures of the Old Testament as well
as of the New: and study those things that are spoken of Christ; and compare
them with the History of him: and we shall find such an exact harmony, and
correspondence, as will mightily strengthen our faith in him.

Inf. 2. Was Christ conceived in a miraculous manner, to escape the natural
pollution of Sin? This should lead us to lament and bewail the corruption of
our Natures, and groan to be delivered from it.

For by GOD's being willing to take our Nature into personal union with the
Divine, but in such a manner as wholly to escape the sin that cleaves to us, he
plainly shows the infinite evil of Sin, and that Sin is the very thing that
separates between GOD and us. We should therefore lament, and bewail the
Corruption of our Natures. Because, although Christ was willing to be like us in
every thing else; yet he would not be like us in this, Heb. 4.15. This then
must be our grief and sorrow, that we are shapen in iniquity, and that in sin
our Mothers conceived us. And we must earnestly desire to be delivered from
this body of sin, as being the very thing that now hinders our union to Christ,
and communion with him. For as our Nature could not be united to his Divine
Nature, but as it was perfectly pure, and holy; so we cannot be united to him,
nor have communion with him, before our corrupt nature is mortified, and
subdued within us And as it was by the power of the Holy Ghost that Christ
escaped the pollution of our Natures: so it is by the power of the same
almighty Spirit that this pollution, and corruption is ever taken out of us.
This must therefore be our heart's desire, and prayer to GOD, that as Christ
was conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, and was perfectly free from Sin:
so we may be born of the Spirit, and thereby sanctified in the whole man
throughout in Spirit, Soul and Body, and made holy as he that has called us, is
holy

Inf. 3. From what we have heard, let us all be fully satisfied as to the time
of Christ's appearing in the World.

Some are ready to wish that Christ had tarried till this time, before he
appeared in the World; that they might see him, and converse with him, and
behold his Miracles: and think they should have been more fully confirmed in
the Faith of him. But now such men are vain in their imaginations. They don't
consider that they have as great advantages for believing in Christ, as those
that lived in Christ's time, and conversed with him: and considering that he
came at the very time that was predicted of him, and considering the other
demonstrative proofs we have of his having been in the World; the matter is
plainer, and more evident, than if he should have lapsed the time prophesied
of, and waited till this time to make his personal appearance. Wherefore let us
not give way to any such vain desires, but be sensible that he came in the
fittest season and let us acquiesce and rest satisfied in it. And although we
have not seen him, yet let us love him; let us believe on him, and accept of
him as our only Savior, placing oar dependence upon him, and submitting our
selves entirely to him; and then we may be assured of this, that when he shall
appear the second time at the end of the World, in the glory of his Father and
of the holy Angels, we also shall appear with him in glory: AMEN.

Sermon, IV.
VII. ANother Instance of the Wisdom of GOD in the affair of our Redemption,
was, The poor Condition and low Circumstances, in which Jesus Christ appeared
in the World

That Christ appeared in a very poor and low condition, is sufficiently evident
from the History of him in the Gospel. As for his Parents, although they were of
the tribe of Judah, and house of David; yet they appeared to be but in very
mean circumstances. His Father was but of an inferior Occupation; a Carpenter
it is said, Matt. 13.25. And as for our Savior's Birth, it was attended with
peculiar circumstances of meanness, and poverty. There was no other room
prepared for the Mother of our Lord to be delivered in, than that of a Stable:
there she brought forth her first born son, and laid him in a manger, Luke 2.7.
And afterward when he grew up, he did not grow rich, nor appear with any
external or earthly grandeur, as the Jews expected the Messiah would: but
instead of this he took upon him the form of a Servant, and made himself of no
reputation, as the Apostle tells us, Phil. 2.7. So Poor was he that he had not
so much as an house of his own, nor any certain dwelling place; he could say as
in Matt. 8.20. Foxes have bo^^s, and the birds of the air have nests, but the
s^n of man has not where to lay his head. And so straightened was he sometimes
for Money, that he had not wherewith to pay his tribute-money, (which amounted
to no more than fifteen pence) before he wrought a miracle for it, Matt. 17.27.

And now Christ's appearing in such low, and despicable circumstances on
worldly accounts, (although to the Jews a stumbling block, and rock of offense)
was an instance of wonderful Wisdom and Prudence. For

1. It was most suitable and becoming, that he who had our Sins imputed to him,
and was about to suffer and make satisfaction for them, should appear in low
and humbling circumstances.

We must consider that the Lord Jesus Christ was coming on our account: he had
taken our Sins upon him, and had undertaken to make satisfaction for them: and
therefore a low and humble state must needs be the most proper for him. Sin is
a sufficient cause for humiliation and abasement, and humility always becomes a
Sinner. And therefore as Christ was made Sin for us, humility and a low
appearance in the World did best become him. There would have been no
congruity, nor agreeableness in Christ's coming with external pomp, and glory,
at the same time that he came loaded with our iniquities, and was to be
wounded, and bruised, and die for them. How indecent is it for a Criminal at
the Bar to appear in a fine dress, with great attendants, and other ornaments
and marks of greatness, which he might properly enough appear with at another
time. Now although Christ was really no Criminal, because he knew no Sin of his
own; yet imputatively he was the greatest Sinner: for GOD had laid upon him our
iniquities. So that such a low condition suited best with the circumstances he
was then under, and with the design of his coming.

2. His appearing in such low circumstances was an instance of Wisdom, as it
served very much to illustrate and set forth the infinite Grace and
Condescension of Christ.

The more Christ humbled himself, the more he exalted his mercy, and grace. And
what a wonderful display of grace is it for him, who was the Eternal Son of
GOD, to leave the Bosom of his Father, to leave the realms of light and glory:
where he had thousands of Angels bowing before him, and a thousand times ten
thousand ministering unto him: to come into this World in the lowest and meanest
circumstances of any man in it: for the Lord of Heaven and Earth, yea the GOD
over all blessed forever, to appear in the form of a Servant, to become a Man
of sorrows and be acquainted with grief, to be clothed with poverty and loaded
with contempt! And we find the Apostle taking notice of this as a wonderful
display of Grace, 1 Cor. 8.9. Says he, Ye knew, (intimating the thing was so
plain that every one might see, and know) the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who though he was rich; yet for our sakes became poor; that ye through his
poverty might be made rich. And the same Apostle takes further notice of this
wonderful grace and condescension, Phil. 2.6, 7. That he was in the form of
God, and thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant.

3. It served to teach his Disciples, and the Jews of that day, that his
Kingdom was not of this World; and that they must not expect any temporal
advantages in following him.

The Jews (as I hinted before) looked for a Messiah, that should appear in
earthly Pomp, and Grandeur; one that should subdue all their Enemies for them,
and restore the Kingdom to Israel, and rear up the Throne of his Father David
that was fallen, and restore that Nation to all, yea and to greater splendour,
riches, and greatness than in David's or Solomon's days. And those
misapprehensions of their's, arose from the gross and carnal sense they put
upon the Prophecies relating to the coming of Christ. But now this was far from
being the design of his coming: it was to set up not a temporal, but a
spiritual Kingdom, and that not to be confined to the Jews, but to extend to
the Gentiles also. He was to be a Light to lighten the Gentiles, as well as the
glory of his people Israel. Whereas if Christ had appeared in external Pomp,
and Greatness, in the form of an Earthly Prince, and Monarch; it would have
confirmed the Jews in their mistaken notion of his Kingdom: and no doubt they
would then have all flocked to him, and owned him for their King and Ruler, and
put themselves under his Government, and protection. But now from what
Principles would they then have accepted of Him and submitted to Him? Not from
any true Christian Principles; not from any love to GOD, nor regard for his
Glory, or in obedience to his Command: nor from a real hatred of sin, or desire
to be freed from the spiritual bondage they were under to their corruptions,
and spiritual enemies: But all would have been from carnal, and worldly views;
to advance themselves in this world; to have their external, and political
Privileges restored to them. And now Christ was sensible of this before he
came: and in his great Wisdom determined to appear in a quite different manner
from what they expected.

And by his Appearing in such a low condition, he took the most effectual
method to convince them of their error, and to let them know that his Kingdom
was not such an one as they expected. He hereby plainly taught them, that it
did not consist in earthly Riches, in splendid Courts, and royal Palaces; but
that it was all of a spiritual Nature: that it was a Kingdom that comes within
Men, and is seated in their hearts; and that the acts of Royalty which he
performs, are the pardoning Men's sins, the subduing and mortifying their lusts;
the restraining and conquering our spiritual enemies for us; the guarding us by
his power; the guiding us by his counsel, till he receives us to his Kingdom,
and Glory, reserved in Heaven for us. Now Christ's appearing in the manner that
he did, had a natural tendency to lead Men into such an apprehension of the
nature of his Kingdom; or at least to lead them into the full belief of it,
when he expressly told them as he did, That his Kingdom was not of this World,
John 18.36. And by this he also taught them that if they looked for any great
temporal Advantages, it was not worth while to come to him. And so,

4. It proved a very good means to prevent persons flocking to him, and
professing subjection to him from mere Worldly views.

If Christ had appeared in outward greatness, many that never did own him,
would have professed subjection to him; and he would have been thronged with a
number of Hypocrites and professed subjects, who knew or at least savoured
nothing of the nature of his Kingdom. But now by his appearing in such a manner
as he did; none or but few in comparison were disposed to own him, but such as
had some other notion of his Kingdom than that of an earthly one. And so in
short, although if he had appeared in outward greatness, he would have had more
professed and pretended subjects; yet he would not have had more, if so many
real and hearty ones.

5. His manifesting himself as he did appears a wise contrivance, from the
happy tendency of it to lead Men into a contempt of this World, and to the
apprehension of something superior to outward Pomp and Geatness.

For when the Son of GOD, who must needs know the exact worth and value of
every thing, had so little regard to earthly grandeur, as not to cloth himself
with it, nor take any particular notice of those that were; he plainly showed
his own contempt of this World and all things in it: and what better argument
could we have to despise it, to look and live above it; and to give the
preference infinitely to a renewed nature, an holy heart and an harmless life;
which Christ himself had so much greater regard for, ^^an for all the outward
pomp and glory of this World.

But to proceed,

VIII. Another instance of divine Wisdom, was the METHODS taken to PROVE Jesus
Christ the true MESSIAH, the Savior that was promised.

Here indeed, I might first of all say in general, that it was Wisdom, and
Prudence in GOD to prove him the Messiah. For unless he had given some evident
proof, and demonstration of it, there would have been no sufficient grounds for
any to believe in him; and so none would have received any benefit by him And
therefore GOD in his Wisdom and Grace did, upon his coming, give proofs, and
demonstration of his being the Christ. And now the Methods he took for this,
manifest a great deal of Wisdom, and Prudence; which will appear by a brief
consideration of the Ways and Methods taken to prove him to be the Christ; and
these may be reduced to Three heads; viz. His Accomplishing the Prophecies
concerning Him. His working Miracles. And, the Testimonies that were given of
him, when he was on Earth.


1. One Method for proving JESUS to be the CHRIST, was his accomplishing the
Prophecies concerning the Messiah.

You may remember I told you in a former discourse, that there were many
Prophecies concerning Christ in the old Testament, which answered many wise and
good Ends: one of which was that they served to point out the Messiah, when he
should come, and distinguish him from any Impostor; accordingly Christ when he
came, took this Method to prove himself to be the Christ, by accomplishing
every Prophecy and Prediction concerning him. There were many things foretold
concerning his birth; as the time when, and the place where; so were there many
things spoken of his life, and death, and many circumstances relating thereto.
All which Christ took care exactly to fulfill: as will evidently appear to any
one that will compare the History with the Prophecy.

2. Another Method he took was, to work Miracles.

As for his doing any Miracles before he was about to enter upon his Public
Ministry we have no account: but after that we have almost innumerable
instances of Miraculous operations performed by him; and those of every kind.
He wrought Miracles upon the Wind, and the Seas, stilling them by a word's
speaking; upon the Water, turning it into Wine; upon Bread and Fishes,
multiplying them miraculously for the feeding vast Multitudes with a small
quantity of them; upon Trees, causing them to wither immediately at his
Command; and what a Multitude of Miracles did he work upon the Bodies of Men;
healing all manner of diseases in a Miraculous manner without the use of means.
He caused the lame to walk, the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the blind to
see, and the lepers to be cleansed. Nay by Him Devils were dispossessed, and
the dead raised to life.

3. The Testimonies that were given of him, was another Method made use of for
the proving him to be the Christ.

And here we might begin with the Testimonies that were given by the Inanimate
Creation: Such as the extraordinary Star that appeared (about the time of his
Birth) to the Magi, or wise Men of the East, and led them to the very place
where the Child lay, and they fell down, and worshipped him, Mat. 2.11. And
then at his Death universal nature seemed to give testimony concerning him. For
when he was hanging on the Cross, the Sun was darkened, and there was darkness
over all the earth, and the vail of the Temple was rent front the top to the
bottom, the earth quaked, and the rocks rent, and the graves were opened;
which, as it filled the Centurion and those that were with him with exceeding
fear and trembling, so it drew forth that confession from them, that truly this
was the Son of GOD, Mat. 27 54.

But then not only such Inanimate Creatures gave testimony of him, but GOD also
at that time endowed Men, and Women with a Prophetic Spirit to testify
concerning him. Thus good old Simeon, who had been waiting for the Consolation
of Israel, was kept alive to the birth of Christ; and when he was brought into
the Temple, to have the customs of the law performed upon him, this good old
Man was brought thither by the Spirit, who took the Child in his arms,
declaring him to be the Person whom GOD had prepared before the face of all
People, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel,
Luke 2.31, 32. And Anna an ancient Prophetess, did at the same time also
testify of him to all them that looked for Redemption, Luke 2.37, 38.

And after this when he was grown up, there was his forerunner, John the
Baptist, who being to prepare the way for him, testified concerning him, that
he was the Christ. Thus besides many other times, we find him upon Jesus's
coming toward him, pointing out to him and saying to those that were with him,
as in Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the
World. But then Christ was testified of not only by Man, but by the Angels in
Heaven. Thus an Angel was sent to tell the Virgin, That She was to be with
Child by the holy Ghost, and to bring forth an holy thing, which should be
called the Son of God. And then he is sent again to tell Joseph that his
espoused Wife was with Child by the holy Ghost, and that the Child that should
be born of her, should be called Jesus: because he was to save his people from
their sins. And then again at his Birth the Angels are sent to inform the
Shepa^^^s in and about Bethlehem, that that very day there was born to them, in
the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord: And tell them where
they should find him. And upon it a multitude of them join in consort, singing,
Glory to GOD in the Highest, etc. As in Luke 1 st and 2 d. Chapters.

But then not only the Angels; but the very Devils were forced to confess, and
bear testimony of him, that he was the Son of GOD, Matt. 8.29. And then that
there might be nothing wanting, but that there might be the fullest and
strongest evidence in this matter; GOD himself gave testimony concerning him
once and again by an audible voice from Heaven. Thus at his Baptism, when he
came up from the Water and the Spirit of GOD like a Dove lighted upon him; then
a voice came from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, Matt. 3.17. And after the same manner was it at his Transfiguration on
the Mount.

Now these were the ways that were taken to prove and demonstrate Jesus of
Nazareth to be the Christ, and herein appears a great deal of Wisdom and
Prudence. For

1. It is a Method the most convincing, and demonstrative that could be.

What more effectual way can we imagine, could be taken, to convince Rational
Creatures, that Jesus is the Christ, than the method that has been taken for
it? What could be a more convincing evidence, that Jesus was the Christ, than
his being found with all those marks and characters upon him, that were
predicted of the Messiah, and accomplishing every prophecy to a tittle that was
made concerning him? This alone one would think sufficient to convince a Man of
unprejudiced reason. But if we add to this the many and mighty Miracles, which
he wrought for the confirmation of what he declared, and professed concerning
his being the true Messiah: and at the same time consider how absurd it would
be to suppose, GOD would enable him to work such a Multitude of Miracles for
the proof of a thing that was not true: I say, he that considers the nature of
GOD, and the nature of miracles, and the declared design of those wrought by
our blessed Savior, would have sufficient matter of conviction by them, that
he was what he professed and declared himself to be. But then if to all this we
add the express testimony of men Divinely inspired, of Angels, and of the very
Devils, and last of all, of GOD himself who has once and again by an audible
voice declared him to be his beloved Son: (...) will be impossible to gainsay,
or stand against ^he force of such irrefragable arguments. And none but such as
are given up to judicial blindness of mind and hardness of heart, would pretend
to evade the force of them. The method GOD has taken, is not to force Men to
the profession and acknowledgement of Jesus for the Christ, contrary to our
Judgment; but he has considered us as Rational Beings: and has laid matter of
conviction before our minds to induce us by the force of rational argument, not
only to confess with our mouths, but to believe in our hearts, that Jesus is
the Christ. And now GOD's taking a method so convincing, and demonstrative, as
it was an act of Wisdom; so it was of Grace, and condescension in GOD to our
natures and capacities.

2. The Method for proving Jesus to be the Christ, was wisely contrived, as it
was very much for the honor of Christ.

Although Christ did not appear with any marks of Earthly greatness; yet in the
Method that was taken to prove him to be the Christ, he honored himself, and
had peculiar marks of honor put upon him. Thus he magnified his Truth, by
accomplishing the prophecies and promises, so exactly as he did, and showed
that as he was full of grace, so was he full of truth. And then he illustrated
and made his great Power known in the many and mighty Miracles which he
wrought; by them he showed that all power was given to him in Heaven and Earth;
that universal nature was at his command, and that his Kingdom ruled over all.
And although the Jews were stumbled at his appearing in the form of a Servant;
yet by the Miracles that he wrought, he appeared to have an infinitely greater
Empire and Government than they ever expected for their Messiah. Moreover his
Miracles were of such a Nature, as to magnify his Goodness and Compassions to
Men. They were not merely for the sake of showing a Miracle, as Moses's was
when his Rod was turned into a Serpent, and then returned again into a Rod:
much less were they like some of the other Miracles wrought by Moses in Egypt,
even those miraculous Plagues, and Judgments, teaching them, by terrible things
in righteousness. But instead of this, most, if not all Christ's Miracles were
Miracles of goodness, kindness and benignity; for the benefit, relief and
comfort of Mankind. We don't read of any Miracles of his that were injurious to
men, but acts of kindness to the Persons that were the subjects of them, which
served to set forth how abundant he was in goodness. I don't remember above two
instances objected against this observation. One is the Devils entering into the
herd of Swine, and their running into the deep and being drowned. The other is
that of his cursing the Barren Fig Tree, and causing it to dry, and wither
away. Now as to the first of these, it may be said in answer to it, that it was
no Miracle at all: for the Miracle was in dispossessing the Man, of the Legions
of Devils that had entered into him. And as for the Devils entering into the
Swine, it was only by permission: that is, Christ did not see cause to restrain
them. As for the second, it appears from Matt. 21.19. to stand in the high way*
and so had no particular proprietor that was injured by the cursing of it. But
then if it had been any Man's propriety, it is being a barren tree, the causing
it to wither, could be no injury or damage.

And then again, how great was the honor done to Christ by the Testimonies
that were given of him? Thus although he was born in a Stable, and laid in a
Manger, yet the appearance of that bright and shining Star, and the Songs and
Acclamations of joy by the Heavenly Host, upon his Birth, were much greater
honor, than to have been born in a Palace.

And then again, GOD's proclaming him once and again his only begotten Son in
whom he was well pleased, was an infinitely greater honor than for the whole
Israelitish Nation to have proclaimed him their King and submitted to him. Nay,
when he was hanging and dying on the Cross, as the vilest Malefactor, yet by
the Sun's withdrawing it is light, the Earth's quaking, the Rocks rending, the
Graves opening, etc. there was more honor done him, than if he had been seated
on the throne of Israel, and the Princes and great Men bowing before him. Thus
although he appeared in outward meanness, yet care was taken, that even in the
deepest of his humiliations, there should be a great deal of honor done unto
him.

3. This Method shows the Wisdom of GOD, as hereby GOD has taken effectual care
to vindicate his Justice in the destruction of those, that will not believe in
Christ, after they have heard of him.

As GOD will certainly punish with an everlasting destruction, the Infidel and
Unbelieving, so it is very requisite that he should appear just when he speaks,
and clear when he judges and condemns them. And now by the Method he has taken
to prove Jesus to be the Christ, he has given such convincing proof and
demonstration of it, as to leave all without excuse, and justly punishable,
that will not believe on him: by this means he left the Jewish Nation wholly
without excuse for not receiving him as their Lord Messiah, and made that utter
destruction as a People, that GOD quickly brought upon them, to be very just,
and righteous. And by this means GOD will also vindicate himself in the
severest, and heaviest punishment, that he brings on unbelievers* for having
laid such a foundation for faith in Christ, when he sentences the unbelieving
to the everlasting burnings prepared for the Devil, and his Angels, we must say
as in Rev. 16.7. Even so, Lord God Almighty, true, and righteous are thy
Judgments!

I have not time to enter upon any other Instances of Wisdom in this grand
affair of our Redemption at present. And so shall conclude with applying and
improving what has been now delivered.

APPLICATION.
Inf. 1. What we have heard of the poverty and meanness of Christ's appearance,
should prevent our undervaluing, or despising any of the Saints, for their
being poor and low in the World.

That many of the Children of GOD are in poor and low circumstances, is no less
evident, than it is common for them to be despised, and undervalued by others
upon the account hereof. A poor Man, although a Saint and a child of GOD, is
oftentimes the object of contempt: his Grace wont secure him from the contempt
of the men of this World. But now how unreasonable is this? For by what we have
heard we find that a person may have true greatness, and real excellence, and
yet have little or nothing of this World's good. For thus it was with our
blessed Savior himself, he was in a very low condition on worldly accounts;
but yet he had that in him that recommended him to our highest esteem: although
he was poor yet he was the chief among ten thousands; altogether lovely. And
thus it is with many of the Saints: they have little of this World's goods; and
yet they are worthy of our love and esteem. They have that in them that is
infinitely more excellent than all earthly good, they have a principle of
Saving Grace which is better than silver and gold, more precious than rubies;
and all the things we can desire, are not to be compared with it. They have the
same Mind and Spirit in them that was in Jesus Christ: they have the Image of
GOD upon them, and are in favor with him, which ought to recommend them to us,
let them be ever so poor on worldly accounts.

Here therefore let me say, that he that despises a Saint because he is poor,
despises the Grace of GOD, despise his image and likeness, and implicitly
despises Christ himself for appearing in a low condition, and Christ looks upon
the contempt offered to his Saints as offered to himself, Luke 10.16. He that
despises you, despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me.

Inf. 2. Christ's outward poverty afford smatter of comfort and ground for
contentment to poor afflicted Saints.

I don't mean that any should make themselves poor, to be conformed to Christ
in it, nor be so satisfied in a poor condition as to neglect all lawful means
for the bettering their circumstances. But that when GOD in his Providence
orders out a state of Poverty for them, they should comfort, and support
themselves, that it was the very state and condition that Christ their Lord and
Master was in. We should argue with our selves, that if Christ put himself into
such a low condition for our sakes, surely we should be content, when he orders
out no worse for us than for himself, and should consider the force of those
words of his, Matt. 10.24.25. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the
Servant above his Lord: it is enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master,
and the Servant as his Lord.

Inf. 3. Let us all be thankful for the wise and effectual Method that has been
taken, to convince the World that Jesus is the Christ.

If GOD had not taken such a way to convince us of this truth, how much doubt
and uncertainty should we labor under? And what danger would there be of our
being carried away with an evil heart of unbelief? How thankful then should we
be that GOD has left so little room for us to doubt in a matter of such
infinite importance to every one of us? But that he has in tender mercy to us,
given such full and convincing demonstration in this matter, that it must be
because we will not, if we do not believe that Jesus is the Son of GOD. So that
every unbeliever under the Gospel will be left without excuse, and what our
Savior said of the unbelieving Jews, may be as truly said of all Unbelievers
under the Gospel, John 15.22. But now they have no cloak for their Sin.

Sermon, V.
IX. CHRIST's taking up his ABODE with us for a time; the DOCTRINES that he
taught; the EXAMPLE that he set; were other Instances of Divine Wisdom.

We are told, John 1.14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us. He did
not only assume the Humane Nature; but he tabernacled or dwelt here upon Earth
among Men, and conversed with them for a time. He lived upon Earth between
thirty and forty Years, according to the best Chronologers. Indeed most of that
time was spent in a private manner, with his Parents, and (as is supposed)
working with his reputed Father at the Carpenter's Trade. Hence he is called
not only the Carpenter's Son; but the Carpenter, Mark, 6.3. But when he was
about thirty years old, the age (that the Priests, were allowed to minister in
holy things) he set out upon his Public Ministry. At which time also he called
his Disciples to accompany him in his Ministry; to hear his Doctrines, to see
his Miracles, and to observe his Life and Conversation. And as for his
Preaching, the sum and substance of it was Repentance, Faith, Humility, and
Meekness, Charity and Forgiving one another, a Contempt of this World, Heavenly
mindedness, Sincerity and uprightness, and the like. A great part of his
public Preaching was employed in exposing those carnal interpretations, and
corrupt glosses, which the Jews had put upon the Law; and in teaching them the
Spirituality and Extensiveness of the Divine. Precepts: that they extended not
only to the grosser, and more external acts, but that they reached to the very
thoughts, desires and intents of the Heart. It was also employed very much in
reproving the Jews for their Hypocricy and for resting so much in carnal
Ceremonies, and vain traditions. He taught them also that he was the Christ
that they had expected, who was prophesied of, and promised to them; and
invited, exhorted and directed all to come to him and believe in him, assuring
them there was no other way to the Father, or to eternal Life, but in and through
him.

And then as to his Life and Conversation, it was altogether worthy of, and
agreeable to the Person he professed himself to be, and altogether conformed to
the doctrines he taught, and the precepts he laid down for others. He sat
before them an exact Pattern of what he taught them. The same rules of living
that he preached up to them, he observed is his own life. He conformed to the
law of GOD in every article that belonged to him. He never was guilty of the
least fault, or failing, or misconduct in the whole course of his life: and
there could be no fault found in him. But as the Apostle says it became him,
Heb. 7.26. He was holy, harmless, undefiled separate from sinners. He went
about doing good: glorifying GOD on earth, and finishing the work that GOD had
given him to do. As he says of himself, Joh. 17.4. And now in all this there
appears a great deal of Wisdom and Prudence.

And that upon this account in general, --

That this was the most effectual way to establish the Gospel Dispensation;
which Christ was then about to set up in the World.

It was now high time to abrogate and lay aside the Mosaical dispensation of
Ceremonies, and carnal Ordinances; for the Jews had sunk all their religion
into Ceremony and outward form. And the Ceremonies they laid so great stress
upon, were not so much those that had been taught them by Moses, as what they
received by tradition. And hence we have our Savior complaining of them, for
making the Commandment of GOD of none effect by their tradition, Mat. 15.6.
They thought that if they were careful to wash their hands before meat; and
tyth'd mint, annise and cummin, and the like, they might safely neglect the
weightier matters of the law; righteousness, mercy, and faith.

It was therefore very necessary that these Ceremonies should be abolished: and
that a more refined and spiritual religion should be set up; whereby Men might
do their duty in a more spiritual manner, and from more sublime and heavenly
principles, than the law of Moses led them into.

But now, how should this be done? who would undertake to bring it to pass? For
the Jews had received the law by the hand of Moses, whom they justly esteemed
as one of the greatest Prophets that had risen among Men. This is the Testimony
given of him after his Death, Deuteronomy. 34.10. That there arose not a Prophet since
in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face: That ^s, whom GOD
conversed with, and communicated himself to, in such a familiar, immediate
manner.

And then, besides the great, and just veneration they had for Moses, there is
to be considered, that if had been a law of long standing, which their Fathers
had been in the practice of, and in the same way (as they imagined) for two
thousand years. And they looked upon all the Judgments that had befallen their
Nation, to be the fruit of their Apostasy from, and neglect of the law of
Moses. All which things, we may suppose made it very difficult to bring the
^ews off from their law, and especially from their oral traditions, which they
looked upon to be above the written law; to embrace another dispensation of a
more sublime and spiritual nature.

And now, who so proper to undertake this affair, as the Son of GOD himself?
There was no mere Man that could have appeared with greater Authority than
Moses did: and therefore no such could have appeared with Authority sufficient
to abrogate, or supersede what he had established.

It was therefore necessary that the Messiah, the great Antitype, or substance
of all the Ceremonial law, should appear, in order to the abolishing of it. It
was necessary that the very Person which Moses foretold them should come, and
which when he came, he directed them to hearken unto; should appear for the
abrogating any of Moses's laws. Moses tells them of this Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet, from the midst of thee, of
thy Brethren like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken. This Prophet that Moses
spoke of, seems to be the only Person that should supersede any thing that
Moses had taught them. Add now this Prophet was Christ: as appears from Acts
3.22. So that Christ's coming and dwelling with the Jews, his preaching, and
prevailing as he did, was the most effectual means to lay aside the Ceremonial
law, and establish the Gospel dispensation. For,

1. His coming into the World, and dwelling among us, as he did, was a plain
demonstration of his Humanity; that he was really and truly Man, and so one of
their Brethren.

If Christ had first appeared in the World at his full growth and Man's estate,
and had when he showed himself for a while disappeared, there would many doubts
have arisen about his Humanity, they would have looked upon him only as some
Spectre; some Spirit only appearing in humane shape; and would not have
believed him to be really and truly Man. And so not one of their Brethren
raised up from among them, and consequently not that Prophet that Moses
foretold them of; whom they were to hearken unto. And so they would have had
more pretense for their not harkening unto him and rejecting him. But now by
his being born among them in a natural and ordinary way (how miraculously
soever he was conceived) and by coming into the World an Infant, and growing up
as other Children do, both in Wisdom, and in Stature, till he came to Man's
estate, and living above thirty years among them: I say, by this he took the
most effectual method to convince them that he was really and truly Man, in all
things made like unto his Brethren, with all humane Infirmities, sin only
excepted: and consequently that he was one of their Brethren: which, together
with other circumstances concurring, gave most convincing evidence, that he was
that Prophet that Moses had told them, GOD would raise up unto them, unto whom
they were to hearken; even although it was to lay aside some of these things that
Moses himself had taught them.

2. His dwelling among Men, and teaching them personally, gave great Authority
to the Doctrines themselves.

He being about to abolish the legal, and set up the Gospel dispensation: It
seemed very proper that Christ should come in his own Person to make this
mighty alteration and change in their constitution: because this was the most
effectual way to give Credit and Authority to his doctrines. For although he
appeared to be really, and truly Man; yet he appeared with marks of Divinity
upon him, and proved himself to be the Son of GOD. And now what could give such
Authority to any doctrines, or dispose persons more readily to receive them,
than for the Son of GOD himself to teach them? That which gives Authority to
any doctrine, is the apprehension of its coming from GOD. Now what better
evidence could there be of a doctrin's coming from GOD than its being delivered
by the Son of GOD, who came out from the Bosom of the Father, and whom the
Father did once, and again by an audible voice from Heaven, declare to be His
beloved Son, and commanded them to bear him? Mat. 17.5.

So that although the Jews had a great veneration for Moses, and looked upon the
Mosaical constitution to come from GOD, (as indeed it did) yet when Christ the
Son of GOD personally appeared, there was sufficient reason for them to hearken
to his doctrine, although it was to lay aside the Ceremonial law of Moses. For
although they might have despised any mere Man that had taught any thing contrary
to their law, and treated him shamefully, as the Husbandmen in the Parable did
the Servants of the Householder; but as he said, so GOD might justly expect,
that surely, they would reverence his Son, Mat. 21.37. So that it was wisely
contrived of GOD, that when he had at sundry times, and in diverse manners
spoken to the Fathers by the Prophets, he has in these last days, when he was
setting up the Gospel Kingdom, spoken to us by his Son.

3. CHRIST's coming, and dwelling among Men was very proper when he was about
to lay aside the Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Jewish Church, and establish
the Gospel; because they had their accomplishment in Him, and were superseded
by Him.

We are told, Heb. 10.1. That the law, that is the Priesthood, the Sacrifices,
and Ceremonies of it, were shadows of good things to come. That is, they were
shadows or dark representations of Christ, and of the great Sacrifice he should
once make of himself; and of the benefits he should purchase for us by that
Sacrifice. And now, as the shadow was to continue till Christ the Substance
came, and no longer: so it was necessary, when the legal Constitution which was
only a shadow of Christ and the Gospel state was to be abolished, that Christ
himself should make his appearance in the World: who being the Antitype, or the
Substance that was shadowed out, might supersede, scatter, and remove those
shadows. For by his coming, and accomplishing what they prefigured of him, he
made it appear, that they had answered the end for which they were Instituted
at first, and that there was no further occasion for them And thus the
Apostles, after they had received the holy Ghost, understood it; and were
accordingly for laying the whole Ceremonial law aside: excepting in a few
particulars which they submitted to for Peace-sake, whilst a Judaizing spirit
continued among the Christian Jews.

4. CHRIST's dwelling among us when he was made flesh, was very serviceable to
the Design he was upon; because his Life was so conformed, to his Doctrines,
and Precepts, as to be a mighty recommendation of them, and served very much to
lead Persons into the Belief and Practice of them.

There is scarce any thing that recommends a virtue more, than to have it drawn
out and described in a Man's life. Examples we all find are more powerful than
Precepts. Accordingly our blessed Savior saw cause, not only to deliver his
Precepts to us; but also to transcribe them in his own life: and thereby has
left on record the most perfect Pattern of holiness, that ever was in Man;
which was certainly the most effectual way to credit, establish, and promote
the holy and spiritual Religion of the Gospel he was setting up.

For,

1. By the Life and Conversation he led in the World, He demonstrated his
Truth, and Sincerity, with respect to the Doctrines, and Precepts that he
taught them.

His Life, and Conversation being so agreeable to what he taught them, gave
sufficient proof that he was sincere and hearty in what he said, that he told
them nothing but what he believed, and knew to be true. He reproved them for
nothing but what he refrained from himself. He commanded them nothing but what
he conformed to himself, so far as it could belong to him: the rules he gave to
others, he made the rules of his own conduct; which must needs convince Men
that they were what he knew to be the best rules for Men to govern themselves
by. For it cannot be thought he would practice according to his own rules,
unless he knew in his heart that they were the best. But then,

2. His Life, and Conversation served very much to set forth the Excellency of
his Religion.

In order to the sincere, and hearty practice of Christianity, it is necessary
that we see, and have a convincing evidence of the beauty and excellency of it.
And now what external way is there that can so elegantly set forth the beauty
of holiness, and the excellency of all Christian graces, as the perfect copy of
them drawn in a Man's life? They are much more livelily expressed, in actions
than in words. It is the living these virtues and graces, and not so much the
speaking them, that recommends them. And thus did our blessed Savior recommend
them to us by his own life: for he strictly observed his own Precepts, so far
as they could relate to him. Now what could recommend a life of piety, and
devotion, a life of Justice, and Charity, an heavenly Walk, and Conversation,
so much as Christ's setting a perfect Pattern of these things before us? For,
as it rendered Christ himself amiable in the eyes of all, but such as were
perversely set against him: so did it give a Reputation to the virtues
themselves. They never appeared so glorious, as in the life of the blessed
Jesus. And there is nothing of outward means, that is now more helpful to
encourage and promote piety, and holiness, goodness, and charity, a contempt of
this world, and the like, than the surveying our Savior's life, as it is
recorded in his Gospel. Which further shows the Wisdom and Prudence of GOD, in
ordering Christ's abode with us for a time, and living such a life among Men.
For since such an holy and spiritual Religion was to be set up, it was
certainly a point of Wisdom to take the most effectual means for the
recommending of it unto the World.

But I pass now to another Instance.

X. In the SUFFERINGS and DEATH of Christ, there appeared a great deal of
Divine Wisdom and Prudence.

He that reads the History of our blessed Savior, will find that he was a Man
of sorrows and acquainted with grief; that throughout the whole course of his
life, especially after he appeared in his public Ministry, he was despised,
and rejected, reproached, and insulted by Men. But toward the latter end of
his life, we find him still more oppressed with grief, and sorrow, and groaning
under the weight of our Sins that were laid upon him; especially under his
Father's holy wrath upon the account of them. Thus we find him in an agony;
complaining that his soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto death; and his Body
sweating as it were great drops of blood. And the same Night we find him
wickedly betrayed into the hands of Sinners, by one of his own Disciples. After
which he was falsely accused, and unjustly condemned, and most shameful abuses
offer^d to him. They spit upon him; they smote him with the palms of their
hands; and in a taunting, jeering manner, called upon him to prophesy, who did
it. Moreover, they sat, him up as a mock-King; stripping him of his own
Clothes, and putting on him a Purple Robe with a crown of thorns on his head,
and a Reed, instead of a Scepter, in his hand; and then with, the utmost
insult, and mockery, bowed the knee before him; crying, Hail, King of the Jews!
When they had done this, they spit upon him, and beat him with the reed, they
had put in his hand. And after they had mocked and insulted him, they led him
away to the Place of Execution, where they had determined to inflict upon him
the cursed, shameful, and painful death of the cross. At which time he seemed
to be under a Divine desertion, that made him cry out with such Inexpressible
distress, My God! my God! why have thou forsaken me! And at length he bowed his
head, and gave up the Ghost. A particular account of which things we have in
Math. 26. and 27th Chapters, and John 18. and 19th Chapters.

And now in all the cruel sufferings, and in the cursed, and shameful death,
that Christ endured, there appears a great deal of Wisdom, and Prudence, in
regard of many wise, great, and good Ends answered hereby.

1. By the death and sufferings of Christ, there was Satisfaction made to GOD
for Sin; and a way opened for GOD, consistent with the honor of all his
perfections, to pardon, and be reconciled to repenting, and believing Sinners.

The Infinite Mercy of GOD inclined him to take pity and compassion upon
miserable Man: but that could not be, unless there was some effectual care
taken, to secure the honor of the other Divine perfections. And here lay the
difficulty, to have Mercy on the Sinner, and at the same time to vindicate the
honor of his Holiness, which consists in an infinite hatred of all sin; and of
his Justice, which obliges him to see to it that every transgression receive a
just recompense of reward: and of his Truth, when he had possitively threatened
death to sin. But now the death of Christ is an expedient for all this; and
wholly removes the difficulty; and makes way for Mercy, and truth to meet
together, and righteousness, and peace to kiss each other. For since Christ has
been delivered for our offenses, and borne our sins in his own body on the
tree, all the perfections of GOD not only harmonize, but shine more gloriously,
in the pardon, and salvation of penitent, believing sinners; as has been
already shown in a foregoing discourse. So that now, as the Apostle says, Romans
3.26. GOD may declare his righteousness, and be just to himself, and to all his
perfections; and yet the Justifier of the Sinner that believes in Jesus* For
although the Sinner be saved, yet the sin is punished in the death of Christ. And
so it is now become even an act of Justice in GOD, to pardon, and be reconciled
to the sinner that repents, and believes in Jesus. Hence the Apostle tells us,
1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful, and JUST, to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. It is with regard to our
Surety, an act of Justice in GOD, to forgive the sins of Believers; and he will
be faithful and just to do it. And now in such a wonderful manner as this, does
the death of Christ remove all the difficulties in the way to our being
pardoned and justified; which seemed insuperable, and would have puzzled not
only the wisest of Men, but the brightest Angel in heaven; which serves to set
forth the Wisdom of GOD in the contrivance.

2. This was the most effectual way that could be contrived, for the
illustrating the infinite Love, and Grace of GOD.

It seems impossible for any thing to be contrived, that could so clearly
display the boundless riches of divine Grace, as the sufferings, and death of
the Son of GOD. How could GOD the Father have expressed greater love, and
grace, than in parting with his only begotten and dearly beloved Son out of his
own Bosom; to receive all the Ignominy, and reproach that Men could put upon
him, and to endure the cruel, shameful, and cursed death of the Cross? And then
how could Christ have manifested greater love, and grace to Man than in laying
down his life for us? There is nothing so dear to Man, of a temporal nature, as
LIFE. It is an undoubted truth, although spoken by the father of lies, Skin for
skin, yea all that a man has, will he give for his life, Job 2.4. Accordingly
the highest instance of love that can be among Men, is for one Man to part
with, or lay down, his life for another: and this is an instance of love that
is exceeding rare among Men, and can never be supposed to be exercised toward
any, but a very particular friend. For thus says our Savior, (who best knew
the degree of love that Men could exercise toward one another,) Joh. 15.13.
Greater love has no ^^n than this; that a man lay down his life for his
friend. And where is the Man that has so great a love as this? But as the
Apostle says, Romans 5.8. GOD has commended his love to us (given higher
manifestations of it) in that while we were sinners, and enemies, Christ dyed
for us. And now herein appeared the Wisdom of GOD: because as he intended to
make a glorious manifestation of his love and grace, he has most effectually
answered his end, by Christ's enduring the Cross, and despising the shame for
our sakes.

3. The Death of Christ was a wise contrivance, as it was the most effectual
Method that could be, to discover the infinite Evil of Sin, and to deter us
from a sinful course.

It was very proper, and requisite for the Sovereign of the World, when he was
about to pardon and save Sinners, to give some full manifestations of the
horrid and odious nature of sin: and take effectual care, not to give us the
least encouragement to go on in sin: but that we should have as much reason to
be afraid of it, and to strive against it, as ever. And now what way could be
taken to convince us more effectually, that sin was the worst of Evils; that it
was infinitely offensive to the pure Eyes of GOD's Glory; and infinitely
dangerous for us to go on in sin; than to see the ^readful effects of it upon
our Savior, when it was imputed to him? How could we have had a more lively
Idea of the horrid nature, and the dangerous consequences, of sin; than by the
dying groans and agonies of the Son of GOD; when he bore our sins in his own
body on the tree? Here we find, that when he had our sins upon him, he was
ready to sink under the weight of them, and would have done so, had it not been
for his Divinity which supported him. Into what an agony did sin put him, when
his (...) ^as exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; ^o that he sweat as it were
great drops of blood: and cried to his Father, again, and again, that if it
were possible, the bitter cup might pass from him! And when he cried out in
such anguish of Soul upon the Cross, My God, my God! why have thou forsaken me!
Now if the Son of GOD himself was ready to sink under the weight of his
Father's wrath, when he undertook to satisfy for our sins; this will naturally
and necessarily lead us to conclude, that there is an infinite Evil in sin: and
that it would be a most fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living GOD,
with the guilt of sin upon us. We are naturally led to argue after this manner:
If the Son of GOD could not help crying out, when under the wrath of GOD for
our sin, how insupportable will our torments be, who are obliged to receive the
punishment of our own Iniquities? Was Christ's Soul exceeding sorrowful, when
he was making satisfaction for sin, how then will our hearts endure, or how
shall our hands be strong, when GOD shall come to deal with us?

Thus we see how the death and sufferings of Christ give the most convincing
evidence of the evil of sin; and afford one of the best arguments to dissuade
and deter us from it. And here I will venture to say; although some may think
that if they did but hear the cries of the damned in hell, they should be
affrighted from their sinful ways; yet that the dying cries and groans of the
Son of GOD are as strong an argument to dissuade and deter us from sin: and he
that will not be moved by this consideration, neither would he be effectually
persuaded, although one should come from the bottomless Pit with the flames of
hell about him.

4. Another wise and good End answered by the death of Christ, is that it
affords mighty Encouragement to Sinners, to come unto him: and a sure
foundation of Comfort, to all such as are in him.

Since Christ had undertaken our Salvation, and we were to be justified, and
saved by faith in him; it was necessary there should be something to convince
us that he was able to save us: thereby to encourage us to repair to him, and
depend upon him for Salvation. And now what could so convince us of his being
able to save us, as the seeing him pay the price of o^^ Redemption, and make
full satisfaction to GOD for our sins; by suffering the punishment due unto us
for them? for if we should suppose Christ proclaiming himself a Savior, able
to save to the uttermost all that should come unto GOD by him, and yet had
never endured these cruel sufferings, and this cursed death: I say, in such a
case, we should not have been so much encouraged to go to him, nor have such a
foundation to depend upon him, as now we have. We should have been more
doubting, and unbelieving. For the consideration of the inflexible Justice of
God, his glorious Holiness, his immutability and Truth, would naturally raise
great doubts in our minds, whether he would ever pass by our sins, without a
satisfaction for the wrong done to all his perfections by them.

But now Christ having made his Soul an offering for sin, and been obedient
unto Death, even the death of the Cross; and thereby having made full
satisfaction for the wrong done by sin; he has given the most convincing
evidence, that he is a complete Savior. Since he has paid a price for our
ransom, having been wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities; we may with courage, and confidence go to him, and depend upon him;
assured, there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, as the
Apostle says, Romans 8.1. For as he strongly argues in 34. v. Who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that dyed. So that indeed the death of Christ is one
of the greatest encouragements sinners have to come unto him for life: for as
the Apostle tells us, Heb. 9.26. He has taken away sin by the sacrifice of
himself. And by that one offering has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, Chap. 10.13.

5. Another good End answered by the Death of Christ, was the Confirmation of
his Doctrines.

Christ had taught that he was the true Messiah, prophesied of, and promised;
that he was the Son of GOD, and the Savior of the World, etc. Now these being
the grand Doctrines of Christianity, the very foundation of the Christian
Religion; it was necessary that he should give the highest testimony that could
be, of the truth hereof. And what fuller confirmation could he have given, that
he taught nothing but what he believed, and knew to be true, than to lay down
his life for the testimony that he had given, and to seal his Doctrines with
his blood?

6. Another good End answered by the Sufferings and Death of Christ is, That
they serve not only as a Pattern, for direction to us in suffering and dying;
but also as an Argument, to reconcile us unto sufferings, and death it self.

Christ assured his Disciples, and followers, that in the World they should
have tribulation: and they all find it so by experience. But now the sufferings
of Christ, and his behavior under them, serve as a Pattern, to direct us how
we must behave our selves under sufferings, and under the apprehensions and
approaches of death. If he had not been a Man of sorrows, he could not have
left us a Pattern of suffering-graces. How could he have left us an Example of
Patience, of profound submission and resignation to the will of GOD; or of a
forgiving spirit toward his Enemies, and the like; if he had not had bitter
cups to drink, and received injuries and abuses from Men?

But then he becomes not only a more full and perfect Pattern and Example to us
hereby; but his sufferings serve mightily to support, and comfort the Saints
under their afflictions. If they meet with the forest trials, and the heaviest
afflictions, they have this to comfort them; That it is no more than what their
Lord and Master himself met withal. And indeed there are scarce any sufferings
to be met with in this life, but that we may comfort our selves with this
thought; That Christ had a share of the same. And our Savior offers this as an
argument of comfort to his Disciples. Joh. 15.18. If the world hate you, ye
know that it hated me before it hated you. And now his having been under the
same troubles and afflictions, affords great comfort, from this consideration;
that he knows how to pity us, to succor, and support us under them. Heb. 2.
last. In that he himself having suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted. Furthermore, The captain of our salvation became perfect
through sufferings, Heb. 2.10. After he had suffered a while, he entered into his
glory. And this serves wonderfully to reconcile us to, and comfort us under
sufferings; because after the same manner we must be perfected. 1 Pet. 1.10.
But the God of all grace, which has called us unto his eternal glory, by
Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect. And thus
even Death it self is made more easy to Believers, and the Grave sweetened by
Christ's having been there before them: especially considering that as they are
to be conformed to him in the likeness of his Death, they will also in his
Resurrection: An instance of Wisdom hereafter to be considered.

7. Another good end answered (...) ^ings and Death of Christ, was an entire^^
^^eat^ng the designs of his Enemies; advancing his own Kingdom and Interest in
that very way, which his Enemies thought would ruin and destroy it.

Men, and Devils, the Enemies of Christ, thought nothing so effectual to
destroy him and his interest, as to put him to death. The Devil himself no
doubt thought that it Jesus was but once dead, his Interest would be destroyed
and his own Kingdom would still remain undisturbed. Accordingly the Devil
entered into Judas, tempting him to betray his Master: and filled the Jews,
especially the Chief Priests and Scribes and Pharisees, with such rage and
malice against him, that they prevailed so far as to get him Crucified, and
having thus actually procured his Death, the Devil and the unbelieving Jews
concluded they had given a mortal stroke to his interest, and that his designs
and attempts would have been wholly frustrated.

But behold how the Wisdom of GOD out-did all the Policy of Earth and Hell! For
that which it was thought would have utterly destroyed the Interest and Kingdom
of Christ, was the very means of advancing it, and destroying the Kingdom of
Satan. When he thought he had given a mortal blow to Christ, it proved a deadly
wound to himself. The Serpent, by bruising the heel of the Seed of the Woman,
had his own head bruised and broken. And here is the Wisdom of GOD in a
Mystery, that Christ by dying overcame death, and destroyed him that had the
power of death, that is the Devil, as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 2.14.

Other instances of Divine Wisdom in the affair of our Redemption, must be left
to another opportunity. And I must conclude at present with one word briefly,
by way of Exhortation.

Let us all be thankful to Christ the Eternal Word, that when he was made flesh
he was pleased to dwell among us for so long a time as to give sufficient
evidence that he was one of us; and did really partake of flesh and blood with
us.

And let us be thankful for the excellent Doctrines and Precepts, that he has
delivered unto us, for the rule of our faith and manners; and for the
transcript he has given of his own precepts in his Life, whereby he has
mightily recommended them unto us, giving us therein the clearest view of the
amiableness of Religion and the beauty of Holiness.

But especially let us be thankful for his Sufferings and Death; which, although
so bitter to him, yet were so much for the Glory of GOD, and of infinite
advantage to Mankind. And since Christ has died for us, let us not only admire
and adore the riches of his love and grace herein, but be also encouraged
herefrom to fly to him for refuge, and depend upon him for Salvation. Let us
believe and be persuaded that by his Death he has fully satisfied Divine
Justice, and paid our debt to the utmost farthing; insomuch that GOD can now be
just, and yet the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. GOD forbid, that we
should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus! Because by that only can we
be delivered from the Curse of the Law and saved from the wrath to come.

And now instead of taking encouragement to go on in Sin, because Christ has
died and made satisfaction for it; let us be more than ever deterred from a
Sinful course. Let us but consider how much it cost the Son of GOD to make
satisfaction for Sin; and then consider how dreadful our condition must needs
be, if we must answer for our own Sins (as we most certainly shall) if we die
in them: and this will make us afraid of Sin. Let us consider, if Sin fetched
such dreadful groans from the Son of GOD, what shrieks and cries it will fetch
from us in the Flames of Hell forever, when we come to bear the punishment of
our own Iniquities. Let us therefore be all awakened by the dreadful sufferings
of Christ to break off all our Sins by Repentance, and to get into Christ, to
get united to him that so we may be saved from all condemnation.

And then lastly, let the Sufferings of Christ, teach us to be Patient under
all our sufferings as he himself was, and let as endeavor with the same
submission and resignation to receive the messages of Death it self; with
calmness, and humble confidence commending our Spirits into his hands, as he
did his into the hands of his Father. If we endeavor thus to have the same
mind and frame of Spirit under sufferings and death as was in Christ Jesus, we
shall at length come to be with him to behold and to partake of his Glory, in
that place, where there is no more Sin* nor suffering, nor any more Death; but
all tears shall be forever wiped away from our eyes.

Sermon, VI.
XI. IN the RESURRECTION of Christ from the Dead, and his ASSENSION into
Heaven, there appears a great deal of Divine Wisdom and Prudence.

Our Blessed Lord and Savior having by shedding his bl^od, and laying down his
Life, made full satisfaction to divine Justice for sin: He did not long
continue under the power of Death* but arose again from the dead the third day
according to the Scriptures; and having shown himself alive to his Disciples
and to many others for forty days; He then ascended up into Heaven, and fits at
the right hand of GOD the Father, where he ever lives to make Intercession for
us. And now in this affair there appears a great deal of the Wisdom and
Prudence of GOD: and that whether we consider the manner and circumstances of
it: or the wise and good Ends that have been and are answered by it.

1. The Manner of Christ Resurrection and Ascension, and the circumstances that
attended them, discover much of the divine Wisdom and Prudence.

And here we must observe, that as it was necessary that Christ should arise
from the Dead: so it was necessary it should be done in such a way and manner
as to afford incontestible Evidence of the certainty of it, and that there
should be no room left for doubts and jealousies to unprejudiced minds. For a
great deal depended upon his Resurrection. The whole Christian Religion hung
upon it. For having foretold his Resurrection; if he had not risen according to
his word, he would have proved himself to be an Impostor; and all that interest
which he had gained in the world would soon have come to nothing. Whereas on
the other hand, his rising again from the dead being what he himself foretold,
and being in it self a most miraculous operation, must needs serve very much to
establish his doctrines, and confirm to every one, that he was the Person he
had declared himself to be. Therefore it was absolutely necessary that when he
arose there should be such proof, and demonstration of it, as would be
satisfactory to a rational Unprejudiced person; for unless there be sufficient
proof of his Resurrection from the dead, there would not be sufficient reason
to believe his doctrines, o^ to embrace his Religion. And now this was well
considered and thought of by GOD, and accordingly the affair of his
Resurrection as to the manner, and circumstances of it, were so contrived as to
leave no room for doubts, or uncertainties in the matter, to such as will but
be satisfied with the same degree of evidence in this, as they are in a
thousand other i^stances.

And here I shall not descend to all the particular circumstances that might be
mentioned relating to this affair, but shall content my self with some general
hints, which will serve to show that there has been a great deal of Wisdom and
Counsel in the management of it.

And here I might say, first of all, that the Time in which Christ arose after
his death, was wisely contrived; which was on the third day. For it was very
necessary he should continue under the power of death so long a time, as to
make it evident that he was really dead. If he had revived quickly after he
gave up the Ghost; People would not have readily believed that he had been
dead, but only that he had fainted, or fallen into some fit; as many persons
do, and to appearance are dead, but recover themselves again Therefore to
prevent any doubts or cavils as to the reality of his death, he continued in
the state of the dead till the third day: which is beyond the time that any can
be supposed to continue in a ^^^oon, or fit.

And it was also wisely and graciously contrived that he should rise within so
short a time after his death. For if he had continued much longer in the Grave,
his body according to the common course of nature would have been putrifyed and
corrupted; which would have contradicted a Prophecy concerning him, in Psalm.
16.10. Thou wi^t not suffer thine holy One to see corruption And so would have
weakened the evide^ce of his being the Messiah.

Moreover, it was very necessary to prevent all possibility of our being
imposed upon, that Christ should rise s^ soon after his death as that his
Countenance might not in the least measure be forgotten: but that they who saw
him, and knew him before, might retain such a perfect Idea of his Countenance,
as to know it was the very same person when they saw him again. Moreover, GOD
wisely and mercifully considered the weakness of Christ's Disciples; and
ordered so short a time for his continuance in the Grave, to prevent their
sinking into utter despair concerning him. It was doubtless a very trying time
to Christ's Disciples, when he lay in the Grave. When they saw him actually
dead, and buried, they were ready to give up the cause While he was among them,
they looked that he should have restored the Kingdom to Israel, and brought
Redemption: but now he was dead, they did not know what to think of it. And
doubtless they waited very impatiently till the third day, to see if he rose or
no. And so GOD in gracious Condescension to the weakness of their faith,
speedily raised their sinking hopes by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead in so short a time.

And thus as there was Wisdom and Prudence, if we consider the time that Christ
continued under the power of death, before he triumphed over it in his
Resurrection; so was there in the circumstances that attended his Resurrection,
which afforded full demonstration that he did really and truly rise from the
dead, and that they were not in the least imposed upon. And here it is to be
observed as an act of Wisdom in Christ that before his death, he told them when
he should rise, even on the third day. Whereby he gave not only his Disciples,
but even his Enemies, fair opportunity to watch his Sepulcher, and see whether
he was as good as his word, or no. And then here the wise and over ruling
Providence of GOD is further to be observed in so ordering the matter, that the
very worst of his Enemies were led into the most effectual method to be
convinced in their own Consciences, that he did according to his promise
actually rise from the dead. For they remembering what he had said concerning
his rising on the third day, suspected that his Disciples would come by night
and steal him away, and then say he was risen, and so the last error would be
worse than the first. The Chief Priests therefore and the Pharisees desire of
Pilate, That the Sepulcher might be made sure until the third day. And Pilate
grants them their request, allows them to do what they thought proper in that
matter, and to make it as sure as they could. Accordingly they went and made
the Sepulcher sure, sealing the stone and setting a watch. As you may read,
Math. 27. chap. latter end.

And now as this was a most effectual way to have detected the cheat, if there
had been any; so as there was none, it served to confirm the truth, and
certainty of the fact. For th^se that were set to watch the Sepulcher, were
hereby enabled to witness to his Resurrection; and did lay sufficient matter
for conviction before the Chief Priests and Elders to leave them inexcusable
for their perverseness, and infidelity. For when the Soldiers were according to
their orders watching on the Morning of the third day (as doubtless they did)
with a great deal of care being the day he told them he should rise; I say,
when they were lo king out sharply, expecting his Disciples would come to steal
him away: behold at that very time the Angel came down from Heaven, and rolled
away the stone from the Door of the Sepulcher, and sat upon it in such
brightness, and luster, as that the Soldiers were all filled with Amazement;
they did shake and became as dead men. And the Angel tells the Women that came
just at that time to see his Sepulcher, that Jesus was not there, but was risen
from the dead, as he had said; and invites them to come near, and see the place
where he had lain. And not only certain Women, but some of his Apostles came
also and saw that he was gone out of the Sepulcher.

But now if he had gone immediately into Heaven, without making his personal
bodily Appearance among Men, there would have been a great deal of room left
for doubts and suspicions among Men; and indeed if he had not appeared visibly
among Men, it would have been morally impossible to bring Men into the belief
of his Resurrection. This therefore was wisely considered by Christ. He
accordingly abode some time upon Earth after his Resurrection, and showed
himself frequently unto his Disciples; he conversed with them, and eat with
them; and caused Thomas that was the most doubting of his Disciples, to feel of
him, to see the print of the Nails in his hands, and to thrust his hand into
his side that had been pierced with the Spear, by which he gave the most
sensible Evidence that he was indeed risen, and had the very same body he laid
down in the Grave.

But then because a few are more easily deluded, and imposed upon, than a great
number, and were not so ready to believe any wonderful thing related by a few
persons: This therefore did Christ consider, and showed himself not only very
frequently to his Eleven Disciples, but he showed himself to a great multitude
at once, even to above five hundred Brethren, as appears from 1 Cor. 15.6. And
now herein appeared the Wisdom of GOD, as the Apostle says, Act. 1.3. That he
showed himself alive after his Passion by many infallible proofs; being seen of
them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God.

And as he took care to give infallible proofs of his Resurrection, so did he
also to prove his Ascension into Heaven. That he did not just appear, and then
dye again, but that as he said to his Disciples, he ascended to his Father and
their Father, to his God and their God; for he did not go up Incognito, but he
took his Disciples with him to the Mount of Olives: and when he had blessed
them, and in a solemn manner taken his leave of them; and while their eyes were
fixed upon him, he Ascended up gradually toward Heaven; so that they actually
saw him going up till a cloud interrupted. But then that nothing might be
wanting to strengthen their faith in this matter; two of the Angels that came
to wait upon Christ in his triumphant progress to Heaven, are sent back to tell
them not to gaze any longer, because he was ascended to Heaven, and that they
should see him return in like manner, as they had seen him go up: that is at
the day of Judgment, Acts 1.10, 11. And then for a further confirmation, we
have the Testimony of the blessed Proto-Martyr Stephen; who because he was the
first that dyed for the cause of Christ, had a glorious revelation made to him,
and declares just before his death, That he saw the heavens opened, and the Son
of Man standing at the right hand of God, Act. 7.56.

And thus we see a great deal of Wisdom, and Prudence in the Manner of Christ's
rising from the dead, and ascending to Heaven: for they have been carried on in
such a manner as to afford sufficient and satisfactory evidence to reasonable
and unprejudiced minds.

Some may possibly think it would have been better if he had appeared more
publicly after his Resurrection; and that if he had then showed himself to his
Crucifiers, and the Infidel Jews, they would have believed on him. But to this
it may be said that he gave sufficient demonstration of his Resurrection. And
that this even the Chief Priests and Elders themselves had sufficient matter
for Conviction offered to them by the report they received from the Soldiers,
whom they themselves had appointed to watch the Sepulcher, and which were
doubtless such as they could put confidence in. Which together with the
Miracles he had wrought in in their presence before his death, and other
concurring circumstances for the proof hereof, made it altogether unnecessary
for him to do any thing further to convince them. For when suitable, and
sufficient means will not answer it is no ways consistent with the honor of GOD
to stoop to all the perverse and obstinate humors of Men. But I proceed to say,

2. In the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ there will appear a great deal
of Wisdom and Prudence, if we consider the wise, and good Ends that are
answered hereby.

1. The Resurrection of Christ served for the confirmation of all his
Doctrines, and of the Religion, that he came to set up among Men.

Our Savior had told them before hand of his rising again from the dead within
three days, which as it would be a sign or token of his coming from GOD, so
would be a confirmation of all he had taught them. But now if he had not risen
from the dead as he promised, he would have proved himself an Impostor, and
deceiver of the People, and his Religion that he was setting up would have come
to nothing. But now by his being so good as his word in this grand Article of
his Resurrection, he has confirmed the truth of all that he said unto them. By
this he has given demonstration that GOD was with him; and that he was such a
Divine Person, even the Son of GOD, as he had declared: as the Apostle tells
us, Romans 1.4. He was declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the
Spirit of holiness by the resurrection from the dead. And now if his
Resurrection declared him to be the Son of GOD, it does by consequence declare
the truth of all that he had taught and commanded. For if he was the Son of
GOD, it was impossible for him to deliver anything but what is agreeable to
truth. And now, as I say he was declared to be the Son of GOD with power by his
Resurrection from the dead, that is, his Resurrection was a demonstration of
his being the Son of GOD. (For if he had nor been the Son of GOD, he could not
have raised himself from the dead by his own power. And most certainly GOD
would never have raised him from the dead, if he had falsely pretended to be
the Son of GOD. For as it is impossible for GOD to lie, so is it impossible for
him so far to confirm a lie, or countenance blasphemy, as he would have done in
raising Christ from the dead, if he had not been the Son of GOD, as he
professed.) So that the Resurrection of Christ affords anirrefragable argument
for the truth of Christianity. Insomuch that if we do but believe that Christ
both died and rose again and revived, we must believe, we must receive and
embrace Christianity, and be fully satisfied in the truth of it.

2. Christ's Resurrection, as it serves to assure us that he had by his death
made full satisfaction for sin, so it affords strong Consolation to all that
believe in him.

Christ having undertaken for us, and our sins being laid upon him; if his
Death had not been a satisfactory sacrifice, he could not have risen from the
dead, much less have ascended into Heaven. Therefore his rising from the dead
plainly teaches, yea assures us, that by the one offering of himself he
finished transgression, and made an end of sin, and brought in an everlasting
righteousness. Christ's being discharged from the Prison of the Grave, makes it
evident that by his death he satisfied the demands of Justice, and had paid the
debt to the utmost farthing that he had undertaken for: which must needs afford
joy, and consolation to all that believe in him; because they have assurance
hereby that their sins are satisfied for, their debt paid, and they discharged,
and no condemnation belonging to them. For the Resurrection of Christ in a
peculiar manner justifies them or frees them from Condemnation; or rather gives
assurance of their Justification, by assuring them that satisfaction is made
for them. As the Apostle says, Romans 4.25. He was delivered for our offenses,
and raised for our Justification. That is, says an Expositour, Christ did
Meritoriously work our Justification by his Death. But the Efficacy, and
perfection of it with respect to us, depends on his Resurrection. By his Death
he paid our debts, by his Resurrection he received our acquittance. If he had
continued under the power of death, his death would have been of no benefit to
us. But every true Believer may now say in holy triumph and joy, as in Romans 8
34. Who is he that Codemneth! It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again

3. Christ's Resurrection and Ascension served entirely to take away the
scandal of the Cross.

Christ's Sufferings, and Death were such as carried a great deal of Ignominy,
and Reproach with them. To suffer and die at all was Infinite Humiliation: but
the death he died was the most shameful as well as cruel death, which was
inflicted only upon slaves, and only the vilest of them. So that this would
have been a perpetual reproach to him; and would have been a sufficient reason
for every Man's not believing in him, as their Savior, who himself had died as
the vilest Malefactor; unless this reproach and scandal were some way or other
taken off. The Preaching of a crucified Christ was to the Jews a stumbling
block, and to the Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. And well it might, if they
had preached nothing else concerning him, or if nothing further could be said
of him. But now his glorious Resurrection and triumphant Ascension served
entirely to remove this stone of stumbling, and rock of offense. For his
Resurrection and Ascension did him more honor than he could suffer reproach by
that cursed death of the Cross. By this he has appeared with more Magnificence
and Glory than all earthly pomp and greatness could possibly have afforded him
By this he was declared to be the Son of God with power. He has herein
triumphed over death, and the grave: and showed that although he submitted to the
stroke of death; yet he could not be held by the Chains of death, but that as
he had power to lay down his life, so he had power to take it again.

And now what reason is there to be in the least scandalized at Christ, although
he was dead, since GOD has raised him from the dead, and he is now alive, and
lives for ever more, and has the keys of hell and of death? Who need be
offended at Christ's enduring the cross and undergoing such shame, since he is
now set down at the right hand of the throne of God!

4. Another good end answered by the Resurrection of Christ is, that it affords
a powerful argument for our own Resurrection to an Immortal State.

The doctrine of the Resurrection, although it was never thought of by the
heathen World, and seemed incredible to them when they first heard of it; yet
it is a doctrine of great importance, very necessary to the believed; and
because it appears with some difficulty, to believe that our bodies after they
have for thousands of years been mouldered into dust, will be gathered
together, and formed into the same bodies again; hence it is very necessary that
this doctrine should some way or other be well established, and confirmed, in
order to bring Men into the full belief of it.

And now what way could GOD have taken more effectually to convince Men of the
truth of this doctrine than by giving a Specimen or Example of it; as he did in
Christ's Resurrection from the dead. Indeed, before the coming of Christ, some
persons had been miraculously raised from the dead: as the Son of the Woman of
Zarephath by the Prophet Elijah, 1 King. 17. and the Son of the Shunamite by
the Prophet Elisha, 2 King. 4. But these were only raised to a mortal state,
they died again; as did all those without doubt that our Savior himself raised
from the dead whilst he dwelt among us, and so they were no examples of our
being raised to Immortality. And although some have been translated to an
Immortal state, such as Enoch and Elijah* yet they never actually died as other
Men. So that our Lord Jesus Christ was the first that ever truly died and then
rose with an immortal Body, after the manner that all Mankind shall be raised
at the last day.

Indeed, the Evangelist Matthew, in reckoning up the strange things that
happened at Christ's death, mentions this, Mat. 27.52. That the graves were
opened, and many bodies of saints that slept arose. But then by the next verse
it looks most probable, and the generality of Expositors agree to it, that this
was after his Resurrection; and that the Evangelist is only summing up in
general the wonderful Events that happened about that time. And this agrees
best with what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.20. Christ being risen from the dead
is become the first fruits of them that sleep. And with his being called the
first begotten of the dead, Rev. 1.5. Which could not truly be said if any had
risen before him. So that Christ's Resurrection was a pledge and token of our
Resurrection; and assures us that we shall all rise again: they that have done
good to the Resurrection of life and happiness; they that have done evil to the
Resurrection of damnation. But especially does the Resurrection of Christ
afford full assurance to Believers that they shall rise again, for he is their
mystical, and spiritual Head, and they are the Members: and if the Head be
risen all the Members must certainly follow. And now that the Resurrection of
Christ is a good argument for our Resurrection, appears from the Apostle's
arguing it from that consideration, 1 Cor 6.14. And God has both raised up the
Lord, and will also raise us up by his own power. 2 Cor. 4.14. Knowing that he
which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus.

5. Another good end answered by the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, is
that it serves to raise our Minds above this World, and set them upon things
that are above.

For since Christ has left the World, and gone to Heaven, if we have a sincere
and hearty love for him, we shall follow him with our hearts; we shall look
upon him as our treasure, and where our treasure is, there will our hearts be
also. The thought that Christ has left the World, and gone to Heaven, will
cause the believing Soul to despise and cast an holy contempt upon this World,
and will carry out the Soul in longing desires to get to that blessed place
where he is, that we might behold, and partake of his Glory. The Apostle
thought that to be with Christ was far better than to be here, in so much that
he was willing to be absent from the body, and leave this World, to be present
with the Lord, Phil. 1.23. And the thought that Christ is gone to Heaven will
put every saint upon looking upward, will fix his affections there, and will
put him upon making his Interest there, as sure as he can. It leads them to
consider that this World is not their home, but where Christ their Savior
dwells, to whom they expect and hope at last to be received. And hence does the
Apostle argue with us after this manner, Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen with
Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God.

6. Another good End answered by the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ is,
that by this means we have a powerful Advocate and Intercessor with the Father.

For being risen from the dead and ascended to Heaven, He there appears in the
presence of GOD for us, presenting his crucified Body, and pleading the Merits
of his sufferings and obedience on our behalf; which as it is of infinite
advantage, so it must needs afford unspeakable comfort to the Saints. This is
the comfort they have, as the Apostle says, 1 John 2.1. That if any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. For although by his
sufferings he purchased Salvation, yet it is by his going to Heaven, and there
Interceeding for us, that he became able to save us: Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is
able also to save them to the uttermost, that come to God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make Intercession for them.

7 It serves to assure Believers of their Ascending to Heaven at last, where
Christ their forerunner has entered for them.

Christ told his Disciples before his Death, That in his Father's house were
many Mansions, and that he was going to prepare a place for them, and that he
would come again and receive them unto himself, that where he was there they
might be also, Joh. 14.2, 3. And now their seeing him ascend up to Heaven after
his Resurrection, served to strengthen the faith of his Disciples, and so of
all true Believers, that when he had prepared a Place for them he would come
again and receive them to it: for as they saw the former part of what he said
fulfilled, viz. his ascending up to Heaven, it assured them of the fulfillment
of the latter, viz. that he would come again and receive them. But then we must
consider further, that Christ when he passed into the Heavens, entered and took
possession for Believers, as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 6.20 Whither the
forerunner is FOR US entered, even Jesus. He entered as our head, and
representative, and so has set open the gates for all that shall believe in
him. So that all believers may from hence be assured, that an open entrance
shall be ministered to them into his everlasting kingdom.

Now these are some of the wise, and good Ends that have been answered by the
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, which serves to set forth the wisdom,
and the prudence of GOD in that affair.

I may not proceed to another Instance of divine Wisdom, but must conclude by
saying,

Let us all be thankful that as Christ died for our offenses, so he has risen
again for our Justification, and is gone to Heaven, there to appear in the
presence of GOD for us; and that he has ordered it in such a manner, as to
afford plentiful evidence and full demonstration of it. And now let us rejoice
in the full belief of this comfortable Truth: a Truth that is the cause and
foundation of all our hopes 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again
unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. It is by
Christ's Resurrection from the dead, that we are begotten again to a lively
hope. For if he had not risen there would no advantage have been received by
his death, and so no foundation for our hope and trust in him; as the Apostle
argues, 1 Cor. 15 17, 18. If Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are
yet in your sins. Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are
perished. But we believe and are assured of better things. And now since Christ
has both died, and rose again and revived; let us be conformed to him in the
likeness of his Death, and Resurrection. As he died for sin, so let us die to
sin: And as he rose again for our Justification so let us be raised to
Righteousness and new Obedience. And let this be our earnest Prayer to GOD,
that as we are by nature dead in trespasses and sins, we may be quickened
together with Christ, That we might know him, and the power of his
resurrection, as well as the fellowship of his sufferings; that as he was
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we might be raised to
newness of l^fe and new obedience, And if so, then when Christ who is our life
shall appear, we also shall appear with him in glory. AMEN.

Sermon, VII.
XII. THE Method that was taken for the PROPAGATING, and ESTABLISHING
Christianity in the World, was another wonder^ul Instance of divine Wisdom and
Prudence, in managing the affair of our Redemption.

Our blessed Savior had the promise, Isai. 53.10, 11. That when he should make
his soul an offering for sin, he should see his seed, and see of the travel of
his soul, and be sati^f^ed. He was assured for his encouragement in the
undertaking our Redemption, that he should purchase to himself a glorious
Church: And having for this joy that was set before him endured the cross,
despising the shame; it was now time for the promise to be accomplished. Since
he had humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross: The time was come for his Name to be exalted above every Name, that at
the Name of Jesus every knee might bow, in earth as well as in heaven. Now the
law was to be laid aside; and the middle wall of perdition between Jews and
Gentiles broken down: and the Gospel or good News of a Savior was to be
preached to every Creature, that so all Nations might be blessed and happy in
him for their Prince and Savior. But

But how should this be brought to pass? How should his Name, and his Fame, his
Doctrines, and Precepts be spread abroad in the World? And how should People be
prevailed with to receive them? For here was to be a crucified Savior preached
and offered unto them, which was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks (the most celebrated for learning in the World) foolishness. Here was to
be the setting forth of a strange doctrine, viz. The Resurrection of the body,
which the Heathen World never dreamt of, and which seemed an incredible thing
unto them. Here was also the preaching up of a Religion, the doctrines of which
were too mysterious, sublime and spiritual, to be easily apprehended by them,
and the duties of it directly contrary to the carnal, and corrupt dispositions
of Men, and which tended directly to the subversion, and overthrow of the
kingdom of Satan: and so whoever should undertake it, would be sure of meeting
with all possible opposition from Earth and Hell. Now surely here were
difficulties, and discouragements insuperable to humane reason. But as I
observed in my first discourse on this subject, the more difficult and
perplexed any affair is, the more clearly does wisdom appear in taking proper
methods for the accomplishment of it.

And now in the present case, GOD has improved the opportunity for making clear
manifestations of his wisdom; as will appear by considering the methods he has
taken, and the means he has made use of for propagating the Christian Religion
in the World at first, and for maintaining and supporting that interest through
the several Ages of the World to this day. And here I shall not take notice of
the Inward, and more effectual means, viz. the Operations of the holy Spirit
working Convictions, and a through Conversion in the Souls of Men, because I
shall leave this as a particular instance of divine Wisdom, to be considered
afterward, But shall only take notice of the Outward means, those that are
visible, and apparent, and observe what Wisdom and Prudence there appeared
herein.

(1.) Let us consider the Persons, employed in carrying on this great, and
difficult affair, who were a few poor Illiterate Fishermen; and it will appear
to be a surprising instance of divine Wisdom.

Indeed considering the difficulty, and importance of the work, we should have
thought (if we had been consulted in the matter) that no Beings inferior to
the glorious Angels could have carried on this affair to effect: Humane reason
would have thought that the only, or the more likely way would have been for
those bright Intelligences, who excel in wisdom and strength, to have come down
among Men, to prevail with them to receive, and e^^orace the sublime Doctrines
and Duties of Christianity. But although this might appear most agreeable to the
wisdom of Man, yet it did not to the wisdom of GOD. And if we do but thoroughly
consider the matter, we shall see the Persons that GOD pitched upon, to be much
more proper and suitable. For if those Ministering Spirits had come down in
visible Shapes among Men, and the Gospel had been delivered by the Ministry of
Angels, as the law was from Mount Sinai, it would indeed have filled Men, as it
did the Israelites, with terror and amazement, and frighted Men into a
submission to it: but they would not have been persuaded into an hearty
entertainment of the Gospel from such clear, rational Convictions, as now they
were; and as is proper for rational and free Agents to be. Moreover, if such
powerful Instruments had been immediately and apparently employed in this work,
the power of GOD in the success of the Gospel would not have been so visible,
and apparent, nor so readily owned, and acknowledged as now it is.

But then supposing we should have thought it proper to employ Men, some of our
selves, as Instruments to carry on this affair, yet surely we should have
concluded that the wisest and most effectual course would have been to choose
the highest ranks and orders of Men for that service: those that had the
greatest Estates, were highest in authority, and that had the most powerful and
extensive Influence upon others. But now even this upon a more through
consideration does not appear to be so wise, and prudent a course as that which
the wisdom of GOD made choice of. For although perhaps many more People might
have professed Christianity than there did; yet they would not have done it
from such true, rational and Christian principles: they might perhaps have come
into the profession of it, for fear of their superiors, or for fashion sake,
or to please those they had their dependence upon; or from some such like
temporal views, and not from any real Convictions in their own minds of the
truth and excellency of Christianity it self. Nay they would rather suspect
that it was the subtle contrivance of the great Men, to keep the People in
greater awe, and in more perfect subjection to them. So that although there might
have been more professed Christians, yet there would not have been so many real
and hearty ones. And so GOD has shown that his thoughts are not as our
thoughts, nor his ways as our ways, in pitching upon such as were the most
unlikely of any to carnal reason at the first thought, for this service, even
Men of an inferior Rank, who had no advantage of Education, and Learning, or
of Estates, or of Authority; and so in short, nothing in themselves by nature,
or birth, or outward circumstances that could recommend them unto the People.
Now, I say, such were the Men that GOD first sent forth to preach the Gospel to
the World; and certainly there was a great deal of wisdom and prudence herein.

For,

1. They were the least likely of any to be suspected of being about to impose
a cheat upon the World.

For none could think that such Men who had no more advantages of Education, or
Estate, or Authority, or Reputation in the World, than a company of Fishermen,
should undertake to draw a new Scheme of Religion, full of strange doctrines,
out of their own Brains, and think to persuade the World into the belief and
practice of it. I say, no body would ever suspect such a company of Men to be
upon such a design as this. For however strange, and incredible the things they
taught might be to the generality of Mankind, yet they would not think but that
these poor Men, who appeared with so much simplicity, did believe what they
said themselves. And then,

2. These were the most likely Men to persuade the World that what they taught
came from GOD, and ought to be received by them.

For, first, it would appear very certain to all that considered it, that these
illiterate Men could not themselves be the Authors of that Religion they
preached. Who could imagine that Men of no better Education than they, could
have drawn up the fullest, and most exact Compendium of all moral Duties; and
have given the most extensive, and the most refined and spiritual Notion of all
divine moral virtues, that ever the World was favored with by the wisest and
most learned Jew or Heathen!

And then as their circumstances were such that no body could believe them to
be the Authors of the Religion they recommended to the World: So it plainly
appeared they were not employed as Tools or Instruments by the wise, and
learned, or great Men of that day; because the Rulers, and the great Men almost
universally opposed, and appeared against their designs, and did all they could
to crush, and overcome them. And then it appears as clearly that they were not
set on work by the Devil, because what they taught was so directly contrary to
his interest, and tended to the overthrow and destruction of his kingdom. From
all which it follows that they received it from GOD; for if they could not be
the Authors themselves, neither had they it from Men or Devils, who else could
they receive it from, but GOD himself?

3. The power of GOD was more clearly manifested by the Gospel's prevailing
under their Ministry of it, than it would by the Ministry of other Men.

The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels,
that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us. The more weak
the Instruments are that GOD makes use of for the spreading his Gospel, and for
the Conversion of Sinners, the more is the divine Power magnifyed and made
known therein. And therefore GOD made use of such Men at first in spreading the
Gospel, to make it evident, that it was not by the enticing words of Men's
wisdom, that it was not by the Authority or Influence of Men, but by his own
almighty Power, that the Gospel spread and prevailed as it did, by which means
the Apostles themselves are excluded from all manner of glorying or boasting,
because of the success of their Ministry. And those that experienced, and felt
the blessed effects of the Gospel on their Souls, are led to see, acknowledge,
and adore the almighty power and infinite grace of GOD therein.

(2.) The Wisdom of GOD appeared in the manner of furnishing, and accomplishing
the Apostles for the important business He was sending them about.

It is the part of a wise Man, when he imploys any in his service, to see that
they be duly qualifyed, and sufficiently accomplished for the service they are
to attend. And thus the Lord Jesus Christ in his infinite Wisdom and Prudence,
when he sent forth his Apostles to preach the Gospel, and propagate
Christianity in all parts of the World; took effectual care that they should be
sufficiently qualifyed, and fitted out for such weighty and difficult service.
Indeed he did not furnish them with Silver or Gold or any earthly authority:
for these things would not contribute to the design he was sending them out
upon, which was to set up not an Earthly but a Spiritual Kingdom; and therefore
instead of those, he endowed them with the holy Ghost, in his extraordinary and
miraculous gifts, which at once accomplished them for their business. And they
were not permitted to depart from Jerusalem before they received the promise of
the Father, Act. 1.4.

Thus as it was left in charge to them that they should go and teach all
Nations, it was necessary they should be able to discourse with each in their
own language, so as to be understood by them. Accordingly before ever they
departed from Jerusalem, there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of
fire, and sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost,
and began to speak with other tongues, even in any language whatsoever. And as
there was of every Nation under Heaven, at Jerusalem, (which by the way gives
us another instance of divine Wisdom, that th^se wonderful transactions with
respect to our blessed Savior, should be at such a time, and place, where
there was a resort of all Nations, who should see and hear of these matters,
the wonderful news of which they doubtless sent abroad to their respective
Nations, which might prepare them for the more ready receiving of the Gospel
when it was sent unto them:) But as I said, there being of all Nations at
Jerusalem, they heard the Apostles at once speaking to every one in his own
particular language: at which they were all amazed, knowing that they were
Galileans, and so had never learned these language. A particular account of
which we may read, Acts 2. chapter the beginning. So that there appeared to be a
miraculous effusion of the holy Ghost; which at once not only qualified them
for going into the World and teaching every Nation, Tongue and Language; but it
also gave great authority to their Ministry, and was a witness from Heaven for
them, that they were going on GOD's Errand, and in a business that he approved
of, and was greatly concerned for.

But yet the alwise GOD knowing it was not sufficient for the Apostles in their
grand undertaking to have barely the gift of Tongues: because although they
should be able to speak in every man's tongue; yet if they had not the Spirit
to guide them, and to dictate to them what they should say, it would have been
to little purpose: This therefore were they endowed with, even the Spirit of
truth, or infallibility, to lead and guide them into all truth, as our Savior
had promised them Joh. 16.13. They had a Spirit of infallibility, if not
constantly and in every action, yet upon all necessary occasions, to direct
them what to do, and dictate to them what to speak: and especially when they
were about to preach or to write any thing for the use, and benefit of the
Church, they were under the guidance of that Infallible Spirit. For this is the
account that one of them gives us in that matter, 1 Cor. 2.13. Which things
also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy
Ghost teaches.

But then further, GOD knew that the Apostles having the Spirit of
infallibility would not induce People to believe them, unless they were able to
give some external demonstration of their being sent of GOD. Therefore GOD in
his great Wisdom, and Goodness, to all the other gifts of the Spirit, added
that of working Miracles, insomuch that the Apostles were able to dispossess
Devils, to heal all manner of diseases, yea and upon occasion to raise the
Dead; all which Miracles they did in the name of Christ, by which they exalted
his Name among the People, and gave sufficient reason for them to believe in
him. And thus were the Apostles every way furnished for the service they were
employed in: they were able to speak to every man in his own language to
deliver to them the infallible Oracles of GOD, without any error or mistake,
and to confirm the same by divine signs and miracles; which was sufficient to
leave any People without excuse, that would not believe their report, nor
receive the Gospel which they delivered to them. For surely these Men spoke in
the demonstration of the Spirit, and with power, a power sufficient to work
Conviction in the Minds and Consciences of men, and not force them contrary to
their minds, as the secular power, and the power of the Sword too often do.

(3.) The Hardships and bitter Sufferings, that GOD ordered out for the
Apostles, and first professors of Christianity, was a wise contrivance for the
advancing and establishing the Interest of Christ in the World.

That they went through many difficulties, sore trials, and the sharpest
persecutions in the course of their Ministry, and at last suffered the most
cruel deaths in the cause, the Acts of the Apostles and the History of those
times do sufficiently assure us of. And now although it may at first view seem
strange that GOD should suffer his own faithful Servants (those that loved him,
and served him with all their Hearts and Souls) to be imprisoned, to be
whipped, to suffer hunger and thirst, to be buffeted, to be persecuted, to be
reviled, and made the off scouring of all things whilst they lived, and at last
to have the most cruel, and tormenting death inflicted on them: Yet if we
consider the matter, we shall see there was a great deal of wisdom, and
prudence in it, and that it was even necessary for the first Preachers of the
Gospel to suffer, and die as Martyrs, or Witnesses for the truth they had
delivered to others.

1. This was the most effectual way that could be, to convince the World that
they really believed, and certainly knew the truth of those things which they
had preached to them.

Here it must be said that it was necessary for the Apostles to give the
strongest evidence possible that they really believed, yea and that not upon
slender grounds, but that they certainly knew the truth of those things they
taught and urged others to the belief of. They taught the World that Jesus of
Nazareth was the true Messiah, that he wrought all those, (and innumerable
more) Miracles that are recorded in the Gospel, and that after he was put to
death by the Jews, he arose again from the dead on the third day, and ascended
up into Heaven. These things they declared to be true of their own certain
knowledge. that they were eyewitnesses of them. Now these appeared strange
things to the World, and they were with difficulty persuaded to believe them.
It was therefore necessary in order to persuade Men into the belief of them,
that those who related them should give all possible demonstration of their
sincerity, that they believed and knew these things to be so. And now what more
effectual way could be taken for this than by suffering persecution even unto
death, in their witnessing to the truth of what they declared? Surely they
could have no temptation to pursue in declaring those things, if they knew them
to be forgeries, and lies, or if they were not fully assured of the truth of
them, since they had no prospect of any temporal advantage; but only poverty,
whipping, imprisonment and death: and had as little reason to expect any better
treatment in the other world, if they were guilty of lying and falsehood. For
according to their own Doctrines and Principles LIARS were to have their
portion in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone forever, Rev. 21.8. And
therefore the persecutions they underwent for the cause of Christ, gave the
strongest demonstrations of their sincerity and that they really believed and
certainly knew the truth of what they suffered for. So that although it might
look like hard and severe treatment from GOD to his Children and Servants, yet
GOD was very wise and prudent in suffering the Church to be so severely
persecuted in the former ages of it; for he knew how to uphold and carry his
Servants through such sufferings, with patience and cheerfulness, and he knew
how to reward them for it by bestowing a far more exceeding, and eternal weight
of glory on them in the other World. And surely it was in infinite mercy to the
Church to this very day as it affords a most powerful argument for the truth of
Christianity, by putting that matter beyond all doubt with respect to the
sincerity of the Apostles.

2. These Persecutions were the means of giving a mighty Recommendation of
Gospel-Doctrines and Principles, to the Esteem and Admiration of Mankind, who
saw the Power and Efficacy of them in Christian Professors.

It showed their principles to be Heroic, and Sublime, that could carry Men
above the fears of Death, and all the tortures and torments that the wrath and
cruelty of Men could invent or inflict. It showed that such Men were endowed
with principles uncommon, and extraordinary, that they could so courageously
embrace the Stake, and with such constancy, and steadiness, yea and
cheerfulness of mind, endure the scorching flames, and instead of being
inflamed with wrath and indignation against their cruel Persecutors* they were
fired with a generous compassion toward them, and prayed earnestly for them: I
say, such a behavior of themselves at such trying times, showed that they were
under the government of higher, and more noble principles than all the
Philosophy of this World could raise men to. And surely it must needs be a
mighty commendation of their Religion to all the bystanders, to see how it
would support them under the fears of Death; to see what patience and
submission, what courage and steadiness of mind, what hope, and confidence,
what love and charity even to their Enemies, they would endure the most cruel
Sufferings withal.

3. And then again, these Persecutions served mightily to keep up the Life and
Power of Chr^stianity in the Church.

The Persecutions, instead of suppressing the interest of Christ, made it to
thrive and flourish more abundantly. The notter the Persecuti^ns were, and the
greater the number that became Martyrs, and sealed the truth with their blood;
the more inclined were People to believe the truth of the Religion, and to
embrace it. And then the fire of Persecution served to cleanse, and purify the
Church, of Hypocrites and false Professors: for at such times they would fall
away, and scarce any but true and real Christians would endure the fiery trial.
Moreover these Persecutions served to brighten all their Graces, and made them
more lively, and more eminent, and exemplary Christians than otherwise they
would be; as might be argued from the natural tendency of a time of
Persecution, as well as from the more plentiful supplies of the holy Spirit,
which doubtless they had at such a season, more than at other times.

(4) Another wise and good Method that GOD has taken for the propagating, and
perpetuating Christianity, was the preserving the Writings of the Apostles for
the benefit of the Church in all Ages.

The Holy Apostles were not suffered to continue by reason of Death. And now if
they had left nothing in Writing for the use of the Church, and if there had
been nothing but uncertain tradition; the true Christian Religion might have
been lost out of the World long before this day, and there would have been only
some glimmering sparks of it left, and those buried up in the grossest
Superstitions. And therefore GOD in his great Wisdom put it into the Hearts of
the Apostles to commit to Writing these Sacred Oracles of the New Testament,
guiding them therein by his Infallible Spirit. These Scriptures, as well as
those of the old Testament, were given by inspirations of God, and are
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction or instruction in
righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. And GOD in his wonderful Providence has preserved
these Sacred Writings pure, and entire, without any material addition, or
diminution even unto this day; insomuch that we by looking into this perfect
Law of liberty, may have as right notions of Christianity as the Apostles
themselves: which shows what wise and prudent care GOD has taken in making
provision for his Church throughout all the Ages of it. For it is most certain
that those Writings of the Apostles, the Scriptures of the New Testament, are
under GOD the very support of the Church, and without them it would long before
this time have come to nothing.

(5) The Ordinances of the Gospel are a wise contrivance for the preserving,
and upholding the Interest of Christ in the World.

GOD designed that the Christian dispensation should continue to the end of the
World. But here lay a difficulty and danger, with respect to those Ages that
should be at a great distance from the time of Christ's appearing in the flesh,
lest they should be ready to doubt and disbelieve the facts, and call the whole
Religion into question: As there are too many such in the World at this day,
who call in question all revealed Religion. But now Christ, to prevent our
sinking into Deism, and to leave those without excuse that do so, did at the
first establish certain Ordinances to be continued in his Church, until his
second coming. Thus the Night before he suffered, instituted the Sacramental
Supper, to be attended in all Ages of his Church, as a standing memorial of his
Death, until he comes. And also the Ordinance of Baptism, which he instituted
before his Ascension to be as an Initiating Ordinance, and to be performed in
the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And also the
Ordinance with respect to a Gospel Ministry, to succeed the Apostles in all
Ages of the Church, and with whom Christ promised his presence always even unto
the end of the World.

And now, if I had time, I could show that these Ordinances having been kept up
in the Church to this day, are most convincing arguments for the Truth of
Christianity, and leave all without Excuse that wont believe those things*
which these Ordinances are, and have been declared all along to be the
Monuments and Memorials of; although it be for near Seventeen hundred years. And
in showing how these Ordinances help to confirm the Christian Religion, I
should set forth the Wisdom and Prudence there was in appointing them.

But I proceed to say,

(6.) The Prophecies of the Gospel were a wise contrivance to maintain
Christianity in the World.

As I have observed in a foregoing discourse, the Prophecies of the old
Testament were wisely contrived, as they served to point out the Messiah, when
he should appear, so the Prophecies of the new Testament are wisely contrived
to be of great use, and benefit for confirming the Truth of Christianity.
Indeed there are some of the Prophecies of the new Testament hard to be
understood; they are wisely hid from us, and I believe will till they are
accomplished but when they are accomplished and understood, they will be of
vast service to the Interest of Christianity: for they afford one of the most
powerful arguments of the divine Authority of the Scriptures, and so for the
Truth of Christianity: for when these things are accomplished exactly as they
were foretold so many hundred years ago, it will appear that the Persons who
wrote these things had the Spirit of GOD with them, as our Savior had promised
to his Disciples, who should as he said, tell them things to come, Joh. 16 13.
And consequently that what other things they wrote of at the same time, were by
the Inspiration of the same Spirit of Truth: for it cannot be supposed that GOD
would give his Spirit to foretell future Events, to Persons that would make no
other use of it than to make it a means of imposing lies and false-hoods upon
the World

And although the Church has not as yet received so much benefit by these
Prophecies, because of the uncertainty with respect to the meaning of them; yet
they seem to be reserved for peculiar usefulness for the Church in the latter
Days: when Deism and Infidelity shall prevail, and the present arguments made
use of for proving the Truth of Christianity be born down by the Corruptions of
Men. Then I say we may conclude that these Prophecies which have been kept as a
reserve, will by their accomplishment, and their being more fully understood,
be a powerful means of reviving, and strengthening the evidences for
Christianity.

Thus for instance, the Conversion of the Jews, supposed by many Divines to be
foretold, both in the old, and new Testament, the destruction of Antichrist,
the downfall of Babylon; I say, the accomplishment of these Prophecies will be
of great service to the Church, upon this account among others, that it will
strengthen the faith of Christians, and induce others to the same belief and
practice, by convincing them that the Scriptures which contained this Religion,
are the word of GOD, and that the holy Men from whom we have them spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost.

(7.) The Controversies and Disputes, that GOD has permitted in the Christian
World, have been wisely ordered for the establishing Christianity.

That there have been grievous Controversies, and disputes in the Church of
Christ even from the beginning, is abundantly evident from the Histories of it
in all Ages. And now although those Controversies arising from different
apprehensions of things, have been unhappy occasions of a great deal of sinful
Contention, unreasonable Animosities, and dreadful Schisms and breaches in the
Church, yet GOD in his infinite Wisdom does so order it as to bring good out of
these evils, and makes these Controversies and disputes in Relion very
subservient for the confirming the Truth of it, and keeping up the knowledge of
and acquaintance with it. By the disputes and controversies things were more
thoroughly searched, and examined into; which always proves of advantage to
that side which is the Truth. For the more narrowly Truth is searched into, the
more clearly it appears But then the Ancient Controversies, and the Books that
were produced by them, as they demonstrate to us that Christianity was in being
in those days; so by their appealing to the Scriptures as the Standard, or Rule
of trial, they plainly acknowledged the divine Authority of the holy
Scriptures. And now by reading and studying the Ancient Controversies of the
Church, and their frequent references to the Scriptures of the old, and new
Testament, as now we have them in our Bibles; it appears that the Scriptures
that we now have in our hands, were agreed upon by all Parties to be the Word
of GOD: which must needs afford very great satisfaction to us, and help very
much to remove the doubts and scruples that may arise in our minds about the
Scriptures, and convince us, that they are a most sure Word of Prophecy, to
which we may do well, and be safe, to take heed, as to a light shining in a
dark place. And this may suffice to set forth the Wisdom of GOD, in the Method
he has taken for the propogating, and perpetuating the Gospel dispensation.
There are some other Instances of divine Wisdom in the affair of our
Redemption, to be considered afterward. I shall conclude at present with a
brief

IMPROVEMENT.
And here I might from the several Instances of divine Wisdom in the Method of
propogating and establishing Christianity, draw some useful and practical
Inferences; but I shall mention only two or three, and so conclude at present.

Inf. 1. We ought not to be prejudiced against any persons merely for their
external poverty and meanness.

For the Apostles themselves were poor, and yet Christ so far honored them as
to make them the Pillars of his Church, and the grand Instruments in setting up
his Gospel-Kingdom, and their Names shall be handed down with the greatest
honor to the latest Posterity. Ministers must not be despised, or rejected
because of their outward Poverty. Let them be ever so mean on outward accounts,
they must be honored, and respected as the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts,
and he that despises them, despises him that sent them.

Inf. 2. Here is ground of Encouragement, that whatever Service GOD calls us
unto, he will furnish and qualify us for it.

He did so when he sent forth his Apostles, he sufficiently qualifyed them for
their Office; and therefore whatever Service GOD shall call us unto we have
abundant Encouragement to seek to him, to depend upon him for all supplies of
Wisdom and Grace, that shall be necessary for us. It is not consistent with the
Wisdom of GOD to call to any Service, and not qualify for it: And therefore if
we are but sure that he calls us to the Service, we may safely accept of it in
a humble confident dependence upon GOD for his Grace and Spirit that shall be
sufficient (...) us.

Inf. 3. Outward Afflictions, although ever so great, are no certain mark of
GOD's displeasure.

Never any Men endured sorer Afflictions than the Apostles, yet GOD was far
from being angry or displeased at them: for they were in the ^ay of their duty,
in the way that pleased him; and they were in a peculiar manner hear and dear
to Christ. We must not therefore judge of GOD's love or hatred by the
dispensations of his Providence. For this we are taught by the Preacher, Eccl.
9.1. No man knows either love, or hatred by all that is before him. Nay, if
any way, we should argue GOD's love from the Afflictive dispensations of
Providence; for says the Apostle, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves he chastneth,
and scourges every son whom he receives.

To Conclude, Let us adore the Riches of divine Wisdom in contriving and
prosecuting such Methods, for the propogating and preserving the Interest of
Jesus Christ in the World, even unto this day; and the good foundation there is
laid for the continuance of it to the end of the World.

And let us adore the Riches of Sovereign Grace, that we have the holy
Scriptures, the Writings of the Apostles among us, and that they are attended
with so many powerful Arguments to induce our belief of all that is contained
in them. And now let such consider how inexcusable they will be who continue in
Unbelief, and wont be satisfied with the Evidence that GOD in his Wisdom has
seen cause to afford, and judges sufficient for us. And let such consider how
dreadful their condition will be, when they find things to be as they have been
told so often from the Word of GOD, when it is too late for them to help
themselves, but must be cast into the place prepared for Hypocrites and
Unbelievers. Wherefore let such be persuaded now to lay aside their carnal and
unreasonable prejudices against the Doctrines, and Precepts of Christianity,
and be no more faithless but believing.

And now let us who pretend and profess to believe these things, see that we
live as becomes the belief of them Let us look upon the holy Scriptures as a
perfect rule of Faith and Manners; and let us order our Conversation aright,
even according to the Gospel of Christ, and then we shall through Him most
certainly see the Salvation of GOD.

Sermon, VIII.
XIII. THE NATURE and KIND of that Redemption, which is wrought out for us, is
another Instance of divine Wisdom and Prudence.

Under this head I shall briefly consider,

First, The Nature of that Redemption, which is wrought out for us, and wherein
it consists.

Secondly, The Wisdom of GOD in procuring such a Redemption for us.

1. I am to consider something of the Nature of that Redemption, which is
wrought out for us, and show wherein it consists. And here,

1. The Redemption wrought out for us, consists in the Pardon of our Sins, and
Justification before GOD.

Thus we have it explained in the verse immediately preceding our Text, In
whom we have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of Sins: intimating to
us that Redemption through the blood of Christ, and forgiveness of Sins, are the
same thing, or that forgiveness of Sins is part of that Redemption. So that all
such as are Redeemed by the blood of Christ, have their Sins pardoned and
blotted out; they are delivered from the curse of the law, and from those
torments and miseries that are the just wages of Sin. Hence says the Apostle,
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us,
Gal. 3.13. And accordingly says the same Apostle, Romans 8.1. There is no^^ no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. And as they are delivered from
the Curse and Condemning Sentence of the law, through the infinite Merits of
Christ; so by virtue of that perfect righteousness which he wrought for them,
they are justified and stand right with GOD. Act. 13.38, 39. Through this Man
is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: and by him all that believe are
justified They are accepted as righteous in GOD's sig^: And accordingly his
anger is turned away from them, and he becomes a reconciled GOD and Father to
them, through Christ, by whom he is reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing to them their trespasses. So that the Sinner which believes in Jesus,
and so is Interested in the Redemption that he has wrought out, is in as safe a
Condition with respect unto his Sins, as if he had not committed them, or as if
he himself had actually made full satisfaction to GOD for them.

2. This Redemption consists in saving us from the Power of Sin.

By the primitive Apostasy we were brought not only under the guilt of Sin, and
so made liable to punishment, but under the Power and Dominion of it: I^ reigns
in our mortal bodies, and we obey it in the lusts thereof. By Nature we are all
inslaved to Sin and Lust, and to spiritual Enemies, and are carried away
Captive at their pleasure. But now the Redemption that is wrought out for us
consists in our being delivered from the power of Sin, and out of the hands of
all our spiritual Enemies. Hence Christ is said, To redeem (...) all iniquity.
Tit. 2.14. That is, from the power as well as guilt of all Iniquity, as appears
from the following words, viz. That he might purify to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works. Now how could his redeeming them from all
Iniquity be an effectual means of purifying them unto himself a peculiar
People, unless he redeemed them from the power and dominion of Sin? So in 1
Pet. 1.18. They are said, to be redeemed by the blood of Christ from a (...)
Conversation: That is from a sinful life, which supposes the power of sin to be
subdued in their hearts. And this is the express promise to such as have an
Interest in the redemption of Christ That sin shall not have dominion over
them, because they are not under the law, but under grace, Romans 6.14. The
Redeemed are freed in a great measure from those propensions or inclinations to
sin that are natural to us. They have the evil nature of sin discovered to
them, and are filled with shame and sorrow for their past sins, with an hatred
and abhorrence of all sin, and resolutions against it, Yea, and they actually
get the mastery of sin so far as to depart from their own Iniquity, and to lay
aside the sin that does the most easily beset them. And then, as for the Devil,
that grand adversary of Souls, and all their spiritual enemies, they are
rescued out of their hands; and although they are sometimes seduced, and drawn
aside by their subtle devices, yet they are not in slavery, and subjection to
them. For Christ who is stronger than the Devil, the strong man armed, binds
him, and dispossesses their Souls of him, and in their conflicts with their
spiritual enemies, they come off conquerors, yea more than conquerors through
Christ that has loved them, Romans 8.37.

3. This Redemption includes the implanting Principles of Grace and Holiness in
our Souls

This Redemption is not only a negative kind of happiness, but it consists in
something that is positive. It contains in it not only the absence of sin and
corruption, but the presence of divine Grace. Indeed the absence of (...) or a
freedom from sin, is the presence of grace (...) the Soul: but yet it affords a
distinct Idea in our minds: as the absence of darkness is the presence of
light; yet we may form some distinct Ideas of them. So here, as the Souls of
the Redeemed are freed from the guilt, and power of sin, so at the same time
they are endued with principles of grace and holiness: As they are brought out
of darkness, so they are brought into mavelous light; They who were sometimes
darkness, are now made light in the Lord. Their Understandings are enlightened
in the knowledge of the Truth: the eyes of their minds opened to behold
wondrous things out of Gods law. They are enabled to discern spiritual things
in a spiritual manner. Moreover, the will is renewed: there is a holy gracious
temper, and disposition of Soul formed within them, whereby they are brought to
be in love with GOD and Holiness, and to take the greatest delight in his
Commandments. Moreover the Affections and Passions are sanctified and set in
order, being put under the Government of an enlightened and a sanctified
Understanding. And so indeed this redemption intends the Sanctification of the
whole Man, Spirit, Soul and Body: And that every grace of the holy Spirit be
implanted in the Soul. It intends their being endowed with faith, with love and
charity, with humility, patience, self-denial and every other grace. In short,
the Image of GOD is restored and reimpressed upon their Souls; and they are
made Pure as Christ is pure, and holy as he that has called them is holy: not
in degree, but in kind.

4. Our eternal Salvation and Happiness is contained in this redemption that is
wrought out for us.

This is not only a temporal but an eternal Redemption. Hence, Christ is said
to have obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. And he is said to be the
Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. Now this
intends not only an eternal freedom from all sin and sorrow, the wages of sin;
but the everlasting fruition of all good and happiness. So that all such as are
redeemed by Christ, are delivered from the power of Death and the Grave, are
acquitted in the Day of Judgment, and shall ascend with Christ to Heaven, and
there dwell in his presence, where is fullness of joys, and set down at his
right hand, were are rivers of pleasures for evermore; where they partake of
such happiness and glory, that neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, neither
has it so much as entered into the heart of Man at present to conceive of.
Which glory and happiness will very much consist in the exalted Services of
their Redeemer in giving blessing, and honor, glory and power to him that
sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

2. I proceed in the next place to show that the working out, and procuring
such a Salvation for us, was an Instance of wisdom and prudence.

And it is so,

1. As it is a perfect and complete Redemption, and such an one as suited the
case of fallen Man.

Since Christ had undertaken the great work of our Redemption, it was requisite
for his own vindication, and honor, to procure such a Salvation, as would be
suitable for us, and that would be every way sufficient to answer the end; for
otherwise he would have betrayed his own wisdom, as not having thoroughly
considered our case in our fallen State, and what was needful to restore us to
a State of happiness.

But now Christ having wrought out a Salvation for us, which is perfect both as
to the nature, and degree of it; having saved and delivered us from those very
things that we needed to be saved from, and to such a degree as we stood in
need of Salvation, showed a great deal of Wisdom.

Men are sometimes ready to do another a kindness, and to help him out of his
present distress; but for want of prudence and discretion, they oftentimes miss
their aim, and what they do to help him, oftentimes proves not only
ineffectual, but hurtful and prejudicial to him. But now GOD discovers his
wisdom and discretion, in a due consideration of our fallen circumstances, and
of all our wants and necessities, and in procuring such a Salvation as would
relieve us under them all. He wisely considered how we had exposed our selves
to misery, and destruction by our Sins; He accordingly took care to find out a
ransom for our Sin, whereby we might be delivered from the curse of the law,
and saved from the wrath to come, to which our Sins had exposed us.
Furthermore, He considered how we had inslaved our natures by Sin, and brought
our selves under bondage to our lusts and corruptions, and contracted such a
temper, as would incline us to a perpetual blacksliding; and that therefore it
would be to no purpose to pardon our Sins, unless he found out a way at the
same time to cure us of our strong propensions and inclinations to it, and so
prevent our returning again to folly after God had spoken peace unto us. He has
therefore in his great wisdom and goodness, at the same time that he made way
for our being pardoned and justified; taken effectual care that we should be
renewed and sanctified, the sinful dispositions within us subdued and
mortified, so as that we may be not only kept back from presumptuous Sins, but
from the indulgence of any Sin, and then serve GOD in holiness and
righteousness for the time to come.

So again, as in our original make and constitution, we were capable of
enjoying the blessed GOD himself in the sweetest fellowship and communion with
him in this World, and in the nearest and most immediate communion with him in
the World to come: and consequently we must be unhappy, unless we are restored
to this unspeakable privilege. This therefore has GOD in his great wisdom and
goodness taken care of, that we should be freed not only from hell and
destruction, and from the reigning power of Sin, but that we should have such
impressions of grace and holiness upon our hearts, such a love of GOD and
Christ, delight in him, and likeness to him; as should fit us for communion
with him here, and the enjoyment of him hereafter.

So that in short, Christ has so fully considered our case, that the Redemption
he has purchased is what exactly suits our circumstances: It removes all the
evils we had involved our selves in by Sin; and brings us into as happy, if not
a more happy state than if mankind had never sinned. And surely so bring as
much good out of so much evil is certainly an instance of wonderful wisdom. But
then

2. It is an Instance of Wisdom, as it is such a Redemption that serves very
much to set forth the Glory of GOD.

As was observed in the first discourse upon those words, Wisdom consists in
proposing the most noble Ends, and in pursuing the most proper means to
accomplish the same. Now the Glory of GOD is a design worthy of GOD himself,
and the highest end he can propose, and consequently every Method GOD takes
that is effectual to promote this, is an instance of wisdom in him. Now the
Redemption that Christ has purchased, and wrought out for us is of such a
nature that it directly tends to advance the Glory of GOD, and that in two ways.

(1.) As it serves to set forth the Glory of the divine perfections. (2.) As it
disposes and enables (...) Redeemed themselves to give glory and praise to him
in an active way and manner.

1. The Redemption that is wrought out for Man is of such a nature as serves
very much to set forth the Glory of the divine Perfections.

Here to instance in two or three of the divine Attributes.

1. This Redemption is of such a nature, as serves very much to set forth the
glory of divine Goodness and Mercy.

The nature and degree of this Redemption is such that separate from our
Unworthiness of it, and separate from the infinite cost and pains GOD was at to
accomplish it; I say, the nature of it is such, that exclusive of these, it
discovers wonderful goodness and kindness in GOD. For it is certain that an
infinite favor and benefit is bestowed upon all that are the subjects of it.
For this Redemption is so great, and so suited to our natures and necessities,
that it affords a complete, and perfect happiness unto us; a happiness as great
as we can desire, or are capable of enjoying. We had undone our selves, we had
corrupted, defiled and degraded our natures, and made our selves more vile than
the Beasts that perish, and more miserable too: for we had lost the divine
Image; had forfeited the divine Favor, and had exposed ourselves to the
revenging Justice of GOD, and so to all the torment and misery that our natures
were capable of enduring. Now the Redemption wrought out for us implies a
delivering us from all these evils; and not only so, but the putting us into a
far more glorious and happy state than we were in, before the fall. Which
serves to illustrate the immense goodness, and infinite mercy of GOD unto us.
What a wonderful display of divine goodness is it to acquit Men from the guilt*
and save them from the punishment of Sin? How bright and glorious does the
divine pity and compassion appear, in freeing Men from the slavery and bondage
they are in by nature to their lusts and corruptions; in rescuing them out of
the hands of Satan, and translating them out of the kingdom of darkness, into
the kingdom of GOD? How abundant in goodness, and how rich in Mercy does GOD
appear to be, in delivering us from the pit of everlasting misery and
destruction, from the place that burns with fire and brimstone, and where is
weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth for ever; and in opening the gates of
Heaven to us and giving us an abundant entrance into his everlasting Kingdom,
where is fullness of joy and rivers of pleasure for evermore? Surely to be thus
delivered from the greatest evils and miseries, and brought into the possession
of the greatest bliss and happiness, and that not only for a few years, but
throughout the infinite Ages of Eternity, are such instances of goodness and
mercy, as serve very much to set forth the glory of them: by this means these
Perfections shine gloriously, not only in the eyes of the Redeemed, but in the
eyes of all the intelligent Creation, who are capable of beholding them.

2. This Redemption is of such a nature as serves very much to magnify the
Power of GOD.

In the Redemption of Sinners, there is, the converting and turning them from
darkness to light; and translating them out of the kingdom of Satan into the
kingdom of the Son of GOD. Which change requires no less than Almighty power to
accomplish it. A dark Understanding being alienated from the life of GOD, is
enlightened and made to see spiritual things in a spiritual manner A carnal mind
which is enmity against God, and not subject to the law of God, neither indeed
can be, is taken out of them. Their natural stubborness removed, and of
Unwilling they are made willing in the day of God's power. Moreover, the Sinner
is so changed with respect to his Affections, that what he loved and took the
greatest delight in, he is made to hate with a perfect hatred: and that which
he was altogether averse to, he is made to take the greatest pleasure and
delight in. Furthermore, this is the dispossessing and driving out the Devil,
the strong man armed who had taken possession of our Souls; there is a
conquering and overcoming Principalities and Powers, and the rulers of the
darkness of the world; who do their utmost to obstruct and hinder our
Conversion. In short, in our Redemption there is a Regeneration, or new Birth.
Hence we are said, to be born again, Joh. 3.3. There is also a Resurrection to
life. Hence, such before their Conversion are said, To be dead in trespasses
and sins; and when any are Converted they are said to be quickened, or made
alive, Ephesians. 2.1. Lastly, there is a new Creation: hence such are said to be
Created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10. All which similitudes serve to set forth
the greatness of the work, and what power it requires to accomplish it: so that
when this work is done, when a Soul is Converted, there is a glorious display
of divine Power. By this it appears that Almighty Power belongs unto GOD: by
his changing the hearts of Sinners He makes it appear that (...) whatsoever he
pleases; for we cant easily conceive what work would require a greater power
to accomplish it. And thus GOD makes his great power known on the vessels of
Mercy in their Salvation; as well as on the vessels of Wrath fitted for
destruction.

3. This Redemption is of such a nature as serves to set forth the glory of
divine Holiness.

If the Redemption wrought out for us had consisted only in the pardon of Sin,
a Restoration to the divine Favor, and a delivery from Hell and Misery, while
the natural propensions and inclinations to Sin remained within; we and all the
rational Creation should have been ready to doubt of the infinite Purity and
Holiness of the divine Nature. For how could any have thought that GOD bore
such an infinite hatred against Sin, if he should have forgiven Sinners, and
been reconciled to them, at peace with them, while their love to Sin, and
aversion to all that is good and holy remained in them. But now GOD's taking
care to free us from the power of Sin, from our love to it, and delight in it,
as well as from the guilt and punishment of it, is a sufficient vindication of
the divine Holiness. GOD takes care that all such as are Justified freely by
his Grace, are also renewed and sanctified by his Spirit. When he cleanses us
from the guilt of Sin, he cleanses us from all filthiness of flesh and spirit;
and is by degrees perfecting us in holiness: which shows how high a regard GOD
has for holiness, and what a hatred and abhorrence he bears to all impurity.
For GOD ^e^^ons no Man's Sins, nor receives any Sinner into savor, till he has
humbled him out of his Sins; brought him to unfeigned Repentance for them, and
the root or principle of Sin is subdued within him; which certainly makes GOD
appear glorious in holiness, even in the pardoning and saving Sinners: because
he saves them from their Sins, and not in their Sins.

2. The nature of our Redemption is such, as tends much to the glory of GOD;
Inasmuch as it disposes and enables the Redeemed to give Glory to Him in an
Active way and manner.

Had GOD only pardoned our Sins, and released us from punishment, and if we had
after that remained under the power of Sin and Lust; instead of giving Glory to
GOD for such an unspeakable Mercy, as the delivering us from destruction and
misery: we should take encouragement to go on yet further in our rebellions
against him, we should be more daring and presumptuous, and do more than ever
to dishonor and displease that GOD that had forgiven us our former trespasses
against him; and so instead of adoring and praising him for his infinite Mercy
and Grace, we should rather insult him as being altogether such an one as our
selves. But now as they that are redeemed from the punishment of Sin, are
renewed also in the spirit of their minds, and are transformed into the divine
Image, so they have such a temper and frame of spirit, which disposes them to
give unto GOD the Glory due unto his Name, and to show forth his praises.

Moreover,

The Redemption wrought out for Sinners is of such a nature, That it gives us
the brightest discoveries of the excellencies and perfections of the divine
Being, and so serves to fill us with the most exalted thoughts, and adoring
apprehensions of him. By this Redemption we have a more convincing sense of our
dependence upon him, and that all we receive comes from him. He that is
Redeemed is made sensible of his infinite Obligations to GOD, not only for the
outward Mercies that he daily receives; but for his redeeming love and grace
that has been manifested toward him. And that very temper and disposition of
mind which is wrought in him by Redemption, and which is part of his
Redemption; fills him with the highest love and gratitude to GOD and awakens
his Soul, and all within him to bless and praise his holy Name, and excites
gracious purposes, and endeavors to bless the LORD whilst he lives, and to
give thanks unto him whilst he has any Being, nay, and not only to speak, but
to live GOD's praises by being devoted to the Fear and Service of GOD, and
employed for his honor. But then further, this Redemption disposes and enables
not only to live a life of praise in this world, but to celebrate his praises
in the world to come. Hence, we find them represented, as falling down before
the Lamb, singing a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and
open the seals of it: for thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God by thy
blood out of every kindred and tongue, and people, and nation. Blessing and
honor, and glory, and power to him that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb
for ever and ever. Salvation to our God which sits on the throne and unto
the Lamb, Rev. 5.9, 13. -- 7.10. So that if it be for the Glory of GOD to have
such Creatures as we, in our most perfect state, to be giving praise and
honor, and glory to him in the most exalted manner that our natures are
capable of, then the Redemption wrought out for us will be for his Glory; and
that such praises will be for his Glory, we are assured of from the Mouth of
GOD himself, Psalm. 50. last. Whosoever offers praise, glorified me. And this may
suffice to show the Wisdom of GOD, from the nature and kind of Redemption that
is wrought out for us. I shall therefore conclude at present, with a word or
two by way of

IMPROVEMENT.
Inf. 1. What matter of Thankfulness is it that there is such a perfect
Redemption wrought out for us, and offered unto us!

It would have been Unspeakable Mercy in GOD, and afforded matter for
Thankfulness in us, if GOD had offered any degree of Salvation to us; if he had
in any measure abated the punishment, and mitigated the misery that we had by
Sin brought our selves into. But now for GOD to procure a perfect Salvation for
us, an entire and an eternal Redemption from all Sin, and from all the evil of
it; is a further manifestation of divine Grace, which calls for the highest
Thankfulness. How ought we to adore the riches of Wisdom and Grace in GOD, that
he has not only pitied us in our low and wretched state; but has wisely
considered our circumstances* and provided a sufficient remedy for us! A
Plaster full as large as the Sore: A Salvation from all our miseries, and a
title to a happiness as large as we are capable of desiring, or enjoying.
Surely we should bless the Lord God of Israel, who has thus visited and
redeemed his people.

Inf. 2. We see an ins^perable Connection between a Pardoned and Regenerate
state here, and a Glorified state hereafter.

This is the constant and stated rule of Christ in our Redemption, that whom he
calls, them he justifies, and whom the justifies, them he also glorifies, Romans
8.30. So that none can be pardoned and saved from the guilt and punishment of
Sin, or received to Heaven at last; but such as have been effectually called
out of darkness into mavelous light, out of a state of nature into a state of
Grace. A through Conversion to GOD, and a pardoned state are inseparable
concomitants: GOD has joined them together; and we cant put them a sunder. It
is therefore vain and foolish f^r any to expect to be pardoned and saved, that
is not converted, and brought to a true Repentance for Sin, and to believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ. For it is impossible from the nature of GOD, and from
the tenor of the Covenant of Grace that we are under, for a Man in an
Unregenerate, Unconverted estate, to be pardoned and reconciled to GOD. So that
all such as look upon themselves in a state of Peace and Reconciliation with
GOD, and have never experienced a gracious Change in their hearts, do miserably
deceive themselves, they cry Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace. For there
is, there can be no Peace, says my God, to the wicked, Isai. 57.1.

Inf. 3. How much does it concern us all to have this very Redemption in all
its parts applied unto us!

More Men are willing to have this Redemption, in part applied to them; but not
in the full extent and latitude of it. They are willing to have their Sins
pardoned, and to be saved from Hell, and the wrath to come; to go to Heaven,
and obtain eternal Life and Happiness when they die. But then as essential a
part of this Redemption as any, they are not desirous of, nor concerned about:
nay, they had rather be without it, viz. A Redemption from the power of
Indwelling Sin and Corruption, and from the power of all their spiritual
Enemies. They are content to live in their Sins; and the slavery they are in to
their Lusts, is no burden to them: they are easy and quiet while they are the
captives of Satan, and are led away by him at his pleasure; nay, they delight
in Sin, and roll it as a sweet morsel under their tongues. But now all such do
in vain hope for the other parts of Redemption without this: for there is no
Remission of Sin with ^ut Repentance, no interest in the Merits and Mediation
of Christ, without Faith in Him; and without Holiness no Man shall see the
Lord. So that if we desire this Redemption to any purpose, we must desire it in
all its parts, we must desire a total Redemption, a perfect and complete
Redemption, or we desire no part of it in a right manner. We must therefore not
only cry with the Psalmist, Psalm. 51.1. Have Mercy upon me, O God, according to
thy living kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out
my transgressions. But we must go on with him in the 10. v. Create in me a
clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. And under a sense of
Indwelling Sin and Corruption, m^st cry out with the Apostle, Romans 7.24. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!

To conclude,

Let us never think our selves in a justified and pardoned state, before we
find our selves in a Renewed and Sanctified one. Let us never think the guilt
of Sin is taken away before we find the power of Sin subdued and mortified
within us; and now let us be as earnest to be delivered from the power, as from
the guilt of Sin: let us look upon it an instance of as great Grace and Mercy
in GOD to free us from the reigning power of Sin, as from the punishment due
unto us for it. And if GOD through his Sovereign Grace should bestow this perfect
and complete Redemption upon us; if he should pardon our Sins, and bestow upon
us his Grace here, and thereby ripen, and prepare us for Glory hereafter, let
us see to it that we give to him the Glory due unto his Name herefor; let us
ascribe our Justification, our Regeneration, and our progress in Holiness by
Sanctification, all to the free Sovereign Grace of GOD. And by beginning to
Praise him here where the Redemption is begun, we shall be the better prepared
to Celebrate his Praises in Heaven, where this Redemption will be perfected,
and completed in us.

Sermon, IX.
XIV. THE MANNER of APPLYING this Redemption to any of the Children of Men, is
another Instance of wonderful Wisdom and Prudence.

I have in some former discourses, shown how the Wisdom of GOD was manifested
in the way and method that was taken for purchasing and procuring Redemption
for us; and so bringing us into a state of Salvation by a Redeemer, I am now to
consider the manner of Applying this Redemption to us which opens another Scene
of amazing Wisdom and Prudence in GOD. It is not only necessary that Redemption
should be purchased for us: but that it should be also Applied unto us. And now
as there was in the purchasing and procuring; so is there in the Applying this
Redemption, a great deal of Wisdom and Prudence. Which will appear by a
distinct consideration of the several Parts of Redemption; such as
Justification, Regeneration and Sanctification, and eternal Salvation and
Happiness at last; and the Manner how they are applied to us, and we made the
Partakers of them.

But before I do this, I would briefly observe in general, by or from whom we
receive this Redemption, who is the Author of it, and by whom we come to
receive it.

Now all the saving benefits of Redemption come originally from the Father,
through the Merits and Intercession of the Son, by the Agency and Operation of
the Holy Ghost.

First of all, The Father is to be considered as the Fountain of all saving
Grace and Mercy that is ever conveyed to the Sinner. Free and Sovereign Grace
and Mercy is to be considered as flowing originally from him. Hence, he is
called the Father of Mercies, and the GOD of all Comfort, and so of all Grace,
2 Cor. 1.3. Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of Mercies, and God of all Comfort. And he even the Father is said to have
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places: As in the 3 d.
verse of the context.

But then Secondly, These blessings are purchased and procured by Christ the
Son of GOD.

He has purchased them for us by his Obedience and Death. Hence we are said to
have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our Sins, according to the
riches of his Grace. In the verse immediately preceding the Text. And we are
said to be Justified freely by his Grace, (the Grace of GOD) through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.24. And the Church is said to be
purchased, or redeemed with his blood, Act. 20.28. But then he actually
procures and draws forth these blessings by his Intercession. For since his
Ascension into Heaven, he appears in the presence of GOD for us pleading the
Merits of his Obedience and Sufferings, in our behalf. So that whatever Mercy
or Grace is bestowed on us, it is by virtue of his prevailing Intercession.
Hence he is said to be able to save to the uttermost those that come unto God
through him, seeing he ever lives to make incercession for them, Heb. 7.25.

But then Thirdly, Whatever benefits Christ has purchased or does procure for
us, they are applied or conveyed to us by the hand of the holy Spirit.

Christ when he was about to leave the World, tells his Disciples that he would
pray the Father, and he would send them another comforter, that should abide
with them for ever; even the spirit of truth, Joh. 14.16, 17. And assures them
that when he is come he will reprove the world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of
Judgment, 16.8. Now the holy Ghost being sent into the world, is the prime
Minister, or Agent in Christ's Kingdom to carry on his work among Men; and to
apply to them the benefits that Christ has purchased for them. HE it is that
works all true and saving Grace in the Soul. Hence he is called the Spirit of
Grace, Heb. 10.29. He it is also that applies all true comfort, and the joy of
GOD's Salvation. Hence, he is called the Comforter, Joh. 16.7. He it is that
Helps our Infirmities, Romans 8.26. And the Love of God is said to be shed abroad
in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us, Romans 5.5. And every
Virtue and Grace is said to be the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23. That is,
the effect of the Spirit, what is wrought in us by the Spirit of GOD.

And thus we see that all the Persons in the sacred Trinity had a hand in
carrying on the grand affair of our Redemption; which is such an instance of
Wisdom as helps very much to confirm the doctrine before us: for as the Three
that bear record in Heaven are equal in power and glory; so it is a wise
contrivance to have each of them so concerned in every affair that brings any
glory to GOD, as that they should be equal Partners in the glory; and now as
there is great glory accruing to GOD by the wonderful work of our Redemption,
so each Person in the Godhead by having a hand in the work will have a share
in the glory. By this means there is glory to the Father, to the Son, and to
the holy Ghost. The glorious perfections of each Person are magnified and
honored hereby; and Angels and Saints give glory to them. Hereby they are
moved to give glory (...) GOD the Father as the Father of Lights, and the
Fountain of all Grace and Mercy; from whom every good gift, and every perfect
gift descends. And to say as in the aforementioned, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings. Hereby they will be moved also to give glory to the Son of GOD, and
to say, as in Rev. 5.12, 13. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory and
blessing. Blessing and honor and glory, and power be to him that sits upon
the throne, and to the Lamb, for ever and ever. Hereby they will be moved also
to give glory to the divine Spirit for working divine and heavenly Grace within
them, acknowledging it to be by the grace of GOD, and the almighty influences
of the holy Spirit, that they are what they are. Acknowledging that their
New Birth, by which they are fitted to enter into the Kingdom of GOD, has been
by the holy Spirit, Joh. 3.5.

Having thus briefly considered by whom this Redemption is bestowed on us. I
proceed now to that which I more especially intended to insist upon, viz. The
consideration of the several parts of Redemption, and the manner of their being
applied to us, and so as I go along, take notice of the divine Wisdom and
Prudence that discovers it self therein.

And here I shall divide or distinguish the Redemption of a Sinner into these
general parts, viz. Redemption, Regeneration and Sanctification, and his future
Glorification or Happiness in Heaven; and shall consider the manner how each of
these are applied to the Sinner, and how the Wisdom of GOD abounds herein. Here
then,

1. In the JUSTIFICATION of a Sinner, there appears a great deal of Wisdom and
Prudence.

The Justification of a Sinner is his being pardoned and forgiven; his being
acquitted and delivered from the guilt and punishment of sin, his being
accepted as Righteous in the Sight of GOD; his being restored to the divine
favor, and entitled to eternal Life and Happiness: all which is upon the
account of Christ's Righteousness being imputed to us, and received by Faith.

Now the Wisdom of GOD in applying this part of Redemption to a Sinner, appears
in two things.

1. In the cause, matter and foundation of the Sinners Justification, which is
the Righteousness of Christ.

2. In the qualifications required, and made necessary in order to our
Justification.

1. The cause and foundation upon which GOD ever Justifies a Sinner; which is
the Righteousness of Christ imputed to them, discovers a great deal of Wisdom
and Prudence.

For the Illustration of this head, I shall say hese things, viz.

1. With the Lord Jesus Christ there is a perfect Righteousness.

2. The Justification of a Sinner is upon the account of this Righteousness
being Imputed to him.

3. In the Imputation of this Righteousness for the Justification of a Sinner,
there appears a great deal of Wisdom and Prudence.

1. With the Lord Jesus Christ there is a perfect Righteousness.

Indeed there is a twofold Righteousness with Christ. If we consider him as
GOD, He is perfectly Righteous and Holy: for there can be no Unrighteousness
with GOD. He is a Righteous LORD: and an Holy GOD, a GOD of Truth and without
Iniquity, just and right is he. But then if we consider him as GOD-Man
Mediator, and there is a perfect Righteousness ^ith him. And this is the
Righteousness that is here intended; for it is by virtue of this Mediatorial
Righteousness, that a Sinner is ever Justified. And that there was a perfect
Righteousness with Christ as Mediator, appears, in that he was perfectly freed
from the taint of Original Sin, being conceived in a miraculous manner, by the
over-shaddowing of the holy Ghost. Hence he is called, that holy thing, Luk
1.35. And in that, He did, as he said, it became him to fulfill all
Righteousness in the course of his Life, Mat. 3.15. As he was perfectly free
from Sin, so there was a constant conformity of heart and life to the mind and
will of GOD: And not only so, but he also suffered the penalty due to us for
sin; and thereby made full satisfaction to divine Justice; and so he is said,
To bring in an everlasting Righteousness, Dan 9.24. Which perfect everlasting
Righteousness is brought in by his active and passive Obedience.

1. By his Passive Obedience.

Christ having undertaken the work of our Redemption, He undertook to satisfy
for our sins, to suffer the penalty due to us for sin: and death being the
penalty threatened, in case of Sin and Disobedience, He became obedient unto
death even the death of the cross, as the Apostle tell us, Phil. 2.8. And He as
it was Prophesied of Him, Isai. 53 8, 12. Was cut off out of the land of the
living, and poured out his soul unto death. After he had been wounded and
bruised, and endured the most cruel sufferings in his body, and inexpressible
Agonies in his Soul. Insomuch that although these sufferings were but temporary,
and of but short continuance, yet considering the dignity of the Person, and
how infinitely near and dear he was to GOD, and considering also the nature of
his Sufferings; and they are equivalent to our Suffering an eternal death (as
has been shown at large in one of the foregoing discourses) and so wa^ a full
Satisfaction for sin. The debt contracted was hereby paid to the utmost
farthing: and so GOD consistent with his Justice, could be reconciled to the
repenting and believing Sinner.

2. It is by the active Obedience of Christ, that there is such a perfect
Righteousness wrought out for us.

In order to Christ's having a perfect Righteousness, it was necessary that
there should be a perfect Conformity to the Precepts of the law, as well as an
enduring the penalties of it: for without this his sufferings must have been
upon his own account; for his own Sin as the high Priests of old, Heb. 7.27.
Could not be Meritorious for us. Or if we should suppose any Merit in his
Sufferings, whereby the Sinner might have been saved from eternal death and
destruction, yet there would not have been wherewith to have purchased eternal
life and happiness: and so all the Salvation procured by the mere suffering the
penalty of the law, would have been only negative. And therefore chose to make
himself a complete Savior, and to purchase a positive as well as a negative
happiness, to bring us to Heaven, as well as deliver us from Hell, has
performed a perfect Obedience to the whole law of GOD. Hence it is said of him,
1 Pet. 2.22. That he did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. And that
he was holy, harmless, undefiled separate from Sinners, Heb. 7.26. And hence he
himself could say to his Father, as in Joh. 17.4. I have glorified thee on
earth, and finished the work which thou gave me to do. And hence the Father
could give this Testimony of him once and again from Heaven, as in Math.
3.17.17.5. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Which could not be
said in an absolute sense, if he had not fulfilled all righteousness, and
always done those things that please the Father.

2 The Justification of a Sinner is by the Imputation of this Righteousness of
Christ unto him.

That is, when a Sinner is pardoned and acquitted from the condemning Sentence
of the divine Law, restored to the divine Favor, and entitled to eternal Life;
it is upon the account of the Merits of Christ's Obedience and death accepted
for him. Christ undertook the Office of a Mediator between GOD and us, and
became a surety for us. Accordingly, all that he did and suffered was upon our
account, in our room and stead, and GOD accepts of it upon the account of all
those that believe in Christ, and obey his Gospel. GOD accepts of it on their
account so far, as to be reconciled to them, and to treat them with as much
kindness and respect, and to bestow as great favors and blessings upon them,
as if they themselves had personally suffered the penalties of the law, and
satisfied the demands of Justice, and had also yielded a perfect Obedience to
the law. And now when GOD treats a person after this manner, he may be said to
justify him: and his doing it upon the account of what Christ has done and
suffered in our stead, is the Imputation of his Righteousness unto us. For GOD,
by justifying a Sinner upon the account of the Righteousness of Christ, does so
far impute the Righteousness of Christ to the Sinner, that to all intents and
purposes it is his Righteousness. That is, he receives as much benefit by it,
as if it had been his own personal Righteousness. GOD is as much at Peace with
him and as propitious to him, as if he had wrought out a Righteousness himself,
because of the Righteous of Christ: and this is what we are to understand by
the Imputation of it.

And now that this is the way of a Sinners Justification, is evident from the
word of GOD, where the Doctrine of a Sinners Justification by Jesus Christ is
taught, and no where else. And there we are taught, That what Christ did and
suffered was upon our account. Thus it was Prophesied of him, That he should be
wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities. That he should
make his soul an offering for sin, and bear the sins of many, Isai. 53 5,
10.12. Accordingly, since his coming into the World, he is said to have born
our sins, in his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. Hence also he is said to be
a Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2. That is, he has made Atonement for
our sins, and the Atonement is accepted by GOD on the account of Believers;
and because the Righteousness of Christ is so made over to them, as that they
receive the benefit of it. He has this style and title given him, THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS, Jer. 23.6. Furthermore, There is a Parallel run, between the
first Adam, and Christ the second Adam: and that as the sin of the first Adam
is imputed to all his Posterity for their Condemnation; so the Righteousness of
the second Adam is imputed to all that believe in him for their Justification.
Romans 5.19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one, that is of Christ, shall many be made righteous. Moreover,
there is a Parallel run between this Imputation of our sin to him, and of his
righteousness to us. 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be sin for us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him. So that as GOD, when Christ
had undertaken to be our Surety, laid upon him our iniquities, and imputed our
sins so to him, as that he looked to him for satisfaction; so Christ having
made full satisfaction and brought in an everlasting Righteousness, that is
made over to the believing Sinner for his Righteousness. And hence this is the
language of such an one, Isai. 45.24. In the Lord, i. e. in the Lord Messiah, I
have both righteousness and strength. And hence also we are counseled by
Christ to come to him for this Righteousness as a clothing and covering, to
cover our nakedness, and to skreen us from the wrath of GOD, Rev. 3.18. I
counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire that thou may be rich, that
is Grace, and white raiment, (which is understood of the Righteousness of
Christ) that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness may
not appear. And hence also the Apostle prays, Phil. 3.9. That he may be found
in Christ not having his own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which
is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.

3. In the Imputation of this Righteousness for the Justification of a Sinner,
there is a great deal of Wisdom and Prudence.

1. Inasmuch as GOD has pitched upon the only suitable and sufficient
Righteousness, that could be Imputed to us for our Justification.

It is certainly a point of Wisdom, to make choice of, and pitch upon what may
be suitable and sufficient to answer the End proposed. Now the End proposed was
the Justification of a Sinner, by the Imputation of the Righteousness of
another unto him. And now what Righteousness so proper, so suitable, and that
could answer the End so effectually as the Mediatorial Righteousness of Jesus
Christ? As for the Infinite Righteousness of GOD, and which is Essential to the
divine Nature, it is Incommunicable, and so cannot be Imputed to any Creature
for its Justification. So that notwithstanding any thing that could be done as
to the transferring of that Infinite Righteousness to us, we must have perished
for ever. Nay, this Essential Justice of the divine Nature would have inclined
and obliged GOD to punish us for ever.

And then as for any Righteousness of our own, That would by no means have
answered for our Justification before GOD: for as the Prophet says, Isai. 64.6.
All our Righteousness are as filthy Rags. Our Righteousness is altogether
imperfect, attended with innumerable Infirmities and Sins: and if we should
suppose that we were able now to perform a perfect Obedience; yet that would by
no means be sufficient to justify us, because it could not satisfy for our
former Violations of GOD's Law. And then again, if we consider the
Righteousness of the holy Angels, and we shall find the incapacity and
insufficiency of it to satisfy for our offenses, if it was imputed to us. For
although the Righteousness of the Angels is perfect in its kind, and is
sufficient for themselves; yet there cannot be the least Merit in it: all their
Righteousness is no more than they owe to GOD their Maker and Preserver, and
therefore it could not in the least measure satisfy for our guilt. But now as
for the Righteousness of Christ wrought out by his active and passive
Obedience, it was infinitely Meritorious, because his Obedience and sufferings
were what he did not owe to GOD for himself: And now this was the only
Righteousness that could be Imputed to us, that could be of any service, or
that could answer the End for our Justification. And therefore the divine
Wisdom and Prudence appears in fixing upon this Righteousness, to be imputed to
the Sinner for his Justification.

2. There is Wisdom, inasmuch as GOD by the same act, magnifies his Justice,
and his Grace.

GOD has contrived the Jusification of a Sinner in such a manner, that he makes
both his Justice, and his Mercy to appear very glorious in it. It is certain
that the Justification of a Sinner is an act of free and sovereign Grace; and
GOD does in such in act show himself to be abundant in Mercy and rich in Grace.
And indeed how could GOD show himself more Merciful and Gracious than in
pardoning the sins and rebellions of his Creatures, who were under infinite
obligations to obey and serve him, and in receiving them into special favor,
and intitling them to eternal Life and Happiness, who contrary to all their
obligations in point of duty, gratitude, or interest, have risen up against
him, and done all they could to dishonor and provoke him? But then at the same
time, and by the same act that he displays his sovereign Grace, he also makes
very glorious manifestations of his infinite and inflexible Justice: and that
because he receives full satisfaction for every sin he pardons. When GOD
forgives our debts, yet he shows that he is very just to himself, in that he
will not do it till the debt be paid by our Surety to the utmost farthing. And
although eternal Life to which Believers are entitled, is the free gift of God;
yet it is an act of Justice, because it is fairly purchased for them by Christ;
even by his most perfect, and meritorious Obedience. So that when GOD is
discovering boundless riches of Grace to us in our Pardon and Justification: he
shows that he is infinitely Just to himself, and will not in the least abate of
his right, nor give up any thing that is his due: That although he is willing to
save us, yet that he is as careful not to wrong or injure himself.

But I shall not insist upon setting forth the Wisdom of GOD in this matter;
because I have prevented my self by what has been said under some of the
foregoing Instances of divine Wisdom: as particularly, that of GOD's insisting
upon a satisfaction for sin, before he would pardon the sinner: And that, of
Appointing his own Son to be the Mediator, who was able, and who accordingly
has made full Satisfaction for sin. Neither shall I at present, proceed to
consider the Qualifications GOD requires and bestows in order to our
Justification, and the Wisdom of GOD therein: but leaving the Consideration
hereof to the afternoon; I shall conclude, at present with some Improvement of
what has been said. And here,

Inf. 1. From what we have heard in the former part of this discourse, we
learn, How careful we should be to acknowledge and adore each Person of the
ever-blessed Trinity, in the Affair of our Redemption.

For each Person is concerned in carrying on this grand Affair, and therefore
they ought all to be suitably acknowledged and adored by us. This is part of
the glory that was proposed by them, in having a hand in this stupendous work;
even to receive the acknowledgments and adorations of the Redeemed: (as we have
already hinted) Surely then we ought to give to each Person the glory due unto
his Name upon the account hereof. GOD has taken care that they should be
acknowledged and adored by us, in commanding every one to be Baptized in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19. And by
the form of solemn Benediction left us by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.14. The Grace
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy
Ghost be with you all. We should therefore consider them in their several ways
of working, and acknowledge them in such acts of worship and adoration, as is
suitable to them. Thus we must direct our Prayers, our Praises, and all acts of
religious Worship, to the Father, in the Name of Jesus Christ his Son, by the
help of the Holy Spirit: believing that no duty can find acceptance with GOD,
but through the Merits and Mediation of the Son; and that no Duty can be
performed, so as any way to be accepted, but what is done by the help of the
Holy Spirit. For this we are taught, not only that our Spiritual Sacrifices are
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. But that the Spirit also helps
our Infirmities, Romans 8.26.

Inf. 2. Has Christ wrought out a perfect Righteousness for us? Hence the
safety of all those that depend upon it, and are found clothed with it.

I say those that depend upon it for their Justification, and are clothed with
it; because they always go together. He that sincerely and heartily depends
upon the Righteousness of Christ for Justification, will be clothed with it:
for this Righteousness is received by faith. And seeing it is such a perfect
Righteousness, such must needs be in a very safe condition that are interested
in it: What need such be afraid, that have the Righteousness of Christ to cloth
and cover them? Verily his Righteousness is so perfect and complete, that it
will effect^ally hide the shame of our Nakedness: It is sufficient to skreen us
from the wrath of GOD, and save us from that eternal Destruction to which our
Sins had exposed us. Surely the Merits of his blood are sufficient to make
Atonement for the greatest Sins, and secure the chiefest Sinner from all
Condemnation. And it is certain, that his Obedience was so perfect, and his
Mediatorial Holiness so spotless; that if it be but imputed to the vilest
Sinner, he cannot but be accepted of GOD, and entitled to eternal Life. So that
there is absolute perfect safety to all them that are in Christ Jesus, that are
found clothed with his Righteousness. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
God's Elect? It is God that Justifies Who is he that condemns? it is Christ
that died, yea, rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of
God, who also makes intercession for us, Romans 8.33, 34. What Christ has done,
and suffered is sufficient to satisfy divine Justice; and since GOD is pleased
to accept of the satisfaction he has made, in behalf of all that believe in
him; it is impossible for any such to perish. Wherefore let such as are able by
faith to apply this Righteousness to themselves, be comforted herewith; for
your condition is exceeding safe. There is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, neither can any real evil befall them.

Inf. 3. We learn the sad condition of those, who have not the Righteousness of
Christ imputed, and made-over to them.

For if the Justification of a Sinner be only by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness; then such as have not the Righteousness of Christ made over to
them, are not Justified, but are yet in their Sins; the guilt of Sin, and so
the wrath of GOD abides on them, and they are every Moment in danger of
dropping into the burning Lake: for they have nothing to secure, or save them
from it. As for any Righteousness of their own, it is all but as filthy Rags;
it cannot hide their shame nor cover their Nakedness: it cannot recommend them to
the favor of GOD, nor entitle them to any blessedness. So that notwithstanding
all their own Righteousness, they are wretched, and miserable, and poor and
blind, and naked: they must answer for themselves, and so must bear the
punishment of their own Iniquity, in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, where is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth for ever.

Inf. 4. And to conclude, Let us all with utmost Earnestness, seek after this
most perfect Righteousness of Christ, to be Imputed to us, that we might be
Justified and Saved thereby.

We see that this is the way and the only way of a Sinners Justification: and
therefore as ever we would be justified, pardoned, acquitted and saved, from
the Curse of the law, and the wrath that is to come; let us see to it that we
get an Interest in this Righteousness of Christ, and have it imputed to us.
There is nothing else can stand between us, and the revenging Justice of GOD.
Nothing else can procure for us the divine Favor and Acceptance. Nothing else
can save us from Hell, and secure to us eternal Glory and Blessedness. So that
this seems to be the One or the Principal thing necessary, and what we should
get with all our getting.

Quest. But how shall we obtain this Righteousness, so as to be clothed, and
covered with it?

Ans. The answer is in a word; Go to Christ for it.

This is his own counsel and advice to us; For thus says the Amen, the
faithful and the true Witness, the Beginning of the Creation of GOD, (or the
efficient Cause, or He that has the Principality, or Dominion of the Creation
of GOD, as it might be rendered,) I counsel thee to buy of me Gold ^ryed in the
fire, that thou may be rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed,
and that the shame of thy nakedness may not appear, Rev. 3.14, 17. This white
raiment is the Righteousness of Christ. And now since the faithful and the true
Witness does thus advise, and invite us to come unto him, we may be sure that
if we come aright, it will not be in vain.

But then another Question arises;

How must we go so to Christ so as to obtain this Righteousness?

To which I answer,

1. Go to him in a humble sense of your own vileness* and nakedness, and so of
the absolute necessity of his Righteousness to cloth and cover you.

You must see that all your own Righteousness is but as filthy rags, or you
will never go to Christ in good earnest for his Righteousness. A self-righteous
person whilst he continues such, cannot have the Righteousness of Christ imputed
to him: for he will not seek aright for it The first step therefore here is to
know your selves, to be sensible how vile, how wretched, how naked and
miserable you are, and how unable to stand before the righteous Judge, if he
should mark Iniquity against you. This is therefore what every Man should
strive after, and earnestly pray for, that he might see what manner of person
he is in his natural State; how vile, sinful and wicked he is, and this will
drive him from all self-confidence: which is the first preparatory step in
coming to Christ.

2. Go to Christ with a firm persuasion that his Righteousness is sufficient
for you.

You must realize the perfection of his Righteousness, that it is sufficient to
cloth and cover you, to hide all your defects and failings, so as that the
shame of your nakedness shall not appear. That it is an everlasting
Righteousness which he has brought in; that can skreen you from the Wrath of
GOD, and secure to you eternal Life.

3 You must go to Him with a firm belief that GOD is ready to give you an
Interest in this Righteousness, as soon as ever you are Qualified and Prepared
to receive it.

For a belief of his infinite Readiness to bestow this Righteousness upon us,
as well as of the sufficiency of the Righteousness it self, is a necessary
Qualification for our receiving it.

4. You must actually Depend upon the Righteousness of Christ alone, for
Justification and Salvation.

We are Justified by Faith; this Righteousness is received by Faith; hence it
is called, The righteousness of God by faith, Phil. 3.9. We must therefore
actually renounce all Confidence in any righteousness of our own, and must have
all our dependence upon the Righteousness of CHRIST. We must pray that GOD
would give us that faith by which we may be Interested in this Righteousness,
and must by faith, as GOD shall enable us, be applying it to our selves: And
this is the way, and the only way of receiving this blessing from the LORD,
even RIGHTEOUSNESS from the GOD of our Salvation; for the Mouth of the LORD
has spoken it.

Sermon, X.
IN the foregoing Discourse, I undertook to show the Wisdom of GOD, in the
Justification of a Sinner. And this I proposed to do by considering first, The
matter, cause and foundation of a Sinners Justification, namely, the
Righteousness of Christ Imputed to him, and the Wisdom of GOD herein: which was
the subject of the forenoon-Discourse. And now for a further proof of the point
before us, I propose in the next place to consider,

2. What GOD requires of us, and bestows on us to qualify us for Pardon and
Justification by the Righteousness of Christ; and the divine Wisdom and
Prudence, that appears therein.

Although the Righteousness of Christ is Imputed to us for our Justification; and
is the only Meritorious Cause of it: yet there are some things requisite to
qualify, prepare and enable us to receive this Righteousness. It is not Imputed
to every Man, nor is any one pardoned and saved, before he is by divine Grace
prepared, and suitably qualifyed for the pardoning Mercy of GOD. And now those
things that are required to qualify us for pardon and forgiveness, are such as
discover a great deal of Wisdom.

Here therefore I shall briefly mention the requisite qualifications for
Justification, and take notice of the propriety and suitableness of them, and
so the Wisdom of GOD in insisting upon these things, in order to our
Justification; and they are in general, Repentance toward GOD, and Faith in
our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

1. Unfeigned Repentance is required of us, in order to our Justification.

As for true Repentance, I don't know a better description of it, than what our
Catechism affords us; which is, That it is a saving Grace whereby a Sinner out
of a true sense of his Sin, and apprehension of the Mercy of GOD in Christ,
does with grief and hatred of his Sin, turn from it unto GOD, with full purpose
of, and endeavors after New Obedience. True Repentance intends that we have a
sight, and sense of the evil of Sin in general, and of our own sinfulness and
vileness in particular. It contains in it a lively, and an awakening sense of
the infinite dishonor that we have done to GOD by our Sin, and of the
Destruction and Misery which we have brought upon our selves thereby. But yet
this does not suppose that we apprehend our case to be desperate and
remediless; but on the contrary, it supposes that we have a sense of the
infinite Mercy of GOD in CHRIST, and that there is forgiveness with him that he
may be feared, and plenteous redemption. And the apprehension of this, instead
of emboldning the Sinner in his sinful courses, helps to fill the penitent with
grief and shame, and sorrow for his Sins, with an utter hatred and abhorrence
of all Sins, with an holy indignation against himself for having so often
committed that abominable thing, which is so hateful and offensive to GOD: and
which has so defiled and degraded himself, and made him more vile than the
Beasts that perish. Yet this is not all that is contained in a true Repentance:
it carries a Sinner further than this; even to full purposes and resolutions,
by divine Grace, against all Sin whatsoever. This is the language of a true
Penitent, Wherein I have done Iniquity, I will do no more. And then finally, It
intends our diligent, and earnest endeavors against Sin, even against those
Sins that do the more easily beset us, and that have the most frequently
overcome us. And then although this may not come into the Idea of Repentance
according to the strict Notion of it; yet it is the natural, necessary and
constant effect of it; namely, an actual forsak^ng of our Sins, a Reformation
of our Lives, and a turning our feet into the paths of GOD's Commandments.

And now that such a Repentance as this is required, and insisted upon in order
to our bring pardoned, and accepted as righteous in the sight of GOD, is very
evident from the whole current of Scripture; wherein pardon, and forgiveness of
our Sins, is never proposed to us, but upon the supposition that we are truly
humble, and penitent for them. This we find to be the tenor of the old
Testament dispensation. Whosoever covers his sins shall not prosper, but he that
confesses and forsakes them shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13 Let the wicked
forsake his way and the Unrighteous men his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon, Isai 55.7. By which we see that although GOD is ready to
pardon, and proclaims his Name the Lord, the Lord GOD, merciful and gracious,
forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin: yet the Sinner in order to be
forgiven, must confess and forsake his sins, must be truly humble and penitent
for them. And then further, as this was insisted upon under the legal, so is it
as much under the evangelical dispensation; for there it appears as plainly
that without Repentance there is no Remission of sins. Repentance was the
Doctrine which John the forerunner of CHRIST, and who was to prepare the way
for him, taught by his Preaching, and by his manner of Living: which may be
considered as an allegory, and serves to teach us, that Repentance is the
forerunner of Remission of sin; and that it prepares the way for CHRIST to
bestow a pardon upon us. But then this was the Doctrine that CHRIST himself
began his public Preaching with. Repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand,
Mat. 4.17. And he says. It behoved him; or it was necessary, That Repentance
and Remission of sins should be preached in his Name, Luke 24.47. Observe the
order, Repentance and Remession of sins. First Repentance, and then Remission
of Sins; Repentance in order to Remission. And this we find to be the Apostles
method, for when Peter's Sermon had pricked many to the heart, and they cried
out, Men and Brethren what shall we do? he tells them to Repent, and be
Baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of sins, Act. 2.38.
Plainly teaching that Repentance was necessary to forgiveness. So in chap. 3.
v. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out. By all which it appears that GOD requires and insists upon Repentance in
order to our sins being blotted out And now the Wisdom and the Prudence of GOD
discovers it self herein.

Inasmuch as,

1. Although GOD forgives the Transgressor of his Law, yet he maintains the
honor of his Law by this means.

If GOD should pardon a Sinner that remains Impenitent, it would be a dishonor
to Himself, and a disparagement to his Law: for what could be thought in such a
case but that GOD had given too rigid, and severe a law to us, and had imposed
an unreasonable Service on us in the Injunctions of his Word, and consequently
that the law was not so holy, nor the Commandment so holy, just and good as it
is declared to be, Romans 7.12. which GOD being sensible of, forgave them, and
overlooked their transgression of his law, without any penitent acknowledgement
of a fault in them, and as if he himself was rather in an error than they.

But now by GOD's insisting upon deep humiliation and through Repentance for all
our Sins, in order to their being pardoned and forgiven; there is a
demonstrative testimony given to the holiness, justice and goodness of his
Commandments: for every true Penitent acknowledges all this. When a Man
unfeignedly repents of his Sins, he implicitly, if not expressly, acknowledges
the holiness, and the goodness of these Commands, that he has lived in the
transgression of. For unless a Man has a suitable sense of this he cannot have a
sense of the evil of Sin, and so cannot be thoroughly humbled for his own Sin. And
now as every true Penitent does acknowledge the goodness of the divine Law, and
his own indispensable Obligations to it; so hereby the honor of the law is
maintained, even although the Sinner be forgiven, infinitely beyond what it would
be, if an Impenitent Sinner should obtain a pardon. Now there cannot be the
least reflection upon the divine Law in GOD's pardoning the transgressions of
it, for besides the full satisfaction that is made for Sin; the Sinner himself
magnifies the law of GOD, and makes it honorable, by honoring it in his
heart, and retracting every thing that he has said or done, that showed any
contempt of it.

2. In this Method the glory of divine Holiness will not be at all Eclipsed,
although he receives the Sinner into favor.

If GOD should receive impenitent Sinners into favor; if he should embrace
them in his bosom, and make them the special objects of delight, and
complacence, what would all the World of rational Beings have said upon it, but
that GOD was become altogether such an one as our selves? Surely it would have
raised a universal doubting in the breasts of Angels and Men, whether he was so
glorious in Holiness, and whether he was of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity.
But now, by refusing to pardon a Sinner, or to receive him into favor, before
he be truly humbled for his sin, or before his heart is broken for his sin, and
broken off from all sin, he shows that he bears the same hatred to sin as ever,
and is not in the least reconciled to it. Surely every one will look upon GOD
as glorious in holiness, that observes the hatred and displeasure he discovers
against all obstinate and impenitent Sinners, and his resolution to abandon
them for ever; and how he shows favor to none but such as have by a deep and
through Repentance returned unto him.

3. In this Method Men are better prepared and disposed to give GOD the glory
of his Mercy, Pinardoning and Saving them.

If impenitent Sinners (while they continue such) were pardoned, instead of
being thankful to GOD for manifesting such infinite Grace to them: they would
only take the opportunity to abuse his Goodness, and turn his Grace into
wanteness, by going on presumptuously in their sins, and rebellions against
him. But now a Man that is first brought to Repentance, and then to a Pardon,
he will be filled with adoring thankfulness to GOD for such an infinite Mercy:
for the humble Soul will be sensible what a dreadful condition he was in
without a Pardon, and how utterly unworthy he was of one, and what an act of
free, sovereign Grace it is in GOD to forgive him, and save him from the wrath
that is to come, and to receive him into favor. I say, the true Penitent will
have such a sense of these things as will enlarge his Soul in the utmost
thankfulness to GOD, when he shall thus have Mercy on him. This will put such a
Man upon Calling on his Soul, and upon rouzing up all the powers within him, as
the Psalmist did, Psalm. 103. begin. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is
within me, bless his holy Name; who forgiveth all thine iniquities, etc. Thus
persons being brought to true Repentance, are prepared and disposed upon their
receiving a pardon, to extol and bless the Name of the Lord, and to give him
the glory of his Grace: which shows the Wisdom of GOD in taking such an
effectual way to bring Glory to Himself.

4. By this means there is not that danger of a Pardoned Sinners returning to
his Sinful Courses, and so walking unworthy of his Pardoned Staff.

If a Sinner should have his Sin pardoned, whilst his love to sin remained, and
before he has a change wrought in his heart; his pardon would serve only to
encourage him the more freely pursue his sinful Inclinations: for the thoughts
that he could so easily obtain a pardon, would remove those fears of punishment
which in times past has been a restraint upon him, and he would pursue his
sinful Courses with more greediness than ever. But now GOD, by taking care that
Men should be brought to Repentance before they are pardoned, and released from
punishment, has effectually prevented this. For a Sinner being brought to such
a fight and sense of Sin as really to hate and abhor it; there will not be that
danger of his returning again to it; although his past offenses should be
pardoned and passed by. Indeed every Man even the very best would relapse, and
return to their sinful courses; if GOD did not restrain and uphold them by his
Grace. But there being an habitual hatred of Sin wrought in the true penitent;
it will always abide with him: and his being acquitted and saved from the
punishment of his Sin, wont at all abate his hatred of it, nor his care least
he again fall into it. Nay the thoughts that he has received such an infinite
Mercy from GOD as the pardon of his Sins, will make him more careful, and more
fearful than ever of abusing the riches of divine Grace that have been
magnifyed toward him, by returning again unto sin and folly. And now by these,
and many other things that might be mentioned, we see the Wisdom of GOD in
bringing Sinners into a Penitent, before he brings them into a Pardoned State.
And now I proceed to say,

2. Another thing that GOD requires in order to our being Justified, is Faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ; and herein also there appears a great deal of Wisdom.

That Faith is absolutely necessary in order to our Justification and
Salvation, is plainly taught us in that Gospel, wherein alone the Doctrine of a
Sinners Justification, and the Manner of it is revealed unto us; therein our
Savior tells us. That whosoever believes on him shall not perish, but have
everlasting life: and that he that believes on the son has everlasting life;
and he that believes not the son shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him, Joh. 3.16, 36. Agreeable to this the Apostle Paul tells the
Jailer, when he put the Question so earnestly to him, What he should do to be
saved, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Act. 16.23.
Accordingly, we are expressly said to be just^^ied by Faith: Romans 5.1. Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ And we
are said to be saved by Grace through Faith, Ephesians. 2.8. And then the
Righteousness, even the Righteousness of Christ, which is imputed to us for our
Justification, is said to be by Faith, Phil. 3 9. That I may be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law; but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith: ( i e.) the
Righteousness of Christ received by faith in him. Now the faith spoken of in
these places, and which GOD requires of us in order to our Justification is in
general this; Namely, A receiving of Christ as our only Savior, and a
depending entirely upon him for Salvation in the way of the Gospel.

And this contains and implies many things in it: for, as many things are
requisite to the rendering Christ a complete, and an alsufficient Savior; so he
that receives him as his Savior, and rests upon him alone for Salvation, must
be supposed to believe all those qualifications to be in him, and to accept of
him in every Office which is necessary for him to sustain and execute, in order
to his accomplishing Salvation for us.

Here then,

1. As it was necessary that Christ in order to his being a Complete Savior,
should sustain and execute the Prophetical Office: so Faith in Christ intends
our receiving him as the great Prophet sent from GOD unto us.

It was necessary that he who undertook our Salvation should be fully
acquainted with the Mind and Will of GOD, and the way to life and happiness. He
must know what is good, and what the Lord our God requires of us; that so he
might be able to teach and instruct us, in those things necessary to be known
and believed by us, in order to our Salvation: And this is the proper office
and business of a Prophet; accordingly Christ being eminently qualifyed for,
did actually sustain the Character, and Execute the Office of a Prophet. For
this was foretold of him that he should be a Prophet: Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy
God will raise up unto thee a Prophet, from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren
like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken. Now this Prophet was CHRIST, as
appears by the Apostles (who were under the direction of the infallible Spirit)
applying the Prophecy of Moses to him, Act. 3.22. Accordingly he executes this
Office. He did so in his public Ministry, and in the whole revelation that he
made of GOD, of Himself, and of the way to life by him, and in those gifts of
the holy Ghost wherewith he endowed the Apostles, to accomplish them for
teaching all Nations, as he had commanded them. Moreover, this Office is now
Executed in the standing revelation which he affords us in the Gospel, in the
gifts of teaching which he affords unto his Ministers; and more especially in
the secret, but most effectual teachings and illuminations, which he affords to
the Souls of Men, in their Regeneration and Conversion, whereby they come to
understand, and discern spiritual things in a spiritual manner. Now then that
faith in Christ which is necessary to ^ur Justification, intends our receiving
him as such a Prophet: It intends, that we believe as we are told. Joh. 1.18.
That Christ was in the bosom of the Father; was fully acquainted with him, and
his Mind and Will, and made the fullest, and the truest declaration of him. It
intends, that we look upon all that he has taught as true and faithful sayings,
as the infallible Oracles of GOD. We must believe all the Doctrines of the
Gospel, even the most sublime and mysterious of them, because Christ who is
full of Truth, as well as Grace, has revealed them unto us. We must believe the
Precepts, that the Rules of living which he has taught us, are exactly agreeable
to the will of GOD, and the direct way to please him, and to be happy in him.
Moreover, we must believe the Promises, and the Threatenings and that they will
be entirely accomplished and executed, as the Scriptures declare. But then, if
we would receive Christ in his Prophetical Office, we must depend upon him, for
those inward teachings, and those spiritual Illuminations that we stand in need
of. We must depend upon him not only to give us an External Knowledge of divine
Truths, but for a Spiritual discerning of them: Now faith in Christ intends
that we thus receive him as a Prophet.

2. As it was necessary that Christ should Undertake and Manage the Priestly
Office in order to his being a Complete Savior to us; so that Faith in Christ
by which we are Justified, is a receiving Him as our great High Priest.

In order to Christ's becoming a Savior to us; it was necessary that he should
offer up a Sacrifice to GOD, to make Atonement for our Sins; and then to plead
the Merits of that Sacrifice on our behalf, that so we might be entitled to the
benefits and blessings purchased thereby, and this is properly the Priestly
Office. And this we find the Lord Jesus Christ to have been in the faithful
Execution of; for he has offered a Sacrifice to GOD, which must needs be
sufficient to make Atonement for Sin, for it is nothing less than Himself;
hence he is spoken of, as making his Soul an offering for sin, Isai. 53.10. And
is expressly said to have Appeared once in the end of the world to put away
sin, by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26. Furthermore, he is said, To have
entered into Heaven, and there to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb.
9.24. And that he ever should to make Intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. And he is
called a Priest, a great high Priest, a Merciful, a Faithful high Priest, a
Priest for ever after the order Melchisedeck, Heb. 4.14.2.17. -- 7.21. And now
he that receives the Lord Jesus Christ by faith, receives him in this Office;
he believes that he has made such a Sacrifice of himself, as fully to satisfy
divine Justice, and make way for GOD to be reconciled to us, and at Peace with
us; and accordingly that his Intercessions at the right hand of his Father are
always most po^e^ful and prevalent, that as the Father is ever well pleased
with him, so he always hears him. Accordingly, the true believer has his whole
dependence upon the Merits of his Sacrifice; and upon the prevalency of his
Intercession, he depends upon being pardoned and accepted of GOD, but it is all
by virtue of the Sacrifice and Intercession of Christ. When he considers of his
Sin, and the Curses of the Law that are denounced against the Sinner: he
fetches all his comfort from this, that he has an Advocate with the Fathers,
Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is a Propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only; but for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.1.

3. As it was necessary that a Complete Savior should have Kingly Power and
^uthority; so our receiving Christ by Faith intends our receiving him as our
King and Sovereign.

There were so many difficulties and oppositions in the way of our Salvation,
that nothing less than Almighty Power could be able to obtain a Complete
Redemption for us; and therefore it was absolutely necessary that the Savior
of the World should be endowed with such an absolute and unlimited Power and
Authority. It was necessary that he should be the Sovereign of the World, and
that universal nature should be under his Empire and Government; that so he
might be a strong Redeemer, and one able and mighty to Save. And now thus it
was with Christ; for as he himself declares; All power was given to him in
heaven, and in earth, Mat. 28.18. agreeable to which the Apostle declares, that
GOD had set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world, but in that which is to come; and has put all things
under his feet, and given him to be head over all things to the Church, Ephesians.
1.21, 22. And as it was necessary that the Kingdom of Providence should be
committed to him; so it was necessary that he should exercise a peculiar
dominion and authority over his Church which he had purchased with his blood;
to give Laws, Statutes and Ordinances to them, to protect, and defend them from
all their Enemies, and to preserve them by his mighty power through faith unto
Salva^^^^. We find GOD declaring that he had fa^ his (...) upon his holy of
^ion, Psalm. 2.6. And hence he that will save as i^ declared to be our Judge,
our Lawgiver and our King, Isai. 33.22.

And now to believe in Christ, to receive him by faith, is to receive him as
our Prince, our Sovereign as well as Savior. It is to believe, and acknowledge
that all power belongs unto him, and he can do what soever he pleases, it is to
believe that he has a Sovereign right, and authority over us: and that we owe
all possible Obedience and Subjection to him. Accordingly it intends, that we
put our selves over into his hands, to be ruled and governed, as well as to be
protected and upheld by him. It intends, that we depend upon him to exert his
almighty Power, and sovereign Authority in our behalf, in subduing our Lusts
and Corruptions for us; in restraining, and overcoming all our spiritual
Enemies, and in making us a willing people in the day of his power. It is a
depending upon him for Grace, and spiritual Strength, as being sensible that
without him we can do nothing: and on the other hand, that we can do all things
through Christ strengthening us. Furthermore, it is an actual giving up our selves
to Christ as our LORD, and our GOD, to be ruled, governed, and disposed of by
him, with sincere and fixed resolutions to receive, and observe whatever he
commands us; according to the measure of Grace he he shall dispense unto us,
and we must accordingly be waiting upon him in all the ways that he has
directed and appointed, for all the supplies of Grace, that we may stand in
need of.

And now thus to receive Christ as a Prophet, a Priest, and a King, as has been
described, is to believe in Christ; and is that faith which is Antecedent in
Nature, if not in Time, to our Justification. And it is in short, a looking
upon Christ as every way fitted and qualified for a Savior, and as the only
one that is so: and a committing the whole affair of our Salvation to him;
renouncing all trust, or dependence on our selves, or any but Christ; believing
that he, and he only is able to save to the uttermost. This is a believing all
that he has taught us; and depending upon the merits of what he has done and
suffered for us, and upon his Grace that shall be sufficient for us: in a word,
it is a casting our selves upon him as the only hope of Israel, and savior
thereof, depending on him for righteousness and strength, for pardon, and grace
here, and glory hereafter.

And now, GOD in requiring such a faith as this in order to our Justification,
manifests a great deal of Wisdom and Prudence. For,

1. This is the most Effectual way to prevent all glorying and boasting in our
selves.

Nothing is more unreasonable in its self, nothing does so dishonor GOD, or
deny him the glory due unto his Name, as a self glorying and a self boasting
spirit: and there is nothing that would maintain and keep such a temper within
us so much, as for us to be justified and restored to the divine Favor, while
we remained in Unbelief. An Unbeliever, one that don't place all his dependence
upon Christ; if he should be pardoned and saved, would ascribe it all to
himself, as if by his own strength and skill he had procured Salvation for
himself* he would have an higher opinion and esteem of himself, but not of
Christ. But now faith for ever excludes all gloryi^^ and boasting in our
selves; it keeps a M^^ from thinking any better of himself; but of GOD and
Christ, for his being brought into a pardoned and justified State. Faith helps
a Man to see himself to be nothing, it gives him to see that he has not, and
could not do any thing toward his reconciliation with GOD, or restoration to
the divine Favor. Yea, it gives him to see that the very faith by which he is
justified, is not of himself, but is the gift of GOD, and so it takes away all
foundation for boasting; because it tells us that all we have, we have received;
and so enables us to argue with Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ
from another, and what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou did
receive it, why do thou glory, as if thou had not received it? Thus does
faith serve to keep the heart of Man humble, even at the receiving the greatest
favors and blessings, by possessing our minds that they are freely given to us.

2. This faith required in order to our Justification, prepares and disposes us
to give the glory thereof to Christ which is the glory due to his Name.

For by our depending upon Christ for Salvation, we acknowledge that all our
Salvation must come from him; and so when we receive it we shall give the glory
of all to him. Faith tells, and possesses the mind of the pardoned, renewed and
sanctified Man, that it is all freely given him of GOD, and that it is all the
fruit of free, rich and sovereign Grace. This is the language of Faith, By the
grace of God I am what I am. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God. Not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us. And so not unto us, O Lord, not
unto us, but to thy Name be the glory.

And now this is Wisdom in GOD, because as he designs his own glory in the
Justification and Salvation of a Sinner; so what more effectual way to dispose
them to it than by endowing their hearts with faith, whereby they see, and so
must needs acknowledge to his glory, all Mercy and Grace coming from him,
without the least merit, or worthiness of their own.

3. This Faith fits and disposes a Man to walk worthy of such an Infinite
Mercy, as that of a pardon.

A Man endowed with such a principle of Grace, as is supposed in Justifying
faith; instead of abusing the infinite Grace and Mercy of GOD in the free
remission of his Sins; he will be filled with the most admiring and adoring
apprehensions of it. He will have his heart influenced with love to GOD, and
filled with the most earnest desires, and diligent endeavors to be living to
GOD, and to the praise and glory of his Name. This principle will make him
studious what he shall render to the LORD for all his benefits; This will
persuade him from a sense of the Infinite Mercies of GOD, to present himself a
living Sacrifice to him. This will Influence him, from the consideration that
he is not his own, being bought with a price, to glorify GOD in his Body, and
in his Spirit, which are his; by which he will not only speak, but live GOD's
Praises, and in a practical manner give him the glory of his Mercy: which he
would not, if there was not a principle of faith Implanted in the Soul in order
to his Justification: which serves to show the Wisdom of GOD in requiring this
of us. And so this may suffice to show the Wisdom of GOD in the terms* or
pre-requisite qualifications insisted upon, in order to our Justification.

All the Improvement I shall make of what has been said upon this head, shall
be only in a word, to Exhort all to the exercise of Repentance toward God, and
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

GOD who has the sole power of dispensing pardons, will never bestow one, but
upon the penitent, and believing Sinner. Without Repentance there is no
remission of Sins, and he that believes not shall be damned. Therefore, as ever
we would be in a pardoned State, (and Oh how happy is the Man that is in such a
case!) We must strive after a penitent, and believing heart. Let us by serious
thought and meditation be possessing our selves with suitable apprehensions of
the Infinite Evil there is in Sin; that we might mourn over out own Sins, and
repent of them. But especially let us pray to GOD that he would send his Spirit
to convince us of our Sins, and to set them so in order before us as that we
might abhor our selves, and repent in dust and ashes. And since Faith is not of
our selves, but the gift of GOD, let us apply our selves to him in all the ways
that he has directed, for the precious faith of his Elect, whereby we may
receive the Lord Jesus Christ as he is offered to us in the Gospel, and rest
upon him alone for Salvation. And when we have attained to this, we shall be
prepared for the pardoning Mercy of GOD. Then GOD will have mercy on us, and
according to the multitude of his tender mercies, will blot out our
transgressions. Then we shall be Justified freely by his grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

But now among serious and thoughtful Persons, that are greatly concerned about
their future state: Such a Question as this will naturally arise within them:
viz.

Q. How shall we know when we are in such a penitent, believing State, as will
entitle us to the pardoning Mercy of GOD?

A. Now the best, and the only certain way of knowing this, is, by the fruits
and effects of such a principle of faith, and penitence in the Soul.

The tree is known by its fruit. If there be such a Repentance as is real, and
such a Faith as is of the operation of GOD, they will have such effects upon
us, as will discover themselves to be true and genuine. Here I may say,

1. If the Repentance be sincere, and such as fits for the pardoning Mercy of
GOD; it will produce a universal Reformation of our Lives.

He that is heartily sorry for, and really hates his sins, will most certainly
forsake them. And therefore he that lives in the willful allowance of any known
sins, has never truly repented of them. And let not that Man think that he has
received the pardoning Mercy of GOD: for verily he is still in the Gall of
bitterness, and bonds of iniquity.

And then,

2. That faith which will Justify us before GOD, will always have these
effects: viz.

1. It will always purify the Heart. Act. 15.9.

Justifying Faith refines and spiritualizes the Mind, and delivers it from
those dark and gross Ideas, that a carnal mind labors under. There will be
more just and true Notions of GOD, and Christ, and spiritual things, there will
be a spiritual discerning of them beyond what is ever experienced by an
Unbeliever.

2. It always works by love. Gal. 5.6.

It gives us such realizing apprehensions of the Infinite love of GOD in
Christ, as will influence our hearts in love unto him who has expressed such
infinite love to us. It will fill us with holy desires after him, and the
greatest delight in him, and in all those ways wherein we may have Communion
with him. Moreover it will excite a sincere and fervent Charity toward our
Fellow Creatures, enabling us to love our Neighbor as our selves, and to
express it in all acts of Justice, and Charity that we are capable of, and have
opportunity for.

3. It helps us to overcome the World. 1 John 5.4.

It gives us such realizing views and prospects of the Eternal and Invisible
World; as enables us to cast an holy contempt upon this present World, and all
the vain and empty enjoyments of it: and so will slaken our pace in the pursuit
after these things, and will quicken us in seeking and securing the future
glory, honor and immortality. It makes us contented and patient under all the
troubles and afflictions we meet with here, because it enables us to realize
the glory that shall be hereafter revealed in us.

Now these are some of the constant effects of a true Repentance, and a saving
Faith* And therefore when ever we find a principle in us working after such a
manner, we may conclude there is wrought within us a Repentance unto Salvation
never to be repented of, and the Faith of GOD's Elect, the end of which will be
the Salvation of our Souls.

Sermon, XI.
THE Instance of Divine Wisdom under consideration, is, the Application of the
Redemption purchased by Christ, and the manner of it.

And under this head,

I proposed a distinct handling the several parts of our Redemption; such as
our Justification, Regeneration, and the progress of it in Sanctification, and
our future Glorification: and at the same time to consider the manner of the
Application of these things unto us, and the Wisdom of GOD that appear therein.
I have considered the first of these already, viz. the manner of a Sinners
Justification; and how GOD has in that affair abounded toward us in Wisdom and
Prudence.

I now proceed to consider another part of that Redemption that Christ has
wrought out for us, and the Wisdom of GOD that appears in the Application of
it. So then,

2. In the Regeneration, or Conversion of a Sinner, and the progress of it in
Sanctification, there appears Infinite Wisdom and Prudence.

The Regeneration, or Conversion of a Sinner is his having a through Change
wrought in his heart. It is his being brought out of a State of Nature, into a
State of Grace. It consists in the subduing our Lusts and Corruptions; and in
Implanting gracious and holy principles in the Soul: in removing the habits of
sin, and the natural aversions from that which is good, and in inclining our
hearts to GOD, and to every thing that is holy, just and good. In short, it is
the Creating a clean heart, and renewing a right spirit within us. It is a
quickening us who are dead in trespasses and sins: breathing a Spiritual Life
into the Soul. It is an Opening men's eyes, turning them from darkness to light,
and from the power of satan unto God.

As for Sanctification, it is the progress of this gracious Change wrought in
us at our Conversion; it is our growth in Grace, a going from one degree of it
to another, and our abounding more and more in the fruits of Righteousness. And
now that there is a great deal of Wisdom and Prudence displaying it self in
this affair, will abundantly appear, if we consider,

1. The work it self, even that of Converting Sinners, working divine Grace in
the Soul.

2. The Manner and Method GOD takes in the Work.

3. The outward Means made use of in this Work.

1. If we consider the Work of Regeneration or Conversion it self, we shall see
a great deal of the Wisdom of GOD therein.

For (as I have already observed) the highest, and last End GOD can propose, is
his own glory; and consequently the pursuing those things that will effectually
promote this, is to act wisely, and with the Prudence that becomes him; and
therefore if the work of Conversion be such a work as tends to the glory of
GOD, it must be looked upon as an instance of Wisdom in GOD to perform it, and
surely if any of the works of GOD serve to declare his glory, this, of the
Conversion of Sinners will: for it serves to the glory of GOD on two accounts.

1. As it prepares, disposes, and enables a number of his Creatures in an
active manner to give glory to him.

2. As it serves to display and magnify several of the divine Perfections.

1. The Conversion of Sinners is for the glory of GOD, as it prepares, disposes
and enables a number of his Creatures in an active way and manner to give glory
to him.

Thus it is with every one that is Converted, and brought into a state of
Grace. Before their Conversion they (in the greatness of their folly) go a
stray from GOD; and by their sin and disobedience do greatly dishonor him, and
offer infinite affronts to him; but when once there is a gracious Change
wrought in their hearts (as there is in Regeneration) they are at once
disposed, and enabled to give unto the LORD the glory due unto his Name. When
once the heart of a Sinner is changed, he sees so much of the greatness, and
the glory of GOD, especially in the face of Jesus Christ, that fills him with
the highest love, esteem and admiration of him. The Soul Converted is enlarged
in thankfulness to GOD, and is for showing forth the praises of him who has
called him out of darkness into this mavelous light. He is for glorifying GOD
in his body, and in his spirit which are his: he is disposed to bless the LORD
whilst he lives, and to give thanks unto him whilst he has any Being. True
Grace in the heart disposes a Man not only to praise GOD on Earth; but
qualifies to join the heavenly Host in singing Praises and Hallelujahs to GOD,
and the Lamb for ever in Heaven. As we have them represented in the visions of
John, Rev. 5.9. But,

2. The work of Conversion serves to illustrate several of the divine
Perfections.

1. This is a work that serves very much to set forth the Power of GOD.

The glory of divine Power appears in proportion to the difficulty of the work
that he accomplishes. The further any work is beyond our Power, or beyond the
reach of any Creature, the more gloriously does the mighty Power of GOD shine
forth in the accomplishment of it. And now what work is greater, or more beyond
the Power of any Creature among all the great, and mavelous works of GOD,
than this of Converting, and Changing the hearts of Sinners? The Creating us at
first was a great and wonderful work of GOD, and served very much to display
his Eternal Power and Godhead: But the Converting us, and Creating us Anew in
Christ Jesus unto holiness, and good works, seems to be as great (if not a
greater) Manifestation of divine Power. For in the first Creation there was
nothing to oppose, or resist GOD in it; but in our Conversion, or the New
Creation, there is a great deal of Opposition, or Resistance from the World,
the Devil, and our own Corrupt hearts.

The Devil ever since he seduced our first Parents, has taken possession of our
Souls for himself. He is that Spirit that works in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. He does all he can to oppose and hinder the work of
Grace upon our Souls; he exerts all his power, and the utmost skill and policy,
to keep us in slavery and subjection to him, and our own lust; he endeavors to
raise within us all possible prejudices against GOD, and all that is good: and
there are Legions of these cursed Fiends that combine together to oppose our
Conversion, that unite their Power and Subtility to keep us in Slavery to our
lusts, and to hinder the Strivings of GOD's Spirit accompanying the outward
Means of Grace from taking effect upon us. Therefore GOD in Converting a
Sinner, makes his great Power known: for in that work he triumphs, yea, and
enables the Sinner who was in Slavery and Subjection to them now, to triumph
over Principalities and Powers, and the Rulers of the darkness of this world.
In Conversion GOD shows Himself to be Stronger than the Devil, That strong man
armed, because he overcomes him, dispossess our Souls of him, takes from him
all his armor wherein he trusted, and divides his spoils.

Furthermore, There is a glorious Manifestation of divine Power in inlightning
the dark Minds, and in removing the natural Opposition that prevails in the
hearts of Men since the fall against GOD and holiness. Was it an illustration
of divine Power, to open the eyes of the blind, especially such as were born
blind? How much greater Power must needs he exercised in inlightning a dark
Soul? In opening the eyes of our Understandings; which were darkened* being
alienated from the life of God, through the Ignorance that is in them, because of
the blindness of our hearts? What Power is there put forth in breaking and
dissolving our hard and stony hearts? in subduing our stubborn and rebellious
wills? Verily when GOD does thus of unwilling make us willing, it must needs be
in the day of his mighty Power: for it is beyond the Power of any mere Creature
to accomplish. And therefore when ever such a Change is wrought, GOD makes his
great Power known, and shows what the Psalmist heard once, yea twice, that
Power belongs unto him, Psalm. 62.11.

And here, I cannot but observe how proper and suitable, and so how very Wise
and Prudent it is in GOD to manifest his Power in this matter in particular:
for if GOD had never put forth a power sufficient for the Conversion of
Sinners, there would have been danger of some reflections being cast upon him,
viz. That he was not able to reduce his rebellious Creatures that had revolted
from him, to their duty and allegiance. GOD never did Convert any of the fallen
Angels, but suffers them to go on in their rebellions against him. And if he
had never Converted any of the Children of Men, but had only punished them for
their Sin, he would not have shown that power and dominion over the hearts of
Men, which now he has: for how would it have appeared that GOD has the hearts
of all in his own hands, and can turn them as the rivers of Water are turned,
unless he had passed such a change upon some of them, as there is wrought, in
their Conversion, even an entire change of the temper and disposition of the
heart? If all the World had remained in their Sin, would it not have been said,
that when once we had revolted from GOD, and gone over to the Devils side, GOD
could not reduce us, and bring us back into his Service? Whereas now by making
some of these rebellious ones even some of the vilest and most obstinate of
them, a willing and obedient People in the day of his power, he Convinces all
the World, that he could have reduced all his rebellious Creatures (even the
Devils themselves) to their Loyalty and Subjection if he pleased; for in the
Conversion of Sinners he exerts a power over them, as well as over the hearts
of Men, and therefore although GOD suffers the Devils with the greatest part of
Mankind to go on in their rebellions against him, it appears that it is not
because he could not, but because he would not recover them to his Service, but
chooses rather to get glory to himself by them in another way, even by making
them the everlasting Monuments of his vindictive Justice.

2. This work of Conversion serves greatly to set forth the riches of divine
Goodness and Grace.

As it is an act of power, so it is an act of sovereign Grace, to Convert a
Sinner. It is an Infinite Mercy to the Sinner to have such a change wrought in
him, and so infinite Goodness and Kindness in GOD to do it. We brought our
selves into this wretched state of ignorance, blindness and darkness, we cast
our selves out of the kingdom and service of GOD, and made our selves slaves
and vassals to the Devil, and to our own Lusts. And now what a wonderful
manifestation is it of glorious Grace in GOD, to call us out of darkness into
mavelous light, out of the kingdom of Satan into the kingdom of the Son of
GOD: to bring us out of an infinitely worse than Egyptian bondage, and slavery
into the glorious liberties of the Sons of GOD. And now considering that we
brought our selves into such unhappy circumstances, and how unworthy we were of
GOD's interposing in our behalf; and further, if we consider that it is no real
profit to the Almighty if we are righteous, nor gain to him if we make our ways
perfect; I say, considering these things, we cannot but see the riches of
divine Grace shining forth very gloriously in our Conversion. And now as the
Almighty Power, Infinite Goodness and Grace of GOD are glorified, in a Sinners
being Converted and brought home to Him; so it must needs be ooked upon as an
instance of Wisdom and Prudence in GOD, to bestow this Grace on some of the
Children of Men. But then,

2. The Order, Method and Manner of GOD's proceeding in the Conversion of
Sinners, is a further discovery of the Wisdom of GOD in the work.

Under this head I shall consider, (1) The Order GOD observes in working this
Change. (2) The Secret, Mysterious and Unsearchable way of the Spirit's working
this Regenerating Change in the Soul. (3) The variety of Persons on whom GOD
bestows converting Grace. And under these heads I shall observe the Wisdom and
Contrivance of GOD therein.

1. If we consider the Order and Method GOD observes in working this Change in
the heart, we shall see the Wisdom of GOD therein.

Thus, GOD when he works a gracious Change in the Soul, begins with the higher
and nobler Faculties, and so proceeds to the inferior powers of it. To go upon
the common distinction of the faculties of the Soul, into the Understanding,
Will and Affections; it has been disputed by Divines, Whether this Regenerating
work begins upon the Will, or the Understanding? but the difference between
them is not very great in the conclusion; for all will allow this in the acts
of a Regenerate Soul, after the charge wrought, the Understanding is the
leading and governing faculty, and the Will follows the dictates of it. And so
without entering into the dispute (which I have not time for at present) I will
suppose that GOD begins the work in the Understanding inlightning that in the
first place; removing the darkness and blindness which our Souls through Sin and
Lust are covered with. Since the Fall the Understanding is darkened, being
alienated from the Life of God through the Ignorance that is in them: and hence
the natural Man, i. e. a Man in the State of Nature, knows not the things of
the Spirit of God; but they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. The natural Man sees nothing in GOD, or
Christ, or in Religion that is excellent and desirable; by which means he
despises, and neglects them, and follows after lying Vanities. Now GOD in the
Work of Conversion begins with enlightening the Understanding, and offering
Conviction to it. The first step GOD takes seems to be to open Men's eyes, and
give them to see the evil of Sin, and the wondrous things out of GOD's Law. To
see our need of Christ, his fullness, and sufficiency for us, and his infinite
readiness to receive us upon our coming unto him. I say, this is the first step
GOD takes in converting a Sinner, to give him a clear, and convincing Sight of
these things, a lively Apprehension and full Persuasion of them in his own
Mind, beyond what he ever had before, and beyond what any Man in his natural
Estate attains unto: and now the Understanding being enlightened, the Will also
is renewed; and so is persuaded and inclined to follow the Dictates of the
enlightened Understanding. But now when I speak of this as another step that GOD
takes in our Conversion, I don't suppose any distance of time in this work of
GOD upon the Soul from the other, but that the Will and the Understanding are
both wrought upon together, the one is before the other in order of Nature
only, not in time. For it is by the clear light, and strong Conviction brought
to the Understanding, that the Will is moved and persuaded to comply with its
Dictates.

And now GOD's proceeding with us in such a way, is Wisdom in GOD: And that for
this easy reason, viz.

Because this is a dealing with us agreably to our Natures, as Rational
Creatures.

It is very Wise and Prudent for GOD, in all his workings with, and upon his
Creatures, to consider the particular Natures he has given to them, and to deal
with them accordingly. And thus he deals with us in the work of our Conversion;
for having given rational and intellective powers to us, powers of
Understanding, and Apprehending, and then of Willing and Choosing according to
the dictates of the Understanding; he accordingly when he Converts a Man,
begins with the Understanding, that being the leading and governing faculty,
and makes use of this to incline and persuade the Will; and so the Man makes a
rational Choice, and is persuaded from rational considerations. If GOD should
so work upon the Will in the first place, as to incline and dispose a Man, to
hate Sin, to make choice of GOD, and t^^ ways of Religion, before he had
rectifyed and enlightened the Understanding, and so given him to see the evil of
Sin, and the excellency of Religion, he would not have dealt with us according
to the rational Nature that he has given us; and so our Conversion to GOD would
not have been a proper rational act. The proper rule and method for a rational
Being is to follow the dictates of his reason; and to choose and refuse as his
reason shall inform and direct ^im. And therefore GOD i^ his great Wisdom takes
care not to break in upon this order of Nature, even in that great and
supernatural work of our Conversion. He will have us Convinced of the evil of
Sin in order to our repenting of and forsaking it. He will have us see the
beauty of Holiness, the excellency of Religion, in order to our making choice
of it, and complying with its Precepts. He will have us see the fullness and
sufficiency there is in Christ, and the need we stand in of him in order to our
receiving him. And now in this method, our Conversion, instead of breaking in
upon, or offering any force to our faculties, is an improving, a rectifying and
strengthening them. For our Conversion or turning to GOD is only the regular act
and exercise of our rational Powers put into such a motion by the supernatural
Grace of GOD; and so every regenerate act in us is only acting according to our
reason under the highest and best Improvement, and not the least inversion of
the (...) of Nature, nor any force, or violence offered to it.

2. If we consider the secret, mysterious, and unperceptible was of the
Spirit's working this Regenerating Change within the Soul, we shall see
something of the Wisdom of GOD.

That our Regeneration, or Conversion is wrought by the Spirit of GOD is
sufficiently taught us in the Scriptures, which declare this to be the special
work of the Spirit of GOD; for therein we find not only the several parts of
Conversion distinctly ascribed to the Spirit; but the whole work in general.
Thus our Savior speaks of our being Regenerated or born of the Spirit, as
necessary in order to our entering into the kingdom of GOD, Joh. 3.5. And it is
called, the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. But now the Spirit of GOD
works this Saving Change in a most secret, mysterious and unperceptible manner;
as our Savior tells us, Joh. 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou
bear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes nor whither it
goes: so is every one that is born of the Spirit. The way of the Spirit is
unsearchable, we cannot find out the manner of it is operations upon us in the
work of Conversion. Indeed the effects of it are plain, and very discernible,
but not the manner of its operation. The Spirit of GOD works with and upon our
Spirits in such a manner that we cannot perceive any thing but the working of
our own Minds, in the change that is wrought in them. The Spirit works so
secretly that we can perceive nothing in us but the free Exercise of our own
rational powers. It is we our selves that apprehend the evil of Sin, and the
beauty of Christ, and the excellency of Religion: it is we our selves that are
sorry for Sins, and resolute against them; we our selves resolve upon a
religious course of life; and we our selves take delight in the ways of GOD:
but now these good thoughts, and motions in our hearts how much so ever they
seem to be our own, are the workings of the Spirit of GOD. And now here also is
Wisdom; for as the Preacher tells us, Prove. 25.2. It is the glory of God to
conceal a thing. It is surely for the honor of GOD so to conceal the manner of
his operations, as not to be comprehended by his Creatur^s. It is for the glory
of GOD to have his works so great and mavelous as to be beyond the reach of
any Created Understanding to comprehend them; because this will lead us the
more to admire, and adore him. For the more wonderful and unsearchable the
works of GOD are, the more readily will He attract the esteem admiration and
adoration of his Creatures. And now for GOD by the secret motions of his Spirit
to work every good disposition within us in such a manner that it cannot be
distinguished from our selves; it shows how unsearchable the ways of GOD are,
and what an intimate Knowledge He has of, and what free access He has to, and
what power He has over our Spirits: which should lead us to fear and reverence
Him, whose greatness is unsearchable, and his ways past finding out: yea, and
to acknowledge Him in every good disposition found in us, and in every good
work performed by us; how much so ever it appears to be of our selves.

3. If we consider the variety of Persons on whom GOD bestows Converting Grace,
we shall see something of the divine Wisdom.

It is most certain that GOD don't confine himself to any particular sort of
people, in bestowing Converting Grace: but exercises a great Latitude and
Liberty in this matter. He bestows Converting Grace upon some of all Nations:
Jews and Gentiles, Barbarians, Scythians, Bond and Fre^ have been called by GOD
into a State of Grace Moreover, GOD Converts some of all Ages: Some He Converts
in Youth, others at middle Age, and some are called at the Eleventh Hour, and
in their Old Age, are made to experience the New Birth. Sometimes GOD makes
choice of the Rich, and oftentimes of the Poor of this World. Sometimes GOD
Converts the less sinful and scandalous, and sometimes he passes by such, and
saves some of the Chief of Sinners. Sometimes he bestows Saving Grace upon such
as have descended from Godly Parents, and so far smiles upon their religious
Education, as that the pains and prayers of their pious Ancestors are not lost
upon them. And sometimes he passes by those, and makes choice of the Children
of the more wicked and ungodly. Thus various is GOD in his bestowing Converting
Grace upon persons, not taking all, nor rejecting all of any sort of People
whatever. And now the divine Wisdom and Prudence appears in such a Conduct of
himself. For,

1. By this GOD shows his Sovereignty, and that Divine Grace is in his hands to
dispense it to whomsoever he pleases.

It is most certain that GOD has such an absolute Sovereignty over the Children
of Men as well as over the rest of his Creatures as to deny, or dispense his
Grace to whom, and when, and where, and how he pleases; he has right to have
Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will to harden. Now it is highly
proper that GOD should manifest this Sovereignty which belongs unto him, and
let us know that he is not obliged to one more than to another; but that he
may, and does do what he pleases with his own, with the works of his own hands.
And now GOD does most fully discover this, in the various manners of his
bestowing converting Grace. For by GOD's choosing some, and rejecting others of
every sort, we are utterly at a loss for any certain Rule that GOD goes by in
bestowing his Grace, but that of his own Will. We find that outward Riches and
Greatness don't move GOD to afford his special Grace, because we may see
multitudes of such going on in their Sins. We also find that outward Poverty
don't move GOD to Enrich them with his Grace; because we see multitudes of such
as poor on spiritual, as they are on temporal accounts. We also find that
descending from godly Parents, and being favored with a religious Education
although the most likely way of any, yet does not always succeed, because many
that have been as highly privileged on these accounts as any, have proved some
of the vilest and most abominable Wretches in the World: So that we cannot find
any certain Rule that GOD goes by, but he takes one here, and another there,
without any constant regard to Circumstances, which naturally suggests to us
that GOD herein Acts according to his sovereign Will and Pleasure. And now
whatever will lead us to see and acknowledge the Divine Sovereignty in this
matter, may be considered as an Instance of Wisdom, because the Glory of GOD is
very much concerned in our believing and acknowledging this Perfection of the
Divine Nature.

2 This way of management serves to convince us that our Conversion is not of
our selves, but of GOD; and that the glory of it belongs unto him.

If only such Persons as descended from godly Parents, or lived in godly
Families, and so were favored with a religious Education were Converted, we
should be ready to impute all to their Education and Instruction, and to the
good Examples that have been set before them; and not think of it is being the
immediate Operation of the Spirit of GOD. We should be ready to look upon these
Privileges not only as Means, but as the Cause of our Conversion, and so GOD
would not have the glory of this wonderful work ascribed to him, to whom alone
it does appertain. But now GOD by Converting some that have descended of wicked
Parents, and have been destitute of the advantages of a religious Education, or
of having good Examples before them: And by his Converting some also in their
Old Age, when they have by their long custom in Sinning strengthened the habits
of it, so as that it would be as easy for an Ethiopian to change his skin, and
the Leopard his spot, as for them to forsake their evil ways, and turn to GOD
of themselves; I say, GOD by bestowing regenerating Grace upon some such,
discovers to us that it is not in the power of counsels, cautions, admonitions,
and good examples to convert Men, but that when ever any are brought into such
a State, the Spirit of GOD has been at work upon them. And so every one will be
led to ascribe this not to the power of means; but to the power of GOD,
acknowledging to his glory, that it is not in the power of counsels or
examples, nor in the power of pious Parents to convey Grace to their Children:
but that it is by the Grace of GOD that Converted ones are what they are; that
they are saved by grace, through faith, and that not of themselves, nor of any
Instruments, but it is the gift of God.

3. GOD's bestowing regenerating Grace in such a, Promiscuous manner, is very
useful to prevent any from sinking into despair.

For if some of all sorts be Converted. Rich as well as Poor, the Children of
the wicked as well as of the godly; some of the greatest Sinners as well as of
the least; then none have any reason to be entirely discouraged. Indeed some
that have often stifled the checks and convictions of their own Consciences,
grieved, and done despite to the Spirit of Grace; they may perhaps have so
provoked GOD, as to be given up to their own hearts lusts, and so the day of
Grace may expire with them before the day of life. ( Genesis 6.3. Psalm. 81.12.)
But none can certainly know this; and it is certain there have been Instances
of the Conversion of exceeding vile Sinners, and therefore one that is never so
great a Sinner knows not but he may be another Instance wherein the mighty
Power, and Grace of GOD shall be magnifyed. So that considering what Instances
of Conversion there have been it may keep all even the vilest Sinners from
utter despair, which is of great Service, as it will prevent them from growing
more desperate in their sinful Courses, and prevent their giving over all Means
that GOD has appointed for their Conversion.

4 I may add also, That this is a way to prevent Persons from having too great
a dependence upon their particular Circumstances.

Men are exceeding apt to depend upon their particular Circumstances* and
conclude from thence that they are or shall be Converted. Thus the rich Man
that is made to prosper in the World, is ready to conclude with himself that
GOD has special Favor for him, and concludes that as GOD has blessed him with
temporal, so he will also with spiritual Blessings. The poor Man he also
depends very much upon his Circumstances, presuming upon what the Apostle says,
of GOD's Choosing the poor of this world: make them rich in faith, and heirs of
the kingdom, Jam. 2.5. Others again have great dependence upon their Parentage,
their being descended of godly Ancestors, as if regenerating Grace run in the
Blood, boasting as the proud Pharisees and Sadduces that they had Abraham to
their Father. But now the manner of GOD's dispensing regenerating Grace, will
lead us to reject such Confidences as these; and teach us that these things are
by no means to be depended upon; and so many a one is driven off from that
presumptuous Hope, they would otherwise have perished in.

And thus if we consider the order GOD observes in beginning this work of Grace
in the Soul, the way of the Spirit's working this Grace within us, and the
variety of Persons whom GOD makes choice of to be the Subjects of this Grace,
we may see that it is all by Counsel and the result of consummate Wisdom.

The next thing to be considered is, the Means made use of by GOD, in the
Conversion of Sinners, and the Wisdom of GOD that appears therein. But this I
must leave to another Opportunity. And I shall Conclude at present with a word
or two by way of Application.

1. Since the Conversion of a Sinner is such a mighty Work as to require the
Almighty Power of GOD to accomplish it; let none of us be so vain as to think
this to be a work within our own Power.

For (as we have heard) the turning a Sinner from darkness to light, and
bringing him out of the Kingdom of Satan into the Kingdom of the Son of GOD,
requires an Almighty Arm to accomplish it. The same Power that gave Being to
the World at first, that raised us up to a natural Life, must raise us to a new
and spiritual Life. It is the Almighty Power of GOD which raised up JESUS from
the dead, must make us to know him and the power of his Resurrection and enable
us to dye unto Sin, and live unto Righteousness. Therefore that Man is a great
stranger to himself, and to the greatness of this work, that imagines it may be
performed by the strength of Nature without the special and supernatural Grace
of GOD, and he will still remain a stranger to this work in his own Soul, so
long as he engages in it in his own Strength.

2. What we have heard of the Order in which GOD proceeds in the Converting a
Sinner, affords one Mark to know whether we are in a Converted State or no.

Namely, Our being wrought on by Grace after the manner mentioned.

The first thing that GOD does is to enlighten the Mind, by which he persuades
the Will, and excites the Affections. Now therefore if we would know whether we
are Converted, we must consider whether ever GOD has opened the Eyes of our
Minds: Have we another sense and apprehension of spiritual things than in times
past? Do we see Sin after another manner? Do we see it in such a view as to see
it to be an Infinite Evil, and to have such a strong and lively sense hereof as
to hate and abhor it, to repent of it, and resolve against it? Do we see Christ
in his beauty and glory? Do we see our need of him, and his fullness and
sufficiency for us in such a manner as to embrace him with all our hearts as
our Prince and Savior? Lastly, Have we ever seen so much of the beauty of
Holiness, and of the holiness, justice and goodness of the divine Commandments,
as to make Choice of them for the Rule of our Lives? Now when we find our Minds
thus enlightened as to have such a spiritual discerning of spiritual things, we
may conclude there is a work of Grace begun. But until we find such an
apprehension and discerning of spiritual things we may conclude we are in a
State of Nature, whatever pangs of Affections and Devotion we may seem to have
at some particular Seasons; for if our Affections are not stirred up from such
spiritual views and apprehensions of spiritual things, they are stirred up by
Nature and not by Grace: for Grace begins with the Understanding, the leading
Faculty of the Soul.

3. Since GOD deals so promiscuously in bestowing converting Grace, let none be
discouraged; but let us all trust in him, and hope in his Mercy.

Although we can find nothing in our selves to recommend us to him, yet we may
hope for his Grace; for it is nothing that he sees in any that moves him to
bestow his Grace upon them, but it is all owing to his sovereign Will and
Pleasure: and therefore although we are never so Unworthy, GOD may have Mercy on
us, and turn us unto himself; nay sometimes he chooses such to make his Power
and his Grace the more manifest and conspicuous. And although it would be most
horrible perverseness in any to go on in Sin that Grace might abound, yet when
we have gone very far in Sin, it may give us some Encouragement to hope in GOD
whose Mercies are Infinite, and who can as easily Convert one Sinner as another.

4. Let such as are Converted see to it that they give the glory of all to GOD.

Surely the glory of it all belongs unto him; let us then give him the glory
due unto his Name. Don't be so foolish as to imagine that because you did not
perceive the motions of the Holy Ghost, distinct from the natural motions of
your Souls, as if it were nothing but your own work. But consider how secretly
the holy Spirit works in and upon our Spirits: therefore where ever we find the
work wrought within us, in how natural and unperceptible a way so ever it has
been performed; yet be sure to acknowledge it as the work of GOD, and that it
is he that has wrought in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure.

And let us ascribe it to him as an act of free, and sovereign Grace. Let us
not think that GOD saw any thing better in us than he did in others; for we
were all equally under guilt, and children of wrath by nature even as others,
and therefore if any of us are Converted, while others remain in a state of
Nature, we must acknowledge and adore sovereign Grace, that makes the
difference, and must say with the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world
began. AMEN.

Sermon, XII.
THE point I am upon is the Regeneration and Conversion of a Sinner, and to
observe the Wisdom of GOD that appears therein. And here I have already
considered the work it self, and shown how much it manifests the glory of GOD,
especially the glory of his Power, and of his Grace: and so the Wisdom of GOD
that he is pleased to perform such a mighty work as the Converting and Changing
the hearts of Sinners. I have also in the next place considered the Order,
Method and Manner of GOD in performing this work; that is, I have shown how,
and where he begins this work in the Soul; namely, in the Understanding,
enlightening that, and then persuading the Will: and that this work is performed
by the secret, unperceptible operations of the holy Spirit, and that GOD makes
choice of a great variety of persons on whom to bestow this Converting and
Saving Grace, even some of all sorts, in all which I showed there is a great
deal of Wisdom and Contrivance.

Now what remains is to consider the Outward Means made use of by GOD in the
Conversion and Sanctification of Sinners. So then,

3. If we consider the Means made use of by GOD in the Conversion of Sinners,
we shall see much of the Wisdom of GOD therein.

Under this head, I shall endeavor to show the Wisdom of GOD,

1. In making use of any Means at all in our Conversion.

2. In the Manner of making use of them, and how far he makes use of them in
the Conversion of Sinners.

3. In the Means themselves, the suitableness of them to answer the End
proposed for them.

1. I shall consider the Wisdom of GOD in appointing some Outward Means to be
attended by usin order to our Conversion, and our progress in Grace ^n
Sanctification.

That GOD is able to Convert a Sinner by an act of his immediate Power, without
the help of Means, and Second Causes, none can doubt of who believe that
Almighty Power belongs unto him, nor is it much to be doubted, that GOD has
done so. The Conversion of the Apostle Paul seems to have been an instance; for
he was not brought to believe in Christ from any arguments, or common Means
that were used, which by the secret workings of the Spirit proved effectual on
him: but notwithstanding all the common Means that had been used with him; he
was as bitter against the Christians as ever, and was in his rage hurrying to
Damascus to persecute them; but GOD Converted him at once as he was on his way,
by a miraculous Light from Heaven that shown round about him, and by a more
glorious Light that shone into him, giving him the light of the knowledge of
the glory of GOD in the face of Jesus Christ: without any use of the ordinary
Means: but this is not the common way in which GOD Converts Sinners unto
himself; but it is by the use of certain Means that he has instituted and
appointed for that End. Thus Prayer is an instituted Means of Grace by which we
may obtain the holy Spirit in the Regenerating and Sanctifying Influences of
it, Luke 11.13. The word of GOD is also spoken of as a Means made use of for
our Regeneration. Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us with the word of
Truth. And this must be by our Hearing of it, and attending to it. For as the
Apostle says, Rom 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of
GOD Other means of Grace also are appointed for us, which I shall take
particular Notice of before I finish the point under consideration; by all
which it appears that GOD has appointed certain Means to be made use of for
begetting and increasing a principle of Grace in the Soul: and now here is
Wisdom and Prudence. For,

1. In the first place, the Power of GOD is as much manifested in the
Conversion of a Sinner, in the use of Outward Means, as if he should do it by
an Immediate act of his Power, without the concurrence of Second Causes.

The Converting or Changing the heart of a Sinner, is such a work as will
always require Almighty Power to accomplish it: and therefore let it be done by
an Immediate act, or in the use of Means, yet such a Power must and will be
manifested therein. GOD's making use of Means, and obliging us to attend upon
them don't prevent his exerting the same Almighty Power, as if he should do it
at once by an immediate Voice, or Light from Heaven: For unless the Almighty
Spirit of GOD accompany the Outward Means to give life, and efficacy to them,
they would never be able to Convert a Sinner; but those who have the richest
and most plentiful enjoyment of Outward Means would remain in their Sins, of
which we have innumerable Instances. So that every one that seriously considers
of it, especially such as have experienced this mighty work of Grace in their
own Souls, will be sensible of, and obliged to acknowledge, that how useful
soever Outward Means have been, the change has been wrought in them by the
power of the divine Spirit, that the same Almighty power which commanded the
light to shine out of darkness at first, has caused it to shine into their
Souls.

2. It is wisely contrived by GOD to make use of certain means in the
Conversion of Sinners, as herein the work of the Spirit is carried on in a
Secret, Unperceptible way, altogether agreeable to, and in Concurrence with our
Natural Powers and Faculties.

If the Conversion of Sinners should be brought about in such a sudden,
immediate and visible manner from Heaven, as that of the Apostle Paul, it would
be like the other miraculous operations of the holy Spirit, and not in that
still and secret way which the holy Ghost designed to work in, and upon us. Our
Savior tells us that, that the Kingdom of God that is within men, that is set
up in Men's hearts, comes not with observation, Luke 17.20. It was not to come
with outward show, in such a visible, and glorious manner as to be observed in
its coming; but it was to come within Men, to be wrought in Men's hearts in such
a secret manner as not to be observed by others till it manifested it self by
the blessed Effects of it in Men's lives.

Moreover, if the work was wrought in an immediate Manner, there would not be
the use of our natural and rational Powers and Faculties, nor any concurrence
of our own Endeavors, but we should seem to be wholly Unconcerned about the
matter: but now by the use of Means, although the Spirit works the change in our
hearts as really and truly as if he did it without Means, yet now we some way
or other concur, and are concerned in the work. By there being Means appointed
we have the opportunity of Exercising our own natural Powers of Judgment and
Choice: By there being Means made use of we have the opportunity of being
enlightened and instructed in our ^uty in a natural, rational way without any
immediate extraordinary revelation from Heaven to us in particular. By the
Means appointed we have life and death, bless^ng and cursing set before us, and
the opportunity of choosing or refusing. And so indeed, although GOD in the work
of Conversion does really work in us both to Will and to Do of his own good
pleasure; yet we may be said in some sense to work out our own Salvation. And
it is highly proper, and so wisely ordered by GOD, that it should be so,
considering that Heaven is proposed as a reward, and Hell considered as a
punishment, and that we shall be sentenced to one of these, according as we do,
or do not comply with the terms of Salvation proposed to us.

And this leads me to say,

3. In the third place, That it is wisely ordered by GOD to make use of Means
in the work of Conversion, as it puts the affair of our Conversion so much in
our own hands as to render us utterly inexcusable if we are not Converted, and
so will vindicate the Justice of GOD in the sentence of Condemnation he shall
pronounce upon all such.

Were no sort of Outward or ordinary Means appointed to be made use of by us in
order to our Conversion; but if GOD should strike down one at one time, and
another at another time by a visible appearance, and audible voice from Heaven,
even perhaps when they were in their full Career of wickedness, instead of
being attendent upon him in any duty* I say, if this were the constant method
of Converting Sinners, Men would have nothing to do toward their own
Conversion, they would not have any tendency toward it: and then one Course of
life would bid as fair for Conversion as another for ought we know. And now in
this case, if a person remained Unconverted, it could not be looked upon as a
crime, but an unhappiness that he was passed by, and so the Justice of GOD
could not appear so clear in punishing him for remaining in an Unconverted
Estate, because it would be impossible for him to know, much less to do any
thing that has so much as a tendency toward it. But now by GOD's appointing
certain Means to be made use of, and attended by us in order to our Conversion,
he does in some sense put it into our own power, and leaves it to our choice,
whether we will be Converted or no. For although Conversion be altogether the
work of GOD; yet the making use of these Means wherein he is wont to convey
saving Grace to the Soul, is in our power who live under the free Enjoyment of
them. Thus for instance, GOD appoints the Reading and Hearing the Word as Means
of our Conversion, now this we can attend upon; it is as much in our power as
any natural Action that we perform, to Read the word of GOD, to go to his
House, and set under the Preaching of it. And as Prayer is another Means of
Grace, so this we are able also to attend upon. And therefore if we don't
diligently and carefully attend upon these, and such like Means of Grace, it is
our own fault: And so it becomes our own fault that we are not Converted,
because we don't make use of the Means that GOD appoints for that End as we
ought. And this will render every Man that lives, and dies in an Unconverted
Estate under the Means of Grace, utterly inexcusable before GOD. For if the
Sinner should plead he could not Convert himself; yet his Mouth will be stopped
wi^h such a reply as this from GOD, that he might have made a better use of the
Means of Grace that were appointed, that he either neglected them, or was
careless in his attending upon them. Otherwise he might have been Converted as
well as others: and their destruction will appear to be of themselves, and
their Condemnation very just and equitable. And surely it is the Wisdom of GOD
so to order things, as that even in the everlasting Destruction of the Ungodly,
it will appear that Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of his
Throne, and so to have this sung to his everlasting honor, Just and True are
all thy ways, thou King of Saints.

2. I proceed to Consider the Manner of GOD's making use of Means in our
Conversion, and the Wisdom of GOD that appears therein.

As it is an Instance of Wisdom in GOD to make use of any Outward Means; so
this Wisdom appears more Conspicuous in the Manner of his making use of them:
for he makes use of such Means, and no other, so far, and no farther than will
answer some very wise and good purposes. Here I shall mention a few particulars
under this Head.

1. GOD's giving Success so frequently to the Means that he has appointed, and
making them for the most part the Instrument of our Conversion, discovers
divine Wisdom.

When GOD Converts Sinners he does it for the most part in and by the Means
that he has appointed, they are generally the Instruments of our Conversion,
and it is Wisdom in GOD that it should be so. For,

1. Hereby GOD puts Honor upon his own Institutions, and gives further
Testimony that they are means of his own Appointment.

It is highly proper that GOD should put Honor upon his own Institutions, and
give convincing Evidence to us that they are from him, that so we might Honor
them by an high Esteem of them, and a reverent and devout Attendance on them.
And now there is no way appears so effectual for this, as the giving Success to
the Means, and making them answer the proposed End of their Institution. Thus
for Instance, how could GOD magnify his word and make it honorable any ways so
effectually, as by making it the Instrument of our Regeneration and Conversion?
By causing it to come with such demonstration of the Spirit, and with such
Power as to enlighten our dark Minds, to enliven our dead Souls, and to make us
wise unto Salvation? So again what greater honor can be done to the
ministerial Institution, or what greater confirmation can be given of Christ's
appointing an order of Men to dispense his Word and Ordinances, and of his
being present with them, than is giving Success to their Ministry; and making
them the Instruments of turning Men from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto GOD? These are seals of their Ministry, proofs and confirmations
of their Commission's being received from CHRIST the King and Head of the
Church: and so any of the divine Ordinances when they are accompanied with the
mighty Power of GOD so as to convert Sinners and edify Saints, it honors the
Ordinances and shows that GOD is with us of a truth.

2. GOD's giving Success to Means leads us highly to Prize and Value them, and
to be more Thankful for them.

When we see the Means of Grace prove effectual for the Conversion of Sinners,
when we find the Ordinances to be quick and powerful, and by the Dispensations
of them great additions made unto the Church of such as shall be saved, it will
naturally lead us to an high Esteem of them, to look upon them as very useful
and necessary and so an unspeakable Favor to enjoy them. For what can be a
greater Blessing than to enjoy those Means which (with the Concurrence of the
divine Power which is wont to attend them) are able to save our Souls?
Therefore if we have any regard for our precious and immortal Souls, we shall
have an high esteem for those Means and Instruments that GOD will own and bless
for their Salvation. We shall be enlarged in greater Thankfulness for them than
for any outward good things whatsoever. This will put Men upon praising the
Lord for giving them his Statutes and his Judgments; this will put them upon
blessing the GOD and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for blessing them with
such spiritual Blessings in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and so GOD will
have the glory due unto his Name for these Means, as well as we the benefit and
advantage of them.

3. GOD's giving Success to his own instituted Means well serve this good End,
That it will Encourage us to the more diligent Attendance upon them, as being
the most, yea the only likely way of obtaining converting Grace.

When the Word, Ordinances, and all the Means of Grace have little or no good
Effect upon Persons, when those that attend upon them are no better than those
that neglect them, it becomes a stumbling block to many; they are apt to
entertain slighty thoughts of the Means themselves as if they were
insignificant, and are ready to say, It is in vain to wait upon GOD in them.
But now when we see the divine Blessing accompanying the outward Means of
Grace, so as that many Sinners are Converted, and Converts are filled with
Righteousness by them; when we see them flourish in the Courts of our God, that
are planted in the house of the Lord: It will convince us of the Advantage of
attending divine Ordinances, the Sin and Folly of neglecting them, and it will
Encourage us to be waiting upon GOD in the ways of his appointment, if we have
any regard for our Souls, or any concern for being brought into a State of
Grace. Surely when we see that they are blessed who watch daily at Wisdom's
Gates, waiting at the Posts of her Doors, it will encourage us to do likewise;
we shall be encouraged to go with them that keep holy Days, to the mountains of
Zion, to the House of the GOD of Jacob, where the Lord commands the Blessing.
But I proceed to say,

2. That as it is Wisdom in GOD to give Success for the most part to the Means
appointed, so on the other hand it is also Wisdom in him sometimes to Deny his
Blessing with Means, or at least not to give success always in proportion to
the outward Means enjoyed.

Although GOD does for the most part, yet he does not always tie himself up to
his instituted Means in bestowing converting Grace. Sometime he works without
the common Means, as in the forementioned Instance of the Apostle Paul. But
whether there be any such Instances as that, now a days, yet this is most
certain, that GOD does not always succeed the Means of Grace in the same degree
and measure, nor in any exact proportion to what Means are enjoyed. This we
often find that the same Means are to some a savor of Life unto Life, and a
savor of Death unto Death to others. We find that the Word and Ordinances,
although dispensed and administered as faithfully in one Place as in another, yet
not with the like Success, no nor with the like Success in the same Place.
Sometimes the number of Converts increases daily under the Means of Grace; and
at another time although the same Means are used, the same Word preached, the
same Care and Watchfulness exercised over the Flock, yet the Minister will have
occasion to complain, that he labors in vain and spends his strength for
naught. Nay it may be observed further, That among those who enjoy the richest
Means, and are most plentifully fed with Knowledge and Understanding, by the
most burning and shining Lights, the ablest Ministers of the New Testament,
eminently qualified aright to divide the Word of Truth; and who are careful to
give to every one their portion in due Season, yet there is not such Increase
of Converts, as in some other Places where they are not favored with such
precious Means, nor with one to go in and out before them so eminently gifted
and qualifyed for that Service. Oftentimes an honest, but weak and ordinary
Preacher, shall do more good with his Preaching than the most learned and
judicious Divine. Nay we may observe further still even with respect to our
selves, that the very same Word or Ordinance has not always the same Effect and
Influence upon us. There are some Passages in the Word of GOD, that we have
perhaps oftentimes heard and read, and they have had no manner of Effect upon
us; and yet at another time the same Word will mightily affect our Hearts, and
perhaps prove the Means of our Conversion. So on the other hand, what may very
much affect us at one time, may be very awakening to our Consciences, and may
warm our Affections, and excite our Devotions; may yet at another time have no
manner of Effect upon us. Now GOD's dealing in such a various manner, sometimes
withholding as well as at others affording Success to the Means, is a wise
Contrivance. For,

1. This serves to prevent our depending too much upon outward Means, as if
there was power or virtue in them to Convert us.

We are all exceeding prone to trust to outward Means, and depend on second
Causes. If persons do but enjoy the Means of Grace, if they set under an
eminent Preacher, and give their constant Attendance upon divine Ordinaces,
they are apt to depend upon them, and think their Condition safe, and look no
further, concluding these will be able to save their Souls. But now, GOD by not
always proportioning the Success according to the Excellency of the Means,
teaches us that Means are of themselves a vain thing to trust unto. GOD by
withholding a Blessing sometimes from the best of Means, when he affords a
remarkable Blessing to more ordinary Means, plainly shows us that there is no
real virtue in the outward Means, that they are dead and ineffectual of
themselves, and are utterly unable of their own power to convey any saving
Grace into the Soul. For if the Virtue was in the Means themselves, then the
best Means would always prove the most powerful: but because we often see the
contrary, it affords sufficient Evidence that the Virtue and Power is not in
the Means, and affords a sufficient Caution against depending upon them.

2. This leads us to have all our dependence upon GOD notwithstanding the
Means, and to give the glory of our Conversion to him alone.

For when the Means of Grace are not succeeded according to the degree and
measure of them Enjoyed; when the richest Means, and the most plentiful
Enjoyment of them fail of Success equal to more Inferior Means and a greater
Scarcity of them: As it shows the Virtue is not in the Means, so it makes it
very evident that all the saving Efficacy is from GOD, and that it is entirely
depending on GOD whether Means shall be successful or unsuccessful, and that
when any have been Converted by outward Means, those Means have been
accompanied with a special Blessing from GOD, even the powerful Operations of
the divine Spirit. So that this way of managing leads or at least has a natural
tendency to lead every Person to wait upon GOD for his Blessing upon the Means
of Grace they enjoy, and whenever they prove effectual for Salvation, to pass
over the Means in a thankful Acknowledgment of GOD for them, and to give the
Glory of all to him: This will lead us to ascribe not to Means, but to GOD,
acknowledging to his Glory, that how useful soever Means have been, yet that it
is GOD that works the saving Change, that it is he that Creates the clean
Heart, and Renews the right Spirit within us, and so in this way GOD the
Efficient Cause of our Regeneration will have the Glory of his own work rendered
to him, whereas otherwise it would be most likely to be paid to the
Instruments, made use of by him therein.

3. Another Instance of the Wisdom of GOD in the Manner of making use of Means,
Is his Confining us to the particular Means that he himself has appointed, and
not allowing us to run after the Inventions of Men.

That GOD has instituted and appointed certain Means in and by which he will
convey his Grace to such as duly attend on them, has been already observed. And
now, as these divine Institutions must be carefully attended, in order to our
receiving the Regenerating Grace of GOD, so no other Means, no humane
Inventions may be attended with any Expectation of meeting with the divine
Grace in them. Although GOD is very ready to convey his Grace, yet it must be in
the channels that he himself has made for it to flow in. If we would draw the
waters of life, it must be out of these Wells of Salvation that GOD has dug for
us, it must be out of these Ordinances that are appointed by Christ for us, and
not out of those that are but humane Inventions. GOD confines his Graces to his
own Ordinances, them he will own and bless, but the multiplying Ordinances, and
Ceremonies of our own Invention in the Worship of GOD, how plausible so ever
they may be, yet is far from being pleasing to GOD, or any way profitable to
us. He insists upon our waiting upon him in the particular ways that he has
prescribed in order to our obtaining his Grace: And although another way may
appear as likely in the natural tendency of it, yet it will by no means answer
the End. The Rivers of Damascus, Pherphar and Abana, had doubtless as much
natural virtue in them, as the River of Jordan, to cure the Leprosy; but Naaman
the Syrian must bath himself in Jordan, if he would be cleansed, because this
was the divine Prescription, 2 King. 5 10. And thus GOD expects and requires
that in order to obtain his Grace, we should wait upon him in those particular
ways that he has prescribed in his Word, and no other. The Commission to the
Apostles, was to teach them to observe all things that Christ had Commanded
them, and nothing more, Mat. 28.20. They were not to transgress the
Commandments of GOD by their Traditions, as the Pharisees did, Mat. 15.3. For
our Savior says, in vain do they worship him, that teach for doctrines the
Commandments of men, as in the 9th. v. of that Chapter; that is, To worship GOD
in a way that is only taught by Men, and no where prescribed by GOD, is a vain
worship. In short, the Word of GOD is the Directory for divine Worship, and
there must we resort for direction at all times; and therefore the Inquiry
ought to be not so much, What says the Church? or what say the Fathers? or
what says humane Reason? but what says the Scripture? Therein we are taught
what is good, and all that the Lord our GOD requires of us* and we must closely
adhere to the divine Prescriptions therein, and not multiply Ordinances and
Ceremonies, under a vain pretense of pleasing GOD thereby, or of being in a
more likely way to obtain his Grace. That general Command, Deuteronomy. 12.32. is as
applicable (from the general reason of it) to those under the Christian, as to
those under the Jewish dispensation, What things soever I Command you, observe
to do it, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. And now here is
Wisdom. For,

1. GOD knows infinitely better than we, what Means of Grace are most proper,
and suitable for us to attend upon.

GOD who has a perfect knowledge of himself, of us, and of all things else,
must needs know best, which way is the most proper for us to wait upon him in,
and which the most suitable way for him to convey his Grace to us: and
therefore it is wisely, as well as graciously done in him to prescribe the way
himself, and not leave it to us.

2. It is Wisdom in GOD to confine us to the Means and Ways of Worship that he
has prescribed, Because of the vain, foolish and extravagant disposition there
is in the heart of Man, with respect to the Modes of Religious Worship.

Indeed it is the temper of some Men to neglect all Means of Grace, they are
for sitting still, till GOD shall by an immediate act of his Power work the
mighty Change within them: They are not for attending any Ordinances, but
expect the Motions of the Spirit of GOD without it. It was therefore necessary
that GOD should himself prescribe the Ordinances, and Means of Grace, to
quicken such to attend upon them, as ever they expect to meet with the divine
Grace. But then on the other hand, it is the temper of a great part of Mankind
to abound in religious Ceremonies, they are full of their own Inventions, and
are for multiplying religious Ordinances beyond what GOD has prescribed,
thinking to honor and please GOD, or at least to make some Atonement for their
defects in moral Duties, by adding to his Ordinances, and doing more in that
way than he requires. We find by History and Observation, that not only the
Ignorant Nations, who have only the light of Nature to guide them, have run
into the Superstitious observance of a multitude of the most absurd and
ridiculous Ceremonies in Religion, but that even those who have had the light
of Scripture to guide them, yet when they have gone off from the divine
Directory therein, and have been for adding something of their own Invention to
the divine Ordinances, they have by degrees run into as idle, ridiculous and
extravagant Ceremonies as the most ignorant Heathen. Thus it was with the
Nation of the Jews, they were in their degenerate State continually disposed to
add to the divine Institutions, one Ceremony to another of their own, till they
came to that Condition they were in, when our Savior complains of them, for
transgressing the Commandments of GOD by their tradition; for running all their
Religion into mere formality, and empty Ceremony, such as their frequent
washing their hands, their cups and platters, their Superstitious refraining
from eating with Publicans and Sinners, their Superstitious building up the
Tombs, and garnishing the Sepulchers of the ancient Prophets, etc. And so we
find among them that call themselves Christians, that by their not confining
themselves to the Means, the Ordinances, that Christ and his Apostles had
appointed, but giving way to their own corrupt and carnal reasoning* they have
run unto as burdensome Ceremonies, as they of the Jewish Nation. To instance
particularly in the Church of Rome, how many vain, burdensome, and ridiculous
Ceremonies, yea what gross Superstition and Idolatry have crept into it, by
their not adhering to the Scripture directory, but following their own
Inventions. Which serves to set forth the divine Wisdom and Prudence, in
prescribing certain Means and Ordinances for us, and limiting us to them, and
not allowing us to follow our own foolish Imaginations. For in short, vain Man
would be wise though he be born as the wild asses Colt: We are wise in our own
conceit, we are apt to imagine there are many ways of pleasing GOD, besides
those that he has prescribed: we are ready to think such a Ceremony and such a
Formality in our religious Worship would please the Almighty, would help our
devotion and would have a more natural tendency to beget, and to increase Grace
within us, than barely those plain and simple Means that GOD has prescribed.
And by what we have seen of others we may be satisfied that if GOD had not
given us a general directory how, and after what manner we must wait upon him
for his Grace, we should quickly entangle our selves in as heavy a yoke of
bondage as that of the Mosaical dispensation; instead of standing fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. By which it appears how thoroughly
GOD considered the natural dispositions of Men, that he ^^^ld not leave us to
our liberty which way to worship him, and wait upon him, but has restricted and
limited us to the Methods of his own prescribing. And thus we see the Wisdom of
GOD, not only in appointing Means of Grace, but in the Manner of his making use
of them.

The next thing is to consider the Means themselves, the Propriety,
Suitableness and Sufficiency of them, and so the Wisdom of GOD that appears
therein; but I may not enter upon this at present, but must conclude with some
brief Reflections upon what has been said at this time.

APPLICATION.
1. Is GOD pleased to make use of Outward Means in the Conversion of Sinners?
Hence the sad Condition they are in who are destitute of the Means of Grace.

Such are without the Means of Conversion and Salvation, and this is the case
of the Heathen World that have not the Gospel, nor the Ordinances of it, they
are perishing for lack of vision; they are in a perishing State because they
are destitute of the Means of obtaining that Faith in Christ which is necessary
according to the tenor of the Gospel for our Salvation: For how should they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
Preacher, and how shall they Preach unless they be sent? Wherefore we should
pity such Regions of darkness, and should pour out our Souls in Prayer to GOD
for them, that he would find out ways for their coming to the knowledge of him,
that he would raise up, and send forth such as shall carry the everlasting
Gospel (the appointed Means of knowledge) to them.

2. Does GOD make use of Means in the Conversion of Sinners? Hence the
Inexcusableness of such as neglect the Means of Grace they have the opportunity
to attend upon.

We are highly favored of the Lord with respect to the Means of Grace that GOD
gives us richly and freely to enjoy, but it must be spoken to the shame of
many, that they are very careless in the Improvement of them. Some there are
that professedly concern the Means of Grace, and think it not worth ^hi^^ ^o
attend upon them; and many more there be that practically despise and
under-value them; that live in the total neglect and omission of some, and are
very inconstant in their Attendance upon other of the divine Ordinances. Now
such are inexcusable whoever they are, and justly reprovable; this is to
despise and neglect the way that GOD himself has appointed for your Conversion,
and surely you cant expect to obtain Converting Grace in any other way: for
although GOD can bestow this Grace without the help of Outward Means, yet you
have not the least reason in the world to expect it who live either in the
wilful or careless neglect of the Means that he has appointed.

3. We learn, that if ever we would have the Means of Grace become effectual
for our Conversion; or Edification, we must see to, and depend upon GOD for it.

We find the Outward Means of Grace by their manner of working are ineffectual
and insufficient of themselves to work saving Grace within us; and that it is
only when they are accompanied with the powerful Influences of the divine
Spirit that they ever prove effectual to Salvation. And if so, surely then our
Duty and our Interest is to seek to GOD for his Blessing to accompany the Means
of Grace that we enjoy. Unless we do so, it is in vain to attend upon them: for
unless he blesses them, they can be of no saving Good and Benefit to us.
Therefore when ever we are about to attend upon any of the Instituted Means of
Grace, we should humbly acknowledge and profess, that we don't depend upon the
Means themselves, but upon him that has appointed them. Accordingly when ever
we are about to read, or hear the Word of GOD, or attend upon the holy
Sacrament, our Eyes and our Hearts should be up unto GOD for a Blessing upon
his own Institutions, and this is the way to meet with GOD in his Ordinances.
This is the way to receive a Blessing from the Lord, and Righteousness from the
GOD of our Salvation.

4. What we have heard of GOD's Confining us to the Means of his own
Appointment, teaches us the Insignificancy of all humane Inventions in order to
our obtaining the Grace of GOD. It has been too much the temper and disposition
of the Church of GOD in all Ages, but especially in the degenerate Ages of it,
to be making some additions of their own Invention in the Worship of GOD, when
the Life of Godliness has failed among a People, they have been for making it
up in Formality and outward Show. And sometimes indeed from an indiscreet Zeal,
and from some superstitious Notions with respect to the Almighty, Persons have
been excited also to make some Additions to the ways of Worship that GOD has
Instituted. But now since GOD in his great Wisdom is pleased to confine us to
the Means of his own appointment, all such Inventions of Men must needs be vain
and insignificant; and how plausible so ever the Arguments may be that are
offered for them, yet they cannot by any means be justified, nor is there any
foundation to expect to meet with the divine Grace in our attendance upon them.
For in our attending on the Means of Grace, so as to receive any Benefit by
them, two things seem to be necessary:

First, That we should attend upon them in Obedience to GOD.

Secondly, In Faith, depending upon GOD to bless his Ordinances, and make them
effectual for the End proposed.

But now how can there be either of these in our following Ceremonies of mere
humane Invention?

1. It cannot be in Obedience to GOD, because it is what GOD has not required
of us. And he may well say, as in Isa. 1.12. Who has required this at your
hands?

2. Neither can there be supposed to be that Faith and dependence upon GOD, for
the special Influences of his Spirit to render them effectual for the Ends
proposed.

For they are far from having the like Encouragement of meeting with the Spirit
of GOD in humane Inventions, as in the divine Institutions: Nay GOD having
always shown his displeasure at uninstituted Ceremonies in Religion, there is
abundant reason to conclude that his Spirit will not accompany them; and so
they cannot be attended with Faith and Dependence upon GOD for his Blessing, or
at least not with any sufficient foundation for such a Faith. But then further.
The grounds and foundations for adding any Ceremonies of our own in the Worship
of GOD, to the divine Institutes, is what will naturally draw us off from
exercising that dependence upon GOD for his Blessing in order to their
answering the End proposed; for upon Inquiry it will be found that the best and
most plausible Argument for adding any humane Ceremonies in divine Worship, is,
The natural aptitude and fitness of them to Compose our Spirits, to stir up our
Affections, and to quicken our Devotion. They will plead for such or such a
Ceremony, that is a very significant one, that it has a natural tendency to
help Men's Devotions. But now this Argument naturally diverts and hinders that
dependence upon GOD for the Influences of his Spirit, which there ought always
to be. By this we shall be found to depend more upon the natural Power of the
Ceremony, than upon the efficacious Influence of the Spirit of GOD.

But I may not detain you any longer, wherefore to Conclude at present;

Let us all admire and adore the sovereign Goodness, and distinguishing Favor
of GOD unto us, that when the greatest part of our fellow Creatures are
perishing for lack of the outward Means of Grace, we are favored with a
plentiful and peaceable Enjoyment of them, without any unreasonable Impositions
of Men. And now let us not Content our selves that we live among the divine
Ordinances; but let us give our diligent Attendance upon them, walking in all
the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord; and when we have done this, let us
not depend upon the Means themselves, but let us wait upon GOD for his
Blessing, who alone is able to bless the Means and make them effectual; and
this is the way for us to have GOD owning and honoring his own Institutions so
as to make them helpful for our Conversion, and for our progress in Grace and
Holiness. And now whenever we Experience any of the Means of Grace working
their desired and designed Effect within us, let us not ascribe it to the
Means, as if they did it by their own power: much less let us ascribe it to our
selves, or to any strength or worthiness of our own; but let us give the glory
of all to GOD, as the fountain of all Gra^^; and as he who alone has or can
work the Change within us. Here let me say, That Ministers who are the
appointed Instruments of turning Men from darkness unto light; whenever they
are succeeded in their work, they should beware of sacrificing to their own
Net. They must consider, that although Paul Plants and Apollos Waters; yet it is
GOD that gives the Increase. We should therefore say as the Apostle, Who then
is Paul; and who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye believed! Neither he that
planteth nor be that waters is any thing, but God that gives the Increase, 1
Cor. 3.5, 6, 7. And so every one that is Converted by the use of Means, must
pass over them in humble Thankfulness to GOD for them, and acknowledge with the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God, I am what I am. I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me. Gal. 2.20. And now in such a way as this, GOD has the
Glory of his own Work; then he is glorified and acknowledged suitably by us in
this World, and then we shall be brought to that Place, where we shall be
employed in giving blessing, and honor, and glory, and power to him that
sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

Sermon, XIII.
YOU may remember that in my last Discourse I undertook to set forth the Wisdom
of GOD in the Means made use of in the Regeneration and Conversion of Sinners.
And under this Head I have endeavored to show the Wisdom of GOD, 1. In making
use of any Means at all in our Conversion. 2. In the Manner of his using Means
in our Conversion: Such as his giving Success so frequently to the Means; and
then sometimes by denying his Blessing with them, or not giving Success in
proportion to the plenty of Means enjoyed; and lastly, By Confining us to the
Means of his own Appointment, and not allowing us to follow our own Inventions.

3. I now proceed in the third place to consider the Means themselves, the
Propriety, suitableness and sufficiency of them to answer the End proposed for
them, and so the Wisdom of GOD that appears therein.

Now the outward Means of Grace may be distinguished into those that GOD has
expressly commanded us to attend upon, and those which he in the course of his
Providence causes us to meet withal: i. e. The Means of Grace may be
distinguished into Ordinances and Providence: For the Providence of GOD may
be considered as Means of Grace, as well as the Ordinances of the Gospel. And
every Converted one that has made any Observation of himself, and of the manner
of his Conversion, will find the Dispensations of divine Providence have been
very helpful herein.

I. I shall consider the divine Ordinances, or Instituted Means of Grace, and
the Wisdom of GOD that appears in them.

And here before I proceed to a particular Consideration of them, I would
observe in general, That they are plain, simple and easy Means. There is
nothing abstruse, intricate or difficult in them; they don't abound in number,
there are but few of them; they are not pompo^^^ and costly, and so are far
from being difficult, or burdensome, but may very easily be attended by us. They
are not so numerous or tedious as to be any great Interruption to our worldly
Business; nor are they so dark and mysterious as to require any great Labor
and Pains to get a sufficient Understanding of them. And now there being but a
few plain and easy Means appointed by GOD for us to attend upon, is an Instance
of Wisdom,

1. As it is an Encouragement to attend upon them, and leaves those the more
inexcusable that neglect them.

Indeed the proud heart of Man is sometimes apt to despise the plainness and
simplicity of the Gospel Dispensation. Men are apt to be pleased with a
Religion more pompous, and attended with more costly and burdensome Ceremonies:
but yet it is most certain that the more easy and plain the duties of Religion
are, the more encouragement there is to attend upon them, and the less they
have to say for their neglect.

Naaman the Syrian was offended because the Prophet directed to so plain,
simple and easy a Method of cure, as that of washing seven times in the waters
of Jordan. But his Servants argued very strongly with him for his complying
with so easy a Method, since if he had required some great thing he would have
done it. My Father (say they) if the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing,
would thou not have done it? how much rather then when he says unto thee,
wash and be clean, 2 King. 5.13. So here, if GOD had appointed many burdensome
Ordinances as he did under the law, we should have thought it reasonable for us
to attend upon them; but how much rather now they are so plain and easy? What
will any Person under the Gospel have to plead for the neglect of the Means of
Grace? Surely the plainness and the easiness of them will render them
inexcusable; and now it is Wisdom in GOD to leave such without excuse, because
the more inexcusable persons are, the more just and righteous will GOD appear
in Judging and Condemning them.

2. The plainness and simplicity of the Means, has a tendency to prevent our
sinking so much into mere Formality, which otherwise we should be in danger of.

The more numerous and pompous the Ordinances are, the more apt Men are to rest
in the Outward form of the duty, and lose that temper and frame of Spirit,
which is necessary and preparatory for our receiving the divine Grace in and by
the Ordinances. And I believe this may generally be observed, that as where the
life and power of Godliness decreases, the more Ceremony and Formality in
Religious Worship is insisted on: So when Religious Rites and Ceremonies
prevail beyond what is Commanded, there the life and power of Religion decays:
for at such times Men's hearts and thoughts are so taken up with the Form, that
they leave the Substance; their care will naturally terminate in observing the
particular Form and Mode, and when they have done that they are apt to rest in
it. And therefore GOD in his great Wisdom prescribes such plain and simple
Means, that we might not trust to them.

3. The more simple and plain the Means are, by which GOD brings about our
Conversion, the clearer Manifestation there is of the Power of GOD.

GOD's Power is always manifest according to the greatness of the work, and
according to the weakness of the Means that he makes use of therein. The
treasure of the Gospel is, says the Apostle, committed to earthen Vessels, to
weak frail Men; to Men subject to like passions and infirmities with other Men;
and what is the reason of it? That the excellency of the power may be of God,
and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7.

But thus much for the Means in general, and of the Wisdom of GOD in the
plainness, and simplicity of them.

I now proceed to consider the Instituted Means of Grace themselves, and the
Propriety and Suitableness of them, and so the Wisdom of GOD in appointing
these very Means of Grace in particular. Now the Means of Grace that I shall
take particular Notice of, are, the Written Word of GOD, the public Ministry
of it by his Ambassadors, Prayer, Singing of Psalms, Sabbaths and Sacraments.

1. The Written Word of GOD is an Instituted Means of Grace, in which there
appears very much of the Wisdom of GOD.

From the beginning of the World even until Moses's time, there don't appear any
Written Word; and the only way there was for conveying the knowledge of GOD and
of Religion was by Oral Tradition: but when the Age of Man was shortened, and
there was a quicker succession of Generations, Traditions grew so uncertain,
that GOD saw it necessary, and did accordingly in his Wisdom and Goodness
provide a standing Revelation for his Church that should be more fixed and
certain, and upon which they might safely depend. For when he had made choice
of the Children of Israel for his own peculiar People, he wrote to them the
great things of his Law. As for a Summary of the moral Law which was to be a
universal and perpetual Rule for the Church, GOD himself wrote it in Tables of
Stone; and as for that Law that particularly concerned the Jewish Church, Moses
was commanded to commit it to Writing, Exodus 34.27, 28. And whether Writing was
ever known among Men before or no, yet we have no certain account of any so
ancient as those of Moses. But since that, GOD has in the several Ages of the
Church till the Apostles Times, raised up one and another, who being under the
Guidance and Inspiration of the holy Ghost, have Composed all those Books which
make up the Scriptures of the old and new Testament, collected in our Bibles;
and now this is called the Word of GOD, because it was given by Inspiration of
God: holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21.
And now this Word is a Method appointed and made use of by GOD, for the
Regeneration and Conversion of Sinners, to turn them from darkness to light,
and to bring them out of the Kingdom of Satan into the Kingdom of the Son of
GOD. Thus we find it declared to be a Means of our Regeneration, Jam. 1.18. Of
his own will begat be us with the word of truth. And the Apostle says with
respect to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.15. That he had begotten them through the
Gospel; that is, the Gospel was the Means of their Regeneration and Conversion.
And the Psalmist could say from his own Experience, That the W^rd had quickened,
or given life to him, Psalm. 119.50. And we are told in general by the Apostle,
Romans 10.17. That faith, or saving Grace, Comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. And now the Wisdom of GOD in appointing this Word of his as the
Means, or Instrument of Conveying saving Grace, will appear, by considering how
well it is suited and adapted to answer the End proposed. And now he that will
but look into this perfect law of liberty, and search the Scriptures thoroughly,
will find they are every way accommodated to their design, and the fittest
Instrument that can be, in the hand of the Spirit, to promote the Regeneration
and Conversion of Sinners. There is nothing necessary to be known and
understood by us but the Gospel sufficiently informs us of it. It gives us the
clearest and fullest discoveries of GOD, of his Nature and Perfections, of his
Works, and of his Will, that can be. It informs us of our Fall and Apostasy in
our first Parents, and of the wretched Estate and Condition we were brought
into thereby, and the way of Man's recovery by JESUS CHRIST. Moreover, it fully
informs us of what is our duty, not only in general, but of our duty in all
Cases, under all the various Stations and Relations, that we stand in to GOD,
or to one another; for in his Word he has showed us what is good, and all that
the Lord our GOD requires of us. But then the word of GOD is not only useful in
enlightening our Minds, but it is as well adapted to persuade our Wills. It sets
before us the evil Nature of Sin, and the fatal Consequences of it, and so
affords the most powerful Arguments to repent of all our Sins, and to turn from
them. Furthermore, It sets before us the fullness and sufficiency there is in
Christ, and his readiness to receive us, and at the same time represents to us
our wretched and undone condition without an Interest in him: which must needs
be the most powerful arguments to encourage and excite us to go to him for
Life, and to place all our dependence upon him. Moreover, do we need to be
excited and persuaded unto our Duty, to love GOD, to fear Him and keep his
Commandments? Surely there is nothing better projected to answer this design
than the Gospel: for it affords the most Cogent, and moving Arguments herefor
that can be imagined: for it not only sets forth the Greatness, the Glory, and
the Majesty of the LORD, to raise an holy awe within us toward Him, but it
sets forth his infinite love and goodness, especially to the Children of Men in
such astonishing Instances, as must needs have a most powerful tendency to
inflame our hearts in love unto him. And it sets forth the reasonableness of
Religion, the excellency of the divine Commands, the obligations we are under
to observe them, the danger of disobeying them, the infinite advantage, and the
exceeding great Reward in keeping them; the strongest Motives to Obedience. Nay
there are no Motives nothing to work upon our Understanding, our Will, our
Affections, our Hopes, our Fears, but we may find them in the word of GOD. In
short, it is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, far Correction, and for
Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished for all good works. And it is able to make us wise unto salvation,
through faith in Jesus Christ. And now herein appears the Wisdom of GOD, that
when he undertook to make a revelation of Himself, and of the way of Salvation,
and happiness, he has done it so fully, as not to leave any one thing
unrevealed, that is necessary for us to know, or that is capable of moving, and
exciting us to our duty, and so to comply with the terms of life and happiness.
The sufficiency of the Scriptures for the end proposed, sets forth the Wisdom
of GOD therein*

2. The public Ministry of the Word is another Instituted Means of Grace,
wherein much of the Wisdom of GOD appears.

GOD has not only written to us the great things of his Law, and Gospel, by
which we may by a diligent searching of the Scriptures get acquainted with
every thing necessary for us to know, with respect both to our faith and
practice: but besides this, GOD has instituted the public preaching of his
Word. He has appointed public solemn assemblies, and He has appointed an Order
of Men, to preach the Word of GOD unto them. This was the business of the
Apostles, and for which they were separated, by that Commission and Command to
them by our Lord, Matthew. 28.19* Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations,
baptising them, etc. Or that, in Mark 16.15. Go ye into all the world and
preach the Gospel to every Creature. And this is the office and business of the
ordinary Ministers of the Gospel; accordingly this among other things is given
in solemn Charge to them, Preach the word, be instant in season, and out of
season. And now that this public preaching of the Word by an order of Men set
apart for that purpose, is a Means for the Conversion of Sinners, is abundantly
evident from the effects of it. No less than three thousand were Converted by
Peter's Sermon, after he had received the promise of the Father: and
innumerable are the instances of those to whom the word preached has been quick
and powerful for their Conversion, and Edification. Nay, the Apostle seems to
make it absolutely necessary to our Conversion, or our arriving to a saving
Faith. Romans 10.14, 15, 17. -- How shall they believe in him of whom they have
not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they
preach except they be sent? So then faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. And now the Wisdom of GOD in this Institution will appear if we
consider, either the public preaching of the Word it self, and the particular
usefulness of it, or the persons that are employed in it.

1. Let us consider the public preaching of the Word it self, and what a
tendency it has to promote the designed End, viz. The Conversion of Sinners;
and we shall see much of the Wisdom of GOD therein.

This is the way to have the Gospel spread, and the knowledge of it prevail
among a People, beyond what it would do, if nothing but Reading of it was
enjoined. Moreover, this is the way to keep up and promote the Credit of the
Gospel, and of Christianity among a People. This is the way to induce persons
to the profession of Religion, and to the external Practice of it at least.
Furthermore, by the Preaching of the Word the Doctrines, and Duties of the
Gospel are more fully opened, and explained, the truth and reasonableness of
them cleared up, which must have a mighty tendency to strengthen our faith in
the truth of Christianity, and to quicken and encourage us to the practice of
it. And then finally, the Doctrines, and Duties of the Gospel being publicly
preached, come with more solemnity, and with greater authority than any other
way: and for this I may appeal to the Experience of Christians, whether the
truths of the Gospel delivered in a serious and solemn manner from the Pulpit,
don't usually come with more weight and authority, and affect you more than the
same truths received any other way: and now the public solemn preaching of the
Word having a tendency thus to affect those that sit under the dispensation of
it, shows the Wisdom of GOD in the Institution of it.

2. If we consider Who they are that are set apart for, and employed in the
Ministry of the Word, we shall see more of the Divine Wisdom.

And now considering the Difficulty and Importance of the work, one would ha^^
thought at first view, that none less than Angels world have been employed in
it, but GOD whose thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his ways as our ways,
has committed this grand affair to Men, to frail Men, to sinful Men, to Men
under guilt and liable to the wrath of God as well as others, to Men of the
like Corruptions and passions with other men. And now the Wisdom of GOD in
committi^g the glorious Gospel to our trust will appear, by considering in the
first place, That this is the way to have the truths of the Gospel delivered to
us in a more easy, familiar, and less terrible manner than could be any other
way. If GOD should speak immediately from Heaven, or send his Gospel to us by
the Ministry of Angels, as he did the Law to the Children of Israel, we should
all be ready to say, as they did to Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will
hear, but let not God speak with us, lest we die, Exodus 20.19. GOD has
therefore considered our frame, and has committed the Gospel Ministry to some
of our selves, to Men formed out of the clay, as we are, whose terror shall not
make us afraid, but with whom we may converse with freedom, and although we are
to sit under their Ministry with reverence, considering them as the Messengers
of the LORD of Hosts, yet there is nothing to terrify or affrighten us.

Again, This treasure of the Gospel being committed to Earthen vessels, to weak
frail Men, serves to set forth, and make the power of GOD more Conspicuous,
when it proves Effectual for the Conversion of Sinners.

The Strength of GOD is made perfect in our weakness. And hence says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this treasure in Earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God and not of us.

But then again, The Ministry of the Gospel being committed to Men that can
preach more experimentally to others than could be by any other Creatures, this
must needs be a great advantage to their Ministry, and so discover the Wisdom
of GOD in appointing them.

Ministers being of the same frame and constitution, and under the same common
circumstances with other Men; they feel the same workings of Corruption, and
the same workings of the spirit of GOD within them, they meet with the same
snares, and are in all things tempted as other Men, have the same failings,
infirmities and imperfections, and are to have the same work of Grace wrought
upon them, and so are brought into a Converted, and saving State, after the
same manner that other Men are. And now this must needs give great advantage to
their Preaching, and wonderfully enable them to adapt and accommodate their
discourses to the circumstances of their hearers. For if a Minister does, and
every good Minister will, frame his discourses very much from his own
Experience, he will be sure of suiting the Cases of many others; for Ministers
and People have the same Corruptions, and meet with the same Temptations, and
doubtless, do very often feel the very same workings of their Spirits within
them. And upon this account, I think I may venture to say, That a good
Experienced Christian endowed with the ordinary Ministerial gifts, is better
qualified for a Preacher to sinful Men, than an Angel from Heaven: for although
we must allow them to be Creatures of much greater Sagacity and wisdom than
Men, yet they have never experienced the workings of a corrupt Nature within*
they never knew what it was to endure the Divine Desertion, or to have the
light of GOD's Countenance hid from them, they never knew what it is to be
under Afflictions, and so never experienced the workings of their Spirits*
under such Circumstances: and therefore cant be supposed to speak so feelingly
and experimentally, if so intelligently, about those things as an Experienced
Minister, who has felt all these things in his own Soul.

Once more, Ministers of the Gospel (if they are as they ought to be) have this
advantage, to give a Specimen or Example if that Religion they recommend to
others, in their own lives.

And now their Example is advantageous upon two accounts Namely, that it gives
Credit to Religion, by assuring their Hearers that they believe what they teach
them, and are under the Influence of those Doctrines and Precepts they
recommend to them. And then Secondly, it shows them that the Religion taught
them is practicable, because they see such as are under the same Corruption,
and exposed to the same Temptations, in the practice of it. And this advantage
we should lose if we had Preachers sent immediately from Heaven unto us. For an
Angel from Heaven although he be perfectly pure and holy, yet his Example would
not be so Influential on Mankind as one from among our selves. For if one of
those pure and spotless Spirits should descend, and preach up a holy life, and
urge it among other things from his own Example, the argument would not be so
likely to affect us: We should be ready to think that the holiness he
recommends may do for the Angelick order, for those that have no principles of
Corruption, and are perfected in holiness; but we should see so much Sin and
Corruption in our selves, as that we should be discouraged from attempting the
Imitation of such pure and holy ones.

But then, as the Wisdom of GOD appears in appointing Men, and not any other
Creature, to Preach the Word, so does it also appear in appointing, and fixing
upon a certain order of Men for that purpose, whom he raises up and qualifies
for it. Are all Prophets? Are all Apostles? are all Teachers? No, for all are
not called, to it, nor qualified for it. And none may take this Office upon
them but they that are called of GOD unto it. And now the Wisdom of GOD in this
is very manifest: for it is very necessary that those who undertake to teach
the great Doctrines, and Duties of the Gospel, should give themselves wholly to
the Study of them. So every Man could not attend upon it, because there are
other affairs that must of necessity be carried on. And therefore GOD in his
Wise and sovereign Providence so overrules the hearts, and dispositions of
Men, as to incline some to one Calling, and some to another, for the good
order, and comfortable carrying on of the affairs of the World. And some he
inclines and disposes to be Studying, and thereby accomplishing themselves, and
then puts them into the Ministry: And having ordained that they who Preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel; and that they who are taught in the Word
should Communicate to him that teaches in all good things: He has hereby made
provision for the Ministers of the Gospel, that they should give themselves
wholly to the Study, and Ministry of the Word. And surely in this way GOD has
wisely contrived for the good of his Church. For in this way provision is made
for the Churches of Christ to be furnished with burning and shining lights,
with faithful Pastors, able Ministers of the New Testament, that shall feed the
People with knowledge, and understanding. Whereas if this sacred Office was in
Common, and every Man might upon every occasion as he plea^ed, undertake to be
a Preacher of the Gosp^l, we may conclude the knowledge of the Scriptures,
especially of the weighty, sublime, and difficult parts of it would not be
upheld among a People, but they would be in the utmost hazard of being seduced
into some fatal Errors and Mistakes or other: for if all undertook to be
guides, we may conclude there would be but blind guides. And our Savior has
told us, what would be the sad Effect of that: Namely, That if the blind lead
the blind, they both fall into the ditch, Mat. 15.14.

And thus much for the Wisdom of GOD in Instituting a public Ministry of the
Word in order to the Conversion of Sinners. I may not proceed at present to
consider the other Instituted Means of Grace, but shall Conclude with a word or
two by way of APPLICATION.

1. What an infinite Privilege do they Enjoy, who Enjoy the Gospel!

Is the Word of GOD an Instituted Means of Grace? Is the design of it to
Convert Men, and bring them out of a State of Nature into a State of Grace? And
is it so well adapted to its design, and so sufficient every way as an
Instrument to answer the End proposed, surely then it is the greatest outward
privilege we can enjoy. They that are without the word, are perishing for lack
of Vision; whereas they that Enjoy the Gospel, Enjoy that which is able to make
them wise unto Salvation. Is it so well accommodated to inlighten our Minds in
the knowledge of Christ, and of his will; is it so effectual an Instrument to
persuade our wills, to work upon our hopes, and fears, and upon every faculty
within us? Surely then such are lifted up even unto Heaven in privileges, that
Enjoy the Gospel; and of such a People it may be said, What could God do more,
on outward accounts, than he has done unto them? And now since we are so highly
favored of the Lord, how should our hearts be enlarged in thankfulness toward
him? how should we adore the sovereign distinctions of divine Grace, that when
he has hid his Gospel from the greatest part of the World, he has revealed it
unto us, only because it has seemed good in his sight. And now let us see to it
that we walk worthy of this infinite Privilege, by living as this Grace of GOD
which has appeared unto us teaches us, even to deny ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in the present World.

2. Is the written Word appointed by GOD as a Means of Grace? Let us then
diligently Read the holy Scriptures, and teach them to our Children. Christ bid
his Disciples, search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. The Bereans are commended for
searching the Scriptures daily, Act. 17.11. Timothy is commended, in that from
a Child he had known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make Men wise unto
Salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15. Let us then give
attendence to Reading: so shall we be in the way of the Blessing pronounced on
the Man, whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and who meditates therein day
and night. Psalm. 1.3. He shall be like a Tree planted by the rivers of water,
that brings forth his fruit in his season. His leaf also shall not wither,
and whatsoever he does shall prosper. And let us instruct our Children in the
word of GOD. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day, shall
be in thine heart. And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and
shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by
the way, and when thou lie, down, and when thou risest up.

3. Is the Public Ministry of the Word Instituted by GOD as a Means of
Conversion and Edification? Hence, we may learn several things. As,

1. That People ought diligently to Attend upon the Public Preaching of the
Word.

For if GOD has Ordained and Commanded the Word to be Preached, it necessarily
implies the duty of People to Attend upon the Preaching of it: It is therefore
the Indispensable Duty of all who have the Opportunity for it to hear the Word,
and to take heed how they hear. We may not neglect the Public Worship of GOD's
House for any frivolous or trifling Excuse, but should rejoice at the
revolution of such blessed seasons, wherein we may hear the Word of Life, and
have the glad tidings of Salvation sounding in our ears. It is the benefit of
the Hearers especially, that is proposed in the Preaching of the Word, it is
their Conversion and Edification that is aimed at therein. It is making use of
the Means GOD has appointed, and a putting our selves in the way of GOD's
Grace. To sit under the dispensation of the Word, this is the way to receive a
blessing from the Lord, even righteousness from the GOD of our Salvation.
Blessed is the Man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the
Posts of my doors, says Wisdom, Prove. 8.34.

2. They ought to take Effectual Care for the Support of the Gospel Ministry
among them.

For if some particular persons art to be set apart for this sacred, and
important Office, and to devote themselves entirely to the Ministry of the
Word, surely they ought to be Supported and Provided for, because it is not
supposed that they should divert to secular Affairs to provide for themselves
and for their families. And therefore since GOD has not only appointed such an
order of Men, but has also ordained, that they who Preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel. Surely those that live under their Ministry, should take
care that this Ordinance of the Gospel should be complied with. For as the
Apostle argues upon it, 1 Cor. 9.11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things,
is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things?

3. The Candidates for the Ministry should give diligence to be prepared for so
high, and holy a Calling.

The business you are designed for, is of the greatest Importance of any in the
World. It is a Calling Instituted by Christ, to open Men's eyes, to turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto GOD. Surely then the
highest Seize in Knowledge and Grace, are requisite to accomplish you for
such an important Service. And now what does this suggest unto you as your
duty, but that you apply your selves unto your Studies with the utmost
diligence, especially to the Study of the holy Scriptures, which you are to
open and explain to others? You are to be the Priests of the Lord, whose lips
are to preserve Knowledge: And the People are to seek the Law and Gospel at
your Mouths; surely then you ought to give utmost diligence to get well
acquainted with the great Doctrines and Duties of Christianity, and to be
mighty in the Scriptures. But then, as I observed, it is highly requisite, and
renders the Preaching of the Gospel very advantageous, to have the Preachers of
it speak Experimentally, feeling the workings of Sin and Corruption, and then
the workings of Grace in their own Souls, and show that they feel the weight
and force of those Truths they offer to others, and then recommend the ^ame by
a Life and Conversation agreeable thereunto. And now this suggests to you how
much you ought to endeavor not only after a Speculative, but a Saving,
Experimental acquaintance with Divine Things. Surely you should pray and strive
with all your might, that the work of Grace may be wrought in your own Souls,
which you are Instrumentally to work in the Souls of others. This it the way to
have the glorious design of this blessed Institution of the Gospel Ministry
answered by you. This is the way for you to come in the fullness of the Blessing
of the Gospel of Christ unto the People that GOD shall send to you, and to have
the pleasure of the LORD prospering in your hands.

4. This might be Improved by Ministers of the Gospel, to Encourage them in,
and prompt them to the faithful discharge of their Office.

For considering the Gospel Ministry is of Divine Institution, when any are
called of GOD to that Office, they may depend upon his presence and blessing to
accompany his own Ordinance; nay, it is no more than Christ has assured them
of, when he told his Apostles, That he would be with them always to the End of
the World, Mat. 28.20. But then the consideration, that the design of their
Office and Ministry is to Convert Sinners, and Edify Saints, should put them
upon doing their u^most, that the End of their Office may be answered. Here I
might say, that Ministers ought to undertake the Ministry of the Word not for
any carnal, worldly sinister designs, but to answer the End of their
Institution, which is the Conversion of Sinners, and having engaged in this
Service, they should give themselves wholly to it; they must be diligent in
their Studies, earnest and frequent in their Prayers; they must in Preaching
the Word give to every one their portion in due season; they must teach,
exhort, and rebuke with all long-suffering, and doctrine, and especially must
they be Examples to their Flocks in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in
Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. And this is the way and the only way for them to
Convert Sinners from the Error of their ways, and so to answer the End of their
Ministry, and thereby make the Wisdom as well as the Goodness of GOD appear
Conspicuous in instituting such an Office, and such an Order of Men among us.

But to conclude at present,

Let us look upon our selves to be advantaged above the greatest part of the
World much every way, but chiefly for that unto us are committed the Oracles of
GOD. And now as we would adore the Wisdom of GOD in writing the great things of
his Law and Gospel unto us, and in sending forth his Ambassadors to Preach the
everlasting Gospel, and show Men the way to Salvation; so let us adore the
sovereign Goodness and Grace of GOD to us, that the lines are fallen to us in
so pleasant a place, and that he has given us so goodly an heritage; that he
has given us his Word to be a lamp to our feet, and as a light unto our paths,
and his Ministers to guide our feet in the way of peace; verily he has not
dealt so with many other Nations: for as for his Statutes, and his Judgments
they have not known them. And now since we Enjoy such precious Means of Grace,
let us consider what is expected from us, and what will become of us, if we
should neglect to improve the price that is put into our hands to get Wisdom
and Grace. Let us consider that our being lifted up to Heaven with Privileges,
will be only the means of aggravating our Guilt, and so of sinking us the
deeper into the bottomless Pit, if we don't Improve them aright. Let us take
the Apostle's Advice and consider the Argument with which he inforces it, Heb.
2. beg. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we
have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip: for if the word spoken by
Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward, How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation,
which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was Confirmed to us by
those that heard him!

Let us then take heed lest we receive the Grace of GOD in vain; but let us do
our utmost that the Word and the Ministry of it which we have set under all our
Days, may answer the Ends of their Institution upon us, and if once we come to
be Converted and brought into a State of Grace by the Word and the Preaching of
it, then we shall rise in our Esteem of it and of those that dispense it unto
us. The Language of a Soul Converted by the Word of GOD will be like that in
Psalm. 19.7.10. The Law of the Lord is perfect, Converting the Soul: the
testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple: more to be desired are
they than Gold, yea than much fine Gold, sweeter also than honey, and the
honeycomb. And as the Converted Soul, the Soul that has felt the Power of the
Word will thus prize it; so will such highly prize and value those who in
Christ's Name dispense it unto them; who should esteem them very highly in Love
for their Works sake, especially such as have been any way Instrumental to our
Conversion or Edification; and we shall be ready to break forth in the words of
the Prophet* Isa. 52.7. How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of him
that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings
of good, that publishes Salvation, that says unto Zion, Thy God reigns!

Sermon, XIV.
I Am upon the Consideration of the External M^^^s of our Regeneration and
Conversion, and so the Wisdom of GOD in appointing such Means in particular to
be attended by us in order to our obtaining the Regenerating Grace of GOD. And
here I have already Instanced in the written Word of GOD, and the ^ublick
Ministry of it, as Instituted Means of Grace, wherein much of the Wisdom of GOD
appears, as they are Means so well adapted to answer the End, and to bring such
as duly attend upon them into a State of Grace. For the Wisdom of GOD appears
as much in appointing proper Means to answer the End proposed, as in proposing
proper Ends. I now proceed to consider some other Instituted Means of Grace,
the suitableness and sufficiency of them to answer the Ends proposed, and so
the Wisdom of GOD in them.

So then,

3. PRAYER is an Instituted Means of Grace, wherein we may see the Wisdom of
GOD.

As for Prayer I cannot pretend to describe it better than I have it done to my
hands, in that Excellent Catechism we have in common Use among us. Namely,

That It is an Offering up of our Desires to GOD for things agreeable to his
Will in the Name of CHRIST, with Confession of our Sins, and thankful
Acknowledgment of his Mercies.

And now that Prayer is Instituted and appointed by GOD, appears from the whole
current of Scripture, where this is considered as an Act of religious Worship
due to GOD, and what he expects and requires at our hands, and is angry with
those that restrain Prayer before him; yea and threatens to pour out his Fury
upon them that Call not upon his Name; and where he also declares himself
delighted with, and glorified by the Prayers and Praises of the Upright. But
then besides such plain Intimations of the Duty of Prayer, we find it expressly
required and demanded of us, Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all Prayer, and
Supplication in the Spirit. 1 These. 5.17. Pray without Ceasing. 1 Timothy 2.8. I
will that Men Pray every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and
doubting. And now that this Duty of Prayer is an Instituted Means of Grace, or
that in the way of this Duty we are to obtain the regenerating and saving Grace
of GOD, is evident from the encouraging Promises to such as attend this Duty in
a right manner. For thus says our Savior, Matthew 7.7, 8. Ask and it shall be
given you: Seek and ye shall find: Knock and it shall be opened unto you: For
every one that asks receives; and he that seeks finds, and to him that
knocks it shall be opened. So Joh. 16.23. Verily, Verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. But then
the holy Spirit in a particular manner, (by which alone regenerating and
sanctifying Grace is wrought in the Soul,) is to be obtained in the way of
Prayer, Luke 11.13. If ye then being evil, know how to give good Gifts unto
your Children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to
them that ask him. Accordingly the Apostle Encourages us to Come boldly to the
Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of
need, Heb. 4.16. And now Prayer is so necessary to our receiving, that there is
no obtaining without it. Ye have not, because ye ask not, James 5.2.

And now GOD's obliging us to give our selves unto Prayer, in order to our
obtaining the regeneting Grace of GOD and to have it carried on in
Sanctification, is an Instance of Wisdom, because nothing is more proper in
general than that Divine Grace should be sought for in order to its being
obtained. For,

1. THIS is the way to have the Fountain of all Grace suitably honored, and
acknowledged by us.

By our applying our selves to GOD in a way of Prayer for renewing and
sanctifying Grace, we profess and acknowledge him to be not only the Father of
all Mercies; but the GOD of all Grace: and the Lord Jesus Christ is
acknowledged as the meritorious Cause of all. Our going to GOD in a way of
Prayer for his Grace, plainly implies our belief that he has it to bestow, and
our Coming in the Name of Christ, is a practical Acknowlegment that he has
purchased this Grace for us, and that it is only through him that it may be
obtained. And accordingly if we obtain the Grace of GOD upon our seeking to him
for it in a way of Prayer, we shall be the more naturally led to give him the
Glory of it. When Converting Grace or sanctifying Grace comes as the Answer of
our Prayers, we shall plainly see, and so shall readily acknowledge, that it is
not of our selves, but the gift of GOD. And now since all Grace is derived from
GOD through Christ, there is all the reason in the world that he should have the
glory of it, and therefore it is wisely and prudently Contrived when he insists
upon being sought unto, and inquired of to do it for us.

2. By Prayer we Express a Sense of our being destitute of the Grace of GOD,
and our desires of it, which is very proper and suitable in order to our
receiving the Divine Grace.

It is very proper and necessary that every one in order to his obtaining the
special and saving Grace of GOD, should be sensible that by Nature he is
entirely destitute of it, that in him naturally, that is in his Flesh, there
dwells no good thing: and it is highly proper we should be sensible of the
Worth and Excellency of Divine Grace, of the absolute Need we stand in of it,
and that we express our desires of it, because by this means upon our obtaining
the Grace of GOD, we shall be led not only to acknowledge GOD as the Author of
all Grace, but shall acknowledge his bestowing it upon us with Thankfulness, we
shall look upon it as an Infinite Kindness, and so shall have our Hearts
enlarged in Love and Gratitude unto GOD the Giver thereof.

3. Prayer is a Means of Grace very proper and suitable, as it serves to
dispose and prepare our Hearts to receive the Divine Grace, and to put the same
into Exercise.

Prayer has a tendency to open the Heart, to soften it, and thereby fit it to
receive the Impressions of divine Grace: the making it our constant Practice to
seek to GOD for his Grace to Renew and Sanctify us, leads us to think of the
Excellency and the Necessity of it, and this will have a tendency to excite our
Desires after it: and those Desires if we should not suppose them to be Grace,
yet they open and prepare the Heart to receive it, and will put us upon using
our Endeavors, in a diligent and careful Attendance upon the Means of Grace in
order to our obtaining it, until at length we find and feel the Grace of GOD
working within us. This we may doubtless have Experienced, that by Exercising
our selves in the Duty of Prayer holy and gracious Desires have been excited
within us, which have grown to holy Purposes and Resolutions, till indeed the
Habits of Grace have been rooted in our Souls. He that Prays with that
earnestness and fervency that he ought, will find that the very Praying for any
Grace in particular, is very helpful to the Exercise of it. Thus for Instance
does a Man Pray that he may Love GOD, he will find that his very Praying for
this, and the Arguments that occur to his own Mind, and which he pleads with
GOD for it, will help very much to put him in the Exercise of Love unto him.
The very Praying that he may Love the Lord his GOD with all his Heart, will
very much help to enlarge his Heart in Love unto him, he will find his
Affections stirred, and inflamed by the very Petition. And thus we shall find
it with respect to any particular Grace we Pray for, or any particular Sin and
Lust that we Pray against. And the same may be said with respect to the other
Parts of Prayer. Such as Confession of Sins, which serves to bring our Sins to
our Remembrance, and so to prepare and dispose our Hearts to Repentance for
them, and watchfulness against them. So again the Calling to Mind GOD's
Mercies, helps to enlarge our Hearts in Love and thankfulness to him. And then
lastly, our Intercessions for others, helps to excite our Charity toward them
we Pray for. So that Prayer, if it be duly and carefully attended, has a
natural tendency, aptitude and fitness to convey saving Grace into the Soul, or
to put it into Exercise, which shows something of the Wisdom of GOD in obliging
us to give our selves unto Prayer in order to our obtaining the regenerating
Grace of GOD, and to continue therein in order to our growth in Grace, and our
advancement to further degrees of Holiness.

4. SINGING of Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs is an Instituted Means of
Grace, very proper and suitable for the End, and so discovers the Wisdom of GOD
therein.

Under the Law, not only Vocal, but Instrumental Music was directed to in the
Worship of GOD. And hence we find the devout Psalmist in the height of his
Devotion frequently Calling, as in the 150th Psalm, upon the Trumpet, the
Psaltery, the H^rp, the Timbrel, the Organs, and all Instruments of Music to
praise the Lord And although under the Evangelical Dispensation which is much
more Spiritual, and has much less of Pomp and Ceremony in it, than the Legal
Dispensation; there is no Direction for Instruments of Music to be used in the
Worship of GOD; yet there is express Direction for Vocal Music, that is for
tuning our Voices in Songs of Praise to GOD. Thus we find in the New Testament
express Precepts and Counsels for Singing Psalms to GOD, and particular
Directions how, and when it is to be performed by us. Thus, Ephesians. 5.19. Speaking
to your selves in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, Singing and making Melody
in your Hearts to the Lord. So, Col. 3.16. almost the same words. And the
Apostle directs us as to the manner of it, when he tells us what his own
Resolution was, namely, that he would Sing with the Spirit, and with the
Understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. Furthermore, We have some general Direction as to
Times and Seasons for this Duty in James 5.13. Is any afflicted, let him Pray:
Is any merry, let him sing Psalms. By all which it appears that Singing of
Psalms and spiritual Songs is a part of Divine Worship under the Gospel as well
as under the Law, and to be attended by all that profess the Name of Christ,
and that as a Means of Grace, an Ordinance in which GOD does sometimes convey
his Grace unto the Soul And now the Propriety and Suitableness of it, and so
the Wisdom of GOD in appointing it, will appear, if we consider in general the
Constitution of our Natures, how closely our sensitive and intellectual Powers
are connected together, and how much they depend upon, and are influenced by
each other, in their Motions and Operations.

We must consider our selves compounded of Body as well as Spirit, and as
having bodily and sensitive Organs, as well as rational and intellective
Faculties: and these sensitive and rational Powers are so blended together in
our present Constitution, that they very much affect each other, and depend
upon each other in their several Affections and Operations. And now, As Singing
or making a melodious Voice does greatly affect and please our Senses,
particularly our Hearing, so it serves as we find by experience to raise and
exhilerate our Spirits, and to put the whole Man into a more lively and
cheerful Frame And th^n considering that the Matter and Subject to be sung with
such a melodious Voice are holy Psalms and spiritual Songs, it serves to turn
that Cheerfulness of Spirit into a religious channel, and to excite an holy Joy
and devout Affections: our Singing spiritual Songs so sublimates and
spiritualizes our Affections, as that our Joy is in the Lord, and our rejoicing
in the GOD of our Salvation. ^^d now many of you can doubtless testify to the
Truth of this from your own Experience, that the tuning the Voice in harmonious
Music serves wonderfully to stir up your Affections: and if they have been
holy Songs that have been sung, they have stirred up holy and devout Affections
much beyond what the bare Reading of them would have done. How much does a
Psalm sung in harmonious Consor* affect us beyond what the bare Reading of it
would have done? And now if Singing of Psalms be such a means of stirring up
holy and devout Affections we must acknowledge it a wise and prudent thing in
GOD to Institute it as a Means to help forward our Conversion and Edification.
For the stirring up of our Affections in a holy and spiritual manner is a great
preparative for our Conversion; and when we are Converted, to carry on the work
of Grace within us: for when the Affections are once stirred up and engaged,
they serve very powerfully to inlighten the Mind, to persuade the Will, to
remove discouragements, and to strengthen every pious and good Resolution of
the Soul.

5. The SABBATH, or the setting apart one Day in seven from worldly Business,
for the immeate Worship and Service of GOD, is an Instituted Means of Grace,
wherein much of the Wisdom of GOD appears.

This GOD ordained from the beginning, that one Day in seven should be
separated and devoted to his immediate Service. GOD finished his Work of
Creation in Six Days, and he rested the seventh Day, and GOD blessed it, and
sanctified it for himself. Genesis 2.3. And God blessed the seventh Day, and
sanctified it, because that he had rested from all his work which he had
created and made So early as this was the Institution of the Sabbath; and GOD
renewed the Institution of it, when he made it one of those Ten Words or
Commandments which he delivered in such an awful and glorious manner upon Mount
Sinai, Exodus 20.8. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy: Six Days shall
thou labor, and do all thy work; but the seventh Day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of Work, etc. And as this Command
is founded upon a particular Reason, viz. GOD's working Six Days in the
Creation of the World, and then Resting the Seventh Day and Blessing it; so
this is a reason that holds for one as well as for another; for Christians as
well as Jews: and upon that account we are all as much obliged to keep a
Sabbath as they; that is, one Day in seven: if not the particular Day; for so
far it is a moral Precept founded on reasons perpetually and universally
obliging. But then as to the particular Day of the seven, That is but a
positive Institution; and for particular Reasons may be changed. Accordingly
ever since the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, which was on the First Day
of the Week, that Day is fixed upon for the Christian Sabbath, as the seventh
Day of the Week was for the Jewish Sabbath. And this is a Day wherein we are to
separate our selves from the World, the Cares and the Business of it, except
what is of Necessity and Mercy; and Employ the h^ly Time in public and private
Duties of Religion. And now GOD's appointing one Day in seven to be separated
from the World to the Duties of Religion, is a Means of Grace wherein much of
the Wisdom of GOD appears, because it has such a happy tendency to promote the
work of Conversion and Sanctification within us. For he that considers any
thing will be sensible that it is absolutely necessary for us in order to our
Conversion, and the progress of Grace in Sanctification, that our Minds should
at some particular Times be taken off from the World, the Business and Cares of
it, and fixed upon the things that are Divine, that are heavenly and of a
spiritual Nature. We must have time to think not only of providing for our
Bodies; but also to think how to secure the Salvation of our Souls. And we all
know too well by Experience that when we are engaged in worldly Business, we
cannot attend the Business of Religion and of our Souls to any purpose: We find
that when our Hands are engaged in worldly Business, our Heads and our Hearts
will be very much taken up about the same, insomuch that whatever thoughts of
GOD or of Religion arise in our Minds at such a Time, they are very distracted,
broken and interrupted, seldom or never ripen so as to produce any good
Purposes, much less to produce any good Practices. So that we our selves, if we
were resolved upon working out the Salvation of our Souls, should think it
highly necessary to set some time apart from our secular Affairs to attend that
Business. And because we should find our selves very apt, from the hurries of
worldly Business, to postpone, and put off the time with the hopes of being
more at leisure, and having a more convenient Opportunity for it; and when that
time we allotted upon comes, shall find something else to interrupt and hinder
us: I say we should find our selves so apt to defer and put off the Business of
Religion, that our own Reason would tell us, that if ever we intended to pursue
the Work of Conversion and Salvation to any purpose, we must not leave the
Times for the Exercises of Religion variable, and at uncertainties; but must
six upon some certain, stated Times, wherein to attend that Business, and not
suffer our selves (unless upon some extraordinary Occasions) to be diverted or
hindered from it. Our own reason upon a little Experience of our selves would
suggest this to be very necessary Accordingly this is a Case that GOD has
wisely considered, and has stated and fixed some certain Times for his more
immediate Service, and attendance upon religious Duties. He has not left it
variable and uncertain, for every one to appoint a time for themselves as it
would suit their particular Occasions; some one Day, and some another; but he
has fixed a certain Time, a particular Day for all to Employ in spiritual
Exercises, which every one knowing may order their Affairs accordingly. And as
there was Wisdom in having the Time fixed and stated, so the proportion of time
set apart for religious Exercises is a further Instance of Divine Prudence;
namely, A Seventh part of Time. GOD in appointing but one Day in Seven, has
graciously accommodated himself to the present Circumstances of Men: for the
Sabbaths are not so frequent, nor do they take up so much of our Time, but that
every Man may easily spare such a proportion from his Secular Occasions to
attend the Service of GOD, and of his Soul; and it leaves Men utrerly
inexcusable, that look upon the Sabbath as a burden, and neglect to sanctify it
as they ought, by resting from all worldly Employments and Recreations. For
when GOD who is the Lord of our Time, and has a right to us, and to all our
Service, allows six Days for our own Employment, it must needs be very base and
ungrateful to deny him the religious Services of the Seventh. But then on the
other hand it was Wisdom in GOD not to set the Sabbaths at a greater distance
from each other. For he knew what Carnal and Earthly Hearts we have within us,
and how apt we are while employed in worldly Business to have our Affections
engrossed thereby, and that if the Revolutions of the Sabbath were more seldom,
wherein we were to be called off from worldly Business and worldly Cares, we
should quickly sink into such a worldly Frame of Spirit, that we should not
without the utmost difficulty be recovered out of it. We all find by Experience
that while we are pursuing our worldly Business, the World and the things of it
steal our Affections, and we grow so cold, careless and unconcerned about
Religion and the grand Affairs of our Souls, that we need to be taken off from
our worldly Business, at least once a Week to engage in religious Exercises in
a set and solemn manner, to prevent our Souls cleaving unto the dust, and to
elevate and raise them up to the Contemplation of, and delight in things more
noble and truly Excellent.

Furthermore, The Sabbaths ought to be so near together as that with proper and
suitable Care the Word we Read or Hear, and the Ordinances we attend, may in
some good measure be retained by us for our use until the return of another,
which we could not suppose if there was a much greater distance between them.
In short, A Sabbath seems to be absolutely necessary for the begetting,
supporting and advancing Religion among a People; it seems as if not only the
Life and Power, but the very form and show of Religion would utterly fail, if
the Keeping of a Sabbath Day should be laid aside: and therefore it must needs
be an Instance of Wisdom, as well as Goodness in GOD to appoint a Sabbath, and
at such distance as that every Man may easily spare the time from his outward
Affairs to attend upon them, and yet so near together, as that the good
Impressions that are made upon our Mind on one, may with Care remain till the
return of another.

I might go on, and show the Wisdom of GOD in Instituting solemn Assemblies for
public Worship, together with the Sacraments of the New Testament, from the
suitableness of them to answer their Intention: But I must leave the
Consideration of them at present, because I think what has been already said
ought not to pass without some particular

APPLICATION.
So then in the first place,

1. What we have heard concerning the Duty of Prayer, and of it is being a Means
of Grace, teaches us, That if ever we would obtain the Converting and Saving
Grace of GOD, we must give our selves unto Prayer.

Since GOD has appointed it as a Means by which he will convey his Grace and
Spirit to us, there is all the reason in the world that it should be attended
by us. Since Converting Grace is to be obtained in the way of Prayer, and it
cannot be expected without it, surely we should Pray without Ceasing, and should
Pray always with all Prayer, even with all Kinds of Prayer, viz. Public, and
Private or Family, and Secret or Closet Prayer.

1. We should attend upon Public Prayer.

Prayer is a part of that public Worship that is to be paid to GOD in his
House; hence his House is called an House of Prayer, Isa. 56.7. We must
therefore go into GOD's Tabernacle and worship at his Footstool: we must join
the Assemblies of GOD's People, in offering up our united Prayers and
Supplications to the GOD of all Grace, for the bestowing his Grace and Spirit
upon us.

2. We must attend Family- Prayer.

We must see to it that our Families be such as Call upon the Name of the Lord:
Our Houses must be Houses of Prayer: Our Families little Assemblies for Divine
Worship; with whom we are to Implore the divine Grace and Spirit to be afforded
to us, and to our Children and Servants, that we and they may be renewed by
divine Grace, and so made the Children and Servants of GOD by Regeneration.

3. But then besides this, There is Closet or Secret Prayer to be attended by
us.

When we pray we must enter into our Closet, and when we have shut the Door,
must pray to our Father that is in Secret, and our Father that sets in Secret
shall reward us openly; as our Savior himself assures us, Matthew. 6.6.

And now, If we would obtain Mercy and find Grace to help in time of need; we
must be frequent in our Addresses to the Throne of Grace: No Day should pass
without our fervent Supplications to Heaven both in the Morning and the Evening
of it. Nay the Practice of the devout Psalmist is very commendable, and should
be Imitated by those whose Business will allow of it: who says, Psalm. 55.17.
Evening and Morning, and at Noon will I Pray and Cry aloud, and he shall hear
my Voice. So is that of the Prophet Daniel, who notwithstanding the Decree that
was made against it, and the Danger he knew he run by it, of being Cast into
the Den of Lions, yet Kneeled three times a Day and prayed and gave Thanks, as
he did aforetime, Dan. 6.10, 11. Nay in short, We ought always to be in a
praying Frame, and ought much more frequently than this to be offering up our
pious Ejaculations to GOD, even upon every Occasion, besides the more stated
Times of solemn Prayer.

And now to move and persuade to the Practice of this Duty of Prayer, merely
from the Consideration, that it is a Means of Converting saving Grace unto us,
let us consider two or three things.

1. The Excellency and the Necessity of Converting Grace.

It is the one thing needful, and comprehends all other Blessings. This is the
Restoration of the Divine Image, and what renders us the Objects of GOD's
Delight and Complacence, and fits us for the sweetest and most intimate
Communion with him, and for the full and everlasting Enjoyment of him. Now
surely this is worth our seeking and asking for. This is the Wisdom, the
Merchandise of which is better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the gain
thereof than fine Gold. She is more precious than Rubies, and all the things we
can desire are not to be compared with her: She is a Tree of Life to them that
lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that retains her. Surely then we
ought to Cry after this Wisdom, and lift up our voice for Understanding: we
should seek for her as for Silver, and search for her as for hid Treasure. For
it is infinitely Worth our taking such Pains to obtain.

2. Consider How reasonable a thing it is that we should apply our selves to
GOD in a way of Prayer for his Grace.

We could not desire nor expect to obtain this Grace upon more easy terms than
asking for it. There are none of us can think it reasonable or proper that GOD
should bestow his Grace upon us without a suitable Acknowledgment of him by
humble Addresses and Applications to him. There is nothing more just and
reasonable than that GOD should be sought unto and Inquired of to do it for us.

3. Consider How Inexcusable we shall be, if we remain in our Unconverted
State, through our Neglect of Prayer to GOD for his Grace to Change us.

It is to be feared this is the Case of many, that they remain in a graceless,
unconverted State, because they have not sought to GOD by Prayer for his Grace:
They wickedly and wilfully restrain Prayer before GOD, they will rather go
without the Grace of GOD than ask him for it. Or if they are not so stubborn
and wilful as to refuse to pray, yet through a sinful Carelessness and
Inconsiderateness they neglect it one time after another. Or if they should
sometimes attend the outward part of the Duty yet it is only for Fashions sake,
and to save their Credit and Reputation among Men; or to quiet and still their
own Consciences, without any proper desires of the Grace of GOD: For though they
worship him with their Mou^hs and honor him with their Lips, their Hearts are
far from him. And now as such Men shall not receive any thing from the Lord,
but will remain in their graceless State: so they will be utterly Inexcusable,
they will have no sufficient Plea for their remaining in a State of Nature and
going on in a sinful Course. It wont be enough for them to say they could not
Conv^rt or Change their own Hearts; because if they would have sought to GOD
aright for his Grace, they might have obtained it; for our Savior has assured
us, That our heavenly Father will give the holy Spirit to them that ask him,
Luk 11.13.

2. What we have heard of singing Psalms and Spiritual Songs, as an Instituted
Means of Grace, aff^rds Matter of Reproof to such who Undervalue and Neglect
this Duty.

It is a common Thing for some Christians to Entertain very slighty Tho'ts of
this part of Religious Exercise: they are ready to look upon it as a thing
Indifferent, and so look upon themselves to be at their liberty whether to
neglect or observe it; and because they have not a melodious Voice or musical
Ear, they excuse themselves entirely from this part of divine Worship. And when
the Congregation are united in Singing the Songs of Zion, they are not only
silent as if they were wholly unconcerned with it; but it seems to be lost time
to them, rather than any profitable part of religious Worship: for they don't
find their Hearts at all moved or affected with it. But now since it is a Means
of Grace that GOD has Instituted, we may Conclude that he will make it useful
and helpful to us in our Conversion and for our Fo^^ification. And therefore
such are greatly to blame and justly to be reproved, that don't make what
Improvement they can of this, as well as of the other Means of Grace. Such are
to blame who don't Endeavor after so much Skill in Singing at least as to be
able to join with the Assembly in carrying on this heavenly Exercise: And if
there should be any that cannot attain to this, yet they are very Criminal if
they don't give diligent Attendance to what is Sung, and if they don't
Endeavor as much as possible to have their ^ffections and Devotion stirred up
her by. And it is not to be doubted but that if Christians made more Conscience
of attending upon, or joining in this Duty, and were more concerned to have the
good designs of this Ordinance answered, it would prove much more beneficial to
Christians with respect to their advance in Grace and spiritual Comfort and
holy Joy, than many of them are sensible of at present.

3. What we have heard concerning the Sabbath's being a Means of Grace, gives
us all matter of Thankfulness that we have the free and peaceable Enjoyment of
GOD's Sabbaths, and intimates to us how careful we should be to Improve them.

It is certainly an unspeakable Privilege to have one Day in seven set apart
for the Service of GOD, for us to retire from the World, the Business and Cares
of it, and to have Time and Opportunity to employ our Minds upon divine and
heavenly Subjects, and to have both Soul and Body engaged in spiritual and
heavenly Exercises, such as praying to him, and praising of him, hearing and
reading his Word, and attending upon him in all his holy Institutions. Now we
should be Thankful that GOD has revealed his Mind to us in this matter, and has
appointed a certain Day for us to serve him in. And it is as evident also that
we should with the utmost Care and Diligence be employing our selves upon this
Day in the Business for which it is separated and set apart. The Sabbath of the
Lord must be our delight, as well as the holy of the Lord and honorable; and
we must honor GOD upon his Day, by not doing our own ways, nor finding our own
pleasures, nor speaking our own words. Let us see to it that we comply with the
holy and gracious designs of GOD in appointing a Sabbath. Remember the
Sabbath Day to keep it holy, is a moral Precept, and perpetually obliging, even
to Christians as well as Jews. And there is scarce any thing that GOD does more
insist upon, than that we should sanctify his Sabbaths and reverence his
Sanctuary. Let us therefore see to the Sanctification of the Lord's Day, by
resting from all worldly Employments and Recreations, and by spending the Time
in public and private Exercises of GOD's Worship, excepting what Works of
Necessity and Charity call for. And this is the way to have the ends and
designs of a Sabbath answered: by such a religious Sanctification of the
Sabbath, it will became a very powerful Means of Grace; hereby we shall be
gradually trained up in Grace and Holiness, till we shall be fitted for, and
brought to that Place where we shall celebrate an Eternal Sabbath, and possess
that glorious Rest which remains for the People of GOD.

Sermon, XV.
THE point that is yet under consideration is the Wisdom of GOD, that manifests
it self in the Means he has Instituted and Appointed for us to attend upon, in
order to our having the Work of Grace begun and carried on in our Souls. And
the Manner that I proposed to illustrate the Wisdom of GOD in the instituted
Means of Grace, was by setting forth the propriety and suitableness of the
Means to answer the End proposed. And this I have done already as to several of
them; such as the written Word of GOD, the public Ministry of it, Prayers,
Singing of Psalms, and spiritual Songs, the keeping of a Sabbath Day, or the
setting apart one Day in Seven for the Business of Religion. I have considered
these already, and shown the propriety and suitableness of them to prepare our
Hearts for the Grace of GOD, and to carry on the Work of Grace begun in our
Souls. Although they are insufficient of themselves to work saving Grace within
us, yet they are Instruments in the hand of the Spirit so well fitted to answer
their design, that the Wisdom of GOD very clearly shines in Instituting and
Appointing them.

I now go on to say,

6. Solemn Assemblies for Public Worship, is an Instituted Means of Grace so
well adapted to answer the End, that the Wisdom of GOD very visibly appears
therein.

That GOD has appointed solemn Assemblies, holy Convocations for the
worshipping him in a public manner is very evident from his Word; where the
thing is not only plainly and necessarily employed, but fully expressed. Thus if
we look back into the Jewish State, we shall find that public Worship, even
the Worshipping GOD in solemn Assemblies was Instituted for them. Nay (as one
Dr. Sherlock.
observes) The whole of that Worship commanded by Moses, seems to be of a
public Nature, and to be performed in a public manner. Public Places were
appointed for the Worship of GOD, such as the Tabercle first of all, and the
Temple, where all the Sacrifices were brought to be offered by the Priests, who
were public Persons. Moreover, there were public Times of Worship Instituted
by GOD for that Nation, such as the seventh day Sabbath, the new Moons and
annual Festivals, when all their Males were to appear three times in a Year
before the Lord, which are called holy Convocations, or Assemblings together.
Lev. 23. And they are called Assemblies and solemn Meetings, Isa. 1.13.

And as there were solemn Assemblies for public Worship under the Law, so are
there under the Gospel Dispensation, and it is a Duty plainly and necessarily
supposed all along throughout the New Testament.

This is contained and employed in the very Name of a Church, that is given to
Christians; for (as the forementioned Author observes) the word (...) properly
signifys a Meeting and Assembly which is called together; hence he defines a
Christian Church to be a Society of Men united, and combined together in the
faith and worship of Christ. It is a Society that agree to worship GOD and
CHRIST, or GOD through CHRIST, in a united, that is a public manner.

Furthermore, some of the Ordinances of Christ were such as was requisite they
should be attended by the Meeting of Christians together in one Place, and so
in a public manner. As particularly that of the Lord's Supper. Accordingly we
read of their coming together in the Church, and their coming together into one
place, to eat the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11.18, 20.

But yet to say no more on this head, the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 10.25.
Expressly cautions and forbids, The forsaking the assembling of themselves
together, as the manner of some was. Now this prohibition necessarily supposes
a positive Precept to assemble themselves together; and that assembling
together could be for nothing else than for the public worship of GOD in the
ways of his appointment: their Meeting together was to offer up their united
prayers and praises, to hear the word of the Lord dispensed by his Ambassadors,
to attend upon the Sacraments, to receive the Blessing that GOD commands in his
House, and the like.

And now GOD's appointing and ordaining Christian Assemblies, wherein we may in
a public united manner pay our religious worship to him, is of such a nature
and tendency, both for the honor of GOD, and for the bringing forward their
own Conversion, and promoting their Sanctification, that a great deal of the
Wisdom of GOD appears therein. For,

1. Hereby GOD has a great deal of Honor done him which is due unto his Name.

Every one that considers who GOD is, and the relation he stands in to any of
his Creatures, will be sensible that all the honor that can possibly be paid
him by any of them, is due unto him: and it is certainly the Wisdom of GOD to
get all that honor and glory from them that they are capable of rendering to
him, because it is the highest end he can propose. And now as every private act
of religious Worship is a doing honor to GOD, much more is He honored by the
public acknowledgments, and adorations that are paid unto him. When a People
meet together in a solemn manner, and offer up their united Prayers and Praises
to Him, it is such an open, public acknowledgment of his Infinite Being and
Perfections, and of all his wondrous Works, that it serves very much to magnify
and honor him in the face of the World; and yet it is but an honor that is
justly due unto him. For he is our common Father; Have we not all one Father?
has not one God created us? Mal. 2.10. Surely then we ought openly to own him
as such, and publicly to manifest our honor, reverence and regard for him. He
is likewise our common bountiful Benefactor; He bestows upon us not only the
private personal and particular Mercies that we enjoy, but all those public
Blessings that we enjoy in common with others. As Men are joined and united
together in Bodies or Societies, whether Natural, Civil or Ecclesiastic, so
there are mercies and favors which they need, and which they receive as such a
Society or Community. And surely there is all the reason in the World, that as
such they should acknowledge their dependence upon GOD, by uniting their
prayers for the public Mercies they need, and their praises for those favors
they have received. But it is not my business so much to consider the justice
and reasonableness of public Worship, as it is an honor due to GOD; but as it
is an Instituted Means of Grace and so the suitableness of it to promote the
Conversion, and Sanctification of Sinners.

Therefore I proceed to say,

2. The Instituting public Worship is an Instance of Wisdom in GOD, as it has
such a wonderful aptitude and fitness (through the operations of the Spirit of
GOD accompanying it) to begin and to increase the Work of Grace within us.

By what has been formerly said, it appears that acts of Worship, such as
prayer, reading and hearing the Word, and the like, are (...) helps to
Conversion, although performed in a private manner; but they are much more so
when they are done in Public Assemblies of Christians, all joining together in
divine Service And now this way of worshipping GOD is eminently serviceable on
these accounts, viz. as it gives credit to Religion, and as it gives Men an
opportunity for making an open Profession of it, and also as it serves to
stimulate, to animate and quicken us in our duty.

1. The worshipping of GOD in a public manner is wisely contrived as it serves
to give credit, and reputation to Religion.

It is most certainly of great advantage to the interest of Religion, and would
very much tend to promote the same in and among Men, to have all bars,
hindrances and impediments removed out of the way, and to have all possible
encouragements to induce, and persuade us to the embracing of it. And now
considering how precious a good Name is in it self, and considering how
naturally we desire the honor and praise of Men, no outward consideration can
be more powerful to persuade us to the external profession and practice of
Religion, than its being in fashion, its being a thing of good report and for a
Man's honor to profess and practice it. And although this be a very inferior
motive to Religion, and what will by no means render our religious performances
acceptable to GOD; yet by being brought into the practice of Religion from such
a consideration, they may at length by the Spirit of GOD setting in be led to
act from higher and more noble Principles. And now Religion and the worship of
GOD being carried on in a public manner serves very much to give reputation to
it, and thereby to recommend it to our practice: for when all Men among whom we
dwell make a public profession of Religion, and in a public manner attend
religious duties, they hereby declare for it, they own it, and approve of it;
and so it cannot be any shame or disgrace, but an honor and reputation to a Man
to be religious, nay it is a scandal and a reproach to a Man in such a Place
not to be religious. And thus we find it among our selves, that because every
Man almost attends upon religious Duties in a public manner, it is so far from
being a reproach to be religious, that such are branded with infamy and
disgrace that are openly and professedly Irreligious. So that this is one
advantage of public Worship, or of Religion's being carried on in an open
public manner, that it prompts and encourages every Man that has a regard to
his credit and good name, to attend upon it.

2. Public Worship is a very suitable means of Grace, and so wisely contrived,
as by it we make a so^emn profession of Religion, and thereby bind our se^ves
the f^ster to GOD, and to our Duty.

By our joining our selves with any Christian assembly in the Worship of GOD,
we make a profession of Christianity. And by every act of public Worship, we
openly, and in the presence of all the People profess, and declare our selves
to be the Disciples of JESUS CHRIST: every time we come to the House of GOD for
divine Worship, we declare CHRIST to be our LORD and Master, we profess a
subjection to his Laws and Ordinances, and an entire conformity to his Will, as
it is revealed to us in his Gospel. We profess to love and serve him, we
professedly and in the eye of the World make a solemn surrender, and dedication
of our selves to GOD.

Now such a public act of Worship is very proper, as it is a mighty spur and
motive to Religion; for he that in a public solemn manner professes himself to
be a Christian, if he be not void of thought and consideration, will be led to
look upon himself under peculiar obligations to be religious, because of his
profession: for if he thinks any thing of the matter, he will bethink how
unreasonable and absurd it is to profess to be Christians to the World, and to
attend upon the external Duties, and not be Christians in our hearts; he will
think how absurd it is to call Christ Lord, Lord, as he does by going to his
House and Ordinances, and not be careful to do what he Commands. He will also
most naturally be led to think how provoking it must needs be to GOD and CHRIST
to mock him, as he does when he don't live as he professes and pretends by his
outward Attendance on Ordinances; and now surely such thoughts will have a
mighty tendency to stir Men up to see to it that their hearts and lives be more
agreeable to their profession.

3. Public Worship is very proper as it serves very much to quicken and stir
up our Devotion.

All private and secret acts of Wo^ship have a tendency to put us into a grave,
serious and devout frame of spirit, but more especially is it so as to all acts
of public Worship. When Christians join together in the Worship of GOD, they
stimulate and stir up one another to a higher strain of Devotion, and make one
another more lively, active and vigorous in the Worship of GOD. If we are apt
to be dull, lifeless and formal in private Duties of Religion; yet the joining
with others in those Duties will oftentimes serve to cure us of sloth and
dullness, and make us fervent in spirit when we are serving the Lord. The
Psalmist seems to be sensible of this, when he was hindered from the public
Worship and Ordinances, by the account he gives of the joy he took in such
solemn Meetings, and by the earnest desires he expresses for his return to the
enjoyment of them. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God, When shall I
come and appear before him? I pour out my soul in me: for I had gone with the
multitude, I went ^^^h them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and
praise, with the multitude that kept holy day, Psalm. 42.2, 4. My soul thirsts
for thee, my flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty land where no water
is, to see thy power, and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary,
Psalm. 63.1, 2. My soul longs, yea, even faints for the courts of the LORD:
Psalm. 84.2. Now he could in his absence wait upon GOD in private acts of
religion, but his expressing such longing desires to the Courts of the Lord,
must be (as he intimates) because he saw more of GOD's power and glory in the
Sanctuary than in the Closet. And surely we may easily imagine that the coming
with a number of GOD's People to his House, and having the Prayers offered up
to GOD by his Ministers who are consecrated to this sacred Office, with gravity
solemnity and importunity, and having the Word of GOD delivered by his
Ambassadors with Authority and if to these we add the devout posture and
countenance of the assembly, and all uniting together in shouting forth the
Praises of GOD in Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs; I say, considering these
things, we may easily imagine that there is a very natural tendency in them to
excite that awe and reverence, that seriousness, that gravity and devotion in
our Souls, as will very much prepare them for receiving the divine Grace, and
for our improvement and advancement in it when received. For when the mind is
composed, grave and serious, then is a fit time for GOD to be setting in with
his Grace, and making such im^^essions upon the Soul, as shall be lasting and
abiding And I appeal to the experience of all, both Saints and Sinners, whether
they have ever found any thing more helpful to stir up a seriousness and
gravity of Spirit than going to the House GOD, and engaging in the services
thereof.

7. The Sacraments are Instituted Means of Grace wherein much of the Wisdom of
GOD appears.

Now the Sacraments of the New Testament are Baptism, and the Lord's Supper,
both of which are so well adapted to answer the end proposed thereby, that the
Wisdom of GOD cannot but appear in them.

1 Baptism is an instituted Means of Grace that serves very much to answer the
end proposed.

This is an Ordinance instituted by Christ in the Commission he gave to his
Apostles, Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptising them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And he that
considers the Nature of this Ordinance, the true signification, and meaning of
it, will see a great deal of propriety and suitableness in it, and that which
with the blessing of GOD serves very much to prepare the heart to receive the
Impressions of divine Grace. As for the outward sign in Baptism, it is the
washing, or sprinkling with Water, which in general signifies, and represents
the blood of Christ, with all the saying benefits that are purchased therewith,
and are by the Spirit of GOD applied to all true Believers. Baptism is a Seal
of the Covenant of Grace, whereby is represented the benefits of the Covenant,
and GOD's engagement to bestow the same upon us, as also our engagement to be
the Lord's. It is an Ordinance in which we give up our selves to GOD in CHRIST,
and whereby CHRIST and all saving benefits are conveyed to us: Accordingly
Baptism signifies our being ingraffed into CHRIST, our being united to him, and
made Members of that body, of which he is the head, and so it signifies not
only our obligations to him but our being in the way of deriving from him all
that grace and mercy that we stand in need of. That washing or sprinkling with
water signifies our being washed from our sins in the blood of Christ, which is
called the blood of sprinkling, and which is said to cleanse from all sin, Heb.
12.24. 1 John 1.7. Hence says the Apostle, Act. 2.38. Repent, and be baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins. It
likewise signifies our Regeneration, or new Birth. Hence we read of being born
of water, and of the spirit, Joh. 3.5. As also of the Washing of Regeneration,
and Renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. Furthermore it is considered as our
conforming to Christ in his Death, and his Resurrection, that as he died for
sin and rose again for our Justification; so Baptism signifies our dying to
sin, and living to righteousness. For thus says the Apostle, Romans 6.3, 4. Know
ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized
into his Death; therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so
we also should walk in newness of life. And now if we consider these things,
the outward sign, and the things signified by Baptism, we shall see a great
deal of significancy, suitableness and propriety in the Ordinance to answer the
ends proposed, even to prepare and dispose us to receive the Grace of GOD; and
so the wisdom of GOD in appointing it.

And here I might first of all observe the propriety and suitableness af the
outward sign made use of in the Ordinance, viz. Water. Now what is signified by
the Ordinance, is our being washed and cleansed from our sins, from the guilt,
and from the filth of them, our being purged, and purifyed from dead works to
serve the living GOD. And what could be more significant of this than Water?
This is of a cleansing nature, and therefore what more proper to represent the
blood of Christ, which cleanses from all sin, and by which we are said to be
washed from our sins? Moreover Christ is very frequently spoken of in the Old
Testament under this Metaphor. Thus he is called, A well of living Waters, and
Streams from Lebanon, Cant. 4.15. So, Z^ch. 13.1. In that day shall there he a
fountain opened to the house of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for
sin, and for uncleanness: Meaning Christ, and the saving benefits that he
should purchase with his blood. So then nothing is more common than to have the
holy Spirit in all the blessed Influences of it represented to us under the
similitude of Water. Isai. 44.3. For I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my spirit upon thy seed,
and my blessing upon thine offspring. And now what Element could be more
significant, more apt or natural, is to represent and signify the conveyance of
these Blessings to us, than the pouring, or sprinkling of water on us, as it is
in Baptism?

But I would observe in the next place, The aptitude and fitness of this
Ordinance to answer the end and design of it, even to convey the Grace of GOD
unto us.

And now he that considers the declared end and design of the Ordinance, and
what is naturally suggested to us therein, will see that it is well adapted to
answer the End, by preparing and disposing our hearts to receive the Grace of
GOD, which he conveys to those that attend this Ordinance in a right manner.

1. Here I may say in the first place, The nature and design of this Ordinance
is to bind Men unto their duty; and he that considers the declared end and
design of it, will be led to look upon himself under peculiar obligations to
observe the Precepts of the Gospel; an apprehension of which will be of great
advantage to prepare us for the Grace of GOD.

It is cer^ainly an advantage to a Man to be bound unto his duty, provided he
be sensible of his obligations, because this will put him upon using the
greater care and endeavor to do it, and will put him upon being the more
earnest with GOD for his Grace to help him in it. Now he that is Baptized, if
he will give himself leave to think, will be naturally led to consider, that by
his Baptism he is laid under the strongest obligations to be the Lord's, he
will consider that by his Baptism he is made a member of that body of which
Christ is the head, and therefore ought to be in entire subjection to him: He
will consider that by his Baptism he is dedicated and given up to GOD, and that
if this was done for him by his Patents in his Infancy, yet he is obliged to
stand to the engagement, and renew the dedication of himself, and that not in
formality only but in truth and sincerity, as ever he expects to receive any
benefit by the Ordinance. He will consid^r that Baptism saves not by putting
away the fi^th of the flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience, That is, by
living agreeable to his baptismal Covenant engagements. Moreover, he will
consider it as representing and signifying his Regeneration, and that therefore
if he would bear any conformity to it, and so receive any benefit, or advantage
by it, he must dye unto sin, and live unto righteousness Now I say, a serious
consideration of those things, which would be naturally suggested to us from
the nature and design of Baptism, would lead us, in a sense of the peculiar
obligations we are under, to live according to our baptisma^ Vows; which would
lead us to be earnestly desiring the divine Grace to help us therein, and to
quicken us to improve all the help and assistance GOD is already affording us
therefore, which will prepare us to receive what we further stand in need of*

2. This Ordinance is a very fit instrument to prepare us to receive the Grace
of GOD, as it gives us all possible Encouragement to be seeking after it, and
the surest foundation to depend upon obtaining it.

In order to our obtaining the Grace of GOD, we must seek for it and as we must
have some encouragement to put us upon seeking, so it is necessary that this
seeking should be with humble hope and confidence of obtaining. If any of you
lack wisdom, let him ask of God that gives to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not, but let him ask in faith nothing wavering, Jam. 1.5, 6. But now
this faith, or confidence must be upon some foundation, and among other things
our Baptism affords a very good foundation for us to depend upon GOD for his
Grace. For by Baptism we are united to Christ as to our head, and now this we
may be assured of, that Christ as the head is willing to communicate to all his
members. We by Baptism are ingraffed into him, and surely he will as readily
convey spiritual life and nourishment into us, as the root and stock does to
the branches, if we are but ready to receive it. In short, as I have said
before, it is a Seal of the Covenant of divine Grace wherein Christ with all
the blessings of the Covenant are not only represented, but are ready to be
bestowed upon us, if we will but receive him: the Word and Covenant of GOD
stands engaged to this in Baptism, which gives us all possible assurance of
obtaining upon our seeking. And now our having such assurance enables us to
seek with the confidence that is necessary to prepare us to receive it. Many
other things might be said as to the usefulness of Baptism, and so the
Goodness, and the Wisdom of GOD in making it a standing Ordinance in his Church.

But I proceed,

2. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is an Ordinance wonderfully adapted, for
conveying Spiritual and Saving benefits unto our Souls.

This is an Ordinance instituted by Christ the Night before he suffered* a
particular account of which Institution we have, Matthew. 26.26. And in other
Evangelists The outward Elements and Signs are Bread and Wine, broken and
poured out, eaten and drunk, by which religious Ceremony is represented and
signified the Death and Sufferings of Christ for us. 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often
as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he
come. But then it is not only a representation of his sufferings, but of all
the blessings that he has purchased by his Death; yea, and an actual Exhibition
of them to all that come in a right manner to the Ordinance. 1 Cor. 10.16. The
cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?
and the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

Furthermore, this Ordinance is to be considered as a Seal of the Covenant of
Grace, as well as Baptism, wherein as GOD promises and engages all the benefits
of the New Covenant to us; so we do herein renew our Covenant-engagements to
GOD. Every time we come to this Ordinance we professedly renew the dedication
of our selves to GOD, and lay our selves under new and fresh obligations to
love him and serve him, and to keep all his Commandments.

And now he that will but consider the Ordinance it self, the nature, and the
design of it, will see that it is wisely contrived to answer it is design, even
to convey the Grace of GOD unto us if not for our Conversion, yet at least for
our spiritual nourishment, and growth in Grace. It is an Ordinance that has a
wonderful tendency to put as into a serious, devout frame of spirit, to stir up
our affections, and thereby fit and prepare our hearts for the Spirit of GOD to
work upon. Nay it gives us such lively representations of Christ, of his dying
love, and his saving benefits, that our eye affects our heart to such a degree
as to put every Grace within us into exercise.

Thus for instance, what could be contrived more powerfully to discover to us
the evil of Sin, and so to dispose our hearts to unfeigned Repentance for all
our Sins, than to see the Eternal SON of GOD wounded for our transgressions,
and bruised for our iniquities? What could better convince us of the infinite
Evil there is in Sin, than to see the cruel sufferings that the Son of GOD
endured before he could make Atonement for it? What could be more effectual to
set us against sin, and to beget an hatred and abhorrence of it within us, than
to see the sorrows, the tortures, the inexpressible agonies it put the Son of
GOD unto, when it was but Imputed to him? And what could serve better to
strengthen our resolutions against sin for the time to come, than to see Christ
bleeding and dying for sin, and to consider that by our returning again to sin
we do as it were crucify afresh the Lord of Life, and put him to an open shame?
Now all this is done in the holy Sacrament, for therein Christ is evidently set
forth as crucified among us.

Again, what better way could there be contrived to stir up devout affections,
and to inflame our hearts with love, than to have a sensible representation of
an Unparalled instance of infinite love made unto us? What could serve better
to fill our hearts with love to GOD and CHRIST, than to see GOD expressing such
infinite love to us as to give his only begotten, and dearly beloved Son to dye
for us? And to see the Lord JESUS CHRIST expressing a love to us stronger than
death, which many waters could not quench, nor the floods drown? To see him who
knew no sin of his own, made sin for us, and to bear our sins in his own body
on the tree, and to submit to the most cruel, cursed and shameful death on our
accounts? Verily GOD has commended his love to us in that while we were yet
Sinners, CHRIST dyed for us; and surely our hearts must be very hard and
stupid, if they are not warmed and melted, if they are not all in a flame of
love at the sensible representation of this dying love in the holy Sacrament.

Again, what better and more effectual method could be taken to excite and
strengthen our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, than to see him suffering the
penalties of the law for us, and satisfying the demands of divine Justice on
our account, and so making way for GOD, consistent with his Justice, Holiness,
and the honor of all his perfections, to pardon, and accept us? What can serve
better to convince us that he is the alsufficient Savior, able to save unto
the uttermost; than to see him not only pleading in our behalf, but to see him
paying the price for our ransom, to see him make his Soul an offering for sin,
and pouring it out unto death for us, and thereby finishing transgression, and
making an end of sin, and bringing in an everlasting righteousness? All which
is set before us in this blessed Ordinance, and that in such a lively and
affecting manner, that whilst we are at it, celebrating the Memorials of his
death, our Souls will make their boast in GOD their Savior, saying with the
Apostle, Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession
for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Romans 8.34, 35.

And thus I might go on to other instances, but these may suffice to show how
well this Sacrament is adapted to excite and strengthen divine Grace within us,
and so the Wisdom of GOD in this blessed Institution.

And thus I have considered the instituted Means of Grace, those that we are to
make use of, and give our Attendance upon, and have taken notice of the Wisdom
of GOD appearing in the suitableness and propriety of them to answer the ends
proposed.

The next thing I am to consider is, the Means that GOD himself makes use of,
Namely, The dealings and dispensations of his Providence toward us, and to
observe how wisely GOD orders things in the course of his Providence to promote
our Conversion, and growth in Grace; but this must be deferred to another
opportunity: And I shall conclude with a brief Improvement of what has been
offered at this time.

1. How Thankful should we be for the free Enjoyment of these blessed
Ordinances?

Most certainly it is an unspeakable favor and privilege to have liberty to go
to the House of GOD, and there to attend upon him in the duties of his public
Worship. It is what the Primitive Christians were oftentimes debarred from, and
when ever they met together for the worship of GOD it was in jeopardy of their
lives; and this has been the lot, and portion of many of the Saints in almost
all ages of the Church. But now we, instead of having any thing to debar, or
hinder us from the public worship of GOD in the ways of his appointment, have
all possible encouragement for it. We are Invited and Commanded to attend
public worship, not only by the Word of GOD, but by the Civil Authority placed
over us, even so far as to expose our selves not only to disgrace, but even to
humane Penalties for the neglect. Now surely this is a favor and privilege
that calls for our highest thankfulness. How thankful would the Primitive
Christians, and the Persecuted Saints be for such liberties as we enjoy? And
therefore if we have the true spirit and temper of Christians, we shall be
grateful for, and careful how we improve such peculiar advantages. This is the
language of the devout Psalmist, and will be of every true Saint in some good
measure. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! Blessed are they
that dwell in thine House, they will be still praising thee: a day in thy
courts is better than a thousand: I had rather be a doorkeeper in the House of
my God (...) to dwell in the tents of wickedness. -- One thing have I desired
of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord
all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in
his Temple, Psalm. 84 1, 4 10. and 27 4.

2. What we have heard, may serve to reprove all such as neglect the public
Worship of GOD in his House, or either of the Sacraments of the new Testament.

It is very evident that some persons are very careless about attending the
public Worship and Ordinances of GOD in his House. Some there are that openly
contemn and despise the House and Worship of GOD, from Atheistical Notions, as
if there was no GOD, and consequently no such thing as religious Worship to be
paid to any Being. Others there are that from a spirit of Deism and Infidelity
despise the Ordinances: for denying the divine Authority of the Scriptures,
they by consequence deny the obligations to attend the Ordinances therein
prescribed.

Others there are that although they don't run to the same excess of folly and
madness in their Principles, yet have too slighty apprehensions of the
necessity of attending the public Worship and Ordinances of GOD's House. They
will pretend they can profit as much by staying at home, and Reading some good
Books in their own houses, as by going to the House of GOD; that they can Read
as good or better Sermons at home than they hear at the Church; and so
sometimes from some prejudice against the Minister, or from some little bodily
Indi^^ (...) or from some little difficulty in the Season, or for want of
fashionable Clothing. and the like, they will suffer themselves to be very much
absent from the House of GOD, and be well satisfied with it, although their
excuse be never so trivial.

And then again, others there are who although they come to the House of GOD, and
attend the more common parts of divine Worship; such as the Prayers, the
Singing, and the Preaching of the Word, yet are very careless and negligent
about attending upon the Sacraments. Some remain Unbaptized for a long time, or
if they have been given up to GOD in Baptism, yet they neglect to renew the
dedication of themselves by their own act, they live many years without owning
the Covenant; and when they do it, they are even forced to it, to escape the
scandal and disgrace of their Childrens being Unbaptized; and when they have
gone so far in order to their receiving Baptism for their Children, yet here
they come to a stand, and neglect to renew and ratify their Covenant engagement
at the holy Supper, but instead thereof for many years, nay oftentimes all
their days turn their backs upon that holy Ordinance.

Now what we have heard serves to reprove all such persons, and leaves them
utterly inexcusable whoever they are. For since these are the means of Grace
that GOD has instituted, since these are the Wells of Salvation out of which we
must draw the water of life; and the Channels in which he is wont to convey his
Grace (...) ^n be no excuse for such as willfull^ (...) ^^^lect them. Such
neglect the means of Grace that GOD has appointed, they neglect to go to GOD
for his Grace in the ways he has ordained, and so they practically despise and
reject his Grace: and no wonder if they remain in a graceless, unconverted
Estate, for they keep themselves out of the way of GOD's Grace, and who can
think that GOD will go out of his way to meet them? Wherefore let such
seriously consider how they neglect the means of their own Conversion and
Salvation, and how much they are the cause of their own Destruction; and how
little they will have to answer for themselves in the Day of Judgment; verily
every such Mouth will be stopped, and GOD will appear very just when he speaks,
and clear when he judges, and condemns them. To Conclude,

Let us all be Exhorted to give our diligent Attendance upon these blessed
Ordinances, and Means of Grace.

It is our highest Privilege and Happiness that GOD has see up his Tabernacle
among us, and that the Doors of his Sanctuary are open to us, and that he has
spread a Table for us; and now don't let us be so foolish and unwise as to
despise and neglect our Privileges, but let us carefully improve them whilst we
are continued under the enj^yment of them Let us prize the House of GOD, and
the Ordinances of it; let us with the voice of joy and praise, go with the
multitude to the House of GOD, with the multitude that keep holy day (...) ^ot
content our selves with a bar^ (...) of GOD, and affording only our bodily
presence at such sacred Institutions, but let us duly consider the Nature and
Design of them: let us consider also after what manner, and with what frames of
Spirit, we are to go to the House of GOD, and to sit with him at his Table; and
let us with utmost care and diligence be preparing our selves accordingly. Let
us see to it that our aims and designs in attending the Ordinances be not to
save our Credit and Reputation among Men, and to appear to them to be
Religious: but let these be the moving considerations with us, Namely, That
herein we comply with the divine Direction and Command, and that hereby we put
our selves in the ways of GOD's Grace that he himself has appointed. And
therein let us be waiting upon GOD for his Grace to be conveyed through those
sacred Channels into our Souls; and by thus waiting on him in the ways of his
own appoinment, we may confidently hope, and expect to meet with Him, and
obtain his Grace. Then we shall see GOD's power and his glory in the Sanctuary,
for there GOD records his Name, and there he commands the blessing. There we
shall meet with CHRIST and have Communion with him at his Table; then the bread
which we break will be the Communion of the body of Christ, and the cup of
blessing which we bless will be the Communion of the blood of Christ. In short,
we shall then be sat and flourishing in the Courts of our GOD, and shall go
from strength to strength till we appear before GOD in Zion.

Sermon, XVI.
I Am yet upon the consideration of the Means of Grace, and of the Wisdom of
GOD that appears in the Methods that are taken for bringing Men into, and
carrying them on in a state of Grace. And you may remember that I distinguished
the Means of Grace into those that GOD has Instituted and Appointed for us to
attend upon: such as written Word, and all the Ordinances of the Gospel: and
those Means that GOD himself makes use of, such as the dispensations of his
Providence. Now I have already considered those Means of Grace that GOD has
Instituted and Appointed for us to attend upon; in order to our having the
divine Grace conveyed through those sacred Channels into our Souls; and as I went
along I endeavored to show the wisdom of GOD in appointing such Means for us,
by showing the suitableness and fitness of them to answer the end. proposed in
the Institution of them.

II. And now my business at this time is to consider the other outward Means of
Grace that are made use of in the Conversion of Sinners, and for their further
progress in Grace and Holiness, Namely, The dispensations of divine Providence
toward us.

That GOD makes use of Providence as well as Ordinance in bringing Sinners
home unto himself, is (...) evident from the frequent, if not constant (...) of
the Saints; for there are scarce any that have been brought into a state of
Grace, or that have made any advances in it, but what (if they have been
careful in their observation) will be able to say that the Providence of GOD
have been very helpful to them. And he that will but consider the manner of
GOD's dealings, and dispensations toward Sinners in the course of his
Providence before their Conversion, and afterward for their progress in Grace,
will see a great deal of the Wisdom of GOD therein.

Here therefore I shall consider the various dispensations of divine Providence
made use of in the bringing persons into a state of Grace, and for their
progress and growth therein, and the wisdom of GOD that appears in them from
the fitness; and natural tendency of them to prepare Men's hearts for the
impressions of divine Grace. For if the dispensations of Providence are so
ordered, is to be very fit means, or instruments in the hand of the Spirit for
promoting our Conversion and Sanctification, we must acknowledge that they are
ordered in wisdom. But before I proceed to consider any of the dispensations of
Providence in particular, I would observe this in general, viz.

That GOD's making use of so great a variety of Providence toward those he is
about to bring, or has brought into a state of Grace, is an instance of Wisdom
and Prudence.

That GOD is very various in the dispensations of his Providence toward the
Children of Men, and even toward those that he intends, and i^ about to bestow
saving Grace upon, is sufficiently evident to every Man of any observation or
experience. Some he chastens with the rod of Affliction, and that in a very
great variety both as to kind and degree. Some he exercises with Inward
troubles, the troubles and distresses of the Mind; some with Outward troubles,
such as sickness and pain, poverty, reproach, and contempt, losses, crosses and
disappointments. But then on the other hand, others there are that GOD causes
goodness and mercy to follow them; he satisfies their Mouth with good things,
and crowns them with loving kindness, and tender mercies. But then oftentimes
the scene is changed with respect to the same persons. GOD does seldom or never
keep the same course with any person all his life long but he is often changing
his hand with them, sometimes laying Afflictions on them, and then removing his
hand from off them, and causing them to see good days according to the days
wherein they have seen evil. This we see to be the Method of GOD's dealings and
dispensations toward the Children of Men, not confining himself to any
particular, certain way of managing us, but putting us sometimes into
prosperity, and sometimes into adversity.

And now GOD, exercising such a variety of Providence is very wisely
contrived. Because,

1. There is such a difference in the natural Tempers of Men whom GOD brings
into a state of Grace.

Whether from the different Formation of our Bodies, or the various Contexture
of the Parts, or however else it comes to pass, yet it is most certain, that
there is a very great difference in the natural tempers and dispositions of
Men, distinct from that which is made by the renewing and sanctifying Grace of
GOD; and therefore they require a very different way of management to prepare
them for the reception of divine Grace at first, or for their improvement in it
afterward. So different are the tempers of Men, that the same kind of
Providence, considered only in their natural tendency, will have a very
different effect upon them. And although it must be acknowledged, that GOD by his
Almighty Spirit, can make any Providence produce the same effect upon the most
different and opposite tempers; yet a Providence that would be very serviceable
to one Man on spiritual accounts, would (separate from the special operations
of the Spirit) be very hurtful to another. Some Men's natural tempers are such
that they cannot bear a great deal of outward Prosperity, a full sail would
overset and destroy them; it would exalt them above measure, and make them grow
proud and insolent, it would lead them into an unmindfulness and regardlessness
of GOD, and of their duty to him, and all his goodness would be turned into
wantoness; their Spirits are such as need to be kept under, and nothing but a
series of Afflictions and Troubles can keep them humble, or make them
thoughtful and considerate: whereas on the other hand, there are other Men
whose natural tempers are such, that they can be more easily led and drawn to
Repentance by the goodness of GOD, than driven by Afflictions, that are apt to
be dejected, discouraged, and even to fall into despair when the hand of GOD
lies heavy upon them: if they meet with Afflictions their Spirits are apt to
sink under them, they are rea^ly to give out, to neglect their duty and
business from such a despairing thought as this, that it is in vain to serve
the Lord any longer; and so many such persons instead of being driven from
their sins, and driven nearer to GOD by Afflictions, they are driven further
from him, and make their case more difficult and desperate than before.

And now considering the various tempers of Men, and what different ways of
management are requisite to produce the same effect; it must needs be wisdom in
GOD to make use of a variety of Providence, and deal very differently with
those whom he designs to bring home unto himself, as the most likely way to
answer the end.

2. The temper of every particular Man is such, as makes it necessary for him
to be exercised with a great variety of Providence.

Although from the different tempers of Men some require more of one kind of
Providence than another, yet there are none but what require a change of
Providence. It is very requisite for the most part that GOD should be changing
his hand, sometimes dispensing Mercies, and sometimes Afflictions to us. As for
Prosperity, there is scarce any Man that can bear an uninterrupted series of
it; it would be very difficult, and something extraordinary would be necessary
to be done to keep down such a Man's Pride, and to make him humble and penitent,
and to keep him so. How difficult would it be to convince a Man (that should
meet with no interruption or disturbance in his worldly Enjoyments) of the evil
of sin, when he feels so little of the ill effects of it? How difficult to
persuade him that GOD was angry with him for his sins, when he causes goodness
and mercy to follow him continually? So again how could such a Man have such a
feeling, convincing sense of the vanity of the World, and all things in it as
to despise it, and raise his heart above it? How would a Man come to himself,
and be brought to serious thought and consideration? How would he be awakened
out of his carnal sloth and security, and quickened to seek after another and a
better Place if he did not meet with afflictions to interrupt his present
comfort? In short, we are all by nature such fools, as that a life of
uninterrupted prosperity would destroy us

And then on the other hand, the case would be as difficult and dangerous for
us* for who could bear with a constant course of sorrow and trouble, without
any metigation or relief? If Men were kept in the fire of affliction, and under
the rod of divine correction, without any mixture of outward comforts; The
Spirit would fail before him, and the souls that he has made. Men would be
very apt to be discouraged from seeking the Lord or waiting upon him they will
(when his hand lies long and heavy upon them) be ready to murmur and complain,
to have hard thoughts of GOD, and think it is vain to serve him and will most
certainly want the proper motives to love him: and although they may be brought
to see something of the evil of sin from the ill effects of it which they feel;
yet this is not likely to produce any thing more than an attrition which is
only a sorrow for sin, because of the evil effects and consequences of it upon
our selves, and not that true contrition of Soul which consists in an hearty
sorrow for sin from a love to GOD, and because he is dishonored and offended
thereby.

And now as we see that no particular way of dealing with any person serves to
well as a variety of Providence, therefore GOD is often changing his hand,
sometimes dispensing mercies, sometimes afflictions, as he sees the case calls
for: As he is leading them to Repentance by his goodness, drawing them with the
cords of a man, and the hands of love; so it is as certain, that whom the Lord
loves he chastens, and scourges every son whom he receives.

3. Such a variety of Providence is very useful to Men in their present state
and condition, let it be what it will, which shows the Wisdom of GOD in such
frequent Changes and Alternations he orders out for us.

Such frequent changes of Providence are of service to Men, whether they are at
present in prosperity, or in adversity.

Thus, supposing a Man at present in very prosperous and comfortable
Circumstances, if GOD was not wont to alter his dispensations, such an one
would think that his mountain stood strong, and that he should never be moved,
he would put far from him the evil day, and would be ready to say, Soul take
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry, for thou have goods laid up for many
years, and GOD and Religion, and the grand concerns of his Soul would be laid
aside. But now GOD by ordering such frequent Changes, and giving such sudden
turns in his Providence takes away all reason and foundation for Men's
depending upon a long uninterrupted continuance of their present Circumstances;
for when they see and consider the many changes that have happened to others,
they cannot but look upon their own present desirable condition to be very
uncertain. The Providence of GOD being so various, we can look upon nothing as
certain that we possess. Riches for ought we know may take to themselves wings
and fly away; friends may forsake us, health may be destroyed, and all our
comforts fail us at once. And now the uncertainty of earthly Enjoyments is of
great service to us, and so wisely ordered by GOD, as it serves very much to
l^ssen our esteem of earthly things, and prevent our putting our trust and
confidence in them.

So on the other hand, if Men were under afflictive Circumstances, if GOD never
altered his hand throughout the course of a Man's life, such would be dejected
and discouraged, they would sunk under the thoughts of spending all their days
in misery and sorrow, and would be ready upon such terms to choose strangling
and death rather than life: but now GOD's varying and changing his hand is a
mighty support and encouragement to such. This gives them grounds to hope the
scene will be changed as to them, and that they shall see good days according
to the days wherein they have seen evil; this enables them patiently to bear
their present calamity, and encourages them to pray for deliverance, and
quietly to wait for the salvation of GOD.

But thus much for the wisdom of GOD in ordering out variety of Providence for
us in general.

I come now to consider, Some of the dispensations of divine Providence, that
are made use of to prepare us for the Grace of GOD, or to advance us in it; and
the wisdom of GOD appearing therein, from the fitness and tendency of them to
answer the end proposed. And here,

1. Let us consider. The Merciful dispensations of divine Providence, and we
shall see them well adapted to answer the Ends proposed, and so the wisdom as
well as goodness of GOD in ordering out the same unto us.

That GOD does frequently dispense his favors to the Children of Men, and
cause goodness and mercy to follow them is too evident for the most insensible
or ungrateful to deny, and therefore there is no need of spending time for the
proof of it. He is frequently causing his goodness to pass before us, yea the
whole Earth is full of his goodness; and we have all tasted and seen that the
LORD is good, although some have received more largely of his goodness than
others. Some are wonderfully smiled upon and prospered in the world. Job was
such an instance, of which he gives an elegant description after the scene was
changed, Chap. 29th. at the beginning, O that I were as in months past, as in
the days when God preserved me, when his candle shined upon my head, -- when
the secret of God was upon my tabernacle, when the almighty was yet with me;
when my children were about me; when I washed my steps with butter, and the
rock poured me out rivers of oil, etc. And this is the case of many persons,
GOD causes whatever they do to prosper, he gives them health and strength,
riches and honor, peace and pleasure. And now this is a wise and proper
management toward some persons that GOD is about to bring or has already
brought into a state of Grace.

1. As it may be very helpful in leading them to Repentance.

Although outward peace and prosperity may be hurtful to some tempers, and serves
to harden them in sin rather than soften, and melt them into penitence: and
although an uninterrupted course of prosperity may be dangerous for any, and lead
them into an unmindfulness of GOD, and of their duty to him; yet there are some
that can bear a turn of outward Prosperity; and the merciful Providence of
GOD, by the concurring influences of his Spirit, prove softning and melting to
them, and help to lead them to or carry them on in an ingenious sorrow for sin.
For when a Man considers that he as well as others is a Child of disobedience,
and so a Child of wrath, and that he has been as great a Sinner all his days as
many others have been, and yet when he sees GOD punishing and correcting others
for their sins, in the sore afflictions that he is bringing upon them,
exercising them with poverty and contempt, with sickness and pains, with losses
and crosses of every kind: and he who has been as great a Sinner is spared, and
not only delivered from these evils; but encompassed with all the comforts of
life. I say, when a Man does thus consider how bountifully GOD deals with him
beyond what he has to others, no more unworthy than himself; it must needs have
a tendency to enlarge his heart in love and thankfulness to GOD, and help to
fill him with shame and sorrow for his sins, which have been such ungrateful
returns to GOD for his benefits. Kindnesses have a natural tendency to soften
us, and if there be any spark of ingenuity, they will stir it up within us; and
this is the end of GOD's goodness and kindness, to stir up our ingenuity, if we
have any, and to bring us to an i^genuous sorrow for our sins; the goodness of
God leads thee to Repentance, Romans 2.4. And it is not to be doubted but that
many a Man has been very powerfully wrought upon by the goodness of GOD: Some
remarkable instances of it have made such impressions upon Men's hearts as have
never been worn off, and which have been so cultivated and improved by the
concurring influences of GOD's Spirit, as to produce an ingenuous shame and
sorrow for sin, an hatred of it, and full resolutions against it. Merciful
Providence when accompanied with the Spirit of GOD will serve wonderfully to
soften Men's hearts, to dissolve them into tears of Godly sorrow and penitence
for sin, even unto a Repentance unto Salvation.

2. The Merciful dispensations of divine Providence serve to enlarge our
hearts in love and thankfulness to GOD, and to encourage us in his Service.

If GOD should be chastning us with the rod, and visiting us with stripes
continually, we should be apt to have hard thoughts of him as unkind and
unmerciful; we could not have such realizing and sensible apprehensions of his
goodness and his mercy, as we ought. And if he should continue his hand heavy
upon us, whilst we are endeavoring to serve him, and to conform our selves
unto his precepts, it would be very apt to discourage us, and be a strong
temptation to lay aside all religious duties, and break forth in such
expressions of anger and despair, as those, Job 21.15. What is the Almighty
that we should serve him? and what profit shall we have if we pray unto him?
And in 2 King. 6.33. Behold this evil is of the Lord, why should I wait for the
Lord any longer?

But now GOD by dispensing his favors to us, and bestowing the blessings and
comforts of this life upon us, helps to give us a quite different apprehension
of him: this convinces us of his goodness and his mercy, in the most sensible
manner, and by having such sensible Convictions of the immence goodness of GOD,
we shall have our hearts enlarged in love and thankfulness unto him, and our
mouths filled with praises. Abraham's Servant was so affected with the goodness
of GOD in giving him such success in his seeking a wife for his Masters Son
Isaac, That he bowed his head and worshipped the Lord, Genesis 24.26. Moses and
Israel were so affected with the goodness and mercy of GOD in their deliverance
out of Egypt, and in the overthrow of the Egyptians in the Red Sea, as to
sing that song of praise to the Lord, in Exodus chapter 15. And how often do we find
the Psalmist so affected with the merciciful Providence he met withal, as to
break forth in songs of praise? I will sing of thy power, yea, I will sing
aloud of thy mercy -- for thou have been my defense, Psalm 59.16. Bless the
Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord,
O my soul, and forget not all his benefits; who forgiveth thine iniquities, who
heals thy diseases, and redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowns
thee with loving kindness and tender mercies, Psalm. 103 beg.

But then, the merciful providence of GOD, serve not only to excite our love
and gratitude, but also to encourage us to engage in his Service, and to go on
in it with the greater cheerfulness: Every act of kindness helps to confirm us
in this, That he is a good Master to serve, and that he is a plentiful rewarder
of them that diligently seek him. The Psalmist was encouraged to learn and to
observe GOD's Statutes upon the account of the divine goodness both in his
nature, and in the communications of it in his Providence, Psalm. 119.68. Thou
art good, and do good, teach me thy statutes. And surely the consideration
hereof, and especially the daily experience of the divine goodness and mercy,
affords abundant encouragement to engage in the observance of his Commandments;
for since GOD is so good, as all the instances of his goodness to us manifest
him to be, we may conclude that his Commandments are good, and that in keeping
of them there will be a great reward.

3. Another wise and good End answered by the Merciful dispensations of divine
Providence, especially to those that are in a state of Grace is this, that
hereby they have the opportunity for their exercising and improving some
particular Graces, which are for the Glory of GOD, and the good of their fellow
Creatures.

Thus, if GOD is pleased to bless a Christian with a good Estate, and a
plentiful supply of the good things of this life, it will give him an
opportunity for, and his heart being inclined by the Grace of GOD, he will
actually honor the Lord with his Substance, by employing a suitable proportion
of it in acts of Piety and Charity, in propagating and supporting the Gospel,
and thereby advancing the interest of Religion, in which the glory of GOD is
most of all concerned, and also in relieving the distresses, and supplying the
wants of the Poor and needy, by which means, The blessing of him that is ready
to perish will come upon him. And not only so, but hereby he will make to
himself friends of the Mammon of unlighteousness, which when he fails will
receive him into everlasting Habitation. So again, is GOD pleased in his
Providence to show such favor to any of his Servants, as to confer places of
honor, power, or trust upon them, very wise and good ends are answered by it;
for as this gives them the opportunity, so they will improve it for the glory
of GOD, and the good of others; they will improve such favors by making use of
their power and influence for the promoting of Religion, for the encouraging of
virtue and holiness, and for the suppressing the growth of sin and wickedness
in the places and people where, and among whom they dwell; Such Men will
improve their powers for GOD, remembering they received the same from him, and
so will be the Ministers of GOD for good unto his People. And therefore it must
needs be as the Preacher tells us, Prove. 29.2. When the righteous are in
authority the people rejoice, but when the wicked bears rule, the people
mourn.

2. Sometimes GOD orders out an Afflicted state for those he is bringing, or
has brought into a state of Grace, in which there appears a great deal of
wisdom and prudence.

We have contracted so much baseness, disingenuity and ingratitude by the fall,
as that we are apt to abuse the goodness and the mercy of GOD, and turn his
Grace into wantonness, and although mercies may be very helpful to draw us to
GOD; yet there is scarce any Man but what needs to be driven to him by
afflictions. And although GOD because He delights in mercy oftentimes begins
with mercies; yet when he sees we will not be drawn with the bands of love, he is
then for driving us with the rod of Correction, and this oftentimes with the
help of the Spirit proves effectual, when a multitude of mercies have been to
little purpose. This was the very case of the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.67. Before I
was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word. And so he argues
from it in v. 71. That it was good for him that he had been afflicted, that he
might learn Gods statutes. The Children of Israel never came to a sense of
their degeneracies, and sinful departures from GOD, till he opened their eyes
by some heavy Judgments, but in their afflictions they would confess their
sins, and seek him early. The Prodigal never came to himself till he was
pinched with extreme poverty and hunger, then he resolved, and actually
returned to his Father. And this is doubtless the case of many; they would
never come to themselves, they would never so much as think of returning to
GOD, if they were not awakened and stirred up to it by some sore Afflictions.

There is nothing of outward Means that has a more powerful tendency to awaken
Men out of their carnal sloth and security, to put them upon serious thought
and consideration, or that is so effectual to discover the evil nature and
consequences of sin, as afflictions. They seem necessary to bring persons to
GOD at first, and to keep persons close and steady to him afterward.

Afflictions are as necessary for the Soul, as Physic is for the Body, they
serve to purge away iniquity, and to take away sin, and make us partakers of
divine Holiness. And now since nothing of outward means is more powerful than
afflictions for the bringing us home to GOD, so the wisdom of GOD appears in
ordering out afflictions for such as he has purposed and determined to bring
into a state of Grace. But as there are several kinds of afflictions that GOD
exercises such withal in order to their Conversion, so I shall mention some of
them, and very briefly hint at the special usefulness of some afflictions in
particular, and so the wisdom of GOD in the particular kinds of afflictions
that he makes use of. Here then,

1. Sometimes GOD exercises persons with losses and disappointments, and
reduces to Poverty, even to such straits and difficulties that they know not
how to turn themselves, for a comfortable support in the World.

But now GOD is very wise and prudent in this, because it seems absolutely
necessary for some persons to be thus dealt withal, and it serves for many good
purposes.

First of all, it serves to give Men a most sensible demonstration of the
Vanity of the World, and so affords a powerful argument to wean us from it.

We are all apt to be fond of the World and the things of it, we are apt to
place too much dependence upon earthly Riches; but now GOD by depriving us of
these outward comforts, by consuming our Estates, and wasting our Substance,
and bringing us to Poverty, he effectually teaches us, they are all uncertain
Riches, not fit for us to place any confidence in, he hereby gives us a feeling
sense and realizing apprehension of the truth of what the Preacher says, Eccl.
1.2. Vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

But then again, Cutting us short with respect to outward good things, and
reducing us to straits and difficulties, may be very serviceable to bring us to
cast our care upon GOD, and to place our dependence more and more upon him.

We are all exceeding apt to worship the Creature, by putting too much trust
and confidence in it: We are ready to say to the Gold, Thou art my hope, to the
fine Gold, Thou art my confidence; and so trust in uncertain riches more than
in the living GOD. But now GOD by taking away th^se things that we more
especially depend upon, leads us to depend upon him, and to be casting our care
upon him; for when other things fail, it affords an argument for our going to
GOD, and trusting in him and waiting upon him. Such a condition will quicken as
to apply our selves to our heavenly Father, as our Savior has directed, to
give us our daily bread; for when the streams (on which we had too much
dependence) are dried up, we shall be naturally led to the fountain.

But then again, Such low and difficult Circumstances give Men the opportunity
of Exercising and Improving in the Grace of Contentment.

The time for the Exercise of Contentment so as to appear any great virtue in
us, or for us to improve in this Grace, is the time of outward adversity, when
our circumstances are low and difficult in the World, and so there is the
strongest temptations against it. For by striving after Contentment with such
things as we have, and against Envy at those who are in better Circumstances,
we shall advance in this excellent Grace, and come nearer and nearer to the
spirit and temper that was in Christ Jesus.

And then lastly, Poverty, and the want of outward good things, may serve very
much to quicken us in our pursuits after heavenly Riches.

When all things here below fail, when a Man is poor and low in the World, and
has little or nothing of this Worlds goods to depend upon, this will lead him
to think of other Riches, and will afford a very good argument to him to be
laying up treasures in heaven. The Apostle tells us, Jam. 2.5. That God has
chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which
he has promised to them that love him. And now when a Man's outward riches fail
him, and he grows poor and low in the world* how natural will it be for him to
take encouragement from the words of the Apostle to bestir himself so as to
become rich in faith, and to secure a more enduring substance than any thing
here below, even bags that wax not old, a treasure in the heavens.

And now if Poverty or Straitness of Circumstances has a tendency to, and will
if sanctified by the Spirit of GOD produce such good effects, it is certainly
wisdom and kindness in GOD to order it out for the lot and portion of some
persons. Indeed Agur desired to be delivered from Poverty as well as Riches,
and it must be acknowledged to be a thing very undesirable, yea, and attended
with many snares and temptations; yet we have reason to believe, and
acknowledge that it is a state of life very necessary for some persons, whose
tempers are such, that they would pine and grow poor in Grace, if worldly
Riches should be increased to them.

2. Sometimes GOD afflicts persons with Reproach, Disgrace and Contempt.

And this he does in wisdom, for it serves many good purposes, which I must
only briefly mention.

Thus such kind of Affliction serve very much to subdue and mortify our Pride.

For when we see others despise us, and have but a mean opinion of us, it will
lead us to suspect, whether we have not had too high thoughts of our selves,
and will have a tendency to moderate our opinion of our selves, and bring us to
a compliance with the direction of the Apostle, Romans 12.3. That a man think not
of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly, according
as God has dealt to every men the measure of faith.

Moreover, A Man's suffering in his Name and Reputation, and lying^ under any
reproach and scandal, will have a tendency to make him the more watchful and
circumspect, it will be an argument with him to take more heed to himself, to
his Words and to his whole Carriage and Conversation. If he has any regard for
his good Name (which is as great riches) he will endeavor by a blameless life
and conversation to recover his reputation, and regain his credit among Men,
and that those who have spoken evil of him as of evil doers, may be ashamed as
falsely accusing his good conversation in Christ.

But then lastly, It will have a tendency to make Men careful to approve
themselves unto GOD, and their own Souls, that when others reproach and despise
them, their own Consciences may have no occasion to reproach them, so long as
they live, but that they may have this for their rejoicing in the midst of
outward contempt and scorn, even the testimony of a good Conscience* That in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of
GOD they have had their Conversation in the World.

So that upon these accounts, reproach and contempt from the World may be a
very useful and profitable Affliction to us.

3. Oftentimes GOD afflicts with bodily Sickness and pains, by which he brings
them down, even to the very gates of the Grave, and so under fearful
apprehensions of Death.

And this is ordered in Wisdom, as it serves many important uses.

Thus, when sickness seizes violently upon us, and death begins to stare us in
the face, it serves at once to rouz^ us out of our carnal sloth and security,
and puts us upon thinking of Death and Judgment, and ETERNITY in good earnest;
it puts us upon more earnest prayer to GOD for his Mercy and Grace, than at any
other times. It also stirs us up to examine our selves, upon looking back upon
our past lives, and renewing our repentance and sorrow for sin, and it excites
the utmost earnestness and diligence in making our Calling and Election sure.
Moreover, such times of sickness and danger, causes all the Glory of this World
to vanish and disappear, and to be despised in our Eyes; then we have a more
sensible apprehension of the vanity of the World, and of all things in it.

Furthermore, a time of sickness and danger puts us upon making solemn promises
and resolutions, that we will forsake our sins, and live more to the glory of
GOD than ever; which although they are too often forgotten when their sickness
and danger is over, yet when it is accompanied with the Spirit of GOD, it
leaves such deep impressions upon Men's minds as have a most powerful influence
upon their lives ever after; their resolution, and their care has been like
that of the Psalmist* Psalm. 66.13, 14. I will pay thee my vows which my lips
have uttered, and my mouth has spoken, when I was in trouble. And surely when
it has such effects as these, we shall have occasion to rejoice and be thankful
to GOD all our days, for his wisdom and his goodness in th^^ visiting of us.

4. Sometimes GOD exercises with inward troubles and distresses, and this also
with a great deal of Wisdom.

GOD sometimes hides his face from his Children, and then they are troubled,
their fears and doubts arise about their spiritual Condition, and they are
greatly distressed in their Minds least they are yet in their sins, and so
under the wrath of GOD, and in danger of Hell, and eternal Destruction. Now
although such spiritual doubts and fears are some of the sorest Afflictions we
can meet with in the World; ( for a wounded spirit who can bear?) yet the
tendency of them is such, as ^^kes them capable of, and they oftentimes do
prove (...) useful and serviceable to us.

For such kind of afflictions put Men upon Examining themselves with the
greatest strictness imaginable, to find what is amiss; by which means if there
be any sin or lust lurking in them, it will be discovered, to be repented of,
and forsaken.

And then again, it puts Men upon a more close walking with GOD, and upon the
greatest care and watchfulness least they fall into sin. When a Man is under
such doubts and fears about his spiritual State, he will be more careful how he
performs duty, and more fearful of neglecting it, or being formal and lifeless
in the performance of it. The distresses of his mind will make him fervent in
spirit whilst he is serving the Lord. And then when GOD shall return to such an
one, and speak peace unto him, the Experience he has had of the sad Condition
of those who have GOD withdrawn from them, will make him careful least he
return again unto folly, and thereby should again have the light of GOD's
countenance hid from him.

5. Sometimes GOD in his holy Providence permits those whom he is bringing, or
has brought into a state of Grace, to fall into gross and scandalous Sins,
which in the conclusion proves very useful and serviceable to them, and so the
wisdom of GOD is to be seen and acknowledged in it.

I say, GOD permits them to fall, for he does not by any positive act of his
cause them to fall; but he for wise and good reasons sees cause so far to
withdraw his restraining Grace, that they are overcome by the temptations they
meet with, and so fall into some scandalous sin; sometimes into the sin of
Drunkenness, as Noah did, Genesis 9.21. Sometimes into Drunkenness and Incest, as
Lot did, Genesis 19.33, 35. Sometimes into Murder and Adultery, as David, 2 Samuel
11. chapter Now although these things reflect great dishonor upon GOD, and are very
provoking and offensive to the pure Eyes of his Glory, wounding to Men's Souls,
and hurtful to Religion, yet GOD who can bring good out of the greatest evil,
does sometimes so order it, as that such gross and scandalous falls prove
useful and serviceable to a Man afterward. Nay I believe it has oftentimes
proved a very great instrument of a sinners Conversion: his having committed a
scandalous sin puts him upon more thoughtfulness than ever he exercised before;
and he is led by it to consider the evil there is in sin in general, as well as
of that sin in particular; and we may oftentimes observe persons growing more
serious and circumspect after some scandalous fall, than ever they were before.
Furthermore, it serves to humble them, and causes them to walk softly all their
days. It also leads them to consider the weakness, and impotency of Men when
left to themselves, and will lead them to be more watchful against those things
that have in times past proved insnaring to them: and so, in short, one foul
and scandalous sin sometimes prevents many less notorious ones, which yet might
have been as offensive to GOD. Moreover, the scandalous falls of some serve as
warnings to others, and may make them more upon their watch and guard: for they
administer this counsel, and admonition to all, 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that
thinks that he stands, take heed left he fall. But now GOD forbid that any
from what has been said, should take encouragement to indulge themselves in any
gross presumptuous sins, from vain pretenses, that it may be useful to them
hereafter; for this would be in a most horrible perverse manner to turn the
Grace of GOD into wantonness.

I might go on to instance in some other particular Afflictions, and show the
usefulness of them on spiritual accounts. I might likewise take occasion to
observe the dispensations of Providence toward the wicked and ungodly, even
such as live and dye in their sins, even the merciful and afflictive
dispensations of Providence toward such, and show to what good purpose they
are capable of being improved by others, for the bringing them into, or
forwarding them in Grace and Holiness; and so the wisdom of GOD that appears in
them. Thus I might show that the awful Judgments which GOD oftentimes in his
Providence brings upon Sinners in this World, is capable of being improved to
great advantage by others, as it serves very convincingly to discover the
divine hatred and abhorrence of sin, and to warn us of the danger of going on
in any sinful courses; and so oftentimes serves to deter persons from going on
in their sinful practices, left they should fall under the like terrible
Judgments. The divine J^dgments brought upon Sinners oftentimes answer this
good end, to make others he^^ an^ fear, and not do any more so wickedly.

So also might I show how the outward prosperity that GOD affords sometimes to
Sinners, may be of great use and service to the Children of GOD. For although we
are ready to cry out with wonder and say, Wherefore does the wicked prosper?
And although the Psalmist confesses, That his feet were almost gone, and his
steps had well nigh slipped, and he was envious at the foolish, when he saw the
prosperity of the wicked. Psalm. 73.1, 3. Yet it will appear that GOD has very
wise and gracious designs in it, especially toward his Children, even to
strengthen their faith, and to advance them in Grace and Holiness. Thus for
instance, it affords a very good argument for a future state, wherein GOD will
make a remarkable difference between him that serves GOD, and him that serves
him not. Moreover, it may serve to give us a more enlarged thought of the
glorious rewards of the other World, and a meaner apprehension of the goods of
this present World; for by this we see that GOD esteems the goods of this World
as nothing, not worth the making a difference, as to them, between the
righteous and the wicked. And then it also naturally leads us into this
thought, That if GOD will give these things so freely to the wicked, how great
a good must that needs be that is laid up for them that love, and fear his Name.

But this is sufficient to show the wisdom of GOD in his Providence, as he
improves them as means to bring us into, and carry us on in the state of Grace.

I shall conclude with a very brief Improvement.

1. It is matter of shame and humiliation, that we have made no better
Improvement of the various dispensations of divine Providence.

By what we have heard, we learn, That every Providence whether Merciful or
Afflictive may be improved to great advantage, and may help us forward in Grace
and Holiness; but what improvement have we made of them? GOD has sometimes been
for drawing us with the cords of a man, and with the bands of love, by causing
goodness and mercy to follow us; but we have been so base and disingenuous as
not to be drawn or allured by his kindness. That goodness of his which should
have led them to Repentance, has been basely abused, by our taking
encouragement therefrom to go on still in our trespasses. On the other hand,
GOD has been sometimes driving us by the rod of Correction, but we oftentimes
have been so stupid as to refuse to receive Instruction by it. We have been
Murmuring and Impatient under Afflictions, and have hardened our Necks under
Reproofs, instead of returning to him that has been smiting of us. Now we have
reason to be humble that we have made no better advantage of the various turns
of Providence, and may well blush and be ashamed that we have made such an ill
improvement of them; and surely many of you who have been so ungrateful, and so
incorrigible, may justly fear that GOD will speedily leave you to your selves,
will let you alone, and use no more means with you to reclaim you, but will
give you up to your own hearts lusts, and then every turn of Providence,
instead of being any way serviceable to you, will only serve to help you fill
up the measure of your sins, and ripen you the faster for eternal Destruction.

2. What we have heard teaches us, to Acquiess in every dispensation of divine
Providence.

For since every Providence is capable of being improved to good advantage, and
since GOD knows what kind of Providence are best for us, we ought to acquiess
in all his dispensations. Who need Murmur or be Impatient under Afflictions,
when every Affliction may be of so great profit to us. Afflictions oftentimes
prove the means of our Conversion and Salvation, they serve to further the
Saints in Grace, and to work out for them a far more exceeding and an eternal
weight of glory; what foundation then is there for Murmuring or Impatience
under Afflictions? We may be sure that the Father of Spirits chastens his
Children for their profit, and therefore if we would govern our selves by
Reason, we should desire GOD to order out such a state of life for us, as will
be most for our spiritual Advantage, even although it be an afflicted one. To
Conclude,

Let us all observe the dispensations of divine Providence toward us, and let
us consider how every turn of Providence may be improved by us, and in what
ways especially they may be helpful to us in working out our Salvation. Let us
consider that GOD has some wise and good design in all his dealings and
dispensations toward us; and let us see to it that we comply with the gracious
designs of GOD in them. Let us hearken to the voice of GOD in every Providence,
and then we shall experience all things working together for our good; and all
the paths of the Lord to be Mercy and Truth unto us. Then we shall find the
Mercies of GOD leading us to Repentance, and to GOD the fountain of all our
Mercies; then we shall find Afflictions turning to our profit, consuming our
dross and corruption, and causing all the Graces of the Spirit to grow and
increase within us; for as the Apostle says, Rom 5.3, 4, 5. We glory in
tribulation, knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because of the
love of God that is (...) abroad by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us.

Sermon, XVII.
WE are yet upon the Fourteenth general Instance of the wisdom of GOD in the
affair of our Redemption, Namely the Application of this Redemption to us, and
the manner of it.

And for the regular handling of this point you may remember that I divided the
Redemption that Christ has purchased, and which is applied to us into three
general parts, viz.

1. The Pardon and Justification of the Sinner.

2. His Regeneration or Conversion, and the progress of Grace in Sanctification.

3. His Glorification, or eternal Salvation.

The two first of these have been particularly, and distinctly handled. And I
have in some measure shown how the wisdom of GOD has abounded not only in the
manner of a sinners Justication, but also in the means and methods made use of
for our Regeneration and Sanctification. And I am now come to the last or
finishing stroke of our Redemption, viz. our Glorification. As Christ has
purchased Pardon and Grace, so he has purchased eternal Life and Glory for us.
And now in the application, or bestowment of this glory and happiness, there
will be bright discoveries of divine wisdom and prudence to such as seriously
consider the nature of this Glory, and the steps and methods taken in receiving
us unto it.

So then,

3. In the Glorification of the Saints, or in GOD's receiving any of the
Children of Men to his Kingdom and Glory, there appears a great deal of Wisdom
and Prudence.

Under this head I propose to consider something of the nature of the Glory it
self. The Persons that shall be received to it. The Evidences and Assurances
GOD is giving of it. And the Time and Manner of arriving at the possession and
enjoyment of it. Each of which will make some Considerable Discoveries of the
divine Wisdom.

Here then,

1. The Nature and Degree of the Glory and Happiness that Christ has purchased,
and is now preparing for us, is such as to manifest and discover the Wisdom of
GOD.

Indeed as for this Glory and Happiness, it is out of the reach of our
Capacities to comprehend; much less to describe. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor.
2.9. Eye has not seen, nor Eye heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man* the things that God has prepared for them that have him. If this could be
said with respect to the glorious times of the Gospel, how much rather may it
be said of the Glory that shall be revealed in us in the world to come?
Nevertheless the Scriptures do give us some general hints concerning the state
of the blessed by which we may have some general, but not adequate Ideas of the
heavenly Glory. Thus we may gather from the Scriptures, that although the
happiness of Heaven is represented by sensible Metaphors; yet that it is not a
carnal, but a spiritual kind of happiness; that we shall be made perfect in
holiness; that there wont be the least Inclination, nor Propension to sin
remaining in us, but that we shall be perfectly pure and holy; and that we
shall dwell in the presence of GOD and CHRIST, and have a most glorious vision,
and full fruition of him; that we shall enjoy every thing that can gratify our
pure and perfectly refined natures, even Rivers of pleasure and fullness of
joys; and that every thing that can disturb or afford any uneasiness to us
shall be entirely banished that blessed Place; that all the former things will
be entirely passed away, that there will be no more sickness nor pain no more
sorrow, nor any more death, but all tears shall be wiped away from our Eyes. It
is likewise represented as a state wherein we shall have the greatest honor
conferred upon us and shall be employed in the most delightful Exercises, even
to join in Consort with all the holy Angels in singing Praises and Hallelujahs,
giving blessing, and honor, and glory and power to him that sits on the
throne, and unto the Lamb.

Moreover, the account the Scriptures give concerning the duration of the Glory
is, that it is Eternal; and so will never have an end: It is called eternal
Life, an everlasting Kingdom; A crown of glory that fades not away; an
Inheritance Incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away. And now here
is Wisdom,

1. Because this is a glory and happiness suited to our rational Nature.

As it is infinite goodness in GOD to provide a happiness for his Creatures, so
he discovers his wisdom in suiting the happiness to the nature of the Creature
on whom he bestows it. That which would be a complete happiness to one kind of
Beings, would not be so to another: that which would be a complete happiness to
a mere sensitive Creature, can by no means be sufficient for a rational one.
Now GOD has wisely considered our frame and constitution, and has provided a
happiness that is altogether suitable to such natures as ours. We are in our
make and constitution not merely sensitive, but rational Creatures: we have
rational and immortal Spirits formed within us; and as this is the most noble
part of our constitution, so GOD has had a particular regard to the Soul in the
happiness he has provided for us. The good which he has laid up for them that
love and fear his Name, is of such a nature, as to gratify all the rational and
immortal desires of our Souls, in a more especial manner* Indeed many Men through
the carnality of their hearts, and their having been strangers to any other but
sensual pleasures, are ready to imagine the happiness of Heaven to consist in
the free and full gratification of their sensitive Appetites: but what a poor
kind of happiness would this be for a man, for a rational Being? What
satisfaction would that be to a rational and immortal Soul? And therefore GOD
in his infinite Wisdom has considered us as Men, and not as Beasts, in the
happiness he has reserved in Heaven for us: and has suited it to our Superior,
that is to our Spiritual and Rational part. But then as our bodily and fleshly
Appetites, if they are ungratifyed afford a great deal of uneasiness and
disturbance to us, and would interrupt and hinder the Soul from taking the full
delight and satisfaction in divine and spiritual Enjoyments; therefore GOD has
wisely taken care that we shall not carry such gross and sensitive Appetites
with us to Heaven. These gross and corruptible Bodies, and consequently these
gross and carnal and sensitive Appetites will be left behind, and our Bodies
will be refined and spiritualized before they get to Heaven. They are to lie
down in the Grave and see Corruption; but they will be refined in their
Resurrection; It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.44. And consequently the desires of the whole Man will
be pure and spiritual in the Resurrection State, and so the happiness of Heaven
which is of a spiritual Nature will be altogether suited to our refined
Natures, and will perfectly gratify every desire, we shall carry with us into
that high and holy place.

2. Because this is a glory and happiness in, and by which the Grace of GOD is
greatly Magnifyed and Illustrate.

As has been all along observed, that must always be looked upon as an instance
of wisdom, that serves to illustrate or display any of the divine Perfections
And now what can be more effectual to set forth the riches of divine Grace, and
make it very conspicuous and glorious in the Eyes of the rational intel^igent
Creatures, than his providing such an infinite and eternal weight of glory, and
happiness for some of the sinful Children of Men, who deserved nothing but
everlasting Misery, and Destruction at his hands? Surely GOD would have
manifested his Mercy and Compassion, if he had only mitigated the torments of
Hell; and a very high degree of it indeed, if he had entirely saved us from
going down into the pit of everlasting destruction although he had bestowed no
positive happiness upon us. And it would be a further manifestation of divine
Mercy and Grace, to have offered any, even the least degree of positive
happiness unto us. But now what infinite riches of grace are manifested in
bestowing Heaven it self with all the infinite glories of it upon us! It is an
instance of grace and favor in a Prince to grant a bare Pardon to a Traitor:
but how much greater grace to receive him into his bosom, and put all possible
marks of kindness and respect upon him, and enrich him with every thing that he
can desire? But now such Grace, yea infinitely greater Grace than that, is
manifested in GOD's bestowing eternal Life and Glory upon any of the Children
of Men. Surely here is such an unparalled instance of love and grace, that
the Angels may well stand and wonder at it, desiring to look into it, and yet
be never able to comprehend it, for it passes Knowledge.

3. Because it is a glory and happiness worthy of GOD to bestow on such as he
adopts into his Family, and makes his Heirs.

It is highly proper that when GOD is pleased of his sovereign grace to Adopt
any of his Creatures, and bring them into the high and near relation of
Children, he should bestow something on them worthy of such a Father, who is
the high Possessor of Heaven and Earth, to give to such as are his Children and
his Heirs. And now as GOD through the riches of sovereign Grace has been pleased
to make choice of some of the Children of Men, to make them his own Children by
Regeneration, and by Adoption, so they are looked upon and considered as Heirs
of GOD, even Coheirs with CHRIST. For thus the word of GOD allows us to argue,
Romans 8.17. And if Children then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with
Christ. Now I say, since they are the Children and the Heirs of GOD, it is
highly proper the Inheritance should be such an one as is worthy of such a
great, such an heavenly Father to grant, and suitable for the Children of such
a Father to receive. And thus it is, for it is a glorious, and an eternal
Inheritance; it is an Inheritance Incorruptible and Undefiled, and that fades
not away, reserved in Heaven for them. It is an Inheritance that is large
enough to afford a supply of every thing that can be desired, and that can make
us happy; and it is an Inheritance Intailed upon us for ever, of equal duration
with our Immortal Souls. So that considering our Natures and Capacities, GOD
could not bestow a better Inheritance upon us, for it is as much as our Natures
in their highest inlargements are capable of enjoying. So that how enlarged
soever the expectations of GOD's Children are, from the consideration of their
having such a Father who is the sovereign Lord Proprietor, and Owner of all
things, yet there will not be the least frustration or disappointment, nay it will
infinitely surpass all their expectations; for Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things which God has
prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

5. Here is wisdom inasmuch as the nature of this Glory and Happiness is such,
as consists in the actual Praising and Glorifying of GOD Himself.

I have once and again observed, that the highest, wisest and best end that GOD
can ever propose, is, His own Glory: and his infinite wisdom discovers it self
in ordering every thing in such a manner, as that his glory shall be advanced
thereby And now this wisdom discovers it self in the Glory and Happiness that
GOD has prepared for them that love him. For the contrivance of infinite wisdom
in this matter is, that we should have such divine, holy and gracious tempers
and dispositions of Soul formed within us, and perfected when we get to Heaven,
as that our highest Glory and Happiness, and that which we shall take infinite
delight and everlasting satisfaction in, will be the serving, praising and
glorifying GOD with all our powers. Heaven, and the happiness of it is
represented as consisting in our being employed in giving Blessing, and Honor,
and Glory; and Power to him that sits on the throne, and unto the Lamb for
ever and ever, in waiting his Commands, and in fulfilling his pleasure. This is
the present happiness of the holy Angels that are admitted into the glorious
presence of GOD, and are continually bowing before his throne, adoring and
praising of him, ministering unto him, and standing ready to do his Will.

And this will be a great part of the happiness of the Saints in Heaven. For
their hearts will be so swallowed up in love to GOD, and the Lord JESUS CHRIST
as that nothing will be so great a happiness to them as to dwell in GOD's
presence, and have sensible manifestations of his favor, to be bowing before
him in the lowest postures of adoration, to be ascribing greatness to their
GOD, and giving to him the glory due unto his Name; in receiving, and then in
fulfilling his Commands.

And now surely this is wisdom in GOD, so to sanctify, change and dispose our
hearts unto himself, as that his glory, and our happiness become not only
consistent, but even one and the same thing; insomuch that by the glorifying
GOD in the highest manner, we shall receive the fullest satisfaction, and taste
the highest delights, and pleasures that we are capable of.

2. If we consider the Persons that shall be received to this Glory and
Happiness, the wisdom of GOD will discover it self therein.

Now the Saints and true Believers, are the only Persons that are interested
in, or that shall be received to this Glory. None but such as are Regenerated
and born again, can see the Kingdom of GOD. None but such as by faith receive
and embrace the Lord Jesus Christ their onl^ Savior, as he is of^ered to them
in the Gospel, shall be saved. None but such as repent unfeignedly of all their
sins, and that bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, shall receive the
remission of their sins, and an Inheritance among them that are Sanctified.
None but such as have clean hands, and a pure heart; and who do not lift up
their Souls to vanity, not swear deceitfully, shall ascend into the hill of the
Lord, and stand in his holy place. in short, we are expressly told, Heb. 12.14.
That without holiness not man shall see the Lord. And therefore according to
the tenor of the Gospel, which alone informs us in this matter, they and only
they, as the Apostle tell us, Romans 2.7. Who by patient continuance ^n well
doing, seek for glory, honor, and immortality, shall obtain eternal Life. And
as for others, Such as are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul
of man that does evil; as in the following words. And then the same Apostle to
the Corinthians plainly tells us, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. That the unrighteous shall
not inherit the kingdom of God; be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
Mankind, nor Thieves, nor ^ave^ous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilens, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God Accordingly in that particular
account we have of the solemn process in the day of Judgment, in Matthew. 25 chapter
This is the conclusion of it, These, that is the wicked, shall go away into
everlasting Punishment, but the Righteous into life Eternal: as in the last
verse.

And now in this appears the wisdom of GOD.

Because,

1. The Saints and true Believers are fitted for this heavenly Glory and
Happiness.

It is highly requisite that such as are designed by GOD for future Glory and
Felicity, should be fitted and qualified for it before hand; for to what
purpose would it be to bring persons to a state of Glory and Happiness that
they have no notion of, nor delight in? Therefore this must be considered as an
instance of wise and prudent management in GOD, that all such as he has
ordained to eternal Life and Happiness, he has taken care that they should be
fitted and qualified by his Grace for the Place, the Company, the Exercises and
Enjoyments of that glorious State. He receives none to that blessed Place that
are in their fine, and under the power of their Lusts and Corruptions; he
brings none thither that are not fit for the Company and Society of Heaven:
None that are not capable of the holy Exercises and Employments, and capable of
relishing the delights of Heaven. They are made meet for the Inheritance of the
Saints in light, before they are brought into the possession of it. They are
chosen to salvation through sanctification of the spirit. Accordingly all true
Believers, who are the only Heirs of the heavenly Glory, are renewed and
sanctified by the Grace and Spirit of GOD. Their Souls are restored to their
primitive rectitude and perfection: the Image of GOD, which consists in
knowledge, righteousness and true holiness, is reimpressed upon their natures;
they are cleansed from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and are perfected in
holiness, and thereby are fitted for the presence of the holy GOD, and to dwell
in the high and holy place, and fitted for the Society of holy Angels, and to
join with them in holy Exercises and Employments. And after such a manner is
every true Believer, who are the persons GOP calls to his Kingdom and Glory,
fitted and prepared for it beforehand. Every Saint has an heavenly temper
wrought in him before ever he is brought to dwell in Heaven. They are all
trained up in the business and employments of Heaven, whilst they are here
upon the Earth, insomuch that Heaven may be said be begun with them, even
whilst they are here upon Earth: for the devout worshipping and serving GOD in
religious duties here in his Tabernacles below, and the sweet communion and
fellowship, the delight and joy, the Saints do often experience in them, are
emblems of the most glorious Services, the ravishing delights and joys of his
Temple above. For the difference lies not so much in kind, as in perfection and
degree. So that the Saints, the Children of GOD, and the Heirs of Heaven, are
here in the School of Christ trained up to it whilst on Earth; and when they
are made meet for, they are received to the Inheritance of the Saints in light,
and not before: which shows the wisdom of GOD.

2. It is wisdom in GOD to receive only the Saints, and holy Ones to Glory,
because it would be unworthy of him (...) and would reflect great dishonor
upon his Name, to receive or admit any other.

If GOD should receive unsanctified, impenitent, unbelieving Sinners to Heaven
and Happiness, it would be a reflection upon the divine wisdom, because they
are such unworthy improper, and unsuitable persons to be admitted into such a
pure and holy place. There is no manner of congruity or agreableness between
such filthy and impure Creatures, and such an high and holy Place, but the
utmost opposition and contrariety; and therefore it could not be consistent
with wisdom to receive them to such a Place. Moreover, it would be a great
reflection upon the Holiness of GOD; for who could have believed that he was as
he declared himself, a God glorious in holiness, and of purer eyes than to
behold Iniquity, if he should have received such impure, vile and sinful
Creatures as we are by nature, into his most favorable and gracious presence?
Who could think that God hated wickedness, and that he is angry with the wicked
every day, if he should receive impenitent Sinners, unsanctified Creatures to
the Habitation of his Holiness, and of his Glory; to enjoy his reconciled face
and favor, to have all possible marks of honor and kindness put upon them,
and they instated in everlasting bliss and happiness? Furthermore, it would be
a reflection upon the Godness of GOD, as if that was degenerated into a fond
Indulgence, if he should not only permit his Enemies and Rebels, and those that
hate him, and do all they can to dishonor and provoke him, to go unpunished;
but also confer the greatest positive honors and favors upon them. And so in
short, there is no perfection in GOD but what would suffer great dishonor, if
he should admit any impure, unsanctifyed ones to partake of the heavenly Glory,
while they remain such; and therefore it is wisely and prudently done by GOD,
utterly and everlastingly to exclude them.

3. It is wisdom in GOD to receive none but Saints, because no other are fit
for, or capable of the Employments and Enjoyments of Heaven.

What would an unsanctifyed Soul do in Heaven, supposing it was possible for
him to have admission? It would be no Heaven, nor afford any happiness to him:
how unsuitable, and how uncomfortable would it be for a sinful, wicked man to
dwell in the presence of an Infinitely holy GOD, and to associate with none but
holy Angels and Saints? And what satisfaction could an obstinate Sinner that
hates GOD, and all that it is good and holy, take in dwelling for ever in the
presence of GOD, and in being perpetually employed in serving, praising and
glorifying of him? Surely all religious duties are a burden and a wearisomness
unto such while here below, and if they carried the same temper to Heaven with
them how would it be possible for them to take any pleasure or satisfaction in
spending an Eternity in such Exercises? Verily Heaven would be a burdensome and
an uneasy place to a carnal* unregenerate Soul; and such an one would prefer
Heaven to nothing but the mere exquisite torments of hell: this world and the
pleasures of sin and sense, are much more desirable to such an one.

Now surely, it is wisdom in GOD to exclude all such as are so unfit for that
glorious place; for why should he receive such into the heavenly Glory, that
would not only pollute and defile the place, interrupt and disturb the blessed
Society there, but would despise and reject the glories of that place, and take
no manner of delight or satisfaction in them!

I proposed to consider the Evidences and Assurances GOD is giving of this
Glory and Happiness, and the Method he takes to bring us to the full possession
of it, and take notice of the wisdom of GOD appearing in these things; but I
must leave the consideration of them to another Opportunity, and shall conclude
at present with a brief

Improvement.
1. Let us admire and adore the astonishing Grace of GOD in providing such a
Glory and Happiness for us.

When we consider what vile and sinful creatures we are by nature, and what
infinite provocation we have offered to GOD by our sinful practices, and how
much we have deserved, and so how just it would be with GOD to have punished us
with an everlasting destruction from his presence, and from the glory of his
power, into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone; and when we consider
that instead of this there is an exceeding, and an eternal weight of Glory
purchased and provided, and offered and made over to every penitent and
believing sinner: I say, if we consider these things, as they will fill us with
the utmost joy and gladness, so they will fill us with wonder and astonishment;
that instead of dwelling with devouring fire, and inhabiting with everlasting
burnings, (which is but the just desert of our crimes) there are glorious
Mansions prepared for us in Heaven, even in GOD's presence where is fullness of
joy, and at his right hand, where are rivers of pleasures for evermore; we may
well cry out with wonder and amazement, O the height, the depth, the lenght,
and breadth of divine love! And now how should this inflame our Souls with
love, enlarge our hearts in thankfulness, and fill our Mouths with praises to
the GOD of all Grace, who not only saves us from the wrath to come, but has
called us to eternal Glory by Christ Jesus.

2. Since there is such a glory and happiness provided for the Saints, and
reserved in the Heaven for them, let us have our Eye continually upon it.

We should be frequently meditating upon the future glory and happiness, we
should be often thinking with our selves of the greatness and the excellency of
it: we should consider it as a good suited to our natures, to afford a perfect
happiness unto us; as that which is able to satisfy the most enlarged desires
of our Souls, and what is commensurate also with the everlasting duration of
them. I say, let us muse and meditate on this happiness, and let us compare it
with the world and all the fading glories of it: and it would serve wonderfully
to fill us with an holy contempt of this world, and all its enjoyments. Then we
shall see and be convinced, that there is nothing in this world, not all the
pomp, riches and grandeur of it, to be compared with the glory that shall
hereafter be revealed in us. The fervent, serious and realizing thought of the
heavenly glory, would raise up our affections from earth to Heaven; we should
then set our affections on things above, and not on things on the earth. If we
would spend more time to think upon Heaven, and the happiness of it, our Souls
would not cleave unto the dust, as now they do; we should not look upon this
world as our home, we should not look upon the riches of it as our treasures,
nor content our selves with a portion here, but we should be for laying up
treasures in Heaven. This would put us upon living above this world, and would
q^icken us in our pursuit after, and preparations for the coming world. This
would quicken us to endeavor after those things that accompany Salvation, and
that are necessary to qualify us for the Inheritance among them that are
fanctifyed. Having this hope in us, and having it frequently in exercise, we
shall be purifying our selves, even is God is pure; cleansing our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God;
that so we may be fit for the high, and the holy place, into which nothing can
enter that defiles. And it is because Men don't take time to think of these
things, nor to bring themselves to a realizing apprehension of them, that they
are so little affected with them, and are so careless in securing an interest
in them. Wherefore let us think more of Heaven, and less of the present world:
and it is most certain, that if our treasure was in Heaven, our hearts would be
there also; yea, and our Conversation would then be more in Heaven than now it
is.

3. From what we have heard, we may gather one very good rule by which to judge
of our selves, whether we have an interest in the future Glory, or not; Namely,
our being fitted and qualifyed for it.

For by what has been said, we find that none shall ever go to Heaven, but such
as by the Grace of GOD are fitted and prepared for it. As the vessels of wrath
are fitted for destruction, Romans 9.22, 23. so the vessels of mercy are before
prepared unto glory and such are made meet for the Inheritance among the Saints
in light, before they become partakers of it, Col. 1.12. So that none can go to
Heaven, but such as are fit for the high and holy place. And therefore the best
way to know whether we have an interest there, is to see, and examine our
selves, whether we are fit for it: if we can find our selves fitted and
prepared for Heaven, we may depend upon it that we have an interest, and shall
in due time have an open entrance ministered to us into the everlasting Kingdom.
For GOD never fits a person for glory and happiness, but he will receive him
unto it at last. But if we don't find our selves fitted for it, if we don't
find a spiritual, holy, heavenly frame of Spirit, producing a blameless,
heavenly Conversation, we may conclude that we have no lot or portion there.

Wherefore let us all Examine and Try our selves by this rule; let us look into
our hearts, and let us observe our lives to see what manner of persons we are.
Let us see whether we have such a superlative love to GOD and CHRIST reigning
in our Souls, as fills us with the most longing desires after, and the greatest
delight in having Communion, and fellowship with the Father, and with the Son
Christ Jesus. Does it appear to us to be our greatest happiness, to dwell in
the presence of GOD, to be employed in serving, praising and glorifying of him
for ever? Have we such an hatred of sin, and love to holiness wrought in our
Souls, that Heaven recommends it self to us chiefly, because of its perfect
purity and holiness? Is the Society of the Saints on Earth the most delightful
Company to us? And is serious, spiritual, heavenly discourse and conversation
with them the most desirable and delightful to us? Can we call the Sabbaths of
the Lord our delight? And is it with the voice of joy and praise, that we go to
the House of the Lord, and attend upon him in the duties of Religion? Now if we
can find these things in us we find a heavenly temper, and a fitness for
Heaven, and may upon good grounds depend upon obtaining an Entrance into it;
these heavenly qualifications are earnests and pledges of the glory and
happiness we shall at length be brought to the possession of.

4. Hence the unreasonableness and folly of those that expect Heaven and
Happiness, while they remain in a graceless Unconverted State.

GOD in his infinite wisdom has seen cause for ever to Exclude such the Kingdom
of Heaven, who have not been born again, but live and dye in their sins; and
from what we have heard, w^ see there is a great deal of reason for it. Now
therefore what folly is it for an obstinate impenitent Sinner to hope for or
expect it, whilst he continues in such a state? For Heaven, as we have said, is
an high and holy place, into which nothing shall or can enter that defiles,
that works abomination, or that makes a lie. Now he that is under the guilt,
and filth of sin, having never been washed in the blood of the Lamb, must needs
be very polluting and defiling to the holy place: and therefore it is not
possible for such an one to enter. Moreover, how can a Man with all his sins
upon him think of approaching before the holy GOD? With what face could he
appear in his presence, that has so often rebelled against him, before he has
humbled himself to the very dust for his sin, and has obtained pardon and
reconciliation with GOD through Christ? But if we should suppose that GOD would
deny himself so far, as to permit such an one to enter through the gates into the
celestial City, what would he do there? You that never loved GOD, nor any of
his ways here on earth, and whose language to GOD has been, Depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; what pleasure can you think of taking
in approaching before GOD in paying religious Worship and Adoration to him for
ever, when the short services of his worship are such a wearisomness and burden
to you whilst on earth? You that never loved the Saints on earth, but hated,
despised and rejected them, with what pleasure can you think of being linked to
them for ever? Or what pleasure could you take in them? Verily you would be
burdensome and uneasy to each other. In short, as the Apostle argues, 2 Cor.
6.14, 15. What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what
communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial?
No more fellowship, concord or communion could an impenitent Sinner have with
Christ, or with the Saints in Heaven. So that it is the greatest presumption,
folly and madness in the world, for any whilst under the dominion of sin, to
think of going to Heaven; for they will most certainly be disappointed. Such
are so unfit, as well as unworthy of that place, that it is impossible for them
to gain admission; the gates of Heaven will be shut against them, and although
they cry, Lord, Lord open unto us, it will be in vain, and CHRIST their Judge
will in his Wisdom and Justice say, Depart from me all ye workers of Iniquity.

Sermon, XVIII.
IT is the finishing stroke of our Redemption that is yet under consideration,
Namely, our Glorification: Under which head I have considered something of the
nature of the future glory and happiness reserved in Heaven for us, and the
wisdom of GOD appearing therein. I have likewise observed to you the wisdom of
GOD appearing in the persons appointed to partake of this glory and happiness
that is to come, viz the Saints and they only; they, and only they, that are
renewed and sanctified by the saving Grace of GOD.

I now proceed to say,

3. The Evidences and Assurances which GOD is pleased to give us, that there is
such a Glory and Happiness prepared for us, is a further manifestation of the
divine Wisdom.

Now GOD is giving us Evidences and Assurances hereof,

1. In his holy Word.

Therein we have Him asserting and declaring that this shall be the Portion of
all true Believers. Thus our Savior tells us, Matthew. 25 46. These, that is,
the wicked, shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into
life eternal. So Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is Baptized, shall be
saved. So, Romans 2.7. To them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for
glory, honor and immortality, eternal life. And so in a multitude of other
places, is eternal life and happiness spoken of as what every true Believer
shall be received unto: And it is said to be promised, and that from the
beginning before the World began. In hope of eternal life, which God that
cannot lie, has promised before the world began, Tit 1.2. But then there is
not only the word and promise of GOD, but he has for the further certainty of
it confirmed it by an Oath. Heb. 6.17, 18. Wherein God willing more abundantly
to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it
by an oath; that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to
lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold
on the hope set before us. And now these exceeding great and precious promises
being thus confirmed, make it abundantly evident that there is a glory and a
happiness prepared for all the Children of GOD, to which they shall be
received. For,

First of all, there is Almighty Power whereby he is able to accomplish his
promises. None can oppose or hinder him from accomplishing every word that he
has spoken. He has the keys of Heaven, as well as of Hell, and of Death: as he
can shut, and none can open; so he can open, and none can shut.

And then again, these promises are strengthened and confirmed by Infinite and
Immense Goodness, which inclines and disposes GOD to do good to all his
Creatures, and especially to fulfill all the good that he has promised to them.

Again, the infinite Justice of GOD serves to strengthen the promises; for
although eternal Life be the free gift of GOD unto us; yet considering it with
respect to Christ our Mediator and Surety, it is no more than is justly due;
for he purchased it for us, and now according to the tenor of the new Covenant,
it is an act of Justice in GOD to bestow this glory upon the Saints; and we are
sure that the Judge of all the earth will do right.

And then lastly, there is the immutable Truth and Faithfulness of GOD, whereby
he is not only always of the same mind he was when he made the promises; but is
also obliged to fulfill them, and to suffer Heaven and Earth sooner to pass
away, than one word that he has spoken.

2 GOD is giving Evidences of the future Glory, by the conduct of his
Providence.

For every one must acknowledge there is a great and real difference between
Saints and Sinners; and that the Saints who love GOD with all their hearts, and
keep his Commandments shall be distinguished by the divine Favors.

But now we find by Experience, that there is no remarkable difference in this
life, with respect to the dispensations of divine Providence; for as the
Preacher says Eccl. 9.2. All things come alike to all, there is one event to
the righteous and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the
unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is the
good, so is the sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an Oath.
Oftentimes the wicked prosper and grow great in the world, they are not in
trouble as other men, neither are they plagued as other men. They live at ease,
and have no bands in their death. Whilst some of the Saints are chastned every
morning, and plagued all the day long. And now although this is at first apt to
excite the envy of the Saints, and tempts them before they have considered the
matter, to say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.13. Verily I have cleansed my heart
in vain. Yet upon a through consideration, it will be found that these are the
Providence that afford the most comfortable Evidences of the future Glory and
Happiness reserved in Heaven for them.

If GOD should make a very remarkable difference between the righteous and the
wicked in this world; that is, if he should cause goodness and mercy to follow
the Saints, even all their days, so as to make whatever they do to prosper; and
should be constantly pursuing the wicked with plagues and judgments, till he
had cut them off; we should be ready to look upon this present world as the
place of rewards and punishments, and that the portion of the Godly was in this
life. But now since the goods and evils of this life are so promiscuously
dispensed to the Children of Men, we may strongly and safely argue with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 58.11. Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is
a God that judges in the earth. As certainly as he is GOD that judges in the
Earth, so certainly there is a reward for the righteous.

3. GOD is giving some secret, but as convincing Evidences hereof unto his
Children, by his holy Spirit.

Thus GOD by his holy Spirit removes all the doubts and uncertainties that are
in our minds, with respect to the truth and reallity of the promises; he takes
out of them their evil hearts of unbelief, so that they are no longer faithless
but believing; the Spirit of GOD endows them with that Faith which is the
substance, or confident Expectation of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen. He enables them to look upon the promises, although they are
afar off, to be as certain as if they were already accomplished. Moreover, the
Spirit of GOD enables them to apply the promises to their own Souls, to see
themselves as having an Interest in them, to look upon Heaven, and the glories
of it as their own. And this the Spirit does by witnessing together with their
spirits, that they are the Children of GOD; and so enabling them to argue, as
in Romans 8.17. If Children then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ.

But then sometimes the Spirit affords to them a more sensible and affecting
evidence of their right and title to Heaven, and of the certainty of their
going to possess that joy and happiness hereafter by pledges, earnests and
foretastes thereof, which he gives the Soul. Christ is sometimes pleased to
make very glorious manifestations of himself, and of the future, glory by his
Spirit, to Believers; they are put into such a heavenly frame, and are in such
raptures and ex^^sies of spiritual delight and joy, that heaven it self seems
to be begun within them; so as to dissipate every doubt, and to give them a
plerophory, or full assurance of their getting thither at last* Nay this has
been the case of a Saint, that being full of the holy Ghost, the heavens were
opened to him, and be saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right
hand of God, Act. 7.55 Yet, there has been such an one who has been Caught up
into Paradise, into the third heaven, so as not to be able to tell whether in
the body or out of the body; and to hear those things which are unspeakable,
and not possi^le for men to utter, 2 Cor. 12 begin. Which m^st needs give the
most convincing demonstration of a Kingdom of glory that is prepared for them.

And now GOD's giving such Evidences as these of the future Glory, discovers
the divine wisdom.

1. As it will serve to leave finally Impenitent Sinners, especially those
under the Gospel, the more inexcusable, and so will make the Justice of GOD
more conspicuous in their eternal Condemnation.

For although they have not the secret Evidences of the Spirit, yet they have
Evidence enough in reason to satisfy them: they have the promises of the
Gospel, founded upon almighty power, immense goodness, immutable truth and
justice, to assure them, that there is such a glorious place as Heaven
prepared, and reserved for the Saints. They are capable also of arguing it as
well as others from the promiscuous dispensations of divine Providence; which
must needs be sufficient encouragement for every man, by a patient continuance
in the ways of well doing, to be seeking after it: and sufficient to leave them
without excuse that neglect or refuse to use their utmost endeavors to secure
it. Such as enjoy the Gospel which brings life and immortality to light, and by
which are given to as such exceeding great and precious promises, will never
^eable to plead the uncertainty of the reward for their neglecting to keep the
Commandments. For they have all the assurance they can reasonably desire, and
therefore if they notwithstanding go on in sin, and neglect their duty, they
practically judge themselves unworthy of eternal Life; and GOD will judge them
worthy of, and will sentence them to eternal Death, and he will appear very
just and righteous in it.

2. It is wisely done by GOD, to afford such Evidence, as it serves mightily to
Encourage persons to engage in Religion, and to be steadfast and immovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, being assured that their labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord.

GOD knows our frame and constitution, and how much we are moved by our hopes
and fears; He knows that the prospect of a reward is one of the most powerful
motives to duty. And atlho' he requires that we should be influenced to duty
from a sense of his Authority, and should act from a principle of Obedience;
yet he allows us to have an eye to the recompense of reward, and accordingly
proposes the same unto us, to animate and encourage us in the ways of well
doing; and surely it is a most powerful motive, and serves wonderfully to
encourage us not only to engage in the practice of Religion, but to persevere
therein. It must needs be a mighty encouragement to persons to forsake their
sins, and turn into the paths of righteousness, to be assured that as sin, when
it is finished, brings forth death; so that in the way of righteousness is
life, and in the pathway thereof is no death. What could be a more powerful
motive, to engage with all our might in the service of GOD, than to be assured
that none shall serve him for naught, but that as certainly as he is, so
certainly he will be a rewarder of them that diligently seek him? The evidence,
that GOD has given of the future glory, is well contrived to carry us through the
duties of Mortification, and self-denial; to bear with patience the afflictions
and troubles of the present life This will enable us patiently and cheerfully
to bear afflictions with the people of GOD, rather than to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season, being assured that these light afflictions which are but
for a moment, will work out for us a far more exceeding, and an eternal weight
of glory. What could support the Saints under all the difficulties they meet
with in their Christian Course, and enable them to persevere in ways of well
doing unto the end, but only the evidence and assurance that GOD has given them
that they shall reap eternal life, if they faint not, but are faithful unto the
death?

3. It serves wonderfully to support the Saints, under the fears of Death, and
to carry them comfortably through their Great and Last change.

Death is the king of Terrors: Nature abhors a dissolution, and shrinks at the
thoughts of it: so that the Saints and Children of GOD need something to
support them in a dying hour; something to enable them to look death in the
face with courage, and with calmness of Spirit to submit to the fatal stroke.
And now what could be contrived to afford so much courage and comfort to them
at such a time, as the joyful prospect and assurance of a glorious Immortality
after this life is ended? What can be a greater support to us at our leaving
the present world and all our friends, estates, and earthly comforts behind us,
than the hopeful prospect of going to GOD the best friend of all, to the
delightful company of Angels and Saints made perfect, and to the possession of
infinitely more substantial and enduring riches, honors, and pleasures, than
this world can possibly afford us? What better cordial could be provided for a
fainting dying Saint, when the world, and all things here below fail, and when
his flesh and his heart fail, than the comfortable evidences of GOD's love, and
the assurances that he will never leave nor forsake him; but will be the
strength of his heart, and the portion of his Soul for ever? Verily there is
nothing can afford so much courage, and patience, under the last struggles of
nature, and the dreadful Agonies of Death, as the prospect of having the scene
so quickly changed, and that their passing through the dark valley of the shadow
of death is only to bring them to that glorious place, where all tears shall be
for ever wiped away from their eyes, where there shall be no more sickness, nor
pain, nor any more death. So that GOD has wisely and graciously considered us,
in making known his purposes of mercy and grace to us: how could we have been
moved to our duty, or left without excuse, if we had neglected it? how could we
have been supported under the numberless troubles, and sorrows of the present
life; and how could we have been comforted in the hour of death, if GOD had not
brought life and immortality to light, and assured us of that glorious Rest
that remains in Heaven for the People of GOD!

But thus much for the wisdom of GOD in the Evidences and Assurances he is
giving us of the future glory.

I now proceed to say in the next place,

4. If we consider the Way and Manner by which the Saints are brought to this
Glory and Happiness, we shall see much of the wisdom of GOD therein.

And here,

1. They must pass through the dark valley of the shadow of death, before they
arrive to the Regions of Light and Glory.

It is appointed for all men once to die, Heb. 9.27. And what man is he that
lives, and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the
grave? Psalm. 89.48. The Saints are no more exempted from this decree of Heaven
than Sinners: there is no discharge in that war for any; the second death
devours one as well as another. The Saints in all Ages have been subject to
death as well as other men, and have not arrived to Heaven and Happiness, but
by undergoing this dissolution of nature. Abraham, Moses, David, Paul, and all
the most celebrated Saints that have been in the world, have passed to Heaven
through this dark valley. Indeed there are two and but two instances from the
beginning of the world to this day, that have escaped the mortal stroke, and
without tasting of death, did pass immediately Soul and Body into Heaven, (only
undergoing, as we may suppose such a change as will pass upon those who shall
be found alive at our Lord's appearing in Judgment) Namely Enoch and Elijah.
And here by the way I cannot but observe the wisdom of GOD in these exceptions,
and in giving to these eminent Saints an immediate passage to Heaven, for among
other things this great and good end was answered hereby, viz. A confirming to
the world not only the Doctrine of the future State, but of the Resurrection of
the Body in particular. For when they were seen or known to be translated up to
glory, it must needs afford a very convincing argument to the other Saints,
that they shall at length come to the participation of the same glory, even the
glory and happiness of the whole man, body as well as Soul, although the man
first be made to see corruption; and from a state of corruption be raised to a
glorious immortality, from which those two eminent Saints were freed.

And then again, we may see more of the wisdom of GOD, if we consider the
particular times when these persons were in such an extraordinary manner taken
up to Heaven. Thus the first translation, viz. that of En^ch was in the old
world before the flood. The second, viz. that of Elijah was under the law; by
which there has been a very convincing Testimony both to the old world, and
those that lived under the law, of the Resurrection of the body, and the future
State. And as for the Gospel-state, there indeed life and immortality are
brought to a much clearer light, not only from the much clearer and fuller
account that is given of the matter in the Scriptures of the new Testament,
than of the old, but also from the Example of Christ's own Resurrection from
the Dead, and visible Ascension into Heaven.

So that there has been a sensible testimony given for the Resurrection of the
body, and the future state to the three grand Ages of the world; Namely, the
Antediluvian, the Legal, and the Christian; which shows the wise and tender
care GOD has taken to support the staggering faith of his Church, in the
several Ages of it.

And then again, as GOD designed to make the discovery of these things in a
gradual manner, so we may observe the divine wisdom in managing these
translations or ascensions into Heaven in such a manner, as to render each one
a brighter, and fuller Evidence than the other; thus as to Enoch, who was the
first, we have no further account of his translation, than that He was not, for
God took him, Genesis 5.24. but no account of the circumstances of it. But in the
translation of Elijah, the Sons of the Prophets were apprized of it before
hand, and Elisha his Successor was made an eyewitness of it: for he saw the
Chariot of fire, and the horses of fire, that came to wait upon his Master, and
saw him actually go up in a whirlwind into Heaven, 2 King. 2.3, 11. But when
life and immortality was to be brought to the clearest light, the Example is
more according to the manner, that all the Saints shall be received up to
glory; for the Lord Jesus Christ submitted to the stroke of death, and then
arose again from the dead, of which he gave many infallible proofs, being seen
of Cephas, and of the twelve; yea, and of above five hundred at once, and then
was seen of the Apostles actually to ascend into Heaven, 1 Cor. 15.5, 6. Act.
1.9, 10. But thus much for this Digression. I now proceed to show the wisdom of
GOD in making it the common lot and portion of the Saints to pass through the
dark valley of the shadow of death before they ascend to glory. And it is an
instance of wisdom, inasmuch as,

1. This is but agreeable to the threatening denounced against our first Parents,
and all their Posterity, for their Sin and Apostasy from GOD.

GOD threatened our first Parents, with respect unto the Tree of knowledge of
good and evil, That in the day they eat thereof they should surely dye, Genesis
2.7. Now as they were considered as the Representatives of Mankind and acting
in this capacity, when they eat the forbidden fruit, so we all became equally
exposed to the threatened penalty, and accordingly brought into a mortal dying
state: according to what the Apostle tells us, Romans 5.12. As by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin: and so death passed upon all men, for
that (or as in the Margin) in whom, all have sinned. And now although with
respect to the Saints and true Believers, the sting of death is taken away, and
it is made a gainful and a happy change to them; yet GOD obliges them to
undergo this dissolution, that so the letter of the law in the threatening may
be executed and thereby the Truth of GOD effectually secured, even although it be
turned to the advantage of the Saints.

2. One good End answered by the death of the Saints, is the frequent
manifestation of the wonderful Power of divine Grace at such a time.

There is no time so trying to a Man as when Death approaches, and stares him
in the face and he expects in a few days or hours to leave the world, and take
an everlasting farewell of all things in it; to endure the agonies of death,
and then to lie down in the rotting Grave, and the^e to see corruption. But now
GOD oftentimes takes such opportunities to discover the Power of divine Grace
in the Souls of his Saints, and Servants; by enabling them at such times to
show such a steady faith and hope, and confidence in GOD; such patience,
submission and resignation, such calmness, peace and joy, which nothing less
than the supernatual Grace of GOD is able to effect. How does the Power of
divine Grace appear in those Saints to whom GOD is pleased to manifest himself
^o far, as to give them assurance of their future good estate, in inabling them
to receive the arrests of death, not only with calmness, and composedness of
mind, but with holy triumph, and joy, from the delightful prospect of being
present with the Lord, when absent from the body, to behold and partake of his
Glory? How powerful does the Grace of GOD appear in such, who from a firm
belief of the future State, of that glory, honor and immortality which they
are entitled to, can in holy triumph say, as 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. O Death
where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory? the sting of death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the law, but thanks be to God that gives us the
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

3. The Death of the Saints seems requisite, in order to their laying aside
their present Corruptions, and their entering upon an Incorruptible and Immortal
Sat.

The Bodies we at present carry about with us, are Corruptible bodies. Now it
is very necessary in order to our entering into the heavenly State, that these
gross, heavy, infirm and unactive bodies should be laid aside, as being
altogether unfit for that pure and holy place; or for those refined, and
spiritual Exercises and Enjoyments. Now therefore GOD has wisely ordered it
that we should put off these clayie, mouldering tabernacles, in order to our
receiving more glorious, and perfect ones at the Resurruction, even more
refined and spiritual bodies, which will be more fit habitations for the
Spirits of just Men, that will be made perfect, and be no clog and hindrance to
the Soul in any of its operations. And this is the account the Apostle gives of
the matter, speaking of the Resurrection of the dead, and of the difference
between the bodies they lay down, and those they shall assure at the
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. It is sown in corruption, is is raised in
incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body. In short, the changing our vile bodies by Death is, as the
Apostle says, for this reason, which is certainly a very sufficient one,
Namely, that they may be fashoned like unto Christ's glorious body, according
to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself, Phil.
3.21.

4. It is wisdom in GOD to order Saints as well as Sinners, to pass through the
dark valley of the shadow of death, because of the Inconveniency that would
arise from their possing out of the world after a different manner.

Thus, if there was only this one Inconvenience in it, viz. That then every
man's State with respect to another World would be certainly known, according
to the manner of his passing out of the world, by those that are left behind: I
say, if there was only this inconvenience, it would be sufficient to show the
divine Prudence in ordering the same way of going out of the world both to the
righteous, and to the wicked. If there was any difference made between Saints
and Sinners in the way of their leaving the world; that is, if the righteous
should be so far privileged* as to escape the pangs of death, and be
translated, as Enoch and Elijah; but Sinners should be subject to the stroke of
death, then only by knowing which way a man made his Exit, by translation, or
by death, we should certainly kn^w what is become of him, whether he is gone
with the wicked into everlasting punishment; or with the righteous into life
Eternal But now what inconveniency would arise from the certain knowledge of
this!

For although we pay suppose it would afford the greatest comfort to mourning
Relations, to see their friends going out of the world in the way assigned for
the righteous, because this would give them an assurance that they are gone to
glory and happiness; yet on the other hand, how insupportable would be the
grief and the distress of tender Parents, especially, when their Children
should be taken from them in the way assigned, for the wicked, by which they
would certainly know that they are lost for ever, that they are gone to Hell,
to suffer the vengeance of eternal Fire!

It is very cutting and distressing to have any near Relation go out of the
world, That we fear is gone to the place of Hypocrites and Unbelievers: but
there is now generally some hope mixed with their fears; there is at least a
Who can tell but they have found mercy at the last! Which abates of that
distress of Soul there would be, if we certainl^ knew they were gone to the
place o^ eternal Torments. Surely the certain knowledge that our Children (whom
we love as our selves, and with whom we have the most tender sympathy) are gone
to dwell with devouring fire, and to inhabit with everlasting burnings, seems
to be too much for us to bear under our present frame, the strength of natural
affection, and the present Imperfection as to the degrees of Grace afforded to
us. But now in the other world when we shall be made perfect in holiness, we
shall in a sort lose that natural affection that arise from the nearness of
Relation; we shall know, i. e. shall acknowledge, respect or regard no man
after the flesh The love of the Saints in the future state, will be fixed on
persons, not because of the natural Relation they bore to them in this life,
but because of the goodness and holiness they behold in them. And so a Parent
will then much more easily bear to hear the Sentence of Condemnation pronounced
upon a wicked Child, than at present.

But Then further, what an ill improvement would be made of such a certain
knowledge, with respect to every man's future state, as there would be, if
there was a constant difference between Saints and Sinners, as to the manner of
their departure hence! Then we should find some among Sinners, and gone to the
place of Torments, who by their profession and outward carriage, every man
reckoned among the Saints: And how would this cause the Enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme? And how would it prejudice them against the ways of GOD* and make
them suspicious of and uncharitable toward many Christians that are sincere,
and upright before GOD? Then also we should perhaps see many whom we ranked
with the wicked to belong to the number of the righteous, and how would this
Encourage the wicked to indulge themselves in those things which those that
went before them had been guilty of, and yet found mercy. And many other
inconveniences would arise from the certain knowledge of every man's state that
are gone out of the world; and therefore GOD in wisdom has hid it from us by so
ordering it that there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, with
respect to their leaving the present world; so that no man can know either love
or hatred by the manner of his departure: for all die; as dies the Sinner, so
dies the Saint, as to the external cause of it. And although the Souls
immediately upon their departure from the body go to very different places, yet
this is invisible, and unknown to us that survive; and we must wait till we get
among them, if not till the Resurrection, and the Judgment, before we shall
certainly know what is become of them.

2. Another step the Saints are to take in order to their arriving at perfect
bliss and happiness, and in which also the wisdom of GOD appears, is the
Resurrection of their bodies.

The doctrine of the Resurrection of the body (how unknown* soever to the
heathen world, and how incredible soever it appeared to them when they first
heard of it) is nevertheless a doctrine according to Truth. For we have not
only the Example of Christ's own Resurrection, who is head of the Church, which
is his body, and every particular Believer a Member of this body, from whence
we may argue their Resurrection; for if the head be risen, the members will
also follow: and hence Christ in his Resurrection, is said to become the first
fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15.20. But it is expressly taught in the word
of GOD, and universally believed by the People of GOD; the Old Testament
Doctrine was, that Death should be swallowed up in victory, Isai. 25.8. And
Christ in the new Testament says expressly, That the hour is coming in which
all that are in their Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they
that have done good, to the Resurrection of life, Joh. 5.28, 29. Now this is
wisely ordered by GOD.

1. Because it will be a glorious Manifestation of the wonderful Power of GOD.

There was infinite Power, as well as Wisdom, and Skill, displayed in forming
our bodies at first out of the dust of the Earth; and there will be as glorious
a Manifestation hereof in raising them up again at the last day; when they have
been dissolved into dust and scattered upon the face of the whole Earth. The
doctrine of the Resurrection seemed incredible to the heathen world, because of
the difficulties that appeared in it; but the more difficult the work is, the
more glorious manifestation there will be of the divine Power in accomplishing
it.

2. Because it is very requisite for Completing the future Glory and Happiness
of the Saints.

The happiness of the Soul in its separate state is not the full and complete
happiness of the Man; for the body is an essential part of the humane
Constitution, and there is not a perfect Man but where Soul and Body are
united, and consequently not a perfect happiness to the Man, but where both the
essential parts of his nature are sharers in it. Now therefore as GOD designed
the happiness of the Saints in Heaven should be perfect and complete; so it is
necessary that their bodies be raised, that they might be glorified, and made
happy with the Soul: and it is necessary that it should be raised a spiritual
body, that it might be more like unto the Soul, and so instead of clogging or
hindering, they may be helpful to each other in their operations, and enjoyments
in the heavenly world.

3. Another thing necessary in order to the Saints arriving at the future
Glory, (and in which there appears much of the wisdom of GOD) is their
Appearing before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, to be tried and judged, according
as their works have been.

As it is appointed for all Men once to dye, so after that is the Judgment. And
we are expressly told, That we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10.

Now here I might observe the wisdom of GOD,

1. In the Person appointed to be the Judge of the World, Namely, the Lord
Jesus Christ. For he is the most suitable Person that can be for that Office.

His par^aking both of the divine and the humane Natures, peculiarly qualifies
him beyond any other Person for Judge of the World.

His partaking of the divine Nature eminently qualifies him for it; as hereby
he is Omniscient, and so cannot be deceived, or imposed on: He must needs be
also infinite in Justice, and so will do right, and can do no wrong. Moreover
as he is GOD, he is Omnipotent, whereby he is able to execute every Sentence
that he pronounces.

And then his being Man, was a further qualification of him for a Judge among
the Children of Men. His being of our own Nature assures us that he is our
friend, and having been touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, having
been tempted in all things like as we are, we may conclude that he will make as
favorable allowances for our Infirmities, and imperfections, as can be
consistent with the honor of GOD. And thus because GOD had determined to judge
the world in righteousness, and because he would have that grand affair carried
on with all possible fairness, and impartiality, he committed it to his Son,
the Man Christ Jesus: which is the reason that is given for it, Joh. 3.27. And
has (i. e. the Father has) given him authority to execute Judgment, because
he is the Son of man.

2. I might observe the wisdom of GOD in the pomp and glory with which the Son
of GOD will appear to judge the World.

When the Son of GOD appears to judge the quick and dead, he will appear in
Power and great Glory; with his own Glory, and the glory of the Father, and of
the holy Angels; which seems to be a piece of honor highly necessary to be
conferred on him. For since his first appearance was in the form of a Servant,
and with all the marks of external meanness, and poverty (which indeed very
well became the design of his first coming, which was to make reconciliation
for sins by bearing them in his own body on the tree:) So when he appears again
(which will be upon another occasion, even to set as the glorious Judge of the
World) it is highly proper for him to appear after a different manner, even
with Power and Glory, that so those who despised and rejected him, because he
was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, might see and be ashamed to
consider what a glorious Person they offered such contempt unto. Moreover, this
is the way to have the process of that great and notable day of the Lord be as
it ought, very august and solemn. And then lastly, this glorious appearance of
Christ to Judgment, as it will serve to terrify and torment the wicked, so it
will be for the comfort and the joy of the Saints. This coming of his with his
mighty Angels, as it will be to take vengeance on them that know not GOD, and
that obey not his Gospel; so it will be to be glorified in his Saints, and
admired in all them that believe.

3. I might also observe, that GOD's not receiving the Saints to their full
glory before they have passed a trial, and have been acquitted, and applauded
at the bar of Christ, is wisely ordered.

For hereby the divine Justice and Impartiality will be sufficiently
vindicated, even whilst he receives some to everlasting life; and at the same
time sends others away into everlasting punishment.

When every Saint passes an exact trial at the Bar of Christ, and gives an
account unto his Judge of his behavior in the body; and when Christ proceeds
with him according to the rules of the Gospel which he lived under, (for I
meddle with none but such as are under the Gospel) it will then very clearly
appear that with righteousness he judges the world, and the people with equity.
It will then appear to his immortal honor, that he who is the Judge of all the
Earth will do right, and that with him is no respect of persons, that he
acquits none but such as according to the Gospel Covenant are to be acquitted
and discharged. And that he condemns none that according to the Covenant of
Grace could lay any claim unto a pardon: so that Christ in going by a certain
rule in Judging, without the least bias by favor or affection will give
occasion for that song of Moses, and of the Lamb, to be sung of all the Angels
and Saints that are about his throne of Judgment, Rev. 15.3, 4. -- Just and
true are thy ways, thou king of Saints: who shall not fear thee, and glorify
thy name? for thou only art holy.

And thus as the Justice and Righteousness of Christ will be vindicated and
honored, so the Saints themselves by being brought to Judgment, will be
vindicated from all those aspersions, reproaches and reflections that have been
unjustly and uncharitably cast upon them in this world: and it gives also an
opportunity for the publishing the virtues and graces, and good deeds of the
Saints to the world of Angels and Men, to their immortal honor; by which means
the Saints coming to a trial, is of unspeakable advantage to them, as well as
great glory to GOD himself.

And now when the Judgment is over, when every Man has received a sentence
according as his works have been; when the Saints have received the blessed
sentence, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you:
and the wicked have received that dreadful heartbreaking sentence, Go, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; and are
accordingly bound hand and foot, and cast into the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, to endure that strange punishment reserved for the workers of
iniquity; Then shall the Saints ascend with Christ, and all the Multitudes of
the heavenly Hosts (that waited on him) into Heaven, and shall go every one to
those Mansions of Glory, which he is now preparing for them, and shall there
partake of such a glory and happiness as eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither has it so much as entered into the heart of man to conceive of: And
there to continue not for a few days or years only, but throughout the infinite
Ages of ETERNITY.

And thus I have gone through the whole affair of our Redemption, from the
foundation to the finishing stroke of it, and in every step hereof we have seen
so much of divine wisdom and prudence appearing, and manifesting it self, as
may well fill us all with the most admiring and adoring apprehensions of that
GOD, who has with such unsearchable and unerring wisdom conducted and managed
this whole affair, causing us to break forth with the Apostle, Romans 11.33. O
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!

I purpose (GOD willing) one discourse more upon the subject, which will be
taken up in pious and practical reflections upon what has been said in general
concerning the wisdom of GOD in this grand affair.

And now to conclude the present discourse.

I (...) us all be thankful to GOD that he has pleased to give us such
Evidences and Assurances of the future Glory, as to leave no room to doubt
about it. And let us not be faithless but believing; let us endeavor after
such realizing apprehensions of these things, although they are future, and at a
distance, as may quicken and encourage us by a patient continuance in the ways
of well doing, to be seeking for glory, honor and immortality, until at length
we obtain eternal life. Having the joyful prospect and assurance of such a
glorious State, let us with utmost diligence be fitting and preparing our
selves for it: Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God. And in this way let us be laboring after such a comfortable prospect, and
well grounded hope of our Interest in that blessed State, as may enable us to
live above the frowns and flatteries of the world, yea, and above the fears of
Death it self, considering that this dark valley is the way by which we must
ascend to glory. Let us also consider that we must stand before the
Judgment Seat of CHRIST, and be acquitted at his Tribunal before we can come to
the possession of the future bliss: and let this put us upon behaving our
selves so agreeable to the Gospel, as that we may be able to stand before the
Son of Man, and lift up our heads withboldness, and give up our account with
joy; and may accordingly enter into the everlasting joy of our LORD, where we
shall to our inexpressible delight and satisfaction, see infinitely more of the
wisdom of GOD in this whole affair, than is possible for us at present to
conceive of.

Sermon, XIX.
THE Doctrine which has been so often insisted on, is, as you may remember,
this:

Namely,

That in the grand affair of our Redemption by JESUS CHRIST, there have been
glorious Manifestations of divine Wisdom and Prudence.

And for the illustrating and confirming this Doctrine, I have shown wherein
Wisdom and Prudence consists. I have likewise shown in general, that the wisdom
of GOD has been clearly manifested in the work of Redemption: 1. From the End
that was proposed herein; Namely, the Manifestation of the Glory of GOD. And
then 2ly. The difficulty and seeming impossibility of accomplishing this End in
our Redemption. And lastly, by showing how fully this grand end and design of
GOD has been accomplished in the Redemption of fallen Man through JESUS CHRIST,
by the glorious Manifestations there have been of all the divine perfections in
this stupendous work.

Since that I have descended into particular Instances relating to our
Redemption, and have shown how the wisdom of GOD thinks in them, from the wise
and good ends that have been answered thereby. Thus, I have particularly
considered the wisdom of GOD in refusing to treat with sinful Man any other way
than by a Mediator: And in his insisting upon full Satisfaction for the wrong
done to him by Sin, before he would remit or pardon it. The divine wisdom has
likewise been considered in appointing his own, and only Son to be the Mediator
between God and us: As also in the Promises and Prophesies that were delivered
concerning him, before his coming. -- In his Incarnation, and the manner of his
assuming the humane Nature into personal Union with the divine Nature. -- In
the particular time and season of his appearing in the world. -- In the poverty
and meanness of his outward circumstances. -- In the Methods that were taken to
prove him to be the true Messiah, the Anointed and Chosen of GOD. -- In his
taking up his abode with us for so long a time. -- In the Doctrines that he
taught us, and the Examples that he set before us. -- In his cruel Sufferings,
and occursed Death. -- In his glorious Resurrection, and triumphant Ascension.
-- And lastly. In the Methods taken for the Propagating and Establishing
Christianity in the world. I say the wisdom of GOD in all these Instances has
been particularly considered.

Furthermore, I have considered, the Nature of that Redemption, which Christ
has wrought out for us; and the Manner of his Applying the same unto us. Under
which head I have distinctly and largely considered the Nature and manner of a
Sinner's Justification; of his Regeneration and Conversion, and of his progress
in Grace and Holiness; and the divine Conduct toward him, till he receives him
to complete Glory and Happiness. In all which I have particularly traced the
footsteps of divine wisdom, and shown what wise, great and good Ends have been
answered, and what Inconveniences would have happened if things had been
ordered otherwise. So that every thing relating to this grand affair appears to
be managed with consummate wisdom and prudence. And there don't appear the
least error or mistake, so much as in one Article, from the beginning to the
end: but every thing has been so wisely and thoroughly concerted, as to be done
in the best manner that could be --. And as for particular Applications, I have
made them, as I went along; so that nothing remains now but to make some
Reflections upon the whole. So then by way of

IMPROVEMENT;
1. Have there been such glorious displays of wisdom in the grand Affair of our
Redemption? No wonder then that the Angels desire to look into it.

The Apostle speaking of Christ, of his Sufferings, and the Glory that should
follow to him, and the Grace and Salvation that is brought about hereby to Men,
by the application of the holy Ghost sent down from Heaven for that end, says,
These are the things which the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. And
considering what a wonderful work of GOD this is, It is no wonder that such
bright Intelligences are looking and searching into it. The works of the Lord
are great sought out of all them that have pleasure therein, Psalm. 111.2. And
what greater work than that of Redemption? And who can we suppose to take more
pleasure in seeking, and searching out such a wonderful work as this, than the
holy Angels? Who, although they are not for prying into the secrets of the
Almighty, yet would be searching into his great and mavelous works, that they
may be led thereby the more to magnify, praise, and adore the Author of them in
whom they take the greatest delight.

When it is said, Which things the Angels desire to look into, it is observed
by Expositors, That the word signifies a bowing down the head, and stooping to
look into a thing; it is a looking diligently and earnestly: It implies, (says
Mr. Pool) "A prying, or looking narrowly into it", which argues great desire to
know it. Thus the Angels are looking into the wonderful work of Man's
Redemption, admiring the riches of wisdom and grace, that discover themselves
therein.

This Text is also observed to have an allusion to the two Cherubims that stood
above the Ark, with their faces toward the Mercy-Seat, and their eyes fixed
steadily upon it, in and under which are concealed all the glorious Mysteries
of our Redemption: For in the Ark was the law of GOD which we had broken, and
so had exposed our selves to all those Curses that are denounced against every
one that continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the law to
do them; which served to represent the condition of Man in his fallen state
without a Savior, in which state he was exposed to the wrath of GOD, and the
penalties of his broken law, which were death and damnation: but now over or
upon this law was the Mercy-Seat, which represented that notwithstanding the
law was broken, and according to the tenor of it there was no Mercy to be had,
yet some how or other the law should be satisfied, and we should obtain Mercy.
In short, here was a representation of Christ, who having fulfilled the law,
and fatisfied the demands of it by his Obedience and Death, he has erected a
throne of Grace, and prepared a mercy-Seat for us to repair unto. And the
Cherubims turning their eyes down upon the Mercy-Seat, are only a
representation of the Angels, who are actually looking with the greatest
earnestness upon the wonderful contrivance of Man's Redemption. When Man had
sinned, they doubtless thought their case as desperate as that of the fallen
Angels; all their wisdom and sagacity could not think of a way how GOD could
maintain the harmony of his perfections in our recovery. And now when they not
only see Mercy and Truth meeting together, and Righteousness and Peace kissing
each other; but that these, and all other of the divine perfections, are
greatly honored and advanced in our Redemption; they behold with wonder and
amazement, and are filled with the most adoring apprehensions of infinite
wisdom, in the contrivance, and break forth in songs of praise, as in Luke
2.14. Glory to God in the highest, because there is Peace on Earth, and good
will toward men. And these are the constant acclamations of the heavenly Host,
saying, as in Rev. 5.12. Worthy is the Lamb to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. The more the Angels
look into these glorious Mysteries, the more they see of the wonders of wisdom,
and grace; which keeps them in continual postures of, and dispositions to the
highest praises and adorations.

2. Has GOD thus abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence? surely then
the highest honor, esteem and reverence is due unto him from us.

Wisdom is such a distinguishing excellency, and perfection of a rational
Being, that it demands honor and respect wherever it is found. Men of wisdom
that manage weighty and difficult and perplexed affairs with prudence and
discretion, have a right to honor and respect from those who see and observe
their wise and prudent conduct; and such Men will be had in reputation for
their wisdom. A man's wisdom makes his face to shine, Eccl. 8.1. "makes him
illustrious, and venerable -- ". But now as GOD has discovered infinitely more
wisdom and prudence in the work of Man's Redemption, than is possible for Men
or Angels to conceive of, much less to exercise and manifest themselves; so
there is infinitely more esteem and honor, and reverence due to him, than
there can be to the brightest Man or Angel. We should admire and adore him for
all his great and marvelous works, because in wisdom has he done them all; but
especially for the astonishing work of our Redemption, in which he has so
abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence. We should think of him, and
behave our selves toward him, with a profound reverence, as the only wise God.
We must honor him in our hearts above every other Being; considering that his
thoughts are a great deep; and that he is wonderful in counsel, as well as
excellent in working. Neither may we speak of him without the greatest
reverence; and as for our whole carriage and behavior toward him, it must be
such as is due to a GOD, that is wise in heart, and mighty in strength. Verily
we should all, with the holy Angels, stand amazed at this wonderful contrivance
of our Redemption; and whilst we are filled with joy and praise, for the
unspeakable Mercy that we receive hereby, we also should be filled with no less
fear and reverence, for the unsearchable wisdom and contrivance there has
appeared in it; and the language of our Souls should be that, in Romans 16 27. To
God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever.

3. Here is enough to satisfy us, that however dark and unaccountable any of
the ways of GOD may be to us; yet that they are conducted, and governed by
infinite and unerring wisdom.

If, as the Preacher tells us, Prove. 23.3. The hearts of kings, that is of
earthly kings, are unsearchable; infinitely more so is the heart of him, who is
the king Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, and the only wise God. Can thou by
searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection? Job
11.7. For have thou not known? have thou not heard, concerning the everlasting
GOD the LORD the Creator of the ends of the earth; that there is no searching
of his understanding? Isai. 40.28. And no wonder there is no searching of his
understanding, for as our Lord is great, and of great power, so his
understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147.5. GOD's ways are not as our ways, nor his
thoughts as our thoughts; for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are
his ways than our ways, and his thoughts than our thoughts. And therefore,
although some of the ways of GOD are dark and mysterious to us, and we can give
no account of them, nor what designs are answered by such a particular way of
management; yet what we have seen of the wonderful wisdom of GOD in other of
his works, especially in that of Redemption, should set us down fully
satisfied, that in wisdom he performs them all; and that it is owing only to
the narrowness, and shortness of our thoughts, that we don't see the wisdom of
GOD in these, as well as in other of his works. And therefore as to those
dispensations of GOD that we cannot see through, we must be far from calling in
question the wisdom of GOD in them, but must attribute it to our own ignorance.
Here I might mention a few of the ways of GOD which seem dark and unaccountable
to us, and yet we must believe are all ordered with consummate wisdom and
prudence.

Thus for instance,

Who can give any account why GOD hated Esau the Elder, and loved Jacob the
Younger Brother, and that whilst they were in the womb, and before either of
them had done good or evil?

That it was so, appears by comparing, Genesis 25.23. Mal. 1.2. Romans 9.11, 12, 13.
together.

We cannot see why they might not both have been beloved, and accepted as well
as one; or if there must be but one we cannot see why Esau and his Posterity
might not have been accepted, and Jacob been rejected. Now the whole account we
can give of this matter is, That GOD herein displays his sovereignty; and if we
should suppose this to be a sufficient reason for his choosing one and rejecting
the other; yet it can be no reason why he chose Jacob and rejected Esau. But
now although we can assign no reason for it, yet when we consider with what
wisdom and prudence he acts in other things, we may be sure he did in this, and
that he saw reason sufficient for rejecting the Elder, and choosing the
Younger, although it don't appear at present unto us.

So again, Who can give any reason why Jacob should come at the blessing by
falsehood, and lying, as he did?

In Genesis 27. chapter we find that in order to his getting the blessing from his
elder Brother, he told a direct and positive lie to his Father, saying, That he
was Esau his firstborn, v. 19. His very son Esau, v. 24. upon which Isaac
blessed him, and GOD confirmed the blessing to him. But now who can give any
account why the blessing should be brought about after such a manner, by lying,
and deceit, and not in an honest way? Especially considering that GOD is a GOD
of Truth, and that lying lips are an abomination to the Lord. Why did not GOD
who has the hearts of all in his hands secretly turn the heart of Isaac to his
Son Jacob? or why did he not let him know that Jacob was the person that he
intended to confer the blessing on? as he told Abraham, That not in Ishmael,
but in Isaac his Seed should be called? But now, although we cannot give an
account of this matter, yet we may be sure that GOD can: and that in this as
well in other affairs he has acted wisely, and that some good ends or other are
answered by it.

Again, Who can give the reason why the Son of GOD took not on him the nature
of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham?

Why did GOD pass by the Angel that revolted from him, reserving them in
everlasting chains under darkness to the judgment of the great Day, when he had
pity on the fallen race of Adam? But now although we can see nothing but that the
glory of GOD might have been as much advanced, if he had acted quite otherwise;
yet considering the wonderful displays of wisdom in the Redemption that is
wrought out for Man, we may be sure it was wisely projected by GOD to make
choice of fallen Men, rather than fallen Angels, to make them the Monuments of
his free, and sovereign Mercy.

So again, It is unaccountable to us that so great a part of the world lies in
Ignorance, and are perishing for lack of wisdom.

Since Christ, as the Apostle says, Heb. 2.9. Tasted death for every man; and
is said to be the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also
for the whole world, 1 John 2 2. and since his sufferings were infinitely
meritorious, and his blood of sufficient value to wash away the guilt of the
whole world; and since it is declared, as in 2 Pet. 3.9. That God is not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance: I say,
considering these things, it seems strange and unaccountable to us, that the
greatest part of the world by far are entirely destitute of the Gospel of
Christ, and have not so much as heard of a Savior. Since there is merit enough
in Christ, for the pardon and salvation of all, and since there is so much
glory to GOD, and joy in Heaven at the Conversion of every Sinner, why are
there not more Converted and Saved, yea, why should not every knee in earth as
well as in Heaven bow at the Name of JESUS, and every tongue confess him to be
LORD, to the Glory of GOD the Father? Or at least why have they not the
opportunity to come to the knowledge of these things, and the offers thereof
made unto them? Now although it may be beyond our skill to give an answer to
these things; yet when we consider with how much wisdom our Redemption has been
carried on, we cannot in the least doubt but that GOD has some very good
reasons for suffering so great a part of the world to lie in Ignorance.

And to add no more, What account can we give for the death of such Multitudes
in their Infancy? That GOD should so immediately destroy the works of his own
hands, without giving the least opportunity for the Exercise of those noble
Powers, with which he endowed them? But GOD managing other things with such
wisdom, may assure us, that he has very good reason for this.

And so there are many other things, which how dark and mysterious soever they
appear to us, yet we may be sure that GOD acts with consummate wisdom in them
all. And although we cannot tell the reason of such a conduct now; yet we shall,
if we are the Children of GOD some time or other come to such a knowledge of
them, as will afford wonderful satisfaction to us. As our blessed Savior said
to Peter, upon his asking with wonder, why he washed his Disciples feet,
Saying, What I do, thou know not now, but thou shall know hereafter.

4. How ought we to Acquiesce, and rest fully satisfied with every dispensation
of divine Providence toward us?

Some of GOD's dealings with us are very dark and mysterious, espcially many of
the afflictive dispensations of his Providence that he exercises us withal; so
that many of the Children of GOD are ready to say unto GOD with Job, Job 10.2.
Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. But now, instead of being impatient,
or discontented; instead of murmuring, and complaining, we should (from the
manifestations GOD has made of his wisdom in the work of our Redemption) set
down satisfied with all the allotments of divine Providence, realizing this to
our selves that GOD governs every thing in infinite and unerring wisdom; that
he knows infinitely better than we do what is best for us: and that he has
done, and always will do that which is for the best; and that he can never err,
or be mistaken in any of his managements. We must believe that GOD never took
one wrong step in the whole course of his Providence, and that he never will or
can; and this should q^iet us in all our times of trouble and darkness. Are we
in poor and low circumstances? Do we meet with losses and crosses, and
disappointments? Do we lose our friends, our estates, our good names, our
health, and ease, and the comforts of life? And do we lose the light of GOD's
countenance, which is more than all the rest? We must be quiet, not a murmuring
word may proceed out of our mouths, nor an impatient thought be harbored in our
hearts: but we should consider after this manner, That if GOD in the affair of
our Redemption has managed with such consummate wisdom, as we have heard,
surely be knows how to order our circumstances in the world. And indeed, for us
to find fault with any of the dispensations of Providence, is to deny the
divine wisdom, and to set up our own above it.

5. We learn where to go for wisdom and prudence, to direct us in all our
affairs.

Surely, that GOD that has managed the affair of our Redemption, with so much
wisdom and prudence, can enable us to manage all our affairs with discretion.
He must needs be the infinitely wise GOD, and the fountain of all wisdom, that
managed that affair: and now to whom should we go but unto him? Surely, we
ought to apply our selves to him to be guided, and directed in all our affairs.
We are commanded to acknowledge him in all our ways; and we are encouraged by
his gracious promise of directing our paths for us, Prove. 3.6. And there is a
further Invitation, and Command given us from the sacred Oracles, Jam. 1.5. If
any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally,
and upraideth not, and it shall be given him. Here then let us cease from our
own wisdom, and acknowledge, and adore the divine wisdom, by trusting in the
LORD with all our hearts, and not lean to our own understanding; but at all
times, and in all cases, let us seek to him for guidance and direction. This we
must do in all the ordinary and common affairs of life: but especially should
we seek for divine direction in all weighty, doubtful and perplexed cases. We
must look upon him as he is, The wonderful Counselor, and that no case is too
difficult for him to direct, or advise us in. For surely there never was a case
so difficult, and perplexed, as that of our Redemption: and therefore he that
could manage that so thoroughly, and completely without any error or mistake in
the least article, can never be posed or puzzled in any case whatsoever. Verily
the most dark, and intricate cases are as plain to him as any. He is never at a
stand to know what is best to be done. Now to this Father of Lights, we ought
to seek, and upon him we ought to wait, for all the wisdom that is profitable,
and necessary to direct; and if he undertake for us, we may be sure of being
led in the right way; for as he cannot be deceived, so neither will he deceive
or fail them that put their trust in him.

6. Since there has been such glorious displays of divine Wisdom in our
Redemption; What inexcusable Folly and Wickedness are such guilty of, as refuse
to accept of this Redemption, as it is offered to them?

Has infinite wisdom been exercised, not only in the manner of purchasing, but
of applying this Redemption, and in the terms on which it is propounded, and
offered unto us? Surely then we practically deny the wisdom of GOD in this
offer, whilst we wilfully refuse to accept of pardon, and salvation, as it is
offered unto us. And now how vile, and wretched, and what pride and ignorance
is it, for any of us to deny the wisdom of GOD in our Redemption? as every one
does, that will not accept of Salvation upon the terms that it is offered unto him
in the Gospel. Surely the matter was wisely concerted, and we may safely say,
That Salvation could not have been brought about in a better way; it could not
have been purchased, nor could it have been offered on better terms. Now then
how inexcusable are they that find fault with the way of Man's Salvation! What
indignity and affront is this to GOD, for such worms of the dust as we, we who
are but of yesterday, and know nothing, to set our carnal reasoning up against
the wisdom of GOD, as if we could have found out a better way for Salvation,
than what infinite wisdom has pitched upon! CHRIST Crucified was to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; and so he is to carnal
Unbelieving hearts: But to them that Believe, CHRIST appears to be the wisdom
of GOD, and the power of GOD; and at length must appear so to the Wicked and
Unbelieving, either in this world by their Conversion, or in the world to come
to their Confusion.

7. We ought to be Studying and Searching more and more into the Wisdom of GOD,
in this grand Affair.

The more we search into this wonderful work of GOD, the more we shall discover
of the riches of divine wisdom therein. And the further we trace the footsteps
of divine wisdom, the more we shall be led to admire and adore that infinite
Being, that is possessed of this glorious excellency and perfection. Therefore
if we would have more enlarged thoughts of GOD, of his wisdom, as well as of
all other perfections of the divine Nature, we must he searching yet further
and further into this glorious and astonishing work of our Redemption. Here are
such Mysteries of wisdom as well as such riches of love and grace as are
unsearchable; we cannot by searching find out GOD, we can never find out his
wisdom in this work unto perfection. Nevertheless, the more we study and search
into these things, the more will these Mysteries of wisdom open unto us: and
the more enlarged will our thoughts be of GOD himself, and the highest
reverence and regard to him will be excited in us. Therefore this should be the
main subject of our studies, and of our deepest Meditations; our Time should be
very much taken up in a serious and devout Contemplation hereupon. A few
cursory thoughts upon this wonderful work will not answer the end; they will not
enlarge our Minds, nor influence our Hearts. It is when we set our selves to
muse on these things, and when our hearts have dwelt some time upon this
matter, that the fire burns within us. The Apostle found so much of the benefit
and advantage of it, that he counted all things but dung for the excellency of
the knowledge of Jesus Christ his Lord, Phil. 3.8. And he was so fully
persuaded of the usefulness of it, that he determined to know nothing, or
preach nothing among the Corinthians, but JESUS CHRIST and him Crucified, 1
Cor. 2.2.

The Angels have looked further into these things than we, and this has filled
them with more admiring and adoring apprehensions, and keeps them in such
constant postures of praise, giving blessing and honor, and glory, and power
to him that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. And so
should we, if we had but seen as far into these glorious Mysteries as they.

Therefore,

8ly. and lastly, How should we long to get to Heaven, to see, and celebrate
more and more the glories of divine Wisdom, in this wonderful work?

Whilst in the present State, it is but a small part that we can know of it,
and what we do see, is darkly and very imperfectly. Our Minds are too much
darkened, weakened and contracted by the remains of Sin and Corruption, to have a
clear, and full discerning of this admirable Contrivance. Whilst in this world
we are in our Childhood, and we think as Children, and speak as Children, with
respect to the glorious Mysteries of our Redemption. But when we shall arrive
at the heavenly world, where that eternal Redemption, which was purchased for
us, shall be perfected in us, we shall have an infinitely more enlarged
thought, than we can have at present, of this affair. Then these unsearchable
depths of divine wisdom will open themselves to us; then the whole Contrivance
will be unravel'd, and those things that are dark and unaccountable to us at
present will be cleared up to us, to our unspeakable joy and satisfaction. Then
those dispensations of divine Providence, which are very dark to us at present,
will appear to have been ordered in the wisest, and the best manner that could
be. And in short, we shall then see that all the Methods that GOD has taken
with us in every step and stage of our lives, have been managed with consummate
Prudence: which will fill us with adoring Apprehensions of him; and not only
incline, but enlarge our Souls, to celebrate the glories of his Wisdom, and of
his Grace for ever.

And now how should we desire, and long to be brought to that glorious Place,
where the footsteps of divine wisdom will be made so Manifest and Conspicuous?
And how earnestly should we desire to be of that blessed Number, on whom the
divine wisdom will be exercised, and by whom it will be magnified and adored?
How should we rejoice to think of going to join those blessed Companies of
glorious Angels, that are with the greatest earnestness and intensness looking
into these things; and who have gone so far into them, as to be able to inform
us of many wonders of wisdom, and grace, that we never imagined or thought of
before?

But now, if ever we would obtain a Mansion in that blessed Place, where there
are such Manifestations of the glory of GOD, in the face of JESUS CHRIST, we
must now be complying with the Terms of Salvation, as they are offered to us in
the Gospel. We must believe that the Gospel-way to Salvation is the wisest, and
the best way that could be; and must with all thankfulness accept the gracious
offers, and invitations that are made to us therein. We must now believe on the
LORD JESUS CHRIST, and accept Him as our only Savior; we must put our selves
over into his hands, to be justified and sanctified, to be guided and governed,
to be protected and upheld, and to be eternally saved by him; depending upon
him, to perform all things for us.

And then he that has abounded in wisdom, as well as grace, in purchasing
Redemption for us, will also in Applying the same unto us. He will then make
use of the wisest and the best Means, not only to bring us into a state of
Grace, but to carry us on therein from one step to another, till he bring us to
the perfection of it. In a word, He will then guide us with his prudent, and
unerring Counsel, till he receives us up to Glory: Where we shall plainly see
the Wisdom of GOD, that is now in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom, which GOD
ordained before the World, unto our Glory.

FINIS.

