The Duty of Young People to give their Hearts unto GOD, because they are His
Offspring

IN Four SERMONS Preached (...) Religious Societies in School Street, on the
Evenings of the Lords day.

By Benjamin Colman. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Mat. xxii, 37, 38 Thou shall l^^^ the LORD thy GOD with all thy (...) and with
all thy Soul, and with (...) Mind: This is the first and (...) ^^mmandment.

^STON: Printed for D. Hend^^^^^ (...) and T Hancock at the sign (...) and
three Crowns near the Town (...)

To the Religious Societies in Boston: More especially Those to whom the
following Sermons were preached.
NOT only is it a Testimony of the good Esteem and hearty Affection which your
Ministers bear You, that they readily come and preach to you at your desire,
but also that they have printed several of the Discourses they have made to
You, when this has been requested of them.

BY this means you may repeat at large among your selves in your more private
Meetings, what is said to you in the Name and from the Word of GOD in your
quarterly and more public Meetings. And if the following Sermons, among
Others, may sometimes be of such Use in your Meetings, as ^ell as of more
private Benefit to your (...) and others singly and apart, it may (...) ^ell
worth the while to print ^em (...) GOD owns and honors your Meet (...) by
making them Nurseries for his Churches, and for the filling of his Table. Many
a worthy Communicant has, through Grace, came forth from You, and many a
Religious Housholde^. By praying together you learn to pray, and to love
Prayer. The Worship of GOD in many a Family has had its rise in your Meetings.
The good Order, Gravity, Prudence, Modesty, Decency, with which you manage your
Meetings, renders the Devotion of them unsuspected, and is the (Means under the
Blessing of GOD) of the good Fruits you both reap to your selves and impart to
others.

MAY you go on in the Fear of GOD, serving the Lord with all Humility, loving
one another with a sure heart sorvently, and seeking the eternal. Good of each
others Souls. Thus Building up your selves on your most holy Faith, praying in
the HOLY GHOST, keep your selves in the Love of GOD, looking for the (...) of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST to eternal Life.

Boston March 29. 17^8. B. Colm^^

The Duty of Young People to give their Hearts unto GOD.
PROVERBS XXIII. 26. My Son give Me thy Heart.


THIS gracious Exhortation speaks unto us as unto Children. It is the great
GOD that so bespeaks as by the mouth and pen of inspired Solomon, the wisest
and g^^^^^t Man in the World in his time.

(...) greater than Solomon is here even (...) GOD who inspired him, the Rock
(...) who spoke by him. Him we (...) come forth to hear, and his Word ^^^od
come with Power upon our hearts, as it does with divine Authority to our
Consciences. Let it command our highest Reverence and best Attention.

GOD is the Father of all men, and as a Father he here speaks to all of us, the
greater and the less, the Elder and the Younger. He demands the Heart of every
one, and all hearts are his: He values all hearts alike, the poor as well as
the rich; the Soul of the Father and that of the Son.

BUT my Text is more especially directed unto Young People; it speaks to
Children and Youth. The whole Book of Proverbs is inscribed to such, 1 Chap. 5.
v. To give the young man Knowledge and Discretion. And in the Verses just before
my Text young People are in a particular manner addressed unto v. 15. My son if
thy heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice even mine; yea my reins shall rejoice
when thy lip^ speak right things. And v. 22. He^^ (...) to thy Father that
begat the^, and d^^^^ not thy Mother when she is old (...) v 24, 25. The Father
of the Right^^ shall greatly rejoice, and be that be^^ a wise Child shall have
joy of him; thy Father and thy Mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee
shall rejoice. -- The next words are those of my Text, My son give me thy heart.

THEY are therefore directed to young Persons, as such; and so I shall chiefly
consider them. And le^ our young People take them as they are meant, and
observe diligently in them.

1. WHAT manner of love the Father besto^es upon them, to call them his Sons,
his Daughters. For in the Male the Female is included, as Eve was in Adam in
the day of his Creation; and was afterward taken out of his side. When God says
my Son, he means our Dau'ters as well as our Sons; for they are equally his: 2
Cor. 6.17. I will receive you and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the
Lord Almighty. (...) Son. God speaks as a Parent (...) Child. Here is the
Affection (...) Concern of a Father, which a ^^^ld has no perfect apprehension
of ^^^ldren feel not the bowels of their ^^reats till they come to be
themselves Parents. God puts on these Bowels, and speaks to the Children of his
people, My Son! O how endearing and constraining should this his Grace be unto
them!

2. LET our young people observe the gracious Demand of the great God from
them: Give me thy heart. How good and acceptable should this Prec^^t, and
Commandment be to them! how kind to thee is this Law! a Fathers will and heart
is in it, which should give it way into thine. For what does a Parent expect
and desire of a Child but his Heart! the love, reverence and respect of his
Soul! and what has a Child to render unto his Parent, more especially in his
minority, but the love and duty of an obedient Heart? -- Each word here is full
of Grace, Endearment and Constraint;

1. GIVE me. How strange a (...) this from the most high God, Posi^^ of Heaven
and Earth to us, indi^^^ and empty worms of the dust! (...) what have we to
give to God! worthy of Him, meet for him to receive at our hands? And what can
God ask? does he need any thing? and least of all from us? Lord how is it? If
we be right us what do we give him! We owe our all, and it is only of his own
that we can give to Him. Our sinful hearts are not fit for his Acceptance, not
worthy to be offered to Him. But if he will prepare himself an Offering in us
and from us, he will graciously accept of it. If he prepares our Hearts and
Wills they become our own Act, and a free will Offering to him This is all that
he requires and expects of us. God asks us when he needs us not at all but we
stand in absolute need of Him. We need that He should accept us. Necessity is
laid upon us, and woe unto us if we refuse to give ourselves unto God! We have
alienated our selves from him, and need to give our selves back unto him. He
must give (...) the heart to give back to him. But ^et us consider the thing
asked.

2. THY heart. i. e. thy Self, thy Soul, thy Person. A part is na^^^d for the
whole; but a principal part, the Heart which is the Fountain and chief
Instrument of Life to every part of the Body.

THY Heart; i. e. thy whole Spirit, Soul and Body. Thy Heart, i. e. thy Love
and Affections, with all thy Mind and Strength. It is the firstand great
Commandment of the Law. The summary of all Religion, of all Duty. It is more
than all whole Burnt Offering and Sacrifice. What does the Lord thy God require
of thee but this? to love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart and with all thy
Soul?

ALL Devotion and Obedience is of the heart. All the Understanding and all the
Soul is in it. And every thing else too that belongs to us. The Heart carries
all things with it. It gives all with it self. So in Friendship, as Jonathan
stripped himself, and gave all to David. And so in Marriage, the Person and
Estate follow the heart. All a Man's Interest, Influence and Power, goes with
his Heart to the Service of God. His Children especially that ly nearest to his
heart, and are among the dearest parts of our selves, our other Souls, these a
man renders to God with his heart. So Abraham circumcised himself and his Son,
and prayed, O that he may live in thy sight.

ANGELS can give to God no more than this, the entire Love and Obedience of
their hearts, We may do this, by the help of Divine Grace, as well as they. The
difference is, We give back an alienated heart, recovered by Grace; but
innocent and perfect Creatures never had their hearts estranged from GOD.

DID ever a King make a Law that his Subjects should love him, and let him
reign in their Hearts? Indeed the Laws of Nations ought to be so interpreted,
and every wife and good Prince desires more to reign in the Heart and Love of
his subjects, than ^ver their Bodies and Estates. But Man looks to the
outward appearance, God looks to the Heart. My Kingdom, (says Christ) is not of
this world No; the Kingdom of God is within us. Luke 17.21. He makes and he
reigns over a willing People. He is the God of the Spirits of all flesh. He
searches the heart and loves uprightness. He and be only knows the heart of
all, etc. 2 Chronicles. 6.30. It belongs to such a King, the Father of spirits, to
give this Precept to his subjects, My son, give me thy heart. This is his
Dominion, the Seat of his Empire. I come to the Doctrine.

DOCT. IT is the Indispensible Duty of young People to give God their Hearts
and Affections, and to be seriously religious in their early days.
I shall explain and urge this Doctrine under these Three heads of Argument. 1.
That they owe this unto the Lord their God and should in Obedience to Him, and
for his Glory give their Hearts unto Him. 2. That they owe this unto
Themselves, and for t^^ sake of their own Souls, their own Interests, present
and future, they ought to give God their hearts. 3. That they owe this to
Others; to the World they live in, to their Relatives and Friends, and to those
that come after them; to all that are about them.

THESE are great and weighty Arguments, worthy of the attentive Consideration
both of Old and Young; their Obligations to God, to Themselves, and to their
Neighbors; For on These hang all the Law and the Prophets. Mat. 22.40.

1. YOUNG people owe this duty to the Lord their God, and should in Obedience
to Him, and for the sake of his Honor and Glory, give him their hearts. Our
Obligations are first to God. His Will is the Rule his Glory ^he End of our
Actions. Your first Consideration must be, what God is in Himself and what he
is to Thee? what his Word requires of thee, and what his Glory calls for from
thee? what Bonds thou art under unto Him? And you will easily see the Reasons
from hence resulting, why thou should give thy heart to God while thou art
young. 1. In Obedience to him. 2. As his Propriety.


GOD requires thy heart, and thou owe it to Him in Obedience to his Precept
and Commandment. The Text is a Law and Commandment of the great God, My son
give me, etc. It is the Duty thou owe to God, what the Lord thy God requires
of thee He demands, he challenges thy Heart. He does not ask of thee a thing
which thou may deny or refuse to him. No; it belongs to thee to obey. He
speaks as a Father and as a Lord; and on both accounts must be obeyed. I son
honors his Father and obeys him. It is the Will and Pleasure of the great God
that thou give him the heart in thy youthful days. Eccl. 12. Remember now thy
Creator in the day of thy Youth. God is the Sovereign, and you must sear him
from thy youth. Youth is the age of Submission and Obedience, and to be under
the government of Parents, Masters and Tutors: And wilt not thou be subject to
God now in the days of thy youth? Will thy earthly Father or Mother require and
command thee? and shall they be obeyed by thee? and shall not God thy Heavenly
Father? Will thou show Reverence to the Father of thy flesh, and not be in
subjection to God the Father of thy spirit? Which should be obeyed? surely God
more than man; Man in Obedience to God only. Young people are not of Age, save
to be obedient, and to do as they are directed and required: and will they not
be observant of the Will and Direction of the blessed God? are their Superiors
on Earth something in their eyes, and is God most High nothing with them? Say
to Him, My Father, and the Guide of my Youth! speak Lord, For thy servant
hears! Fit words to be put into the mouth of young People; as Eli put them
into the mouth of Samuel when the Lord called the Child. So God calls our
Children, He speaks to them, he bids them give Him their Hearts; He commands
'en to do this: Do it then and be obedient: If you do it not, you are a young
Rebel, bursting the bonds of Natures and breaking that Yoke which it is good to
bear from thy youth. God says to thee, Son do this: Will you answer Him, I will
not? and turn away from Him, and deny his Right and Authority to command thee?
his Dominion and Power over thee? You would not do so by an earthly Parent,
Master or Ruler? and how dare you act thus to the blessed God?

THIS is the first Argument; In Obedience to God give Him thy heart, now while
thou art young; for He requires it of thee.

2. I come to consider Gods Proprie^^ in thee, and his Right to thy Heart. And
here let us consider, first the right and bonds of Nature. Secondly cho^^ of
Grace. Under the first head w^ must consider God as our Creator and Preserver,
under the second as our Redeemer and Covenant God.

1. GOD has an unalienable Right to thy Heart as the Lord thy Maker, Preserver
and Benefactor; and as such thou owe Him this Gift, in Justice and Gratitude.
God's Propriety in us arises from his Relation to us, and Benefits done us. For
as He has made us what we are, and we receive our Being, Endowments,
Preservations and Supplies from Him; so by all these ties of Nature, Justice
and Gratitude we are wholly and solely His, and ought to render unto Him all
that we are and have; and that as soon as we are capable of doing it. To be
sure God speaks here, and bespeaks the hearts of young People, as their natural
Lord, Ruler, Lawgiver, Judge, and the only Portion of their Souls. He cannot
deny Himself, and you must not deny him. He must and will reign; will reign
over thee, and would reign in thee; and if thou refuse him the Rule in and ^ver
thy Soul, thou deniest him his sacred Right in a most unjust and ungrateful
manner. Here,

1. GOD is thy Creator, thy Maker, and therefore thy Proprietor; and shall he
not have thy heart? Why he made it, and he made it for Himself, and never gave
it away, nor can he do it. What thou make is thine, especially what thou have
made of thy own, for thy self; and have not parted with thy Right in it to
another. And shall God be denied this common Justice and Equity, or Right,
between man and man? Who formed thy fleshly Heart? and who made thee a Soul and
Spirit? who fashioned thy Body in the womb, and who quickened it there with a
living Soul? The Spirit of God has made thee, and the Inspiration of the
Almighty has given thee life. Job 32.8. Thy hands have made me and fashioned
me together round about Job 10.8. He made thee in his own Image, in the
likeness of God, with an understanding Heart, to know, and love, and choose him;
and give thy self to him. He gave thee not a beasts heart, that cannot think and
say, where is God my maker! but he made thee this Heart which is fitted for
Himself, and is able to render it self back to God. What ever thy Heart and
Spirit be it is his, for he made it; but if he made it such as it is proper to
give to Him, and endowed it with this Power of giving it self to Him; to be
sure it ought to be so given; it is the most righteous thing in the world that
it be so; and it cannot be wi^held without great Injustice. -- Will a man rob
God? yet he robs Him that gives not his heart to him, which God made for
Himself and not for another, and which is made for a Man voluntarily to offer
and give to God. To whom would a Man give his heart, if not to God? he may not
to Himself, not to his dearest Relatives, and much less to worldly things which
cannot fill and satisfy a Soul; and much less to sin and satan and vile lusts,
which are all Enemies to God. And yet if it be not given to God the heart will
be given to these, to the utmost wrong and injury of the blessed God. For the
Spirit and Heart, the Mind, the Will and Affections of Men are plainly made for
God the infinite Spirit and the Father of Spirits: they are made for Spiritual
things, Exercises and Felicities; for Communion with God, for the Serving of
God, for the Enjoyment of God. It is therefore the greatest wrong and injury to
God that can be, not to give Him this heart, which is formed exactly for the
Knowledge of Himself, for the loving and choosing Him, for the serving and
enjoying Him. If then thou give not thy Heart to God, thou robbest him of one
of the richest pieces of his ^w^ Workmanship, which he has just finished for
Himself; and of the Rock that beg^t thee thou art unmindful and have forgotten
God that formed thee Deuteronomy. 32.18 Yea thou worshippest and servest the Creature
rather than the Creator, who is God over all blessed for ever, Romans 1.25. God
is therefore worthy to receive Blessing, and Glory, and Honor, and Power from
all his reasonable Creatures, because he created them all for his pleasure.
Rev. 4.11. And this great Maker of thee and of the Universe has therefore
required thy Heart of thee because he made thee, and made thee for this very
thing. Eccl. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth. Because
he made thee therefore he must never be forgotten by thee; therefore he must
have thy first and early remembrance. For should not a man look to his Maker?
and should not the first respect of his Eyes and Heart be to Him? Yea, thus
says the Lord that created thee O Jacob, and he that formed thee O Israel!
bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the ends of the Earth; even every
one that is called by my Name; for I have created him for my Glory, I have
formed him yea I have made him. Isa. 43.4, 6, 7. Thus God has the first and
sole Right to thy Heart for he made thee.

2. GOD is the Preserver and daily Benefactor, therefore thou ought now to
give him thy Heart, in the days of thy Youth. The Benefits of God to thee
demand from thee thy Heart. The law of Gratitude and common Ingenuity teaches
thee this. He is an unnatural Creature, and to be abhorred among Men, whose
Heart is not wro't upon by Benefits, and that has no Consideration of
Kindnesses shown unto him. It is inhumane, irreligious and unchristian to be
insensible of Benefits done us. We are obliged to render the love and respect
of our Hearts to our Benefactors. This is one reason why Children should and do
love their Parents; their Obligations are so many and great to them for the
Benefits they have received from them. It is a kind of Instinct in Nature to
love them that love us and take care of us. Infants therefore do so naturally
and strongly love them that nurse and tend and feed them. And the very brute
Creatures do after their way the same thing: the ox knows his Owner, and the
ass his Masters crib. The lion they say, and the dog we know, will long retain
a sense of Benefits done them.

AND shall not the Sons and Daughters of Men give their Hearts to God, their
first and supreme Benefactor? the Lord that daily loads them with his Benefits!
what shall they not render to Him? to whom they owe all they are and have, for
they have received it all of Him. Therefore the first and great Commandment is
this, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul.

GOD is thy Benefactor in giving thee thy Being, and such a Being that thou art
capable of knowing and loving Him, and being blessed for ever in him. God is
thy Benefactor in all his Care of thee through thy Infancy and Childhood: Thou
owe much to thy Parents, but more to thy God, infinitely more; yea They and
all that they have ever done for thy Soul or Body are God's gift to thee; among
his first and greatest Benefits to thee. Thou art ready to give thy heart to
Them, and you should do so first among Men; i. e. more to Them in thy youth
than to any others. But how much more owe thou thy Heart unto the Lord thy
God? the God (Creator and Preserver) of thy Father and of thy Mother, as well
as thine. -- Read thy Obligations to God on all these Accounts, and think how
wicked thou art if He have not thy Heart now while thou art young. Job 10, 11,
12. Thou have poured me out as milk, thou have clothed me with skin and flesh,
and senced me with bones and sinews, thou have granted me life and favor and
thy, etc. Psalm. 22.9, 10. Thou art He that took me out of the womb, thou did
make me hope upon my Mothers breasts. I was cast upon thee from the Womb. Genesis
32.10. O God of my Fathers, I am not worthy of the least of all the Mercy which
thou have showed me to this day. Psalm. 139.7. How precious are thy Thoughts
toward me O God, how great is the Sun of them, when I Awake I am still with
thee.

Now what will thou render, my Child, for all these Benefits of a gracious God
unto thee? will thou den^ him thy Heart, when that is al^ that he asks of thee?
Ah wicked and ungrateful! if thou do not give it with Thankfulness and with
the greatest Pleasure. Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do thou thus requite the Lord? Is be not
thy Father that has made thee and established thee? Isa. 1.2. Hear, O Heaven,
and give ear O Earth, for the Lord has spoken: I have nourished and brought up
Children, and they have rebelled against me.

My Son, thy Parents and all the Benefits of God to Them, and whatsoever God
has made Them to thee, or thee to Them; the Blessings of his Providence and of
his Grace to them for thy Comfort, thy good Education, thy Instruction, and
Nurture, and Admonition in the Fear of God; these are so many strong
Obligations on thee now to give thy self thankfully to the Lord.

AND consider, how great and glorious a Being God is! and what a wonderful
thing it is that he should do so much for such a Worm of the dust as thou art,
and one altogether born in sin. If a Friend and Nei'bour do thee a common
kindness your Heart will go out to him; but if your Governor or King should
look upon you and enrich or dignify you, you would hold your self yet more
obliged, because of his high Estate and Rank: But look up then to Heaven and
see there the King of glory, the King of kings, regarding thee in thy low
estate, and every day feeding thee and holding thee in life, and requiring of
thee the love of thy heart; and say -- with what Humility and Gratitude and
Affection thou should give it all unto Him? As when David sent for poor
Mephibosheth to his Court, and when he came into his Presence and did
Obeisance, the King looked on him with a heart full of Love and said,
Mephibosheth! I will surely show thee Kindness, and thou shall eat at my Table
every day, and I will restore thee all the Land of Soul thy Father: The obliged
grateful Youth answered, as one overwhelmed with the gracious Favor and
Goodness o^ the King, and said, What is thy Servant that thou should look
upon such a dead dog as I am! 2 Samuel 9, 8. O how much more cause have We to say
these Words before God our great Benefactor, who has done for us more than
David did for Mephibosheth, and it is infinitely more Grace and Condescension
in him to do it. For we are indeed dead dogs before Him the Blessed and only
Potentate; but Mephibosheth was the Son of David's Friend, the son of a Prince
his Equal, and who had been his Benefactor and Patron; the generous Savior of
his life; and to whom he had sworn to show the Kindness of God to his Seed
after him. But as for our Children, they are born of sinful Parents, and they
are born Sinners, and in the day of their Nativity they are guilty and polluted
before God, and as soon as they can speak and go they go astray from God
speaking lies; and yet the great King of Glory speaks kindly of them and to
them, and takes a tender Care of them, and feeds them every ^ay from his Table
with a munificent hand: And if Mephibosheth though he was so much obliged to
David what should our Children think they owe to the Lord their God? But a
David looked for nothing from lam^ Mephibosheth, but a loving and grateful
Heart, in return for his princely Kindness to him; so the great Go^ requires
nothing from us for all the Benefits of our lives, of a tempora^ and spiritual
nature, but to give hi^ our Hearts; which it is free and sovereign Grace in him
to accept o^ from us! For what is the heart o^^ such dead dogs as we are before
Him that he should accept of them? B^^ if you refuse, My Son, to give th^^
heart of thine to the high and grac^ous God, how justly will he be offended at
thee and very angry? (...) David was when Ziba falsely told hi^ that
Mephibosheth was ungrateful the King in a passion (rashly and unjustly) took
all away from him the he had given him: So will the ho^^ God most righteously
be displeased with thee my Child, and justly incense against thee, if thou will
not give him thy Heart after all the Benefits that he has done thee. Ezra 9 14.
Will he not be angry with thee, and consume thee? Josh. 24.20. Then he will
turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after he has done you good -- Thus I
have enlarged on the natural and unalienable Right which God has to thy heart
as the Lord thy Maker, Preserver and Benefactor. Surely our hearts were made
for One in these Relations to us; and that is God alone.

2. LET us pass now from the bonds of Nature unto those of Grace; God is thy
Savior and Redeemer, and thy Covenant God; therefore (my Son) give him thy
heart. This is a further and higher Reason. He is the Maker and Preserver of
all Men, and they all partake richly of the Bounties and Benefits of his common
Providence; and therefore the very Heathen and their Children owe their hearts
to God; and they are left without Excuse, even by the light of Nature, if they
know him not, and glorify him not as God, and are not thankful: Romans 1.21. But
how much more guilty will the Children of Christians be, to whom God has made
known his Name in his Word, and to whom he has therein shown the Covenant of
his Grace thro^ Jesus Christ; if they under the light of the Gospel, and under
their covenant and baptismal Bonds, do not give their hearts to God from their
early days.

FOR thou, my Son, have from thy Infancy been told of the great God thy
Creator, and Redeemer and Sanctifier, and of a Child have known the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation; have been born
within the walls of God's House, and have been educated within the Household of
Faith, and have grown up in the Courts of the Lord, under the droppings of the
Word upon thee from the mouth of thy Parents, and from the lips of Gods
Ministers; who have taught thee and charged thee, innumerable times over, Know
thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart: Thou therefore
art under the bonds of Grace, superadded unto those of Nature, to give God thy
Heart betimes: For 1. He has bought thy heart with the Blood of his own Son.
And 2. He has bound thee by thy Baptism to do it.

1. GOD has bought thy alienated Heart with the Blood of his own Son; And
therefore you ought readily and thankfully to give it. What a moving Reason,
what a mavelous Argument is this! Herein is Love on the part of God; not that
thou have loved Him but He thee; and has parted with his own Heart to bleed for
thee; for the recovery of thy estranged heart back to Him. Herein God
commends his love to us, that while we were enemies Christ died for us. Romans
5.10. Thou art an Enemy to God by Nature, thy ^^rnal Heart is Enmity unto him;
but to slay this Enmity and gain thine inimical Heart, the blessed God has
given the Son of his love, in whom his soul delighted, to suffer and die. O
what has God done to gain back our Hearts unto Himself! and what has the Son of
God undergone for this thing! and will thou nevertheless refuse him thy Heart!
O hard hearted and ungrateful! O heart of stone, insensible and impenitrable as
the Rock! How good and tender has the Heart of God and of Christ been to thee?
and how base and evil is thy heart to thy Father that has bought thee? Deuteronomy.
32.6.

MY Son! thou art not thy own; but thou art bought with a price, both Soul and
Body, that thou should glorify God with thy body and spirit which are his; 1
Cor. 6.20. And will thou not yield thy self then to God, who has thus purchased
thee? Consider the Price that God has given for thy heart: Thou art not
redeemed with corruptible things as Silver and Gold but with the precious Blood
of Christ, as a lamb without blemish, and without spot. 1 Pet 1.19. Behold the
Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world! He has shed his precious
Blood to purchase thy Heart for God! He ha^ given Himself for thee, an Offering
and Sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling savor. Ephesians. 5.2. Will not this
prevail on thee to give thy self to Him? If another would but give thee a
little Silver and Gold, a corruptible Price, you would give your Heart to him;
and think your self highly obliged to do so; But God has given his Son and with
Him the Treasures of Heaven for thy heart, and this affects thee not;
constrains thee not! O if thou knew the Gift of God, and who it is that
speaks to thee, (my Son, give me thy heart) thou would give it, instantly,
wholly and for ever; thankfully and joyfully.

SUPPOSE you were taken by Turks, and carried into slavery by those that hated
the name of Christ; or suppose you were taken captive by Indians (as many of
the Children of our People have been) and carried into a howling hideous
Wilderness, by bloody Salvages; and some kind Person should send and offer them
some great Price for thy Redemption; Yea, suppose this Person was one whom thou
and thy Fathers had highly disobliged and offended; whom you had hated in your
hearts before time and often injured and when he had ransomed you from this
miserable Servitude into which you were fallen; suppose He should in the most
obliging manner imaginable tell you, that he desired nothing now of you but an
Interest in your Heart and Love; and that he would greatly reward you for this
likewise, if you did not deny it to Him; Tell me how you would think and speak
of such a Person how you would honor Him and study to oblige him all the days
of your life! Why, this is the Case, my son, between God and and thee. He has
paid a great Ransom for thee, and bought thee out of the hands of Satan, to
deliver thee from the pit of eternal Destruction and now only asks of thee thy
Heart in return for this redeeming Pity to thy poor Soul! He only asks and
requires the Love and D^votion of this Soul which he has redeemed. Truly it is
his, as what a Man buys and pays for is his own. Mat. 10.45. The Son of Man
came to give his life a Ransom for many. 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself (...)
Ransom for all. O will you not be the ransomed of the Lord, and as such give
him thy Heart. Christ died to buy Us and our Children for God; to he his
purchased Possession, his peculiar Treasure: thy given Heart shall be this to
God.

O that we could see the Heart of God in this Gift of his love, his Son, (...)
Ransom for our Souls; that we might thankfully give our Hearts an Offering
acceptable and well pleasing to Him.

2. As God has bought thee, so He his bound thee by Covenant Engagements to
give him thy heart. The Covenant ^s the fruit and purchase of Christ's Blood:
And what is the Tenor of the Covenant but this, what the Term and Condition of
it on our part, but ^^e giving our hearts to God! O Covenant of Grace indeed!
God promises ^hee his Heart when he takes thine: We love him because he first
loved (...) Read the grace of the Covenant, a^ it is given to our young People
to tak^ hold of; Prove 8.17. I love them th^^ love me, and they that seek me
early sha^^ find me.

CONSIDER my Son, what the great God has done to oblige thee to giv^ him the
first of thy Heart, to give (...) first to Him. He took thy Parents i^ to
Covenant with him, to be a God (...) Them and to their seed. He oblige^ them to
make the early Dedication (...) thee to Him in Baptism; for the Pr^mise is to
Us and to our Children; to (...) who were afar off and the Lord ha^^ called us;
Act. 2.30. The Blessing (...) Abraham is come upon us Gentiles th^^ Faith. Gal.
3.14. God required th^^ Parents to bring thee up for Him, (...) a devoted seed
to serve and glorify him and to this end that they should di^^gently teach thee
his laws, Deuteronomy. 6.^^ and inform thee of the meaning (...) his Sacramental
Institutions, the se^^ of his Covenant; Deuteronomy. 6.20. Also bring thee on by a
pious Nurtu^^ and Education in the fear of God to make the Gift and Offering of
thy Self to God; first in secret, and then in a more public and solemn manner;
openly giving thy self to the Lord and his People. Thy Parents have accordingly
given thee to the Lord in Baptism, and I hope they have told thee of the Bonds
of the Lord which are upon thee to give thy self to Him: Your Ministers have
often admonished you hereof in the Name of the Lord, and required your hearts
for Him. Thy Parents, my Son, have a Right to bind thee to the Lord: In thy
Minority they have power to bind thee out for thy temporal Interest and
Usefulness among Men; And the God of Nature and Grace has certainly given them
power to bind thee to God, to be for Him and not for another; to be his dutiful
Children and his obedient Servants; that you may be blessed in Him for ever.
And now, my Son, what does God and Man expect and require of thee, but to begin
betimes to be religious and to love the Lord thy God, and to fear him, and
serve him and to cleave unto him all the days of thy life? Is not your Heart
his by all possible Engagements, and by every Right and Claim? Can you give
away your heart from God to any Creature, and much less to sin and satan, the
Enemy of God, without the greatest Guilt and Impiety? Ought you not with Jacob,
while you are in the house of your Parents, and when you leave it, to remember
the God and Fear of your Parents? and to implore Him to be with you in all your
way through this World, from the beginning to the end of i^? and to say -- the
Lord shall ^e my God! He is my Fathers God and (...) will exist Him; my God and
I will prepare Him an Habitation; a Palace and Throne in my Heart; a Temple,
Altar and Sacrifices there for ever! -- Do thou not hear thy Parents saying
to thee, What my Son, and the son of my Vows, Will thou not now give thy heart
to God? to whom I have given thee will thou give it away from Him (...) thy
infinite Guilt and eternal Ruin (...) Will thou not reverently answer before
God and thy Parents; and say, My Father, have thou opened thy Mouth to God on
my behalf? be it according is thy word! And to God say, My Father, be Thou the
Guide of my Youth. Lord, take my unworthy heart and make it thy own! prepare
and fix it for thy Self for ever! I cannot rightfully or lawfully, nor for my
own Advantage. dispose of it any where else! it would be impious Sacrilege and
to my eternal ruin if I should! Therefore set up thy Throne in my Heart and
reign there for ever! write thy Law there, and put thy Fear there and be obeyed
there for ever! build thee an Altar there, and prepare thy Sacrifices, and
kindle a Fire there for thy holy Worship for ever and ever! Accept me through
Christ, as a living Sacrifice, which is my reasonable Duty and Service!

THUS in point of Duty to God, you most give Him thy Heart: in Obedience, to
his Precept, for the Glory of his Name, and because of his Right to thee and
Propriety in thee, as thy Creator, Preserver, Redeemer and Covenant-God.

Sermon II.
PROVE. XXIII. 26. MY Son give Me thy Heart.


THE great and gracious God speaks to us all in these Words, but more
especially to young People.

DOCTRINE. THAT it is the duty of young People to give God their Hearts and
Affections, and to be seriously religious in their early days.
THE Method I went into was, (...) consider the Obligations upon young People
to give God their Hearts, 1. In point of duty of God. 2. To Themselves. 3. To
Others.
I have gone through the first of these Heads, and have shown it to be the Duty
of young People to give God their hearts, 1. In Obedience to his Precept to
them. 2. Because of his Propriety in them and Right to them; 1. As their
Creater, Preserver and Benefactor; 2. As their Redeemer and Covenant God. -- I
come now to the second Head.



II. YOUNG people ought to give God their Hearts in point of duty to
Themselves. For their own sake they ought to do this thing, It is their
Interest, and their Happiness depends on it. Man is a selfish Creature. In a
good sense he is so, and ought to be To. Angels are so and it is their W^^dom
and Duty. Our first respect must ^e to the Glory of God from us, and ^o his
Will respecting us; and then ^e may and should respect Our selves, ^ur
Happiness in God, and his Fa^^r and Blessing to us. God is firstly and
ultimately regarded in all this and we our selves only in the second place, and
in subordination to his Will and Glory. He has commanded us to ^^ve this
Respect to our selves, and (...) us with that Principle of self love which is
invincible. It is his great Glory that he has made us to be happy, and made it
out duty to seek after Happiness. But then our Happiness is found only in the
way of Holiness, which is the way of Obedience to the Will of God, and Devoted
ness to the Glory of God, and of ou^ coming to the everlasting Enjoyment of
God. Wherefore we do most and best seek our Selves, by giving ou^ hearts to God.

GOD made us holy at first because i^ was our Blessedness to be holy. And God
has redeemed us from our Sin because they are our Misery. Because he would have
us again holy and happy he gave Christ for us. And no^ as a redeemed People he
requires (...) to give him our Hearts, and to do early, as the Means of our
true Hapiness. For the ^^^lier it is done we so much the more consult our
Happiness. For though he that gives his heart late to God shall be happy, yet
he that does it in his Youth is happier, both as to Body and Soul, Time and
Eternity. He shall escape many G^ilts, and enjoy much more of God in this Life;
and he lays up the more in store against the World to come; greater degrees of
Happiness for ever.

THE Word of God calls thee, O young Man, to this far exceeding Weight of
eternal Glory: in requiring thee now to give him thy heart. This is the Way to
it, the Means of it; and therefore thou owe it to thy self. God is very good
to thee in this Precept. If thou be wise thou shall be wise for thy self. Prove.
9.12. Is it profitable to God if thou give him thy Heart? No: If thou be
righteous what do thou give Him, etc? Job 35.7. The Benefit is only to thy
Self and Others here on earth. Indeed God is pleased and thou art saved. He is
pleased and gratified to see thee saved. He has commanded thee, this for thy
Good, as well as for his own Glory. Hear it and know it for thy good. And let
it move thee to give thy Heart to God that his Soul may bless thee. It is Gods
Favor and Blessing that makes Man happy. Gods Heart toward us makes us
blessed: his heart turned against us makes us miserable. Now what can be the
way to have God's heart turned toward us, to bless us and make us happy? but
this -- to give our Hearts to Him.

WHEREFORE come ye Children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the Fear of the
Lord, and the proper Motive to it: Psalm. 34.12. What Man is he that desires
li^e, and loves many days that he may see good? let him give his Heart be^^mes
to God and to the ways of Religion, for the Eyes of the Lord are upon the
Righteous, and his Ears are open to their Cry. And they are happy indeed on
whom the Eyes of the Lord are, and to whose Cries his Ears are open (...)
Chron. 22.11. My S^n, the Lord be with thee and prosper thou

WELL then, It is thine own Interest to give God thy heart while thou are
young. Thou owe it to thy Self. The law of self love teaches it to thee. You
sin against Self and are your own Enemy if you do not give God your heart
betimes. You wrong your own Souls, and injure your own Bodies. You are guilty
not only of self-neglect, but of self destruction. You are ignorant of, or
wretchedly careless about your present temporal and worldly Interest; as well
as your spiritual, future and eternal Interests.

To be particular therefore in this Argument.

1. IT is thy temporal and worldly Interest to give God thy Heart betimes. God
condescends to move us by these low and inferior things. And why not? when he
has made us to live and sojourn a while in this World, to tabernacle in Bodies
of flesh and blood. For while we are here we have a temporal and worldly
Interest to se^k, together with (but in subordination to) our spiritual and
eternal Interest God has therefore joined these things in his Word, as well as
in their own Nature; the one to subserve unto and promote the other; and that
He might omit no kind of Motive proper to use with ^s. Deuteronomy. 4.1. Now therefore
hearken O Israel unto the Satute^ and the Judgments which I teach you, (...) do
them; that ye may live, and go in and possess the Land which the Lord gives
you. To prosecute a little this lower Argument.

1. IT shall be thy Credit and Reputation, my Son, among good Men and in the
Church of God, if thou give God thy heart. What is there more to be esteemed
than a Child that fe^ts and loves God? Like CHRIST he increases in Wisdom as in
Stature; and grows up in favor with God and Man Even those that have not given
their own hearts to God, will be likely t^ admire and praise the Child that
does it. But to be sure, all that have done it themselves will love and este^^^
the Child that does it O such (...) be sure thou shall be had in honor, an^
that should content thee although others should contemn and scoff at thee. -- Let
your Parents see that you have given your heart to God, and they will doubly
love and esteem thee. You should value their good opinion of thee very much; to
be tender and only beloved in their Eyes. My son, if thine Heart be wise my
Heart shall rejoice, even mine. If thy heart be wise thou will give it to God,
and this shall rejoice the heart of thy godly Father and Mother; and make thee
doubly dear to them. And so if you value the esteem and love of your Ministers
and of the People of God, and the honor that comes from God; this is the way
to have it; Give thy heart to God. As Eli loved Samuel when he saw that be Lord
had called the Child, and all ^srael saw with pleasure that he was ^stablished
a Prophet of the Lord. 1 Samuel (...). 20 As Solomon says of the Woman that
fears the Lord, so may we of ^he Son and Daughter that does so, -- He or She
shall be praised. As David ^ad this Praise in his Fathers house; 1 Samuel 16.18.
Behold I have seen a So^ of Jesse the Beth^^mite, a comely Person prudent in
matters and the Lord is with him. What Son of ours is there, that should not be
very ambitious of this Character? It shall be thy Honor among wise and good
Men, my Son, if thou give thy heart to God. Prove 3.4. So shall thou find
Favor an^ good Understanding in the sight of Go^ and Man.

2. IT shall be Health to thy Body, to give thy Heart to God. You will believe
the God of thy health who says so; Prove. 3.8. Fear the Lord and depart from
evil, it shall be Health to thy navel and morrow to thy bones. 4.22. My son
attend to my Words, keep them in the midst of thy Heart, for they a^^ Life unto
these that find them and Heal^^ unto all their flesh. The good Habit of the
Body depends very much o^ the good habit of the Soul. A good Disp^sition of
Soul in young people would often preserve a good Constitution of Body; which is
very often broken by youthful Lusts, and the giving the Heart to Wine and Women
instead of God. My Son, by giving thy Heart now to God thou shall preserve thy
self from many hurtful Lusts which are destructive to bodily Health; as
Intemperances, Uncleanesses, Sloth, Passions, etc. As Solomon warns the simple
One of going after the Harlot till a Dart strike through his liver, and he die
of a Consumption the Effect of his Intemperance. Our Health and long life
depends on the Blessing of God; but to give Him our Heart is certainly to put
our selves in the way of his Blessing. This has the Promise of life and health
here, so far as God shall see it best for thee: Prove. 3.2. Long life shall they
add to thee. To be sure the Commandments of God tend only to Life; They are a
Tree of Life to them that keep them. Obedience to' them never burt any ones
Health, in an ordinary course of things. But God has sometimes smitten young
Sinners, and for being wicked they have died before their time. -- It is true
that young People may give God their Hearts, and yet remain sickly and weekly;
or grow sickly after they ha^ done it: But then it shall be best for them to be
so, and God will turn it to the Health of their Soul. Yet it may certainly help
a weakly Body, an^ will never hurt it, to give the Hea^ to God. But to give it
to Sin is the way to hurt and consume it apace for a weakly Constitution will
wash away the sooner under wasting Lust^ It will follow also upon this,

3. IT may serve thy bodily Beauty (...) thou give thy heart to God. Thi^ may
seem a mean and small thing (...) bring into the Argument I am upon and
comparatively it is so, and so (...) bodily Health too. But the Lord is so the
Body, even for the Beauty of it (...) the Health of it. For by Beauty I (...)
not mean so much Features, as the Complexion and Vigor of Health whi^^ makes
the Face to shine, and give^ Life and Sprightliness wherein (...) Comeliness of
the Person is most c^^spicuous. So God took care of Dan and his Companions, and
blessed the bread and their water, because they ^^d given him their hearts, and
would not defile themselves with the Kings meat and wine: Their Countenances
were the fairer and they fatter in flesh Dan. 1.15. The Hearts of young People
are too much given to their Beauty; and alas! they give it away from God from a
vain and wrong conceit of making themselves appear beau ^^ous. But after all,
some of the Ornaments they pl^^se and deceive themselves with do ^on^dd to
their Beauty, but take from it: And the Extremity of their Adornings is their
Blemish in the Church of Christ. It shows an Heart given to Vanity rather than
to God. And though these Daughters of men may be fair in the Eyes of some of the
Sons of God, yet a Heart more given to God and set less upon these things would
make 'em look fairer in the Eyes of all that regard the inward Adorning. Favor
is deceitful and Beauty is vain, but the young Persons that give their hearts
to God they shall be praised. The one is skin deep, the other deep as the
Heart, whose Praise is of God Which is fairest? a fair Face or a fa^ Soul?
Besides that the fair Soul shines through the fair Eye and Face, and makes them
fairer. -- Give God thy heart, and as it will not alter thy Features, so to be
sure it will not hurt them. It will add the inward to the outward Beauty; the
hidden and incorruptible to that which is visible and fading. The heart that is
given to God should be the more serene and Joyous, and shine through the Face and
irradiate it. So Moses skin shone, and Stephens face was beheld as if it had
been the Face of an Angel. But to be sure the way to have the Body raised in
Glory, like Christ's transfigured Body which shone as the Light, is to give our
hearts to God. This Resurrection Body can never be looked for, i^ the Heart be
not now given to God. And as one Body will then differ fr^^ another in Glory,
so where the Heart has been given young to God there may the greatest Degree of
Glory b^ looked for. -- But to return from thi^ Excursion.

4. IN respect of thy Worldly Estate (...) shall be thy Interest to give thy
Heart to God while thou art young. It will give thee P^^udence and
Consideration, and make thee sober, moderate, diligent in thy worldly Business.
It will preserve thee from Idleness and Intemperance which are the way to
Poverty. It will give thee Credit and Trust among Men, when th^^ see thee
religious, virtuous and temperate, prudent and diligent, righteou^ and
conscientious, just and upright, and true to thy Word. Men will love to deal
with thee; and good Men to assist thee and put thee forward. The Blessing of
God also, which makes rich, will attend thy honest Industry, and give thee
Food convenient for thee. While you seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, God will add other things needful and convenient for thee. So
Christ has promised and you may take his Word Mat. 6.33. Both Riches and Honor
come of Him, and of those ways of Wisdom which He has laid out for us to walk
in. You may ever indent with God when you are going forth into the World, as
Jacob did, Genesis 28.21. If God will be with me in the way wherein I go, and will
give me Bread to eat and Raiment to put on. But this must be done with a
Moderation of Desire to the things of this World, and with Submission to the
Will of God respecting them, and with a Resolution through his Grace to adhere
unto his Covenant, Worship and Service, in the Acquisition and Enjoyment of
them: all which must needs be supposed in Him that has given his heart to God.
Such a one is fittest to be rich in this world, that will be rich in good
works. But God who knows Men, only knows what is fittest for them. We may think
that there is many a good Man that does good with his Competency, would fall
into Temtation and a Snare and into foolish and hurtful lusts if he had much
more. God chooses for his Children, and they pray to him daily, lead me not into
Temptation. So Agur prayed, Give (...) neither Poverty nor Riches, Feed me with
food convenient for me.

5. To give God thy Heart in thy Youth will interest thee in the special
providential Care of God from thy Youth up. Gods Heart is toward thee, if thou
have given thy heart to Him. Yea because his Heart was to thee for good, thou
have given thy heart to Him. You may trust in the Lord therefore and do good,
so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shall be fed. Psalm. 37.3. God
will not fail him that casts himself upon Him in his early days. He shall take
thee up in the hands of his fatherly Providence, and of his Covenant Mercy. He
shall give his Angels charge concerning thee to hold thee in their hands, to
incamp about thee; to minister to thee in all thy way, through this world, as
an Heir of Salvation. So Jacob gave his Heart to God as he set out, and at his
Return the Angels of God met him, and he said, These are the Lords hosts. They
were an heavenly Guard ordered to attend and defend that Heir of Promise, who
as a Prince had power with God and had prevailed. Many a^^ the Afflictions of
the righteous, but yet no Evil happens to the Just. All is meant for good, and
made to work together for their best good. So take that Promise along with thee
when thou have given thy Heart to God, Psalm. 91.10. There shall no evil befall
thee. This Secret of the Lord is with the righteous, and he shows them his
Covenant when others see things with them just as with other men, or it may
seem worse. But they and their works are in the Hand of God; and they should
consider themselves so, and say All is well. Is it not so, if God is thy Hope
and Trust from thy Youth? thy Guardian and Guide from it? and even unto Death?
and thy Portion after it. Yet surely it is and shall be thus with thee, if thou
give Him thy Heart from thy Youth.

6. To give thy Heart to God in thy Youth is the way to be made a Blessing to
all about thee as long as thou ^^v^st. That Blessing of Abraham shall here by
come upon thee, as one of his spiritual ^eed, Genesis 12.2. And thou shall be a
Blessing. What a blessed thing is this! What a Blessedness to a Person to be a
Blessing to the World he lives in, all his life! from the early to the latest
days of it: So shall the Man be blessed that gives his Heart early to God. A
Child thus becomes a Blessing to his Parents, and the Joy of their hearts. Thy
Father and thy Mother shall be glad. Such a Child becomes a blessing in the
Family, to his Brethren and Sisters, and to the Servants in the house. A little
spiritual Leaven may leaven the whole lump. A little spark of Fire presently
catches the Tinder that lies in its way, and spreads over it.

WHAT a Blessing was Joseph rendered by his Piety to his Fathers house, both on
temporal and spiritual accounts? and so Samuel to all Israel, as well as to his
Parents? How did Hannah's heart rejoice in the Lord on his account? her Horn
was exalted in the Lord: i. e. her honor, happiness and joy. -- But the great
Instance of a heart always with God, from the first exercise of Understanding
and from the first use of Reason, was our Lord Jesus Christ; who came to bless
us and to give us an Example; to love us, teach us and die for us; in whom all
the Families of the Earth are blessed. Would our Children be in their places
Blessings to the World, as Christ was; let them now give their Hearts to God
and be before Twelve Year old, and after it about their Heavenly Fathers
business. It became Him, in whose Heart Gods Law was from his Conception and
Birth, and in whom was no sin, that in Him all the Families of the Earth should
be blessed* The Child that sconest gives his heart to God is most like to
^^^rist, and most like to be a Blessing (...) the Church of Christ.

GODLY (...) like to serve their own (...) Samuel and David did (...) to the
Will of God; (...) a Foundation for many (...). That Blessing is greatly to be
desired, Psalm. 144.1^ That our Sons may be as Plants grown up in their youth,
that our Daughters may be as Corner st^nes polished, etc. The way for our
Children to attain this Honor and become this Blessing, is for them to give
their Hearts now to God. Happy is the People that is in such a Ca^^.

7. And lastly, GIVE thy Heart young to God and it will prevent thy giving it
to other things, destructive of Soul and Body, and injurious to all about thee.
God has his Rivals which stand Candidate for thy heart, and vehemently
solicit for it. And alas! thy foolish corrupt and vile Heart naturally and
strongly inclines to them, and is averss to God till he change and constrain
it. Sin, Satan and worldly Lusts would ensnare, captivate and possess thy Heart
for ever. Thy heart is gone to them, but God requires thee to give it back to
him; and he will help thee to do it, if you will seek his help. Will thou give
thy Heart to the greatest Evil, and to thy greatest Enemy? Is this thy
Interest? No; it is to r^^ne and destroy thy self. Nothing can save thee from
this Destruction, but the giving thy heart to God. Give it not to destructive
Vices rather than to God. He would save it and these damn it forever. Destroy
not that for which Christ died. Hear the words of King Lemuel, the Prophecy
that his Mother taught him; Prove. 31.1, 2. What my Son, and what the Son of my
Womb, and what the Son of my Vows! Give not thy strength to Women, nor thy ways
to that which destroys Kings: It is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for
Princes strong drink. That meaning is, that if young People do not give their
hearts to God betimes they will be in great danger of giving them to one
destructive Vice or other to their after undoing on temporal and on spiritual
Accounts. To prevent this, give thy Heart betimes to God: It w^^^ save thee on
all accounts: It is thy temporal and the worldly Interest, -- This was the
first thing proposed. I (...) to say,

2. IT is thy spiritual and eternal interest to give thy Heart unto God (...)
thy Childhood and Youth. If thou love thy precious Soul, do this; place it on
God and portion it in Him. This is of more price than all earthly and temporal
Things. What shall it profit a Man, if by giving his Heart to this. World he
could gain the whole of it, and should l^se his own Soul? or what shall a man
give in exchange for his Soul? O that those Words of Christ were graven on our
Hearts! What are all the poor Interests of Time, when compared with those of
Eternity?

OUR Hearts are made for spiritual and invisible Things, things heavenly and
eternal. The eternal God is their Portion. They are made for spiritual
Exercises and for spiritual Enjoyments; and those out of the Body and beyond
the Grave; and in the Body for ever after the Resurrection, in Glory and
Incorruption.

OUR Hearts are made to know and love and desire God, to thirst after the
living God, to choose Him and seek after Him; to walk before Him and enjoy Him;
and attain Glory, Honor and Immortality in his Presence, where is the fullness
of Joy and at his right Hand Pleasures for evermore.

OUR Heart were never made for this World and the temporary passing things of
this life. Our immortal Souls can never find a Happiness in a dying Body, and
in things which they are going from; but only in Him that only has Immortality
to Whom they are going; and in whose Favor is their Life, and in his Anger is
their eternal Death.

THE young Person may die to day or to morrow, and if he have not given his
Heart to God, what will then become of Him to all Eternity? Or suppose that he
may have many Years to abide in the Flesh, yet it is his spiritual everlasting
Interest to give his Heart now to God, as much as if this night his Soul were
to be required of him. For why is Life given us, but to be preparing therein
for a blessed Eternity?

BESIDES that it makes the whole Life easy and pleasant, if the Heart is given
young to God. Then go, eat thy Bread with a merry heart. Then lay thee down in
peace and sleep. Then take the Comfort and taste the sweetness of all the good
things of this Life that God gives thee. The Work of Righteousness is Peace,
and the Effect thereof Quietness and Assurance for ever.

AGAIN, Thy Advan^^s and Proficiency in Grace from thy Youth are the true
Riches, the enduring Substance. The Heart and Treasure are in Heaven. This is
the good Foundation against the Time to come, that thou may est lay hold of
eternal Life. This is to choose that good Part which shall never be taken away
from thee.

WHEN Old Age comes (the evil Days to him that has never given his Heart to
God) O the Consolation to him that gave his in Youth to God. When the Grinders
cease you shall Feast on this and sing, Psalm. 71.14. I will hope continually
and will yet praise Thee more and more.

OR let Death come, sooner or later, it is disarmed of its Terrors, its Sting
is taken away, by having given our Hearts young to God. The aged Believer may
then be waiting for his Departure in peace, like Simeon. Of if the Believer die
in the Prime of Life, he may take up Hezekiah's Prayer, Lord remember how I
have walked before thee in Truth and with a perfect heart. The Angels of God
will be near to that failing Heart, to take it and carry it to the bosom of
Abraham. Like Daniel it shall stand in its Let, and that a very glorious one,
at the End of Time.

THUS blessed is He like to be that gives his Heart young to God. He is the
Candidate for that Blessing. Romans 5.17. Abundance of Grace and of the Gift by
Jesus Christ. These are the Sons, and these the Daughters, that are like to sit
on Christ's right Hand and on his left in his Kingdom. For the^ furely it is
prepared of the Father.

AND thus in point of Duty to Themselves should young People give their Hearts
to God. It has the Prospect and the Promise of the Life that now is and of that
which is to come.

WE wish you Happy as to both Worlds, and therefore require you now to give
your hearts to God. We urge you as Rebecca did her Jacob, to seek and get the
Blessing of Abraham. Obey our Voice. God give thee of the dew of Heaven and of
the fullness of the Earth! But what is infinitely more, God crown thee with the
Riches of Grace here and of Glory hereafter. So Isaac kissed Jacob and said,
See the smell of my Son is as the smell of a Field which the Lord has blessed
Here this Sermon may be divided.
.

I come now to the third and last Head, which is,

III. YOUNG people owe this to Others, to the World they live in, to all that
are about them, and more especially unto all Those that are related so them and
concerned in them: For the sake and benefit of Others they ought to give their
Hearts to God.

THIS is an Argument of great weight also, though it ought to come after the
other two which have been already named and urged. God is first, our own Souls
are next, and then the Souls of Others. The whole moral Duty of man lies in
these three Branches, our more immediate Duty to God, to our Selves and to our
Neighbors. So our Savior and his Apostle have taught us; He in his Gospel,
the Other in his Epistle. Mat. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul: This is the first and great Command. And the
second, is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. On these
two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets. Tit. 2.16. For the Grace of
God that brings Salvation has appeared to all Men, teaching us to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present World. Young People are not
righteous toward Men, no more than godly before God, unless they give
themselves unto God. If they give their Hearts unto the ways of God they are
dutiful to Him, they are wise for themselves, and will be but just and
righteous to others. God has set us all in mutual Relations one toward another,
and there are the Duties of those Relations to be discharged; and pure Religion
before God and Piety toward Men lies in the discharge of those Duties. And
young People stand in various Relations to one and another as much as their
Elders; and are as much bound by the Law of God to render unto all the Duties
of these Relations, as Others are: All Souls are Gods to obey him, and the Law
of God binds all Souls alike to their particular Duties; even the soul of the
Son and Daughter as much as the soul of the Parent. Therefore young People
cannot be Religious before God, if they be not Righteous and dutiful toward all
that they stand related unto; whether in a nearer or more remote Relation. And
the Glory of God from them, and their own Happiness and Comfort in their
Obedience to God, depends upon their doing their Duty to Others, in their
several places and Relations. -- God has sent us into the World to do good in
it, to do good to all about us, to be Blessings to them among whom we live, to
whom we are related, with whom we have Conversation and Acquaintance. Our very
Children know that they sustain these and those Relations, to their Parents, to
their Brethren and Sisters, to their Masters and Teachers, to their Ministers,
to their Rulers, and to the Church and People of God whereof they are a part;
Now if they give their Hearts betimes to God then and then only they will
answer all the Duty of all the Rela^^ons which they stand in to Others For the
Word of God and the Lo^^ and Fear of God teaches them all these Duties; and if
they refuse their Heart^ to God, to his Word and Ways, then the^^ will never do
their Duty to other^ according to his Will and Commandment: And therefore young
People owe this unto Others that they give their Hearts now to God because then
and not till then will they be just and righteous to all about them, whether
Superiors, Inseriours or Equals.

My Text points me to this Argument with young People, that for the sake of
Others and particularly of their Parents they should give their hearts to God.
For thus runs the Context, My son if thy heart be wise my heart shall rejoice
even MINE; thy Father and thy Mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee
shall rejoice. Solomon speaks here as a Father, and says to his Son, My Son!
for my sake give thy heart to God, do it for thy Mothers sake as well as mine;
We command thee to do this; do it in obedience both to God and us; and do it
for our good, for our Comfort and Benefit, for the Joy that it will give to us;
to see thee wise and good and happy. -- You see then that I must forget my Text
and depart from that, if I do not pursue this Argument a little, and move young
People to give their hearts to God, for the sake of Others, that so they may
have Comfort in them, and Good from them.

I say therefore again, Young People owe this to Others, to the World they live
in, to those they are more nearly related to, and unto all about them that they
give their Hearts unto God. -- And to be particular, and to begin where Nature
and my Text teaches me to begin,

1. YOUNG people owe this unto their Parents, to give their Hearts betimes to
God. They owe it to their godly Parents as an Act of Obedience to their
Commands; and as an early Requital of all their Love to them, and Pains and
Cares and Prayers for them. They owe them this Joy; for the Father of the
Righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that heget^eth a wise son shall have
joy of him. Prove. 10.1. A wise Son makes a glad Father, but a foolish Son is
the heaviness of his Mother. Here is an Argument with Children that love their
Parents, why they should give their Hearts to God, because hereby they will
glad the hearts of their Parents, and if they do it not they will be a Grief of
heart unto them. What do not Children owe to their Parents? and what should
they not be glad to do for their Comfort? And what can they do to comfort them
and make their Hearts glad like this, to let them see the Fear and Love of God
in them while they are young? How will they, like Mary, lay up all they see of
this in their Hearts; and give God Praise for it? For what is a Parents hope,
or joy, or Crown of Rejoicing? or what should it be, but this! even the Grace
of God in their Children? the Earnest of their seeing them hereafter in the
Presence of the Lord Jesus at his Coming! Every pious Parent is ready to say to
his or her pious Offspring, as the Apostle to the Thessalonians, Ye are our
Glory and our Joy. If Children did but know and consider how it would please,
gratify and even edify their gracious Parents; it would (...) of some force
with them to cause them to be religious in their early days. Prove. 29.17. Yea
he shall give Delight to thy Soul. So Jacob did (...) the Soul of Rebecca, and
Joseph to the Soul of Jacob, and Samuel to the Sou^ of Hannah, and JESUS to the
Soul o^ Mary: And so should you to the heart of your pious Parents.

2. YOUNG people should give God their hearts for the sake of their Brethren
and Sisters, and for the good (...) the Family whereof they are a part They owe
this Duty to all that are in the House with them; to let them see that God has
their hearts. Hereby they will be Examples to the Children and Servants of the
Family, and e^^cite them to give their Hearts to God and will reprove and
admonish them if they are wicked and do it not They will become a living Lesson
and daily Monitor to all that li^^ with them. So thy Fathers Children shall
learn of thee; and thou may (...) save the Souls of them that live w^^^ thee.
Besides, that if You give your Heart to God, you will daily pray to Him for
others, when you do for yourself. For thy Brethren and Companions sake
therefore, now give thy heart to God. Who knows but you may save some of the
Household? yea and others in the nei'bourhood where you dwell?

3. YOUNG people owe this to their Masters according to the flesh, to give
their Hearts early to God; that they may the better do their Duty to them in
obedience to the Word of God, and become Blessings in the Families where the
Providence of God disposes of them. So Jacob, having given his heart to God,
carried a Blessing with him to the house of Laban. He served him faithfully by
day and by night, and the blessing of the Lord accompanied him in all that he
set his hand unto. Laban found by Experience that the Lord had blessed him for
Jacob's sake, Genesis 30.27. So Joseph went down a sold servant to Egypt, (...) he
had given his heart to God, and was prudent and diligent in hi^ Masters
business, for he feared God; and God blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's
sake. Genesis 39.5. -- And so it will be always good for a Family to have such
young People come into Service in it; who have given their hearts to God and
his Ways; they will set themselves to do their Duty, in their place, to their
Master and Mistress, to the Children of the house, and to their Fellow
servants, in singleness of heart, fearing God. And such Servants are an unknown
Blessing in a Family. And for this reason, among others, young People should
give their hearts to God, that they may be Blessings to the Families where they
may go to serve. Read what a Blessing religious Servants are to a Family, and
what an Argument it should be with young People in their Services to be
religious that they may be such Blessings; Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7. Col. 3.22, 23, 24.

4. And lastly, YOUNG people should give their hearts to God, for the s^^^ of
the Generation which they are to serve by the Will of God, if they live. Young
people should not build upon living long; but they ought to prepare and lay in
for a godly Life of Service to God and Good to Men, if it should please God to
prolong their lives. And in order to this the short Rule before them is this in
my Text, My Son, give God thy heart, Thou will then give thy self to his People
according to his will, to do good in the place wherein his Providence sets
thee; that thou may be a Blessing both in Church and State. If a young
Person has given God his heart, he is like to make a grave, prudent, judicious,
faithful Man in his civil Capacity and Relations, and into whatever public
Offices he may be called. And in like manner he that gives his Heart young to
God is like to be a ^hining exemplary useful Christian ^n the Church of Christ.
Both in ^tate and Church, he will be seen and ^bserved with a raye of Moses
shining ^^^e upon him. So Joseph having given his heart early to God, what a
Blessing was he made to the World, and unto Israel? And so we may say of Moses
and of Joshua; and of Samuel and David; and of Daniel. The Luminaries, and
Glories, and great Benefactors to the World, have been such as have given their
hearts young to God. In These, in their measure after Christ, (from the Spirit
of Christ dwelling and ruling in them) has been exemplified that Blessing of
blessings, the Glory of the Son Himself in our Nature; In thee the Families of
the Earth are blessed. And what (...) Motive and Reason should this be to young
People? that they may be great Blessings in their places as long as they live,
even unto old Age if God should spare them to it.

AND thus for the sake of Others you should give your hearts to God while you
are young.

HAVING now gone through the several Arguments I proposed, and show^ that young
people owe this Duty (...) God, to Themselves, and to the World they live in;

I come now to make some Improvement and Application of the Doctrine. and it
may be in three or four Uses, of Examination, of Reprehension, of Consolation,
and of Exhortation.

1. OF Examination, and serious Self-Enquiry. Have we yet given our hearts to
God? Child, have thou done it? and you that are Parents did you do it in your
younger days? or is it done even to this day? And should you not do it now?
Should it not have been done many a Day, or Month, or Year past? and when shall
it be done? when shall it once be?

2. THE Use is of Reprehension to all such as have not given their hearts to
God, whether Elder or Younger Persons. The youngest among us are very wicked
and miserable if they have not yet given their hearts to God. Our Children may
not excuse themselves or think God will excuse it in them. They may and should
see their own vile Nature, the Plague of their hearts, how vitiated and
depraved their Minds are, alienated from God, and Enmity against him. It is a
desperately wicked heart of thine, or it would give it self to the blessed God.
It is a cursed heart that departs from the Lord its God. -- But then how
criminal and guilty are Elder People, under the power of this evil Heart; and
in the same gall of bitterness and bond of Iniquity! Our Children are to be
bewailed under it, but much more our Adult people. As Moses lamented over the
Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29.4. Yet the Lord has not given you a Heart to
perceive, nor Eyes to see, nor an Ear to hear unto this day. How wretched is
their case that have lived long in the world, but all their days without God in
it! that are just going out of the world and have never given their hearts to
God! It is a hard word to the youngest sinner, but should sound terribly to the
Older; Of the Rock that began thee thou art unmindful, and have forgotten God
that formed thee.

3. THE next Use is of Consolation, to all them that have given their hearts to
God, but especially them that have done it in their younger days. If it is done
at all, though done late, blessed be God for it, and blessed be thou of the Lord
thy God. Happy is he that can say with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.8. Last of all He
was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time. But happier is he that can
say with Him, My manner of life from my Youth up, has shown a heart given to
God. Happy was Obadiah, who could say of himself, 1 King. 18.12. I thy servant
fear the Lord from my Youth. Let the Mouths of such be filled with God's Praise
and Honor all the day. -- Happy is the young person that has given his heart
to God; whether he lives to serve God in this World, or whether he dies and
goes to enjoy him in a better. Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; the Kingdom of
Grace here, and o^ Glory hereafter. Where ever Jesu^sees any such young People
he loves them; and such Children be takes (...) in the Arms of his Grace and
Covenant, and blesses 'em.

4. THE last Use is of Exhortation; and let it be directed to all, both elder
and younger Persons, as the Voice of God to them; Give God your hearts. What a
gracious Exhortation is this, which speaks to us as unto Children? for surely
it is a Father that asks of us our hearts. Who can refuse this to God? For let
us consider, 1. GOD only has Right to our hearts. To whom shall we give them,
if not Him? What has sin or satan, the world or flesh, to do with these hearts
of ours? God that made us this Soul, made it for Himself He filled the heart of
Man at first with Himself, and fixed it on Himself, and He has redeemed it for
Himself. He claims but his Own, and of his Own we give Him, when we give him
our Hearts. 2. THY Heart is too great and good I thing for any thing below God.
It is I Spirit, and made for spiritual Blessedness: It is a living and immortal
spirit and made for a blessed Immortality. This World therefore, with all the
Objects of sense which it is filled with, is not suited to nor sufficient for
thy Heart. These are not great, good or durable eno' to fill and satisfy that.
Wherefore reverence thy self; know ye not their own selves? that you are
spirits and not flesh; like the horses and cattle about your doors, to feed and
live upon the husks of this World; and that you are immortal Spirits, made for
a future and eternal World. You must not therefore bow down to this stock, nor
sacrifice your Hearts to these empty and transitory things, nor prostitute your
noble Souls to trifles and childish Vanities? to Riches and Honors which
neither improve nor satisfy the Souls of Men while they live, nor can descend
after them when they die? Or will thou give thy Heart to those ways of Sin and
Wickedness, which render this Life miserable, and which end in Hell and eternal
Damnation? Surely thy Heart is too good to give it to the devil; and yet in
effect thou give it to him if it be not given to God. 3. CONSIDER that you
owe your heart to CHRIST, who has died to purchase it for God; to redeem it
from Sin, to recover it from the devil, to purify it for God: Thou art bought
with a Price, therefore glorify God with thy Body and Spirit. 1 Cor. 6.20. Thy
whole Spirit Soul and Body is due to Him, who gave Himself a Ransom for thee;
who made his Soul an Offering, who through the Eternal Spirit offered up himself
without spot to God! He claims thy Heart, for he has dearly bought it with his
Blood, to sanctify and cleanse it, for an Habitation of God, a living Temple
and a living Sacrifice. Romans 12.1. I beseech you therefore Brethren, by the
Mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. 14.7. For none of us
lives to himself, and no man dies to himself; for whether we live, we live
unto the Lord: and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live
therefore or die, we are the Lords. For to this end Christ both died, and rose,
and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. 4. LET young
people consider that they have been given to God in Baptism, by which they are
bound and obliged to give their hearts to God. And now it lies upon them to
make this Act and Deed, the Dedication of themselves to God; secretly and
publicly. Your Parents and Ministers who have done their part in giving you up
to God according to his Appointment, and all the Lord's People that saw you
bro't under the holy Bonds of God in your Baptism; do all join in calling upon
you to give your hearts to God And God calls upon you as the Seed of his
Covenant People, as a devoted Seed to him, and as your Covenant God -- My
Children, give me your hearts. To refuse him is in effect to deny and renounce
your Baptism. 5. And lastly, GOD will give Himself, his Son and Spirit, his
Heaven and Glory, to all them that give their hearts to Him. He requires our
hearts, that he may bestow Himself on us. The Heart of the Blessed Trinity is
toward thee in this Demand of thy Heart for God; it is that thou may be
blessed in God, in his Love and Favor, in his Presence and Glory for ever and
ever. Give thy heart to God and God will come down into it and possess it for
Himself, and dwell and reign in it, and prepare it for his heavenly Glory. Give
thy Heart to God, and the Grace of Christ, the Love of God and the Communion of
the Holy Ghost shall be with thy Spirit. Give thy heart to God and when flesh
and heart fails God will be the Strength of thy heart and thy portion for
even. Give thy Heart to God, and when thou die God will take thy Spirit to
Himself; to his Presence where is the fullness of Joy for ever and ever. All
that God has to give, and that thou can receive, God will give to thee
another Day if thou give thy Heart to him now.


BY way of Direction, 1. GIVE thy heart to God, and do it instantly. What you
do, let it be done quickly, forthwith, presently. Do it now: To day if you will
hear his Voice. Delay not in a matter of this Importance. To morrow may be too
late; you may be dead before it ^omes; This night may thy Soul be required. 2.
GIVE thy heart to God and give (...) wholly to him. He requires of thee all thy
Heart and all thy Soul. He (...) a right to It all, He will not accept of a
part, a divided heart. His Glory forbids it. It is wholly His, ^^d must be all
devoted to him, all ^^ployed for him. Thy Soul and all that is within thee, thy
whole Spirit, Soul and Body; This is God's claim. 3. GIVE thy heart to God and
give it for ever to him. It is a living immortal Spirit, that thou rendrest to
the living God, the everlasting King. Thy heart must be given absolutely and
irrevocably. This is my God, and my Heart shall be his for ever and ever. Come
and let us join out selves to the Lord in an everlasting Covenant, never to be
forgotten. You are acting for Time and Eternity. 4. GIVE thy heart to God and
do it joyfully and thankfully. It is thy greatest Honor and Happiness that he
will accept of thy poor heart, and that thou have a heart inclined to give it
self to him. Who am I, O Lord God! and what is my People, that we should be
allowed to effer so willingly after this sort! Thy heart! it is a wonder of
Grace that God should allow thee to make a Tender of it to Him. If he has
prepared it for Himself it will be a most willing Offering a Thank offering. 5.
GIVE thy Heart to God and give it to his People, in all his appointed Ways.
Give your own selves first to the Lord, and then to Us by the Will of God; As
the Apostle speaks; 2 Cor. 8.5. Give thy self to God and come into his Church,
and be walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless. As
Ruth clave to Naomi and her People, having given her self to the God of Israel:
Ruth 1.16. Entreat me nor to leave thee, nor to turn from following after thee;
for thy People shall be my People, and thy God my God. Let our young People
show that they have given their Hearts to God by coming into full Communion;
and by continuing sted fastly (all their Life) in the Fellowship of the Saints.
Give your Hearts to God and it will bring you on to the Table of Christ, and
make you welcome there. Yea when you have given your Heart to God, you may give
Thanks unto the Father who has made you meet for the Inheritance of the Saints
in Light. 6. And lastly, GO to God in the name of Christ that he would give
the^ a Heart to give to Him The Prep^ration of this heart in Man is of the
Lord, and we must ask it of Him. It is a singular Gift of his Grace. Let us ask
of Him a new Heart, a purified and clean Heart; a holy and heavenly Heart; that
He would put his ^^ar in our hearts and shed abroad of his l^ve in them Let thy
Heart answer to God's; O that there were such on Heart in me. David has r^^ght
us to pray, Unite my Heart to fear thy name; Incline my heart unto thy
Testimonies. And David has assured as that God will hear the (...) of the
Humble, when that is their Petition; he will prepare their Heart, and cause his
Ear to hear.


Sermon III.
ACTS XVII. 28. -- For we are His Offspring.


THESE gracious Words speaks of God and us; they speak to us concerning God and
our Selves; they speak to us as unto Children, and concerning God as a Father.

You, to whom I now bring them, are our Children; some of the Offspring of the
People of God: And I now invite and lead you into this Consideration of your
Selves, That You are the Offspring of God. May you be a Seed which the Lord
shall bless.

THE Words are quoted from an Heathen Poet, Aratus, by the Apostle Paul in an
excellent Discourse which he made to the Men of Athens, to convince them of
their Folly and Impiety (...) in the Idolatry which he saw among ^em. It is a
very rare thing in the holy Writings to find a Quotation from a heathen Author;
It is (as On says) like the bringing a Greek into the Temple. Yet certainly in
the Case before us the Propriety and Wisdom of the thing is evident; it being
adapted to the Persons spoken unto, and an Argument ad Hominem, to convince and
shame 'em out of their Idolatry, from what one of their own Poets had written.

THE Apostle being now at Athens, one of the famous Cities of Greece, was
exceedingly moved to see the City given wholly to Idolatry. Among other wild
and absurd Instances of their Superstitious Devotion, he found one Altar
erected and inscribed to the unknown God. They had collected and gathered (it
may be) the Images and Pictures of all the Gods of the Nations that had come to
their know Iedge; but well imagining with themselves that they had not light
upon them all, they would have One it seems in compliment to Him, who ever he
were, that was still unknown. But some think that by the unknown God they
indeed meant the God of the Jews, the Invisible God, who would not allow of any
Image, or likeness of any thing in the Heavens above or on the Earth below,
whereby to represent Him: For what Image can be made of a Spirit infinite and
immense, Him therefore the Apos^^ preaches to them: Whom you ignorantly worship
(says he) Him declare I unto you: God that made the World and all things
therein, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, and dwells not in Temples made with
Hands; neither is worshipped by Men's hands as though be needs any thing;
seeing He gives unto all Life and Breath and all things; and bath made of one
Blood all Nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the Earth, and has
determined the times before appointed, and the Bounds of every ones Habitation:
that they should seek the Lord if happily they might feel after Him, and find Him
(...) though he be not far from every one of us; For in Him we live, and move
and have our Being, As certain also of your own P^e^s have said, For we are his
Offspring: For as much then as we are the Offspring of God, we ought not to
think that the Godhead is like unto Gold, or Silver, or Stone, graven by Art
and by Man's device.

-- THUS runs the Apostles Discourse wherein we find my Text, with an
inimitable Vein of Eloquence and Reasoning. They that heard him might have seen
that he was Inspired by the Unseen God whom he preached to 'em; if they had not
been blinded and infatuated by their Idolatries. And He was inspired in the
quotation he made from the Poet Aratus, which are the words of my Text, and
very meet to be the Subject of a Sermon in a Christian Assembly; being adopted
by an Apostle and consecrated by the HOLY GHOST

WE are his Offspring* We, i. e. all Mankind; all the Sons and Daughters of
men. His, i. e. Gods. Aratus meant Jupitor, the High God among the Heathen; the
Father of Gods and Men; as they used to call him. But the Apostle speaks of the
LORD JEHOVAH, the God of Israel, the Possessor of Heaven and of Earth: the
Father of Angels and of Men. -- His Offspring. As Children proceeding from Him
and hoaring his Image. The Offspring among Men are Children proceeding from
their Parents. Job 5.25. Thy Seed shall be great, and thine Offspring as the
grass of the Harth. 21*8. Their Seed is established in then sight, and their
Offspring before their eyes.

Let the Doctrine be.

DOCT. IT is a great and serious Truth, worthy of our most devour and frequent
Consideration, that we are the Off spring of GOD.
I shall endeavor 1. To explain and wave the Thing asserted. 2. To lead you
into a proper Improvement of it.


I. And first, To explain and prove his Truth, that We are the Offspring of
God. A high and noble Truth, which should be awful as well as pleasant to
confider of. We must limit and state it aright, least we debate God and elate
our selves. We should do both in a very heinous manner, if we should call our
selves the Offspring of God in the highest sense, or should we call our selves
so as to our Bodies, out earthly part; or should we count out selves less his
Creature and his Work in our Souls, though they are Spirits that bear his Image
and likeness.

HERE then let me premise, and say,

1. WE are not the Offspring of God in the highest fe^se, which is singular and
peculiar to the Only begotten and eternal Son. There is an Only-begotten of the
Father; a S^n by an eternal Generation; His only Son our Lord. He is a Divine
Person, his Nature and Glory is Divine. Joh. 1.1. In the beginning was the
WORD, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. ver. 14. And the Word
w^^ made Hesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the
Only begotten of the Father. O this eternal Existence of Christ, the Wisdom and
Power of God, we read Prove. 8.22. The Lord possessed Me in the beginning of his
ways, before his Works of old: I was set up from Everlasting, from the
Beginning, or ever the Earth was: Then I was by Him, as one bro t up with Him,
and I was daily his delight, rejoicing a ways before Him: rejoicing in the
habitable parts of the Earth, and my Delights were with the Sons of Men. This
Divine Offspring of God is so by an Ineffable everlasting Communication of
Essence, having Life in Himself, even as the Father bath life in Himself. He
and the Father are One, in Essence, in Glory and Power. Joh. 10.30. I and my
Father are One. His glory is incomprehensible and incommunicable. Phil. 2.6.
Who being in the Form of God though it it not robbery to be Equal with God. Heb.
1.3. The Brightness of the Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person.
Col. 2.9. In Him dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily.

THIS is the Mystery of God; of the Father and of Christ; which we receive and
adore, as it is revealed and because it is revealed, without pretending to
comprehend it. Prove. 30 4. What is his Name, and what is his Sons Name, if thou
can tell? No, we must answer, I neither learned Wisdom, nor have the
Knowledge of the Holy. Far be it from us. (and as far is it above all Angels)
to call our selves the Offspring of God in such a sense; Far b^ the Though It from
us, and detested by us. The Only begotten Son it Christ, whose Name is above
every Name, and Angels in Heaven as well as we on Earth how down before it.

2. WE are the Offspring of God eminently or only in our Souls, not called so
with respect to our Bodies or outward Form. When the Creation of Man came on,
the Crown and finishing piece of God's Creation here below, the Lord God said
-- Let us ^^ks Man in our Image, ofter our likeness: and he formed the Body of
Man out of the dust of the Ground, and breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of
Life, and Man became a Living Soul. Man's Body is a wondrous piece of Divine
Workmanship, and great is the glory of the Wisdom and Power and Bounty of the
CREATOR shining in it. But the living Soul or Spirit which God breathed into
this Body, bears the Image of the wise, eternal ever living SPIRIT, whose
breath it is. God is the Father of Spirits. Angels and Souls, intelligent and
immortal Beings, are his Offspring; and not Bodies. There is a Spirit in Man,
and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives him Understanding. Souls are His,
all Souls are so; his Offspring in his Image.

AND this is the manner of Reasoning in our Context; that it is absurd to
worship the invisible and immense. SPIRIT, that gives to all Life and Breath
and all things, under any dead and bodily Form, whether of Man or Beast; for in
HIM we live and move, being made living Souls by Him and active Spirits, and so
his Offspring.

3. IT must moreover be premised and considered, That Angels and humane Souls,
though vastly in their Nature excelling Bodies and bearing the Image of the
Invisible God; yet they are as much at last the Creatures of God and infinitely
below Him, as any and every part of the inferior World. At last the distance is
infinite between God and the highest created Intelligence. There is no
proportion between Finite and Infinite: there is no measuring that which is
Eternal and which is Immense. An eternal Existence is just the same to a
million Years before the World, as to a million after it: And so is an immense
Presence just the same to the Heaven of heavens and to this House which we are
in. That is to say, There is neither greater not less if compared to Infinity:
the Heaven of heavens do no more contain God than this Room can. In like manner
the highest created Beings are but Creatures, and the least Worm or Mire is one
of Gods Creatures. If therefore some of God's Creatures are called his
Offspring, what then? they are never the less as much below the eternal and
immense Creator, as the least and lowest thing that he has made. Wherefore He
puts no Trust in his Angels, he charge them with Folly, they cover their
Faces before Him; the Heavens are not clean in his sight. And as for the
Spirits in Flesh, what are they but Dust and Ashes before Him? as Abraham
beheld himself, when God spoke to him, and gave him leave to speak before him.
-- As our Context has it, -- God that made the World and all things in it,
seeing he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, is as much above the highest as the
least of his Creatures. So then, although our Souls are the Offspring of God,
yet pride must be hid from Man, and he is before his Maker but a Worm of the
dust. Lucifer, the Son of the Morning, in his high state grew proud, not
considering that his distance from the Throne of the Majesty on High, was as
great as if he had been the least of Angels or only a Spirit here below in
flesh; and so he fell --. But having said this to keep us low under the
Privileges of our Nature and the Favors of God to us; I come now to say,

4. YET it pleases the High God to call some of his Creatures his Offspring,
and to require them so to account of and esteem Themselves. For we are his
Offspring.

ANGELS and Men may say this. They both are so. God calls them so, owns them
so, puts them among his Children.

1. ANGELS are the Sons of God. Job 38.7. When the Morning Stars sang together
and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy. i. e. The Angels did so when God made
this Earth of ours. The blessed Angels are among Creatures, the First born of
the Father of lights; and they shone bright in the Morning of time; before that
God commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness here below. They saw God rear
the Earth for Men their younger Brethren, immortal Spirits like themselves; and
they rejoiced at it; (in the habitable parts whereof the Son of God was before
rejoicing.) The holy Angels shine bright in the Image of God; love him as their
Father, he delights in them as his Sons, their delight is to do his Will, they
dwell in his House above, and they inherit everlasting Life and Light.

2. MAN was created a Son of God as well as the Angels. So we read, Luke 3.
ult. Adam, which was the Son of God. He was immediately the Offspring of God in
his Creation; We are mediately, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Is he not thy Father? has he not
made thee? Mal. 2.10. Have we not all our Father? has not one God created us?

Now there are two Reasons why Angels and men should be called the Offspring of
God, more than the other inferior Creatures which God has made. 1. They are
made more in the Image and Likeness of God than the inferior Creatures. And 2.
They are in an eminent and exalted sense made for God, his Service and Praise
more than the other Creatures. 3. They are treated by God in a peculiar manner
as his Offspring.


I. ANGELS and Men are the Offspring of God because they are made more in the
Image and Likeness of God than the inferior Creatures are. This is the
Distinction that God put, and the Difference he made, in the Creation of other
Creatures and of Man: Let us make Man (said He) in our Image and likeness.
Which means not that the inferior Creatures do not bear the manifest stamp of
God's Wisdom, Power and Goodness upon them; They evidently do so, and His
eternal Power and Godhead are clearly seen in the things which are made. But in
Man there is the Image of God's Spirituality, Dominion and Government,
Knowledge, Rectitude, Immortality, as is not to be found in the Inferior
Creatures.

IMAGE and likeness; i. e. says One, the likest Image, the nearest Resemblance
of any of the visible Creatures: It is this Image of God on Man, this Likeness
to God in him, that makes us the Offspring of God: As Children bear the Image,
and are in the Likeness, of their Parents.

So,

1. WE bear the Image and are the Offspring of God because we are living Souls
and Spirits. God is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24. The Lord is that Spirit. 2 Cor. 3.17.
The eternal and infinite Mind; invisible, incorporeal, immaterial,
incorruptible; that is GOD. Material and visible things cannot give us any
Image of God, like things Spiritual which only fall under the discerning of our
Minds, which are Spirits, and capable of Spiritual Operations. In his we are
like God, that our Souls are Spiritual Substances; that there is a Spirit in
Man; invisible, incorruptible, immortal; a Power and Principle intelligent,
active, free, self-conscious: God made us this Soul, and herein we resemble
God, whose Spirituality and Simplicity of Essence is infinitely above the
Nature of created Spirits, as these are above stupid and gross Matter.

2. We bear the Image and are the Offspring of God because intelligent and
rational Creatures. We are Minds; God has given us Knowledge and Understanding.
Man is a Spiritual Intellect, as the Angels of Heaven also are Intelligences.
The Inspiration of the Almighty has given Us an Understanding. An Understanding
to know HIM, and to form Ideas of things spiritual, invisible, immaterial and
eternal. In this we must needs see and consider the Image of God upon us. Job.
35.10. Where is God my Maker, who teaches us more than the Beasts of the
field, and has made us wiser than the Fowls of Heaven? The LORD is a God of
Knowledge; Angels bear his Image in their Knowledge and Wisdom, and so does Man
on Earth, Col. 3.10. Created after God in Knowledge. Christ the express Image
of the Father has his Name, (...) the Word and Wisdom. So Man is a thinking
reasoning Creature. And this Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord, Prove.
20.27. As a Candle is light from some Fire, and then shines and gives light it
self.

3 WE bear the Image and are the Offspring of God, in our Will, Freedom,
Election and Choice, in our Actions. We are Agents by Counsel. We judge,
deliberate, advise, choose o^ refuse; upon reasoning and considering of things.
This is the property of a spiritual and intellectual Nature, and shows very
much of God's Image on us. Hence we are capable of moral Perfection; Virtue,
Grace, Goodness: A Mind rightly disposed and inclined to choose the Good and
refuse the Evil. This was the Image of God at first on man: God made him
spright. Eccl. 7.29 God made him holy, beheld him very good, and forbad him to
Sin. And this is the Image of God in Man restored by Grace (...) Ephesians. 4.24.
Created after God in Righteousness and true Holiness. We are made to be good,
and do good, and love the things that are holy and good: As to know God and his
Will so to please and obey Him; to place our Affection on him, and to choose the
things that please him. This the inferior Creatures are not capable of; They
have neither knowledge not will for moral Government; the Government of
themselves; to be ruled by a Law proposed to them. They are not capable of
chufing for themselves, or of yiedling Obedience to Another; from a sense of
Duty; and because what he commands is wise and right, just and good.

4. MAN is made for Dominion and Rule, and therein bears the Image and appears
to be the Offspring of God, The Words of the Great CREATOR are very remarkable
about the formation of Man; Let us make Man i^ Our Image, after our likeness,
and (...) him have Dominion over the inferio^ Creatures. God is the Lord,
Proprietor and Possessor, Ruler and Governor of all things. Man as the
Offspring of God bears this part of God's Image, that he was made Lord,
Proprietor and Governor of the Earth, and the Creatures on it. The Begotten
Son is the Heir and Lord of all things, visible and invisible. Of the Angels we
read that they are Thrones and Dominions, Principalities and Powers: And their
Agency, Influence and Rule in the Kingdom of Nature and Grace, and over the
Kingdoms and in the Hearts of Men, may be much more than we conceive of: But
Man the Offspring of God on Earth has that for his Possession and Dominion. He
should be Lord of Himself, and have the dominion of his own Soul; and then act
as God's Representative and Vice-toy in the use of the Creation. He is made and
accomplished for his Place and Dominion by the supreme Power; and then limited
in it, as it is meet (...) should be. He must rule for God, ^^le Himself and
reign over the Creatures of God. They are not endowed to fear and serve God,
but are made to serve Man, whose Fear is put by God upon them. Genesis 9.2. By the
Government of himself Man shines in the moral Image of God, and by his
Possession and Use of the Creature he bears the Image of Gods visible and
universal Government.

5. MAN bears the Image and is the Offspring of God in his Immortality. GOD is
the King Immortal; He only has Immortality. He is to Everlasting. In like
manner Angels are immortal Spirits; they live for ever, can never die. Man was
indeed from his Original Make and Constitution capable of Death. He is a living
Soul in a Body of Flesh, or Earth. The Union is wonderful, of things very
distant in their own Nature. The Separation of them is therefore the less
wonderful. Never the less without the Sin of man it had never been God by his
power would have kep^ Soul and Body together if he had no^ ^^^ed. Dissoluble
they wore, an^ God let him know it, and told him in the day he eat he should
surely find it. Never the less the Soul of Man is an immortal Spirit. That
lives when it leaves the body. That is liable thenceforth to no other Death
than the sinning Angels themselves are under, scil. Guilt and Misery eternal.
We read therefore of the Souls returning to God that gave it. Eccl. 12.7. and
of the Spirits of good Men immediately in Abraham's bosom; and of the Souls of
the wicked in the place of Torment, Luke 16.23. The Soul is the Man, and that
is as much immortal in its own Nature as any Angel in heaven. Herein then it
bears the Image of the E^ernal God as much as they, and as much as a Creature
^an do; for it is eternal in its duration, it lives and lasts to all Eternity.
Mat. 25. ult. These shall go away into verlasting Punishment, but the righteous
into Life eternal. The Offspring ^f the eternal God must be an immor^l
Creature. What Image of the ^^ing Being were a short lived, perishing Nature?
as the spirit of a Beast that goes entirely out into Air, and downward to
Earth. He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. The living only are
meet to be called the Offspring of God. But then too -- Immortal, living
Spirits must needs be in their original State the high Offspring of God. These
are each of them as the Children of the King Eternal: they bear a high Image
and Resemblance of his Immortality. This is a high Honor and Glory, wherein
Man is at last not a whit below the Angels, those Sons of God. They both
inherit Glory. Honor and Immortality: ^^e eternal Life.

AND so much for the first Reason why we are called the Offspring of God;
namely, Because made in the Image and Likeness of God.

II. WE are the Offspring of God, because eminently and in an ^^a^^ed sense
made for God, for his Serv^c^ and Praise, more tha^ any other Creatures here on
Earth. The Offspring belongs to the Parents; so we among the Creatures do more
immediately to God. We are his more than other Creatures; his Propriety and
Peculiar.

Here, 1. IT is true that all things are Created for the Glory and Praise of
God. Of Him, and to Him, are all things, Romans 11.36. For his Glory they are and
were. Created, Rev. 4.11. Every Creature of God bears more o^ less the Stamp
and Impress of his Image; of his Wisdom, Power and Goodness; which declare it
to belong to God and to be made for his Praise. Job. 12.7. Ask now the Beasts
and they shall teach thee, and the Fowls of the Air and they shall tell thee;
or speak to the Earth and it shall teach thee, and the Fishes of the Sea shall
declare unto thee: Who knows not in all these that the Hand of the Lord has
wro't this? in whose Hand is the Soul of every living thing, and the Breath of
all Mankind. Go to any Creature of God on Earth and you will see the
Perfections of God shining forth in it. These declare it to belong to God and
made for his Glory. The Creature does herein in eff^^^ ^peak to us and say
Whose and for what it is (...) and in this sense God is the Father of all
things.

2. BUT in a more special Manner and in a higher sense Mankind are made for
G^d, his Glory, Praise and Service. Of the inferior Creatures God has said,
the Beasts of the Earth shall honor Me; But of Man he adds, Isa. 43.21. This
People have I formed for my Self, that they should show forth my Praise. Man is
more peculiarly formed and endowed for God than other Creatures are; as in
bearing more of his Image, so to design and act more peculiarly to his Honor,
And this I shall show of Man both as to his Soul and Body.

1 THE Soul of Man is gloriously formed for God; in the following Respects: 1.
To know Him; as the Offspring in due time knows the Parent tha^ nourishes and
brings it up. The inferior Creatures cannot know or acknowledge their Maker; but
we may and must, Job 35.10. Where is G^d (...) Maker that teaches me more than
the Beasts of the earth? All the People see his Glory; says the Psalmist. If
they will but use their Eyes and look about 'em, and look up, they may do so:
they cannot help doing it, (...) they will but use the Reason and Understanding
that God has given them. The ^^tute Creatures are not made to know God, they
are not capable of it, it is too high for them to attain unto: But we are made
to know God, that he is, what he is, who he is, and how he will be worshipped,
and what his will is; to know him from his Works, and from his Word, and from
within our se^ves; to know him in part here, and more hereafter. In this we are
made meet to be called the Offspring of God. 2. THE Soul of Man is formed to
love God, and design his Glory; propose it and act for it, and herein is meet
to be called the Offspring of God. The dumb Creature honors God, but it does
not love him. As it does know that he is, so it cannot design his Honor. But
Man that is an Agent by Counsel can and should propose to himself this supreme
and governing End, to which all things are to be subordinated by him 1 Cor. 10
31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink or whatsoever ye do, do al^ to the Glory
of God. How absurd a Precept would this be to the brute Creatures, that eat and
drink, but know not who gives them their Grass and Water? But Man the Offspring
of God knows and should consider the God that makes the Grass to grow for the
Cattle and Herb for the service of Man; that the Rain has a Father who by it
brings forth Food out of the Earth. They are the Offspring, that live on the
Table of their Father in Heaven, and can acknowledge Him in their daily Bread.
The first and great Commandment of God to Man is that, Mat. 22.37. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God. This becomes the Offspring; but the Creatures that cannot
love, cannot be put among the Children. Now to love God is to design his Praise
and Glory, with a supreme Regard to his W^ll. Knowledge and Love are
essentially requisite (i. e. a Capacity for them is so) to denominate an
Offspring. 3. THE Soul of Man is made to obey G^d, which is the duty of the
Offspring, and the Expression of love due from us to God. This is the Love of
God that we do his Commandments; do his Will, as Angels (the Offspring above)
do. This it is that God says to us and requires of us, -- Only obey my Voice.
This must be done with all the Understanding, and with all the Soul- Obedience
is of the Soul. It must be a reasonable and free service. This is what Man only
is capable of on Earth, and therefore he only is the Offspring of God here
below. 4. THE Soul of Man is made for Communion with God; as to know him and
love him, and design his Glory and act for it; so to be known of God and
beloved by Him; and taken unto Fellowship with Him. The Soul ^an draw nigh to
God, and God comes down into it. The Soul by Faith and Love converses with God
in mental Acts of Prayer and Praise, or in oral ones. It can delight it self in
the Almighty, and in holy Affections and Desires go forth to God. It can wing
away and ascend to Him. And God takes pleasure in the Soul so disposed and
exercising it self, and manifests himself unto it as to his own. This is the
Privilege of the Offspring; to stand in the Parents presence, to sit at his
feet, to hear his Words and learn of Him; to ask and receive; to be beloved and
delighted in; to be takes into the Arms and Bosom, upon their drawing near
with Reverence and Confidence. This is the Offsprings Privilege, -- As
Children to a Father. 5. THE Soul of Man is made to live with and enjoy God for
ever and ever. The Fathers House and Presence is proper to the Offspring and
them only. The immediate Servants in the presence of God are all Children.
Angels are therefore Sons because they live and serve in the House eternal in
the Heavens, and as Children do the Will and enjoy the Love of God. And so we
are the Offspring because made for the same Felicity and Bliss, the same high
Dignity and Joy. He that is the Son by an eternal Generation, the Blessed and
only Beloved of the Father, has said to redeemed Souls I ascend to my Father
and your Father: in my Fathers house are many Mansions. In Heaven the Saints do
perfectly know God, perfectly love him, perfectly obey him, and their Communion
with God, their Enjoyment of him is perfect; Then and there therefore will it
be seen that they are the Offspring of God, and what it is to be so; when they
shall shine forth in the Kingd^m of their Father, and be with Christ in his
Glory.


I need not add as a distinct Head here, That the Soul of man is the Offspring
of God because in it God will be glorified for ever. Service and Enjoyment go
together, both now and hereafter. So does our Happiness in God and God's Glory
from us. The Offspring of God are growing eternally in the Knowledge of God, in
the Love of him, in Obedience to him, in his Praises; to the everlasting Glory
of God from them. He has Glory from them, and they Blessedness in him to
eternal Ages. He the King of Glory makes his Offspring Kings and Priests to
Himself; a Crown, a Kingdom, an everlasting Reign is their high Portion. This,
this is the Manifestation of the Sons of God at last: This Man was formed,
endowed, designed for in his first Formation; and this the Elect of God are
redeemed unto by Jesus Christ and called to by the Gospel.

2. To descend lower, Man in his Body is designed and form^d apparently for God
and for his Glory more than all the other Creatures here on earth. As the Body
of Man is apparently formed for Superiority and Dominion over the Creatures
here below, so is it also for the Knowledge of God and the Service of God. The
heathen Poet could observe this long since, O^^ Homini sublime dedit, Caelumque
tueri ^^ssit. The Face and Eyes of Man were ^or made to look down on the Earth
^s the Brute Creatures that know nothing more than how to find their ^ood
there; but the erect Form of man's Body bids him survey the Heavens and all the
Works of God, and ^ee his Perfections shining in them, and observe what they
demand from ^s. Man's Eye was made to read the ^ook of Nature and of Scripture,
what the one and the other speaks of God and our Duty to Him. Man's Tongue,
which is his Glory among the Crea^ures, was made to speak of God ^^d to
discourse of Him and of ^is Will, in more familiar and pri^ate manner, or in
more public and ^^lemn form. Our Speech is given (...) to speak to God in
Prayer and ^^ise and Thanksgiving; to bless and ^^d his Name, alone by our
Selves ^^d also in Company; to sing his ^^ises too; to utter the Admiration,
^^e and Devotion of our Souls; yea (...) to call upon our Soul and all that is
within us to admire and love and laud Him. Man's Ear is manifestly made to try
Words, receive Knowledge, and Faith which comes by Hearing; to hear from God
and of him and of all his Wonders in the Works of Nature and of Grace. Once
more, the curious Hand and Fingers of Man are made to write and work for the
Honor and Praise of God; as much as the Mind and Tongue to think and speak to
his Glory. And again, this Social Nature in Man, which joins us in Families, in
Towns, in Churches, and which brings us together this day to worship is
intended firstly and ultimately for the Glory of God; that we may join together
in Worship, and by Love serve one another; that we may edify one another,
excite and animate each other to every thing that is holy and just and good.
And finally, As our Souls and Bodies are wonderfully united by the Power of the
God of Nature, so he has given us a Power of Self-consecration, that we should
present our Selves Soul and Body a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable
through Christ; that He may be glorified both in our Bodies and Spirits which
are his.

MAN only is capable of all this, which I have but hinted at; and therefore he
only among the Creatures here below is meet to be called the Offspring of God.
He has a he^ven b^rn Soul to know and admire and love and ^^huse and obey God
and enj^y Him for ever. He is an immortal Soul that can be happy in nothing
below God And he only has a Body formed for religious Purposes; to see the
Glory of God in the Universe, to see it by ^elliscopes and by Microscopes in
things ^o minute or distant for the naked ^ye to re^ch. He only has a Tongue
(...) speak, an Eye to lift up an Far to ^eat, as well as a Heart to
understand. (...) only has a Hand to wri^e, or Hands (...) lift up i^ God's
Name, and K^ees to (...) before Him. He only is formed (...) W^^sh^p in Mind
and in B^dy; (...) this is ^is Honor and P^e^oga^^e among the Creatures that
He is the Offspring and they God's Works; God is his Father and their Maker.

Sermon IV.
ACTS XVII. 28. For We are also His Offspring.


III. MANKIND are peculiarly treated by the great God as his Offspring. The
special Providence and Grace of God to Man shows that he is His Offspring.

AND this is indeed the Argument in my Context: For in Him we live and move and
have our Being: He is not far from every one of us: He determines our T^mes and
the B^unds o^ every ones Habitation: He gives to (...) Life and Breath and all
things: -- Upon and from all which the Con^^^sion is -- We are his Offspring.
Which is to say, God in his all-disposing, all-governing Providence, carries it
toward us and orders what concerns us as a Father to his Offspring. And herein
he acknowledges us to be so. -- My Context will not allow me to ^mit this
Argument; The most High God treats us as his Offspring; and therein owns and
declares us to be so. But I will make this Advantage too of the Apostles
Reasoning, which he also leads me to do in the Verses following my Text; to
step from the Kingdom of Providence into the Kingdom of Grace. I say then, 1.
GOD peculiarly treats us as his Offspring here below in the daily Sustentation
granted us and Provision made for us in the Course of his Providence. 2. IN his
Redeeming Love and Mer^^ shown to us through Jesus Christ. (...). WE are
peculiarly treated by ^od as his Offspring in the daily Sustentation granted
us, and Provision made ^^r us in his fatherly Providence. In this God
acknowledges us yet to be his Offspring, because he cares and does for us as
such.


And 1. IN his daily sustentation of us. As P^rents would if they could sustain
and preserve their Offspring. They do all that they can for that end; they
watch and rend and minister to them: But He in whom we live and move and have
our Being, He that gives to us and ours life and breath and all things, (as our
Context has it) his Offspring we are. He is our great and high Parent in Heaven.

WE have a necessary and constant Dependence on God, more than the Offspring
has on the Parent; for our Life and Breath and Being is from the continued
Concourse of his Providence.

BY him We and all things consist. Every moment we are upheld by the Word of
his Power. He pr^^^^eth Man and Beast. In his Hand is the Soul of every living
thing, and the Breath of all Mankind; and his are all our Ways.

THIS rises vastly beyond the Kindness and Offices of (...) Father to his
Offspring Psalm 22.10. I was cast upon Thee from the Womb, thou art my God from
my Mothers bowels, Isa. 38.16. By this Man lives, and herein is the life our
Spirits.

2. GOD treats us as his Offspring in the daily Provisions of his Providence.
He feeds and supplies us, as well as upholds us. The Parents Arms take up and
embrace the Offspring, and their Hands feed them. So we live on the Table of
the Divine Providence, and have and are bid to ask of God our daily bread, as
Children live upon the Care and Provision of their Parents. God has s^d us all
our Life time unto this day. He ^loathes us also and gives us all Things ^ichly
to enjoy. He has forbid us to ^ake Though It for our selves, what we shall (...),
etc. He adds, -- Because Your ^^venly Father knows that ye have ^^^d of th^se
things God as a Father to (...) takes knowledge of our Wams from ^^y to day and
provides for us. We are a f^eble Offspring that cannot supply our selves without
Him. Genesis 28.20 If God will be with me in the way wherein I go and give me
bread etc. What Job says of himself toward the poor and destitute, we must
every one of us confess to the Glory of God; from our Youth and from our
Mothers womb, He has brought us up as a Father. -- Thus we are peculiarly
treated by God as his Offspring, in the daily Sustentation granted and
Provision made for us.

BUT you will say, In this respect every Creature of God shares al^ke in his
fatherly Care: for he upholdeth all thin^s by the Word of his Power, and
preserve^h not Man only but the Beasts also, and gives to them their Food: All
Eyes wait on Him and he give^h them their Meat in du^^season.

I answer, True; Behold the F^wls of the Air, your heavenly F^th^r seed^h them,
Mat. 6 26. What the^? as i^ follow, -- Are ye not much better than th^^ in his
sight? And is not his tende^ care much more for you? His care of them is for
your sake. He feeds them to feed you of them. He gives them to you for Food In
like manner, He makes the Grass to grow for the Cattle; but the Herbs and
Flocks themselves are his Provision for your Tables; O Children of Men! that
bear his Image, and to whom he has given the Earth and all things in it. Do you
not see the rich Farmer look carefully to the state of his Flocks, and provide
Food for them with like care as he does Bread for his Family? but the Care is
at last for the Family who who live on the Fat of the Flock, and are clothed
with the Wool of it. So God upholds the inferior Creatures in their life, and
feeds them daily; not because they are his Offspring; no, but that his
Offspring should feed and live upon them. So in the day of Noah, when the Flo^d
came God preserved in the Ark some of every Beast and of all Fowls as well as
the Family of Noah. But was his Care theirfore for the one like that which he
expressed for the Other? No, not at all: For as soon as the Flood was over, and
Noah was out of the A^k, God delivered all those Creatures again into the hand
of Noah, and put the Fear of Man upon them, and give him every moving T^ing
that lives to be Meat for him, even as the green Herb. So then, Noah and his
Sons were declared to be the Offspring, and not the preserved inferior
Creatures, who are only the rich Variety of Provision for the Childrens table.

II. WE are more especially cared for and treated as the Offspring of God, in
what God has done for our Redemption and Salvation by Jesus Christ. We were in
our Original State the Children of God even as the Angels: Like them Man was
created in the Image of God and in his Love, holy and obedient as they are. But
by our Sin and Fall we cast our selves out of this blessed State and Relation:
We lost the Image of God, and are Alienated from God, turn^d Enemies and Rebels
to him. We lost the Disposition of Children, became Children of Disobedience,
and so Children of Wrath: We are d^sinherited by our heavenly Father whom we
rejected, and by fin we are of our Father the devil to whom we revolred and
sold our selves. Yet God, the Father of Merc^es, did in an Eternal Council
decree the Recovery of a Remnant of the apostare Children of Men into the
glorious State, Liberty and Privibedges of Children to God. To which End the
Only begotten and Beloved of the Father took our Nature, from the everlasting
and infinite delight he had in his Fathers Glory and our eternal Salvation.
Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be
again the Sons of God! The Son of the Highest, God blessed for ^^e^more, took
not the Nature of Angels, (...) restore those once Sons of the Morning into the
Dignity and Seats of Children from which they had fallen; ^^t the Elect
Children are taken from ^nong the si^ful Sons and Dau'ters (...) Men. And
because the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blond, He also himself took
part of the same, that he might call us Brethren: Heb. 2.14. He became the Seed
of the Woman whom the devil had beguiled, and was made under the Law, was made
Sin, suffered the Curse for us, yet we might become the Sons of God and Heirs
of Heaven. Gal. 4.4. But when the fullness of Time was come, God sent forth his
Son made of a Woman, made under the law. In short, the whole Design and
glorious Effect of the Incarnation and Death of the Son of God is this, his
bringing many Sons to Glory; a numerous Election of Grace given him by the
Father. As it is written, 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father to you, and ye shall
be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

THUS all the Elect in Christ, according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father, are from the days of Eternity chosen and fredestinated unto this
Dignity and ^dery, to become the Children of God. And in time they receive
Power to be so, by an effectual Vocation: As we read Joh. 1.12. As many as
received him (i. e. Christ, by beleiving on his Name, and submitting to Him in
the Offices of a Savior, on the terms of the Gospel) to them gave be power to
become the Sons of God.

THERE is a glorious Adoption in Jesus Christ, for some of the Children of
fallen Man, whereby they are again made the Children of God. This Name is put
upon the visible Seed, the Children of the Covenant: The Name of the Father and
of the Son is put upon us in Baptism; and to the Visible Church belongs the
Adoption and the Covenant: (I am a Father to Israel, and out of Egypt have I
called my Son.) But the Thing really helongs to all the Children of the
Promise, who are counted for the Seed; being made the Children of God by a new
Birth by a blessed Regeneration; born again, born from Above, born of God;
receiving of ^im a new Heart and Nature, the ho^y Dispositions of Children to
God: ^^m. 1.18 Of his own Will begat beaus (...) the Word of Truth. Of such and
(...) such it is that the Apostle John says, 1 John 3.2. Behold, now we are the
Sons of God and it does not yet appear what we shall be.

FVERY Believer in Christ has Acces unto God as his Father. Because ye are Sons
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into year Hearts, crying, Abba Father.
i. e enabling you to go to God in Prayer with the Freedom and Confidence of
Children to a Father. They have boldness to enter into the holiest by the blo^d
of Jesus, with a true heart in the full assurance of Faith They have an
Assurance of a Fathers Heart and Ear and Care for them in God; and they have
the sense and feeling of the hearts of Children in themselves toward Him. Mat 7
9 What Man is there whom if his Son ask Bread will give him a Stone? if ye then
b^^ng evil know how to give good Gists to your Children, shall not your
heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask Him?

AND truly the Care of God for Believers in Christ, is the special Care of a
Father for his Children, both on temporal Accounts and also on spiritual. As a
Father pitieth his Children so the Lord pities them that sear him. And as a
Father cares for his Offspring, so these are assured that God cares for them,
and are required to cast all their Care upon him. As a Father chastens his Son
whom he loves, so the Lord their God chastens them; and the Exhortation
speaks to them as unto Children; My Son despise not thou, nor saint. Who ever
do, don't You: You will find the fatherly Kindness and Love of God constant to
you ^o their dying day, and through Death: As Parents change not in their love to
their Children, but their Te^derness for 'em increases if they see 'em ready
(...) die. The Believer may breathe ^ut his Spirit into the hands of Grace ^s
Christ did his, -- Father, into thy ^^nd. And after Death the Saint ^es to the
Inheritance of Children, in ^bt above. He goes to the Presence (...) God, to
his House eternal in the ^avens, to his Table, to the Company of Angels, the
Elder Brethren: He goes to be with Christ, to inherit Everlasting Glory in his
Right; who as He was going to his Cross said -- In my Fathers House are many
Mansions, I go to prepare a Place for you; and when he was to be taken up said
--, I ascend to my Father and your Father. Upon all then we must conclude and
say of all Believers in Christ, in the Words of the beloved Apostle, -- Behold,
now ye are the Sons of God and it does not appear what we shall be But this we
know, that He that fitteth upon the Throne on high will ever treat them as his
high Children; he will array them in Robes of Glory he will possess them of the
eternal Kingdom; he will for Christ's sake say of them as he did of Him, that
in them his Soul is ever well pleased: they shall be ever dear to him, and
blessed in him; and shall rejoice in his Love, and love him with the Ardor of
Children and Seraphims, and do his Will as the Angels do for ever.

AND this is the last and utmost Proof, that We among the Creatures below are
the Offspring of God; because fallen as we are from God there is an Elect
Number that are adopted in Christ, and made the Children of God by
Regeneration, who are treated by him already as becomes the Name and Relation,
and shall be so for ever hereafter in the most glorious manner.

USE. I come now to the Im^^ment and Use of the Doctrine, An^ in the first
place,

1. ARE we the Offspring of God? We learn then what God is. There is no like
Looking glass in Nature wherein we may see the Image and Face of God, like our
own Souls. The Image of God is within us. Look in then and see what thy own
Soul is; Consider its Spiritual Nature, its Understanding and Knowledge and
Power of thinking; its Freedom and Will and Affections; its Self consciousness,
and immortal Nature: And then from the Effect argue to the Cause, what God is:
He that made Me this Soul must be a glorious, immense and eternal Spirit: He
that teaches Man Knowledge shall not be know? Yes, He must be perfect in
Knowledge, his Understanding is infinite, He is the Only wise! And he must be
most Good and Holy; For it is very plain to us that he made us with these
Affections and with this Conscience under a holy Rule, a Law of Rectitude: From
which we must (...) ^^arily again infer, that He is our Sovereign, Lawgiver and
Judge. -- Well therefore has One said on my Text, That the Soul of Man
considered in its three noble Faculties of Understanding Will and active Power,
is the clearest Glass we have wherein to see God; and whereby to form our
Conceptions of his Spirituality Knowledge, Rectitude; that he is a Mind and
Spirit m^st holy, wise and good.

2. ARE we the Offspring of God (...) we see the Folly and Absurdity of the
Idolatries which have been common in the World, in the Worship of Images, The
Apostle means my Text as a plain and direct Argument against this Impiety. He
saw the City of Athens given wholly to Idolatry, and his Spirit was moved
within him at the Stupidity of the learned and polite City; as they valued
themselves and were esteemed of by others; and in a holy Fervor and zeal of
Spirit, he tries to convince them of their barbarous Superstition and ignorant
Worship. He asks them whether the Mak^^ (...) Lord of the Universe could be
^^pr^sented by a lifeless Idol, set up in temple, there to stand a stock,
without Sense or Motion? He asks 'em, If they could think that an Image made
with Men's hands could be any Representative of the living One, that gives unto
all Life and Breath and all things? Their own Life and Breath ^ight convince
them that an Idol was ^^hing, for it had not so much as any ^^fe or breath in
it. He bids them ^^ok over all the Nations of Men welling on all the face of
the Earth, whom the Creator has made of one Blood; and then put it to
themselves whether the Father of so many immortal Spirits can be fitly
represented by an Image of wood or stone, of sil-and gold? He tells them that
the Soul of Man was made to seek God and find Him of it self and in it self;
and that indeed God is not far from every one of us, but is always present with
and to a devout Mind that de^i^es to know and worship Him. He ^^^er the nearer
for an Image set before us; That does not at all represent Him who is always
and every where present. Yea says the Apostle, We live and move and have our
Being in him, and are an Immortal Offspring of this Eternal Spirit; and can we
be so absurd at last as to think that the God head is like unto Silver and
Gold, or Stone graven by art and man's device? Unworthy to be called Men are
they that can think so. Why has God made us Souls, if we represent him by
things Corporeal? we forfeit ou^ Souls and Reason, we forget and deba^^^ our
selves in acting thus. A Son honors his Father, and shall the immortal
Offspring so dishonor the Father of their Spirits? He made them living Souls,
and shall they make Him a dead, dumb and deaf Idol? that can neither see, nor
speak, nor move? Shall Man change the Glory of his Maker into that which is so
much beneath himself? Yet how often have Mankind done so? and how many Nations
upon Earth still do it? Romans 1.25. Who changed the Truth of God into a lie, and
worshipped and served the Creature, more than the Creator. ver. 23. Who
professing themselves to be wise become fools; (so did the Men of Athens) and
changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God, into an Image made like to
corruptible Men; and to Birds and fourfooted Beasts and creeping things.

3. ARE we the Offspring of God? Learn the original and the last Dignity of our
Nature. It is the highest Honor that the highest Creatures are ^apable of, to
be called by God his ^^ons, his Children, his Offspring. The Angels of God have
no greater honor, nor can have. They are the Firstborn, and the Elder
Brethren. They were made before us, and but a little above us. We are made a
litter lower than they; yet are crowned with the like Honor and Glory that
they are; in that we are the Offspring of God as well as they. They have not
Bodies as we have; But we are immortal Spirits, and are made for an
intellectual Happiness and moral Perfection as well as they. We bear the Image
of God and are formed for Him; to know him, and love him, and do his Will, and
to enjoy him as well as they: They and we have one Father, one House and Heaven
for our everlasting Abode; and one Work and Blessedness for ever: They are
Principalities and Thrones in the Heavens, and to Man was given the Dominion
here below.

IN a word; We ought ever to keep in mind our Original and high Descent; our
Alliance to Heaven; tha^ we are made for it, are near akin (...) Angels, and
are the Offspring of the same Father. We are not of the Earth earthly, nor to
resolve finally into dust, but to return unto God, and be ^he Heirs of heavenly
Glories and Honors, in a blessed Immortality. For nothing less we were first
designed, and unto this we are redeemed by the Blood of Christ and called by
the Gospel. We need every day we live ^o bear this in mind; Who and what we
are; not to elate our Selves, yet that we may know and reverence our Selves;
and remember our chief End; our Relation and Duty to God.

4. ARE we the Offspring of God (...) let us lay to heart and be deeply
affected with our Sin and Misery in our ^^all from Him. We are fallen from God:
That the Scripture teaches us, and how it came to pass; how suddenly and easily
it was effected by the ^^vils Malice and Subtlety. We feel ^ithin ourselves
that we are no more ^orthy to he called the Offspring of we see how little
others about worthy of this Honor. The poor Heathen perceived this but could
give no account of it, knew not what to think or say of it, or how to act. But
God has revealed to us how it came about, and what we now are, through the Fall
of our first Parents.

LET us consider, 1. The Sin, and 2. The Effects of it.


1. THE Sin. By one (the first) Man's Disobedience we all are made sinners. "We
sinned in him and fell with him in his first Transgression". But O the horrid
Nature of that first Sin! the unnatural Rebellion in it against God, and Revolt
from him! Hear C Heavens and give ear O Earth! the Offspring of God, just
formed in his Image and inclined for his Glory and provided for as a Son;
placed in a Paradise, visited and blessed and taught and commanded by his
Maker; immediately rebelled against Him, flew in the Face of his high Parent,
renounced Him and denied him Faith, Love, Fear, Honor, Worship and Obedience!
What Impudence! Ingratitude! -- the Aggravatio that the Offspring could treat
the Parent with such Indignity!

2. THE miserable Effects of this first Sin were a very dreadful but righteous
Punishment of it. And here we might consider how the holy Image of God upon the
Soul of Man, the Crown where with his Maker had crowned him in the day wherein
he had created him, was vilely thrown away, as if the Holy One had never so
anointed him: -- The Relation ^o God as Son and an Offspring was utterly
forfeited; the Disposition of Children was entirely lost: Of a Son the Creature
Man was become an Enemy, an impotent Rebel; and his Posterity in his loins, to
be hereafter begotten in his Likeness (for who can bring a clean thing out of
an unclean?) were of necessity and in the course of Nature Children of wrath,
shapen in Iniquity, conceived and born in sin; odious to the Holiness and
obnoxious to the Justice of God, and condemned already. Thus all Mankind by the
fall lost Communion with God, are under his Wrath and Curse, and so mad^ liable
to all Miseries in this life to Death it self and to the pains o^ Hell for ever.

INTO this state of Sin and Misery is Man fallen, who was at first a So^ of
God, and among whom God ye^ has many Children, whom he wi^^ bring to Glory. The
Dishonor an^ Offense, Injury and Grief has been great to God; and so is the
Guilt an^ Misery to (...). O let us lay both (...) heart, and mourn before the
Lord an^ weep for our selves! Our Bodies ar^ sunk among the beasts, and become
vile, sensual and mortal: Our Soul are sunk down into the number of u^ clean
Spirits; we are naturally (...) our father the devil in respect of spiritual
Lusts and Impurities; we be^^ his Image and do his Works; are pro^^ to what is
evil and averss to what (...) good and holy! Alas! whither are (...) fallen!
what are we become! to who^ are we like! and what is like to b^ come of us for
ever? -- We have destroyed our selves and we all peri^^ Well did the Lord God
say to the ^^man, What is this that thou have done? ^^d well might they hide
themselves (...) Shame and Fear from God; for they (...) themselves naked and
miserable, ^^d their hearts smore 'em for their ^^ilt. -- In short, We were
made the ^^^spring of God --, think then what (...) have done, and what we are
be^^^e, by our Fall from Him!

-- But

(...). ARE we the Offspring of God? ^^re is a worthy Reason why Christ has ^^e
so much for our Redemption. In^^d it was the Misery of the Crea^^^e made it the
Object of redeeming ^^rcy; but if the Creature had not ^^n of such a Dignity it
had not been ^^eemed. Nor yet was it for the ^^gnity of the Creature merely
that ^^eeming Mercy was shown to Man; (...) by the Dignity of Nature the fal^^
Angels would have claimed before

(...). The free Grace of God, with ^^ite Wisdom, pitched upon the Ob^^ of
misery; and chose one fallen Nature and not the other, and some of one only and
not all. God saw Man his Offspring perishing, and sent his Son into the World,
in the Nature of Man, to save him. If Man had not been a Son by nature, the Son
of God would not have left the Fathers Bosom, come down and died to save him.
Though the Dignity of Man's nature could not deserve this, yet it recommended
him unto so great a Favor. Each Soul of Men is unspeakably precious, and
therefore was this inestimable Price given for Our Redemption. 1 Pet. 1.18. For
ye are not redeemed with corruptible things as Silver and Gold, but with the
precious Blood of Christ as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot. Had
Man been a corruptible thing, he might have been redeemed with some corruptible
Price: But being a Soul, made in the likeness of the Incorruptible God, and for
his Everlasting Glo^^ and Love, therefore this incorruptibl^ Price was given
for his Ransom, eve^ the Life of the dear and Only-begotten Son.

BESIDES, the Offspring elected unto Salvation, are a vast number of these
precious Souls; and the Salvation to be procured for them was from spiritual
and eternal Miseries, unto infinite and eternal Glories. They were to be
redeemed to God from the Earth (from Sin and Hell, to heavenly Holiness and
Glory) out of every Kindred and People and Tongue, through every Age of the
World. These are an exceeding great number. If the Redeem^d had not been Such
and so Many, ^uch a Redeemer had not been raised up.

THE Harmony of our Redemption by Christ very much lies in this, that He is the
Son and we belong to the Offspring. The lost Children were Par^akers of Flesh
and Blood, and the Word ^as made Flesh (God was manifested in ^e Flesh) to save
'em.

THE Son of God bears a special Re^at^on to all the Offspring of God; for by
Him God formed them. Why then did he pass by the Angels that sinned, and take
the Humane Nature? We know not why; Unless we might say -- that the sinning
Angels were the Original of Sin, and sinned even in Heaven, and the whole
Nature of Angels were not lost, and they ruined the whole Offspring of God on
Earth; and therefore the Mercies of God are denied them and offered to us.

THE Redemption being of a fallen Offspring, to make them again Children; to
restore them again into the Liberty of the Sons of God; the eternal Son himself
became the Redeemer. The Only begotten Son bears and brings these ^ons to God:
Behold I (says He to the Father) and my Children, which are all thine: And to
Us he says, My Father is your Father; in my Right you are Children. Our
Adoption is in Christ the Son: He gives the Power to us to become the Sons of
God.

HERE then is a worthy Reason wh^ Christ has done so much for our Redemption;
He is the eternal Son and we among the created Offspring; and He by the Travel
of his Soul sees a glorious Number of a lost Offspring restored into the
Relation, Dispositions, Privilege and Inheritance of the Children of God.

6. ARE we the Offspring of God? see how the Grace of God by Jesus Christ, as
revealed in the Gospel; agrees both to the Original and lapsed State of Man as
it is given us by Moses. There is an admirable Harmony between the Two
Testaments, the Old and New; And they give in a mavelous Light, and bear a
strong Testimony, the one to the other. As in the Instance before us:

1. THE redeeming Mercy of God by Christ admirably agrees to the Doctrine of
man's Original State; that he was made in the Likeness of God, and in his Love,
and perfectly good and happy, and in short a Son of God. For what is it that
Christ by the Gospel proposes, but to recover us into the Favor and Grace of
God; and into the Relation, D^gnity and Privileges of Children to God. For the
whole Design and Scope of the Gospel is to make us again the Children of God.
This it proposes to us, the Way to this it reveals to us, and in its saving
Efficacy this it produces in us and for us. It reveals to us a gracious
Adoption in Christ, a blessed Way for our Reconciliation to God, by a blessed
Regeneration and Renovation passing on us. It tells us of our being born again,
renewed after the Image of God in Knowledge and Holiness; it shows and teaches
the Spirit and Disposition of Children which God is ready to restore in us. It
would beget in us the Love of Children to God, and bring us into the ready
Obedience of Children; and it would bring us into the Communion of Children
with God; to be known of God, and loved by him; to converse with him, hear his
voice, speak to him, walk before him, and live with him for ever and ever. --
Thus on the one hand the Doctrines of Gospel Grace agree unto the Account given
us of the Original State of Man; that he was made a Son in the Image and Love
of God.

2. IT agrees also to the Account given us of Man's Fall and of his lapsed
State; in being a Doctrine and Precept of Repentance.

FOR if Man be the Offspring of God, and be fallen from God, it must needs be
that the way of his Recovery and Return to God be by an ingenuous and deep
Repentance: And if God be a Father to Man by Nature, as his Creator, and he
will please to become his Father again by Grace after his Sin and Fall, we may
be assured then of the Sinning Creatures Reception and Pardon upon his
Repentance. And accordingly the Gospel addresses unto lapsed Man.

1. IT invites and calls him to Repentance. And 2. It assures him of Gods
Pardoning Mercy upon his Repentance. A Penitential Return to God is the least
that can be enjoined on the Sinning Offspring; and the Repentance which the
Gospel requires is a filial Repentance, such as becomes Children to an offended
Father: A filial Fear and Shame and Sorrow. So our Lord Jesus has represented
it in the Parable of the Prodigal; Luke 15 The Sinner is a Son that has left
the House of a tender and loving Father, and acted shamefully to his great
Offense and Dishonor; yet at last pinched with his Needs and with the Sense of
his miserable and lost Condition, he bethinks himself of his Sin and Folly, and
resolves to arise and go to his Father, confess his Fault and beg Forgiveness
and cast himself upon his Pity: -- I will say unto Him, Father I have sinned
against Heaven and Thee. You see then that Evangelical Repentance is the Holy
Sorrow of a fallen Offspring in a penitential Return to an offended God and
Father. -- And it must be added, The Gospel assures the Penitent of such a
Reception from God as an offending Child may look for from a Father upon his
Repentance. God pardons like a Father, freely, fully and for ever; and most
tenderly and affectionately. So the Parable represents the Prodigals Reception;
While he was yet a great way off the Father saw him, and ran, and sell on his
^^eck and kissed him. And all the Answer to his hun^^le Confession and Petition
is the Fathers saying to the Servants, Bring forth the best Robe and put it on
him, and put a Ring on his hand; And bring hither the fatted C^^^, and kill it,
and let us eat and be merry. So the tender fatherly Compassions of God are also
represented upon the Repentance of sinning Ephraim: Jer. 31.20. Is he a dear
Son? is he a pleasant Child?

UPON all then we see the Harmony of the Doctrines and Laws of Christ, with the
Original and lapsed State of Man. Man was at first a holy Offspring, now he is
a sinning one; and our Holy Savior brings him by Repentance back to his
Father, into his Heart and Arms again. The Sin of Man is the Sin of a Son
against his Father; the Repentance which the Gospel requires is a-filial
Mourning and Return to God Renewing Grace restores us to our Original Dignity
and makes us again meet to be called the Offspring of God. -- But I come to a
seventh Inference.

7. ARE we the Offspring of God? Let us act and behave as becomes this high and
worthy Name: Live as the Offspring of God should do. And to be sure that is to
say, 1. Negatively, Not as the Beasts here, nor as the Devils below. 2.
Positively, live as the Angels do in Heaven and as CHRIST did here on Earth.


1. Negatively. NOT as the Beasts on Earth, nor as the Devils in Hell. The most
of Mankind do both. It is sad to say; By Fleshly Lusts, Men live like the
Beasts that perish: and by Spiritual Lusts they become like the Devils below But

1. THE Offspring of God may not live like the Beasts of the Earth in fleshly
Lusts, and to the Gratification of their Senses. The brute Creatures are not
the Offspring of God, wherefore though we have a Body of Flesh like them, yet we
must not live to the flesh as they do that know no higher Good. We debase our
Selves if we do so; and it might be justly said and done to us as it was to
Ne^uchadnezzar, Let a Beasts heart be given him, and let him be driven from
among Men. Alas! This spiritualized is the Case of all sensual Men, that live
in Drunkenness and Lasciviousness and the like fleshly Lusts: And it is
verified also in the earthly and worldly Heart that seeks its Portion in
Riches, Honors or Pleasures here on Earth: The Person forgets that he is a
Soul made in the Image of God, and for superior and eternal things. Psalm.
49.20. Man that is in Honor and understands not, is like the beast that
perishes.

2. THE Offspring of God must not live like Devils. This were worse ^et; and
yet it is too possible for the Children of Men to act like Incarnate devils.
Many of the once glorious Angels of God are by Sin turned into foul and
deformed devils. Of the noblest Order of Beings in the Creation of God they are
become the basest and most ignoble Creatures. Of the most beauteous and lovely
Creatures they are now most odious and ugly, filthy and loathsome. They are
unclean Spirits, and spiritual Wickednesses. Our Souls are capable of like
spiritual Lusts, Wickedness and Uncleanness. There is in Man on Earth
Filthiness both of the Flesh and of the Spirit. 2 Cor. 7.1. As some Sins render
him like a Beast, so other Sins render him like the Devil. So does enmity to
God, hatred of Holiness, tempting to Sin; Pride, Hatred, Cruelty, Malice,
Revenge, etc. These are Sins of our Spirits, and are the complexion of Hell
upon a Soul; They show the Seed of the Serpent and The Children of the wicked
one. Joh. 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil. Spiteful they were against
Christ, Truth and Holiness. Act. 13.10. O full of all Subtlety and Mischief,
thou Enemy of all Righteousness, thou child of the devil. Misecheivous Subtlety
and spiteful Enmity shows the Old Serpent all over.

THUS by Sin the once Offspring of God become viler than crawling toods and
hissing snakes. -- But this Negatively; We are the Offspring of God and must
not live like Beasts or Devils.

2. Positively. We must be like the Angels of God in Heaven, and live as the
Son of God did here below, and as his Gospel teaches.

1. THE Offspring of God should be and do as the Angels of God are and do in
Heaven. We should be knowing and wise as they are: We should be full of
Devotion and Worship as they are; We should be meek and lowly like them: We
should be kind and benificent as they are; we should be holy Ones as they in
Heaven are holy: We must endeavor to obey and do the Will of God here on Earth
^^^^ey do it above; universally, con^^^ly, delightfully. We should love (...)
as they do fervently; we should (...) with holy Zeal for his Glory and Honor
as those Seraphims and Charubims, do; who are Flames of Fire. We should worship
and serve God with that profound A we and Reverence which they do; who cover
their Faces and cry Holy, Holy, Holy. We should love Them for the Image of God
on them, and for their high Place in his Favor, and rejoice in their Felicity
and Glory, as they love us and minister most affectionately to the Heirs of
Salvation. We should love One Another as they love each other, and love us,
desiring our eternal Felicity with them. We should love Them because they are
the Offspring of God, and love one another for the same reason; as they do us:
Rev. 19.^0. I am thy fellow servant, and of thy Brethren that keep the
Commandments of God and the Faith of Jesus.

2. THE Offspring of God on earth should be and live as CHRIST the Son of God
was and co^verss'd here (...) Earth. Angels may learn of Him of Son, who is
higher and holier than the They cried before HIM, Holy, holy! holy! when they
saw his Glory. On Earth Men behold his Glory, the Glory as of the Only begotten
of the Father. He is the Holy one of God. He was separate from Sin and higher
than the Heavens. Higher than Angels in Holiness, more perfect than they in his
Obedience. He took our Nature for this End among others, to give a Pattern as
well as a Law; how we must walk and please God; live and act as the Children of
God. We must receive Him and become the Sons of God; have Him formed in us and
shine in the Kingdom of our Father. This makes and declares us Children; Romans
8.29. Conformed to the Image of his Son, that He may be the First born among
many Brethren. How then did CHRIST walk? So let us that we may act up to the
Dignity of this Style, the Offspring of God. Let the same Mind be in you which
was in Christ Jesus. Let there be that Spirit of Devotion toward God which was
in Him; so let is love and honor our Father in Heaven; so let us worship Him;
pray to and praise Him; so let us keep his Sabbaths and observe his Ordinances;
so let us trust in Him and resign to him; and so let us obey Him and work the
Works of God with diligence and industry; so let us delight to do his Will, and
let the Law of God be within us; so let it be our Meat and Drink to do his
Will; so let us do no Sin, nor Guile be found in us; so let us be perperfect
even as our Father in Heaven is perfect. And so let us carry to One Another, in
all Love and Goodness. Meekness and Humility. Beneficence and Mercifulness: so
good let us be unto the Evil and unto our personal Enemies; let us pray for and
forgive them, and overcome Evil with Good: that we may be the Children of our
Father in Heaven.

3. THE Offspring of God must from a Principle of holy Love live in an entire
Obedience ^o the Gospel. Only let your Conversation be as it becomes the
Gospel of Christ, and you shall live as becomes Children. Obedience is the
Duty, and distinguishing Character of the Offspring; a filial Obedience, with
all the Heart and with all the Soul. The Law is, Children obey your Parents in
all things: This is what belongs to the Offspring, to know and do the will of
God. Disobelience to or Transgression of the Law of God cuts us off from his
fatherly Love, and from the Relation of Children. The Father and Mother were to
bring forth the rebel Son in Israel to be stoned. God has doomed the rebel
Offspring to an eternal Death an Everlasting Destruction.

THE Gospel is a Fathers Law, a Law for Children. The Exhortation speaks to
us as unto Children: My Son, attend unto my Wisdom and bo^o thine Ear unto my
Undeastanding; Hear ye Children the Instruction of a Father, for I give you
good Doctrine. It is the royal Law of Love; the perfect Law of Liberty; a Law
meet for the King of Heaven to give unto Them whom he has chosen and called to
his Kingdom and Glory. Therefore do but observe ^^d keep this Law and you will
act up to the Dignity of (...) Nature; Worthy of God unto all pleasing. John
15.10. Keep my Commandments and abide in my Love as I have kept my Fathers
Commandment and abide in his Love.

THUS let us act and behave as becomes the Offspring of God. I might enlarge
here on many filial Duties, proper to such.

THE Offspring should love their FATHER with all their Heart and with all their
Soul. The Offspring should love One another with a pure heart servently. The
Name, and Honor of God should be exceeding dear to his Offspring, and all the
Interests of his Glory. We should Pray always and every day give Thanks to God
with the Dependence, Reverence, Gratitude and Confidence of Children to a
Father; and be always in a Childlike Submission and Subjection to his Will, how
ever made known to us, whether by his Precept or by his Providence.

ALL this, and whatsoever more the Relation of an Offspring infers of Duty from
us, is contained in those Words of the Apostle immediately preceding my Text,
That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after Him and find
Him, though He be not far from every one of us.

SURELY it is the Offsprings part to seek and enquire after God, to find the
Knowledge of Him and of his Will; how we may please and honor Him, worship and
serve him aright, be for Him, and live to him, and come to the everlasting
Enjoyment of.

This is the Whole of Man, the End on his Being; his Perfection and
Blessedness. As the Offspring are to know and acknowledge their Parent, so are
we to seek the Knowledge of God, and render Him all Love, Fear, Reverence and
dutiful Observance. -- But O wretched and miserable We! if we live in ignorance
of God, or alienated from Him, or in Enmity to Him! O what an Off cast and
Outvast is that Offspring, that has not the saving Knowledge of God! A Child
that has no part in his Parent, by reason of his undutiful behavior! What a
Cain and Vagabond in the Earth, i^ this Son of Adam? a Fugitive from God, and
driven from his Face! Ah who can bear this Exile and Banishment! whither will thou stray from thy Fathers House and Presence Whom will thou find to love and
serv^ besides Him? or whose Love and Blessing shall suffice thee instead of
His? or what shall make up unto thee the loss thereof? Can any earthly thing
(...) for thy Heaven born and immortal Soul? can you live on these busks and
feed with these Swine, which you hi^ out your self to keep? When will you ^ome
to your Self, and say, "Am I not the Offspring of God? am I not a living Soul?
made in his Image and formed for his Praise? to know and love and serve Him
here and for evermore? How many Myriads o^ ^^hol^ Spirits do see his Face in
Glory? ^^^ng Whom I should be, a^^ (...) be, ^^^o' Grace, for ever I will arise
therefore, and go to my Father; for I also am his Offspring.

THIS becomes the Offspring of God: Bewail thy Fall from Him; seek a Recovery;
seek it instantly and earnestly: Thank God for the Gospel of Jesus Christ which
calls thee into that blessed State and Relation, from which Sin cast thee. See
that you be the Children of God in an Evangelic Sense, by Faith in Christ and
by the Spirit of Holiness; adopted in Christ and begotten of God: To which End
may He send forth (...) Spirit of his Son into your Hearts: Your Heavenly
Father will give his Holy Spirit unto them that ask Him.

I will close all with a Word to the Afflicted Children of God. The fallen
Offspring have brought the Rod upon themselves, but God corrects and chastens
as a Father. This we are commanded to consider in our Hearts, and it is a most
gracious Precept, That as a Man chastens his Son, so the Lord thy God chastens
thee. Deuteronomy. 8.5. Behold, Happy then is the Man whom God correctet^^. A Fathers
Heart and Hand is in all the Afflictions of the Children of God. As a Father
pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that ^o^r Him. And in all their
Affliction he as affl^cted. If n^ed be they are in Hea^^^ess; but it is for
their Pr^fit. It (...) parental Discipline. Though He ^^^se Grief yet will he
have Comp^ssion; and the humbled Sinner is yet a pleasant Child. -- If the
Offspring is Sick, will not the careful Parent visit him? if he is in Pun, how
tenderly does the Parent feel it? if he is naked and needy, will not the Parent
send in Supplies and Clothing? O^ if the Rod is used to subdu^ ^^^quer and
reduce ^he rebel Off^^^ing, how ^^therly and good and (...) is his? Or if the
gracious (...) pl^^se to try, prove, exe^^^^^ and ^^^e^se the Love, Faith,
Trust, Pen^^^^ce, Submission and Dev^^^^^ of the beloved Offspring; let them
show Reverence, Silence, Obedience, and be thankful. Surely it is meet to be
said unto God, I have born Chastisement, I will not offend any more; that which
I know not teach thou me, and if I have done Iniquity I will do so no more.

LET pious Parents, bereaved of their dearest Offspring, learn to resign them
unto God, as His more than theirs: And let pious Children, bereaved of their
dearest Parents, go to God as His Offspring, when Father and Mother forsake
them: And let the desolate Widow, trusting in God, leave her Fatherless (...)
God as the hest of Fathers.

NOW unto GOD an^. ^lory, for ever and ever

ERRATA.
Page 1. l. ult. r. should. p. 12. l. 19. r. God. (...) l. 10. r. God. p. 55.
l. 14. 85. l. 3. r. are also. l. 4. r. speak. (...) p. 97. l. 24. r. three. p.
12^. 126. l. 7. for yet read that p.


