Mr. Gay's SERMON Preached to the Artillery-Company In Boston, June 3. 1728.

Zechariah's Vision of Christ's Martial Glory, opened and applied, IN A SERMON
Preached at the Desire of the Honorable Artillery-Company In Boston, June 3.
1728.

By Ebenezer Gay, Pastor of a Church in Hingham.

Josh. 5.13, 14. And it came to pass when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lift
up his Eyes, and looked, and behold, there stood a Man over against him, with
his sword drawn in his hand; and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art
thou for us, or for our Adversaries? And he said, Nay, but as Captain of the
host of the Lord am I now come.

Rev. 19.13, 14. -- His Name is called the Word of God. And the Armies which
were in Heaven followed him upon white Horses, clothed in fine linen, white and
clean.

BOSTON: Printed for J. Eliot, J. Phillips, and B. Love, and Sold at their
Shops, 1728.

A SERMON Preached at the Desire of the Honorable Artillery-Company In Boston,
June 3. 1728.
Zech. I. 8. I saw by night, and behold, a man riding upon a red Horse, and he
stood among the Myrtle-trees that were in the Bottom, and behind him were there
red Horses, speckled and white.


GOD at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets: Sometimes he revealed his mind to the Prophets by an
audible Voice; sometimes by immediate Inspirations, secret Impulses of the
divine Spirit, moving the holy men of God to speak; sometimes by Signs and
Wonders; sometimes by Dreams, the Representations of things to the Fancy in
Sleep; and oftentimes by Visions, the Representations of things to the waking
Eye; hence the Prophets were called Seers. In the last manner God spoke much to
the Jews by the Prophet Zechariah. Eight distinct Visions are recorded in this
Book; the most of which were granted for the Encouragement and Comfort of God's
People, after their Return from the Babylonish Captivity. In the Words of my
Text, the Prophet declared to the Jews the first Vision that he received. He
had before called them to Repentance, exhorted them to turn unto God, and
assured them that if they did so the Lord of Hosts would turn unto them. Upon
their humble and penitent Confession of their Sins, and of the Justice of God's
dealings with them, Zechariah was sent to make known to them what Token, or
Appearance he had seen of the Lord's returning to Jerusalem with Mercies: I saw
by Night, and behold, a Man riding, etc.

That we may understand this Vision, which doubtless was written for our
learning, we must inquire,

I. Who the Man was, whom the Prophet saw riding upon a red Horse, and what was
signified thereby?

II. What was intended by his standing among the Myrtle-trees that were in the
Bottom?

III. What the red Horses, speckled, and white behind him, represented?

Q. I. Who was the Man, whom Zechariah saw riding upon a red Horse, and what
was signified thereby?

A. That he was the Man Christ Jesus, who appeared thus as a mighty Man of War,
to protect his People, and destroy his and their Enemies.

I. He was the Man Christ Jesus, whom the Prophet saw riding upon a red Horse.
Before the Son of God took on him the humane Nature, he on some special
Occasions assumed, and appeared in a humane Form. Thus he exhibited himself to
Abraham in the Plains of Mam^e, Genesis 18. One of the three Angels, which in
bodily shapes stood by Abraham, is expressly styled JEHOVAH, which is the
incommunicable Name of God; and Abraham, in his Addresses to him for Sodom,
called him the Lord, and the Judge of all the Earth. Her afterward appeared to
Joshua in the shape of a Man, as Captain of the Lord's Host, with a Sword drawn
in his hand Josh. 5.13.
. That must be a divine Person, otherwise he would not have permitted Joshua to
fall on his face to the Earth, and worship him; nor have bid him loose his Shoe
from off his foot, telling him that the place whereon he stood was holy, as
being Consecrated by the divine Presence. -- So he was the Son of God whom
Zechary saw by Night in the shape of a Man. We have not only the universal
Consent of Expositors herein, but also such an Account given of him in our
Context, as may well induce us to think that he was the Lord Jesus Christ who
thus appeared. He is styled the Angel of the Lord; and this is one of Christ's
Titles. He is so called, not in regard of the Nature he assumed, but the Office
he undertook. The Angel of God which spoke to Jacob in a Dream, is said to be
the God of Bethel Genesis 31.
. With that Person in the form of a Man, Jacob wrestled a whole Night; and
Hosea tells us, that he was the Angel, and the Lord God of Hosts Hos. 12.
. Christ is the Messenger, the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. because the
Father sent him into the World to negotiate and establish a Peace betwixt God
and Man, on the Articles of the New Covenant. Now he whom the Prophet saw in
this Vision, is styled the Angel, and the Angel of the Lord, in the Context,
and this Title belonging to Christ, may we not suppose that he was the Person
here represented? Especially, if we farther observe, how those which were
behind him, having walked to and fro through the Earth, rendered an Account to
him, v. 11. They answered the Angel of the Lord that stood among the
Myrtle-trees, and said, we have walked through the Earth, and behold, all the
Earth sits still, and is at rest. These were Created Angels, (as we shall
presently see) and to whom are they put in subjection, and unto whom are they
accountable, but unto Jesus Christ, the Lord of Angels?

Furthermore, this Man, this Angel, whom the Prophet saw, made Intercession for
the Church, V. 12. Then the Angel of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of
bosts, how long will thou not have Mercy on Jerusalem, etc. The Created Angels
do not* ex officio, intercede with God for his People on Earth: The increated
Angel of the Covenant is the only Mediator between God and Man. The Angel who
thus prayed for Jerusalem, was the same whom John saw performing this Office of
a Priest, Rev. 8.3, 4. Another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a
golden Censer, and there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer
it with the Prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, etc.

Thus, it is very probable, if not more than so, that he was the Man Christ
Jesus who appeared in this Vision to the Prophet.

2. His riding upon a red Horse signified that he came as a great General, a
mighty Man of War, to defend his People, and destroy his and their Enemies.

The God of Jesurun, who rides upon the Heavens, for the help of his People,
and in his Excellency on the Sky, was by the Prophet seen riding upon a red
Horse. This glorious Captain of the Lord's host came toward Jerusalem, not on
foot, but riding; which denoted his coming with speed, and Ensigns of Majesty,
to relieve and defend his oppressed People. Psalm. 48.3, 4. Gird thy Sword upon
thy Thigh, O most Mighty* with thy Glory and thy Majesty; and in thy Majesty
ride prosperously. He rode upon a Horse, a swift, strong, courageous Beast;
which is prepared against the day of Battle: whose Neck God has clothed with
Thunder; and the Glory of whose Nostrils is terrible; He paweth in the valley,
and repriceth in his strength: He goes on to meet the Armed Men; He mocketh a^
fear, and is not affrighted; neither turns he back from the Sword, nor from
the Quiver rattling against him, the glittering Spear and the Shield: He
swalloweth the Ground with fierceness and rage, -- he says among the Trumpets,
ha, ha; and he smells the Battle afar off, the thunder of the Captains, and
the shouting Job. 39.
. The Man who appeared for the succor and defense of the Jews, was mounted on
such a gallant, strong and bold Creature, to signify his Resolution, Strength
and Courage to fight for his People.

Not only the Kind, but also the Color of the warlike Beast on which he rode,
is observable, and has it is significancy: Behold, a Man riding upon a red
Horse. The grand Enemy of the Church is set forth by this Color, Rev. 12.3.
Behold, a great red Dragon, having seven Heads, and ten Horns: i. e. The Devil
with his many crafty and powerful Confederates. The redness of the Dragon
imports the fierce and bloody Disposition of Satan and his Agents toward the
Woman, the Church: That the Enemies of the Church are set on fire with a
hellish flame of Wrath and Cruelty against it; and are often red with the blood
of Martyrs. But for the Comfort of the Lord's People, their great Deliverer
appears on a red Horse: -- for,

1. This denotes Christ's fiery Indignation against his and their Enemies. Red
is the Color of Anger: a fiery Color. The Horse on which the mighty Defender
of the Church rode, was of this Color, to show that he was jealous for
Jerusalem with great jealousy, and very angry at her Enemies, and came with
fiery Indignation to consume the Adversaries. He is red with Anger, and his
Eyes are as a flame of fire Rev. 19 11, 12.
, when he comes in Righteousness to judge and make War.

2. The Lord Jesus appeared on a red Horse, to signify the perfect Conquest he
would atchieve over his and his People's Enemies.

This portended Blood and Slaughter to the Enemies of Christ, and of his
Church: That the Horse on which the Savior of God's people rides, should be
died red with the blood of their Enemies. A red Horse was in sacred Visions
Symbolical of great slaughter and destruction: Rev. 6.4. There went out another
Horse that was red, and power was given to him that sat thereon, to take peace
from the Earth, and that they should kill one another, and there was given unto
him a great Sword. The Prophet Isaiah, in like manner as Zechariah did, saw
Christ's martial Glory, and spoke of him: He saw this same victorious Warrior
in red Apparel, and was told the reason of his appearing in such a Habit; which
explains to us his riding upon a red Horse. Isa. 63. begin. Who is this that
comes from Edom, with died Garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his
Apparel; traveling in the greatness of his strength? -- The Prophet with
Admiration saw a mighty Hero returning from the land of his Enemies, into which
he had carried the War, with died Garments, and in a majestic Gate, both
honorable to a Soldier when he comes from a bloody Engagement. He first
inquired, who he was: The victorious Prince answered the inquisitive Prophet,
saying, I that speak in Righteousness, mighty to save: -- It is Jesus, the
mighty Savior -- The Prophet then asked, Why art thou red in thine Apparel,
and thy Garments like him that treads in the Wine-fat? To which Question the
Conqueror gave this Answer, I have trodden the Wine press alone, and of the
People there was none with me: for I will tread in mine* anger, and trample
them in my fury, and their blood shall be sprinkled on my Garments, and I will
stain all my Raiment. For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year
of my redeemed is come. He was red in his Apparel, to show that when the day
determined for the taking vengeance on his and his People's Enemies, and the
time fixed for the deliverance of the Church, should come, he would make such
dreadful slaughter as a mighty Conqueror does when he besmears all his Garments
with the (...) of his Enemies. The same thing is represented in our Text, by
Christ's appearing on a red Horse. His Horse is red for the same reason, that
his Garments are. His Wrath against his Enemies is so severe, and his victory,
over them so glorious, that even the Horse on which he rides, conquering and to
conquer, is died red with the blood of War. The destruction of Mystical Babylon
is thus expressed, Rev. 14.20. The (...) press was (...) the city, and (...)
out of the (...) unto the Horse-bridles, by the space of a thousand and six
hundred furlongs. "The Spirit of God is so particular in describing the height
of the deluge of blood, to the Bridles of the Horses, and the length of the
flood, to the space of two hundred miles, that we might apprehend the severity
of that Wrath which shall be executed on his Enemies".

Thus we see, who he was whom the Prophet beheld riding upon a red Horse, and
what was signified thereby. -- We pass to the second Inquiry:

Q. II. What was intended by this Man's standing among the Myrtle-trees that
were in the Bottom?

A. Christ's presence with his People in their low Condition. -- The
Myrtle-trees represented the People of God; were Emblems of the Saints. The
Lord's People are frequently in Scripture compared unto Trees. They are called
Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified
Isa 61.3.
in their bringing forth of much fruit. The Saints are compared unto diverse
sorts of Trees. The Lord God has planted a second Eden, the Garden of the
Church, and in it he makes to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight,
and good for fruit. Among other trees in this Garden, there is the Myrtle-tree.
Saints are resembled to Myrtle-trees; Isai. 41.19. I will plant in the
Wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah tree, and the Myrtle* God here promises to
set up his Church in the Gentile Wilderness, and that the Myrtle should be one
of the goodly trees which he would plant therein. Isa. 55.13. Instead of the
Thorn shall come up the Fir Tree, and instead of the Brier shall come up the
Myrtle-tree: and it shall be to the Lord for a Name, for an everlasting Sign
that shall not be cut off. There is as great a Change wro't by converting
Grace, as if Thorns and Briers were turned into ^irs and Myrtle trees -- This
is a promise to the Church, that it should be delivered from hurtful vexatious
Men, and replenished with holy and useful Believers, and with all sorts of
divine Graces and Blessings.

In these places of holy Scripture, the true people of God are compared unto
Myrtle-trees; and why should not we think that they were signified by the
Myrtle-trees in this Vision?

The Myrtles are valuable, verdant Trees; and so fit Emblems of the excellent,
flourishing and fruitful Servants of God. The Myrtles are very beautiful Trees,
the Branches thereof were used to adorn Houses withal (...). Not. Hist.
; so they represent the Saints, who being planted in the house of the Lord, do
flourish therein, and are an Ornament thereto. The Myrtles are odoriferous
Trees; they are not only pleasant to the sight, but also grateful to the smell;
they yield a sweet and refreshing Oil. The Saints therefore are fitly compared
to them, in respect of the fragrancy of their Graces and good Fruits. Says
Christ to his Spouse, the Church, How much better is the smell of thine
Ointments, than all Spices? and the smell of thy Garments is like the smell of
Lebanon Cent. 5 10, 11.
.

The Myrtle-trees which our Prophet saw, were in the Bottom, a low piece of
Ground; signifying the people of God in a low, afflicted Condition. The Jews
being then newly come from Babylon, to resettle the Land of Canaan, and rebuild
the House of God at Jerusalem, were in low, dark, and melancholy Circumstances
at that time. They were surrounded with enemies, proud and strong; which like
Mountains over-top'd them: Zech. 4.7. Who art thou, O great Mountain? The
Nations about them hated and oppressed them; therefore Myrtle-trees in the
Bottom, did aptly set forth their Condition. And this is frequently the state
of God's People in this world: they are oftentimes brought low, yea, very low;
are greatly depressed by their Enemies, who exalt themselves against them. But,
for their comfort, the Prophet saw the Man on a red Horse, ride into the
Myrtle-Grove in the Bottom, and there make a halt; representing the Lord Jesus
Christ's seasonable coming to the succor of his People in their low Condition.
He will then be present with them, to defend and save them. He may suffer them
to be brought low, but not to be quite trodden down by their Enemies. He will
remember them, and appear for them, in their low estate. Isai. 63.9. In all
their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them,
all the days of old. And as this Angel of God's presence, the Lord Jesus
Christ, was all the days of old with his People in their low estate, so he will
be with them all the days to come: Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of
the World. Amen. He is among the Myrtle-trees in the bottom, as in an Ambush;
undiscovered by the Enemies of the Church, and will in the fittest season arise
for her defense, and to their Surprise and Confusion. Psalm. 46.5, 6, 7. God is
in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that right
early, (or, when the Morning appears, as it is rendered in the Margin, i. e.
Pool in loc.
speedily, after a short Night of Affliction; and seasonably, when the danger
is greatest, and the Enemies prepare to make the Assault, which is commonly
done in the Morning.) The Heathen raged, the Kingdoms were moved: He uttered
his Voice, the Earth melted. The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is
our Refuge. Selah.

Q. III. What did the red Horses, speckled, and white, behind the Man which
stood among the Myrtle-trees in the bottom, represent?

A. Holy Angels attending on Christ, and ready to be employed by him for the
defense of his People, and the destruction of their Enemies.

The Prophet saw a goodly Troop behind the Man riding on a red Horse: He saw a
Company of Horses, with their Riders doubtless, having every one a
Slaughter-weapon in his hand, marshalled to Battle, under the Command of a
glorious Captain; whom Zechariah (as it seems) quickly perceived to be a divine
Person, the blessed Angel of the Covenant, and therefore applied himself to him
as his Lord, desiring to know what those were behind him. -- v. 9, 10. Then
said I, O my Lord, what are these? And the Angel that talked with me, said unto
me, I will show thee what these be. And the Man that stood among the
Myrtle-trees answered and said, These are they whom the Lord has sent to walk
to and fro through the Earth. This Information which the Prophet received from
the Mouth of the faithful and true Witness, shows that they were Angels,
which the Horses behind the Man that stood among the Myrtle-trees represented:
For are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who
shall be Heirs of Salvation Heb. 1.14.
? The Account which is in our Context given of the Horses behind the Man
standing among the Myrtle-trees, agrees with that which the Apostle gives of
the holy Angels of God: They are such whom the Lord sends forth, and improves
as chief Ministers of his Providence. This was not the only time that Angels
appeared in the form of Horses; See 2. King 6.17. Zech. 6.2, 3. Horses are
Emblems of Angels, in regard of their swiftness, strength and courage. The
Angels were in this Vision represented by Horses of diverse Colors, red,
speckled and white; signifying the various Offices to which they are deputed,
and the different Events of Providence in which they are made use of, and
perhaps alluding (as One suggesteth) to the diversities of Colors in the
standards of an Army, for Soldiers to know their Leaders, and keep Rank and
Order. -- We shall consider the Angels now only in their Martial Character, for
they are here represented in a Warlike Posture, formed into a strong
Battalion: And they are in Scripture termed an Host, and the Army of Heaven.
They are good Soldiers of Jesus Christ: are under his Command: This was
signified by the place in which they appeared; Behind the Man riding on a red
Horse. The Captain of our Salvation, is Captain General of the heavenly Host.
By Right of Creation, the Son of God is the Lord and Leader of Angels; for by
him were all things Created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible
and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or
Powers: all things were Created by him, and for him. And, as Mediator, Christ
Jesus is the Head of Angels: for although the humane Nature be lower than the
Angelical, yet the Son of God assuming it into personal Union with the divine,
he as God-Man, is far superior to all Created Angels: And for a Reward of his
deep humiliation, God the Father has exalted him, as Mediator, to a supreme
Dominion over them: Angels, and Authorities, and Powers, are made subject to
him. Thus, the Scriptures of the New Testament clearly reveal to us, what was
in this Vision darkly represented to the Prophet, viz. That Jesus Christ has
all the Angels of Heaven under his Command: They are behind him, ready to
receive and execute his Orders.

And he employs them,

I. For the defense and salvation of his People, while they remain in this
World, and when they pass into another. The holy Angels protect and deliver the
Servants of Christ in this World, both from their bodily, and their spiritual
Enemies. From their bodily Enemies; Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth
round about them that fear him, and delivers them. But, how can an Angel
encamp about the Multitude who fear God? Encamping about them imports an Host's
surrounding of them, to guard them from dangers on every side. -- I answer,
that either the Singular Number is here put for the Plural, as it is in other
Texts of Scripture; or else, by the Angel of the Lord is here meant Christ
Jesus, who appoints an Army of Created Angels to encamp about his People. They
are a constant, strong and faithful Lifeguard to the Saints, who are way-lay'd
by Enemies whithersoever they go. Psalm. 91.11, 12, 13. He shall give his Angels
Charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in
their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a Stone. Thou shall tread on the
Lion, and Adder: the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under feet.
They shroud them under the Wings of their kind Protection; oppose and hinder
the malicious Designs, even of their bodily Foes.

When Esau was coming to meet Jacob, and four hundred Men with him, to destroy
his Brother; Jacob went on his way, and the Angels of God met him. And when
Jacob saw them, he said, This is God's host: and he called the Name of that
place Mahanaim: two Hosts, or Camps* Genesis 32.1, 2. Troops of holy Angels met
him, to assure him that they would fight for him against his Brother Esau, if
there should be any Occasion therefore. When the King of Syria sent a great
Host, both with Horses and Chariots, against the Prophet of the Lord, Behold,
the Mountain was full of Horses, and Chariots of fire round about Elisha. 2
King. 6 17. There was a Guard of mighty Angels about him. When the Apostles
were fallen into the hands of their bloody Persecutors, the Angel of the Lord
by Night opened the Prison-doors, and brought them forth. Act. 5.19. All the
Locks and Bars of the Prison, and the Vigilance and Strength of the Keepers of
it, could not detain them, when the Angel came to bring them forth. Thus, the
Angels are employed by Christ for the Temporal Defense and Deliverance of his
People. -- And they are so likewise for their Defense against Spiritual
Enemies. We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, (not only, nor chiefly against
humane and bodily Enemies) but against Principalities, against Powers, against
the Rulers of the darkness of this World, against spiritual Wickedness in high
places. And Believers are assisted in their Warfare against the many Ranks of
Devils by the holy Angels. Michael and his Angels do fight against the Dragon
and his Angels Rev. 12.7.
. The good Angels vigorously resist the evil Spirits, and prevent their
accomplishing of their wicked, mischievous Designs. They often times secure the
Servants of Christ from the Wiles, and shield them from the fiery Darts of
Satan. When the Devil left Christ, behold, Angels came, and ministered unto him.
Mat. 4.11. The Angels did not come to him until the Combat was over, and the
Devil had quitted the Field: But they come, and minister to Believers in their
Conflicts with the Powers of darkness. They came to Congratulate Christ's
victory; but they come to help the Saints obtain theirs. Jesus Christ did admit
the assistance of an Angel in his Agony in the Garden; at which time he was
doubtless most violently assaulted by the Devil: Luke 22.43. There appeared an
Angel unto him from Heaven, strengthening him. This might be, to encourage and
assure his followers, that they should have Angels to strengthen them against
their spiritual Enemies, whom they must resist unto blood, with Agonies
striving against Sin.

Holy Angels are employed by Christ for the Defense of his People, not only
while they continue in this World, but also when they pass into the next: Not
only before, but also after Death They may sometimes guard the dead Bodies of
the Saints. Michael the Archangel contended with the Devil about the Body of
Moses. Jude v. 9. Men have differently conjectured what the ground of that
Contest was. One thinks, "that Satan resolved to do some harm to the dead Body
of Moses, that Man of God; which Michael and his Retinue perceiving, watched
over it, carefully defended it, and would not suffer the infernal Spirits to
seize on it". Whether this were the Controversy betwixt Michael and the Devil
about the Body of Moses, or not, I pretend not to say, for the Scriptures are
silent concerning it: neither do they expressly tell us that the good Angels
guard the Saints Bodies after Death: Yet it is not altogether improbable, that
they sometimes do this kind Office for them: for precious in the sight of the
Lord is the death of his Saints; so precious, as that he may give Angels charge
concerning their Dust, to keep it from being attacked and abused by malicious
Men and Devils. -- But, whether the Angels guard the dead Bodies of the Saints,
or not, we know that they are the Convoys of their happy Souls to Paradise.
There appeared a Chariot of Fire, and Horses of Fire, i. e. holy Angels, to
conduct Elijah to Heaven, 2 King. 2.11. The Horses behind Christ, the blessed
Angels under his command, are as really, though not so visibly, sent by him, to
conduct the Souls of all Believers to Heaven. Luke 16.22. It came to pass that
the Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham 's Bosom. The
mighty Angels guard the Souls of Believers through the Territories of the Prince
of the Power of the Air; protect them from malicious Spirits, who, like Birds
of Prey, watch to seize upon them in their slight to Heaven; do secure them
from the infernal Pharaoh, who with an host pursues them to their Celestial
Canaan.

Thus Jesus Christ employs the holy Angels, in a military way, for the Defense
and Salvation of his People.

2. He employs them for the Destruction of his and his People's Enemies. We
find in our Context, that those whom the Prophet saw behind the Man that stood
among the Myrtle-trees, were sent forth as Spies, to discover the Posture which
the Enemies were in: and they are sent forth also, as Armies, to vanquish and
destroy them. Christ brings the Forces into the Field of Battle, when he comes
to make War upon the Enemies of his Kingdom: Joel 3.11. Thither cause the
mighty ones to come down, O Lord. By the mighty ones here, may be intended the
mighty Angels of Christ. These Morning Stars have in their Courses fought
against Sisera, the Enemies of God's People. Some by the Sound of a going in
the tops of the Mulberry-trees, 2 Samuel 5.24. understand the Sign of the
marching of a Brigade of Angels, with the Lord in the head of them, for the
discomfiture of David's Enemies. One of those mighty Warriors, the holy Angels,
did in one Night lay a vast Army of brave though wicked Soldiers dead upon the
spot; and turn the whole Assyrian Camp into an Aceld^ma. 2 Kin. 19.35. It came
to pass that Night, that the Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the Camp
of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose
early in the Morning, behold, they were all dead Corpses. Angels are employed
more than we are aware of, in the just Wars of the Church; and are great
Instruments of breaking the Power of its Enemies. And the final destruction of
all the Enemles of Christ, and of his People, shall be accomplished by the
Ministry of Angels. Jesus Christ will at the great Day be revealed from Heaven,
with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, to take Vengeance on them who know not
God, and obey not the Gospel. -- The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels,
and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which
do Iniquity; and shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire. -- They shall bring
forth all his Enemies, which would not that he should reign over them, and slay
them before him.

Thus I have in some poor measure, opened the Vision recorded in my Text: I
come now to apply it.

1. Let us with Admiration behold the Glory of Christ. The Prince of Peace is a
Man of War; and how glorious is he in this Character! The Vision exhibits him
to us in his own Glory, and in the Glory of his Angels. How glorious does he
appear in his Martial Equipage, riding upon a red Horse, and having behind him,
red Horses, speckled and white* Did any conquering Hero on Earth ever ride in
such Majesty, and so prosperously? John, in a Vision, saw the eternal Word
clothed with a Vesture dipped in Blood, (glorious Apparel for a Warrior) and all
the Armies which were in Heaven following him. We by Faith see him riding on a
red Horse, stained with the blood of his Enemies, and all the Angelical Hosts
behind him. It was a Credit to David, his illustrious Type, that he had so many
valiant Soldiers, renowned Worthies, under his Command: They were called
David's mighty Men, David's Worthies: How much more honorable is the Lord
Jesus, who has under his Command an innumerable Company of Angels, the lowest
Rank of which far excells David's first Three, in warlike Accomplishments and
Achievements? If a Man were the Captain of Nobles, of Princes and Kings, would
he not be admired as a great General? Consider then, how great the Man Christ
Jesus is at the head of all the Train-bands of Heaven, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, Powers, Cherubim and Seraphim following him! -- Is there any
Number of his Armies? -- WHO IS THIS KING OF GLORY? THE LORD STRONG AND MIGHTY,
THE LORD MIGHTY IN BATTLE. -- WHO IS THIS KING OF GLORY? THE LORD OF HOSTS, HE
IS THE KING OF GLORY. SELAH.

II. The Vision speaks terror to the Enemies of Christ, and of his People. To
such the Lord Jesus appears very formidable, riding upon a red Horse, and
having behind him red Horses, speckled and white. Is there any Army of Men with
Banners so terrible as this, which the Vision represents? Woe to them, who sight
against so victorious and invincible a Captain as Jesus Christ is, and who
oppose his mighty Angels! He will sprinkle all his Raiment, and die his Horse,
with the blood of his Enemies. Who would set the Briers and Thorns against him
in Battle? he will go through them, and burn them together: for he makes his
Angels Spirits, those Ministers of his a flame of fire, to consume the
Adversaries. All Christ's Enemies shall break, shall scatter and flee before
him, when he shall arise against them. He shall strike through Kings in the Day
of his Wrath, -- he shall fill the places with the dead bodies: -- he shall
wound the heads over many Countries. -- The time is hastening, when the Kings of
the Earth, the great Men, the chief Captains, the mighty Men, and all that are
in open hostility against Christ, shall seek to hide themselves in the Dens,
and in the Rocks of the Mountains; and say to the Mountains and Rocks, fall on
us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the
Wrath of the Lamb: for the great Day of his Wrath is come; and who shall be
able to stand? O! let not any of us be found among his Enemies. Luke 14.31, 32.
What King going to make War against another King, sits not down first, and
Consulteth, whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that comes
against him with twenty thousand? Or else, while the other is yet a great way
off, he sends an Embassage, and desires Conditions of Peace. Let us consult,
and do so likewise; for we are not able with all our Strength, no, nor with all
the confederate Forces of Hell, to meet him, who is coming against his Enemies
with twenty thousand Chariots and Horses, even Thousands of Angels.

III. The Vision affords much Comfort to the People of God, even when they are
in a low Condition. This Vision was first granted for the Comfort and
Encouragement of the poor depressed Jews, that were surrounded with Enemies;
but it looks farther than unto them, and speaks Comfort to all the true Israel
of God. The great red Dragon and his Angels thirst for the Blood of Saints, and
with restless Rage seek to devour them: But the Captain of our Salvation rides
on a red Horse, comes with Speed and Resolution to protect and save his
People. He is Jealous for them with great Jealousy; he is red with Anger, and
his Eyes do flame with Vengeance against their Enemies; whose Blood shall be
sprinkled on every thing he uses in War against them. -- The Righteous shall
rejoice, when they see the Vengeance, and shall wash their Feet in the Blood of
the Wicked. Jesus Christ, the Captain of the Lord's Host, has innumerable
Squadrons of Angels behind him, under his Command, and which he employs for the
Defense and Deliverance of his People; therefore, let them not be dismayed at
the Number, or Strength of their Enemies; for they that be with them are more
and mightier than those which be against them. There are Horses and Chariots of
Fire round about them, for their Protection when they are brought low, and seem
to be over-top'd by the Mountains of wicked Men, their haughty, strong and
stubborn Enemies, which encompass them; even then may they receive great
Comfort from this Vision. The Lord of Hosts is with them, and the worm Jacob
need not fear, for his Redeemer will help him, so that he shall thresh the
Mountains, and beat them small. Isa. 41.15.
When the Israelites slew the Syrians with a great Slaughter, the Servants of
Benhadad encouraged him to renew the Battle, saying, Their Gods are Gods of the
Hills, therefore they were stronger than we: But let us fight against them in
the Plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they. 1 King 20.23.
The Syrians foolishly imagined, that the People of Israel had Gods, which
could not defend them, and fight for them in a low, as they could in a high
Place: But the God of Israel made them to know, that he was the God of the
Valleys, as well as the God of the Hills. In every Valley of Trouble, God's
People have a Door of Hope, and Matter of Comfort, given them in this Vision.
When they are brought low, they shall be helped and defended; for the Captain
of their Salvation, the Man riding on a red Horse, stands among the
Myrtle-Trees in the Bottom.

IV. From what has been said, Those of the Military Order may be exhorted and
incited to the Duties of their Station. -- It has from the days of our Fathers
been the laudable, religious Practice of the Honorable Company, the Chief of
our Militia, who have now invited us into the House of the Lord, thus solemnly
to wait upon him, that so their Military Exercises and Affairs might be
Sanctified by the Word of God, and Prayer: And although the Subject which has
been treated on at this Time by the least of Christ's Ministers, (who could
think of no other but what has been exhausted on this Occasion) may seem not
to be well chosen; yet is it pregnant of wholesome Instruction unto Soldiers,
and affords proper Inducements and Incentives to the Duties of their Calling.
-- By viewing the Angelick-Artillery, the Celestial Cavalcade, which the Vision
exhibits to us, Soldiers may learn what they they ought to do, and be excited
to the faithful discharge of all that is incumbent on them, as such. --
Wherefore,

1. Let them be exhorted to list under the Banner of the glorious Captain, and
so join themselves to the excellent Company, spoken of in our Text. There are
two Generals with their Armies that divide the whole World; Michael and his
Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels, Rev. 12.7. By Michael here is intended
Jesus Christ; and his Angels are not only those who are so by Nature, but all
such also as do engage in his Service, and are sent forth by him. By the Dragon
is meant the Prince of Devils; and his Angels are not only Infernal Spirits,
but all Men on Earth which are Confederate with them, in Warring against the
Church. The Man whom the Prophet saw riding upon a red Horse, and the great red
Dragon are the two mighty Commanders, under whose distinguishing Colors all do
fight. They are contrary Captains, to the one or other of which we do belong.
-- Now, who will not be on the Lords side? Do we not choose to fight under the
Conduct of a Victorious General, and in the Company of Valiant Soldiers? Then
let us be Christ's (...), as all his People are in the Day of his Power, the
Day of his Armies (...) 110.
. The Root of Jesse, the illustrious Branch which sprang from that dry root,
now stands for an Ensign of the People; to it let us seek, and be gathered Isa.
11.10.
. Will not Christ's Banner displayed, allure us into his Service? Shall we not
all list under it? Especially, let those of the Military Order suffer this Word
of Exhortation, and give in their Names this Day to Christ, to be entered in
his Muster-Roll. Do ye not choose him, or renew your Choice of him, to be your
Captain, and resolve to follow him, with the Armies that are in Heaven upon
white Horses, clothed in fine Linen, white and clean Rev. 19.14.
? Devote your martial Skill and Strength unto him, to be employed only and
wholly in his Service. Let Holiness to the Lord of Hosts be written upon all
your Weapons of War. May the Spirit come on you now, as it did on Amasai, when
he said, Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou Son of Jesse: Peace, Peace
be unto thee, and Peace be to thine helpers, for thy God helps thee 1 Chronicles.
12.18.
: And the Son and Lord of David will receive you. Take the Military Oath unto
him: solemnly oblige your selves to obey this Commander in all things to the
utmost of your Power; and be ready to attend, whenever he shall order your
Appearance in the Field of Battle. Say unto him, as the Israelites did unto
Joshua, his Type, All that thou command us to do, we will do; and
whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go Josh. 1.16.
. The glorious Angels count it their Honor to be behind the Man riding on a
red Horse; and will any of you disdain to be so? Is it not a high Privilege to
be joined to the innumerable Company of Angels? -- Behold, God has given his
Son for a Leader and Commander to the People; and will you not thankfully and
joyfully accept and own him to be yours? How happy will you be under the
Conduct of so wise a Leader, so great a Commander, as the Lord Jesus is, and in
such a valiant glorious Company, as that of the angelical Host behind him?

2. Having listed your selves under the Banner of Christ, prepare for the
Service which he may call you forth unto. You should not profess your selves
his Soldiers, unless you design and resolve, that whenever there shall be
Occasion therefore, and a Call thereto, you will fight under his Banner. Since
your Captain appears on a red Horse, you may look for bloody Engagements with
his and his People's Enemies, and should furnish your selves with Skill to
fight the Lord's Battles. The happy Time is expected, in which Men shall beat
their Swords into Plough-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks: Nation
shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more
Isa. 2.4.
. But, till that peaceful Period arrive, the Art of War is not to be laid aside
as useless by a Christian People. War should be learnt, when there is no
present Occasion for the Practice of it. Those of the military Order should
study this Art, and be Men expert in War. Cant. 3.7, 8. Behold, his Bed, which
is Solomon's, three score valiant Men are about it, of the valiant of Israel.
They all hold Swords, being expert in War. The Bed of him whom Solomon
typified, is the Church; Not only Magistrates and Ministers, but Soldiers also,
are appointed to guard and defend it: and it is requisite, that they be Men of
Valor, and expert in War. -- Military Skill is a good Gift, that comes down
from the Father of Lights: It is to be obtained of him by Industry, and the
praise of it to be rendered unto him. Psalm. 144.1. Blessed be the Lord my
Strength, which teaches my Hands to War, and my Fingers to Fight.

It is a Glory to a People, and a Defense upon all their Glory, to have Men
skilful in War: And on the other Hand, ignorant, undisciplined Soldiers are
always a Reproach to, and sometimes the Ruin of a People. -- Is it not faulty
Negligence in those of the Military Order amongst us, that the most of them
take so little Care to furnish themselves with proper and useful Skill, and do
remain so great strangers to the Art of War, and that too many who should be
able to teach it others, need themselves to be taught which be the first
principles of it? -- The reviving of the Military Spirit, which has for many
Years languished among us, should be endeavored; Especially in the Reign of a
puissant, yet peaceable King, who is renowned for his early and exemplary
acquaintance with the Art of War; which is one of his bright Accomplishments to
be a tutelar Angel unto his loyal People, over which God has set him, and we
pray long to continue him.

3. In Obedience to your great Commander, and Conformity to the blessed Angels,
willingly go forth to War, whenever ye shall be called thereto. -- We are bound
to thank God, for the happy prospect which there is at this Day of continued
Peace in Europe; and for his Blessing on the prudent measures of this
Government, whereby Peace is established in our Borders. But we know not how
soon we must hear the Alarm of War again: And if you should be called to
jeopard your Lives in the high places of the Field, or Thickets of the
Wilderness, remember that you are Volunteers in the Service of the God-man
riding on a red Horse, and you must follow him whithersoever he leads you. --
Do not Cowardly stay at home, when he calls you abroad, but readily go forth to
fight for the Cities of our God. Avoid the Curse of Meroz, the Inhabitants
whereof, the Angel of the Lord said, Curse ye bitterly Judge. 5.23.
, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty.

It is a Work, in it self considered, very undesirable and melancholy, to
destroy the Lives of your Fellow Creatures. Malice should not be your Motive to
it, nor the glutting of your Revenge make it pleasant to you. It should not be
your Sport and Pastime, to kill Men whom ye ought to love, and dispatch to
Eternity those who, you may fear, are unprovided for it. He that loves his
Neighbor as himself, and blesses, and does good to his Enemies, will take it
heavily to be employed in killing of them, even when urgent Necessity and the
evident Call of God make it his Duty. Yet, Obedience to your great Commander
should be always delightful to you, and the good and safety of his People be
cheerfully and vigorously pursued by you.

The holy Angels, to whom ye join yourselves, and with whom ye go forth in a
just War, and whom ye are to imitate in doing the Will of God on Earth, readily
execute the Orders of their and your glorious Commander, when he sends them on
the Errands of his Vengeance. Ezekiel. 9.5, 6, 7. To the others he said in mine
hearing, go ye after him through the City, and smite: let not your Eye spare,
neither have ye pity. Slay utterly old and young, both Maids, and little
Children, and Women -- defile the House, and fill the Courts with the Slain, go
ye forth; and they went forth and slew in the City.

4. If you should be called into the Field of Battle, fight as it becomes
those, who are under the Conduct of the Lord Jesus, and in the Company of his
mighty Angels.

To be led into the Field by a victorious General, and with valiant Soldiers,
may well animate the greatest Coward to fight. When Christian Soldiers go forth
to War in a just Cause, they may by Faith see the Man riding on a red Horse, a
glorious Captain, an invincible Hero, before them as their Leader; and behind
him, the red Horses, speckled and white, the mighty Angels of God, as their
Fellow Soldiers: And this may well inspire them with Courage, and make them wax
valiant in fight. -- Courage is a necessary Qualification of a Soldier; the
greatest Skill and Strength without it, are of little use in War: The Exercise
of it is difficult, when a Man looks a potent Enemy in the Face, and marches
into the Mouth of Danger, hears the roaring Canons and Guns, and the confused
horrible Noise with which every Battle of the Warrior is attended; sees the
glittering Sword brandished, and multitudes fall on his right hand and on his
left, rouling their Garments in blood. "The heathen Moralists reckoned bravery
in War, to be the highest expression of Courage, and that the Soldier had the
greatest Opportunity to show Courage, because Life, the dearest thing in this
World, is risqued in War." Now, Christian Soldiers have the greatest Incentive
to Valor, they fighting under such a Captain, and in such a Company, as the
Vision represents.

Plutarch observes concerning Caesar's Soldiers, that they who in Service under
other Commanders, did not exceed the ordinary Rate of Courage, nor excel their
Fellows, did yet when he led them, become irresistibly valiant, being animated
and inspired by his unparalled Gallantry.

Behold, a greater than Caesar leads the Christian Soldiers, and the mighty
Angels are with them in a holy War; the consideration of which may render the
most dastardly Spirit bold and adventurous. The exemplary Valor, and
invincible Force of so great a General and Host, may infuse Courage into the
most timorous and faint-hearted, and make him that is feeble to be as David. 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8. Be strong and courageous, be not afraid, nor dismayed for the
King of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more
with us than with him. With him is an Arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our
God, to help us, and to fight our Battles. The Egyptians, the Enemies of God's
People, are Men, and not God; and their Horses, flesh, and not spirit Isa. 31.3.
: But the red Horses, speckled and white, behind the Man, who is God as well as
Man, standing among the Myrtle-trees, are spirit, and not flesh.

5. Take heed, that your whole Behavior may please the Lord Jesus Christ,
under whose Banner ye list, and the holy Angels also, the Celestial Company,
to which ye join yourselves. Every Man that warreth should endeavor to please
him, who has chosen him to be a Soldier 2 Timothy 2 4.
. Has the Captain of the Lord's host, the mighty Jesus, chosen you to be his
Soldiers? be careful then to please him in all things. The Angelic Legions
behind him do so; they do his Commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his
Word: And they are exhibited as a Pattern for your Imitation. With speed and
cheerfulness obey every Word of Command, that ye receive from the Mouth of so
glorious a Captain; and do nothing without, or contrary to his Order. Be always
upon your Guard against Sin. Arm your selves against those Temptations unto it,
with which Soldiers especially are assaulted, and too often overcome. -- Watch
against Sin in your preparatory Exercises: On Days set apart therefore, run not
into excess of Riot, as the Practice of many has been: Serve not your Lusts,
which war against your Souls, and the grand Enemy of God and Man, while you
pretend to be fitting your selves for the Service of Christ, your King and
Country. -- And if you should go forth to War, keep your selves from every evil
thing: Let there be no accursed thing in the Camp, to trouble it. Manage your
whole Employment inoffensively. Luke 3.14. The Soldiers demanded of him,
saying, And what shall we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no Man,
neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your Wages. -- You are entirely
dependent on Christ for Safety and Success: This Lord of Hosts is for Strength
to them that turn the Battle to the Gate. It is your Wisdom therefore to take
heed unto your selves, lest ye should in any Action of yours displease him. --
And herein Soldiers must exercise themselves, that they may be void of Offense
toward God and Man, and Angels also. Good Behavior is required not only in the
Church, but also in the Camp, because of the Angels 1 Cor. 11.10.
. Take heed, that ye do not by any unseemly and sinful Carriage offend those
holy Spirits, your fellow servants and soldiers, and forfeit their Assistance
and Protection. Let your whole deportment be such as may please your great
Commander, and the heavenly Allies: Then shall your Righteousness go before
you, and the Glory of the Lord shall be your Rereward:

The Lord our Righteousness shall go before you, as a Vanguard, to secure you
from Enemies that may charge you in the Front; and the Glory of the Lord, his
mighty Angels, shall be your Rereward, a gathering Host, to secure you from
Enemies that, like Amalek, would fall upon your Rear. -- Happy are those
Soldiers who are in favor with the Man whom the Prophet beheld riding on a red
Horse, and with the valiant Company which he saw behind him. They shall ride on
the high places of the Earth, and tread on the Necks of their Enemies: Or,
should their Bodies fall, and die on the Bed of Honor, yet their Spirits shall
not miss of a Triumph; but gloriously ride up to the City of the living God,
the heavenly Jerusalem, and there be received with the Acclamations of Angels,
and rewarded for their Faithfulness by Jesus Christ with the Garland of
Immortality, the Crown of Life which fades not away.

To Conclude;

Let us all engage in, and manage the spiritual Warfare, under the Conduct of
the Man Christ Jesus, the Captain of our Salvation, and in the Company of his
blessed Angels that are behind him. Let us fight the good Fight of Faith,
trusting in the Wisdom and Strength of our great Commander, who is ready to
give us Legions of mighty Angels, to assist us in our Combats with infernal
Principalities and Powers, and to bring us off at last more than Conquerors. --
In other Battles, the Event is uncertain, and that is a good Caution, which the
King of Israel gave Benhadad, 1 Kings 20.11. Let not him that girdeth on his
Harness, boast himself, as he that puts it off But, Christ assures
Believers of Victory in their spiritual Conflicts. He has in his own Person,
though not for his own sake, encountered and overcome the Enemies of our Souls,
and will certainly help us to vanquish them, if we resign our selves to his
Conduct, and rely on his Power: This should not make us careless, but
Courageous, in fighting against them.

And when we have overcome, we shall stand before the Throne, and before the
Lamb, Clothed with white Robes, and Palms in our Hands, and cry with a loud
Voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb. -- And all the Angels round about the Throne shall say, AMEN: Blessing,
and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might, be
unto our God for ever and ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

