Mr. Chaunrty's Arguments For Regular Singing.

At a General Association as Hartford, May 12th. MDCCXXVII.

THIS Association having heard the Reverend Mr. CHAUNCEY's Arguments for
Regular Singing, do Approve of them, and Vote them to be Printed; Recommending
them to the Public, hoping they may be of Usefulness.

As Attests L. Woodbridge, Moderator.

Regular Singing Defended, AND Proved to be the Only True Way OF SINGING THE
SONGS of the LORD; By Arguments both from Reason and Scripture: Having been
Heard and Approved of, by the General Association at Hartford, May the 12th.
1737. with their Recommendation of it to the PUBLIC.

By Nathaniel Chauncey, M. A.

2 Cor. xiii. 8. We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth.

Joh. viii. 46. And if I say the Truth, Why do ye not believe me?

N. LONDON; Printed and Sold by T. GREEN. 1728.

Regular Singing THE ONLY True Way of Singing.
MAN being so incapable of discerning how to Worship God, in a manner becoming
his Excellency; It is truly a great favor of God to Man, to give him needful
Directions about his Worship. It is generally held, That God has done so; and
therefore, Man is under no necessity of acting without a Rule, or of following
the Traditions of Men, for want of a Divine Rule.

GOD's Command is Perfect, Psalm. 19.7. and serving thoroughly to furnish the Man
of God (...) every good Work. 2 Timothy 3.17. And if it has pleased God in any way
or manner to declare his Mind about his Worship, there is an Obligation lying
on Man, to observe and follow these Directions: And that in one thing, as well
as another. But this is (...) great Unhappiness of Man, that his Heart does not
stand alike disposed toward every part of the Mind of God. Although there be
somethings that he can readily receive and comply with, yet there be some other
parts of God's Mind, that he is averse unto. Men are loach to own, that their
refusing to comply with this, or that, is from a Dislike or Disaffection unto
Truth, There is an endeavor to put a fair face, or pretense on the matter, as
that, they are not convinced it is the Mind of God, but some Invention of Man.
But many times there is a real Dislike and Disaffection, toward that part of
Gods Will. And this Dislike arises from sundry things,

1. Custom, the power of which, is many times very great. If Persons have been
for many Years accustomed to that for which they have no Warrant, it comes at
length, to have as much power over them as a Law. Its a very difficult thing to
bring persons off from what they have been long used to; and to bring them to
take directions from the Word of God. There is commonly in such Cases a
Superstitious fear, wherewith the Minds of Persons are Exercised and Teased.
They dare not leave what they have been used to, lest they should Sin. They
dare not admit of any alteration from what they have been used unto, for fear
of some lad Consequents. And hence may we observe (many times) that men of
honest Principles, and it may be of most Zeal in Religion, prove the Greatest
opposers of Reforming what is amiss in Religion, or the Worship of God, let
there be never so good and weighty reasons for it. And thus we see, how a great
defect in Obedience any, through a mistaken mind, arise from a good Principle,
that is fear of doing amiss. Many for fear of doing amiss, Do amiss, or neglect
and refuse to do well.

2. Many times Persons are much Swayed and Influenced in this matter, From the
Judgment and Practice of such as they have a great esteem of, for Knowledge,
Wisdom and Piety. It is a very unsafe thing to rely wholly on the Judgment or
Practice of any, in matters of Religion; but yet it many times is thus. The
Judgment of men that are highly accounted of, Sways more with some, than the
strongest and clearest Arguments in the World. There are, that either have no
great capacity of trying and weighing things, or have not accustomed themselves
thereto; but they rely on the Judgment of such as they have a great esteem of;
and hence, are entirely complying with them. Let these they admire be for or
against the Truth, they be so too Joh. 7.48. Have any of the Rulers believed on
Him?

3. Men's dislike unto any part of the mind of God arises many times from their
passing a Judgment on things by False Rules. There is no possibility of
proving, Truth to be Error; or of proving Error to be Truth; however those
things may attend or follow one or the other, from whence, Persons that have a
Bias or their minds will take occasion to argoe amiss. Thus.

Persons will sometimes argue for the thing they hold and practice, that it
right and good, from the good tendency of it, or from some good fruits and
effects. And so on the other hand, its a common thing for Persons to argue and
plead against the Truth, from some ill things that attend, or follow it. Thus
Persons may Argue against the Doctrine of the Gospel, because it causes
Contention. Its no solid Argument against the Truth and Goodness of a thing,
that in sometimes proves so. That which in its own nature tends to Union, Love
Peace, etc. may by Accident prove a cause to the Contrary. Romans 7.7. What shall
we say then, is the Law Sin? God Forbid.

4. Men's dislike unto any particular Branch of God's mind, does very often
arise from Corrupt Affections and Vicious Inclinations. The nature of Man
abounds with these, and hence when any Precept of Religion is declared and
urged, that is contrary unto these Sinful inclinations, they dispose a man to
reject the same. And this is the (...) a time; when Conscience is pleaded and
pretended, corrupt Affection, or evil Inclination is at the Bottom, and does
cause this dislike and rejection of the Truth As, 1. Sometimes Sloch Men love
an easy and a cheap way of serving GOD, and when any thing is moved, and urged
from the Word that reguires some Labor and Pains taking, beyond what they have
been used to, their Slothful inclination disposes them to reject it, and oppose
it. There is some Labor in the case, and that they Decline and Reject. Prod 15
19. 2 Sometimes Covetousness moves Men to hate and reject a Duty moved and
urged. Thus when work of Charity and of Merry are urged, Covetousness, causes a
dislike, as Luke 16 14. And the Pharisees also, who were Covetous, heard all
these things and they Derided him. 3 But very often Pride is the great opposer
of Truth It is no Dishonor to the wisest and greatest of men to yield to
Truth; but really a very commendable thing, and for a man's Honor, but many
times men have this though it, that the owning and receiving of such a Truth, will
touch their Reputation, and turn to their Discredit. Its ask some to them, to
own, they have been in an Erro: It may be, they have spoken and done much
against the Truth; and now the Temptation is strong, to stand to what they have
said Prove. 15.10.


By reason of Pride it hurts the Man that those he has opposed about the
matter, should get the Victory; and therefore he is pushed forward by this
Luft, that he may have the Victory.

Sometimes Persons are moved to reject a thing urged, as a Duty, from a Spirit
of Co^ahism, or a forward disposition to oppose Ministers.

Sometimes because they have not been Advised with, and Consulted in the case,
or about the matter to be advanced, they are so far from Complying, that they
will oppose; Inasmuch as their Consent was not asked, they will not fail to
enter their Dissent. It may be, Reader, thou growest angry at the Reading of
these things, and it so, thou art the man, I need no more Evidence, that thou
art Guilty.

Well, let it be from the causes mentioned, or from any other Springs, its a
great Sin, and a great Unhappiness, for a man to have such a dislike or
disaffection unto any part of the Mind and Will of GOD, as to reject it on that
account.

1. In this a man deny's GOD's Sovereignty over him, Return against him,
Prefers himself unto GOD, and does indeed make himself both the Rule and End in
that Worship that he will not have guided by GOD's Will, but by his own. Zec.
7.8. When ye Fasted, did ye Fast at all unto me?

2. It is directly contrary unto the Profession that men do commonly and freely
make, viz. That they are very ready and willing to be guided and governed by
the Will of GOD, if they did but know it. Now for any that make this free
profession, to reject a Branch of GOD's Mind, because it is disagreeing with
their corrupt inelinations is a contradiction to their Profession. Tit. 1.16.
In Works they deny him.

3. In case the thing that men reject and oppose (through disaffection) comes
to them with sufficient proof and evidence, its a violation of the order, that
GOD has set, and established in the Soul of Man. There is a certain Order or
Law established in the Soul of Man, and that is, when the evidences for a
thing, do plainly outweigh, all the Objections that can be made against the
same, to yield an assent unto the Truth of it; and in case he do otherwise, he
offers violence unto his own mind. And this is a matter to be seriosly thought
on by Men that make nothing of rejecting what does not suit their Humor or
Corrupt inclination, though it be never so well Proved and Evidenced. As though it
were a matter in their Power to receive or reject as they please. But indeed to
reject a Truth duly evidenced is a great Sin Jer 8 9 Do they have rejected the
Word of the Lord. And the,

4 This Dislike or Disaffection unto Truth does many times render Persons very
Unreasonable and Unmanly. It is certainly a Duty for Reasonable Creatures to
act as Reasonable Creatures. I sa 46 8. Show your selves men But Persons from a
Dislike and Disaffection unto Truth, are many times moved to act (...) becoming
Men, and much more unbecoming Christians As, (1) In speaking evil of the things
they know not, an Argument of Folly and Rashness, Prove 18.12. He that answers a
matter before he understand, it, it is a folly and a shame unto him Jade 10
These speak evil of the things they know not. (2) It will make a man
regardless, of all the Arguments, that can be brought for the proof of the
thing; let them be never so Clear and Convincing. (3) Many times it fills men
with such Rage against the Truth, that they will not bear to hear any thing
about it. (4) This makes men to lay great weight, on light and worth ess
Arguments, to defend what they hold; and to raise Silly, Foolish, and Frivolous
Objections against the Truth; and never own, or acknowledge any Answer to their
Objections, be it never so full. (5) This will move Men to hate and abuse, such
as plead for, what they dislike and reject. And, (6) It will move them to enter
into the sharpost Contentions, to keep off Truth, and to hold and maintain,
what they have no Warrant for. And when they have set the City, and the
Sanctuary of GOD on Fire, then ( Nero like) lay the blame on the Innocent
pleaders for Truth, that they are disturbers of the Peace. These, and such
like, are the unhappy fraits of men's having a disaffection, or prejudice,
toward any part of the Mind and Will of GOD. And when we observe under what
fair pretenses all this is, there is reason to say to these men, Surely, Ye
know not what manner of spirit ye are of, Luke 9.55

An Instance wherein the Truth of what has been said, may be very plainly
observed is about the Singing of Psalms. The matter of Controversy about the
performance of this part of Divine Worship, is this, viz.

Whether in Singing the Songs of the LORD, we ought to proceed by a certain
Rule, (...) to do it in any Loose, Defective, Irregular way, that the, or that
People, have Accustomed themselves unto?

Its a matter the wiseft and most able to Judge, are clear, and full in, and do
assert, That there is a sure and certain Rule, to be used, in Singing; and it
is as clearly discerned, by the best of Judges; that this excellent Rule is
left; and that there are many ill fruits and effects that follow upon the
neglect of the Rule, or deviation from it.

Hence it is, that a multitude of Persons, live in a neglect of this Duty. Many
neglect it in Public, they open not their Mouths to Praise GOD. And probably
many more that neglect it in their Pamilies, and because they know not how to
Sing.

Again, For want of knowledge and skill in Music, Persons cannot have that
Love to, that Delight in and that Relish of, the Duty, as if they were Skilled
and did use their Skill. This is known to be a truth by the Experience of such
as once were ignorant and have afterward gotten Knowledge. And the truth of this
may be seen in other things: The ingenious Artist has much more of pleasure, in
his Science or Trade, than another man that has no Skill in it.

(7) The Rule being neglected as useless, the Performance is very mean,
compared with what it would be, were the Procedure by a Rule. It is as flat
Drink, compared with that which is lively, brisk and full of Spirit: And the
Esteem of it is much sunk, and a careless spirit prevailing about the
Performance. And as it has been an unhappiness attending our defective, loose
way of doing, that we have been under disadvantages either to discover our
Defectiveness, or to Reform it; so now, though we are delivered from that, as
great, if not a worse evil is met with; and that is, that having been long
accustomed to a Loose, Irregular way, we are now, grown into love with it, and
are so far from any willingness, to Reform, that we cannot bear to have any
fault found with our doings in this part of Divine Worship. Many are found so
under the influence and power of Custom, that they account the common
performance to be better, than any Reformation can make it; and are therefore,
so far, from harkening to any proposals for a Reformation, that the Proposal
meets with not only Rejection, but very fierce Opposition, and abundance of
Censure and Reflection: And some, are ready to Lavish away as much Zeal, as
though there were an attempt, to pluck away a Fundamental Article in Religion, or
to bring in one of the greatest Heresy's or destructive Corruptions into the
Church. The Observation of this, is matter of discouragement to attempt to do
any service to Religion as to this Affair. However, there are some
Considerations that may, notwithstanding move a man to adventure.


1. It is not only the most Rational way of treating our fellow Creatures to
offer plain Arguments for their Conviction, but its a thing that is really
owing, and due unto them.

2. Its an Honor due to Truth. Indeed our Zeal is to be wisely and duly
proportioned. Our greatest Zeal should be about the weightiest points in
Religion, but smaller things are not to be neglected: But just so much Zeal is
to be proportioned out unto them as is due. Mat. 23 23. These things ought ye
to have done, and not to leave the other undone.

3. Such an attempt may do some good, and it may be more than is feared. But,

4. In case Persons will continue to Reject the Truth, after that it has been
sufficiently Evidenced and Proved, and their Objections Answered, it will make
a full discovery of these Persons, and of the cause of their continuing to
reject and oppose the Truth: Men's fair pretenses, will not hide them in so
plain a case.

And this will leave such Persons without excuse. Joh. 15.22. If I had not come
and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin: But now they have no Cloak --. And
this will roll all the blame that comes herefrom at their Door. Let them use as
much subtilty as they have to shift it off.

I shall accordingly proceed to make some attempt for the convincing and
satisfying of such as reject and oppose the making use of a certain Rule in
Singing. Only I shall premise Three Things, which I conclude every one will
readily concede and grant, that does oppose and withstand the use of a certain
Rule in Singing.

[1] You grant and readily profess, that you are willing to Comply with, the
Mind of GOD about this matter, if you could but come to the Knowledge of it.
Every one that dissents professes this. See that there be such an heart in you.
[2] You will surely grant also, that its a very great Sin for men to Reject any
Truth or part of GOD's Mind, in case it comes with due Evidence and Proof. Its
a greater Sin than men commonly imagine. And then, [3] You will certainly
grant, that so much Proof and Evidence as is accounted sufficient and rested
in, in other Cases and such as are more Weighty, should be accounted sufficient
in this Case. No solid Reason can be rendered, why more Proof and Evidence is
needful in this matter, than in many points that are more weighty.
These things Premised, I new proceed to lay down the Assertion to be made
Evident, viz.

That there is One and only One sure and certain Rule to preceed by, in Singing
the Songs of the LORD; so much Knowledge of which as is needful to the due
performance of this part of Divine Service, its the Duty of all, who are to
bear a part in Singing of those Songs to attain.

Now that there is One and only One sure and certain Rule to proceed by in
Singing, may be rendered Evident by these following Arguments.

I. It is not consistent with the Wisdom of GOD (who designs His own Glory and
man's good in every Ordinance that He has appointed) to leave the Performance of
this Duty, without a Rule to guide it so as to reach these finds.

Every wise Agent, first of all proposes to himself an Bud; and then proceeds
to choose Means, fit, suitable, and proper, and to conclude about the order and
manner of using these Means Now if this be the way of very wise Men, how much
more is it of GOD, who (...) all things with the most perfect Wisdom. For He is
wonderful in Counsel and excellent in Working, Isa. 28.29. As for the great end
of every Ordinance, it suits with the great end of Man's Being; and therefore we
may Conclude, from GOD's Infinite Wisdom, that there is a Rule, whereby to
proceed in this Affair. It could not Consist with the Wisdom of GOD, to leave
this Performance, to the Wit, Will, or Fancy's of Men: It was not likely to be
done, in a manner becoming the Excellency of GOD: If GOD has done so, he has
not done like himself; in case he has done so, his Command is not Perfect;
which we know it is, Psalm. 19 7. And then by such an Imperfect Command, the Man
of GOD would not be Perfectly Furnished, unto the Performance of every good
Work; which we may not allow. 2. Tim 3.16, 17. In case GOD has done thus, he
were not the GOD of Order, but of Confusion; but this is contrary to that, 1
Cor. 14.33.

If GOD has done thus, he has done contrary to what he always, and in all other
cases has done; for he has always been so full and particular in his Directions
about his Worship, that his Directions have extended to the outward order and
in very small things. Hence, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. Because we sought him not after
the due (...), in short, to say that GOD has given no Direction or Precept
about the manner of Procedure, would be a Contradiction of that General Rule, 1
Cor. 14 40. Let all things be done Decently, and in Order: Which necessarily
supposes some Rule, in agreement with which Decency ly's; Now this cannot be
Custom, for Custom it self may be Undecent.

II. Its Evident there is some Certain Rule; for the Command to Sing, does
Include and Involve in it, that we use the Instrument, or Means, suitable and
proper for the doing of the Work, or Duty Commanded to be done; and it does so,
though there be no mention made of the Instrument, or Means in the Command.

Its received without any Gainsaying or Disputing, That Singing of Psalms is a
Duty Commanded; its not an Inyention of Men, but of Divine Institution. Now as
man is under a necessity of using Instruments, or Means in doing his Work, and
there are Instruments, or Means suited to every sort of Work or Business, so
the Command to do a thing, obliges to use the Instrument suitable and proper
for that Work: though there be no mention made of the Instrument, or Means in the
Command.

Its easy to make this plain by a Multitude of Instauces, that the Servant
Commanded to do a Work, is by virtue of that Command, obliged to use the
Instrument proper, and suitable for the doing of that Work. It is so in
Writing, Measuring, Weighing, etc. And he that teaches Man more than the Beasts
of the Earth, and makes us Wiser than the Fowls of Heaven, does instruct man to
Discretion, in this point. Isa. 28 26, 27, 28. -- For the Fitches are not
threshed with a threshing Instrument, nor is a Cart-wheel turned about upon the
Gammin, etc. It is not a matter of Indifferency, what Instrument the Servant
goes to work with: But the Servant that attempts to work without an Instrument,
or to use an Instrument or Means, not at all suited to the work, may be as
really Guilty of Disobedience, as he that wholly neglects the doing of the
thing Luke 12.47. And that Servant that knew his Lords will, and prepared not
himself.

Now if there be an Instrument or Means, that is suited, and appropriated to
this work; then it may be Concluded, that the Command to Sing, does include
that, and oblige to the use of it in performance of the Work. Now this will
presently appear. From Hence,

III. In as much as there is but only One Instrument or Means, that is it, or
suitable for the doing of this Work; and therefore its a Duty to use it in the
doing of the Work.

This is a matter as clear, as the Noon-Day-Light; that if I am Commanded to do
any work, and there be only one Instrument or Means, wherewith the work can be
done, its my Duty to use that Instrument or Means. Its true, there be some
Works, that may be performed by Various Instruments; but ordinarily, to each
work to be done, there is an Instrument or Means that is suited, and
appropriated to that work: And it is founded in the very nature of things: The
work being of such a Nature, the Efficient must have an Instrument, so and so,
fitted and suited to do that work with, and it is certain, that there are many
works that have instruments so appropriated to that work, that the work cannot
be done, without that Instrument. It is so in Reading, Cyphering, Weighing,
Measuring, etc. There is no Reading without the knowledge of the Letters, and
of Joining them together. No casting accounts without Arithmetic, etc. Each of
these and a great many others, have their appropriated Instruments or Means.
The work commanded to be done, cannot be done without the proper Instrument or
Means. And it being so, it can be no matter of doubt whether it be a Duty or
not, to use that Instrument, seeing the work coramanded cannot be done without
it, And now to apyly it to the present Case, We are Commanded to Sing, and
there is but one Instrument or Means, suited to this work, wherewith the work
can be done; And this is THE ART OF MUSIC. The design of Art is, by suitable
means to guide the mind of Man in the management of that whereto the Art
relates: Now Arts are very Numerous; to almost every Purpose, there is an Art;
which is the Instrument or Means for the doing of that thing whereto it
relates. New there is no Art or Science that teaches to Sing, but one, and that
is The Art of Music, Logic teaches to Reason well, Navigation to Sail well,
Geometry to Measure well; But only Music Teaches to Sing well. And there being
no other Art or Instrument, to direct or serve to this Work, it must be a Duty
to use it. And therefore, the Notion that some have of Various Rules, is
utterly Vain; because there is but one Art that Teaches any thing about the
Work. This Instrument is appropriate to the Work, and can be done with no
other. Wherefore, I reason thus, Either GOD has given us but One Rule, or
Various, or None at all. As for his giving us None, that cannot Consist with His
Wisdom. As for there being Various, that cannot be, because there is but one Art
that Teaches any thing about it. And therefore there is One, and but One Rule.

Object. But it may be, it will be Objected, That those that Write about the
Art of Music may Vary, and therefore it looks, as though there may be Various
Rules, and a matter of Indifferency, which we use.

To which I

Answ. The Objection seems to Contain in it, an acknowledgment of a Rule, and
if this be but yielded, the difficulty about the Variety is easily removed. And
therefore I Answer That it is a very common thing, for such as write about any
Art or Science, to Vary; scarce any two men that write about any Art, do
exactly agree in every thing. But then 1. This don't argue the Rule or the
Instrument to be Various Truth is but One, and it holds true of every Art. No
Art delivers any more, but one Body of Rules, to lead unto the end the Art aims
at. And there is no other Variety, or Multiplicity of Rules, but what arises
from the differing apprehensions of Men. And this is plain and evident from the
nature of each work to be done; the Instrument must needs have its make and
shape, according to the nature of the work that is to be done by it; thus a
Knife, a Key, a Pen, are fitted to the nature of the work to be done with them.
And this is also further Evident from hence, In as much as no man, that writes
about any Art or Science, pretends to give any more, but one Directory, or one
Body of Rules leading to the end that the Art aims at: Which is a very plain
proof that the Variety is not founded in the Nature of the thing, but arises
from the differing thoughts of Men. 2. There being some difference among
Writers, about the Art of Music, is no solid Objection against the owning of
it to be the Rule, and only Rule of Singing. Allowing this Objection to be
Valid, we must Renounce every Art and Science in the World: Nay, we most
Renounce Divinity it self; for in This Writers disagree probably more than in
Humane Arts: But we don't do thus in other Cases We many times find that
Weights and Measures don't agree, and yet we own that Weights and Measures are
the true Rule of Buying and Selling. In case we should Renounce Arts and
Sciences because of the disagreement of Writers about them, we could scarce
carry on any Affair in the World. But then 3 It may be offered farther in
Answer to this Objection, that the disagreement of Writers that we are
acquainted with, is so small, that it need make no difficulty, were it greater.
A little Humane Prudence in following one Author that is best approved, puts an
end to all the difficulty, and is no more, than what we are enforced to do in
other Cases; and is well agreeing with the Divine Rule, 1 These 5.21. Prove all
things; and hold fast that which is Good.


IV. I shall Argue nextly, from the end and design of GOD's bestowing the Gist,
or Art of Music on Men, and that is on purpose to direct men in Singing Songs
of Praise unto His Name.

If this be made evident, the point is sufficiently proved.

All Gifts are from GOD. Every useful Art and Science among Men, is as really
from GOD as Saving Grace, Jam. 1.17. He is the Father of Lights; from whom
comes down every Good and Perfect Gift.

It is certain that no Man can receive any thing of this nature unless it be
given him of GOD. And these Gifts are bestowed on Men to direct and enable them
in answering the great End of their Being, viz. To Glorify GOD, and to do good
in the World, to Profit withal, 1 Cor 12.7. Now as these Gifts are Various, for
GOD has suited the dispensation of them unto the various necessities, duties,
businesses, whereto he calls Men, whether Civil or Sacred; so its the Duty of
Men to improve this Gift of GOD in the doing of that work, or thing whereto the
Gift relates, and which the Gift enables a man to do. This is plain from
Scripture, Romans 12.6. Having then Gists, differing --. 1 Pet. 4.10. As every
one has received the Gift, even so Minister. Men seem not to be in doubt in
other cases: If a man be called to a Military Post, he doubts not but he must
be acquainted with, and must act by Military Skill. If a Man be called to a
Chief place in a Ship, he doubts not but he must now use the Art of Navigation.
If a Man be appointed to be a Surveyor or Measurer of Land, he doubts not but
he must use the Art of Geometry. If a Man be called to the Work of the
Ministry, he must now use the Ministerial Gifts he has received. Isa. 54 4. If
a Man had bestowed on him the Gift of Tongues, and GOD should send him to
Preach to a Heathen People of a strange Language, and he had no other way to
make them understand, but by speaking to them in their own Tongue, it would be
his Duty to do so, though GOD had never made any particular mention of it in his
Command. He ought to use the Ability that God had given him. 1 Pet. 4.11.

It were easy to multiply Instances of this kind to make it plain, that GOD
having bestowed a Gift on men, enabling to the performance of a certain work,
it should be improved about the Work, if God calls thereto.

Now we are to remember, there are Duties for Private Men to attend, and for
the better discharge of which, they want Gifts, and should Covet them; as the
Gift of Praying and the Gift of Singing, etc. 1 Cor. 12 ult. 1 Cor. 14.4. And
having Attained them they should Improve them in the doing of that Work they
relate to, and enable to perform. Wherefore I reason thus, Either GOD has given
this Gift or Art of Music to be improved in Singing Songs of Praise unto His
Name, or Given it to be improved in pleasing Men's Lusts, or he has Given it in
Vain: But not the Two Latter, and therefore the Former.

V. I Argue in the next place from Scripture Precept and the agreeing Practice
of the People of GOD.

From what I have offered already, the matter might be Concluded which has been
laid down to be Proved; and that it is not a matter of Indifferency how we
Sing, but a matter of Duty to proceed by that ONE CERTAIN RULE. There are
doubtless many things that are Duties, and Necessary to be done, that we can
find no particular Precept for, and yet may be fairly Argued to be Duties from
some General Rules. Where do we find any Precept or Command to teach our
Children to Read? And yet Who is there that does so much as doubt of it? If it
be their Duty to Read, then they should be enabled to do their Duty, by being
learned to Read. And so the Case before us may be in this manner Argued to be a
Duty, though there were no particular Precept about it. Its our Duty to Sing, and
therefore we should endeavor to furnish ourselves with the knowledge of the
Rule. But besides this, GOD has been pleased to declare to us in the Scripture
how his People of Old were wont to perform this Duty, and how he would have us
do in the Affair.

And here, besides the General Precept, 1 Cor. 14.40. To do all things in the
Public Worship of GOD Decently and in Order. Which certainly supposes some
Rule in agreement with which Decency ly's.

We are Commanded to Sing with Understanding. Its an Old Testament Precept.
Psalm 47.7. And its mentioned and renewed in the New Testament, 1 Cor. 14.15.
And because it is so, it makes it more plain to be understood. Its safest to
take the Scripture in the largest sense; and then, there will be Three things
contained in this Singing with the Understanding.

(1.) An Understanding of the End and Design of the Ordinance. (2.) An
Understanding of the Matter that is Sung. And then, (3.) An Understanding of
the True Rule and manner of Performance.
I see no Objection that can be made against this account of the Text (...)
then, as they and we are Commanded to Sing with Understanding, so its
abundantly evident that the People of GOD of Old, did Sing thus. They proceeded
in it by a certain Rule; and this is (...) and all doubt, from 1 Chronicles. 15.2^.
(...) was for Song, be Instructed about the Song, because be was Skilful. This
out Text of Scripture affords much of Evidence for the Point. Its plain from
hence, That GOD's People did proceed by a Certain Rule. There was care taken
that those that were to be concerned in Singing, should be furnished with
Skill; and to that end, they were under the Instruction of One that was an
Artist. It is plain, that the thing he taught them, was how to Sing: And
therefore it was the Art of MUSIC that he Taught. It is evident that he taught
them to Sing by Rule; for it were very Improper to call him Skilful, in case he
were not acquainted with the Rule. It is evident their Instrumental Music was
by Art, and so it is also that their Vocal was 1 Chronicles. 25. 7. They were
Instructed in the Songs of the Lord, all that were Cunning or Skilful.

And there is much of Argument for the point, to be drawn from the Titles of
the Psalms. David having Composed a Psalm, directed or delivered it to the
Chief Musician, to be Sung by the Rules of Art. And among the many Titles of
the Psalms, we may take notice of some that plainly hold out to us, not only
that they Sung by Rule, but that they used the various parts that belong to
Music: As might be instanced in Suminith, which is supposed to intend on the
Lowest part, or Base. And Alamoth, which intends the Treble, being shrill like
a Virgins Voice. Unto all which the Apostolical Precept may be added, Ephesians.
5.19. Speaking to your solves in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, making
Melody in your Heart to the Lord. Col. 3.16. Teaching and Admonishing one
another, in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs.

VI. There is One, and only One, Sure and Certain Rule to proceed by in this
Affair, otherwise its Impossible there should be a due Union among them that
Join in Singing the Songs of the LORD.

Surely, none will deny but, that there should be Union; Romans 15 6. That ye may
with one mind and one mouth Glorisy GOD. It is certain it may be, it has been,
and it should be, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. They were as One to make one Sound: Which must
be understood of a Musical Unity, or Concord.: All on the same Noto; all begin
and end together. And indeed, so much as there is of Disunion, so much of
Confusion and Disorder. Now unless there be only One certain Rule to proceed
by, this cannot be expected; scarcely among those of the same Congregation, but
in case those of differing Congregations are to join, its much more unlikely, 1
Cor. 14.7, 8.

VII. Unless there be only One certain Rule, etc. the excellent Ends to be
Aimed at in the Performance of this Duty, cannot be so well reached and gained.

As for the Great and Ultimate Ends of this Ordinance, it has been hinted; As
for the particular and next ends, they are to utter GOD's Praises, to give to
us a deeper sense of GOD, suitably to move our Affections, to improve our Joy,
express our Thankfulness, encourage our Hope, give us some Taste of Divine
Pleasure, etc. Now we cannot discern how these excellent ends can be reached
unless there be a Procedure by a certain Rule.

It is a very great Reflection on any Ingenious Art, in use among Men, for any
to say that all the ends of it may be gained as well without the Art as with
it; for Men to say they can Sail as well without the Art of Navigation as with
it; or, that they can do any thing in Arithmetic, as well without the Art as
with it: or, that they can read any Author, without ever learning the Art of
Reading. But its against the common sense of Mankind, and their daily
experience, that the ends of Art can be gained so well without the Art as with
it. And against the Determination of the Spirit of GOD, who has said that
Wisdom is Profitable to Direct. Ecel. 10.10.

I know this very Plea is made in Defense of Singing without Regard to Rule,
and against Singing by a Rule.

The OBJECTION is this, Object. This way of Singing that is in use in the
Country Answers the End as well; I find (says one) it raises my Affections much
more than Singing by a Rule; and therefore I must needs like This way, and
dislike the Regular way of Singing.

Answ. Its needful I give a particular Answer to this Objection. And, 1. I
don't suppose, but that this Common way of Singing may have some of these Good
Effects. But then, 2 I would Suggest this, its more than Probable, that it
reaches these Good Ends, no further than its agreeing with the Rule. There are
but Two ways (that I know of) in which the Duty can attain them; the one is
Natural, from the Natural tendency in Music to move, or raise the Affections.
The other is Moral, by the Blessing of GOD on the Ordinance. Now its readily
Granted, that so far as the common way of Singing agrees with the Rule, so far
it may in a natural way tend to raise the Affections, and so far the Blessing
of GOD may go along with it. For it is to be Remembered, that our Singing was
Originally by Rule, the very Rule we now Plead for the use of. Every Song that
we Sing, was Originally Composed by the Art of Music; and Directions given us
to Sing the Tunes by. Which thing is as evident, as any thing of this Nature
can be. Now though the Rule has been long neglected, and disregarded, and we have
swerved very much therefrom, in various Regards, yet is there in every Song
that we Sing, some agreement with the Rule; and in proportion to what there is
of agreement with the Rule, so far it may both in a Natural, and in a Moral way
have some of these Good Effects. But yet, 3. I would mind you in the next
place, that this can be no certain Rule to Judge by, whether the Duty be well
or ill done, that the Affections are moved or not moved. The Affections are
indifferent to Good or Evil. We are liable to be much pleased with our
performances, when as they are very unpleasing to GOD. 4. And as for your
dislike of Regular Singing, because it don't raise or move your Affections: I
Answer in Two things. (1) It cannot do it in a Rational way, so long as you
don't understand the same. But there is a better Reason. (2) It cannot be
expected it should move your Affections so long as you don't like it, but are
full of Prejudice toward it. There can be no Pleasure in That a Man is full of
Enmity toward.



VIII. Unless there be a certain Rule, there cannot be any certain End.

As for the Ends for which the Ordinance has been appointed, they are Certain,
and there must needs be a Certain Rule to lead to a Certain End. The design and
use of a Rule is by suitable means to lead to a Certain End. And there can be
no Certainty in the End, unless there be a Certain Rule. Hence that 1 Cor.
14.8. If the Trumpet give an uncertain Sound, who shall prepare himself to the
Battle? In case there be no Rule at all, we are as a man that wanders, in the
Wilderness without Path or Compass: In case there be various Rules, they must
lead to differing Ends to be sure, Differing, in proportion to the difference
there is in the Rules or Means. And this shows it cannot be a matter of
indifferency how we Sing: Because that various Rules, or various Means lead to
various Ends.

IX. In case there be not a certain Rule, there is no possibility of passing
any Judgment on the Work or Duty done, whether it be well done, or ill done.

We have a power of Reflection in our Souls, whereby we can look back on our
Actions and Judge whether well or ill done; and it well becomes Reasonable
Creatures to do so. Gal. 6.4. Lee every Man prove his own Work. Now unless
there be a certain Rule to direct and guide the Performance, there is no
possibility of passing any Judgment about it, because this matter is
discernable only by the Rule. Romans 3.20. -- By the Law is the Knowledge of Sin.
We come to know whether a Work be well or ill done by comparing it with the
Rule. And therefore in case there be no certain Rule, there can be no Judgment
passed on the Work or Duty done.

X. In case there be not a certain Rule to proceed by in Singing the Songs of
the Lord, there can be no Rectifying of any thing amiss in the Duty or
Performance.

I take it for Granted, that none will Deny, but this Ordinance is liable to
Corruption. There can be no reason rendered why it should be impossible to fall
into a Defective way. If all other Ordinances are liable to be Corrupted, Why
not This? And surely its the Duty of GOD's People when it is become so, to
endeavor to reform and Rectify what is amiss. It is certainly a thing
Provoking to GOD, to be careless of the due Order in Divine Worship, 1 Chronicles.
15.13. Now in case there be no certain Rule, there is no possibility of
Rectifying what is amiss in it. Because it must be done by the Rule, and can be
done no other Way. Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith shall a Young Man Cleanse his way? By
taking heed thereto according to thy Word. To Rectify a thing amiss is to bring
it to agree with the Rule. It is by the Standard that Weights and Measures must
be brought to be True. And how can this be effected in case there be no
Standard. And this discovers the extreme. Folly of some who oppose and reject
the use of a certain Rule in Singing, and yet will attempt to Rectify the
Common way of Singing without a Rule.

XI. In case there be not a certain Rule, there can be neither Well Doing, nor
Ill Doing in the Case.

This Inference may seem somewhat Strange and Surprising, that there should be
any One Ordinance, to be attended on, in which we can neither do Well, nor Ill;
and yet this is fairly drawn, and does most necessarily follow. It plainly
appears from hence, Inasmuch as Well Doing lies in a perfect Agreement with the
Rule, and Ill Doing in a Disagreement with the Rule This is the true and proper
notion of Well Doing, and of Ill Doing, Genesis 4.7. If thou do Well, shall
thou not be Accepted? If thou do. Not well, Sin lies at thy Door. And
therefore if there be not a certain Rule there can be no Agreement or Deviation
Romans 4.15. -- Where no Law is, there is (...) Transgression. If there be no
certain Rule of Guide and Govern this Affair; Men might Imitate the Birds and
the Wild Beasts, and be accepted as well as now.

XII. In case there be not a certain Rule, the Matter admits of no Skill; it is
utterly incapable of any Skill.

Study none will deny but that this Astir does admit of Skill. There is surely
need of Skill to perform it. Should any deny it, it were easy to Confute them
from Scripture and Reason too. It was accounted needful in Ancient Times. When
David had Composed a Psalm, he directed it to the Chief Musician, one that was
excellently Skilled. And 1 Chronicles. 15.22 Chenaniah lustructed about the Song
because be was Skilful. Skill was in those times accounted needful; it was
sought after, and care was taken that those that were to Sing might be
turnished with Skill Yea a plain Command to use Skill, Psalm. 33 3. But in case
there be no certain Rule, there can be no Skill. And this is plain from the
Nature of Skill, for Skill lies in a due knowledge of the Rule, and aptness or
readiness to act by it, or in agreement with it, this is the true and proper
Motion of Skill, as is plain from the Instance given before of Chenaniah. Its
said he was Skilful. i. ^. He was acquainted with the Rule, and able to guide
others into the knowledge of it. And therefore the knowledge that many are
supposed to have in Singing, who are ignorant of the Rule, is not Skill; No
more than a Child can be said to have skill in Reading, because he can say a
few Answers in the Catechism by Rote; when as it may be he cannot tell half the
Letters of the Alphabet.

I therefore Conclude this Argument thus, Either the matter does not require
Skill, or Men are born Artists, or else there is a certain Rule; but the two
former must be Denied, and therefore the last must be Asserted.

XIII. In case there be not a certain Rule to proceed by, but the Manner be
lest indisserent; then men have an Advantage put into their bands to Assront
the Majesty of Heaven without Trespass or Offense.

The design of this Ordinance is to glorify GOD; and GOD who is the Object,
that it is directed unto, being of such Transcendent Excellency and Glory, the
Worship should certainly be done in the best manner Possible. It is very
unsuitable and unbecoming to turn GOD off with that which is mean when as it is
in our Power to do better, Mal. 1. 14. Cursed be the Deceiver who has in his
stock a Male, etc. But in case there be no certain Rule to proceed by,
Advantage is put into the hands of Men to Affront the Majesty of Heaven without
Trespass, by turning Him off with what is mean, unsuitable and unbecoming. In
case GOD had not Cautioned his People, not to offer to him any thing that had a
Blemish in it, but had left it entirely to their liberty to offer what they
would, so they did but offer: Have we not reason to think, that they would have
turned him off with the Torn, Lame, Maimed, etc. surely they would have done
so, in case they could have done it without Trespassing on a Divine Command:
for they did so, notwithstanding they had an express Command about the Matter.
And exctly thus, would it be in the Affair before us about Singing, if there
were no certain Rule to guide and govern the Affair. And indeed, this is truly
the fruit of our leaving the Rule, and taking our Direction from Custom and
Fancy. It does naturally tend to Sink the esteem of the Ordinence, and to make
Men careless how they perform the same

Its Lamentable to every Serious and Judicious Mind, who is concerned that GOD
should be Worshipped in the best manner, to observe how Shameful, Mean and
Defective our Sacrifices of Praise are. And where is the Trespass or the
Offense, in case the manner be left indifferent? Let the Songs of the Temple be
hideous Howlings, the Worshippers may hold themselves not Guilty.

XIV. In case Man have a certain Rule, to guide him to his great End in the
General, he must needs have a certain Rule to guide him in the use of all those
means that are to lead than way.

I trust I need not stand to make good the former; it is a conceded point, that
as Man's Great and Chief end is to Glorify and Enjoy GOD, so GOD has given him a
Rule to lead him to this End: And if this be his great and main Business, he
must never be without a Rule; and one that is full, perfect and complete. And
in case he must have a Rule in the concerns of this Life, how much more in the
things that do immediately concern GOD's Glory. In case Man have no certain
Rule, to guide him in this Affair, then so far, he goes as in a Wilderness,
without any Path, in the Dark not knowing whither he Steers right to his End or
not. Joh. 12.35. He knows not whither he goes.

XV. Unless there be a certain Rule to proceed by in Singing, there can be no
Singing at all.

This may seem to be somewhat strange at the first tho'r, but is easily made
plain by many Instances about the Affairs of this Life, wherein Art is used to
direct Men in the Design that they are Pursuing: Were it not for the Help Men
have from Art they could not carry on, or manage the Affair at all. It were
Impracticable. How were it Possible for men to perform vast Voyages, from one
side of the World to the other, without the help of the Art of Navigation or
Compass? How would it be Possible for Men to manage vast Accounts, in which it
would be needful to Add, Divide, Substract, etc. in case there were not a
certain Rule to guide and enable Men to do it? Mankind have Universally a sense
of this: And therefore the unskilled man Answers, when put upon doing a thing
that belongs to Art, and must be done by Rule, I cannot do it. Isa. 29.12. -- I
am not Learned. A free Confession, that the thing being to be done by Rule, be
that is not acquainted with it, so far as to be able to use it, cannot do the
thing. The matter is really thus in the Case before us about Singing: There can
be no Singing at all without a Rule. Let the Rule that we make some use of, be
wholly said aside, as it is in part, and we cannot Sing at all. It would be a
confused Noise, and not Singing. Let the Rule be wholly said aside, and we
shall be like a Ship in the Sea, without Compass or Rudder, or any means to
guide her toward a Haven, tossed hither and thither.

XVI. I shall in the last place Argue from Testimony.

It is very true, that this fort of Argument, is not of that strength and force
with the former; however, it will Contribute somewhat; and its a common thing,
for Men to lay Weight on the Judgment, Says and Practices of others. And
therefore let them cast in their Mite.

And [1] I shall Argue from the Judgment of the Learned and most Knowing, who
ever Assert the Art of Music, to guide and direct in Singing the Songs of the
Lord. Poetry and Music, have ever been acknowledged among the Learned, as Real
Arts and very Excellent, both of them Contributing to the perfecting of the
same design; the former is employed in Composing the Song, and the latter
directs rightly to Modulate the Voice in the Singing of it. And the Learned
account no Singing true but what is by Rule. And surely they should be
acknowledged to be the best Judges in the Case. In other cases Men will have a
regard to the Judgment of Artist's, in things pertaining to the Art that they
profess to be knowing and skilful in; and there is as much reason to Regard and
Honor it here, as in other Cases. [2] We may Argue from the Judgment and
Practice of our Forefathers, who acknowledge a certain Rule, in their leaving
of the Psalms with Tunes Composed by the Art of Music for our use. Concerning
which! would Argue thus, Either our Forefathers Practiced by the Rule they have
left for us, or not, In case they did the point is Gained; In case they did
not, they were very Deceitful and Hypocritical, according to CHRIST's own
Judgment. Mat. 23.3, 4. -- They say, and do not. If the thing now pleaded for
be right, we should use it, though our Forefathers had neglected it; for though we
are to honor Examples, we are to live by Precepts. GOD's Precepts should move
us more than our Forefathers Example; but seeing we have our Forefathers good
Example, it should serve to move us yet more.

[3] I shall Argue from the Plea and Practice of such as are against a Rule, in
their making some use of the Rule, and their speaking of right and wrong in
Singing. It is very natural unto each. Man, that differs in Sentiment from his
Neighbor, to challenge to himself this Honor and Happiness, that he is in the
right and his Neighbor is in the wrong. And its to be seen in this matter
about Singing as well as in any other thing.


The difference among Towns in Singing is Great, scarce any two Towns that Sing
perfectly alike, and some differ very much: And yet each Town or Person asserts
they are in the right and their Neighbor is in the wrong: Now this is a
virtual or implicit yielding and acknowledging that there is some Rule, by
which a Judgment may be made. Upon which I would say only this, Romans 14.22.
Happy is the Man that condemns not himself in the thing that he allows. Its an
odd thing to blame our Neighbors, for going besides, or against Rule, whenas
we our selves acknowledge no Rule. But then I would have a remark, on these
Men's making some use of the Rule. I have before made mention of this, that our
Singing was Originally owing to the Rule, and the very Rule we plead for; and
that there is some use made of the Rule in every Song. Wherefore I would reason
thus, If there be no certain Rule, why do you make any use of one? In case
there be a Rule as your Practice declares, why don't you conform wholly to it?
Its beyond the wiseft Man in the World to Reconcile this matter, to wit, How it
should be a Duty to make some use of the Rule, and yet be so Heinous a thing to
conform wholly to it.

It is certain, Men don't usually Argue so in other Cases. Men can ordinarily
see in other things, that the degree don't alter the kind.

What wise Man would judge thus, that its a Lawful thing to Read, or to Write,
but a very abominable thing to Read or Write exectly and well? Or that its a
Lawful thing and a Duty to use Weights and Meafures, but an intolerable thing
to have them Exact and True. And yet this is the very case before us: We know
assuredly there is some use made of the Rule in the common Singing. We only
plead for an entire Conformity to the Rule; And see how its resented and
opposed, as an Insufferable thing. And thus I have offered the Arguments for
the evidence and proof of the Assertion laid down. But though here be vastly more
evidence and proof, than we have or can have, for many things that we readily
own and hold in Religion, yet the disaffection of Men to the Thing and their
deep prejudices make light of all the weightiest Arguments.

And, Object. 1. This Practice leads to the Church of England and will bring in
Organs quickly.

Answ. 1. In case the thing be a Duty, we need not be afraid of any ill
Tendency; the way of Duty is the way of Safety.

2. Its beyond the wisest man in the World to imagine how Skilful Singing,
should lead or tend to ill, more than Unskilful; we may as well plead that
Skilful Writing, or Skilfulness in Arithmetic tends to ill. There is nothing
in the nature of the thing that leads to the Church of England.

3. But suppose it were possible for any to make some ill improvement of it.
Its against the common sense of mankind to reject any ingenious Art or Science
in use among Men, because it may be ill improved, or abused by some.

Because Printing is, or may be ill improved unto the Venting of the worst
Errors and Heresies, and the most Lewd and Wicked things that Debauch Ma kind,
shall we refuse to use any thing that is Printed? Or because a Silver Smith
could make Shrines for Diana, therefore to allow of no such Art.

4. This Argument lies as hard against the common way of Singing; for they
pretend to Sing the Tunes of the Church of England.

5. Its a very strange thing that our Forefathers had no sense of this Danger
and Hazard, but that after they were come into the Country, they should turn
the Psalms into new Meter, and Annex Rules to (...) to Sing them by.

Object. 2. The very Original of this way was from the Papists. It came from
Rome.

Answ. 1. I deny not but the Gospel it self came from Rome to England; we know
it did so, and its very probable that Singing came along with the Gospel. I
know not of any other coming from Rome but that. And if we must reject Regular
Singing on that account, we must by the same reason reject the Gospel too. But,

2. As for the Original of Music, That was before ever there was a Papist, or
a Church of Rome in the World. It was in great Request, and Flourished much in
David's time; David himself was excellently Skilled in Music, and so were many
others in his time. And it is plain it was in use in Moses's time, and probably
known and used before the Flood. But,

3. Suppose some Papist has writ about it, and the Papists make use of the Art
of Music in Singing, its very probable it is so, and its no solid Objection
against the use of it. There is no reason to reject a thing because a Papist
has delivered it. If an Angel should Preach falsehood we ought to reject it. And
in case a Papist or a Devil should utter a Truth its not to be rejected. Its
very true that the Papists have horrible Errors and Corruptions in Religion,
and that both in Doctrine and Practice; yet many of them are learned Men, and
write well about various Arts and Sciences, and Practice well in some things.
And if we reject every thing that the Papists hold and do, we must reject a
great many things that are plain Duties in Religion. Its enough that we reject
what is Ill, and as for what is True and Good we should account of it, and
embrace it, notwithstanding the Papists do hold or practice it Phil. 4 8,
Whatsoever things are True, etc.

But,

4. To take off the force of this Objection, the Guides that we follow in this
Affair, are Ministers or Learned Men of our own Country or Persuasion.

Object. 3 This way of Singing we use in the Country is more Solemn, and
therefore much more Suitable and Becoming.

Answ (...) If by Solemn, you mean and intend as the Scripture does, there is
nothing at all in the Plea, for it intends no more but Joyful and Merry, and is
a Word that is almost forever appropriated to their great Feasts, which were
attended with the utmost Demonstrations of Joy, as Singing, Dancing,
Instrumental Music, etc.

2. But suppose, by Solemn you mean Grave and Serious. Nothing makes more
against the Common way; for they will readily Grant that they use many Quavers,
Semi quavers, etc. And on this very account it is they are so pleased with it,
and so very loath to part with it; now all these Musical Characters belong
wholly to Airy and Vain Songs; Neither do we own or allow any of them in the
Songs of the LORD. Judge then which is most Solemn.

Object. 4 It looks very unlikely to be the right way, because that Young
People fall in with it; they are not wont to be so forward for any thing that
is Good.

Answ. 1. As Old Men are not always Wise, so Young Men are not always Fools.
Job. 32.9.

2. Young Persons are expressly Commanded to Praise the LORD. Psalm. 148.12. Both
Young Men and Maidens, etc.

3. The very same Objection was made by the Scribes and Pharisees against
CHRIST's being the true MESSIAH. The Young Persons and Children Owned him,
Honored him, and Followed him with their Hosannah's, whenas the Scribes,
Pharisees and Elderly People rejected him; and they were very much displeased
with the Young People, and would have them Rebuked. But the Young People were
in the Right then, and the Elder People in the Wrong: And so is the case now.
The Childrens learning to Praise their great Creator and Redeemer is very
displeasing to some Older People. But its doubtless pleasing to GOD the Father
and to JESUS CHRIST. Psalm. 150. ult Let every thing that has Breath Praise the
LORD.

4. And as for Young Persons being so forward in the matter, a Good account may
be given.

(1) They are generally more free from Prejudices than Elderly People. And then
besides, (2) Their present Age disposes them to Mirth, And it should be a very
Joyful and Acceptable thing unto Elderly People to see them forward to improve
their Mirth according to Scripture directions. Is any Merry? let him Sing
Psalms.
Object. 5. Its a cause of Sore and Bitter Contentions. It had been well for
the Country they had never heard of it.

Answ 1 Conclude by this Objection, the Objector aims at one of these two
Things,

Either, 1. By this Objection to Prove the Evil of the Thing it self, i. e. of
using a certain Rule in Singing. Or, 2. Though the thing it self were Innocent,
yet because it has such effects it should not be urged.


I shall Answer Briefly unto both of them. As to the Former, [1] Its no
Argument at all against the Truth, Warrantableness, Goodness of the thing, that
such sad things follow. We are wont to say, Fools Argue from the Event, but
Wise Men from the Rule. This matter has no tendency in its own nature to
Divisions, but to Union, Peace and Love. And it is a cause of Divisions only by
Accident or an Occasion of them. The true cause of Contention is the Corruption
and Lust in the Hearts of Men Jam 4.1. Whence came Wars and Fightings, etc.
come they not hence, even of your Lusts? The very same Objection might be made
against the Gospel in the General, and various particular Doctrines thereof.
What Contentions have followed the Preaching of the Gospel? And bitter
Contentions about some particular Doctrines of the Gospel? So that there can be
no solid Argument drawn from hence. But then, [2] You say farther, Suppose the
thing be Innocent, seeing it has such effects it should not be urged.


To which I Answer, 1. Although its a Warrantable thing to be Zealously affected
in a thing that is Good. Gal. 4 8. However I readily Grant, 2. Our Zeal should
be under the Government of Wisdom and Justice. We must duly distinguish between
the more and less weighty things of the Law, and proportion out our Zeal
accordingly. Not making so great a Fire to Roast an Egg, as an Ox. And yet
ought we to account every branch and particle of Truth to be precious and
worthy of our purchase. And therefore we are not camely to yield up the cause
of Truth, because a smaller Truth and Opposed, but assert it, and sufficiently
prove it, That so in case we cannot gain a Reception of it, without loosing a
greater Good (I mean Peace) we may with a good Conscience Desist and Wait,
leaving the Guilt at the Door of the Opposers and Gainsayers.


AND now I shall Conclude with a most earnest Entreaty to all, in every place,
where there is this (...) in Singing the Songs of the LORD, That in case there
be a Motion or a Proposal made for a Reformation of that matter, that you would
forbear to Withstand or Oppose it, or to speak Evil of it, or of those that
would Promote it, until you have honestly and faithfully looked into the
matter, and so far acquainted your self with it as to be able to pass a
Judgment.

Consider, (1) How disagreeing to the Counsel of the Spirit of GOD not to do so
Jam. 1.19. Be swist to Hear, slow to Speak, slow to Wrath. Prove. 17 27. He that
has knowledge spares his words. (2) There can be no advantage in this
opposing and speaking Evil. If the thing be of GOD, it will be a Vain thing to
Strive against Him, and to Kick against the Pricks. Job. 9.4. Act. 9.5 and
5.39. If it be of GOD, ye cannot Overthrow it, lest happily ye be found to Fighs
against GOD. (3) Its a now of Folly and Rashness to speak evil of the things we
know not, Jude 10. And for a Man to Answer a (...) before he Understands it,
Prove. 18.13. (4) It is what we Disapprove of and Condemn in other cases. Joh.
7.51. Does our Law Judge any Man before is hears him? Should a Man as soon as
he discerns another coming toward his House in the Night, Strike him or
Discharge upon him, without any Enquiry whether he is a Friend or Fee, it would
surely be Condemned as a very rash thing; he might hurt or destroy a dear
Friend or Neighbor, instead of an Enemy. So here. (5) It argues a naughty and
sinful Bia^ on the Mind, when Persons will Cry out bitterly against a Thing,
and yet will not examine or try it. We are Commanded to try all things, 1 These.
5.21. And have the Balance of Reason to Try or Weigh things in. Now when
Persons will not honestly try, but inveigh and oppose, it argues a Bias on the
Mind. Joh. 1.20. Every one that does Evil hates the Light. (6) It comes from
ill Causes; from Custom, Corrupt Affection, etc. Mat. 12.34. The common
Pretense is Conscience and Religious Zeal, but CHRIST gives another account,
Mat. 15.19. (7) Its Contrary to the Treatment that these Men would desire to
meet with. Mat. 8 12. (8) Its Contrary to the Law of Charity and Love. How it
is that Charity acts, see a Cor. 13.5, 7. It does not behave it self (...), --
Believes all things, Hops all things. (9) It is not (...) the Honor and
Glory of GOD. The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of GOD. (10) It
exposes Men to many sore Temptations and especially to this, to shut their Eyes
against the Truth and reject it, when made never so evident; Having spoken and
acted against it, their Pride inclines them to stand to what they have said.
(11) In case you would but Faithfully Look into and Examine the Matter, you
would certainly be Convinced, and then it will be your Grief that you have said
and (...) so much against it.


FINIS.

