The Great ASSIZE: OR, Day of Jubilee.


THE GREAT ASSIZE: OR DAY OF JUBILEE, IN Which we must make a General Account
of all our ACTIONS before Almighty GOD.

Delivered in Four SERMONS upon the XXth Chap. of the Revelations, plainly
showing the happy State of the Godly, and the Woeful Condition of the Wicked.

Whereunto is annexed Two SERMONS upon the First Chapter of the Canticles.
Verse 6, 7* By the Author SAMUEL SMITH Minister of the Word.

The Sixth and Fortieth Impression.

Mat. 12 36. I say unto you, that every idle Word that Men shall speak; they
shall give an Account thereof at the Day of Judgment.

Re printed at Boston in N. E. Sold at the Sign of the BIBLE in Cornhill. 1727.

To the Christian READER
Courteous Reader,
I Present here unto thy View, the fourth publi^ Fruit of my Ministry, wherein
I have endeavor that those, especially mine own Hearers (those rel^gious
People and Inhabitants of Prittelwel in Ess^^ whom I love with my Heart) might
once more t^^ notice of these my Exercises that in Public I de^ver'd unto
them. The Night comes when ^ Man can work, therefore it behooves us all, bo^
Minister and People, to esteem of Time as the most precious thing in the World,
and the rather because we know not how soon we shall be called to an Account of
our Works. Many have had (many times) good purposes of Heart to clea^^ (...)
the Lord, that have been prevented by Death, for want of timely Repentance. It
shall then be our Wisdom to agree with our Adversary while we are in the way
with him, for if we are but once arrested with Death, we shall be sure to pay
the utmost Farthing Use this as ^ (...) unto thee, to better thee in the
Performance of that (...) which concerns thee so ^early, that thou may^st one
Day give an Account of thy Works If thou reap any Benefit by it, give the
Praise unto God, from whom every good and perfect Work proceed (...); for God
is a Spirit^punc; and they that worship him, must worship (...) in Spirit and
Truth And help me in my Prayers which I shall take as full Recompense of my
Labors, and be encouraged to spend some Hours more in the like Duties for the
Good; and in the mean time remain, thine in the common Savior.

SAMUEL SMITH.

THE GREAT ASSIZE.
The First SERMON.
Rev. 10.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 11. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that
sat on it, from whose Face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there was
found no place for them.

12 And I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God, and the Books were
opened: And another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life: And the Dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the Books, according to
their Works.

13. And the Sea gave up the Dead which were (...) it, and Death and Hell
delivered up the Dead which were in them: and they were judged every man
acccording to their Works.

14. And Death and Hell were cast into the Lake of Fire; this is the Second
Death.

15. And whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, were cast into
the Lake of Fire.


HAving spoken (not long since) of the coming of Christ unto his Garden, or
into his Church, and of his kind and princely o^^^ ^^^ous, su^^^ for (...) at
our (...), be^^g his first coming unto us here in this miserable Vale of Tears;
I thought it very necessary to speak something of his second Coming, that those
that will not be moved with the former Coming of him, which was in mere Love to
Mankind, might be terrified and astonished with the latter, who though he defers
his Coming, (as some think) having leaden Feet, because he expects Amendment,
shall then assuredly find that he has Iron Hands; who first came to be a
Savior to all them that believe in him, now comes to be a Judge, who will not
be blinded, nor bribed, either with present Money, nor yet with future Hope of
Reward.

The Sum of the Scripture.
To which purpose I have made choice of this place of Scripture, in which this
Matter (as you see) is at large described, with many necessary Circumstances,
most needful to be known, and learned of every one of us. For here the second
coming of Christ is revealed to St. John in a Vision from Heaven, even in that
manner in which the Lord Jesus himself will come at the last Day. For these
five Verses contain in them a lively and heavenly Description of the second
coming of our Saviou^ Christ to Judgment, with all the Circumstances belonging
to the same.

The Parts of the Text.
First, I will show you who it was that writ this Book, called the Apocalypse,
or the Revelation of St John the Evangelist, which our Text now treats on; and
then where he writ it. First, his Name was John, which Name in the Original
signifies Gracious. Secondly, the Time when it was written, and that was when
he was banished for the Testimony of Christ. Thirdly, (...) Place where he was
exiled, and banished to; and that was to an Isle called Pa^mos, a remote Place,
and most fitting for so high Contemplation, and the more to be free from
worldly Tho'ts. Fourthly, by whom he was banished, and that was by the Emperor
Domitian, who was then elected by the whole Senate o^ Council to be their Head.
Now this John was a Disciple of Christ, and one whom he loved; he followed
Christ wheresoever he went: Peter only went with his Master to the Judgment
Hall, this John went with him both to the Judgment-Hall, and also to the Cross,
and never left him till he had laid him in his Sepulcher. Upon the Cross Christ
commended the Care of his Mother unto the Author of these Words, which is John,
and was in these Words expressed, Behold thy Mother.

This Saint John was one of the three which went always with Christ, Christ had
but three Disciples with him in the Garden; and this John was one; Christ had
but three Disciples that went with him before Pilate, and this John was one. At
the Marriage in Cana in Galilee, there went but three Disciples, and this John
was one. This John was he that leaned on Christ's Breast at Supper, and asked
him many Questions. John always justified himself to be Christ's Disciple; for
in these Words he expressed himself to be of Christ's Flock, and his Disciple.
I John, a Brother of yours in Tribulation and Affliction.

And so I have now done with the Explanation of the Party which wrote these
Words which now I have read unto you in the Text.

1. The Person of the Judge.

And first, if you would know with what Majesty, Power, Integrity, Severity and
Terror, this great Judge will come, you may see the Person of the Judge
described in the first Verse of this present Text.

Secondly; If you would understand what Persons must be cited and summoned, who
must appear, St. John says here, he saw the Dead, both great and small stand
before the Judge: All that are, that ever have been, or shall be unto the End
of the World, shall be gathered together, and appear before the Throne of
Christ.

Thirdly, If you desire to be instructed after what manner Christ Jesus will
proceed in Judgment? what shall be the Evidences and the Witnesses? What Jury
shall pass upon every Man and Woman? The Holy Ghost tells us, that Book shall
be opened, that God will judge, every Man by his own Conscience; for that shall
give Evidence either for, or against him; either to excuse, or accuse in that
Day, either to stand or fall.

4. The Issue of the Judgment.

Fourthly, and lastly, If you would know what shall be the final End of all
Men, you may here perceive that they whos^ Names are written in the Book of
Life, shall be blessed; but Death and Hell, and Satan, and all ungodly Persons
shall be cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone for evermore: which is the
second Death.

Now having seen the meaning of the Text, let us come to speak to the several
Points one by one, in order. And the God of all Order so open our Hearts, that
we may hear and understand his Will* that our sinful Souls may be saved in the
Day of our Lord Jesus.

I saw a great white Throne, etc,
THis verse contains in it a notable Description of the Judge himself. And
whereas St. John said, he saw a great white Throne: That is, Christ Jesus
revealed to him in a Vision; the manner of his second Coming to Judgment; and
withal commanded him to write in a Book, for the Comfort and Instruction of his
Church and People for evermore.

Doct. Here then we may observe the great Care and Love of Jesus Christ toward
his poor Church and People, that he would not have them ignorant of his second
Coming to Judgment: But he does make it known to his Disciple John. and bids
him record it in the Book of God, that so no Man might be ignorant of it, but
rather prepare himself by true Repentance to meet the Lord in the Clouds.

Knowledge of the last Judgment necessary.
Doct. Surely the knowledge of Christ's coming to Judgment is most necessary,
being now so near at hand, for it was thought of, and looked for in David's
time, much more must we expect it in these our sinful Days, when we are divided
among our selves, at difference in the Church, and such a Rent made in the
seamless Coat of Christ: What can we expect less than that the Day drawing very
nigh, which our Savior foretold, that there should be Dissentions and
Differences among Nations, Wars Abroad, Rumors of Wars at Home, and such
Policy and Tricks used to deceive Men, and all for their own Ends, and under
the Color of Religion, as if it were possible, to d^ceive even the very Elect:
Where the Sabbath is so much profaned and neglected on all sides; which. Day,
God himself has set apart for Praying, and Hearing his Holy Word? It is a Day
for Praying, and not for Playing: It is not a Day for bodily Recreations. nor
Sport, but to converse with God in Holy Duties; but it is too much abused with
Sports and other May-games, which God forgive us for Christ's sake: And
therefore this Doctrine of E^ernal Judgment was one of those six Principle^
that were taught in the Primitive Church, by the Apostles themselves, as one of
the most necessary Points to be known of a Christian. There is not one Truth in
the Scriptures more urged both in the Old and New Testament; than this of the
last Judgment, as a Doctrine that above all others, is most effectual to awaken
Men out of their deep Security, to work men's Hearts to a reverent Fear and Awe,
of that Majesty, before whom they must one Day appear to give up their last
Account. See the Effects of this in Paul, who knowing the Terror of the Lord, 2
Cor. 5*11. How did this provoke him and others to a reverence and fear of that
dreadful Majesty? When in the 24th of the Acts, verse. 25. St. Paul preached
unto Felix of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, his Knees smote
together, and he trembled. See this likewise in the Prophet Habbakkuk, who when
he heard of the Judgment to come, says, My Belly trembled, and my Lips
quivered at the Voice, and rottenness entered into my Bones. Hab. 3.16* See this
also in David himself: My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of
thy Judgments, Psalm. ^19.120. See this likewise in Noah, of whom it is
recorded, that when the Lord had forewarned him of the Judgment that was to
come, albeit it was not nigh, but an hundred and twenty years to come, yet he
was moved with the Reverence of that God, which had threatened that Judgment,
and was willing to use Obedience in that Duty required in framing the Ark: And
as St. Austin says, every Knock that was given upon the Ark by Noah, was so
many warning-pieces to the (...) World.

And what Doctrine can be more needful for these times wherein we live, upon
whom the ends of the World is come, and every Man so forgetful of it? Yea, the
Ignorance, and want of due Consideration of this Day of Judgment, the
Scriptures makes the Ground indeed of all Sin. For in the Days of Noah, they
eat, they drank, they were married, and given in marriage, they planted, they
builded, never dreaming of the Judgment that was so nigh at hand, until the Day
come upon them as ^^ snare. See this likewise in those foolish Virgins that
slumbred and slept, and provided not their Oil of Faith in their Lamps, for the
coming of the Bridegroom. And what was the cause why that evil Servant in the
Gospel fell to eating and drinking, and beating his fellow Servants, but that
he put from him the Thoughts of the Return of his Master?

Oh, how should the consideration of this, cause every Man to sit and prepare
himself for this Judgment, that he may be able to stand bfore the Son of Man.

Now there are two things principally that hinder this Preparation in God's
Children for this Day.

The first, Security, or careless putting off this Day of Account, that the
Master will not come yet, and that they have yet time enough to provide for
their Reckoning and Account, yet let me tell you, we can call no Time ours, but
this present time: For who knows whether he shall behold the Light of the next
Day, yea, or no ^ and as St. Austin says, the Day of Death is not known,
therefore every Day, and every Hour in ^ in the Day, we must labor to repent
and prepare our selves, and to observe and look for this sudden Change; for who
knows how soon he may have his Mutation, which every Man (...) subject unto by
Nature, although for a time they give themselves to all manner of Dissoluteness
and Profaneness? And therefore it is high time to hearken unto the Word of God.
While the Gospel is so plentifully preached among us, and now while he calls
and knocks at the Doors of our Hearts, and would gladly be entertained; for,
says he, If any man will hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in, and
sup with him, and he with me. Christ makes a Proclamation of his Love,
whosoever he be, whether Jew or Gentile, he shall be received; and therefore
let us take this present time while we have it; for Time and Tide will stay ^
for none; the time past we cannot call back again, it is irrecoverable; the time
to come is full of uncertainty; for we may be cut off suddenly, as Herod was.
And therefore it is good that we make our Calling and Election sure and labor
with the Apostle to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and not to
lie in Security, which is the first hindrance, in that we do not meditate on
the Day of Death For after Death there is no Repentance; let us not think that
God has leaden Feet, because he is slow in coming, left when he comes, we
(...) he has Iron Hands.

Now the second hindrance that keeps Men from the Thoughts of this Judgment to
come, is the Care of this present Life, and the immoderate Love of the World;
Men's present Felicity does so affect them, that they will not think of another
Life; Whereas did Men consider, that even this Night their Souls might be taken
from them, Luke 12.19. How would they husband Time, making it their chief Care
to make their reckoning straight against the Day of Reckoning come, which no
man can tell how soon.

Such was the careless Thought of the rich Man in the Gospel, which sung that
lullaby to his Soul: Soul, thou have much Goods laid up for many Years, take
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. But what became of him? The Text says,
The Lord demanded his Soul, and that very same night following, his Soul was
taken away from him, and his Goods then might be any bodies: Some God takes
away because the World is not Worthy of them; 1 King 16.30. 1 Samuel 1^ 33. Acts
12 23.
some again, because they are not good Stewards, and they are not worthy of the
World: Such as Ahab, Agag and Herod; for being vile and ungodly Men, they did
not live out half their Days. Again, God took up E^j^b and wrap^ him unto the
third Heaven: He likewise cut ^ff Josias for his Soul pleased God; and
therefore God made haste to take him Away from the Evil to come, and the
Iniquity of the World, which when was great. Let us well consider and weigh
with our selves what our Deserts are, and ^xamine our Consciences, whether
there be any reason why God should spare us, and deal so severely with other
Nations, surely it is because he hopes, and daily expects that we should brin^
some Fruit in our Lives and Conversations which if we do not, then must we
expect the same measure to be meeted to us, as he has done to others. Some God
punishes, as we so^^ in this Life, which should be an Example to (...) that
live in it, for to amend our Lives a (...) ^e lets alone, as he did Pharaoh,
for a (...) time, others to the Day of Judgment: A^^ therefore let us not
slumber in our own Security, though we have Strength, Health, Riches, (...) all
that the World can afford us, but labor (...) th^r to abandon it, and apply
our selves to Heaven and heavenly Meditations, and leave (...) World as our
Inheritance; as Sheba, Queen (...) the South did, who left all, and came from
(...) further most Parts of the World, to hear (...) Wisdom of Solomon, and if
we will ^^t he^ his Voice, but stop our Ears at his Preaching we must then
expect our Punishment due un^ ^s, and with the Jews to be forsaken, and l^^ as
Vagabonds, wandering up and down, or (...) Sheep having no Shepherd; and after
this Life have our Torments with the Wicked in H^^ Fi^e; so much for Security.

1. Great Things described by two Properties.

Doct. 2. Christ's coming with great Glory.

Now concerning the Vision, St. John saw great white Throne; he saw a Throne
set, (...) this Throne is described by two Properties First, a great Throne.
Secondly, a white Thr^^^ The first shows the wonderful, Might, Majesty Power of
the Judge. The second shows the ^^^ity, Integrity and Uprightness of the Judge,
(...) ^oth set out unto us the wonderful Majesty Power, in which the Lord Jesus
shall come and appear at the time of his second Coming, when he shall sit upon
the Throne of his Glory. And then shall we see the Son of Man, coming in the
Clouds; (which is from Heaven;) with Power and great Glory, Mat 24.30. Glorious
shall the Lord Jesus be at that Day, not only in his own Persons and
Attendants, being accompanied with all his holy Angels, and blessed Martyrs in
their bright Array; but also in the Administration of Justices and Judgment, in
respect of the Glory he will bestow upon the Godly; for now he shall come to be
glorified in his Saints, and made mavelous in them that believe, 2 These.
2.10. So for the Administration of Justice against the Wicked, upon whom he
shall now get himself a greater Name than he did upon Pharaoh and his Host, who
now beholding the Terror of the Lord, shall try to the Mountains to fall upon
them, and the Hills to cover them, and hide them from his Presence, (...) they
are not able to endure, Rev. 6.16. But it is not the Multitude of People and
Nations which shall then appear, can hide them or their Sins from th^s Judge.

The Scriptures sets out the Majesty and Glory of the Son of God at his second
Appearing, in diverse Particulars: First, that he shall come, and all his holy
Angels with him. Secondly, That he shall come with Power and great Glory, Mat.
24.30. Thirdly, That he shall come in the Clouds, which shall be as a fiery
Chariot, 'to carry him with admirable swiftness. Fourthly, his Herald and
Archangel, making the way by the sound of a Trumpet, which Dust and Ashes
shall hear ^ I mean the dead Bodies of Men turned to Dust and Ashes, shall now
arise and come to Judgment ^ Yea, such shall be the Glory of (...) coming at
this time, that the very Heavens shall be shaken, and shall pass away with a
noise, and the very Elements shall melt with heat, 2 Pet 3.10 Consider we but
the Glory of Earthly Princes going unto their Parliaments to make Laws; (...)
of their Judges, when they go to put the si^^ in Execution against Malefactors,
with wh^^ Majesty, Pomp and Glory! How are they ^^tended! How are they
reverenced and honored* All these are far short in comparison of the
Excellency, Majesty, and Glory, wherewith the Lord Jesus, the Judge of all the
World shall come and appear at that Day.

Use 1. Shows the difference betwixt Christ's first and second Coming.

Herein then we may perceive a manifold difference between Christ's coming in
the Flesh, to be a Mediator and Redeemer, and his second coming to Judgment.
His first Coming was in Meekness, Love, and great Humility, for he was laid in
a Manger between two Beasts, an O^^ and an A^^: And as a learned Father does
interpret it, as it were between a Jew and a Gentile. And we may read that
Christ says, The Foxes have bo^es and the Birds have nests, but the Son of Man
has not where to lay his Head. Where he c^nfess^^h himself to be the Son of
Man which was his Meekness, and then his Humility and Love, in that he had no
where to lay his Head. Our Sins caused all this, and more than all this, for he
was wounded for our Transgressions, and our Sins were the main cause of putting
Christ to death. The Jews thought once crucifying had been enough, but we daily
crucify the Lord of Life again by our Oaths, in breaking his Commandments, and
in pelleting his Sabbaths; which will make our Reckoning greater at his second
coming, which will be to Judgment. Therefore let every one who reads these
Words, have a Care to do well, and cease to be what they have been, and deny
and go out of our selves, that we may entertain this new Man Christ Jesus, and
say with holy David, Ps. 51.10 Create in me, O God, a clean, Heart, and renew a
right Spirit within me, so that they may appear blamless and spotless before
him having been clothed with Robes of Christ's Righteousness, God does not
delight in the Death of any Sinner. Christ is now a Mediator, and hereafter
will be our Judge. Moses was God's Oracle, and did deliver God's Will to the
People; he went between God and the Children of Israel, as Christ had done
between his Father and us sinful Men, and as Moses and Aaron pleaded for the
Children of Israel unto God, and desired rather to be blotted out of the Book
of Life, than that they should perish; so likewise has Christ pleaded with
God, and has bought with his gracious Blood and Life, which he willingly laid
down for our sakes; and as Moses led the Children of Israel through the Red Sea,
even so has Christ led us through the Red Sea of his Blood, which is a full
Satisfaction for all such as truly repent of their Sins. And so much by the way
to show unto you the Humility and great Love which our blessed Savior bore to
Mankind at his first coming to us in the Flesh; for he so loved us, that he
laid down his Life for our sakes; and shall we be so ungrateful, as not to love
him again, and give him Thanks* O let us not be so ungrateful; for Ingratitude
St. Ambrose calls the Devil's Sponge, wherewith he wipes out God's Love and
Mercy; b^t his second coming shall be with Majesty, Power and great Glory And
let us here note, that he comes not alone. but with Majesty and Power, and
brings Ten Thousand of his Saints and Angels, to execute Judgment upon all;
then he promised his Disciples which followed him, that they should sit upon
Twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tr^bes of Israel; David in Psalm 57. says,
The Lord comes to judge the World. St. John likewise in his 9th Chap. says,
The Father judges no man but has committed all Judgment to his Son, which is
the second Person in the Trinity, it is he that must pronounce this Sentence,
though the whole Trinity agree in the same Condemnation: Where it is plain, that
Christ Jesus i^ the Judge of the whole World. And surely i^ makes much for the
C^mfort of God's poor Children, though here they be in Want and Misery, yet they
shall be made Partakers of this Glory of their Head Christ Jesus.

Use 2. Secondly, It serves to astonish all hard hearted Sinners, who contemn
Christ and his poor Members: Christ will at last manifest his Power in their
just Condemnation such as will not stoop unto him, that he might reign over
them by the Scepter of his Word, and hear that still Voice of his in the
Ministry o^ the same shall be never able to abide the brightness of his coming,
but shall hear that terrible Voice of his, when he shall exalt himself i^
Judgment, to the everlasting Confusion of his Enemies.

Seeing the Person of the Judge is of such endless Power and Glory, of such
wonderful Might and Majesty, this must humble all men, when they come to stand
in the Presence of so great a Person, as we do when we come to hear the Word
preached and taught, to receive the holy Sacrament. For when the Word is
preached God speaks to us, and when we pray we speak to God, and how dare we
then be so bold to sleep in his Presence, talk, or use any unreverent Gesture?
If we were to come into the Presence of an Earthly Prince how careful and
circumspect would we behave our selves, to do nothing unbeseeming the Presence
of so great a Person? This is the great care of Men, when they come into the
Presence of an Earthly Judge, to put off their Hats, and to show all Tokens of
Reverence, and it is a wonder to see how unreverently Men and Women come into
the Presence of the ever-living and most high God, into the Presence of the
Great Judge of Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. When we
come to pray, or sing Psalms unto God, how unreverent are some, would any man
be so in the Sight of an Earthly Judge, or a Mortal Prince? Surely then
unreverent Behavior ought to be avoided, either when we speak unto God by
Prayer, or when God speaks unto us in his Word.

And last of all, this may serve for Matter of singular Comfort and Consolation
unto all the Godly, that Christ shall appear thus gloriously in Judgment For
this assures them that they shall participate of the same Glory with their
Head: For this great Judge shall say, Come ye Blessed: They shall both with
Body and Soul receive a Glorious Kingdom, and a beautiful Crown from the Hands
of the Lord, and with his Right Hand shall he cover them, and with his Arm
shall he protect them. It is a Day of refreshing, when all Tears shall be wiped
away from our Eyes, Sorrow shall cease, and we and all penitent Sinners shall
live and reign with the Lamb forever. Indeed now God's Church is many times
black and deformed through Aff^ect^^n, it shows many times without any Appearance
of any Excelcellency or Beauty at all; the World sees no Glory at all in them;
no, they many times perceive not their own happy Condition; but now when Christ
shall appear thus glorified, they shall appear with him ^n Glory Let us then
(my Brethren) walk by Faith, and not by Sight not minding so much what we are.
but rather what we shall be when the Day of refreshing shall come; God tells us
plainly that he is a jealous God, and if he be jealous of us, let us be jealous
of our selves, and supect our selves For if we judge our selves, we shall not
be judged

White Throne. Doct 3 The Integrity of Christ Judgment.
SEcondly, This Throne of Christ Jesus is called a White Throne, now this White
Throne bet^k^neth Purity, Beauty, Sincerity, and Integrity; and therefore
shows that Christ Jesus the Judge of the whole World, will judge all Causes
and all Persons uprightly, sincerely, and justly, no Cruelty, nor Injustice,
nor Wrong will he do to any Creature, but will proce^^ most sincerely with all
Integrity, for our Conscience will testify either for or against us. Indeed
Judgment in this World often swervet^ greatly; sometimes the Judge is not able
to search the Depth the C^^^se; sometimes (...) Fear he dares not to do
Justice; sometimes for Favor he is with holden; sometimes Bribes blind his
Eyes, and prevent the right Sentence. But it shall not be so with this Judge of
the whole World; he that is verus Iudex et justus, the true and righteous
Judge; his Sentence is a righteous Sentence; he will judge according to Truth;
he is able to find out any Cause, and will examine to the bottom; he fears no
Man's Person, he will not be moved with Favor to conceal the Truth; and as for
Rewards, he contemns them all, it is far from him to deal unjustly, therefore
no doubt he will proceed according to Justice. Nor is he like to these our
Earthly Judges, who are called to Judge; but he comes of his own Power and
Authority to be avenged, and give Sentence to all those that in their Lifetime
had forgotten God.

We know that the Judgment of God is according to Truth, Romans 2.2. Says the
Apostle again Thy Throne O God, is for ever, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a
right Scepter, thou love Righteousness, and hate Iniquity, Heb. 18 And this
is to be referred to that of the Prophet Daniel, who says Dan. 7.9. That this
Judge shall sit upon a great white Throne, therein alluding to the very Throne
of Solomon, but infinitely more glorious, which place of Daniel; and this of
St. John does betoken the Uprightness, Purity, and Integrity of the J^dge, and
of his Judgment, when every secret thing shall be brought to Judgment (as
Solomon says) Eccles. 12.14. And when he shall lighten all things that are bid
in Darkness, and make the Counsels of all their Hearts manifest: When there
shall be no bribing of Justice, pleading of Lawyers, or salving up of bad
Causes with Silver and Gold, nor Sanctuaries or privileged places to fly unto
for Succor, but every Person must now receive according to his Works, and
therefore woe now unto the Hypocrite, woe now unto the Murderer and Shedder of
Blood, woe unto all hard hearted and impenitent Sinners, that can no^ in this
Life sh^ft off Justice, and escape the Judgment of Men, that break the Net and
escape, none dare to control them. What will become of such at that Day, when
they shall stand naked before the Judge, before the Saints and Angels, yea,
before all the World, and hear their Indictment read against them for the same?
^ it such a shame to do Penance only in a Congregation for one particular
Fault, when the Punishment is inflicted upon a Man for his Amendment when M^^
shall pity this Man, and pray for him? Oh what Terror will th^s be to all
wicke^ and ungodly Men and Women in this Day, when the^ shall now in the Day be
charged with all their Sins before this Judge before the Saints and Angels, yea
before all the World; not for their Amendment for then it is (...) their utter
Confession, when none shall pity them, no Heart shall lament for them, b^^ all
shall rejoice that have done well at their righteous Judgment.

Use 1. T^is (...) for the Comfort of God's People in this World. We see
sometimes the righteous Cause is trodden under Foot, Men (...) and Livings are
detained and taken from them by unrighteous Judges, and that under Co^^^s of
Law. Well, let Men have Patience (...) this, that there will come a Day when
(...) there shall be Justice and true Judgment do^^ unto them, Here thy Cause
shall be heard, shall be righted, for Christ Jesus shall be the righteous Judge
for the Poor, the Fatherless and Widow.

Again, we see how those that make Conscience of Sin, and are careful to hear
the Word, and to walk accordingly, are despised of the World. Well, let us
learn to possess our Souls with Patience, for there will come a Day of
Reckoning, when our righteous Cause will be heard, and we shall have Justice,
but all the contemners of the Lord Jesus, and such as have been Persecutors of
his poor Members, shall feel the sm^^^ of it. What a Comfort were this to a
poor Man oppressed by Tyrants, having a long time lain under the vile Aspersion
as Joseph, reputed an Adulterer, and suffering Imprisonment for the same, to
have his Oppressions come to light, and to be delivered, to have his Innocence
known and be justified. Lazarus for suffering Hunger to have P^enty, and Dives
for his Excess and Riot to have Penury and Want? O then what will the Comfort
of those be that shall thus at that Day before the Saints and Angels yea, and
before all the World, be set free and at liberty from their Oppressions and
Wrongs they have s^ long a time laid under, and cleared from those Censures and
Aspersions that by the World have been laid upon them? What a Comfort will it
be when we shall hear the Judge say unto us, Well done thou good and Faithful
Servant, come enter into thy Masters Joy?

Use 2. Secondly, This may persuade the Godly in their sharpest Sufferings and
greatest Wrongs and Injuries they can meet withal here in this World, to
possess their Souls with Patience, and take heed of Revenge, but rather commit
all to Christ the righteous Judge, that judges righteously; for the Lord
says, Vengeance is (...) I will repay it. The Lord will strike home to them,
and will revenge thee upon all thine Enemies above thy weak Power. Observe we
the Rule concerning this Judgment-day; When thou see in the place of
Judgment, Wickedness: and Iniquity in the place of Justice th^nk in thy Heart
surely God will Judge the^ Just and Wicked, for there is Time for every
Purpose. And again, when thou see^ Oppression of the Poor, and the defrauding
of Judgment and Justice, be not astonished at the Matter for be that is higher
than the highest regards ^t.

There is nothing in all the World does prove more certainly the Judgment Day
than the Justice of the wicked World; for thus we reason Will the Lord thus
certainly punish the Wicked, and recompense the Just? This being not always
here in this Life, certainly it must be (...) the Day of Judgment. Thus reasons
the Apostle St Paul, showing that the Affliction of the believing Thessalonians
were an evident Sign of God's righteous Judgment, in which Judgment Day
Tribulations should be rendered to them that troubled them, and to them that
now did suffer Rest should be given. Upon this very ground exhorts St. James,
thus; Be ye also patient, a^ settle your Hearts for the coming of the Lord
draws near. As if he should have said, do not saint neither be out of Heart
that ye are now oppressed by the Men of the World, but wait the appointed time,
as the Husbandman the Weeks (...) the Harvest, till the coming of the Lord be,
until which time the full Recompense of Righteousness is neither given to the
Righteous, (...) the deserved Judgment rendered to the Wicked

Use 3. Thirdly, This gives us to see the Truth of Solomon's words, Prove 11.18.
The Wicked (...) a deceitful Work, than the which, what greater Deceit than to
persuade themselves that though they live after the Flesh, yet they shall not
die, and that they may sow iniquity, and yet look to reap Happiness; that Men
may despise God's Bounty and Grace, which he tendereth unto them in his Word,
and yet look to taste Mercy after Death, that they may all their Lifetime walk
the broad Way that leads to Destruction, and yet at the last arrive at the
happy Port and Haven of Bliss? Whereas it is a most sure and grounded Truth of
the Apostle, Gal 68. He that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption: But he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life
everlasting, Heb. 12.14. And without holiness no man shall see God.

Use 4. Fourthly, Seeing Christ Jesus the Judge comes thus with Might and
Majesty, not as a Savior or Mediator, but as a Judge, it must admonish all Men
and Women now to repent and turn to God in time of Mercy, to seek the Lord
while he may be found, to call upon him while he is near Iso. 55.6. Now while
we live Christ Jesus comes unto us by his Ministers, as a Savior to save our
Souls, in Mercy to bring us unto Repentance. He offers his free Grace to all,
for in Isa. 32.15. The Text says, I will pour out my Spirit upon you; and if
you will not have Vessels of Faith to receive this Spirit, it will then be a
Witness against us; for after this Life, he will no more come as a Savior or
Mediator, but as a mighty Judge, full of mighty Power and Glory. And therefore
look how Men die, so shall the Judge find them.

If thou die in thy Sins, and do not repent and seek for Pardon at the Hand
of the Judge while thou live here, there is no hope of Mercy after Death, for
how Death leaves thee, so shall Judgment find thee Cain died many thousand
Years ago, and Judas in their Sin so shall the last Day find them; for afte^
Death there is no Mercy, but Justice an^ Judgment, when every Man shall receive
according to his Works. How glad would D^^es have been if he could have
persuaded ^braham to have sent one from the Dead, t^ his five Brethren, to
admonish them to repent No, said Abraham, they have Moses and the Prophets, if
they will not bear them nor believe the^ they will not, though one come from the
Dead, le^^ their wicked Ways. Therefore while we ha^^ Time let us make use of
it, and employ to the best Advantage.

And one sitting thereon The Person of the Judge described.
NOW who this is which sat upon the great white Throne, you may see in R^^ 14
14. I saw a white Cloud, and one sitting on like the Son of Man, having on his
Head a gol^ Crown and in his Hand a sharp Sickle.

Doct. 4. Christ the Judge at the last Day.

So that we see that it is the Son of M^^ even Christ Jesus, God and Man, that
shall the Judge. And so does St. Matthew call h^^ Mat 25.21. When the Son of
Man comes in Glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then he sit upon the
Throne of his Glory. And (...) he intitles him by the name of a King, (...) 34.
Then shall the King say unto them on his (...) hand, Come ye blessed, etc. This
is taught the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear fore the Judgment Seat
of Christ. And (...) Joh 22. The Father judges no Man, but has committed all
Judgment to the Son. Not that the first Person in the Trinity, or the Third is
excluded from this Judgment, but appropriating his Judgment to the Second
Person, the Lord Jesus Christ, who in a visible Form, according to his
Humanity, shall execute the last Judgment upon all Flesh.

Quest.But how is it said, 1 Cor. 6.2. That the Saints shall judge the World?
Answ. That place of the Apostle and the like is to be understood as Assessors,
as such as shall approve of the Judgment of that most righteous Judge, to whom
shall be given at the last Day that Honor, to sit as Justices on the Bench by
the Judge, to approve of his righteous Judgment. Again, the Saints shall judge
the World, as Members of the Head, which is the Judge.

Now the Administration of the last Judgment is laid upon the Son for diverse
Respects. 1. Why Christ will be Judge. First, In regard that he was the Person
that was Redeemer of the World, and was himself judged in and by the World? It
is therefore expedient that he should show the Power and Glory of that in's
Humanity, he being Judge of the World.

Secondly, in regard of his Church, who have seen only his Humility to their
Justification, so they may at last behold his Power and Glory at his second
appearing to their Glorification.

Thirdly, and lastly, That in the last Act of his he might fully accomplish
that his Kingly Office, and then deliver the Kingdom to God the Father: no more
to rule and govern them by his Magistrates and Ministers, as now he does, for
the gathering together of his Saints, and to the perfecting of God's Body; and
to nourish and cherish them by his Word and Sacraments, since^ the Lord
himself, the Lamb, in the midst of the Throne, shall be all these unto them.

True it is that our Savior Christ is King, Priest and Prophet, a true
Prophet, in whom was contained all the Secrets, and whole Counsel of God, ^
true High Priest, whose Sacrifice alone was able to put away the Sins of the
whole World, b^^ when he comes on the Throne of Majesty, to judge the Quick and
Dead, he will not come as a Priest or Prophet, for the Offices of Christ are
finished. For this Prophetical Office, he has sufficiently revealed the whole
Counsel of God his Father to his Church and People, first by his holy Prophets,
then by himself, after by his Apostles and Ministers. And therefore seeing that
this Prophetical Office is finished, he calls not himself Prophet, but a King.
Again, Christ Jesus our Priest having once for all offered up that propitiatory
Sacrifice for the Sins of all the Elect now this Office of a Priest is also
finished, and the Sacrifice must be no more entreated and repeated. But now he
comes as a King, in al^ Majesty and Glory. For though his Prophetical and
Priestly Office be accomplished, yet his Princely Office is not finished, but
shall in a special manner show it self at that Day, and Christ Jesus the Judge
of Quick and Dead, shall manifest himself to be King of all Nations, to Men and
Angels. Now shall he show himself to be a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
full of Divine and Heavenly Glory. When our Savior Jesus Christ lived on
Earth, he came in misery, very poor and lowly, then every base Fellow, every
sinful Wretch durst mock him and spit in his Face; Herod, Pontius Pilate,
Caiaphas, and the Rabble of the Jews durst then use him at their pleasure. But
now he shall come as a King full of Majesty and Glory, guarded and attended
upon with many thousand of heavenly Soldiers, even all his holy Angels; and
then he will make Herod, Pontius Pilate, yea, the greatest Kings and Monarchs
to stoop; nay, then all his Enemies shall tremble and quake, Zach. 12.10. And
not dare to open their Mouths against him, as the wicked and rebellious Crew
did once; when they cried, away with him, away with him, crucify him, crucify
him, when the third part (I dare say) did not understand what he was accused
for; but they the oftener cried. Crucify him, when the Judge could not find him
any way guilty; but if it were not so, his blood, say they, light upon us and
our Children. Which I think has done for they are utterly depopulated, and are
as Vagabonds on the Face of the Earth. These were that faithless Generation of
the Jews, which when they shall behold him whom they have crucified, to become
their Judge, and have that Power with him, and shall see his Side and his Hands
which the Nails and Spear pierced: What then will they do? What then can they
expect? Even that fearful Sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting fi^e with the
unbelievers where is nothing, but weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

This may serve then in the first place for matter of singular comfort and
consolation unto the Godly, who may rejoice in this, that Christ their Savior
and Redeemer shall be their Judge; they need not fear the Judge, nor any hard
Sentence that he will Pronounce against them at that Day; since the Judge is
their Savior, their Redeemer, their Brother, their ow^ Flesh; yea their own
Head. The consideration of this made Job to hold up his Head, and in the midst
of all Miseries to receive some hope; ^ know that my Redeemer lives. Go tell
my Brethren (says Christ) that I am risen again: Words ^ joy and comfort, a
Redeemer, a Brother: Why should the Godly fear, when they are to deal with such
a One? What Wife would fear ha^^ loving Husband to hear and judge her Cause:
She need not doubt, but that the matter will go well with her; her most dear
loving Husband shall both hear, and judge, and avenge her Cause* Let all God's
People then comfort themselves i^ this the consideration of their Judge: It was
h^ that was judged for thee on Earth, and redeemed thee with his own Blood, and
has ever find made Intercession to God for thee, that is to b^ thy Judge.

Use 2. 2 dly, What ground of Terror may thi^ be to all wicked Sinners that
live in Sin, to fe^ him come in that wonderful Majesty, to be the Judge, whom
they have condemned, whose Members they have persecuted, and whose Word and
Gospel they have not regarded, but trodden under foot? For he shall come with a
s^^rp two edged Sword to cut them in pieces, and a consuming Fire to burn up
all ungodly Sinners Heb. 12.29 Surely the consideration of this, that Christ
shall be the Judge, may daunt the Heart^ and st^^ke Terror into the Souls of
all wicked Men; They shall see him whom they have pierced says the Prophet,
even him against whom all their Villainies have been committed. What a fearful
Sentence may such expect from Christ at that Day. Here is a Judge that will
judge righteously, from whom there is none to appeal to; and because it is he
whom they have rejected, condemned and despised; him whom they would in no wise
suffer to rule and reign over them: What can such look for, but Condemnation,
and to be cast into utter Da^kness.

Oh consider this betimes, ye that put from you the Thoughts of this Judge, and
of this Judgment; for as a Snare it shall come one day upon all that are on the
Earth; take heed of abusing his Patience any longer: Why should thou thus
treasure up to thy self Wrath against the Day of Wrath? Thou think it will
go hard with Cain, Pharaoh, Pilate an^ Judas, at that Day, and why not with
thee, if thou remainest disobedient, and trampiest under Foo^ the Lord Jesus,
that is now offered unto thee in the Gospel? for this let us be assured of,
that if we draw our Love and Obedience from God, he will withdraw his Blessing
from us.

From whose Face fled, etc. Severity of the Judge described.
IN the description of the Judge it is further added, that from the Face of
this Judge, both the Heaven and the Earth fled away. And this does show the
wonderful Severity of this great Judge of Heaven and Earth. We know that Men
fly from those things they fear and dread: So here, the Heaven and Earth do
fear the glorious Presence of Jesus Christ, the great Judge of the whole World,
and seek to hide themselves that ^hey may not appear before him. This flying ^f
the Earth and Heaven, hiding themselves that they dare not appear in the
Presence of Christ, does show the wonderful Majesty, and great Severity and
Terror of Christ Jesus the Judge.

Object. But the Heavens and the Earth are void of Sense; Again, they be very
goodly and beautiful Creatures. Besides all this, they never committed any Sin:
How comes to pass then, that they shall fly and hide themselves from the
Presence of the Son of God?

Ans^^^. They never sinned indeed, but yet the Sin of Man is of that force,
that it has infected both the Earth we tread on, and the Heavens over our
Heads, yea, all Creatures for Man's Sin are subject to Vanity, Rom 8.20. O then
see how odious a thing sin is in the sight of Almighty God; what a vile things
that the contagion and infection thereof should infect the whole Heavens, and
make them that they dare not abide the glorious Presence of God their Creator?
O should we not abhor Sin as the vilest thing in the World? We are afraid of
the Plague, because it infectet and kills Men's Body: B^t the Plague of Sin is
a thousand times more to be abhorred and fled from, seeing it poisons and
infects both Body and Soul; and is so contagious, that the C^eature is afraid
to behold the Face of the Son of God; for in that Day the Sun shall be dar^ and
the Moon shall be turned into Blood: This i^ that which is able to turn a
wicked Man from his sinful ways, and return unto God: The Remembrance of this
Day of Judgment, and of our Sins which cause it, should make them be wan^ how
they mis-spend their time in vain and id^^ Thoughts. This kept holy David so
much awe, when he heard of the Punishment due ^ him for his Sins, he presently
repented him the Evil, and the Lord forgave him. Likewise in the 112 Psalm.
says he, I have feared thy Judgments, thy Judgments were always in my sight.
It is a fearful thing to lie in Sin, and it is a fearful thing to fall into the
Hands of the everliving Lord, for he is a consuming Fire; yet if we will
confess our Sins, he will as soon forget and forgive them. God is not like a
Marshal of a Field, nothing but present Death for every Fault. No, he gives Men
warning before he strikes and bids us repent and turn unto the Lord our God. He
gave warning by Jonah to Nineveh; and tells them, Yet forty days and Neneveh
shall be destroyed: The Nenevites presently repented and were converted; the
found of Jonah's Words caused not only the Subjects, but the very King of that
City, to come from his Throne of State, and to ^hrow off his rich Robes, and
put on Sachelock, and fit in Astres, with weeping, fasting and great mourning;
and if we be put in mind of our Sins, and still run on in our Wickedness we
must expect the punishment which fell upon Sodom and Gomorrah; for if we
neglect God's Favors, and cast them behind us, we must one Day expect his
Punishments. We know that we have sinned, and that his Wrath burns as hot as
Fire, and shall we not seek to quench it by our Tears of Contrition: It is our
own fault; if we be ^onsumed, having so many fair Proffers from God's Hands
offered us. Shall God's Word move Rocks and Mountains, and shall not his Word,
nor his Love, nor his Threatenings move ^s to hearken to his Law? Sin poisons
all the ^nward Parts and Faculties of Man, and it is the only cause of all
those Judgments that will ^ne Day fall upon us; and that we must give an
^ccount of all our Misdeeds before God and all his holy Angels in Heaven, who
cannot behold his Majesty but with dazzled Eyes. And ^^ much shall serve to
show how heinous a thing Sin is.

Observe. Seeing both Heaven and Earth shall (...) and perish from before the
glorious Presence of Christ Jesus; nay, they shall burn with Fire, as Pe^^
says, 2 Pet. 3.10, 11. All our goodly Houses, ^ our Gold and Silver, and
costly Apparel shall ^^ burnt with Fire This may teach us Moderation a^
Sobriety in the use of God's Creatures. What Fo^^ is it to spend all that a Man
has, to build a state^ House, and yet in the end of it must be consumed wi^^
Fire, and become nothing else but Fuel for the Fire.

Secondly, Seeing that Heaven and Earth, the^ great and glorious Creatures,
these beautiful ^ excellent Works of God's Hands, which ha^ no Sense nor
feeling, nor have sinned, shall ^ before the Son of God, as being not able to
e^dure his Presence: Alas. what shall wicked an^ hard-hearted Sinners do? What
shall become ^ the vile Wretches of the World, which live a^ delight in Sin?
Where shall the Ungodly and Sinn^ appear? What will become of the Blaspheem^
and Adulterers; if the Heavens and the Eart^ those great and amiable Creatures,
which ^ not, shall not be able to stand in his Presenc^ then I say what will
become of all profane ungodly Sinners? Alas they shall be even their Wits end,
not knowing in the World whi^^ way to turn them, nor where to fly for Succo^^
Where shall they seek for Refuge, when as ^^ Judge himself is their Enemy? Who
dares pl^^ for them? Dare any Saint or Angel? No, no Saint or Angel dares open
his Mouth to sp^^ one Word in their behalf; neither can ^^ Creature deliver
them from the dreadful Vengeance of this terrible Judge. What drowsiness is in
us? Nay. what carelessness does possess our Minds, if we will stop our Ears like
the deaf Adder, at the preaching of God's Word, that is daily in our Land, and
every Hour almost delivered amongst us? Can we not remember? Are we choked
with the Cares of this World? Is our Memory so short, or have we drank so much
of the Cup of Forgetfulness, that we cannot remember what our Savior says
plainly, Except ye repent, ye shall all perish?

The Scripture in diverse places sets out unto us the Severity of the Judge at
the time of his coming, especially against the Wicked and hard hearted Si^ners,
by that Thunder that shall be heard from Heaven; by the Voice of the Arch
Angel, as it were the Herald that shall go before Christ; by the Sound of a
Trumpet; by the Judgment it self that then shall pass upon the Wicked, Mat. 25
41. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels,
etc. By that fire that shall go before Jesus Christ, Psalm 50 3. Our God shall
come, and not keep silence; a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be
very tempestuous round about him And again, 2 These 1.8. He shall come in a
flame of fire, rend^ing vengeance, etc. By that shame and contempt that shall
light upon the Ungodly in that Day, Dan. 12. And many of them which ^^eep in
the dust of the Earth shall awake, etc. some to shame and perpetual contempt;
by the total discovery of all the Evils they have committed, Psalm. 50.21. These
things have thou done, etc. By the Pain and Horror they suffer and undergo.
Tributation, anguish and sorrow shall be upon every one that does evil, Romans
2.9. By the Companions the Wicked shall have after the Life, Mat. 25.41. Even
the Devil and his Angels, and^

Verse 11. And I saw the Dead, both great and small.
THus you have heard the Person of the Judge described by his wonderful Majesty
and Power, wherewith he will come to Judgment; and also by the great Severity
and Te^^ that shall astonish both Heaven and Earth, a^^ make them to fly before
his Presence.

Now in this Verse, and that which follows is declared who they be that shall
appear before this great judge, namely, I saw the Dead, both great and small,
etc.

Secondly, The Evidences that shall be bro^^ in, and that Witnesses shall be
produced, either excuse or accuse, in these Words, And the Ba^^ were opened,
etc.

The Persons that shall appear in Judgment. And saw the Dead both great and
small, etc. Before ^^ come to speak of the Words, here a Question may arise,
How this can be true that St. J^^ faith, He saw the Dead both great and small;
(...) we believe, that Jesus Christ shall judge both the Quick and Dead, not
only the Dead but (...) Living* And Paul says, We shall not die, but changed,
they that be living at his coming* Then how does this place agree with them,
^^ing St. John says here, He saw the Dead. H^ is none spoken of but the Dead,
no mention^^ the Living.

I answer, St. John says, That he saw the D^^ Not that he saw not the Living
too; for (...) saw (no doubt) both Quick and Dead ste^^ before God, but he
speaks here only of th^^ of whom there might be some doubt. F^^ the Dead, and
they which have been rotten for many thousand Years, and turned to Ashes, shall
appear and stand before God; how can we think that any of the Living shall be
wanting? Is they which have been dead for six thousand Years, and turned to
Ashes. shall be bro't to Judgment, then (no doubt) they which be found living
when Christ shall come to Judgment, shall appear before him likewise. So then
it is evident, that although St. John speaks here only of the Dead, because
there might be most doubt of them: Yet he saw in a Vision all Men both quick
and dead, stand and appear before the Judge, and before his Throne.

I saw the Dead, etc.
Doct. 4. Men shall be raised out of the dust at last.

THe Instruction we are hence to learn, is, that the Bodies of Men, howsoever
turned to Dust and Ashes, shall one day be quickened and raised up to Life again.

This is confessed by Hannah, in her Song. 2 Samuel 2 6. The Lord kills and
makes alive, brings down to the grave, and raises up. I am sure (says Job)
that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall stand the last day on the earth; and
though worms destroy my body, yet I shall see God in my flesh, Job 19 25. So
Esaias, the dead shall arise, awake and sing ye that dwell in the earth, Isa.
26.19. So likewise you may read in the 37 of Ezek^el, (which I pray you read at
leisure) how the Lord caused the Graves to open, and the Bones to come
together, and live: So that we see that the dead Bodies of God's Children do
not perish, they are not cast away and lost when they die, but they shall rise
again; they shall be purified, made glorious Bodies, and shall stand in
Christ's Presence, and see his Glory.

We must not think the Antiquity of long lying in the Grave, can shelter us
from the Resurrection, which will be common and general. It Is not like an
earthly Trial, it is not the Stubble shall hide Saul, nor the ground hide
Achan's Sin: Cain shall rise with Abel Face to Face; Herod with John the
Baptist, Fel^x with Paul, Moses with Pharaoh; and then who can deny that he
has done wickedly? Our Consciences will accuse us, which we carry daily about
us: The Gentiles shall rise up against the Jews; the Heavens shall bear witness
against us for our cold Prayers, and the Creatures of ^ the Earth for our
rebellious Thoughts, and then our Consciences shall justify this to be true,
then Wo^ and Sorrow, and Wringing of Hands, an^ no comfort can be afforded us,
then would (...) give all that we were ever worth, to have but ^ Months time,
or but a Weeks time, nay, but^ Day or Hours time or space, to repent: (...)
make our Reconciliation with God, whom (...) have so offended.

And therefore let us not think that what Death comes and separateth the Soul
from the Body, that then the Body does perish and cast away, no, no, it shall
rise again, it is (...) laid in the Grave, as in a sure Chest, and the^ is at
ease, and lies asleep, as on a Bed of Do^^. But when Christ Jesus shall come
to Judgment it shall rise again: For we must know, that very true Believer is
made a Member of Christ and not only our Souls are united to Christ but even
our dead B^dies, when they be l^^ in the Grave, they shall still remain the
de^^ Members of his Mystical Body, and therefo^^ shall not perish, but rise
again to Glory. A^^ for our further Confirmation in this Point of the
Resurrection, let us see how it is confirmed to us by Testimonies of holy
Scripture, as that of Daniel, They that sleep in the Dust shall awake, some to
everlasting Life, and some to everlasting shame, Dan. 12 2.

And the Lord God by the Prophet Hosea does make unto his Church this gracious
Promise, Hos 13.^4. I will redeem thee from the Power of the Grave, I will
deliver thee from Death: O Death, I will be thy Death, O Grave, I will be thy
Destruction. This is cleared by the Testimony of Jesus Christ himself, Ioh.
5.28, 29. The Hour shall come, in the which all that are in the Graves shall
hear his Voice, and they shall come forth; and they which have done Good, shall
go unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done Evil, unto the
Resurrection of Condemnation.

This is taught by the Apostles of Jesus Christ in diverse places of their
Epistles, ^^ 1 Cor. 15.51. behold I show you a Mystery, we shall not all sleep,
but we shall all be changed, and that in the twinkling of an Eye, at the Sound
of the last Trumpet: And so forwards in the same Chapter you may read, which
will give you Satisfaction about the Resurrection of the Dead. And as St. Paul
further speaks, saying, As by Sin came Death, and so by Death comes Life
Likewise St. Austin says, be that lives ^ell, cannot be afraid to die, nor
doubtful of his Resurrection. And this is that which all of us ^o ^^ess and
believe, as one of the most prin^ip^l Articles of our Faith, the Resurrection
of the Dead. So that we may see it clear that the Godly and the Wicked shall
both arise, ^ut the Ends of their Resurrection are different, the one shall
rise to Life Eternal, the other to perpetual Shame and eternal Destruction; so
that howsoever it shall be a joyful Day ^o^ the Godly, that have the Sting of
Death take^^ away from them through Christ's Death, yet the Wicked shall have
no Benefit by it, and herefore t^ them it cannot properly be called a
Resurrection, no more than the taking a Malefactor o^ of Prison to be Executed,
can be called a Delivery. But it shall be with the Godly and Wicked at that
Day, as (...) was with Pharoah's Servants, Genesis 40 Both of them were taken out
o^ Prison, one of them to be Restored to his Office, to minister before the
King, but the other to be Executed and put to a shameful Death Even so it shall
be with the Godly and the Wicke^ at the last Day; both shall rise out of their
Graves as out of a Prison, but the one to be ^ver with the Lord, ministering
Praises to him fo^evermore, the other to be banished from hi^ Presence, and
cast into everlasting Condemnation: For to them alone is the Resurrection ^
Benefit, where Remission of Sin goes before, ^ we are taught in the Creed.

Now there are many Grounds for this Truth the main Ground of all this is the
Word of Go^ wherein we have a Cloud of Testimonies cleaning this Truth. The
Vision of Ezekiel, when he saw the Field of dry Bones; these receive^ at God's
Commandment, Flesh, Nerves, and Life Ezekiel. 37 3. So Paul, 1 These 4 17. We which
are alive and remain till the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which
are asleep. Christ has undertaken this for his Church and Children, Joh. 6.39
This is the Father's Will that sent me, that of (...) which he has given me I
should lose nothing, but raise it up again at the last day. And the Apostle St.
Paul is bold to speak peremptorily, That this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality, as pointing indeed at
his own Body, 1 Cor. 15.53.

And indeed the Scriptures are clear and plain for the confirmation of this
Article of our Faith, our Resurrection from the Dead, as may appear by all
those places here quoted, Isa 26 19. Joh. 5.28.1 Co. 15.16 Acts 24 15. Dan 12 2.

This must needs be a great Comfort to God's Children, when we can say with
Job, chap. 19.25 I know what my Redeemer lives and that I shall see him with
these Eyes. The same Body for Substance, though purged and clean^d from Sin, yet
the same for Substance shall rise again; and these my Eyes which have been
careful to seek Christ Jesus, to behold his Glory, to read his blessed Word, to
relieve the distressed Members of Christ, that these my Eyes shall see my
blessed Redeemer to my endless Joy; and these mine Eyes, which have been
careful to hear thy holy Word, to save my Soul then shall hear his sweet and
blessed Voice, saying, Mat. 3.21. Come be blessed of my Father. For the Bodies
of God's Children shall not perish, but life to Glory, and be made like unto
the glorious Body of Jesus Christ. O how should this move all Men and Women to
use their Bodies well to the Honor of their Creator, seeing he w^ll not let
them pe^^sh, but will Crown them and glorify them for ever.

Use 2. Secondly, T^^ (...) needs be a fearf^l Terror un^^ all prophan^ and
filthy Sinness, who bestow their Times wholly in the Service of Sin and Satan.
They shall look on (...) whom they have pierced, and shall lament, Zach. 12 10.
For even their dead Bodies shall rise too; but how? To Judgment, to Torment,
and to burn for ever in the Lake of Fire and Brimston. Then thy Soul and Body
shall be an unhappy Couple met, whilst thy Body in one place is eaten of Worms,
thy Soul is in the other place, which is Hell, shall be tormented for ever. All
good things shall be taken away, all evil things heaped upon thee, all hope of
coming from Hell is quite cut off; it will be a Terror to behold Almighty God,
and a Torment too; in that we cannot fly nor escape from him; then will the
Devils be gathering up their Force to take Possession of their sinful Souls,
who in their Life time would not hearken unto God's word, nor fear his
Judgments; for after Death comes Judgment, says the Text: Then if thou have
done ill, the Devils in their several shapes shall bind thee and lead thee to
the Place of Perdition, even to be tormented for ever Remember I pray you that
the aching of a Tooth does hinder our Sleep Night after Night, and so torment us
that we can take no Rest; what ^hen will be the a^ king of the Soul, when it
shall be always burning like the S^l^nander, continually in the Fire, and yet
never consumed? Thou that have opened the Windows of thy Body, I mean thy
wanton and adulterous Eyes, to behold Wickedness, thou that have a delight to
hear Vanity more than Goodness, thou that have used thy Tongu^ to Lying,
Deceit, Swearing, and c. and have ru^^ to vain Sports and Pastimes on the
Lord's Da^^ to the Dishonor of Christ, to serve the Dev^^ and ^hine own Lust.
Know, O know, that thy ^ody shall one day rise again to Judgment, to Torment,
to be cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone.

Consider the rich Glutton, he should be a Warning to all ungodly Sinners, he
gave his Body to all Uncleanness and Gluttony, etc. and now is his Body
tormented, and he would give even a whole World, if he were Lord over it, for
one drop of water to cool his flaming tongue. O let him be a warning to all
Sinners, and teach us to rise our Bodies well, to look to our Eyes, to our
Ears, and to set a Watch before our Mouths, for fear left we d^shonour God by
them, and bring ^ndless Woe unto our selves.

Well then, you see that it is an exceeding great Joy to the Saints that they
shall rise again, and it is a Comfort of all Comforts, that we shall rise
again, for then these Eyes shall see those Friends, which Sin and Death has so
long separated; so it will be a Terror to the Wicked, that they shall rise
again to Judgment. It were well with the adulterous Man, with the Drunkard,
etc. if their Bodies might never rise, if they might rot and perish in
Corruption, and that their Souls might be even as the Souls of Beasts, a
Vapor, utterly to be extinguished, but now there is more behind, they shall
one Day come to Judgment. And therefore St. John tells us in this place, that
he saw the Dead, both great and small, stand before God. Even our dead Bodies
must rise, either to Honor or Dishonor, either to Joy or Pain, to Salvation
or Damnation, and therefore it is necessary for us, to bethink our selves of
this betimes, while it is called to Day.

Thirdly, This should teach us that we mourn (...) immoderately for the Dead,
which is a great Sin to mourn without ^^pe, nay, it is a kind of Envy to bewail
the ^^s of a Friend that is gone to Rest, since when Christ comes again, he
will bring us again with him*

What though these B^dies of ours taste Corruption, they shall not perish in
Corruption, but the Ear^h and Waters, nay the Fire it self, shall give up a
true Account of all the Dead they have swallowed up and devoured in the Day of
Christ.

Use 4. Fourthly, this should move us with all Care and Diligence to get good
Assurance unto our own Souls, that these Bodies of ours should have a glorious
Resurrection in that Day. So Paul, Acts 24 13 I have hope toward God, that
these shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the just and of the unjust.
And this made him endeavor to keep a good Conscience before God and all Men;
so should we live as Men wholly devoted unto God, whose we are in Life and
Death*

Both great and small. These Words may admit a double Exposition, for it may
seem thus, that by great and small is meant those that by Men grown, or else
little Children, Young and Old, all must appear; for we see that many die, even
Children of a Span long, some again die full of Years. Well, both great and
small must appear, none shall be so young or so little, but they must stand
before God, and none so great of so strong, but they must appear likewise.

Secondly, By great and small may be understood all sorts and degrees of Men
and Women, rich Men and rich Women, poor Men and poor Women, all Sorts and
Conditions shall come to Judgment, as well the Prince as the Subject, as well
the Rich as the poor Beggar. As though St. John should have said, I saw all men
that ever have been, or shall be to the end of the World, none shall be
wa^^ing: The rich and poor, young and old, high and low, married, and
unmarried, bond and free, all must stand before God. Oh what a wonderful
Assembly will this be, to see so many Millions of Thousands? It is a great
sight to behold an Army of Men of an Hundred Thousand, but here shall be a
Thousand Thousand; a number without number, even all Men, Women and Children
that ever have been, or shall be unto the Worlds end.

None shall be wanting, the rich and needy, Young and Old, High and Low, Bond
and Free, all must stand before God. And therefore it is well called the Day of
the Lord, when all the Offspring of Adam shall stand before God, whose Nature
is Majesty, whose Life is Sanctity, whose Ways are Holy, whose Eternity has no
End, who made the World, and will never change his Power nor Mind, whose Age
never decays nor, grows old in years. And as St. Austin says when he thought
of God's Attributes, O Eternity, O Eternity, O Eternity, in repeating the word
so often, he thought to have dwelt upon the word; for indeed Eternity has no
end, and all things else have an end, and all must appear before this
everlasting God at this General Assi^e.

So that the instruction is very plain, that all must appear in Judgment: High
and Low, Rich and Needy, Noble and Ignoble, all must then make appearance
before the Lord Jesus in Judgment; The poorest Soul that ever breathed in the
World shall not be wanted, when Christ shall come to Judgment, 2 Cor. 5.10. We
must all appear before the Judgment sent of Jesus Christ, that every man may
receive the things that he has done in this body, whether they be good or
evil, Heb. 9 27. It is appointed for all men to die, and after death come to
Judgment. All men are sure to die, so su^ shall they come to Judgment after
death.

It will not serve their turn, as with earthly Judges, the party is dead; for
this Judgment seat is set forth for the quick and dead. The Lord Jesus now for
the manifestation of his Power, Truth and Justice, must bring every one (...)
Judgment.

Use 2. Seeing St. John saw the dead, both great and small stand before God,
that is all sorts of men and women, high and low, rich and poor, bond and free,
all must appear and hold up their hands at the Bar of this great Judge, surely
this ought to move all sorts of men, to make a conscience of their lives, to
repent of all their evil ways, to turn to God by true repentance: For no excuse
will serve your turn, no avoiding (...) his appearance, all must appear, the
very devil themselves, and all the damned spirits must come to Judgment, Tophet
is prepared for the King says Isaiah, Isa. 30.33. The Judge, the Gentlemen,
the rich man, if they be wicked, their riches shall not excuse them; but rather
be (...) witness against them; nor the poorest shall not b^ forgotten* Surely
then, if we have any care (...) all what shall become of our poor souls at this
day we ought to persuade all, both the poor and the rich, to repent and turn to
God, and lead new Lives that we may rejoice with joy u^^ speakable, and be
glorious at the last appearance: This made St. Paul, labor to keep a good
Conscience before God and all men, Act 24.16, An^ why? Because there must come
a day when all must arise to Judgment, and give a strict Account of all their
evil thoughts, words and works, and the same reason should stir us up all
likewise to keep a clear Conscience. And what is the cause that men live in sin
and defile themselves with many thousand abomininations? Surely because they
think not of this day, that they must all come to a reckoning. O it would stay
and bridle their car^^l hearts from many foul and filthy sins which now they
commit with greediness.

This will be a happy day to all the Children of God, to hear the Judge say
unto them, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning of the World. O happy day! O blessed voice! But to the
ungodly sinner, that liv^^ in sin, as the drunkard, blaspheemer, etc. This will
be a terrible and fearful day to hear the Judge say, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. O doleful v^ice! O
heavy news! Oh fearful Sentence! Woe and ten thousand woes to a'l ungodly
sinners? Woe then unto the Idol^^er, ^e then unto the Adulterer, etc. Woe then
unto the ungodly wretched sinners; for there is no escaping of this Sentence
all must appear, all must stand before God, all must come to their answer.

None shall be so great to escape, or so small to be forgotten. And then woe to
them that shall ^rise to this fearful and heavy Sentence, and sad ^ew^ of
condemnation. Oh it had been better ^or such men if they had never been born,
or ^ad been brought forth as loa^hsome Toads and Serpents; for then begins
their eternal misery and condemnation.

Oh then again and again, let us bethink ourselves that we must come to
Judgment, we must be called to a reckoning, we cannot escape the heavenly
sentence of Judgment by any means whatsoever.

Use 2. Again, Where St. John says, He saw the Dead. As this may be a terror
to all wicked and ungodly Men and Women; so here is matter of endless comfort
unto all poor Members of Christ Jesus. In this Life, who is more full of grief
in Body and Mind than God's Children! Long and tedious sicknesses, many
annoyances some be full of sores from top to toe, as J^^ was, who confessed and
said to corruption, Thou art my Mother, and to the worm, Thou art my Sister and
Brother. And though Job had all their outward, yet St. Ambrose says, He has
with^^ him a Soul full of sweet Oyn^ent, which was full of sweet savor in the
N^str^ls of God. Same maim^^ and diseased in Body, as Lazarus was, as the poor
Cripple which lay at the pool of Bethesda: We^^ then our bodies shall arise,
they shall not be weak or lame, or maimed, but a very perfect soul and a
glorious body: All pain shall have a end, all ^o shall cease, and such shall
their Resurrection be, as is spoken of, in Mat. 27.52 And the Graves were
opened, and many of the Sai^^ Bodies that slept arose, and came out of the
Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the Holy City Jerusalem. But as
for the ungodly, it is not with them, but they shall arise, that both Body and
Soul may go into Hell together, which a place of Reprobates.

Oh that we had hearts to think of this, ^^ young and old, rich and needy,
Minister and People, that we must stand before God; that we must give an
account of all our sins unto his Majesty! It would bridle us, and keep us from
many presumptuous sins, which we now daily commit, and as wilfully as a Horse
that rush^eth into the Battle.

The Great Assize. The Second SERMON.
Rev. 20. ver. 12. etc. 12. And I saw the dead both small and great, stand
before God, and the Books were opened: And another Book was opened, which is
the Book of Life: And the dead were judged out of those things which were
written in the Books, according to their deeds.


WE have already the Person of the Judge described unto us, with what
unseakable Majesty and Glory he shall come, to the great comfort of the Godly;
and also with what terror he will come, to the amazement of the Wicked.

Secondly, We have heard who shall be cited ^o appear, both great and small,
all must appear.

We shall at the day of our Resurrection ap^ear in full beauty and strength,
the old not be ^bove thirty, nor their Infants under the same years: I say we
shall a'l appear before God in (...) perfect Age, as Adam was created at, which
was a perfect man, about thirty years old, or at the Age of our Savior, when
he died upon the Cross, which was about thirty three years, as our Ancients
affi^m. And for the place where it shall be, it is imagined by diverse good
Divines, and likewise by Thomas Aquinas, and all the Schoolmen, except Peter
L^mbard, and Alexander Hales, that it shall be over the valley of Jehoshaphat,
by Mount Olivet, which is near unto Jerusalem, eastward from the Temple, and as
our Cosmographers describe i^ to be in the midst of the superficies of (...)
Earth; and it is very likely for four reasons.

First, To confirm this, the Scriptures does intimate so much in plain words, I
will gath^^ together all Nations into the valley of Jehoshaphat and plead with
them there, Joel 3.1, 2. Cause thy mighty one to come down, O Lord, let the
Heath^^ be awaked, and come up to the valley of Jehos^^phat, for there will I
sit and judge all the H^^then round about, Joel 3.11, 12.

Secondly, Because that as our Savior w^ thereabouts crucified and put to open
sham^ so over this place his glorious Throne sha^^ be erected in the Air, when
he shall app^^ in Judgment, to manifest his power and g^ory for it is meet that
Christ ^ould in that pl^^^ judge the World with righteous Judgment where he
himself was unjustly judged a^^ condemned: Likewise that near unto this v^^ley
was mount Ma^ea, where Abraham (...) have Sacrificed his Son Isaac, as you may
read Genesis 22. Also that Jacob law two Angels sending and descending on a
Ladder, Genesis Also the Angel put up his Sword, and fire from Heaven burnt the
Sacrifice in Araunch's floor, 2 Samuel 2 4 Also near this place Solomon built the
Temple, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. Likewise this was near the place where he preached the
Gospel, suffered his Passion, and after entered into Glory.

Thirdly, Because seeing the Angels shall be sent to gather together all the
Elect from the four winds, from the one end of the Heavens to the other; it is
most probable that the place whither they shall be gathered, is to be near to
Jerus^lem, in the valley of Jehoshaphat; and this valley was so called at
first, from the great victory which the Lord gave Jehoshaphat and his people
over the Amor^tes, Moabites, and those of Mount Seir, which victory is a type
of the final victory which the Supreme Judge shall give his Elect over all
their Enemies in that place at the last day.

Fourthly and lastly, Because the Angels told the Disciples, that as they saw
Christ ascend from Mount Olivet, which is over the valley of Jehoshaphat, so he
shall in like manner come down from Heaven; and this is the opinion as I have
said before, of the aforementioned Schoolmen and Authors.

Now follows in the third place, the most especial and principal manner ^f all;
namely^ after what manner all Men shall be judged in these words, And the Books
shall be opened, etc. We know that earthly Judges are brought to the Assi^'s
with great attendance, They being placed, the Prisoners are brought forth, they
at ^ c^lled over one by one, and their Indictment^ are read, and Witnesses
produced, and so according to their offenses they receive judgment: Even so is
the great day of the Lord. Christ Jesus shall come with ten thousand of Angels,
and before him shall stand all Men and Women, both great and small, then shall
the Books be brought forth. Indeed we see, when an ea^thly Judge sits on the
Bench, it holds a long time to try Causes: Such witnesses and such evidences
shall be produced: But it shall not be so at the last day: For when all Men
stand at the Bar of Christ's Judgment, they shall be judged according to the
written Record, even according to the Books; for they shall then be opened.

Books, what is meant by them, every Man's Conscience.

Now, if you would know what these Books be; it is easy to know, for they be
even the particular Conscience of every Man and Woman: Thy Conscience is the
Book that shall be opened, and that shall be as good as ten thousand witnesses,
either to excuse or accuse thee before God: For there shall need no more
witness; no other evidence against us at the last day, but our own Conscience:
For as God has his Book of infinite knowledge, whereby he knows the sins and
offenses of all Men, as certainly as if they were written in a Book; So
likewise he has given unto every Man and Woman a Book, their own Conscience,
wherein are fully written all our thoughts, words and deeds, so as none shall
escape: David says, Thou, O Lord, know the thoughts of my heart, long
before I utter them And then shall be opened, first, The Book of the La^, and
then the Book of the Conscience, by which all our Actions must be tried and
examined, for God keeps a Book of all our particular Thoughts, though they were
never so swift, and it is called God's Book of Remembrance; then the Book of
our own Conscience shall be opened, which is now so closed up in our Breasts,
that no Eye on Earth bu^ our own knows and perceives; these Books being opened,
we shall find then our Sins do agree in every Tittle. Then there is a Book of
Ju^gment which this Sentence shall be pronounced by: Then last of all there is
a Book of Life, in which all our Names are written, and that was the B^ok which
Moses's zeal did desire that his Name might be blotted out, rather than his
Master's Name should be blasphemed. God's Book is unalter^ble, and cannot be
changed or defaced by Time. Mark ^ pray you, before the Sentence is denounced,
the Books shall be opened, first, the Book of the Law, and then the Book of our
Consciences; the one showing a M^n what he should do the other what he ha^h
done. Against the Book of the Law none shall be able to except; Psalm. 16. For
the Commandments of the Lord are pure and righteous altogether: And as for the
Book of Conscience, who can deny it, or except against it, seeing the Lord will
then judge a man not by another man's Conscience, but by his own, which he has
always, had in his own keeping, even in his bosom.

Doct. 1. All our thoughts, words and works must come to Judgment.
Now seeing here wh^t is meant by these Books, namely every Man's particular
Conscience: Let us come to search what are the things written in this Book; and
first what use we are to make unto our selves from this: Every Man's Book shall
be opened, etc. First, in these Books are written the very tho'ts of our
hearts; none so secret, or so close, but it is here recorded. Secondly, every
ungodly speech, every idle word of our mouth. Thirdly every Act that men do,
though never so closely done.

Thou have sealed up all our sins in a bag, says Joh, ^o show the exact kind
of keeping them against that day of account. Surely if there be any thing in a
man to be marvelled at; I m^st needs confess that this is a wonderful work of
God, that he has given to every man and woman a Conscience which is like unto
a Book, in which are recorded all our thoughts, w^rds and works. A wicked man
and so unchaste woman, how many vile and filthy thoughts have they in their
minds night and day? their hearts burn in lust and uncleanness; now they pass
away from them they regard them not, they make little or no account of them:
But know, they are all written in this Book of thy Conscience, thy Conscience
marketh them, thy Conscience writes them down, and if thou will not repent of
them, and leave them, O woe unto thy Soul, When these Books come to be opened,
and read over. For then thy Conscience will accuse thee, and lay unto thy
charge every one of them in order.

Thou have set my misdeeds before me, and my secret sins in the light of thy
Countenance, says David.

Again, in the heart of man what anger, what^ envy, what malice lurks therein,
and they pass it over, and think it no matter? Well, know beloved, that un^ess
you repent of the very thoughts of your hearts, even these things will ^e found
written in the Books at the day of Judgment, and what a lamentable thing will
that be.

Secondly, As our Consciences is privy unto all our thoughts, and will accuse
us of them at the day of Judgment: So all our speeches are noted within. What a
number of profane speeches pass out of the mouth of wicked and ungodly men and
women? What horrible and blaspemous Oaths? What cursed speaking lying and
slandring? Now a wicked Person that thus abuses his tongue so many several
times in one day, he cannot for his life remember them. Well, know, that every
sinful word thou speak, is written in this Book, there it is recorded; and
when this Book of thy Conscience shall be opened, it will discover all thy
Sins, not only thy filthy Thoughts, but every wicked Word.

Our Savior tells us, Mat. 12 35. That we must give an account of every ^lle
word at the day of Judgment: And though Men labor to forget them, and slight
them by Pastimes and Company, yet they are written in their Consciences, and
one day must come to Judgment. Know this I entreat you, that we must all have a
Resurrection, and then give an Account of all our Actions, whether they have
been good or bad; the number is here set down in the word, all, as in 2 Cor.
5.10. All must appear, all must arise and give an Account to this Judge. Nor
must we imagine that we shall be called one by one, like a Jury impanell'd, or
like a Company, or Corporation, as first one, and then another, no, it is said
all must arise together, and give an Account how we have bestowed our Talents.

If so, how then should this awaken us ail, and cause us to look unto our
Lives, and to learn to know of what we are made, and to make a Covenant with
our Eyes, at Job did; and to confess with him, 'tho' we be now rich and strong,
as Job was, that Corruption is our Father, and to the Worm thou art our Mother,
and our Sister, and to set a Watch before our Mouths, as David did; and to lay
aside our vain Oaths and idle Mirth, which as Solomon says, cannot want
Iniquity, seeing, all of them must come to Judgment.

Thirdly, If we view the lives of Men and Women, why? (alas) they be nothing
almost but a continual Practice of Sin, and the Sins of Men's Lives be
innumerable, even as the Sand on the Seashore. Now though Men's Lives abound with
so many thousand Sins, yet we see that Man perceives not, nor knows one quarter
of his S^n^^t may be he knows some, but forgets the greatest part of them,
but yet they be all written in the Book of Conscience, and they shall all come
to Judgment, when these Books shall be made manifest, though never so secret,
for thy Conscience does mark them all, and pen them down against the Day of
Account.

There is no Sin so secret, that God will not bring to light, yea, all our sins
shall be discovered and laid naked before them, what has been done in secret
sh^^l^ be published on the Housetop, and shall come to light, Eccl. 12.14.

And there is reason for it. First, Because i^ shall make the S^nner the more
ashamed and tormented for his Sin, for the more a Man comes ^^ see the
greatness of his Sins, the more 'twill ve^ bi^^ Soul and torment his Heart. As
a man that is it Debt, the move he thinks of his Debt the more it troubles him;
so it is with a Sinner, his Sins are Debt^^ set upon God's Score, and registered
in his Books.

Secondly, That the Wicked may not plead not guilty. God will take away all
Col^ur of Excuse, they shall have no Cloak for then S^n; and if it were not so,
they would be ready to say, Lord, when saw we thee an hungry, etc. The Lord
does as every righteous Judge does, or ought to do, convict them before he
condemns them.

Now seeing what is meant by these Books of our Conscience, and likewise what
be written in them, even all our Thoughts, Words and Works let us come to see
what use we are to make of this Doctrine.

Use 1. Hence, first of all we may observe the endless love and mercy of our
God toward us, foretelling every one of us, of the opening of these Books,
that our Consciences shall be laid open, these Books unclasped, and that all
our Thoughts, Words and Works must come to Judgment: Surely it is to this end
and purpose, that we might prevent the danger that is to come, and labor to
keep a good Conscience, washed and purged in the Blood of Christ, that it may
not lay to our charge any one sin, but assure us that we are in the favor of
God.

Use 2. Secondly, We see here, that it is not enough for a man or woman to
abstain from evil words and works, but evil thoughts likewise; the very lusts
of the heart. Paul complains of this, and Peter bids S^mon M^gus to repent and
pray, if perhaps the thoughts of his heart might be pardoned. How ought then
every Christian man and woman to be wary of their words, yea, of their tho'ts,
seeing we must give account for all; and our own Conscience which is a ith^n
us, to bear witness against us; and this we pu^ it to take notice of if the
Book of our Con^cience be foul, that we do not sink under the weight of
despair; and if we be clear, not to presume of our selves, as Peter did; but
rather with David, desire the Lord, Not to enter into Judgment with thy
Servant, for in thy fight no m^^ living shall be justified. But say, O Lord, I
will not dispute the cause with thee, for if I propound my Righteousness, thou will cond^mn mine iniquity: We may justify our selves before our selves, but
not before God; and not by pleasing our selves but displeasing God, for our
Books shall be opened, says the Text, and that is the Touchstone to try
whether we have done good or ill. St. Augustine confesses, O says he, I want
mercy and as a Fugitive I return and seek for pe^ce, and confess I am not
worthy to be called thy Creature, (...) Conscience tells me so, which is a
witness that I da^ and hourly carry about me. And, why should we carry this
Book within us, some will say? I answer because God will be just in all his
ways, and righteous in all his dealings, and because we a^^ apt to smother the
sins we have committed, wha^ we think we have committed them secretly, and that
no man has seen us, we will deny and forget them: therefore has God placed
th^^^ Book in our Breast, which is our Conscience which will either excuse or
accuse us at th^^ day. I doubt not but the Children of God a^^ careful over
their very thoughts and words: F^^ a wicked carnal man may abstain from so^^
grievous Sin, but it is a note of a true Child (...) God, to repent of his evil
thoughts, and be caref^^ over them continually.

Thirdly, Seeing every Man's Conscience (...) his Book, and every man's sin is
p^nned d^^ therein: We may see the woeful misery of (...) those that have
desaled Consciences, wicked a^^ unclean hearts. For look how their Consciences
do accuse them, even so will God condemn them. And having not repented of their
sins, they carry a torment with them; namely, a guilty and accusing conscience,
which is their Judge to condemn them, and their Hel^ to torment them

Fourthly, Here is condemned that wilfulness of many in our days, who never
think of this; but if they can conceal their sins from the World, they think
they have done wisely. But alas, al^^, receive not thy self, nor thy own Soul
God (...) a view of all thy actions; he notes thy (...), ^nop, thy false
Weights, and mixed Wares. (...) light it self, and shall not he see? Justice i^
self, and shall he wink at unrighteous dealings? He knows the Heart; and can
the deceitful Tongue of mortal Men deceive him.

If then this be so, what manner of Men ought we to be in holiness of life, and
blameless Conversation? How should we set a Watch over our tongues, and be sure
to have an Eye to our Feet, to abandon all our evil thoughts; But alas! We
think not of this day, it does not enter into our Hearts; for if it did, would
Men lie, steal, commit adultery? It were impossible. Call to mi^d then betimes
this day of reckoning and account, that if thou go on in an evil course and
way of sin, that one day thou must come to account, when all thy sins shall be
discovered and laid open to all, to Angels and to Men. We pity that Man's Case
whose Cause being bad, is like to be heard before the Judge that will do
Justice, and so can look for naught, but to be undone for ever; and yet never
consider what reckoning we have our selves, to make at this day of the great
Assize of all the World.

Firstly, Seeing the Book must be opened, and every Man's Conscience must come
to scanning, because Sentence shall pass, and Judgment shall be awarded
according to the things written therein: How should this cause us all, both
Minister and People, to labor to get a good Conscience? If thy Conscience be
good, thou shall no doubt be blessed; If thy Conscience be filthy and pollu^ed,
thou art cursed. And therefore it should be our chiefest care, study, all our
life time, to keep a good Conscience. Now if you ask how it is possible to get
a good Conscience; I answer, for the getting and keeping of Faith and a good
Conscience, we must know it is done by the use of the Word of God, Sanctify
them by the Truth, thy Word is Truth. And therefore we must entreat the Lord to
exhibit unto our Minds the certain Testimony of his saving Grace, which he has
begu^ to work in us, which will make our Consciences tender and good
Consciences, when those Books shall be opened, and so pour out his holy Spirit
into every one of us, that it working in our hearts, we may do that which is
pleasing in his Eyes, to walk in his Commandments, and to keep his Judgments,
and that by the Ministry of thy holy Word and Sacraments (endued with a
justifying Faith) to believe in the Name of thy Son, and so being made
partakers of Christ's Righteousness, we may have the Books of our Consciences
found perfect, and all our misdeeds cancelled, and that then no longer we may
have the spirit of bondage and of fear, but the spirit of thy gracious
adoption, which makes us cry Abba Father, which we cannot do without this, in
having a good Conscience before God, and all Men. But that we may have a good
Conscience, we must,

First, Repent of all our sins; we must know by the Law of God* what is sin,
and what is not.

Secondly We must know the heavy curse of God even for sin, that the reward of
sin ^is death eternal, both of body and soul, for men do by Nature sooth
themselves in their sins, and though we hear of God's Judgments against sin, (yet
whose heart is touched or troubled?) Thus we run on still in sin, and fear
nothing; they mean well they say, but live ill, and think all well.

Thirdly, Till we see what sin is, and the^^ see the curse of God due to sin,
we shall never seriously try our Consciences, and see how our sins have wounded
them, that so we may repent us of sin.

Fourthly, We must be grieved for our sins, we must acknowledge and confess
them, begging for the pardon of them; and to hunger and thirst after Christ
Jesus. For there is nothing that can purify the Conscience, and quiet the
heart, but only the blood of Jesus Christ applied to our Souls by Faith, with
persuasion of the forgiveness of them.

Mark then here (beloved) when a man is thus truly humbled for his sins, and
beggeth the pardon of them with sighs and groans, then will the Lord send down
into his Soul his blessed Spirit, to assure us of God's mercy, of the pardon of
our sins, that our wounds in Conscience are healed: And this is done by the
means of a lively Faith, which purifies the Conscience.

Hereby we may perceive that most men etc. women are in a woeful case; for
(alas) the greatest part are ignorant of the Law of God, and know not what sin
is, and what is not sin, and therefore cannot possibly have a clear Conscience;
for Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

Again, though men see their sins, and oftentimes their Consciences check them
for sin, yet how few do bewail their sins? For I am persuaded, that there is
not so wicked a sinner living, but sometimes his Conscience checks him: Indeed
Men see not the danger, and feel not he wounds of the Conscience, because now
their Books be clasped, they be shut up, their feared Consciences be now
asleep; but the day will come that their Books must be opened, and their
secrets declared, and than their Consciences will accuse, condemn and torment
them so, that they will wish they had never been born.

Again, When a Man or Woman has got a good Conscience, so as being truly
humbled for their sins, and begging pardon, they find some assurance of God's
love in Christ, and that now their Consciences do not accuse 'em; even then
must men take no less pains to keep and preserve a good Conscience, to do
nothing to wound their Conscience, O Lord, says David, a wounded Conscience
who can bear? A man's Conscience is a very tender thing, it is li^^ the Apple
of thine Eye, if it be pricked but with a pin, it will not only blemish the Eye,
but endanger the sight; so the Conscience i^ a tender thing if ye prick it by
sin, it will blemish thy Conscience, wound it, and make havoc of thy Soul. And
therefore says Solomon, Counterguard thy heart, and watch over thy soul, Prove.
4 6. That thou do nothing that may (...) try Conscience.

Meant to preserve a good Conscience.
Now that we may keep these Books of Account (our Conscience) pure and good, we
must do two things. First, avoid all things that may any way hurt a good
Conscience. Secondly, Use all good means and helps to cherish a good
Conscience. In truth all sin hinders a good Conscience. Sin is that which does
wound the Soul, makes Shipwreck of a good Conscience, that is the very
overthrow of men's Souls. And therefore if you would keep a clear Conscience,
take heed of sin, which wounds a good Conscience, and makes it unable to stand
before God at the last day.

But there be two special lets and impediments of a good Conscience: First,
Ignorance of the Law, and of the Word of God: For when ^ man knows not what is
sin, and what not, how can he take heed left he wound his own Soul ^ And
therefore we see, let a man come into his House at midnight, he can find
nothing amiss and out of order; but let a man come in a^ noon, then he can espy
the least disorder: Even so poor ignorant Souls, not knowing the Law of God,
cannot see any wound in their Consciences, nor nothing amiss in them; but let
them once come to the Word of God, and look, in this Glass, then they shall
find themselves much out of order, to have wounded Souls and defiled
Consciences.

Then the other impediment of a good Conscience, is worldly lust; namely, the
love and exceeding desire of Riches, Honors, Pleasures, etc. and he that
suffers these desires to rule too much in his Heart, cannot possibly keep a
good Conscience.

And here I would advertise every Christian, First, to do all things that may
serve and cheri^h true saving Faith, whereby our Souls may be assured of the
love of God in Jesus Christ, for the pardon of our sins. For Faith is the root
and foundation of a good Conscience. And without Faith there can be no good
Conscience. Now to preserve Faith, we must often hear and read in the Word of
God, repent of our sins; acknowledge and confess them, and be humbled for them,
and walk in the Path of Faith and Repentance, and in so doing we shall find
more and more the Comforts of a good Conscience. And therefore we must take
heed that we do nothing to break off the feeling of God's love, for to wound
our poor Consciences.

Secondly, We must endeavor in all things to obey God's Will, and to bear a
constant purpose not to sin in any thing; for a purpose (...) live in sin, and
a good Conscience, cannot stand together, so that where a purpose is to live i^
sin, there is neither Faith nor a good Conscience.

Thirdly, We must walk with God by example, as Enoch and Elias did; so to order
our lives as if we were always in the presence of God; and likewise to remember
that his eye is an all-seeing eye, though we thi^^ none does behold us; yet God
sees us, and will punish us; but remember this, and th^^ will make us keep a
good Conscience; and the want of this makes men bold to sin, because they
consider not that God sees them and that they have a Conscience within the^

And another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life.
What is meant by the Book of Life.
THus when Christ Jesus has examined the Books of Men's Consciences, to view
what is therein written, that Judgment may be awarded accordingly, now he
shows that he will open a second Book, and that is even the Book of Life. And
of this Book of Life, we shall see often mention made in the Word of God, both
in the Old and New Testament; as that of Moses, Exodus 32.31, 32. O this People
have sinned a great sin: Therefore now if thou pardon their sins, thy mercy
will appear; but if thou will not, I beseech thee raze me out of the Book which
thou have written. Again, Psalm. 69.28. Let them be blotted (...) of the Book of
th^^ Living, and not be written with the Righteous. Again, Rev. 3. He that
over^^eth shall be clothed in white Ra^^^ent, and I will not blot his name out
of the Book of ^ife. And the^ Holy Ghost speaking of the Heavenly Jerusalem,
says, There shall in no wise enter into it, any thing that defiles or works
Abomination, or makes a lie ^ but they which are written in the Lambs Book of
Life, Rev. 21.27. Now if you would know what i^ here meant by the Book of Life,
it is the Book in which all the Names of God's Elect, which is in his eternal
purpose he has chosen, are written as it were with Letters of Gold: It is
nothing else but the Almighties eternal counsel, purpose and decree, wherein he
has elected and chosen a certain company of Mankind, to bestow eternal life
upon: For we must not think that God has any need of a Book, not only for our
understanding he speaks thus: Even (...) Captain records the names of his
Soldiers, to call them one by one; and as in Cities, the names of the chief men
are recorded: So God has as it were, enrolled the names of all his Saints, and
engraven them in the Book of Life, with letters of Gold for ever, so that not
one of them shall perish. Thus having showed you what is meant by the Book of
Life, let us see what we may learn hence.

Doct. 1 Hence then we learn, that God has a Book of Life, wherein the names
of all the Elect are written, who is able to call over his servants and people
by their names, even as Records are kept in a City or Corporation, wherein the
names of all that are free in the same are written: So perfectly are all the
Elect known to God, who can tell them all over by their names. Let us hear the
reasons for the further confirmation of this Point.

First, He is the true Shepherd of his Sheep; now every good shepherd knows
his sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine,
Joh. 10 14.

Secondly, The knowledge of God is so exact and perfect, That nothing can be
hid from him. He searches the heart, he tries the reins, and understandath
the hearts long before. His Eyes are like (...) a flame of fire, and his feet
like fine brass, Rev. 2^.18. as St. John says, to show that nothing ca^ be hid
from his sight.

What are the Uses.
Use 1. First, Hence we behold the blessed and happy estate of all the Elect
and chosen Children of God: For all these which are written in the Book of
Life, are blessed and happy for ever. If (...) be written in the Book of Life,
thou shall (...) per^sh. Christ will not blot thy name out of the Book of Life,
but acknowledge it to be in his Book at the latter day, to thy endless joy etc
eternal comfort, whom God loves once, he loves to the end. But miserable are
those that are not written in this Book, for all shall be shut out of Heaven,
whose Names are not in the Lambs Book of Life, Rev. 21.27.

But here take heed of the carnal reasoning of wicked Men and Women. Many there
are who reasons thus, if I be a Child of God, and written in the Book of Life,
let me live as I lift, nevertheless I am sure to be saved. Others say, If I be
a reprobate, and am not written in the Book of Life, I am sure I shall not be
saved, although I live never so well: Take heed, I say with St. Paul, that evil
communicatio^ do not corrupt good manners; We know that God has made us
without our help, yet he will not save us without our help, or whether we will
or no: Such-poor souls, they know not what they say? For if God has elected
any Man or Woman to eternal Life, he has ordained that they should walk in the
way leading thereunto, and by their good works, which others behold, may
glorify their Father which is in Heaven: And it is impossible that they should
run on in sin, and live and die therein. And therefore such Reasoners do cast
away their Souls, and with Cain and Judas are their own Judges and
Executioners, but let men know, that as God has ordained some men to eternal
Life, and Written their names in Heaven, so he has appointed them th^^ ^ay to
walk in, to bring them thereto.

Secondly, We are taught here, that the Lord has a Book of Life, wherein all
the names of the Elect are written; We see hence what must be our chiefest joy
and comfort; even this, to kno^ assuredly, that our names are written in the
Book of Life. This Christ himself will teach us in that speech of his to his
Disciplis, who rejoiced because the Devils were subdued, and cast out by them;
Nay rather (says our Savior) Rejoice that your Names are written in the Book
of Life? But alas, what do we rejoice in? To be the Son of a rich man, a
Gentleman or Nobleman? To have Gold and Silver, Lands and Livings? This makes
Men so Lofty and prodigal, that they forget God and a good Conscience, which
must stand them in great stead at the End of their Life: But who is he that
rejoices in this, that he is the Son of God, and that his Name is written in
the Book of Life.

Well, having thus observed from the Word of God, what is understood by the
Book of Life, namely, the eternal decrees of God's Election: hence arises two
weighty points to be considered. First, If it be possible for a Child of God to
know whether his Name be written in the Book of Life or no? Secondly If it be
possible, then by what means we may attain this knowledge, to be assured that
our Names be in Heaven, that we are in the number of th^se that shall be saved.
And these are two most necessary points to be known of all good Christians.

Now concerning the first, If it be possible for a Child of God to know whether
his name is written in the Book of Life or not? The Church of Rome holds that
no man can certainly know whether he be a true Child of God, or no. Nay, they
condemn ^^is as a fault, and bold presumption for a man to be certainly
persuades of this, that he is a Child of God, Elected in Christ Jesus, and that
his name is written in the Book of Life. They say, we are to hope well, But
(alas) shall we venture the Salvation of our Souls upon an uncertain hope? No,
we must go further, and labor to be assured, and certainly persuaded of this
hope that our names are Written in the Book of Life.

And that a true Christian Man or Woman, may assuredly be persuaded, and
certainly know that he is a Child of God, it is out of question, if he will
believe the Holy Ghost; else why should St. Peter exhort us to give diligence
to make our calling and election sure. And why did our Savior bid his
Disciples, Rejoice that their Names were written in the Book of Life, if they
could not know it? Again, every Article of our Christian Faith confirms the
truth of this Doctrine, where we are taught to believe the Catholic Church,
and that we are the number of Gods People: We believe the pardon of our sins,
and that we shall have Life Everlasting.

By this you see how little we are beholden to the Church of Rome, who holds
that we cannot be certainly persuaded of our Salvation, but must only hope
well. Did not Job know it? Job 19.25. Did not Paul before know it? Romans 8.16.
Then let no man doubt of this, that the Children of God may, and do know that
they shall be saved. And therefore let us believe this doctrine, and embrace
it? And withal let us abhor the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which is
contrary to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. For what comfort can any Christian
have, till he knows that he is a Child of God? How can we be at peace with our
souls? With what comfort can we perform obedience unto God, except w^ find this
blessed persuasion, that our names are in this Book, and that we are the elect,
and chosen of God?

Secondly, Now the next question is, How a^^ man or woman may come to this
certain knowledge, that his Name is written in this Book, and how ^^ may
confidemtly be persuaded that he is a Child of God, or no? And this is a matter
of no small moment; but a thing that concerns our Souls very nearly, and
therefore let us be very careful to listen unto it, that we be able to prove
our selves, whether we are in the Faith or no, whether we be the Sons of God or
no; and so whether we shall be saved or not. Oh it is a matter of endless
comfort to Gods Children when they know this, that they are the Children of
God, and that eternal life belongs unto them, it will stir them up to (...) God
with joy and cheerfulness all the days of their Life.

By what means we may come unto this knowledge:

Now there are two ways to know it: One is by ascending up to heaven into the
Privy Counc^l of God, but this is a dangerous way, and not to be attempted by
any man, because secret things belong to the Lord our God, but those things
which are revealed, belongs to us and our Children: And his ways are past
finding out, Deuteronomy. 29 29. And therefore this way no man dares assay.

Besides this, there is yet another way to know this, and that is by descending
and looking in^^ our selves, and by certain marks and testimonie^ in our own
hearts to prove that we are of the number of God's Elect. For as Solomon says,
^ water shows face to face; even so the heart soe^^^ man to man, Prove 23.
Even as a glass shows ^ man's face, so will a man's heart and conscience show
what he is in the sight of God. Then ^ you would know whether your names are
written in the Book of Life, that is, whether you be the Elect of God, and
heirs of Eternal Life, you must enter into your own Souls. Prove your selves,
and you shall certainly know whether you shall be saved, yes, or no. For if
thou find in thee the true marks and notes of Gods Children, thou ^eedest not
fear but that thy name is in this Book and thou shall certainly be saved: But
as for Wicked and Profane Men and Women, that make no Conscience of sinning,
they shall upon this examination, utter this doleful rune; I am a sinful
wretch, I know not what will become of my poor soul at the day of Judgment. And
therefore that we may in some measure try our selves, and judge whether we are
in this Book ^^d so shall be saved, let us search out of the Holy Scripture
some certain marks of God's Children.

Marks of Gods Children by the Spirit.
The first mark whereby we may know whether we be elected or not, is the inward
testimony and witness of Gods Spirit; ye have not received the Spirit of
bondage again to fear, but ye have, etc. Romans 8.15. Where St. Paul tells us,
that Wicked and Ungodly Sinners which have not the Spirit of God to guide them,
but live in sin, have only the Spirit of Bondage, they have no true peace in
their Souls: But they that are the Children of God, have the Spirit of
Adoption, which se^^s unto our hearts the assurance of Adoption and Election,
and makes it known unto us, that we are the Sons of Almighty: For the Spirit it
self does witness to our Spirits that we are the Sons of God, Rom 8.16 And that
no man may deceive himself, and think he has the testimony of the Lords
Spirit, when he has it not; St. Paul gives two most excellent Notes, to know
whether we have the testimony of the Lords Spirit, yea or not; it makes us cry,
Abba Fat^^^ Where the Spirit of the Lord does witness to any man's Soul, that he
is a Child of God, it will make him cry unto God, and even fill Heaven and
Earth with crying and tears, with sob^ and sighs, for the pardon of his sins,
as Da^^d did, who in the sincerity of his heart, humbly con^essed his sins unto
the Lord, and left it unto poste^^ty, to be said and sung in the Church, for a
testimony of his unfeigned repentance; and he which has not this in him, that
he cannot cry unto the Lord for the pardon of his sins, this man cannot assure
himself that he is a Child of God; and though men say they hope to be s^ved yet
(alas) they seldom or never pray unto God for the pardon of their sins, and if
they are troubled for them, carelessly pass 'em over with idle company and
pastime; just like a man that has burnt his finger, puts it into cold water,
which for a time ass^^ages it; but pulling it out again, it inflames and burns
the worse. Secondly, if we find by the Testimony of Gods Holy Spirit, that we
are the Children of God, it will make us not only to be earnest with God for
the pardon of our sins, but will make us cry, abba father, that is, it will
make us bear the tender affection of a dutiful and obedient Child, so as we
shall be afraid to offend so loving a Father, not so much for fear of
punishment due for sin, as for offending so loving a God, who has loved us
from the beginning. And therefore all those which delight in sin, and are not
afraid to offend God, surely they can find no assurance that they are the
Children of God. And therefore if you desire to be assured that your Names are
in this Book, labor to find this Testimony of Gods Spirit, to witness to your
souls, that you belong to God, and labor to be earnest in prayer to God, for
that is a special Work of Gods Spirit.

The second means whereby we may kno^ that our names are Written in the Book o^
Life, is by the Word of God: For the Wor^ of God tells us, whosoever believes
in Jesus Christ shall be saved. But a Child of God hearing this promise opened
and applied by the Ministry of Gods Word and Spirit, is able t^ say, I believe,
and am able to apply this promis^ to my self For a man that has faith, knows
that he has it: And therefore can say, seeing I believe with all my heart, I
surely know ^ shall be saved.

Thirdly, Besides the blessed Testimony of Gods spirit, which cannot deceive,
and the Witness of the Word of Truth, we may know our Election, by the fruits
and effects thereof. As we say, ^ man is alive so long as he breaths, and can
judge ^^ the Tree by its Fruits: Even so by ^h^ ^ff^cts (...) Election, we may
know whether our N^mes a^^ in the Book of Life, or not. Now the Fruits of
election are set down by the H^ly Spirit, that all men may be able to examine
and t^y themselves, and know whether they be ordained to life, or not, Rom 8
30. Wh^^ God pred^^inated, them he also called; and wh^^ he ^^ked, the^ be also
justified; and whom he justified, them be also Glorified.

Where we may behold the marks of our Election; for all that be Elected unto
Life Eternal and are written in this Book, they are f^^st called, secondly,
justified, and thirdly, sanctified So then, if you would know whether you are
Elected to life, look to those three effects of Election, Art thou called? Art
thou justified? Art thou sanctified? Then sure thou art elected; but if thou
have not these three, then thou can no^ assure thy self of thy Salvation.

So then the first fruit of our Election is our Effectual Calling: When God
does by his Spirit, and the preaching of the Gospel, call us out of the World
from our old sins, to be of the number of his People, to live as his Children:
As he called Samuel three times, so Samuel answered and left his bed: And
likewise as he did Paul, when he went to persecute the Children of God at
Damascus; and so he did Matthew from the receipt of Custom. So he called Peter
and John from fishing, and made them to be fishers of men. At this call being
amazed, Paul fell to the ground; and ^t was the happiest fall that ever man
had, for as one says, he fell a Jew, and rose a Christian.

Again, when a man comes by the Spirit or preaching of the Word, to see his
sins, and Gods anger for them, he dislikes them, (...) grieved for them,
bewails them, and begs pardon for them, and begins to become a new man, (...)
believe in Christ, to seek after Gods Kingdom, as Nicodemus did. He which
finds the effectual calling in him, may assure his soul, that he is
predestined to eternal life. But we must take heed that we deceive not
ourselves with an outward calling: For our Savior says, Many are called, but
few are chosen. Many hear the Word of God with the ear, but we must labor to
find the Spirit of God, to preach unto our souls, to apply the Word of God unto
our Consciences, to believe in it, and to obey it, this is that which is found
in every Christian, and that which assures him of Eternal Life and Salvation,
and therefore they which live in their old sin, are as blind, ignorant and
profane as ever; (alas) how can they think to be saved, seeing God chooses
none, or saves not any but whom he calls effectually by the Gospel, and severs
from the rest of the World.

Secondly* The fruit of Election is Justification, For whom he predestined,
them he called ^ whom he called, them he justified, Romans 8.30. Here ^^^en is
another token and mark to know whether we are Elected, namely, our
Justification Now this is a special grace of God, to justifi^ a poor sinner
that must be saved; and whosoever is not justified, cannot be saved.
Justification has two parts, first, the pardon of sin* secondly, the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness. For before a man can be justified, he
must repent of his sins, know them, hate and abhor them, and beg the pardon of
them, and then Christ Jesus will assure us of the pardon of them. And therefore
if we would know whether we be justified or no, we must look whether we have
truly repented; yea, and have been truly humbled for our sins, and got the
pardon of them all. Secondly, that we may be truly justified, we must have a
true faith in Christ Jesus, to lay hold upon him, and to wrestle with him, as
Jacob did with the Angel, and not let him go, till he gives us a blessing, to
be persuaded and assured in our souls, that Christ died for us, shed his blood
for us, obeyed the law for us, and will cover all our sins and trespasses in
his Righteousness, so then, mark the Conclusion; where there is repentance and
obedience, there is remission of sins, where there is remission of sins, there
is Justification; and where there is Justification, there is Salvation. And
this we must acknowledge not to have by nature, but by Regeneration, which is
wrought in us by Jesus Christ, being the Author and Finisher of our Faith and
Salvation; and we must always confess that all the benefits and means of our
Salvation we have received ^^^m him; and it is he that has separated us
wretched sinners from the World, by an outward vocation, and an inward
illumination of ^^is Holy Spirit, which has already kindled ^ith in us,
through the hearing of his holy (...): It is by the Grace that we believe in
^hee our Savior; and let us beg at Gods hands, ^^at our Faith fa^l not, but
that he make it ^^rle^^, that we may be justified and glorified on the day of
our Lord Jesus. And on the contrary, where there is no repentance, nor
obedience, there is no remission of sins; where there (...) no remission of
sins, ^here is no Justification; and where there is no Justification, there is
no Salvation.

On ^^en what shall become of those that live^ in sin, as Pharaoh and Di^^s
did. And as the rich man, which laid to his Soul, Soul, take thine eas^ for
tho^ have goods laid up for many years: These m^^ trusted more in the Creature,
than in the Creator: More in their Host, Strength and Rich^^, than in the
living God* These are such which delight in sin, and never as yet could shed
one tear for their manifold and grievous (...), they cannot find themselves to
be justified, they can have no pardon of their sins, so long as they live in
sin, and therefore if you would know whether you shall be saved or no, ^abour
first of all to repent, and to lay hold on Christ by faith, that he may cover
your sins in his Blood.

The third fruit of Election, is Sanctification and this is a special mark of
God's Child, to be Regenerate, to be Sanctified. Now Sanctification stands in
two parts. First, they must die to (...). Secondly, they must rise to
righteousness, and labor to know Christ, and the virtue of his Resurrection:
And Christ's Resurrection must be our Regeneration, and our Regeneration must
be our Resurrection from sin and iniquity. And would you know assuredly,
whether your names are Written in the Book of Life: Look to your hearts, if you
find that you are Sanctified, if you hate your old sins, or former evil ways,
if you love Virtue, and delight in holy duties, then it is a certain token th^^
ye belong to God. For there is therefore no comdemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. But if you do favor the things that are of the flesh,
and desire the garli^^ ^^d flesh port^ of Egypt, lying in old sins, (...)
drunkenness, and the like: Then certainly you have no Assurance of Salvation,
but you must repea^ this dreadful saying, I know not what s^^lt be^^^^^ of my
poor soul, whether I shall be saved or d^^ne^. Nay, if thou live in sin, thou
may justly fear that thou art a firebrand in Hell ^ (...)* He that is born of
God, sinner b^ not, ^ John ^ 18. And let every one that names the Name of
Christ, depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Thus to die to sin, and to live in Righteousness, is a sure token that we
belong to God. Thus I have showed you how a man may know ^hether he is Elected
and ordained to Life, or not. Now let us see what Use arises hence.

Use 1. Seeing God has this Book of Life, in which is Written the names of all
those that shall be saved, and none of them shall perish. Hence proceeds
endless comfort to all Gods Children; if thou find that thou art a Child of
God, and thy name is written in Heaven, nothing can hurt thee though thou be
poor with Job, sick with Hezekiah, in Prison with Joseph, haled to death with
thy Savior Christ, yet nothing can hurt thee; Nay the Gates of Hell cannot
prevail against thee; no damnation can come to thee; For if God justify, who
can condemn? For at the day of ^udgment, Christ Jesus will take his Book of
Life, and call us, saying, Come ye blessed, etc. So that we shall not come to a
terrible Judge, but a loving Savior.

Use 2. Secondly, Seeing it is so excellent a thing to have our Names Written
in this Book, to be the Elect Children of God; we should labor for this above
all things in the World, for without this we can have no found Comfort, either
in this Life or death. And therefore our blessed Savior bids us in (...) not
boast our selves of Learning of Wisdom, or of Riches, because they are but vain
things; but to rejoice that our Names are written in Heaven.

This shows the necessity of Christian Obedience.
Thirdly, Seeing God has a Book of Life and has written down the very names
of every man and woman that shall be saved, and has withal showed us the way
that leads to Life, and unless we walk in this way, we cannot come unto it; it
is our wisest course for to walk in the way, that leads to Life, in the
practice of Godliness. We are Vessels of Honor, and therefore must live
Soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World Not serve Sin and Satan
any longer, but labor to die to sin, before we die so nature, and bury sin,
before it buries us; for the issues of sin brings nothing but vexation and
shame in this Life, and perdition in the Life to come. Oh let us then as the
redeemed of the Lord, walk from strength to strength, from virtue to virtue,
from one degree of perfection to another, till at length we appear perfect Men
and Women before the Lord, and there reap the happy reward, even the fruition
of all goodness, and that for evermore.

The Great Assize. The Third SERMON.
Rev. 20.12, 13. 12. And the dead were judged out of those things, which were
written in the Books, according to their Works.

13. And the Sea gave up the dead which were (...), and Death and Hell
delivered up the dead that were in them: And they were judged, every Man
according to their Works.


COncerning the Book of Life, you have heard already, what is meant by it;
namely, the Counsel and decree of God's Election, whereby he has chosen Men
and Women out of the ^ump of Mankind, upon whom he will bestow eternal Life.

Secondly, We have learned that a Man may, nay, every Christian Man and Woman
ought to be assured that his Name is written in it.

Thirdly, We set down some marks out of the Scriptures, whereby a Christian may
be assured he is Elected; namely,

First, the Testimony of God's Spirit, which cannot lie.

Secondly, By the fruits and effect of Election, (...) Vocation, Justification,
Sanct^fication, Love of the Brethren, and Obedience to all the Commandments of
God. And therefore it behooves us all to labor to get assurance of our
Election, or we cannot be saved, Luke 10.20. And without it we can have no true
Joy to our Souls. Surely men's carelessness in this point is great. They are
careful to make their Lands and Leases sure, which condemns them for their want
of care in this point.

After what manner all men shall be Judged.
Now St. John proceeds in the description of this last Judgment, as it was
declared unto him in a Vision; in an Island. It was necessary to have it there,
it being private and free from Company, his Soul might the better be fitted
with contemplation to receive the power of God: For when humane help is
farthest o^^, then God i^ most near to hi^ Children. And then St. John shows
after what manner we shall be judged: Even according to those things written in
the Book, according to our works. You have heard before, That he saw all, both
great and sin all stand before God. None shall be wanting; now it may be
wondered how so great a multitude shall be judged, how every man's Book shall be
read, and every man's Conscience tr^ed. For we see what a long time it holds our
Judges here, to try a few persons; such calling of Evidences, such producing of
Witnesses, such prefering of Indictments, etc.

But St. John says, that it shall not be so here, for all must proceed
according to the written Records, And according to those things which are
written in the Book. So that when Christ Jesus the great Judge shall once sit
upon the Throne of his Glory, attended by his holy Angels, then shall the Book
of every man's Conscience be opened and then they shall afresh call to mind
their former sins which they have committed so freely and willingly, running
into sin, without remorse or fear.

In these words we are to observe three special points.

First, Who they are that must come to Judgment, namely, the Dead. They which
have lain many thousand years ^otting in the Grave; and then likewise let us
observe that God would have us certain of the day of Judgment.

First, For his Glory.

Secondly, For our Comfort

Thirdly, For to keep us in fear of him.

Fourthly, That all might be inexcusable.

First, God would have us certain of the Time.

First, To exercise faith and patience.

Secondly, To bridle our Curiosity.

Thirdly, To contain us in our duty; therefore (says the Apostle,) Be ye
always ready; for in such an hour as ye think not of, the Son of Man comes.

Secondly, The means whereby they must be tried; even by those things which are
written and Recorded in their Books which is their Consciences.

Thirdly, The Touchstone of this Tryal^ namely, the Word of God, and first of
the Persons.

It is not to be doubted, but that St. John means that all must come to
Judgment; Both great and small must stand before God. But why does he say here,
And the dead shall be judged! It is to be observed, that he names expressly the
dead, even those that have lain rotten many thousand years, must come to
Judgment they must be called to account, their old sins must now be brought to
light; for these are the Wicked Thoughts of many carnal men, that when a man is
dead, he is well! Then all his sins die with him, he is forgotten, and his sins
are not spoken of. But St. John says here, that even the dead must come to
Judgment, even their old sins must come to light, and they must answer for 'em.
It is perhaps Six Thousand Years since Cain flew his Brother, yet his sin shall
not be forgotten; though Cain be dead long since, yet his sins are not dead; No,
no, Cain shall one day come to account for his sin. Judas who betrayed his
Master many hundred years ago, at this day shall be called to account.

So in these our days many men think when they die, their sins shall never be
bro't to light

The Userer that by wicked means gets Wealth: When he dies perhaps he thinks
he shall never hear of his sins again. So the Drunkard, Swearer, Prophaner of
the Sabbath, etc. they think that death will end their Misery, and that they
shall never come to Judgment, but they are deceived; and to prove the same
Christ said to his Disciples, be of good cheat, though the World hate and
revile you for my sake: yet he told them, for those sufferings here on earth,
that they should sit upon twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of
Israel, a shadow whereof we have in these our earthly Judgments, where you see
the Justices and men of account sit with the Judge, which is a Token of Honor
and Dignity in the sight of the People; not that they have to do with
pronouncing Sentence, or with the Judgment; according to which we read, Luke
13.28. That there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when the ungodly
which used no Conscience while they lived, nor once thought of their giving
account, shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; meaning thereby all the godly and
faithful, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of Heaven; and themselves thrust
out, and Heaven Gates shut against them; being in that case Dives was, who in
Hell beheld Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom, himself crying out for one drop of
water to cool that unquenchable heat which he suffered, and could not obtain
it. Then shall these wicked worldlings which set their hearts only on their
riches, pleasures and preferments, when they shall behold the righteous stand
in great boldness and cheerfulness, be grievously terrified with horrible fear
and amazement.

And then shall their Consciences accuse 'em, and their minds change within
them, and sign with inward grief and say within themselves. These are they whom
sometimes we had in devision, these are they whom we wronged in their Estates,
and whom we so much oppressed and scorned; and as indeed who are more derided
in the World, than they that are well disposed, and live in the fear of God?
These are they which we had in devision, and said unto our selves, W^ Fools
thought their lives madness, and their ends without Honor: But now how is it
that they are count^^ amongst the Children of God, and that their portion in
among the Saints, and that they are so highly in God favor? Therefore we have
erred from the way of Truth and the light of Righteousness has not shined unto
u^ And the Son of understanding rose not upon us: We have wearied ourselves in
the way of wickedness and destruction: And we have gone through dangerous ways,
but we have not known the way of the Lord, nor lived in his fear, nor have we
diligently walked with upright Consciences before God and Man. Ah (poor Souls)
it were well with them indeed if death might end their woeful misery: But alas,
alas, Death is even as a wide Gate, to give them a passage to endless woe and
misery. For when they are dead and buried, their sins dye not with them, their
misery is not then ended: O no, then, begins their misery and torment. O it
were good they might no more have a being after Death ^ it had been good for
such men if they had never been born; or being born, that they had been rather
Toads or Serpents, for in death these have an end; but it is not so with the
wicked and ungodly sinner; for when he is dead and buried, even then begins his
greatest woe and misery; for the sinner that is dead many thousand years, must
for all this come to Jud^^ment. And therefore thou that live in Adultery, o^
in any other sin whatsoever, Remember that though th^^ die, yet thy sins die not
with thee, No, no, both thou and thy sins must one day come to Judgment.
Solomon says, ^^^ember ^^ young man, that for all this thou must come to
Judgment. Thy old sins, and those which thou have committed in secret, they
must now come to light.

Seeing that the dead must come to Judgment that have lain so many hundred
years in the Grave, and that their old and secret sins must come to light; O
let us then watch over our lives, and have this still in our minds; well though I
die, and ^ot in the Grave, yet my sins shall not die, any evil ways cannot be
forgotten, they must come to light, so that we may never dare to sin, thinking
as many do, that when they are once dead, they must never come to an account
for their sins. But St. John says here, That the dead were judged, even those
whom we forget, and whose sins we would think would never be called to an
account, even they must come to a reckoning: For God will bring every work to
Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. Eccl. 12.14.
Which will be terror to the Wicked: But the Saints of God are not afraid of the
Tribunal, or Judgment Seat; but in the quiet of a good Conscience they comfort
themselves in Jesus Christ. God punishes all our sins in strictness of Right,
but has Mercy in Transferring the Punishment upon Jesus Christ.

In the next place St. John tells us, how men shall be tried, and according to
what evidence, Sentence shall be awarded; namely, according to those things
written in their Books. Here is the Evidence, here is no witness to be
produced; for a man's Conscience shall be even as a thousand witnesses. Now
what is here meant by the Books, you have heard already; namely, the particular
Conscience of every man and woman. Says the Samaritan woman, behold, come and
see a man which has told we all things which I have done. Just so will our
Consciences witness against us; thy Conscience is the Book that is the
Evidence: Again, the things that are written in the Book, I told you they are
all our evil thoughts, words, and works; not only our gr^ss sins, as Murder,
Adultery, Drunkenness, etc. But in our Books is recorded, even our idle and
vain words, every idle and filthy though it, our close and secret sins, nay our
whispering and covert sins such sins will then be brought to light, which now
we have almost forgotten. While we lived, we sowed our words and idle thoughts,
as a Husbandman does his seed, which will one day rise up again, which we long
ago though it had been forgotten and intombed. Man's Conscience is Gods Register, as
one day will appear plainly and evidently to our sorrow, we shall hear again of
every light transgression, and idle word that we do but whisper against our
neighbor; and by this sentence must proceed, and according to our deserts,
must Judgment be awarded.

Now then, those which have good and holy thoughts written in their Book, they
are blessed and happy, for they shall not be ashamed astray, they shall be glad
to have their Books laid open, that their Obedience, Repentance, Faith, Love,
Zeal, Patience, etc. may be known and come to light: But woe then to all filthy
Adulterers, etc. For the reward of these sins is death, the wrath and curse of
God for ever.

But when our cause comes to be cried before God, from whom nothing is hid,
nor can be kept secret, then no excuses can prevail; to so say, I have married
a Wife, and cannot come, or have bought this Farm, or that yoke of Oxen, I pray
you have me excused from this Trial. No, this shall not serve the turn, come,
thou shall stand naked before the Judge, then no persuasion can prevail,
neither any devices help us, or blind the Judge. Our first Parents, When God
called them to a Trial for transgressing his Commandments, and when they fled
from God and hid themselves, but by excuses? Adam speaks for himself, etc says,
The woman which thou gave me, gave me of the Tree, and I did eat. The Woman
likewise, ^he thinks to escape by that means, Eve says, the Serpent beguiled
me and I did eat. Likewise when King Saul had disobeyed God's Commandment
turning after the prey; being called to Account, he devises an excuse, and
says, Yea, ^ have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have gone the way which
the Lord sent me, and have bro't Agag the King of Amalek, and have destroyed
the Amalekites: But the people took of the Spoil, Sheep and Oxen, and the
chiefest of the things, which have been destroyed, to offer unto the Lord.

Amongst these may Pilate be reckoned, who against his own Conscience condemned
Christ to Death, and yet would excuse himself as though he were innocent in the
cause. When Pilate sam that, he took water and washed his hands, saying, I am
innocent of the Blood of this just man; All this shall not serve the turn,
their excuses must not free them, for their Consciences tell them otherwise; no
fair tale shall then be heard, but the plain and nake^ truth, and our own
Consciences shall testify against us; and we shall not be able to answer one
word of a thousand; we shall b^ forced to confess our misdeeds, and can keep
back nothing, for all must be manifest: And we shall not find as it is in this
World, when upon the humble confession of our sins to God, we may cry for
pardon, and hope to be forgiven; but then shall our confession be to our open
shame, confusion, and endless destruction: Yea, all the Nations and People of
the World, that ever have been, shall be gathered before the presence of this
Judge, and their witness in their Bosoms. And the reason why they shall appear,
is, that they shall be called to an account of their Stewardship; and after
Trial of their Cause, he shall separate the one from the other, the just from
the unjust, the godly from the ungodly, the Sheep from the Goats, for says St.
Matthew, He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet; and they
shall gather together h^^ E^ect from the four winds, and from one end of heaven
to the other. Whereby may be perceived, that both the good and the bad shall be
gathered into the presence of the Judge, and then shall just men shine as the
Sun, and shall be as it were quit by proclamation, Come ye blessed, which made
the Apostle St. Paul to break out into these words, Herein is the love of God
perfect toward us, that we should have boldness at the day of Judgment:
Therefore do the godly make their prayers in an acceptable time, and with that
this day may come shortly. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. This is a comfort to
the righteous man, when his Conscience shall be found blameless in this day of
Trial.

Seeing that here is the Evidence, and by the things written in the Book, in
our Consciences; we must be arraigned; and seeing in our Books is recorded all
that we do, all our words, tho^^ and deeds, and that we must give up our left
account; what account shall those give who have been idle hearers, and idle
doers of his Word?

First, It must teach us above all things to look to our Books, our
Consciences, to keep them very fair and (...), that our B^^ks of account be in
a readiness; for our Consciences shall either excuse or accuse us a^ that day.

Therefore the greatest burden a man can bear, is the burden of sin lying
upon his Conscience, and pressing it down without any assurance of pardon, and
so by consequence Dav^d accounts that he is blessed, who is eased of the
burden of his sins: Let them that fear the Lord, and love their own Souls,
give (...) diligence to make sure the remission of their Sins, (...) ha^^^^ss
of heart, drowsiness of Spirit, and a Conscience which is feared, as with a hot
Iron, which causes the fearful Judgment of God, and then ^t the last receive^
according to that he has done in this Life, whether it be good or bad. All
must appear says St. I^^n, (...) if all of us, then every part of us both
Souls and Bodies, must be presented at his Tribunal. ^ Thi^ was the care of the
blessed Apostle St. Paul, Acts 24. By reason we must all come to J^^gment, and
our Consciences laid open, and we judged according to the things that are
therein recorded; this I say made that holy Servant of God, to take all
possible pains to ^^op a clear Conscience before God and Man, ^ that we may
imitate this blessed Apostle, that ^coing we must all come to Judgment, our
Books, even our Consciences, must be opened and disclosed, that we must
receivve sentence ^^ Salvation or Damantion, according to the (...) written in
our Books: O that we would (...) and endeavor, that no filchy sins might (...)
our Books, but that we may keep them (...) in t^^ ^ight of God. It ought to
(...) above ^^^ things in the World, to look to this, to keep the Book of our
Consciences fair: For if ou^ heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart,
and will also condemn us, 1 John 3.20.

Use 2. Secondly, Seeing that sentence must pass according to the things
written in our Books, and those are not only the gross sins of the World
themselves, but even the vile and unclean thoughts of our hearts, even these
must come to Judgment; then let us be careful to avoid not only the outward
actions themselves, but those unclean thoughts of ours; for they must come to
Judgment. Alas, many think th^ughts are free, and they shall never be arraigned
for their vile and ungodly thoughts: But St. Paul says, Thoughts shall either
excuse or accuse us, Rom 1 20. And whosoever truly repents, they repent of
their vile and ungodly thoughts; for if we had sins written in the Book of our
Consciences, but our sinful thoughts, they were enough to condemn us, both Body
and Soul, for evermore.

Neither let us content our selves to think, we are in a good case, if we can
say, like the proud Pharisee, (which justified himself before God and Man) I am
no Drunkard, nor Formcator, nor Extortioner, etc. No, let us look to our own
Book, that there be not so much as an idle word written there, that has not
been blotted out with the tears of true Repentance, for even they must come to
Judgment, as our Savior says, for I say unto you, that every idle word that
Men shall speak, they foo^ give account thereof in the day of Judgment, Mat.
14.36.

And that we may know in particular, what ^ Written in our Books, St. John
says, Tha^ ^^ shall be judged according to our works, Rev. 20.13. So it is, 2
Cor 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad. We shall be judged, and receive a reward according
to our works. If thy works are good, then life, glory and salvation; but if
they works be evil, then death, destruction and damnation. Good works, although
they cannot merit yet they will show the Faith which lay in the heart. So when
an evil man dies, as Dives, his evil works go with him, his guilty Conscience
will not leave him, neither in ^ife nor death. Wherefore this day of Judgment
may well be called the day of Revelation, when all that is now hid, shall be
revealed and made known. Here on earth many things are kept close and hid? But
God shall lighten all things that are hid in darkness, and make the Counsels of
the heart manifest, 1 Cor. 4.5. And at that day God shall judge the secrets of
men by Jesus Christ. Rom 2.16

Doct. 1. Men shall be judged according to their works.

Hence then we see, that all Men and Women shall be tried at this dreadful day,
by their works: Either they sh^^l be acquitted and absolved, or else condemned
by their works: For tho^ no man can merit Life and Salvation, at the hands of
God by his works, yet kn^w this that Judgment shall proceed at the last day,
according to thy works. If thy works have been good, just, h^ly, a^^ pure; then
^ho^ shall receive life, happiness, glory, and salvation: but if thy works are
wi^ked, unjust, and ungodly, t^^n nothing but Death, Hell, and Damnation
belongs unto thee. God told Adam, In the day that thou eatest of the Tree of
Life, thou shall surely, die the Death.

Our Savior teaches us, that a cup of cold water should not go unrewarded
with him at the last: And of Cornelius it is said, that his prayers and aims
are come up for a memorial before God. And to this agrees, the Author to the
Hebrews, God is not unrighteous to forget your works and labor of love, etc.
And as the Godly shall be rewarded according to their works: So likewise in
regard of the Wicked. These things have thou done, etc. And again, I was
hungry, and ye fed me not, etc. Psalm. 50.

Use 1. Well, what should this teach us, seeing we must all receive sentence,
according to our Works? Surely it ought to move us above all things in the
World, to labor to abound in all holy Duties and Graces of God's Spirit, in
Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Love, Zeal, Clothing, Feeding, and Lodging the
poor Members of Christ; for according to our works, so shall our reward be: And
though our Works can merit nothing at the hands of the Judge, yet he being a
most bountiful and merciful Savior, will crown his own Works in us, and reward
them in his mercy, though we merit nothing. Do thou relieve a poor Member of
Jesus Christ? or do thou give a Cup of cold Water to a Prophet. Christ does
promise thee of a truth, he will not let thee lose thy reward. True it is, a
Cup of cold Water is a mean Gift, and far from any merit; yet Christ says.
Verily, verily, of a truth thou shall not lose thy reward.

Oh how should this persuade all to labor to abound in all holy duties, to be
liberal and bountiful to the poor afflicted members of Christ, seeing our good
Works, though they cannot merit, yet they shall be rewarded; they shall not be
forgotten in the day of Judgment? They are sweet and blessed Companions? When
all our friends can do us no good, they will bring endless peace and comfort to
our souls.

Again, It ought to terrify us all from evil works, and ungodly ways? From
Whoring, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, and every evil way; for if we are full of
these, and these be found written in our Books? O then! Woe unto us when these
Books shall come to be opened, for then nothing but Death, Hell and Damnation
belongs unto us. The remembrance of this latter day teaches us,

First, The fear of God not to sin.

Secondly, Faith in Christ to receive eternal Life.

Thirdly, Patience in Adversity, because after momentary pain, succeeds
everlasting Joy.

Doct. 2. Here we s^e of all that we have and enjoy in this world what shall go
with us when we dye, what shall accompany us to the Grave, and to Judgment; our
Conscienc^, and our Works, nothing else-shall go with us. And when thou die,
thou shall not take any thing in the World with thee, b^t they works, which is
engraven in the Book of thy Conscience. Thou can not take thy Gold and Silver
with thee, nor thy Lands or Livings, Corn nor Cattle; all these must stay
behind thee when thou die; only thy Conscience, thy Book, and thy Works must
go with thee: If they are good, O blessed art thou, if they are wicked, filthy
and unclean, O woe and ten thousand woes to thy Soul for evermore.

Saint John plainly tells us, that both the quick and the dead shall hear the
Trumpet, and be gathered together to Judgment.

First, By the powerful Voice of Christ, as in the example of Lazarus, Those
that are in the grave, shall bear his voice.

Secondly, By the Ministry of Angels, that shall gather the Elect from all
parts.

Thirdly, By the diligence of the Creatures, who in their kinds shall hear the
Voice of God. The Sea, Death, the Grave, the Fire, which time and nature
consumed shall give up their dead, and obey the Voice of God, as at the
Creation. The Godly shall not enter into Judgment o^ Condemnation; but in the
Gene^al Judgment they shall be quitted: And as their Souls at death, so shall
their b^dies be then absolved from mortality? They shall solemnly be
inaugurated and invested in the Glory of their Savior. Christ's coming to
J^dgment ministers Comfort to the Godly, because he comes to Judgment, who is
able perfectly to free them from all misery, from all terror of C^nscience,
fear of Death, the Grave, the Devil, and Hell it self.

Use 3. Oh then what madness has bewitched the hearts and souls of most men
and women in the world? What do men desire? What do they hunger and thirst
after? Surely for pleasures, profits and preferments? For those they run Night
and Day, Winter and Summer, by Sea and Land; for these they spend all their
labor, wit and strength. Here is all that most men desire, they care for no
more. No account of Prayer in their houses, to read, to hear, and speak the
Word of God; nor desire to attain to knowledge, Faith, and Repentance; no
conscience to live in the fear of God; little or no pity to the needy members
of Jesus Christ. Alas, they never think of these things, but all their desire
is for the World: Ah poor blind souls! They imagine not, nor consider ibat they
must leave all these behind them; they must part from them all; Thou can not
take one piece of Gold or Silver with thee, but all must be left behind, only
thy Conscience, only thy Books, only thy Works must accompany thee. O then what
madness is this, to seek and hunt after such things as cannot help us, nor
stand us in any stead in the day of Judgment? Nay, if they be gotten wrongfu^ly
by oppression, usury, extortion, or kept with a bad Conscience, they will be a
terror unto u^ at the last day.

Let us then set not our hearts too much upon these things, which cannot profit
us in thi^ fiery day of Trial. Why should we^be so foolish to set our hearts
upon that that cannot help us, nay, which we must leave behind us? And so
improvident for the true treasures which only will avail at that day?

Let us therefore enter into Covenant with the Lord, to strive against all sin,
especially against the particular sins and corruptions of our hearts and lives,
wherein we have most dishonored the Lord, and have raised up most guiltiness
^^ our Consciences, which will at the last condemn us, and let us hereafter
carefully see our Covenant be kept and continued as much as in us lies, and
let us remember the words of the Prophet Esdras, in his Second Book, Chap. 7.
ver. 32. The earth shall restore those that have slept in b^^, and the most
high shall appear upon the seat of Judgment, and miseries shall vanish away,
and long suffering shall have an end, Justice only shall continue, t^^ truth
shall remain, and unrighteousness shall bear (...) more Rule.

Oh then I beseech you again and again, ^^^ing that nothing shall go with you
to Judgment, but only your works, to lay aside all immoderate care of the
World; yea, and the things of this World, for these must stay behind us, and
cannot help us in the day of Judgment. Let us labor for better things, for
durable Treasures, for a clear Conscience to abound in good works, in
Knowledge, Faith, and Repentance. Let us take need we are not found naked of
these. O what a woeful case are they in that have nothing in the world to go
with them to Judgment but ^^ evil heart, a galled Conscience full of
uncleanness. Their states is woeful and miserable; it had been good for them
they had never been burn.

Here a Question may be asked, how this saying of St. John, can stand with that
of our Savior, Joh. 3.18. He that believes on him is no^ condemned, but he
that believes not, is condemned already. Now if the faithful Children of God
shall not come into Judgment and the wick ^^ unbelievers be condemned already,
how says he, that all shall be judged at the day of Judgment?

I answer, it is true, that the faithful Children of God shall not come into
Judgment, that is, of condemnation: Romans 8. For there is no comdemnation, etc.
But God will pronounce that Blessed Sentence, Come ye blessed, etc. As for the
wicked it is true, they are condemned already.

First, in the decree and counsel of God, being Reprobates and Castaways.

Secondly, In the Word of God.

Thirdly, In their own Conscienc^ they are condemned already: But the full
manifestation of this Sentence shall not be until the day of Judgment: And so
we are to understand that saying of Solomon, Eccl. 3 27. God shall judge the
just and the unjust, the just to Salvation, the Unjust to condemnation.

Now the third point that we propounded, is the touchstone of this Trial,
whereby all men's thoughts, words and works shall be tried. To this St. Paul
answered, At the day of Judgment, God shall judge the secrets of all men's
hearts by his Gospel, Romans 2-16 Our Thoughts, our Words, and our Works, must be
tried by the Word of God, and that Thought, Word and Work, that is not
according to the Commandments of God, i^ a very idle thought, a ^ile word, and
a ^^icked work.

Seeing then that all our thoughts, words, and evil works, must be tried and
examined by the ^acred Word of God, by the Law, and by the Gospel, we have need
to labor to know them, and to be acquainted with them, that we may know what
is sin, and what is not sin, that so we may leave the one, and do the other. Oh
what a woeful case they are in, which are ignorant of the Word of God, ignorant
men an^ women, without any knowledge? They know not what is good or evil. And
therefore says the Apostle Paul, 2 These. 1.8. The Lord Jesus will come in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them ^ha^ ^now not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of ^u^ Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore as you le^^ your ^o^is, love the
Word of God, labor ^o ^^ow it, and embrace it: ^f thou be ignorant it, and
will not yield obedience unto it, it sha^^ stand against thee at the day of
Judgment, when thou must be tried by it, when perhaps thou would wish thou
had but a w^^^s time here; ^ay, a days time to repent, (...) an hours time to
pray, and to make thy peace with God. Therefore let us all labor to be
instructed in it, read it, remember it, and lead our ^ives by it, as long as we
live, for we cannot tell how soon we shall be called to give an account of our
Stewardship; and whatsoever is done contrary to it, is sin: It must come to
Judgment, and the Word and our own Consciences will condemn us.

13. And the Sea gave up the dead which were in her, and Death and Hell
deliverd up the dead that were in them, and they were judged every min
according to their Works.

YOu have heard in the 12 verse immediately going before, how St. John saw the
dea^ both great and small, stand before God, that is, all men and women that
ever lived, or shall live until the end of the World.

Now here a question arises how can this be? How is it possible, that all men
should come to Judgment? There have been many thousands drowned in the Sea, and
the F^shes have devoured them; some have been slain in the field, and the Fowls
have eaten their flesh; and ^any have been burnt, and their bones consumed to
ashes.

Then it is a very high point, a matter beyond all natural reason tha^ all the
dead should rise again. Men that have been drowned, and F^^hes have eaten them,
and men perhaps again have eaten the F^shes, and they have been burnt to ashes;
their ashes have been scattered who knows whither? How then is it possible
for them to rise again; Indeed Atheists and Epicureans are not ash^med to say,
that there shall be no Resurrection, but when a man dies there is an end of all
his joy, and all his misery.

But that the dead shall rise again, is an Article of our Faith; We believe the
Resurrection of the dead; and we know that God will in mercy reward his poor
Children, and in justice punish the wicked and ungodly.

But we see, as Solomon says, In this life all things happen a^^ke to the just
and unjust. Nay, of en^me^ Dives is full, and at ease, when La^ous is empty and
in misery. How then should God be just, if he should suffer his poor Children
that love and fear his Name, here to live ^n misery, and never to reward them;
Or again, how should God be just, if he should suffer the ^icked and a^godly to
live at ease, if there were not a time to come, when they should ^^l^e of
vengeance; therefore they must come ^o Judgment, they must rise again, the
Godly to ^e made partake^s of life and joy, and the wicked of ^ame and
confusion.

So that the instruction we observe hence it this, tha^ the dead bodies of men,
both good and bad, shall not always be under the power of ^^ath, but shall one
day be quickened and raised ^p to life again. There is n^^ one A^ticle of ^u^
Christian Faith, more clearly set down in (...) the Bo^k of God, than this
A^ticle of our Resurrection. How confident is J^b in this thing? I know that my
R^deemer l^veth, etc Whom (...) e^es shall behold. And the Lord himself faith
thus by the Prophet, Isa. ^6.19. Thy dead men shall arise, even with my body
shall they arise, awake and sing ye that dwell in the Dust The Apost^e St Paul
proves the Doctrine of the R^surrection of the dead, writing unto the
Corinthians by many unanswerable Arguments: 1 Cor. 15.12. If there be no
resurrection of the Dead, then Christ is not risen. And again, If Christ be not
risen, then is our Preaching vain, and we are in our sins. And again, This
Corruption must put on incorruption, and this Mortal put on immortality. This
then we may re^olve on, that the Bodies of men shall one day rise again,
whether they b^ good or bad, godly men or sinners, to. Judgment they must all
come, according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for all men
once to die, and after death comes Judgment. For by the found of the last
Trumpet, the dead shall arise. We must not think that it shall be a common.
Trumpet which shall be blown; no, it shall be the shrill Voice of the Angels,
which shall make this Alarm, that all the dead shall hear, obey, and rise out
of their Graves. At this day of Jubilee there shall be no new Moon, in which
the Trumpet was used to be blown, which the^ Prophet David speaks of in the ^^
Psalm: But we shall have a new Earth, and a new Heaven, when this Trumpet shall
be blown, it shall be heard far and near, no ear whatsoever but shall hear this
sound; the dampness of the Earth shall not hinder it, nor the depth of the
Grave shall excuse us, no place, though never so remove, shall hinder ^his ^ound,
for it shall be universal, and from all the corners of the Earth (...) this
^ru^pet be he^^d, it is the Lords signal* All must ^ise, tha^ (...) t^^ Power
of the Voice, and the obedience of the dead. Indeed it is a powerful Voice, and
all must obey it. The Grave must surrender up all; for the Sea and the Grave
are but faithful Stewards, and must deliver up the Bodies which have been so
long hidden; the living must then be congregated, and the dead shall arise and
come to Judgment, and every one receive according to his actions he has done
in the flesh.

Reas. 1. And indeed, it is requisite it should be so in regard of Gods
Justice, that his promises made to the godly, and his Threatenings against the
wicked, might at last be made good to both, which many times in this life are
not. His Justice then requires that men should one day rise again. The Elect
Children of God are only partakers of Christ's Resurrection to Eternal Glory.
The ungodly indeed rise by virtue of Christ, not as he is a Redeemer, but a
terrible Judge; and besides the Death of the Body, they must ^^ffer a second
Death, which is a pouring out of God's wrath on them for ever.

Secondly, The very Works in nature do in a sort show this: As the Phanix, who
in waxing aid, it is said, makes a fire, and burns her self to ashes, out of
which ashes, she reviveth again. We see it in other Birds, as the Swallow, etc.
which all the Winter are said to be asleep in ^oles and clifes of the Rocks,
and in the Spring come abroad again. Yea, the very Trees and ^ants of the
Earth, as in Winter, they appear to be dead, so in Spring they revive and live
again.

And why then should any think it is impossible for God to raise our Bodies out
of the dust? We see a poor ignorant man is able of Clay ar^ Ashes, to make a
very beautiful Glass. How much more then is the ever-living and Almighty God
able to raise our bodies out of the dust? But you will say, are not men's Bodies
eaten of Fishes, and Men eat them again? How is it possible to raise the Bodies
of these men thus consumed to dust, and mingled with the bodies of several
Fishes, and of diverse sorts of Beasts.

I Answer, that though it be impossible to mortal men, yet it is not impossible
to God; For he that created all our Bodies of nothing can make them again with
something, namely, of their own matter, and sever their Bodies from all other
Substances. The Atheist denies the Resurrection of the dead, which we will
confute by the Scriptures, and the Resurrection of Christ.

And since Christ gave life to himself when dead and in the Grave: How much
more now being alive, and in Heaven Glorified, is he able to raise his members
from Death to Life, and to raise up those that are dead in sin, by his Spirit
unto newness of Life? Christ's Resurrection is both the cause and confirmation
of our rising again. If we believe that Jesus Christ died and rose again, even
so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, 1 These. 4.14. And
again, If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he
that raised up Christ, etc. Romans 8 11. And to prove the Resurrection of
Christ's Body, the witnesses are these: First, the Angels, Why seek ye the
living among the dead? he is not here, he is risen, Luke 24.5. 2 dly, the
Saint^ that rose with him, and went unto the holy City. 3 dly. A forced
Testimony of the Soldiers; They came (...) the (...), and told all things that
were done. Fourthly, The Disciples and followers of Christ, the Apostles the
Women, the two Disciples, Peter and John, and more (says the Text) than five
hundred brethren at once: But especially the Apostle Paul, the chosen of God.
Then Fifthly, his own love was shown, he bid the Woman, Go^ tell my brethren
that I am risen, 1 Cor 15. So St. Peter in his first Epistle, Chap I Verse 3.
says, Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to
his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively hope, by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled,
and that f^deth not away, reserved in Heaven for you who are kept by the power
of God, through Faith unto Salvation. St. Paul testifies as much in diverse of his
Epistles: 1 Cor. 15.20 Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first
fruits of them that sleep. Likewise Ephesians 2.6. He has raised us up together, and
made us fit together in Heaven with Jesus Christ. And again in Acts 3.26. Unto
you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus Christ, has sent him to bless
you, in turning every one of you from his Iniquities. And after he was risen,
he appeared (as the Text says) first to Mary Magdalen^ when she stood without
the Sepulcher weeping.

She teaches us that we have cause to weep; when we have lost Christ: For he
is our righteousness, and our life; and not without hope we must weep; for in
his Resurrection we recover him with Consolation. To believe and hope in our
Resurrection; is a chief solace of our troubles and crosses which are but for ^
time; for Hope does expect that certainly, which Faith from the Word of God
does believe confidently. Christ's death was not only for our sins, but his
Resurrection was to obtain Righteousness for us, the Holy Ghost, and
Everlasting Life and Glory.

First, He rose for our Justification.

Secondly, For our Regeneration.

Thirdly, For our Resurrection to everlasting Glory.

All the benefits of Christ's Death, are the fruits which we receive by his
Resurrection; by Christ's Resurrection he applies the benefit to us which he
merited for us of his own free love.

The Fruits of Christ's Resurrection are, First, we are confirmed, that by his
merit he hat^ perfectly satisfied for our sins. Secondly, in the application of
Christ's benefits, that could not be conferred or applied, except he had rose
again. Thirdly, In the Gift of the Holy Ghost, by which Christ Regenerates us,
and gives us Eternal Life. Fourthly, We are by Christ's Resurrection preserved
in a perpetual and applied Righteousness begun, which shall be consummated in
Eternal Life. Fifthly, In the Resurrection of our Bodies.

First, Because Christ is our Head, and we his Members.

Secondly, He has taken away sin the cause of Death.

Thirdly, He received Life for us.

Fourthly, We have the same Spirit.

Fifthly, By the Man Christ, came the Resurrection from the Dead.

Sixthly and lastly, The Fruit of Christ's Resurrection, is the consummation of
all benefits, and the glorification of his Church Militant, and therefore with
Paul, let us believe in the Resurrection of Christ, who rose the third day from
the dead; to make us partakers of his Righteousness, Sanctification and
Glorification, purchased by his Merits only. John 16 These things have I spoken
(says Christ) unto you, that in me you might have peace, in the world ye shall
have tribulation: But be of good cheer, I have overcome the World: And St Paul
says, Rom 14.9. To this end Christ both died and rose again, and revived that
he might be Lord both of the living and the dead.

So then this place proves and confirms that Article of our Faith, that we
believe the Resurrection of the Dead. For though a man die by Sea or Land, in his
Bed, or in the Field, St. John says, The Sea shall give up all that have been
drowned, Death and Hell, that is the Grave shall deliver the dead in them, so
as all must come to Judgment, of what Death soever they die. O then, see
(Beloved) how the Devil be witcheth many a poor ignorant soul, When he is in
misery, distress and calamity, or in a deep melancholy, the Devil persuades
him to become his own Executioner, to end his misery and shame, by hanging
himself, cutting his own Throat, drowning himself, etc. And we know and hear,
that he prevails much in these days: Some being in disgrace, as
Nebuchadnezza^ and A^bitophel; some with the gu^^t of sin, and sling of
Conscience, as Cain and Judas, and some being crossed in the World's affairs,
cut their own Throats, or otherwise destroy themselves. Now they foolishly
think by this means to end their grief. When alas, alas, they do but hasten
their own destruction, as if a man should (to avoid a little smoke) cast
himself into a flaming fire. So they to avoid this little grief of their
Bodies, plunge both Body and Soul into Eternal Torments: For what case is it
for any to destroy themselves, seeing they must come to Judgment: Though they
kill or drown themselves, The Water and Grave must one day give up their dead.
From hence let us learn, to arm our selves if Satan should tempt us to such
horrible facts, to cast away our selves, etc. Let us answer him, we may not
cast away that which Christ has bought with his own Blood; nay, let us answer
him, that we shall not thereby end our misery, but increase it.

Now if you demand, by what means the dead shall then arise at the last day; I
answer. It is by the mighty power of the Voice of Christ, The hour shall come,
(says Christ) in which all that are in the Grave shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and come forth. And to show the wonderful power of the voice of
Christ. It is compared to the sound of a Trumpet, the loudest and shrillest of
all Instruments, These. 1.25. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the Arch Angel, and with the Trump of God, and
the dead in Christ shall rise first. Such shall be the power and force of this
Voice of the Lord Jesus, that it shall be heard over the whole World. Nay,
though men have lain many thousand Years rotten in the Grave, yet they shall
hear it. and come forth to Judgment. Nay the Devils and damned Spirits shall be
constrained to appear at his Voice. No Prince, nor Monarch, no King, nor
Nobleman shall be able to absent himself from Gods Presence, nor once dare to
plead in our Cause, but they must be forced to obey the Voice of the Son of
God, and come to Judgment. Christ was a Lamb at his Passion, and some shall
find him a Lion at his Resurrection

Seeing then we must all hear the Voice of the Lord Jesus at the day of
Judgment, and we cannot b^^ come forth out of our Graves unto this J^^gment. O
let us now obey his Voice in the Ministry of his Gospel. and embrace the Word,
and the voice of his Ministers. If we do not leave sin, hear our Savior Jesus
Christ speaking unto us in his Word, and embrace his Truth; Then let us know,
that we shall one day hear another voice; when we shall be compelled to come
before him to condemnation.

Therefore in all afflictions and miseries whatsoever, and especially in
diseases and death, we must strengthen our selves in the future Resurrection,
remembering that of the Apostle, Phil. 3.20, 21 Our conversation is in Heaven,
from whence also we look for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according
the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. Every
Christian. as in the eleventh Article of our Creed, does believe the
Resurrection of the body. And St. Paul, in 1 Cor 15.10.21. says, But now is
Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that s^^ep; for
since by man came death, by man also came the Resurrection from the dead.

Quest. But how?

Answ. God that in his Omnipotency made our Bodies, and all things else of
nothing, can after, in our corruption, restore in the same substance and
quality to Eternity, for with him is nothing impossible, Luke 1.37. With God
nothing is impossible. St. Paul satisfies this scruple abundantly and
sufficiently, which is able to stop the mouth of all Atheists whatsoever: O
thou Fool, (says he) that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die,
and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bear
grain, as it were wheat or some other grain; but God gives it a body, as it
pleases him; and to every seed his own body.

Though it pleases God not to let thee know the time of the Resurrection, to
himself only known; yet the manner has he left to be showed by the Apostles,
and they have recorded it for us, as in 1 These. 4.16. For the Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Arch Angels, and
with the Trump of God, the dead in Christ shall rise first, then we which are
alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds to meet
the Lord in the air, and so shall we for ever be with the Lord.

This hope of the Resurrection has ever been the greatest consolation to the
godly in their afflictions, whence Tertullian says. That the confidence of a
Christian is in the Resurrection from the dead. An example hereof is in Job, in
the midst of his affliction, he said, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that
he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth, and though after my skin worms
destroy my body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. What can be more manifest? No
man (after Christ, than he before Christ's appearance in the flesh) could speak
more plainly and certainly of the Resurrection, from the confidence of our
Resurrection we contemn things present, in hope of the future, for all flesh
shall see the Salvation of God.

Of the Resurrection, Isaiah says, ^b 26 verse 19. Thy dead men shall live,
together with my dead Body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in
the dust, For they dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the
dead. At that time the people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found
written in the Book. Ezekiel also has it very plain in Chap. 37 Verse 12.
Prophecy and say unto them, Thus says the Lord God, Behold, O my people, I
will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring
you into the Land of Israel, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have
opened your Gr^ves, O my people, and brought you up out of your Graves, and
shall put my Spirit in you, and ye shall live: And I shall place you (...) your
own land, and then shall you know that I the Lord have spoken it, and performed
it, says the Lord. Thus you may see, that all the dead must rise, and come to
Judgment: And you hear how and by what means our bodies shall be raised,
namely, by the mighty and wonderful power of the Voice of the Lord Jesus. Let
us now come to the Uses.

Use 1. First, Seeing of what death soever men die, either by Fire or Water, or
howsoever, they must one day come to Judgment. Let us then beware of that
ungodly thought and devilish persuasion, that runs in most wicked men's minds,
that think that when they die, there is an end of all their misery. And
although they have been very great ^^^ners, yo^^^ ^hey escape ^ill de^^h,
(...). And (...) thi^^ that they and their sins shall be buried together.

No, no, (p^or S^u^) they much deceive themselves. However thou (...), thou
shall come ^o judgment; and death is so far from ending thy misery, that is a
broad Gate to let thee into it. For so soon as the rich man died, he was
presently in Hell Torments.

Therefore let us take heed how we wish as foolish men do in their sickness,
old age or misery. O would I were dead, then I should be out of my pain. Oh!
no, if thou be not a Child of God, and a repentant sinner, it had been better
for thee never to have been born, or to be a Toad or a Serpent. And thou shall
find, that death is so far from easing thy pain, that it will bring thee to ten
thousand times more pain and torment, even in Hell Fire for ever. Therefore let
us not think that death shall end the miseries of wicked men.

Use 2. Secondly^ Seeing that all men must rise to Judgment, and by what means
soever they die, they must be called to account: This is a wonderful comfort
unto God's poor Children, who abide more trouble and grief than they? Who are
more hated, reviled, crossed, and wronged than they? Their life here for the
most part is nothing else but a life of misery; but their comfort here is this,
that they shall rise again, and then the Case shall be altered, then their
Misery shall be turned into Felicity, Joy and Happiness. Have thou been poor
here? There thou shall be rich, and possess a happy Kingdom, as Lazarus did.
Have thou been hungry and thirsty here? There thou shall taste of the Tree of
Life. Have thou been wretched and naked here? There thou shall be clothed with
the precious Robes of Christ's Righteousness, and instead of Rags of Infamy and
Reproach, which we put on here, we shall be crowned with a Crown of immortal
Glory, etc. But it is not so with the Wicked and Ungodly, for they having taken
their Pleasures here, and received their Portion in this present World, shall
rise to Judgment, to hear the heavy Sentence of Condemnation denounced against
them, and now to he cast into that Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone,
which is the second Death.

Use 3. Thirdly, Seeing St. John says, that all shall come to Judgment, these
Bodies of ours, though they be drowned, burnt to Ashes, or howsoever they be
consumed, yet they shall rise again, either to Life Eternal, or Death Eternal:
Should not this make us all (Beloved) for to look to our selves, to take (...)
we do not use our Bodies to the Dishonor of God, knowing that our Bodies are
the living Temples of the Holy Ghost? Would thou have thy Body to be partaker
of Life, Felicity, Glory, and Salvation in Heaven? Then use thy Body now to the
Glory of God upon Earth, to hear his Holy Word, to sanctify his Sabbath, etc.

But if thou use thy Body to sin, as Swearing, Drunkenness, Whoredom, etc..
Then know that thy Body shall rise again to Judgment, to be tormented for ever.
Do but consider the rich Glutton who had abused his Body in surfeiting and
Drunkenness, etc.. What became of it? Was he not tormented in Hell at last? And
as he had given his tongue unto swearing, etc. now he cries, His Tongue, his
Tongue: Oh that all sinful Wretches would but think of this one Example of
God's Judgment, that if they abuse their Bodies as this man did, that they
shall then taste of the same Judgment.

Would thou have thy Body glorified? Then Glorify God in thy Body, do thou
think that thy Soul shall be saved, and thy Body glorified, if thou use the
members thereof to sin, to uncleanness, etc. Oh no, let us not deceive our own
Souls, it cannot be: For says the Apostle, how can we that are dead to sin,
live any longer therein.

Use 4 4 thly, Seeing that the Holy Ghost says that whatsoever death we die,
we shall rise again ^ and God's Children only shall rise to Life and Glory:
This may teach us not to weep and mourn immoderately for our Friends deceased.
For it is a kind of envy to bewail those that are at rest and gone to happiness.

True it is, that our Savior wept for Lazarus and the Disciples made great
lamentation for Stephen: And so we have great cause to mourn and weep when Holy
Men are taken away; we ought not to be as stocks and stones, or senseless
Creatures, without affection. I^ must needs grieve the heart of a Husband to
part with a Loving, Godly, and Religious Wife^punc; But we ought to moderate
our mourning, that we weep and mourn not overmuch, for they shall rise again. I
would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep,
that ye Sorrow not even as those which have no hope, 1 These. 4.13.

Where the Holy Ghost tells us, that the dead in Christ do not die properly,
but lay them down to take a sweet sleep, after their long and tedious labors
and troubles in this World, and afterward they must rise again to Life,
Happiness, Liberty, Glory, and Salvation.

Wherefore then should we mourn excessively, and weep and lament at the death
of our Friends, seeing they do not perish, they are not cast away? Oh no, their
Souls are presently in joy; and their wearied Bodies are at rest in the Grave
as in a Bed of Down, until the day of Judgment, and then they shall rise to
Glory. And whether this separation of our Souls from our Bodies, shall be by
voice, or a secret guiltiness of our own Consciences: It is all one, for all
must rise and come to Judgment. The Angels they shall obey his Voice, they
shall be his reapers at this great Day of Harvest, and they shall make a
separation at his Word; for by the Power and Omnipotency of Christ shall this
separation be. Wherefore let us endeavor to die to sin, before we die to
nature; and let us strive to bury it, before it bury us; for sin brings only
guilt and shame in this Life, and utter perdition in the Life to come.
Therefore, O Lord, let my eyes be as a Well. Spring every morning to shed forth
tears of true Repentance for my iniquities.

And they were judged every one according to his works.
NOW mark, I pray, how the Holy Ghost repeats this point again and again, he
insists often upon it; he said before, The Books were opened, and the dead were
judged according to those things written in the Books. And now again ^e says,
They were judged every man according to his works. What should be the cause why
the Holy Ghost so often repeats this point, again, and again? I answer, The
cause is in us, because we are hardly brought to believe this point, for hardly
one of a thousand believes this, that (...) shall be judged according to his
works. O^ (...) to persuade Men and Women of this, that they must give an
account of their works. Tell the wicked sinner of his ungodly ways, of his
Profaneness, contempt of Gods Word, etc. What do they say? Do they quake and
tremble? Do their hearts and souls even yern in them? Oh, no, no, they flatter
themselves with this conceit, God is^ merciful, or say, God forgive me I
thought not of it, I was urged to it: And so abuse the mercies of God, to
excuse all their abominations. And thus it is in the vile heart of man, to
think he shall never come to account for his sins, nor receive^ a reward
according to his works, whether they be good or evil.

How needful is it then, for all men that are blinded with ignorance, and so
deluded by the Devil, and their own imagination, to pray to the Lord for the
assistance of his holy Spirit, to guide them in all their ways, and to mollify
their hard and obdurate hearts, that they may be sensible of their wicked
Actions, acknowledging^ with the true penitent sinner, the Wrath and Judgment
of God due unto them for every sin, to render all possible thanks for the
preservation of their Lives from day to day ^ for shall they with a quiet
Conscience be comforted in this Life, and end their days with assurance of a
joyful Resurrection in the Life to (...)

The Great Assize. The Fourth and last SERMON, Treating of Death and Hell, and
also of the Joys of Heaven.
Rev. 20.14, 15. 14. And Death and Hell were cast into the Lake of Fire, this
is the second Death.

15. And whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the
Lake of Fire.


IN handling this weighty point of Religion, the (second coming of Christ to
Judgment,) I have showed you from the mouth of God* First, what manner of
Person the Judge shall be, and how he shall come: namely, like a mighty Prince,
with great Power, Majesty and Glory, with an innumerable company of Arch Angels
and Angels, with all the Host of Heaven; there is the number of them that shall
appear at the last day, even all, and leave Heaven empty, as it were, of
Angels; for at this Sentence the whole Trinity will be present, so that there
will be no need of Angels in Heaven, to do any office to wait upon God, or on
the Holy Ghost, while this Sentence is passing, unto the great comfort of his
poor Members, and to the terror and amazement of all his (...).

Secondly, You have heard who shall be judged, Both great and small.

Thirdly, The manner how Judgment shall proceed. Namely, By the written
Records, which are the Books of Men's Consciences,

And now in the last place we come to the execution of Judgment upon wicked
Reprobates and ungodly in these two last Verses: For when Judgment is
pronounced according to their works, when Christ Jesus, which is the second
Person in the Sacred Trinity, shall say unto them, Depart from me ye cursed
into Hellfire, there to remain for ever with the Devil and his Angels, etc.
Then immediately the execution of this Sentence shall follow; for says St.
John, Death and Hell were cast into the Lake of fire; that is the second Death.

First, We are to enquire and seek the true meaning of the Text, because every
word may move a Question. For,

Quest 1. What is Death, that he should be cast into Hellfire? Is Death any
Creature? Is Death subject unto pain and torments? Surely, no, Death is no
body, it has no sense nor feeling; Death is no Creature, but only the
deprivation of Life. Again, What a strange speech is this, that Death shall be
cast into Hell: How can this be?

Quest: 2. Secondly, What is meant by the Lake of fi^^? Is Hell a Water, or a
Fire like unto our F^^e?

Quest. 3. And lastly, We are to consider, What is meant by the Second Death,
into which all Reprobates must be cast without Recovery?

First Here by Death and Hell, is meant not Death it self, nor Hell it self,
but the Heirs of Death and Hell, that is all the Reprobates that shall be cast
into Hell fire, and there abide for evermore. Thus you see what is here meant
by Death and Hell; namely, the Heirs of Death and fire brands of Hell, all
Reprobates, all s^iff-necked Pharoahs, all bloody Cains, all covetous Nabals,
all treacherous and betraying Judas's, all impenitent sinners, that live and
die in their sin, all these shall be cast into the Lake of Fire.

Use 1. Seeing the Holy Ghost gives these Titles and Names unto all wicked and
ungodly sinners, even Death and Hell: This shows the wonderful misery, and
cursed Estate of all those that live and die in their sins, without Repentance.
Alas! It is so woeful and damnable, that they are even called Death and Hell it
self.

This shows the misery of those that die in their sins.
Oh then, let all sinners that live and delight in sin, take heed to
themselves. You see the woeful misery of all impenitent sinners, namely, that
they are no better than Vessels of Wrath, the Heirs of Eternal Death, and
Firebrands of Hell for evermore. Oh that all sinners would forethink of this
woeful misery that hangs over their sinful heads. What a strange kind of speech
is this, and of what force? When God called such Reprobates, even Death and
Hell it self. Ah poor Wretches! Ah miserable and woeful Creatures, which are but
(...) and Hell it self! O^ would to God that the Drunkard, the Swearer, the
Prophaner of the Lords Day, the Adulterer, etc. Would lay this to heart, that
though they see not their misery, nor the woeful estate wherein they live, but
cheer themselves in their sinful ways, yet they are no better than the heirs of
vengeance and Wrath of God, nay indeed very Death and Hell it self; and one day
the Vials of Gods Wrath will be poured upon them.

True it is, that Wicked men do as the people did in Isaiah's time, Isa. 28.21.
Though they lived in horrible sin, yet they made a League with Death, and were at
an Agreement with the Grave; they had taken a Lease of Death and Hell; as the
Rich Man, which said to his Soul, Soul take thine ease, for thou have Goods and
Riches laid up for many years, and so live in sin, without fear of punishment:
But the Lord tells 'em, he will break the Covenant. and disanul their
Agreement. And although they have lived a long time in sin, yet in the end
Death will knock at their Doors, and then seize them, and they must pay dear
for their long Lease, even the loss of Body and Soul for ever.

And is not this the daily practice of most men and women at this day? Do they
not make a Covenant with Death, and labor to be at an Agreement with Hell? Men
live in Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness, etc. as if they thought they should never
die, they imagine they shall escape for all their sins. But (poor Souls) let
them know, that Death and Hell will seize upon them. Nay, if they live and die
in their sins without repentance, let them know that they are no better than
Death and Hell it self, and they must be cast into the Lake of Fire.

Use 2. Here you may see what a horrible and cursed thing sin is in the sight
of God, for sin makes men become guilty of Eternal Death, and Firebrarnds of
Hell. As when a Traitor is executed for Treason, his (...) ^marteth for his
Offense. Even so sin, ^^^ch is Treason against the Majesty of God, when it is
brought forth, it brings us to Death and Hell; for Death and Hell is the reward
of sin.

And Death and Hell were cast into the Lake of fire. Would you know what shall
become of the profane Wretches of the World! The Blasphemer, Adulterer,
Drunkard, Idolater, Swearer, etc. St. John says here in plain terms, They
shall be cast into the Lake of fire. Thus was the rich glutton, Luke 16. For
his excess, drunkenness, and want of piety, etc. cast into the Lake of Fire:
And so shall impenitent Sinners one day be cast into the terrible and woeful
Lake of Fire.

Now if a Blasphemer, or an Adulterer, etc. should have but this punishment, to
hold one of his Fingers in the flame of a Candle one quarter of an hour, how
could he endure it? But if a man should be roasted alive upon a Grid-Iron, or
boiled in a Chaldron of molten Lead, what misery were this? Whose heart would
not quake and melt to think of it? Yet these are nothing in comparison of those
most extreme and endless torments in this Lake of Fire, when both Body and Soul
shall burn and broyl, and as it were fry, yet never be consumed in those
scorching flames which cannot be quenched. Most men are afraid to commit
Treason, because Traitors are so grievously punished; they are drawn, hanged
and quartered; but alas, Men are not afraid to commit Treason against the King
of Heaven, though they must be cast into a Lake of Fire for evermore. Men are
afraid to offend a Prince for fear of death, and yet our Savior bids us, Mat.
10.28. Not fear them that can kill the Body, and can do no more ^ but to fear
him that can cast both body and soul into Hell fire.

And yet we see that men and women are more afraid to offend Man than God, That
can cast both body and soul into Hell fire.

If we should see a Child fall into the fire, and hear it cry pitifully, and
the very bowels should be burnt out, how would it grieve us, and make our
hearts bleed within us? How much more then should it grieve us to see, not a
Child, but even our own Bodies and Souls cast away for ever by sin, into the
lake of fire that cannot be quenched? If a man should come amongst us, and cry
Fire, Fire, thy House is all of a flaming Fire, thy Corn and thy Cattle, thy
Wife and thy Children, and all thou have, are consumed by fire; how would this
astonish us! And make the very hair to stand upright upon one heads, and tears
to gush our of our eyes. Behold then and see the Spirit of God cries out, Fire,
Fire, even the dreadful fire of Hell gapet^^ ready to devour, not thy House,
Corn or Cattle, but thy poor Soul, and that for evermore. Then, how should this
break out hard and flinty hearts asunder, and make them to bleed, if we have
any spark of Grace, any Care of our Souls, that they may not be tormented in
this Lake of Fire for ever.

I will leave the further handling of this point, until I come unto the next
verse, where the Holy Ghost again, the better to make it sink into our hard
hearts, That whosoever is not found written in the Book of Life, shall be cast
into the Lake of Fire.

Now by Fire, in this place, we must not conceive a material Fire like unto
ours, but the Holy Ghost means here the second Death, (...) at is, not of the
Body only, but of Eternal Death and Damnation both of body and Soul for
evermore. This is the Second Death, and by this we may plainly see, there is a
double Death, There is the first Death, and then the second Death.

The First Death is the separation of the Soul from the Body, and that is
common to all; the Children of God die this Death as well as the wicked; yet
there is some difference; for Death is no curse to the Children of God, because
Christ's Death has taken away the sting of Death; it can neither dismay nor
hurt them, no, it is but as a door for our Souls to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: But the second they never taste of; no Child of God needs to fear the
second Death, Romans 8 1. For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus. Now as the First Death is only a separation of the Soul from the Body,
so the Second Death is a total and final separation both of Soul and Body from
God for ever; and this second Death stands principally in these three points.

First, That all wicked and ungodly sinners, that live and die in their sins,
shall be punished with everlasting destruction, being severed from the blessed
Presence of the Lord for ever, and from the glory of his Power, 2 These. 1 9 Oh
what a woeful death is this, to be deprived of the blessed and comfortable
Presence of God! Wherein the bap^^^^ and joy of Gods children shall stand in
the be^^^^ing of God, and enjoying his presence for ever^^^^ Then what misery
and woe will this be (...) wicked, to ^^ cast out of the glorious presence of
the Lord for ever, who alone is the Fountain of Life and Happiness.

Secondly, The second Death stands in this, that wicked men and women shall not
only be severed in Body and Soul from the blessed and glorious presence of the
Almighty for ever; but shall be cast into the Lake of Fire, and have their
abode with the Devils, and all the damned Spirits in Hell, where there is no
joy, nor comfort, nor ease, but weeping and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth If a
man should be cast into a deep and dark Dungeon, full of Toads and Serpents,
what comfort I pray, could be have but to wish for Death: That is the death
that all impenitent sinners must die, they must be cast out of the sweet and
comfortable presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, and thrown headlong into the
terrible Lake of Fire and Brimstone, there to be tormented for evermore.

Thirdly, The third thing wherein this second Death does consist, is, that all
Reprobates shall be punished with everlasting perdition; they shall be
tormented both Body and Soul with unspeakable torments: The wrath and vengeance
of God shall seize upon them, and feed on them, as fire does on pitch and
brimstone, where they shall be ever burning and broiling, and yet never be
consumed; ever in pain and torment. Our Savior compares the wonderful torment
of this second death, to a Furnace of Fire: What a woeful torment is it to be
cast into a furnace of Fire, and there to lie many thousand years? This is a
torment that cannot be expressed. Again he says, Isa 66.24. This their ^rw in
shall not d^e, and their fire shall not be quenched. Now what can a man do, if
^^ should have a worm always gnawing at h^^ heart? This is the state of all
wicked men and women, they shall always have a worm, even grief and anguish,
and ever gnawing at their heart, and biting at their Consciences; and thi^ worm
shall never die nor kill them, but be ever gnawing and wounding them. And this
condition of the damned in Hell is miserable in three respects.

First, In regard of the degrees of it.

Secondly, In regard of the place.

And Thirdly, In regard of the perpetuity thereof.

The first appears in the loss of our blessed Communion with God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, In whose presence is life, and at whose right hand there
is pleasure for evermore

And thus shall the wicked be punished at that day with everlasting Destruction
from the presence of the Lord, 2 These. 1.9.

A second degree of their misery consists in the Society they shall have for
ever with the Devil and his Angels, according to that of our Savior, Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
A punishment which we may guess to be intolerable; to burn and not to consume,
to live, and have no end; includes all woe and misery whatsoever: Cursed of
Christ himself, cursed of the Angels; whose curse will always remain in their
Consciences: Cursed shall they be likewise of the Devils themselves, whose
curse shall be always tormenting them; never have rest nor ease; perpetually
howling and crying which is their Music, their joy nothing but cursing and
blasphemy.

But especially in ^^spect of that Horror, Torment and Pain, that shall seize
upon the Bodies and Souls of all wicked and ungodly men at the last day: Which
will be such as shall make them cry out, unto rocks and mountains to fall upon
them and cover them, when there shall be tribulation, anguish and wrath upon
every man that does evil, Romans 13.4.

Secondly, The place shall add likewise to their misery, and that is Hell, the
proper place of the damned after death: This in the Scripture is called Hell,
the bottomless Gulpb, utter darkness, the fearful Tophet, the Dungeon of
Despair, the burning Lake, the hollow Cave, the Chaos of all Confusion, the
Grave of Perdition, whose Furna^e is always burning, whose Fire is made by
God's Wrath and his Power upholds it, and it is, blown with the bellows of his
Indignation, it is unquenchable, even prepared for the Devil and his Angels And
therefore Christ bids them, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc. and all to
show the miserable condition of those that are there.

And last of all the Eternity of the Punishment that the damned shall suffer,
adds not a little to the misery of the wicked; they shall suffer and endure the
heat and burning of Gods Wrath for ever: It shall never have an end; It shall
be without hope of intermission, for says St. John, Rev. 14.11. The smoke of
their Torment shall ascend evermore, and they shall have no rest Day nor Night.
What a punishment will this be! Let all Men and Women consider.

First, It is the loss of Almighty God, and of his most Glorious and Blessed
Presence, which the Saints and Angels always ^enjoy, which is his Love, his
^^rcy, his Bounty, his ^eauty, his gracious Aspects, and all his Eternal
Attributes, the loss of Heaven, which is unspeakable, past the thoughts of man,
the loss of ^^e Society of the Holy Martyrs, Angels, and Arch Angels, whose
Glory, Riches and Treasures never have an end. Thus I have showed you what the
second death is, and also wherein it does consist.

Now the question will be, Who shall be cast into this Lake of Fire? Who are
they that shall die the second death, which is so misrable and woeful? For there
is no man or woman that lives, I think, but suppose that they shall escape
this death, they hope they shall be saved, and so escape this Flaming Fire, and
by that hope, defer their R^pentance till old Age, till they have no other
employment. And therefore now you shall see who they are that shall be cast
into it. There are some marked out unto us, Rev ^1.8 The fearful and
unbelievers, and abominable and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers,
and Liars, etc. shall have their part in the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. So then the Holy Ghost tells us that all
impenitent sinners shall be damned, and cast into this Lake of Fire which is
the second death; for after this there is no Repentance, no recovery; there
will be a great Gulf, as Abraham told Dives, between the Godly and Ungodly: The
Godly shall see and behold the Ungodly in Hell, as Lazarus did Dives in Hell^
Torments.

Then how strange is this? The Holy Ghost tells us who shall be damned and cast
into the Lake of Fire, all impenitent sin^ers, the Blasphemer, the Drunkard,
etc. and yet no man (almost) w^ll consider this: Well, the Spirit of God cannt
lie: he says, That all wicked and ungodly sinners shall be c^st into the Lake
of fire, which is the second Death. Now tell a wicked wretch of his sin, as his
Swearing etc. and what will he say, Tush, God is merciful, I hope I shall be
saved: Is not this I pray, to give the Holy Ghost the Lie? Tell the Drunkard or
Prophener of the Lords day, that they must one day give an account for it, or
that they shall be damned? do they believe this; Oh, no, no, for if they did,
how durst they be so bold to live in sin: Well, let these vile Wretches that
say they hope to be saved as well as the best; yet know that this is the truth
of God, the Holy Ghost tells us plainly, That all Unbelievers, and Thieves, and
Murderers, etc. shall be cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone; which is
the Second Death.

But those whose hearts tremble for fear of these things, whose Souls do melt
for fear of this second Death, if you would know how to escape this terrible
Lake of Fire, and how to avoid this the second Death, which is eternal
damnation and torment both of Body and Soul, you shall see how the Spirit of
God does not only show you how to escape Hell, but to come to Heaven, not only
to avoid damnation in this Lake of Fire, but to obtain Salvation ^^d J^y in the
Blessed and Glorious Presence of God for evermore. Now mind what the Holy Ghost
teaches in the 6th Verse of this Chapter, Blessed and happy is he that has
his part in the first Resurrection, for on such the second death shall have no
power; but they ^^all be the Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with
him a thousand years, that is for evermore.

Now would you know what manner of men and women shall escape this second
death, and eternal damnation in this Lake of Hell Fire, the Holy Ghost says,
they and none but they that have their parts in the first Resurrection. So it
is manifest in these words, that there are ^wo Resurrections, and als^ a double
^^a^h: The children of God have a double Resur^ection and one death, but all
wicked and u^g^d^y sinners have on^ Resurrection, and a double death. Now let
us see what is meant by this first Resurrection, name^y, our rising out of the
Grave of sin, to ^ewness of Life: This is the first Resurrection, You has be
quickened, who are dead in Tresp^sses and sins, Ephesians ^.1. Therefore we are burned
with Christ in Baptism into death, that as like as Christ was raised from the
Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
Life, Romans 6 4 Now would you know whether you shall escape eternal Fire in
Hell, even this second Death? Then look into your own Souls; are you quickened
in the inner man? Do you hate sin as much when it is committed by your self, as
by others? Do you labor to mortify and keep under the Works of the Flesh and
walk in all holy Duties and Obedience, both to God and Man? Remember what is
said, There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, which walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

Blessed and Happy are they that have part in the first Resurrection: Rom 8.
Where he shows that none shall be blessed, none shall have part in the first
Resurrection, and be freed from the second Death, but such as are Sanctified,
and live a Godly Life. Therefore if you desire to be blessed, and escape the
second death, which is everlasting damnation both of Body and Soul, then labor
to live a Godly Life here, for these two Justification and Sanctification
cannot be severed.

And this is a very great Comfort to all the true Members of Christ, that
repent and forsake their sins, and strive to conquer their unruly passions,
bearing patiently what wicked men lay upon them, and strive to live a Godly
Life, though they are in Misery, Poverty, or Want, and in the end die the first
Death of the Body yet they shall be ^reed from the second Death, that is from
Eternal Death. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against them. And therefore
as you love your Souls, as you desire to be blessed, and to escape eternal
Damnation, which is the second death. Labor to have a part in the first
Resurrection, to die to sin, before you die to Nature, and to live in newness
of Life.

But as for wicked and ungodly sinners, t^^t live in sin, delight in sin, and
that have no part in the first Resurrection, their case is woeful that be
subject to the second, that is eternal death ^^ damnation: For if ye live after
the flesh, ye shall also die, Romans 8.^^.

Therefore deceive not your selves as many do which think if they come to
Church, hear the; Word, and receive the Sacrament, all is Well t they hope God
will be merciful to them, and tha^ they shall not be damned. Well, mark what
say, thou may come to Church duly hear the Word of God as long as thou
Live, receive the Sacrament as often as thou will; but if thou have not thy
part in the first Resurrection, that is, unless thou live a Godly Life, unless
thou become a new Creature, surely thy estate is lamentable, and thy part is in
the Lake of fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death. Therefore let no man
deceiv^ himself, to think, because he hears the Word, professes the Gospel,
receives the Sacrament that therefore he is well enough. No, no, tho^ thou hear
never so much; if thou live i^ sin, swearing drunkenness, etc. thy estate i^
miserable, because thou art not freed from the second Death.

And mark this difference The Children of God have two Resurrections, and one
Death; they rise from sin in this Life, to newness and holiness of Life; and
they rise at the Last Day to Eternal Life in Heaven, and therefore truly
blessed. But graceless and ungodly sinners have two deaths, and but one
Resurrection, they die in sin here, then when they are dead in sin, and delight
in sin here, and so they die the first Death of the Body, and an Eternal Death,
the second Death of Body and Soul in Hell. And as they never had part in the
first Resurrection, so the second Resurrection is only to Judgment, to Death.
Nor is that all to die and go to Hell, for they shall be in the Sea of
Miseries, and in an Ocean of Calamities, Fire continually flaming about them,
and yet not wasted, nor they consumed. Then the worm of their Consciences which
they never felt in their former Life, shall bite and gnaw within them, rage and
madness, and wrathful indignation be among them: When they shall look up, and
behold the Angels and Saints Triumphing and Rejoicing, what a terror w^ll this
be, to behold nothing about them, but Devils to affright them, Brimstone, and
hot burning Coals under their feet, the revenging hand of God over them, and
his Angels pouring forth the Vi^ls of his Wrath and Indignation upon them,
never ceasing, no intermission? For their Torment shall be both comfortless and
endless. They shall be always ^ying, yet never dead; they shall be always in the
flame, and yet never consumed, their meat shall be griping hunger, and famine
intolerable; their drink Lakes of Fire and Brimstone, their pleasure bowling
and roaring of Soul deformed F^ends accompanied with Devils, barbarously and
cruelly handled. Thus, Heaven they have lost, which cannot now be purchased;
Hell they have received, and pain they must endure: and look how many sins and
offenses they have committed, which their own Consciences can Testify, so many
kind of Tortures and Punishments are severally provided for them in Hell. O how
many causes of weeping and doleful crying shall those miserable Wretches then
endure? They shall howl and weep, because they cannot be heard, nor yes appeal
from Gods dreadful Judgments, they shall weep and lament, because their
Pleasures which they enjoyed in their lifetime, have been the only cause which
has brought them to all these Woes and Sorrows. They shall weep and howl and
cry, and no man pity them; and shall weep with bitter Tears, because they shall
know their miseries are past all recovery, and their Repentance too late; Then
they will begin to curse their Birthday, and their Parents with brought them
up; and the Paps which have them suck, and the Place and the Air that gave them
their first Breath; and will cryout, woe, that ever I was born to neglect GOD's
Commandments, and to break his Laws: running after my own Inventions; by this
have I justly deserved Hell fire for evermore,

And therefore if you would Live when you are Dead, you must die to sin, while
you are alive, only the Penitent Sinner shall live for ever in Eternal Life
only those which die to sin shall escape the second Death. But the Impenitent
that lives and delights in sin here, shall die for his sins eternally; nay, he
shall never taste of the Life to come: But as he would not labor to have his
part in the first Rese^rection, so he shall be sure to have his portion in the
second Death, which is so fearful a thing, that it might make even a flinty
heart to break in pieces, to lie in Fire, burning for ever, without any ease or
end, and never to consume, nor waste away: Oh then let us look to it, and
labor to have our part and portion in the first Resurrection, and then shall
the Second Death do us no harm; but we shall Live in joy and happiness for ever
in Heaven with the Almighty; and all the Angels and Arch Angels and holy
Saints, shall be our Companions forever, and without end.

1. And whosever was not found written in the Book of of Life, was cast into
the Lake of Fire.
THE former Verse shows us the execution of the last Judgment upon all wicked
and ungodly sinners, and of that we spoke the last time. Now in this Verse we
may observe the different Estate of the Children of God, and of the Wicked, for
as there are but two sorts of Men, Good and Bad, Elect and Reprobates,
Penitent, and Impenitent, the Children of God, and the Children of the Devil,
so there be but two places, Heaven and Hell, Joy and Pain, the Right Hand and
Left: And the Rewards shall be according, either Blessed or Cursed: For so St.
John says here, The Elect shall have Eternal Life, but they that are
Reprobates, shall be cast into the Lake of Fire.

First, concerning the Elect, and those that be chosen in the Lord Jesus; and
whose names are written in Heaven: As their Lives differ from the wicked and
ungodly, so their Estate after this life is far different; for they shall be
blessed and happy for ever. And if you ask, what is the blessedness that all
the elect shall have? I answer with Paul, The eye never saw it, nor ever entered
into the heart of Man to conceive the hundredth part of this happiness, 2 Cor. 2
9 Yet we may out of the Scripture gather some relish of it, as it is there
described unto us.

And first this blessed estate of the Godly at the last day, stands in this,
that God shall be all in all unto us: What good things soever the heart of man
can wish, that will God be to us. If thou desire Wealth, God will be it to
thee: If Honor or Pleasure. Almighty God will be all in all unto us: Nay,
every Child of God shall have as it were a Kingdom, Come ye blessed, etc.

Secondly, In the Kingdom of Heaven there shall be no manner of want; for we
shall be free from all sin, and all defects of Body and Soul shall be supplied.
And though we see God now but in part, yet then we shall behold him face to face,
unto our eternal comfort; not as in a Glass darkly; but see and behold him,
even as we are seen and beheld perfectly; and Jesus Christ the Lamb of God,
which has been our Advocate; and the Vision of the Holy Ghost, not like a Dove
hovering, but perfectly and directly, and we shall then for evermore live in
his blessed presence, and reign with him for ever.

Thirdly, Then all the Elect shall be like unto Jesus Christ: So says Paul, He
shall change our vile Bodies, and make them like unto his glorious Body. Christ
was most holy, pure, incorruptible and glorious; even so shall we be: We shall
be free from Sin, Satan, Death and Hell, and the Grave. And at the point of
Death let us entreat the Lord, that he would be a Fountain of Everlasting
Water, to besprinkle our Souls and Hearts, for his Son's sake, Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, In Heaven we shall reap endless Joy, and Eternal Happiness; and
shall delight in praising God for ever, so as we shall keep a perpetual Sabbath
and Joy in the Service of God for ever.

Oh it is a great happiness to be in the presence of God: for there is Glory
and Honor, and true content indeed: Where we shall have Joy without Sorrow,
Day without Night; no Valley of Tears, but a Sion of Glory, and endless
comforts. And this shall be for all that fear God, and whose Names shall be
found written in the Book of Life.

Oh then, cursed be those men and women, who think and say, it is in vain to
serve the Lord: Or as Pharaoh said, who is the Lord, that I should fear him?
Then men shall know it is not in vain to serve the Lord; for if we will not be
careful to keep a good Conscience, and serve God aright, and so go to Heaven by
good Example; we then must expect to go to Hell with the wicked for Company;
Nay, God will put a difference between them that serve him, and them that serve
him not. And this should encourage all men to labor to abound in holy Duties,
seeing God will reward even the least work of Faith.

If thou give but a Cup of cold Water in the Name of Christ, verily thou shall
not lose thy reward. Though our works cannot any way merit, yet he will in Mercy
for his Son Christ's sake thus Crown the good Works of his Children: For though
Works do not Merit, yet they are Rwardable. And seeing few shall be saved, let
us labor to be of that little Flock, let us above all things seek this Kingdom
of God; if thou obtain this, thou art happy and blessed, although thou lose all
the World besides; and if thou lose it, thou art miserable and wretched, though
thou win the whole World. Oh then, what madmen are we, if we never seek for
this, or think of Heaven, until we have one foot in the Grave or Hell; let us
not think to gain a Kingdom so easily; we cannot go to Heaven on Beds of Down,
but we must strive to enter therein, we must take pains for what is got
without? And as Life, Joy, Riches, Honor, and Pleasures are sweet; so to enjoy
them for ever, without fear of losing, this is a blessed thing; for it is with
them that are in possession of this Kingdom, they be out of all fear to lose
it, and shall reign with Christ for evermore.

Thus (in some sort) you may conceive the blessed and most happy estate of all
the Elect and faithful Children of the Almighty, which ought to stir us up to
repent, and turn to God while we have time and space.

But what shall become of the ungodly sinners, of them whose Names are not
written in the Book of Life? Alas poor wretched Souls* It grieves me to think
of them; It would make a man's heart to melt, to think on their woful^ misery;
and I quake to speak what shall become of them after this Life. The holy Ghost
says here, They shall be cast into the Lake of Fire* What then shall become of
the Swearer, Drunkard, etc. They shall be cast into the Lake of Fire. And so
says Christ, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, etc. Mat. 25.41. This is
their end, and their Portion for evermore! Ah miserable wretches! Ah vile and
miserable Sinners! It had been better for them they had never been born, or had
been rather Toads or Serpents, than Men. For they shall not only be cast out of
the glorious and comfortable Presence of Almighty God, and his holy Angels, But
they shall be cast into the Lake of Fire for ever.

This Lake of Fire, into which all impenitent and hard-hearted sinners shall be
cast for ever, I have already described to you; and for a Conclusion, to put
you still in mind of this Lake, this Hell, this Tophet, this place of Torment,
which will never have end, I will set down three weighty Points, and that
briefly.

First, The extremity of it.

Secondly, The perpetuity of it.

And Thirdly, That it is remediless.

And which well considered, m^thinks should make the flinty hearts of sinners
to melt, and break to pieces, for fear they come into this Place of Torment,
this L^ke of Fire.

And seeing the Spirit of God does repeat it again and again; that all
reprobate sinners shall be cast into the Lake of Fire, it is to show, that men
little consider of it, they do not tremble at it; and therefore he insists upon
it, to teach us that it is a weighty Point to be thought on, to mollisie our
hard Hearts. And first, concerning this same Lake of Fire: In that it is named
here, a Lake of Fire; this notes to us the extremity of the Torment, that it
is a place of endless ^oe, and unspeakable pain. The Scriptures afford it
sundry Names, to set forth the unspeakable torments thereof. All wicked and
impeniten^ Sinners shall be cast into the Lake of Fire. For of all Torments
none is so extreme as-Fi^e, and Christ says, There shall be weeping, wailing,
etc. And it shall be most hot, and yet most cold, which shows the strangeness
of this Fire. Again, their worm shall never die, Mark 8 14. That worm which
shall gnaw their conscience. Oh what a woeful thing is this for any man or woman
to have a worm continually to gnaw their Bowels within, never to let them
alone, or give them any rest! Such shall be the misery of the wicked. Again,
Tophet is prepared for the King, he cannot escape, and it is deep and and
large, and the burning thereof is Fire and much Wood, and the Breath of the
Lord as a River of Brimstone shall kindle it, Isa. 33.33. So the w^ath of God
shall be as Bestows to blow it, and as a River of Brimstone to maintain it. By
this you may conceive the extremity of this woeful Lake of H^ll Fire. But if I
had the Tongue of Men and Angels, I could never express it to the full. For as
the Joys of Heaven are unspeakable, so the Torments of Hell are unexpressible:
For then the full Wrath of GOD shall seize upon the Reprobates, both ^ody and
Soul, and that for evermore.

Now to the end you may the better conceive the extremity of it, you must know
that the Torments of Hell are universal, even in all the the parts of the Body,
and the faculties of the Soul at once, the Mind, the Will, the Conscience, the
Affections, the Head, the Heart, etc. all at once shall be tormented. The pains
in this Life are for the most part particularly in some part of the B^dy; but
in this Fire the Sinner shall be tormented in all parts at once, and yet we see
that some pains there be, as in Convulsions, or the Stone, etc. which men would
not willingly have for a whole World. Alas, what a woeful thing will this be, to
be tormented in all, and every particular Member so extream^y? ^^t one ex^mple
serve in this point; the Rich Gluton cries out, Oh, I am tormented in this
Flame! Luke 16.24. The Torments and heat was so great, that he would have given
a whole World, if he had been Master of it, for so much Water as would have
stuck upon his Finger, to have cooled his flaming Tongue. Thus you see that the
first is most extreme and woeful, and yet men will not consider it, they mind it
not.

B^t let every one think on the woeful and extreme pain of this Lake of Fire,
let us make that use which our Savior teaches, Mat 5.20 If thy Right Hand or
Foot o^lend thee, that is any thing, never so sweet, or never so profitable,
never so dear or near unto us, Let us out them off and cast them from us, that
is, let us forego and forsake them all; for it is better to go lam into Heaven,
than whole into ^^ll; i^ i^ better to go naked into Heaven, than in costly
Apparel into Hell: O therefore let carnal men, and ungodly Sinners, that lives
in Pleasures and in Sin, know, they shall pay full dear for these things, even
the loss of their Souls for ever.

Secondly, As the pains of Hell are easeless, and most ex^ream, so they are
endless and perpetual, no end of them for evermore. So Abraham tells the Rich
Glutton; Y^u that are there ca^^^^ come b^^^, L^ke 16 26 And so says S. John,
Rev. 12 It is a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, that bi^ ^^th for ever: Also Mat 24
41. Go ye cursed into e^^^last^ng fire, I^ can never be quenched. Thou^h d^mned
sinners shall lie therein many thousand years; yea, a^ many as there be Stars
in Heaven, yet it shall never have an end If a man should once every thousand
years, take one Spoonful of Water out of the Sea, how many thou^and years would
be expired, before he should have emptied the same?

On consider this, you that forget God; consider this you which contemn the
Word of God profane the Lord's Sabbath, that make no Conscience at all of
Drunkenness, but rather count it good Fe^lowship, and brag and boast of it.
What Treasure of Plagues the Lord has reserved for the Damned. On let us think
often of this, that these same Torments are both endless and easeless. On, how
mad, and what Fools are we, that to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a Season,
will ^ndure the Torments of Hell for ever. What will it profit us, to enjoy a
little Money, Lands, or Livings here, or to live in all pleasures or delights
Sixty or Eighty years, and then to be Tormented in Hellfire for evermore? And
yet we see that such is the folly and m^dness of many, that they will have
these enjoyments here, al^ho' they pay never so dear for them in the Life to
come.

Thirdly, These Torments, as they are end^ess and easeless, so they are
remediless. This we may beh^ld in the Rich Glutton in Hell, who would have
given a World, if he had been owner of it, and yet for all that, he could not
have it, it was then denied him. For there is no case nor remedy in Hell, no
redemption after death; no Silver nor Gold, no Wit nor Policy no Appealing to
another Judge, but he must Lie by it for ever, even in this close Prison, until
he has paid the debt and u^termost Farthing. For if all the blessed Saints and
A^geis in Heaven should fall down at the Feet of Christ, to beg but for one
Soul, it could do him no good, Christ would deny them all, they must have a
Repulse.

O then consider this; this ought to make all men q^^ke, and (...) to tremble,
that in Hell is no ease, nor hope of Redemption.

This is that which mak^^ the Devil and damned ^pirits to Fear and Tremble, and
yet it cannot move flinty and stony hearted Sinners once to be afraid. O then,
I beseech you, let us think on these things now in the day of mercy, now the
remedy is to be had, now we may avoid the fearful misery, now we may escape
this woeful Torment and Wrath to come.

If we will now repent, and leave our sins, and beg Pardon of Almighty God for
them, we may escape: But after Death there is no time of Mercy, but only
Judgment and Torment, Fire and Brimstone, and the Wrath of God for e^ evermore.
And therefore let us repent and bewail our sins. while we have Time and ^reath
to repent; and Live as the servants of God, and not as the slaves of Sin and
Satan any longer, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against us, nor the
second Death triumph over us.

Our Blessed Savior tells us, that the Soul of the poor Beggar is more worth
than many Thousand Worlds. And therefore the Loss of a Soul is greater than the
Loss of the whole world. What benefit were it for a man to win the world, and
presently to lose both Body and Soul.

If a Man should Lose House, Land, Wife, Children, and all that he has, yet it
is nothing in comparison of his Soul; that is a Loss of all Losses, to be
severed from God and Christ, and to be in Hell Torment for ever. O then let us
consider the worth of our Souls, and what Christ paid for the ransom of them,
and learn to prize them above the whole World. But alas, men will not so esteem
of them: But will for one Penny with Judas, or an hours pleasure, hazard loss
of Soul and Body for ever.

Ah poor Man, thou did never yet know the worth of thy Soul. Christ Jesus
says, it is more worth than all the World. O let us esteem of it, and value
it, and account all Riches, Pleasure or Profits as Dung, so that our poor Souls
may be saved in the Day of our Lord. For a conclusion to this purpose; Let us
remember the words of St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3 6. The World that then was being
overflowed with Water perished Again, St. Peter gives us here a good Lesson,
and tells us, that the Heavens and the Earth which are now by the same Word
kept in stone, and reserved unto F^re against the Day of Judgment, and
Perdition of ungodly men, Verse 9 The Lord is not slack, but patient, Verse 10.
But the Day of the LORD will come as a Thief in the Night, in the which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with
Fervent Heat, the Earth also, and the Works that are therein shall be burnt up.
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons
ought ye to be in all Holy Conversation and Godliness looking for, and basting
unto the coming of the Day of God, wherein the Heavens being on Fire shall be
dissolved? But we look for new Heavens and a new Earth, according to his
Promise, wherein dwells Righteousness. Wherefore, Beloved, seeing you look
for such things be diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace, without
spot, and blameless, and account that the long suffering of the Lord is
Salvation. Now the end of all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober, and
watching in prayer, Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your
Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness; and Cares of this Life,
and so that Day come upon you unawares. For as a Snare shall it come on all
them that dwell on the Face of the whole Earth. Watch ye therefore, and pray
always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall
come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man: For it is he that will say,
Arise ye dead and come to Judgment. Now I have done with the Text, and have
showed you the way to get a good Conscience, and the benefit of it, and
likewise the Reward of an evil Conscience, which is the Lake which burns with
Fire and Brimstone for ever. I will not leave you in Horror and Dread in the
conclusion of the Text, being the last words of it, but I will comfort you with
the description of Heaven, and the Joys thereof, as St. Paul relates in 2 Cor.
2.9. The things which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered
into the Heart of Man the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

If the Holy Apostle St. Paul being taken up into Paradise, heard such words
which cannot be spoken, and are not possible for a Man to utter; as he
testifies of himself, 2 Cor. 12.13. How should I be able to express the
greatness of these Joys, which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor ever
entered innto the Heart of Man?

Herein I know Men's Minds will run upon needless curiosities, which is no part
of my duty to satisfy; and to show you mine own Imaginations would show mine
own folly. For Man's Reasons in Spiritual Affairs is altogether foolishness;
But so far as the Scr^ptures does instruct us, we may be desirous to learn, and
also be content, although many things be hid from us. Let it therefore be
sufficient, if we have a taste of those Joys, and that it pleases God in a
measure to grant us some knowledge of them.

Adam being in his Earthly Paradise, knew not all the Secrets thereof: And how
shall we think to attain the full knowledge of the Heavenly Paradise; But
seeing God does grant us the understanding of these matters in part, he does it
for our good, that seeing those Joys which we can conceive, are surpassing
excellent, yet the Heavenly Joys, does surmount our conceits, many degrees
further, we might the more be drawn into love with God himself, who has
ordained such Unspeakable, Incomprehensible, and endless Excellencies, for them
that love him, and live in his Obedience.

I will first show you what a blessed Life is, and what they enjoy in Heaven. A
blessed Life, is the fruition of God himself, which is our chiefest good, the
most plentiful Fountain and Treasure of all goodness in whom all Godly Men that
die in a true and lively Faith, and invocation of the Son of God, are raised
from the dead, and delivered from all evil, and united to the Quire of Angels,
and Saints in Heaven; and there behold God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; not
as in a Glass, or darkly, but Face to Face, and Live free from all Calamities,
Miseries, Diseases, Labors and Griefs; and with ineffable Joy and Comfort,
celebrate God's praise to all Eternity. For the World is but a Vale of Tears,
and this Life is full of all sorts of Miseries, but God in the Life to come
will wipe them all away, and Death shall be swallowed up in Victory; and he
will take away the reproach of his People from off the Earth; Isa 25 8* He will
^wallow up Death in Victory; and the Lord God will wipe away Tears from off all
Fa^es, and the Rebuke of People shall be taken away from off all the Earth; f^
the Lord has spoken it. In so great Feli^^es shall the righteous live for
ever, and receive a Kingdom of Glory; for which St. Paul says. That we must
through much Tubulation enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: And of this Kingdom
we are Heirs, and the Sons of the most high God: For David affirms as much;
Thou, O God, have made him to have Dominion over the Works of thy Hands; thou
have put all things under his Feet In Heaven we shall be free from the thoughts
of Sin, and assaults of the Devil, and be so secure, that we shall fear no
evil, for the Lord will rule us with his Right Hand, and defend us with his
Holy Arm. Also considering our own great unworthiness, we might with the
Prophet David break forth into the Praises of God, Psalm. 144.3. and say, Lord,
what is Man that thou take Knowledge of him, or the Son of Man that thou
make account of him. Now as the Prophets do stir up the peoples minds to
Serve and Honor God, by setting before them the Temporal Blessings of this
Life, and thereby giving them an earnest of greater Blessings to come, so is
the Happy Estate of Everlasting Life described unto us by such earthly
comparisons as our natural capacity can conceive; that we beholding in mind and
contemplation, those wonderful Joys which we can conceive; may grow into
admiration of those Heavenly and inexpressible excellencies which are
altogether past our apprehension, and far beyond our reach and understanding.
For as Spiritual Blessings do far surpass Corporal Blessings, so Heavenly Joys
do far exceed all earthly Glory; yea, and these stately secrets of another Life
are so much hidden from Flesh and Blood, that all the Learning of the Wise men
of the World can come nothing near them; that in this case they may truly say
with the Astrologers of King Nebuchadnezzar, Dan 2 11. It is a rare thing that
the King requires, and there is none other that can show before the King,
except the Gods, whose dwelling is not with Flesh.

But let us a little behold what Flesh and Blood has set down concerning these
Joys of Heaven. In the Turkish Alcoran, thus the Joys of Heaven are set down.
Their Prophet promises them Garments of Silk, of all sorts of Colors,
Bracelets of Gold and Amber; Parlours and Banqueting Houses upon Floods and
Rivers, Vessels of Gold and Silver, Angels, serving them, bringing Milk and
Wine in Gold and Silver; Lodgings Furnished, Cushions, Pillows, and Down Beds,
most Beautiful Women to accompany them; Gardens and Orchards with delightful
Arbours, Fountains, Springs, all manner of pleasant Fruits, Rivers of Milk
Honey, and Spiced Wine; all manner of sweet O^^^^s, Perfumes, and Fragrant
Scents; and to be short, whatsoever they shall desire to eat.

Thus fleshly People have a fleshly Religion and a fleshly Paradise to inhabit;
and sensual men have imagined the Joys of Heaven according to their sensual
delight, and yet to them that have and Sense or Reason, (...) cannot choose but
seem to end (...) in a Fable. These Joys are seen in Princes Courts, these Joys
are seen in the Turkish Kingdom, but the Joys of Heaven are such, that no eye
has ever seen them.

But to leave these deceived Turks to their false and feigned Joy, let us
consider what others have imagined, not much unlike to this which is express^d
by way of comparison; of a p^o^ man's miserable estate, suddenly changed into
most unlookt for Happiness; whereby the Joys of another Life may appear by the
miseries of this: As if a poor man that was out of his way, wandering alone upon
the Mountains, in the midst of a Dark and Tempestuous Night, far from Company,
destitute of Money, beaten with Rain, Terrified with Thunder, Stiff with Cold,
almost Famished with Hunger and Thirst, and near brought unto Despair, with a
multitude of Miseries, should in the twinkling of an Eye be placed in a Goodly,
Large and Rich Palace, Furnished with al^, kind of clear Lights, Warm fire,
Sweet Smell, Dainty Meats, Soft Beds, Pleasant Music, Fine Apparel, and
Honorable Company, all prepared for him, and attending his coming to serve
him, ^o Honor him, and to Anoint and Crown him a King for ever. Beholding the
Miseries of this Life, and the Joys of another; yet this is but an Imagination,
and the Wit and Wisdom of Man can devise a great deal more; and yet all far
inferior in degree to those true Joys that hereafter shall be found. See how
the Invention of Men blinded with their natural conceits, run all upon outward
comforts, and sensual Joys, all for the Body; and as for the Sou^, that is not
once remembered. Now from the Devices, Inventions and Imaginations of men, all
which come not near the matter; let us come to hear the Revelation of the
Scripture, and if any where this (...) estate is to be found, we shall read of
(...) the Book of the Revelations, wherein thoug^ many things be hard and
intricate, and passing Men's understanding; yet is this matter lively described
after a measure, and in a sort, under the Name of the City of God, and the
Heavenly Jerusalem. And strange it is that those matters that neither Eye ha^^
seen, nor Ear heard, nor ever entered into the Heart of man, should so much be
opened and revealed, as there we read.

First then, let us speak concerning the Place, then the State of Joys
thereunto appertaining. The Place is Heavenly Jerusalem, the City of God, the
Land of the Elect, which the Apostle describes after this manner, And I John
says he, saw the Holy City, New Jerusalem, come down from God, out of Heaven,
prepared as a Bride trimmed for her Husband: Whereof the Prophet Isaiah
speaks in the Person of God, Chap. 65.17. For lo, I will create new Heavens,
and a new Earth; an^ the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. But
be you glad and rejoice for ever, in the thing that I shall create For, behold,
I create Jerusalem a Joy. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and Joy in my
people, and the voice of Weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice
of crying; and where we shall sing no more the Song of Babylon, but the Song of
Sion, saying, holy, holy, holy Lord God of Heaven and Earth.

Of this heavenly K^ngdom, we may ^ay with David, Psalm. 84.1, 2. How amiable
are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My Soul longs, yea, even faints for
the Courts of the Lord, my Heart and my Flesh cries out for the Living God.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be still praising thee, for
a day in thy Courts is better than a thousand, I had rather be a Doorkeeper in
the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tents of the Wicked; These be the
Tabernacles of Health and Security: The LORD himself says thus, Isa. 32.18. My
People shall dwell in a peaceable Habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in
quiet, resting places. Of this the Lord says, Ezekiel 34.14. I will feed them in
a Pasture, and upon the high Mountains of Israel, shall their Fold be; there
shall they lie in a good Fold, and in a Fat Pasture shall they feed, upon the
Mountains of Israel, and shall possess a Kingdom which cannot be shaken.

And this Kingdom of Heaven is such a Kingdom, that it is past thought; it is
very Spacious, it is a Paradise, it is a Kingdom of Grace, it is the Kingdom of
Glory, it is the Kingdom of our God, the Kingdom of Christ, a Cae^estial
Kingdom, a Kingdom not made with Hands, but an Immortal Kingdom, because it is
established by Grace. It is a Kingdom which has a King that never dies, nor is
subject to change, and at whose Right Hand are Pleasures, World without end. It
is all glorious within, the Gates are of Pearl, and the Coverings are all of
fine Gold, and the Pavements are of Precious Stones; our Meat shall be Manna,
which is the Angels Food, our drink shall be Wine, our Music Quires of Angels;
and if we desire Voices, there shall be the Se^^ph^ms and Cheru^^ms, with the
Twenty Four Elders falling down, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of
Hosts.

And if we are loath to go to this place, it is because we do not know how to
come thither, even as a Child, that will cry to go from the Mother to the
Nurse. This Kingdom is that of which David says, Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted,
unless I had believed to ^ee the Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the
Living. In which we believe we shall see so many, and so great good things of
the Lord, prepared for them that love and expect him. For since the beg^nning
of the World, men have not heard, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides
thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him, Ps. 36.7, 8. How
excellent is thy Loving Kindness, O Lord! Therefore the Children of men put
their trust under the Shadow of the Wings. They shall be abundantly satisfied
with the fatness of thy House, and thou shall make them Drink of the Rivers of
thy Pleasures: For with thee is the Fountain of Life: in thy Light shall we see
Light. This is that City which is spoken of in Rev. 21.21. and so forwards, of
which St John says, The Twelve Gates are Twelve Pearls, every several Gate was
of one Pearl, and the streets of the City were pure Gold, as it were
Transparent Glass And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty and
the Lamb are the Temple of it. And the City had no need of the Sun neither of
the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is
the Light thereof And there shall be no Night there and they need no Candle,
neither the Light of the Sun, for the Lord gives them Light, and they shall
reign for ever and ever. Of this Heavenly City speaks the Prophet Isaiah: In
this M^untain shall the Lord of Hosts make to all the People a Feast of fat
things a (...) of Wine on the Lees, a Feast of Fat things su^^^f Marow, of Wine
on the Lees. David resolves thus: As for me I will beh^ld thy Fare in
Righteousness. I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy Likeness. Thou will
show me the path of Life in thy presen^e ^ fullness of Joy, and at thy Right
Hand are P^easure for evermore. This is the Holy of Holies, it is Holy in
respect of the Glorious Company that as in it: For there are none but Saints
and Angels; and it is m^st Holy, because the Sacred Presence of the Deity is
there.

O glorious Banquet! O Heavenly Seats! O Eternal Mansions! In which the Souls
of the Blessed are always replenished, and abound with all Godly Joys; and
being adorned with Crowns, they shall assist the Angels sitting in a Regal
Throne, worthy of Eternal Life, and which is the highest Happiness of all, they
shall enjoy continual Conversation with Jesus Christ, with his Arch Angels,
Angels, and the higher Powers, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers,
that exceed all Gold, precio^s Stones, and the bright Rays of the Sun.

A^ for the King of Heaven, nothing can be said s^fficiently, for he exceeds
all hearts, and thoughts. If Peter who saw our Savio^rs Transfiguration in the
Mount, in a Cloud, that was but an Image of the Glory that was to come, sa^^h
unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be h^^^, rej^cti^g all Worldly
Pleasures from his mind, in respect of tha^; what shall we say, when the very
Truth shall appear, and ^e have the ^^uition of the same? Likewis^ we may
behold the blessed Estate of those that shall enjoy the L^fe to c^m^ You are
come unto Mount Sion, and unto the C^^y of the Living God, the Heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the General Assembly,
and Church of the First Born, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge
of all, and to the Spirits of Just Men make perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator
of the new Covenant, Heb. 12.22. And how this Heavenly City and new Jerusalem
is described, we may read it notably set down in the 2^ of the Revelations,
where by diverse earthly Similitudes, the Glory thereof is shadowed, setting
forth the same by those things which make earthly Cities famous and admirable;
as the great compass and height of the Walls and stately Buildings, the
gorgeous Furniture thereof, Jewels and precious Stones, pleasant Rivers, and
the Tees of Life in the midst thereof, no light in the City. But let us behold
the order and frame of the City, as we may read in the aforesaid 21 Chapter of
Revelations, whither still I refer you. The matter declared is as follows,
beginning at Verse 12. This City Jerusalem had a great Wall, and high and at
the Gates twelve Angels, and the Names written which are the twelve Tribes of
Israel. On the East side there were three Gates, and on the North side three
Gates, and on the South side three Gates and on the West Side three Gates; and
the Wall of the City had twelve Foundations, and in them the Names of the Lambs
twelve Apostles: And the City lay four Square, and the length is as ^uge as the
breadth of it, and the length an^ breadth and height of it are equal: and the
building of the Wall of it was of Jasper, and the foundation of the Wall of the
City was garnished with all manner of Precious Stones and the twelve Gates were
twelve Pea^ls, and every Gate is of ^^ie Pearl. and the Streets of the City are
pure Gold as shining Glass. The Names of the precious Stones are further there
recited.

Oh glorious City of God! Psalm. 46 4. and 36.8. There is a River, the Streams
whereof shall make glad the City of God, the place of the Tabernacles of the
most High out of which thou, O Lord, shall make them drink of the River of thy
Pleasure

A torrent of Pleasure, a full Cup running over: in which the Saints of God
rejoice in Christ, clothed in White, and following the Lamb wheresoever he
goes; and with the Angels Sing to the Lord, saying, Salvation to our God,
which sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, Amen. Blessing and Glory, and
Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might be unto our God, for
ever and ever. Amen.

You see in these Words, how Glorious the City of God is, the Walls of Jasper,
the Foundations of precious Stones, the Gates of Pearls, the Pavement of pure
Gold. And if the Walls, Streets, and Gates be such, how much more joyful,
comfortable and inexpressible are those things within the City? For we may
assure our selves, there are many hidden Treasures, and matters of far more
account. Many things spoken of the outward Palace, but those things which are
within are unsearchable. According to Rev 2.17. To him that overcomes, will I
give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white Stone, and in the
Stone a new name written, which no man knows, save he that receives it: So
secret and hidden are the things within the City.

This Jerusalem is called a Kingdom, Luke 22.29. Therefore (says Christ) I
appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye may
eat and drink at my Table, in my Kingdom, and sat on Thrones judging the Twelve
Tribes of Israel. And to comfort the Godly in all wants, distresses and
necessities in this World, Christ says unto 'em, Luke 12.32. Fear not, little
Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom: And what
greater preferment can they look for? Yea, which is more, that which but one
can have in a Realm here, every one shall be a King, as we read, Rev. 3.11.
Behold I come quickly; hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy
Crown. And that which the Apostle speaks of himself, in 2 Timothy Chap. 4. Verse
7. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the
Faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness. Rev. 4.10.
And the Four and Twenty Elders cast down their Crowns before the Throne of God.
If earthly Princes want no worldly Joys, yet they that wear Crowns in Heaven,
shall far more abound in all Happiness

The greatest Joys on Earth, are of least account in Heaven; for all shall be
Crowned, 2 Timothy 4.8 Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but
unto all them that love his appearing.

Gods Kingdom is not shaken, as our earthly Kingdoms are; nor is it to be
compared to our Terristrial or Temporary Kingdoms; no, he has left those
Kingdoms to the Sons of Men, as to David, Solomon, Hezekiah, and the like. His
Kingdom is not made with hands, that is past our Imagination, and contains in
it all that can be wished or desired; and therefore did Abraham forsake his own
native Country, his Kindred, and his Fathers House, to go into, a Land he knew
not whither And why did Moses forsake Egypt, and not only that, but refused to
be called the Son of Pharoah's Daughter? Why did so many Patriarchs, Prophets,
Saints, and holy Men and Women, leave their ancient Houses, Riches, and lay
down their Treasures at the Apostles feet, and wander up and down in
Wildernesses, and in Mountains, and hide themselves in Dens and Caves of the
Earth? Surely for this cause they had respect unto the Recompense of Reward,
and that was Regnum Dei, the Kingdom of God, this Heavenly Mansion, where they
desired to be, and were assured they should see the Goodness of the Lord in the
Land of the Living, which has a Crown that never fades, and Salvation that
never ends; an inheritance immortal, and a Habitation perpetual. Jerusalem,
where God would be worshipped, and in which King Solomon built the Temple,
seated in that place, which we now call the Holy Land, was in times past so
famous, that all Nations had recourse thither? Both because of God's Worship
and Service performed there, and his manifold gracious Blessings poured
thereon; and therefore the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to this, and called
the new Jerusalem Likewise also Canaan, that plentiful Land, which flowed with
Milk and Honey, which was the Land that was promised to the people of Israel, is
compared to this Heavenly Habitation, But as many died short of it, and never
entered into the Land of Canaan, some for Murmuring, some for Wheredom, some for
Idolatry, some for one offense, some for another; so although we hear of the
Joys of Heaven, and of this new City, and many would enter therein; yet for
their manifold offenses in this time of their life and trial, many are debarred
from thence, and few are made the Citizens of Heaven; therefore if we expect to
come to this place of Happiness, we must first be Reconciled to God by true
Repentance; we must come with Jesus Christ in our hearts by Faith, and plead
his Merits, Death and Passion and so enter into his Joy.

Thus much for the place, now for the Commodities.

The Heavenly Joys of the Soul
THE Commodities or Joys which belong to this Heavenly Jerusalem, first concern
the Soul, which is the principal part of Man.

Secondly, The Body; for the Body being joined to the Soul, shall be partaker
of this inestimable and everlasting happiness, that in Body and Soul, the whole
man may receive his full perfection, as he was at first created perfect. And as
it is the chiefest delight of the Godly to serve God especially in the Church,
and in the Congregation, but in this Celestial Jerusalem, there shall be no
Temple, no Church. And I saw no Temple therein How then? Why the Presence of
God himself shall be unto them instead of a Temple and Church. For the Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it; and therefore why should men be so
loath to go into this Joy, which is so unspeakable? And as St. Ambrose says,
where we shall have in that Celestial Mansion, no Joy by measure, as in a Glass
or Cup, no, but a River of Joy and Comfort; we shall be overcome with Joy; and
this Joy is as it were wings to the Soul to fly through this Valley of Misery and
Adversity; for as long as the Soul is in the Body, it is but as in a Prison,
like a Bird in a Cage, not having her usual Liberty.

Thus in the Presence of God shall be all happiness, and at his Right Hand
there are Pleasures for evermore. And it is said the Four and Twenty Elders
fell down before him that sat on the Throne, and worshipped him that lives for
evermore, and cast their Crowns before the Throne, So shall the Saints in
Heaven continually sing forth God's Praises, Rev 7 4 And the Hundred Forty and
Four Thousand, which had the Name of God in their Foreheads, do sing a new song
before the Throne, and to man could learn that Song, but the Hundred Forty and
Four Thousand which were redeemed from the Earth. And they were Clothed in
long white Garments, having Palms in their hands, Verse 9. Which cried with a
loud voice, saying, Salvation be ascribed to him that sits upon the Seat of
our God. And all the Angels stood in the compass of the Seat, which fell before
the Seat on their faces, and worshipped God, saying, Amen. Blessing and Glory,
Wisdom, Thanks, Honor, Power, and Might, be unto our God for evermore. Now
shall the Mind, Heart, Thought, and Imagination of those that are thus blessed,
be filled with abundance of Spiritual comfort. For now we see as St. Paul
says, as it were in a Glass: But there we shall see Face to Face, Rev. 12.4.
Then shall all terror and darkness of Ignorance be taken away; then shall we
not desire as now we do in this Life, to see God, as the Prophet David
speaks, My Soul thirsts after thee, like as the Heart desires the Water
Br^oks, so longs my Soul after thee, O God, yea even for the living God; when
shall I come to appear before the presence of God? At that time shall our
desire be fully satisfied; and that which was denied the Prophet Moses, to see
the Glory of God in this Life, shall then begranted to every one that there
shall be placed.

Then grief of mind, and sorrow of heart shall be utterly removed; no Weeping,
no Mourning, no Lamentation to be heard throughout that Holy Mountain. Behold,
says the Prophet in the Person of God, Isa. 65.14. My Servant shall sing for
Joy of heart: I will joy in my People, and the voice of crying, Rev. 21.4 For
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
sorrow, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things are passed
away. That is, those things which we suffered in this Life shall not molest us
any more. Then shall sorrow never be felt, nor complaint heard, matter of
sadness shall never be seen, neither shall evil success at any time be feared.
No cause of Fear, no cause of Grief, for they shall posses thee, O Lord, which
art the perfection of their felicity. In him shall we find all Knowledge,
Wisdom, Beauty, Riches, No^^ilicy, Goodness, Delight, and whatsoever besides
either deserves Love and Admiration, or was both Pleasure and Content. All the
powers of the Mind shall be filled with the sight, presence and fruition of
God: all the senses of the Body shall be satisfied. God shall be the universal
felicity of all his Saints, containing in himself felicities without number.

He shall be a light to our eyes, M^sick to our Ears, Honey to our Mouths, most
sweet and pleasant Balm to our Smell: He shall be Light to our Understanding,
Content to our Wall, continuation of Eternity to our Memory. In him we shall
enjoy all the varieties of things that are delightful here, and all the true
pleasure and joys that content us now. Finally, the Soul shall be restored to
the Image of God in a full measure, as it was first created, and be thoroughly
beautified and adorned with all Righteousness and Holiness, all Heavenly and
Spiritual Graces. The consideration whereof must needs be a great comfort to
the Children of God, and cause them the more cheerfully to undergo the troubles
of this Life.

The Heavenly Joys of the Body
THE Commodities and Privileges of the Body, also thus united to the Soul
shall be many: And first to begin with that which I find set down in the Text,
And the City had no need of the Sun, or of the Moon to shine on it: that is,
there shall be seen no Earthly want. For, what a great temporal blessing is the
heat of the Sun? Most comfortable to Man and Beast, which brings forth the
Fruits of the Earth for Man's Food and without which all things seem to be sad
and lowering, but then shall we not need this benefit; for the presence of God
shall be more comfortable, and the Glory of God shall supply the want of the
Sun and Moon.

All things then shall be ministered unto us abundantly, that we shall not once
think of any want, whether it be food or clothing, or any comfort of this Life
whatsoever, as the Prophet Isaiah does worthily express it, Chap. 49 10. They
shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat not Sun smite them, for he
that has mercy on them shall lead them even by the Springs of Waters.

Here the Body has need of rest, but these shall be no Night, neither any need
of Rest: Here for fear of Thieves and Enemies, our Houses and the Gates of our
Cities are shut, but there the Gates shall not be shut, but always open;
because there shall be no fear of enemies, no fear of future hurts or dangers.
They that are oppressed here, had need of defense, of help and comfort, which
hardly is to be had in this World. But there shall violence no more be heard
of. There shall every ones cause be heard, and every wrong shall be righted:
For there shall be no Curse. For not only the Curse of sin shall be cut off,
but all occasions of sin shall be far removed from us, and we shall be
thoroughly reconciled to God, and enjoy perfect peace. As no Grief of Mind, so
no disease of Body shall molest us. neither shall there be any use of Physic.
Al^ Infirmities shall be turned into perfections; and all deformities shall
have an end. That which is now the mighty Conqueror of Mankind, that is Death,
shall then be trodden under foot: For Death shall be swallowed up into Victory,
that with comfort we may say, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is
thy victory? And that which our first Parents could not taste of, nor so much
as touch that is, of the Tree of Life: For though they tasted of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil, yet they were soon cast out of Paradise, least they
should put forth their hands, and take of the Tree of Life also and eat, and
live for ever, Genesis 3.22. In this Jerusalem, even in the midst of the Streets
of it, shall be the Tree of Life, and a common passage unto it, 1 Cor. 15.53.
For this corruption must put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality. Thus shall there be mirth without sadness, health without
sickness, strength without weakness, light without darkness, felicity and all
goodness, without any evil, where Youth flourishes that never waxet^ old, Life
that knows no end, Beauty that never fades, Love that never cools, Health
that never diminishes, Joy that never ceases; there shall be Pleasure without
Pain and all happiness without any change, and Life without the reach of Death;
for there shall be L^fe Everlasting Now Man grieves for the loss of his Body,
Delights of the World, which Faith alone does ease, that promises an undoubted
restitution of the Body, to a better condition, and assures him of an
everlasting Life, in which shall be everlasting Blessedness. Then (as I
formerly said) shall the Body be free from all Corruption and Mortality, and
all other casualty, malady, pain or grief; Men shall then be like Angels, free
from want, and full of all felicity: They shall hunger no more, neither thirst,
neither shall the Sun light on them, ^or any heat; for the Lamb which is in the
midst of the Throne shall feed them, and lead them unto the living Fountain.
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes Rev. 21 4 I saw no Temple
therein, that was made with hands, says St. John for the Lord God Almighty and
the Lamb are the Temple of it, Rev. 21.22, 23. And the City had no need of the
Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God did lighten it,
and the Lamb is the light thereof. And there shall be no more curse, but the
Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his Servants shall serve him,
they shall see his face, and his Name shall be in their Foreheads. Oh the Joy!
Oh the sweet Harmony and Melody! Oh the Heavenly Music which is sung by the
Quire of Angels in the Church Triumphant, would ravish a Soul on Earth^ if be
heard it! we know that here on Earth we have Music that delights the Ear of
Man very much, but the music which is above, no Ear has heard. St. B^sil
says, It is more sweet than Devotion; nay, more sweet than Contemplation, and
far sweeter than all things in this World can be.

Let us therefore be converted to God with all our hearts, and say, Oh how
great is they goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which
thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the Sons of men. And let
us with joy exalt our selves, Psalm. 42.1. Even as the Heart pants after the
Water Brooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God; My Soul thirsts for God,
for the living God; O when shall I come and appear before God? There is nothing
so bitter or sharp in this Life, but will be sweetened in contemplation of the
Joys of Heaven, and of eternal Life; for in Heaven there is nither Death, nor
Mourning, Weariness nor Weakness, Famine nor Thirst, Corruption nor Want, nor
Sadness at all; so as we may rather be able to say, What is not there, than,
What is there? As it is written, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has
it entered into the Heart of Man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love and fear him.

Therefore let no man that has lived uprightly, fear to die, or doubt of the
Joys of Heaven; for as we are all born, so we must all die: And shall any man
think to get that by Favor, which God only has himself by Nature,
Immortality? No, we must change this Life, and for this mortal Habit, put on
immortal Habit, which never fades.

The Godly in this Life are as Warriors, then they shall come to their own
possession; now they are in the Skirmish, then they shall be crowned
Conquerors; now they are in the Tempestuous Sea, then shall they be in the
quiet Haven; now in the Heat of the Day, then shall they be in the rest of the
Evening. Now they are absent from Christ, though in affection they are present
with him, then shall they follow him wheresoever he goes; now they suffer
trouble though their Life be hid with Christ in God, but when Christ shall
appear, they shall also appear with him in glory; And then also they shall
receive an incorrptible Crown of Glory, according to that which was pronounced
by a Voice from Heaven, Rev. 14.13. Write, Blessed are the dead which die in
the Lord. Even so says the Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them: And what joy will thy Soul receive in that day, when we
shall be presented before so honorable and infinite a multitude, before the
seat and Majesty of the holy and blessed Trinity, with recital and declaration
of all the good works and Travels suffered for the love and service of God,
when there shall be laid down in that honorable Cons^^ory, all thy Virtuous
Deeds, all the Labor thou have taken in thy calling, all thy Alms and Prayers,
all thy Fasting, all thy Innocence of Life, all thy Patience ^^ Injuries, all
thy Constancy in Adversities; and for their further comfort, and in a manner
wonderful astonishment; as the wicked shall be vexed with horrible fear, when
they shall see the righteous stand in great b^ldness, and they shall curse
their foolishness and madness, for tormenting such unjustly whom they thought
nothing worthy of honor, and yet now see them amongst the Saints of God. So
shall the righteous in their place go forth, and look upon the carca^ses of the
men that have transg^essed God's Will and holy Law, Isai. 65.14. And looking
back upon the dangers which they have passed, and wherein other men are yet in
hazard, their joy shall be so much the more en^^eased; for they shall evidently
see how infinite times they were ready to perish in this mortal life, if God
had not held his special hand over them. They shall see the dangers wherein
other men are plunged, and the death and damnation that many of their friends
and acquaintance have fallen into; the eternal pains of Hell is incurred by many
that used to laugh and be merry with them in the World, when as they shall
shine as Stars which have converted many unto God, Dan. 11. As on the contrary,
they tha^ by evil example and manifo'd offenses have been the cause of the
downfall of many, shall suffer intolerable grief.

In earth no joy, or comfort so surpassing, strange and wonderful, but will
breed a satiety, and we shall after a while wax weary thereof, either desiring
a greater, or else longing after variety; for man's Nature is given to nothing
so much as to newness and novelty. But behold the joys of this new Jerusalem
shall be so diverse, so strange and incredible, that we shall never be
satisfied therewith. We see in Rev 21. The Tree of Life bears twelve manner of
Fruits, and gave fruit every month; twelve manner of Fruits. There is the
diversity of their joy; giving fruits every month, there is the continual
change still pleasing thy mind with variety, and ravishing thy senses with
infinite delight.

And this may make us more eager after those joys, because we shall not be long
without 'em. For the time of this Life is but short, and the time of thy Trial
in this World, is but in a manner a moment. If our time here should be a
thousand years, what is it to one day there which has no night; which, be it
that it has a Sun rising, yet it shall never set; an entrance and a beginning
there is unto those Joys, but the terms and date thereof cannot be told. And as
the Torments of Hell, already spoken of, are endless; so are the Joys of Heaven
beyond all time; as they are remediless (for out of Hell, there is no
redemption) so are these joys without all change or alteration; as they are
comfortless, so these exceed in all manner of comforts; all without end,
without number, without measure.

Thus have I showed you the Joys of the Kingdom of Heaven, in part, but their
fullness I cannot utter, nor you conceive, we can only guess at them: But that
which I have already spoken is sufficient, for the satisfying of our ininfinite
desires, edification, comfort and instruction. And if I should fill your Heads,
with my own devices and Imaginations, I should but delude you. Again, be not
desirous to know more than is fit and convenient: For when we have spoken all,
or the learnedest in the World expressed all, yet none can fully utter the
truth of these Joys. For if no Eye has ever seen them, or Heart of Man can
conceive them, how is it possible for me to declare them? But that which we do
know, let it be instructive, and let us leave off to search where God will give
no understanding. Hidden they are and unknown that we might the more earnestly
desire them, for known things grow out of love.

The consideration of these Joys already recited, may be sufficient to
establish and confirm us that there be not in any of us an unfaithful Heart, to
depart from the Living God. And who would deprive himself of those Joys, if
they were no other, but such as our own minds might imagine, or our own hearts
conceive? In this case, let us be content there to make a stop where Gods Word
has set a full point. And blessed be God, who to encourage us in a way of
Godliness, has giveh us a taste of these unutterable Joys, though it be but as
it were under a Veil

Now to show you all these Joys and not apply them, seems altogether without
use, and life. The profitable instructions therefore that hence may arise, are
more than I can utter; yet give me leave to recite some, and be not uneasy
though I stay you a little longer, for to hear the discourse of those things
which pertain to the Kingdom of Heaven. I my self which have searched more
perhaps than any of you, should be at a loss.

Suppose we are now busy in the Field at Harvest, unmindful to come even to
our own Houses, and surely this is a far better Harvest, and a better Grain and
Commodity than we can gather in. When it pleased God I wrote this for your
good, it was with comfort; and therefore I doubt not but that you that hear it,
hear it also with comfort.

The first instruction for our use may be this, to learn to grow out of love
with the present World, and with the transitory Pleasure and Profits of the
same; so that we may prepare our journey to our long and wished home; and to
those Houses and Heavenly Habitations, whose Leases shall never expire; to our
Heavenly Canaan; and to this beautiful new Jerusalem. Howbeit for the most part
we are so bewitched with the glistering Joys of this present fading World, that
no exhortation or persuasion will lightly prevail to withdraw our minds from
thence; which thing may lively be set forth to your view, by reciting of a
parable of the custom of a certain Commonwealth, People and Nation, which were
wont to choose their King from amongst the poorest sort of people to advance him
to great honor, wealth and pleasure for a time.

But after a while when they were weary of him, their custom was to dispoil him
of all his felicity; yea, the very clothes of his Back, and banish him naked
into an ^lan^ of a far Country, where bringing nothing with him, he lived in
great misery and slavery forever. Which practice one King considering (for all
other though they knew it yet through negligence and pleasures of their present
felicity, minded it not) took care to prevent this misery, which was by this
means: He (...) every day great sums of money from his Supe^^^^ties and idle
expenses and secretly made over before hand a great Treasure into that Island,
whereunto he was in danger da^y to be sent.

And when the time came, that indeed they deposed him from his Kingdom, and
turned him away naked as they had done others before, he went to that Island
with joy and confidence where his Treasure lay, and was received with great
Triumph, and placed presently in greater glory than he was before.

This City or Commonwealth, is this present World, which advances to
Authority poor men, that is, such as come naked into this World; and on a
sudden, when they look least for it, it pulls them down again, and turns them
naked into their Graves, and so sends them into (...) World; where bringing
no Treasure with (...) they are like to find little Favor, but (...) ^ternal
Misery.

The wise King that prevents this calamity, is every one which in this life;
according to the Counsel of Christ, does seek to lay up Treasure in Heaven
against the Day of their Death, when they must be banished hence naked, as all
the Princes of that City were. At which ^mre if their good deeds follow them as
God promises, then shall they be happy men, and placed in much more Glory than
ever this World was able to give them. But if they come without Oil in their
Lamps, then there is nothing for them to expect than this, I know you not.

The Sum of Money is not so much our good deeds, as the forgiveness of our
manifold offenses, the amendment of our sinful Lives, the Godly and Religious
care of the Life to come. That which we are so greatly in love withal, the
Apostle counsels us against, Love not the World neither the things that are in
the World, 1 John 2. He' adds the Reason because the World passes away. But he
that does the Will of God abides for ever. Heaven is not in this Life, and we
must look to be weaned from this World if we ever look to attain it.

The Joys of Heaven, and the desire of the World, are quite contrary; worldly
pleasures hinder us from mounting up so high. And herein for the most part we
may be resembled to the Grasshopper which is born and bred, lives and dies in
the same ground.

This Grasshopper has wings, and hoppeth up a little, but presently falls
down again: So many of us have often good motions unto Godliness, and the Life
to come, and again all is gone in a moment, and we return to our old affections
to this World, as though all our Portion were only in this Life.

The Fowls that feed grossly, never fly high, and they which feed their hearts
with things be low, cannot have their affections in Heaven; the joys of Heaven
being so excellent, and wonderful, that they might remove our heavy, lumpish
and grovelling desire after this World. The careless, earthly and worldly mind,
has no sight nor sense, nor feeling of these Joys. But as the Ox is fatted in
the pasture, and the Bird sings sweetly, and feeds without fear, and
suddenly the one is driven to the Slaughter, and the other is taken in the
snare; so they that be Worldly minded are lulled asleep in security, until the
time that Death strikes with his dart, and endless destruction overwhelm them.
But where is the Man or Woman which can say with the Apostle, I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all. For they that say such
things, declare plainly that they seek a Country, Heb. 11.16. Desiring a better
Country than is to be found in this World; that is, a Heavenly Country, and for
them has God prepared a City, Heb. 13.14. For here we have no continuing City,
no continuing Habitation. Let us therefore seek this new Habitation to come,
which is of longer continuance, and free from all miseries. The next fruit is
that the remembrance of these Joys teaches us patience in afflictions,
troubles and distresses. And if we desire to attain this heavenly place, we
must forsake this earthly Tabernacle, and while we live here on Earth, we must
pass through affliction, and be carried into Heaven by a fiery Chariot, that our
Earthly minds may be purged; that is, the black line of our sins which must be
purged both out of our mind and out of our hearts. Christ he was not free from
Affliction, for he cried out, My God, my God; why have thou forsaken me? We
must go first to Mount Calvary, before we can come to Mount Olivet, that is,
from a Cross to a Crown, from Earth to Heaven: Our Graves are but as Folds,
which Death brings us into, and keeps our Bodies till the Morning Sun of our
Resurrection shall appear; which is the Day of our general Resurrection; For
Death is but a Door of Entrance to a Crown of Glory, which shall never be taken
from us. For how troublesome soever this Life is here, yet there shall all
troubles, griefs, and wrongs be abundantly recompensed, and the Apostle
speaks truly, Romans 18.8. The Afflictions of this present time, are not worthy
of the Glory which shall he showed unto us. In the 126 Psalm. ver. 5. They that
sow in tears, says the Psalmist, shall reap in Joy. And he that now goes on
his way weeping, and ^earing precious seed, shall doubtless come and bring his
S^oaves with him. Woe be to you, says Christ, that now laugh for you shall
weep, and therefore happy shall they be in another World, who have in good
cause suffered wrongs, committing themselves to God, This time of heavenly joys
is compared unto Harvest: And what care does every one take to provide good and
choice Seed, that their Harvest may prove good? Thy Seed is thy thoughts, thy
Words, thy Deeds and Conversation. Therefore let me exhort you, as the Apostle
does, Gal. 5.7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap: for he that sows to the Flesh, shall of the
Flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit
reap Life everlasting. Look now we sow, so shall we reap: such as our seed is,
such also shall be our Harvest. The ^^te of this our Life is but short, but the
Remembrance of a Life well led, shall be comfortable for ever, and this shall
for ever and ever be an endless harvest, still gathering, still increasing,
never diminishing.

The last thing in the aforesaid 21 Chapter of Rev. is, that there shall enter
in this heavenly Jerusalem no unclean thing. And as the Prophecy of Zachariah
14.21. In that day there shall be no more the Canaanites in the House of the
Lord of Hosts.

The Canaanites were a lewd people, and for the same were driven out of the
Land; and if they were not worthy to dwell on Earth, much less shall they be
worthy to be received into Heaven. De^rly beloved, says the Apostle St. Peter,
1 Epist. 2.11* Abstain from fleshly Lusts, bridle them, keep them under, for
they war against the Soul, C^l 3.1. If then ye be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of God. Set your
affections on things above, and not on things on the earth, and mortify your
immoderate affections and evil concupiscence. Remember this peremptory Word, No
unclean thing shall enter in there, Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God, Heb 12.14. Follow holiness, without which no man can
see God.

And God grant us this Wedding Garment of holiness, that we may go in with the
Bridegroom; for we know what befell him that wanted it, Phil 2.12. Let us work
our own Salvation with fear and trembling; being desirous to receive a Kingdom,
which cannot be shaken. Let us pray for Grace, to serve God, that we may please
him with Reverence and Godly Fear. And seeing we have precious Promises, 2 Pet.
1.4. And that more sure than the Heaven and the Earth, 2 Cor 7 1 Let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God. For as they that thus do his Will, shall enter through the Gates
into the City, and their right shall be to the Tree of Life; so without are
Dogs, and unclean Persons, Rev 22.14. Let not my last exhortation be forgotten
among you, Enter in at the strait Gate; for it is the wide Gate, and broad way
that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. Because the
Gate is strait, and the way narrow that leads to L^^^, and few there be that
find it.

To add to these, one of the greatest Joys of all, is God's mercy, whereof we
have a sweet taste in this Life: For were it not for that, none at all should
enter into that place where those joys are to be found. For our first Parents,
by God's just anger, according to their desert, were cast out of Paradise, and
an Angel set with a Sword drawn to keep the way, that no flesh should return
thither; so the only gate to lead us in again is God's mercy: Whereof as the
Godly and most righteous that are, stand in great need, so let none of us all
ever abuse God's mercy, least we miss of the same. This mercy is called the
rich Mercy of God; for no Treasure is comparable unto it: And as it passes all
understanding, so cannot the deepest reach of men conceive any part of the
depth or height thereof; the compass, the largeness, the wideness, and breadth
of it is such, that it cannot be measured; and therefore it may well be called,
as indeed it is, both infinite and incomprehensible. And because no tongue of
man can speak it, let Angels bring the message, as we read, Luke 2.14. Glory to
God in the highest, and on Earth peace, Good Will towar^s men. The Lord of his
goodness direct our steps to his Throne of mercy; and cloth us with this
Garment of mercy; and the Lord this day set his Print and Seal upon you.

Last of all, for a conclusion, and for admonition. In brief, I will show you
the right way of dying well; and the comfort of it, which in the end brings all
this joy and happiness. First, by Virtue of Christ's Death, Death cease to be
any more a terror or a plague, but it is made a blessing, and a passage between
this and Eternal Life. Christ is the Key of our Graves, and has opened the
Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers. The day of death is only terrible, when it
is joined with the apprehension of GOD's Wrath, and we are not defended with
the Shield of Faith. When we die, we should rejoice in the Lord, for the
corruption of our nature is quite abolished, and our Sanctification is there
accomplished. By death our present miseries are removed, and the future
prevented. What happiness is it to see the glory of God's Majesty, face to
face, to live and abide with God, and the Holy and Blessed Angels for ever? And
when we are joined to Christ by the bond of the Spirit in our life time, we
shall eternally remain with him in unutterable felicity. Likewise being once
certainly assured in conscience of our being in Christ let Death come when it
will, we shall yet remain in the covenant, and shall be reunited with him, and
taken up to Everlasting Life: And whether we wake or sleep, or whatever we do,
let us always bear in mind the end of our Life; and that we continually hear the
found of the Trumpet, Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment; knowing that the
power of Death lies in our sin; and therefore let us use all g^od means, that
our sins may be removed and pardoned. And to weaken the force of Death, the
best way is to humble our selves, repent us of our sins, amend our lives, and
to trust and rely upon the Mercies of God, that we may comfortably say with
St. Paul, I live not, but Christ lives in me, which we must find by the
Testimony of our sanctified conscience, that Christ my Redeemer by his Spirit,
governs according to his Holy Will. O how late is that hour for a man to begin
to live well when he must of necessity die, and depart out of this Life? Does
any man think that God will be co^^ent, that we should lay our old and rollen
bodies upon his Altar, when we have lived all our youthful time in our own
delights? No sure, or do we think that when we have spent all our time and
study to got Wealth and Honor, and then in our old age when we can do nothing
else, begin to pray and serve God? This will be a great cause, when we examine
our lives, how we have misspent it to fear Death. What was the reason that
Christ loved his Disciple John better than the rest? because he came to him in
his youth, while he was young and lusty. Indeed God will not be our Staff in
our Age, if we do not serve him in our youth. Solomon the wisest King that ever
lived, gives this instruction to all posterity: Remember (says he) thy Creator
in the days of thy youth. For our Life is but a perpetual motion, even from the
Cradle to the Sepulcher: Nor does our sleep hinder us in this our Journey: We
must still remember our end, and have an eye upon Death, that has an eye upon
us at all times. We must not come into the World as Cato did in the Theater,
only to go out of it again: Nor ^e must not think that God put Adam into the
Garden to eat the Fruit, and take his pleasure, and to spend his time in
idleness; no, he put him into it to dress it, and look t^ it; for, says God,
Thou shall get thy Laving with the sweat of thy brows. N^^ is the World made
for man, as the Sea was for the Leviatha^ to take his pleasure and pastime in:
No, we must labor to run in God's Laws and Commandments, which will bring rest
to our Souls He can never shoot well, that has not his eye still upon the mark
or white; so no more can a man live well, that has not his mind upon the day
of his Death. It is a comfort of all comforts, especially to a godly man, to
have hope and faith, to believe he shall rise again from the grave; and so
their eyes to see those Friends again, which Death has separated; nor must we
think that we shall arise voluntarily, but the sound of the Trumpet shall be
the Voice, which is meant, the Voice of Christ by his Ministers the Angels. For
he shall only speak the Word as a Judge does on Earth, appoint a Summons. All
must appear. For this day of Jubilee there shall be no more New Moons, as the
Trumpets were used to be blown at, as the Prophet David speaks in the 61 Psalm.
No, but we shall have a new Earth, and a new Heaven, where dwells all
Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3 13. When this Trumpet shall blow, it shall be both loud
and shrill: no ear but shall hear the sound; the dampness of the Earth shall
not hinder it, nor the depth of the Grace excuse us; No place, though never so
remote, shall hinder this sound: For it shall be universal, and in every corner
of the Earth shall this Trumpet be heard. For we must remember, that our bodies
when they are in the Earth, is but like a sowing of seed; for we shall rise
again The Lord calls to man by his Prophet Isaiah, saying, Earth, Earth, Earth,
Hear the word of the Lord: To put him in mind that he is but Earth: For at the
first, Earth we were, and still we are Earth, and Earth we shall be again, when
God but speaks the word First, an ordinary change by Death we must have.
Secondly, an extraordinary change at this day by the power of God; for the
Earth and the Heaven shall be changed by Fire. Death is but a change, our
Bodies shall be changed; for the Text says, We shall all be changed. Paul
meant himself too: We shall be changed says he ^ This substance of ours shall
be altered at the last day, though not with that formality as ours are, to die
and then be put in a Coffin, and then into a Grave. Not by such degrees; but we
shall be suddenly changed, even in the twinkling of an eye; for Death is but
the first step to Earth, and then to Glory. We shall have likewise a twofold
Resurrection: First of our Bodies from the Grave. And Secondly, of our Souls
from Sin. Abraham, he confessed, and said, O Lord, give me but leave to speak
this once, who am dust and ashes.

First then, seeing we are but as the Dust of the Earth, the Earth must then
obey when God calls, and render up her dead. So likewise the Fire obeyed Gods
command, not to hurt the three Children which was put into the Fiery Furnace,
and yet had power to burn and destroy those that put them into it: So likewise
the Sea obeyed God's command, and was a Wall to the children of Israel, and
gave them then a miraculous and dry passage. So the Earth and the Sea must obey
God's Voice at the last day, and yield and give up their dead: The earth shall
give up her dead. And yet the Earth devoured some, as it did at God's command,
when Corah, Dathan, and his company was swallowed up quick, so at the last day
of Account, God shall only say the word, and all his Creatures must obey it;
for the dew of Heaven is as the dew of Herbs. And as the dew of Heaven waters
the Flowers in a Garden, and the Sun causes them to grow, so will the dew of
the Lord's Word, raise us up again at the last day: We know that the dew of
Heaven falls suddenly, so will the dew of the Lord fall suddenly and
unexpectedly, at the day of our Resurrection, even in the twinkling of an eye,
in a moment; for the Trumpet shall but sound, and all shall arise. It is a
Divine Work, and is past our understanding; therefore let us rather admire
God's infinite Wisdom and Goodness, than be too nice and curious to search into
them. Then shall these corruptible parts of ours put on incorruption, our
natural bodies shall be made glorious bodies, though we have lain a long time
in the grave mouldring and consuming away.

We all know that every night: the days funeral, and what is the Morning b^^
the days Resurrection again? Or like the setting of the Sun at evening, which
the next morning shall Rise again? And we know that when we set or put a Root
into the ground, that it must lie all the Winter, and as we think dead; but in
the Spring we see it revive by virtue of the Sun: Just so will it be with us at
the day of our Resurrection. For it is certain, that he that can do the greater
work, can also do the lesser; for God who made the World, and also Man at first
of nothng, can a^ the day of our Resurrection make us perfect Bodies again of
something Therefore, O Lord, I beseebh thee, prepare me for the day of my
Death, and whether it shall be by the messengers of Death, or by the Trumpet of
thy Judgments, that at the last day when I shall rise again, I may behold thy
glorious Majesty with all the Royal Army of Holy Martyrs, and blessed A^ge^t;
that I may not be found with a ^^stracted and guilty Conscience, nor with the
Reprobates, all to the Hills to cover me, nor the Rock to fall upon me: But
that I may taste of thy endless mercy, and so be received into thy Heavenly
Mansion Therefore, my Beloved, seeing we look for such things, let us be
diligent, that we may be found of God, pure, spotless and blameless; for seeing
then that all these things shall come to pass, and be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought we to be, in all holiness and Conversation of Life? Therefore let
us labor while we live here on Earth, that we may be found write as the Snow
in Salmon, and clothed with the Robes of Christ's Righteousness. A^as, what
are we at the best, (as I have said) but Dust* Earth and Ashes, a Coffin of
Co^i^, yea ^ Coffin for the Worms? A little Sickness carries us away in our
youth; and if we hold out a little longer, we consume and moulder away with old
Age. We, at the best* are but like a painted Wall: One Winter Storm quite
defaces the beauty of it: So one blast of Death carries us quite away to the
Grave and the Earth again; therefore says the Prophet, The dust shall return
to the Earth as it was, the Spirit shall return to God that gave it, Eccl. 12.7.

And let all men remember this, that we shall Rise again, and stand upon the
Earth: And then God will Reward a sinner in that day, if he die without
Repentance, as if the sinner had but just committed the acts of sin at the same
time. Paul will be found, although not preaching as he did on earth, yet in the
condition he died; and we with the same sins, or with the same Righteousness,
as we live or die in; for our Consciences will then accuse us, our Memories
witness against us, and our Reason will be our Judges at this day. We shall
have no more to say for our selves, than the man in the Gospel who came to the
Dinner without the Wedding Garment on; but mark, I pray you, Being asked how he
came thither, the Text says, he was dumb, he was silent, he had not a word to
say; his own Conscience accused him, and so he was bound hand and foot, and
cast into everlasting Fire And if we would have the Wedding Garment found upon
us, we must first while we live here on Earth, labor to get Grace into our
hearts, and Faith into our Souls, we must wholly leave and forsake this sin of
Covetousness. The Prodigal must forsake his sins of Wantonness. We must do it
presently as Zaccheus did, who came down hastily, and received Christ joyfully;
and gave satisfaction to those men he had offended: We must not defer the time,
or take advice whether it were time yet so to do; No, we must with Zaccheus
make our own Will, and be our own Executors, and make Christ our Overseer.
Behold, Lord, half of my Goods I give to the Poor, and if have done wrong to
any, I will restore him four fold. God does not regard the extension, but the
intention. Not only our tongue, but the heart: We must not slobber over our
Confession, we must not put away some sins only, and retain other-some. No, we
must put the Sword to the Throat of sins, and cut them off; and like Phineas,
pierce Z^m^i and Cosbi through and through. We must not (if we mean to appear
before God blameless and spotless, leave some beloved sin in our bosom, no, not
our beloved Dalilah's sins: And, like Naaman say, The Lord be merciful unto me
for this sin, I did not think it, no I had forgot it: But pray with David,
Cleanse my Soul even from my secret sins. Sins whether done to please my self,
or others; Yea, our whispering sins; such sins, as we have striven so long to
hide from God and Man, that now we have forgotten them our selves. O says
David, Forgive me the sins of my youth; Psalm. 25.7 My sins of Negligence, and
my sins of Ignorance; there is no sin so small or little, but is able to cast
us into Hell for ever; there is no sin, which if it be unrepented of, but we
shall one day render an account of to God Almighty, else how should God's
Justice be manifested, if man's offenses be not punished? For the manifestation
of God's Glory will be such at this day, that we shall confess that his Justice
is but justly and rightly fallen upon us; so it shall be with a wicked man at
his Resurrection, he shall not have a word to answer for himself, no, not, a
word at all to plead for himself. Oh! what would Dives have given that he might
have but sent to his five Brethren to have warned them of the place of Torments
which he was in. No, says Abraham, it cannot be, if they will no-hear and
believe Moses and the Prophets, they will not believe, though one Rise from the
dead. A day there is for a man, and a day there is for God; and as there is a
day for man's account to be made up in; so there is a day for Gods Eternity to
be shown. Gods account is true, those live long, that live well the Text says,
as you may read, Isa. 65.20 A Child shall die an hundred years old, and the old
man shall not live half his days. The meaning is, the gracious Child is the
honorable old man. For where a young man observes God's Commandments, does
not he believe more than the old man that has spent his whole time in Vanity
and Wantonness? He that can give an account of his time, and the life of his
experience, his frequent and fervent prayer, his many tears of Contrition shed
for his sins. His hearing Sermons, and practicing what he heard, and his often
receiving the Lords Supper; His days shall be long in the Land. The young man
in this case, is the old man, because he is the first born by Regeneration and
Reformation: Old Age is extracted from Youth ^ a young Samuel shall be called
before an old Eli. We shall meet and see* the ancient Patriarchs, as I have
said, Moses, Aaron, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the old Prophets, Elijah, Jeremiah,
David, Hosea, Isaiah, Joel, Am^^: We shall likewise behold the Twenty Four
Elders the Holy Apostles, Matthew, Mark, Luke, James, John, Paul, Peter, and
all the Holy Martyrs, John the Baptist, St. Stephen; all those Infants which
were slain by Herod, with their Olivebranches in their hand, saying, Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God of Saba^th, Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of
thy Glory.

Now who are the Twenty four Elders? It is generally imagined by all Divines,
that they be the Twelve Tribes of Israel* and the twelve Apostles, which make
the twenty four Elders. Therefore let us cheer up our Spirits with old Jacob,
and go up to the Land of Goss^en, where we shall see our Brother Joseph, who
will prepare all things necessary for our occasions, and we shall then set down
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Therefore I pray, do not put off the though it of this day of Death, as Agrippa
did Paul, saying, I will bear thee another time. It was Jerusalem's fault and
sin, that they remembered not their end; Death comes swiftly, not on Foot, but
on Horseback, and on a pale Horse: Let us therefore remember our death, and
leave sin, that sin may not leave us in the Grave: O let us consider our latter
end; let us be as the Wise Virgins, to have the Oil of Faith in our Lamps, that
we may enter with the sweet Bridegroom of our Souls, to the Land of Bliss and
Eternal Happiness! O that our minds were but answerable in God's mercies; ^or
if we had as upright Souls as we have Bodies, then we should be persuaded to
forsake this idle, sinful and wicked World, and account all as dross with St.
Paul, and desire to know nothing more than Jesus Christ, and him Crucified;
then Sickness may come as often as possible, and we shall not be afraid of it.
For indeed we are not by Nature able to bear the pangs of Death well, until we
be Schooled and instructed by sundry Trials and Exercise in this Life. Our
sincere consideration before Death approaches, ought to appear: First, in
examination of our hearts and ways: Secondly, In the Confession of our sins,
and manifold transgressions, which we from day to day have committed, and all
the good we have omitted; and then likewise that God is just in his Judgments.
Thirdly, In begging and petitioning with unfeigned sighs and groans of the
Spirit, for pardon and reconciliation in Jesus Christ.

A dying man must not so much fix his mind on the ^^ngs of Death, as on that
blessed estate of (...) Life enjoyed after Death; upon which he must fix the
eye of his Faith by Jesus Christ.

We must look upon Death in the Glass of the Gospel as i^ is a sweet sleep, and
an entrance into Heaven; not looking upon it in the Glass of the Law, or as a
Curse and (...) to destruction: For Death of (...) is nothing: It is our ill
Consciences that makes us afraid; it is not the Coffin, the Sh^^t, the tolling
of the Bell, and the weeping about us, makes Death so horrible as for Death it
can do us no harm, for it i^ but a passage to a better Life. I would have every
Christian man and woman upon their sick beds to look for Death, and take it
patiently and willingly: My first reason is, because the Death of every Member
of Christ is foreseen and ordained by the special Decree and Providence of God,
yea the very circumstances thereof. Secondly, Then God's promise, Blessed are
they that die in the Lord, for they rest from their Labors, and their Works
follow them, Rev. 14.13. Thirdly, He ^a^ dies in Christ has his Soul an ^^^dy
really united to Christ according to the ^^^nant of Grace. Then Fourthly and
Lastly, God has promised his special and blessed presence to the sick and
dying that are his, as we may read, Isa. 43.2. Where he declares himself t^^^,
When thou passes through the Waters, they shall not overflow thee; when thou
walk through the Fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flames
kindle upon thee: For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel, thy
Savior.

Now to die in Faith, is when a man in time of his Death, with all his heart
relies wholly on God's special love and mercy in his Son Jesus Christ. So did
the Prophet David, when he was greatly distressed, he enco^^ged himself in the
Lord (...) God, with a great deal of Faith, saying, Remember the Word unto thy
Servant, upon which thou have promised and caused me to hope. This is my
comfort in my first John, for thy word has quickened me. My flesh and my heart
fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. As Moses
lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted
up: That is, when he feels Death to come upon him; he then must fix his eye of
Faith on Christ exalted on the Gross, and also crucified for Eternal Life.

The very sighs, sobs and groans of a repentant and a believing heart, are
Prayers before God as effectual, as if they were uttered by V^c^^ Intercession;
Such as, Lord, thou have heard the desire of the Humble, thou will prepare
their hearts, thou will incline thine ear. He will fulfill the desire of them
that fear him; He will also hear their cry, and save them. Call to mind the
last words of a dying man mentioned in the Holy Scripture, O Lord, I have
waited for thy Salvation; Father, into thy hands I commit my Spirit, Lord
Jesus, receive my Soul.

Here is matter of great comfort, man's misery then shall have an end, then his
joys are approaching and at hand; yea, even while he is a gasping in pangs of
Death; then he is carried on a sudden by a Company of Holy and Blessed Angels,
from Earth to Heaven, from his Cross to Paradise, from a World of Woe, Trouble,
Afflictions, Care and Anxiety of mind, to a Kingdom of Happiness and Eternal
Bliss in Heaven, where there is no fear, nor sorrow. Satan's Envy, nor the
World's malice, shall not once offer to assail our Bodies, or vex our hearts;
and though Satan came to our first Parents, Adam and Eve in Paradise, and there
tempted and deceived 'em, here he darenot come to tempt any* Oh how blessed is
the change, when in the very moment of misery, joy enters! Imagine you, were a
poor Traveller in the night time, and out of your way, wandering alone upon the
mountains, and far from any House ^or Company; destitute of money, terrified
with Thunder, stiff with Cold, weather beaten with rain and wind, wearied with
labor, famished with hunger, and almost brought to despair with a multitude of
miseries: mark, I pray you, if this man upon a sudden, in the twinkling of an
eye, should be placed in a goodly large and rich Palace, furnished with rich
and clear lights, warm Fire, sweet Odours, dainty Meats, soft Beds, pleasant
Music, fine Apparel, honorable Company; and all these prepared for him, and
to anoint and Crown him King for ever; What would this poor man do? What would
he say? Surely nothing, but rather in silence admire it; and weep for joy. Yet
far happier than all these, are the joys of Heaven, and surely so is the state
and condition of every penitent man, which can before he die, make his peace
with God; for then shall he be free from all earthly trouble this World brings
upon him, for while he lives here, he lives but in a Vale of misery, and in a
Vale of Tears, tossed to and fro with every storm and wind: But he is happy, who
can say with Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace. And
with Thomas can say, my Lord, and my God. Then will our Savior meet us,
saying, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Crown* Receive the Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the World. And no sooner art thou come
into Paradise, this Heavenly Mansion, this place of everlasting joy and
happiness; but instead of sorrow, we shall have joy, instead of trouble and
affliction, peace and rest for our souls; and for our company, we shall have
Angels and Arch Angels to entertain and embrace us, with Arms of Love. Our
Savior performing his promise in giving us a Kingdom; at which meeting the
Angels shall sing, the Blessed Saints rejoice all Harps warble, all Hands clap
for joy, and our poor Souls ravished with delight; and if this be the case and
state of all penitent and true Believers, who will not say, Hasten thy Coming,
O Lord, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly.

O let us present to the view of our Souls, the blessed and happy condition of
the Life to come: And this will stir us up to every good and Holy Duty; and
comfort and cherish us in all conditions and estates whatsoever, while we live
in this sinful World, and amongst this untoward Generation. What will a man
care for crosses, lesses, and disgrace in the World, that thinks of an Heavenly
Kingdom! What will a man care for ill usage in his Pilgrimage of this earthly
Tabernacle, when he knows he shall be a King at home? we are all (in this time
of our absence from God) but even strangers and pilgrims upon Earth: Here in
this Life we must suffer Indignities, Reproaches, Scoffs, may, what not? yet
all of these are for our good, if we can endure it with patience, and overcome
these Temptations with joy and alacrity; for in the end there is comfort, we
shall have a better Estate to come; yea, in the highest Heavens, and all this
in the mean time is nothing but a fitting and preparing us to the Heavenly
Kingdom, which holy David ^^red to be but a Doorkeeper of, rather than to
dwell in the Tents of Kedar: (that is amongst ungodly people:) Let this be our
hope and comfort, howsoever we fare in this Life, that we have here but a
little time to spend, and it must not be long e^re we inherit the Kingdom of
Glory: Alas, The afflictions of this Life are not worthy to be compared to the
Glory hereafter, Rom 8.18. And therefore good old Ignatius in a burning Zeal
durst say, Come Fire, Gallows, Breaking of my Body; Quitering of my Members,
Crushing of my Body; all the torments of the Devil, let them come upon me, so I
may enjoy this Treasure of Heaven. So St Paul, He counted all things but dress
in comparison of Christ; I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, says
he: And well might he say it, that knew what a change would be one day; for
never was cold shade so pleasant in hot Summer, never was easy Bed so
delightful after Labor, as shall be the rest of Heaven to an afflicted Soul,
coming thither out of this Valley of Tears: On then; What Service should we do?
What pains should we suffer and take, to attain this Rest? were it to run
through Fire and Water;^ were it (as St. Augustine said) to suffer every day
new torments; yea the torments of Hell, yet should we be content to abide it.
And how much more when we may buy it and obtain it with tears and repentance,
with a little sorrow and contrition for sin, which we have brought upon our
selves, by our disobedience and neglect.

Obedience, says a Holy Father, is one of the first steps to Heaven; and to
die in obedience, is to be willing and ready to go out of the World when God
calls us. As in Rom^^ 7.8. It is thus said, None of us lives to himself, and
no man dies to himself: For whether we live, we live unto the Lords. Which
words teach us, that in the very hour, and when the pangs of Death are upon us,
we should resign our selves to the Will and Pleasure of Almighty God, who first
made us, and gave us life; And as David did freely with confidence say, Into
thy hand I commend my Spirit; thou have redeemed it, O Lord God of Israel. the
Lord; or whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live or die,
therefore we are the And he that will surrender his Soul into the hands of God
the Creator of it, must firmly believe that God can and will receive his Soul
into Heaven, which none can do of himself, except the Spirit of God seal it to
his Conscience that he is Redeemed, Justified, and Sanctified in Jesus Christ,
and shall b^ Glorified. We must not fear Death at all, and my reasons are
these. First, In all our care we have occasion to show our Obedience to God
Almighty. Secondly, All future sin is prevented by Death, and St. Paul says,
that the last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. That shows us, that Death
has no more power over our Bodies, and that our Bodies and Souls shall be
united together again, and receive a reward according to the deeds we have done
in the flesh. Thirdly, our Bodies are bro't to a better and far more happy
place and blessed Estate, where we are free from all future miseries, and cease
to be any more either active or passive in sin. Fourthly, It gives a Soul a
free passage to the Caelestial Glory, where we shall have the vision and
fruition of God the Father, who was our Creator; the Society of God the Son,
who has been our Redeemer, and Advocate, the Company of God the Holy Ghost,
who has Sanctified us. Where sorrow is never felt, more complaint heard, (...)
is never seen, evil success never f^^^ed, but instead thereof, there is all
good without evil life that never ends, beauty that never fades, love that
never co^let^, heal ^ that never impaire^ ^^y that ne^ never cease: O did we
but think of this glorious place (...), wherein are those Heavenly Mansions
prepared for us: did we spend many thoughts upon it, until we come to the
possession of it; O how would these heavenly Meditations ravish our (...), a^
if Heaven entered into us before we entered into Heaven! Thus I persuaded my self
Where no^ won some? and whom I have won the Lord in mercy keep, and so I
discharge my self.

For we are all by our own dispositions, like unto tottering Walls, still ready
to fall. And therefore I wish I could say, as it was said to him, that suffered
with Christ, This day shall you be with me in Paradise. And if ^his day your
hearts be thoroughly converted, surely this d^^ you are in Paradise. It was no
compare to Adam and Eve, to remember that were in Paradise, s^^^g themselves
now cast out. And if we are once placed in (...), then let us look to our
^^^^^ng, that we (...) not: To (...) so we are m^tabl^^ (...), as to change.
U^co^^t^^t we are, God (...): the Lord make as (...). And the remembrance of
those (...) Joys, which we have now heard, let that make us steadfast unto the
end; (...) pray, that the Lord in his infinite (...) our present sinfulness and
(...) knowledge in him, and direct our future frailty, that we may earnestly
desire ^^^gent search, (...) know, and perfectly fulfill all things that may
please him, the ever living God: that we may walk uprightly in his ways, and
live truly in his love, to our comfort and his Glory, that in the end we may
obtain that long looked for, and much desired beautiful ^^ade^^, wherewith he
crowns all his Elect, and to reign with him in his everlasting Kingdom, the
Heavenly Canaan, the Land of Promise, a Paradise of Pleasure, there to behold
the delightful countenance of his most Glorious Majesty, and to be filled with
the exceeding sweetness of his most (...) presence, which is Life everlasting,
wh^^^ (...) can imagine, no Tongue can utter, nor the Wit of man express the
Happiness thereof.

Now I entreat you to conclude with this short Prayer, which is the substance
of that you have already heard, that God Almighty may give us both Hearts and
Time to pray for a pious dissolution out of this Life, whenever it shall
happen.

A Godly Prayer to the effect of the Matter before mentioned, proper for a
Person on his Death B^d.
O Most sweet Jesus? as the Heart pants for the Water Brooks, so (...) my Soul
(...) after thee, my God. O when shall become to God my Savior, to see him
with these eyes and ^^^ear in the presence of the Br^^^g^^^n? When shall I be
loosed from this Prison, wherein my Soul is miserably captivated? I am weary of
this sinful and wicked World; with the Apostle let me say, I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all. Lord Jesus, thou have
numbered my days, and thou know the hour of my death, and thou have appointed
the term of my Life; my days are in thy hand, for thou have made my days but as
a span long, and my age is as nothing unto thee: for what is my life: Even as a
Vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away: Therefore, O
Lord, teach me so to number my days, that I may apply my Heart unto Wisdom
Deliver me from the Body of Death when it pleases thee, for my Soul inclines
to Heavenly rest, I desire to go from darkness to light, from pain to pleasure,
from this life's troubles to eternal rest from manifold Infirmities to
perfection and felicity. Come Lord Jesus, and dissolve me from this body, that
longs to be with thee Thou have said, O Lord, where the Master is, there
shall the Disciple be A little before thy death thou did pray thy Father, O
Lord Jesus, pray now for me. Father, those whom thou have given me, I will that
they shall be where I am, that they may be with me, and see my Glory, which
thou have given me; for thou have loved me before the Foundation of the World.
Let me with thine Apostle cry out, It is good for me to be here. O Lord Jesus,
be present at my right hand when I die, and say unto my Soul, Soul be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgven thee. Remember me in thy Kingdom, and say in mine
ear, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. At length, O sweet Jesus,
raise my Body, that in the Resurrection of Saints I may rise to life, and with
Joy appear before thee my Judge and Advocate, that I may hear the desired voice
to thine Elect, and to me, saying, Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the
Kingdom prepared for thee from the foundation of the World. Come Lord Jesus,
from thy Kingdom of Grace, to thy Kingdom of Glory; and not for any merits or
deserts of mine, but for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, who is the Son of thy
Love, and the Lamb of thy B^so^^; to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
he ascribed all Honor, Glory, Power, Might, Majesty, and Thanksgiving, from
me, and all God's People, now and for ever, Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning, ^ for all People.
O Lord Jesus, the Judge of the Quick and the Dead, let thy good Spirit so
teach and direct me, that I may so much profit b^ wishing, as to desire thy
coming in Glory, and consider the last day of my life, as the sweetest day of
my Redemption; and with a joyful desire expect thee the Son of Man, as my
Savior, Advocate, Surety, Bridegroom, my Head, and the Bishop of my Soul. But,
O my God, keep and guide me, that I may beware of those horrible Vices, which
in these sinful, dangerous and mutable times do reign amongst the wicked and
ungodly; and likewise from Gluttony, Drunkenness, Adultery, and immoderate care
of this life, knowing that none such can inherit the Kingdom of God; and that I
set not my mind nor affection too much upon Delights, Riches, Profits,
Preferments, and Pleasures of this World, with which our Hearts are carried so
away, that they seldom come to a serious consideration, and desire of Heaven,
and future felicity. But work in me the Grace to seek Christ, and his
Righteousness, and with St. Paul, to desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, and count all those things in the World dung or chaff, to the knowledge
he had of Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

Furthermore, lead me, O Lord, and guide me, I beseech thee in the way of all
Truth and Righteousness, and so govern all my actions this day, that I run not
into any sin, or hind of danger, that all my doings may be to thy Glory, the
good of thy Church, and the discharge of my duty in my life and conversation.
Defend and deliver me likewise from all temptations and afflictions of this
sinful World, and from all mine enemies, and from all deceits and dangers of
Satan, the deadly enemy of mankind. Kindle my Heart and Affections with a
fervent* Zeal of thy Sacred Word, that I may observe, learn and embrace thy
Holy Word, and know thy Blessed Will, and walk in thy ways, strengthen me with
thy Holy Spirit, boldly and constantly to profess the Honor and Service of thy
Great and Holy Name le^^ at any time (through the frail^y of the Flesh, or through
fear of Worldly Afflictions) I fall from thee. O Lord, strengthen my weak
Faith, kindle it more and more in fervency and love toward thee, and in all
Christian love toward my Neighbors; Suffer me not, O Lord, to receive thy
Grace any more in vain, but grant that it may prove as good Seed, sown in
fertile Ground, that I may bring forth the fruits of Repentance in my life and
conversation, to thy Honor and Glory, and future good of my Soul and Body
hereafter. Give me a contented mind with my estate and all other Blessings,
which thou, O Lord God of thy bounteous goodness in mercy have bestowed on me,
that I may use them soberly, discre^^^y, and be truly thankful unto thee for
them. Grant me patience in all my troubles and afflictions, which may daily
happen unto me. And grant, O dear Father, that I neither grudge or repine at
thy Fatherly corrections, knowing them to be tokens of thy Love, and
instruments of my Exercise and Trial, neither that I seek revenge of my
Enemies, knowing that Vengeance is thine, and thou will repay it in due season.

Keep my wandering Will and Affections from all evil Thoughts, my Tongue from
profane and lead Speeches, my Body, and every part thereof, from all sinful
Actions, and outward Violence; let all my Love, Faith, Hope, Delight and
Confidence be only upon thee. Open my Heart to have pity upon the poor
distressed Members of Jesus Christ, whether they be afflicted in Body or Mind,
or both. Give me the Gift of Chastity, that I may walk honestly, and that I
possess my Vessel, which is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, with Sanctification
and Honor, and not in the lusts of the Flesh, as the wicked and foolish do,
which know not God. Give me, O Lord, a soft and tender heart, to be sorrowful
for my sins and transgressions that are past, which I have so wilfully
committed; Thankfulness unto thee for all thy Mercies and Benefits which thou
in love have from time to time bestowed upon me. Let thy mighty Hand and out
stretched Arm, O Lord, be still my defense; thy mercy and loving kindness in
Jesus Christ thy dear Son, my Salvation; thy true and holy Word, my
Instruction; thy Grace and holy Spirit, my comfort and consolation unto the end
of my Life. And give me Grace hereafter to perform that which thou have
commanded me, that so I may live in the fear of thy holy and blessed Name, and
also die in thy Favor, that I may rise to Life for ever, with my Lord Jesus
Christ, and evermore dwell with him in thy most Glorious and Joyful Kingdom;
the only thing which I desire and hope for, through the Merits and Mercy of
Jesus Christ thy only Son, and my only Lord and Savior; not for any Merits or
Deserts of mine, but for thy Son Jesus Christ. In whose Name and Words, I
conclude and shut up my imperfect Prayers, in that absolute Form of Prayer,
which thy Son our Savior taught his Disciples, saying, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Most mighty Lord God, and merciful Father, I ^ sinful Creature return unto
thee Praise and Thanks, for all thy favors which thou in thy mercy have from
time to time vouchsafed unto me a sinner, I beseech thee favorably to hear my
Prayers, and to grant my requests, which I offer and make unto thee at this
time. Forgive me I* entreat thee good Father, all the sins that I have
committed from day to day against thy Divine Majesty. And suffer me not, O
Lord, hereafter to offend thee any more, but neither sin nor Satan, nor any
unruly Passions may have dominion, nor reign any longer in (...) mortal Body.
For I confess I have herein done wickedly, and have broken all thy
commandments, for which th^^ might in thy severe Justice punish me both in
Soul and Body to eternal Death; Forgive me all that is past, and pour upon me,
O Lord, the Holy Spirit of Wisdom and G^^^e, and so govern and lead me by the
Holy Spirit, that it may be a Lanthorn to my feet, and a Light to my Steps.
Increase my Faith, O merciful Father, that I may not swerve at any time from
thy Heavenly Word, but increase in me Hope and Love, with a care of keeping all
thy Commandments. Show thy mercy upon me, and enlighten the natural blindness
and darkness of my Heart, by thy Heavenly Grace and Spirit, that I may be
regenerated and renewed by the same; by which, O Lord, purge the grossness of
my hearing, and understanding, which have been choked with the cares and
pleasures of this World, that I may profitably read, hear and understand thy
Heavenly. Will, believe and practice the same in my life and conversation; and
also mortify and kill in me all carnal desires and lusts of the Flesh, that my
life may express my faith in thee. But most chiefly, I entreat thee, O Lord, to
defend my Soul against the temptations, and subtle deceits of Satan: And when I
happen to fall into sin through frailty and weakness of Nature, I beseech thee to
work true repentance in my heart, that trusting in thy mercy without
presumption, I may amend my life, and become truly religions, faithful and
trusty without deceit, sad without distrust, and content with what thou have
bestowed upon me; that I may increase it to thy Honor. Finally, For as much as
it has pleased thee to make the night for Man to rest, and ordained for him
the day, to follow his honest Labor and Vocation: Grant, O Heavenly Father,
that I may so enjoy my bodily rest that my Soul may continually watch like the
wise Virgins, with the Oil of Faith in my Heart, for the second coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and that I be not overcome by Dreams, or any other
temptations but that I may fully set my mind upon thee, to love* fear, and rest
in thee. And then, O Lord, waken me in due time, that I may behold the day with
comfort^ still preparing my heart and mind to serve thee, that when I have run
the short race of this mortal life, ^ thou may be pleased to call me to
partake of a better, that so I may ever remain with thee in thy Heavenly
Kingdom, through Jesus Christ, our only Lord and Savior; in whose Name I beg
all these Graces, in that short and absolute Form of Prayer, which he has
taught us, saying, Our Father, which art in Heaven, etc.

FINIS.
A Fold for Christ's Sheep.
Delivered in two several Sermons.
Cant. 1.7, 8. Tell me (O thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest: Where
thou make thy Flock to rest at noon, for why should I be as one that turns
aside by the Flocks of thy Companions.

If thou know not, O thou the fairest among Women, go thy way forth by the
footsteps of the Flock, and feed the Kids beside the Shepherds Tents.


BEfore I enter upon the Text it self, it will not be amiss for my better
proceeding, and your understanding, for to speak something concerning the Order
of Placing this Book, the Title of it, the Subject, and the matter therein
contained.

First, Touching the Order of placing this Book, wherein Solomon labors to
build up the Spiritual Temple of the Soul: It is the same he has observed in
building the material Temple, where he framed three Courts; the outmost for the
common People, the second for the Priests and Levites; and last of all the
Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holiest of Holies, only for the High Priest to enter in
at, and that but once a Year. Even so in this Spiritual Temple of Man's Soul he
has likewise framed three Courts: First an outward Court, which is his Book of
Proverbs, where all sorts and degrees of men whatsoever are taught and
instructed a civil course of manners: Next to that, he has a second Court,
which is his (...), leading Men on further in the way of Godliness, and
Christian Piety: And last of (...), he has a Sanctum Sanctorum, which is the
Canticles, where not every one, but only those that delight in Heavenly and
Divine Mysteries, can behold the pure, free, perfect, eternal and constant Love
of Christ Jesus toward his Church, and every faithful Soul, as also the love
of his Church toward him, and the great benefit she reapeth by him.

Secondly, For the Title and Subject, or matter of this most excellent Book: As
there is Sabbatum Sabbati. So this is a Song of Songs; because of all that
Solomon indicted, this is most divine and most excellent: Wherein he most lively
and affectionately, by Allegorical and Parabolical Speeches, deciphers out, and
describes unto us the most Holy and Perfect Love of Christ Jesus toward the
Church his Blessed Spouse. For Christ and his Church are here brought in, in
this worthy Book, as two Paramours, who are in love, one with the other, as the
time of wooing ever goes before the Solemnization of Matrimony, of those which
in due time purpose to Marry, Mat. 1.18. as Joseph and Mary were first espoused
before they came together, so the same order is observed in this Spiritual
Union betwixt Christ and his Church, Job 3.29. They must first be contracted,
then afterward married: The contract is, when a man is Regenerate and born a
new, Rev. 21.9. Translated out of Nature into Grace, depending only upon our
Savior Christ for Salvation, and finished and made up in the day of Judgment,
when all the Elect shall surely enjoy God: For so witnesses the Holy Ghost,
where it is said, Let us be glad and rejoice, and give Honor to him: For the
Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready, Rev. 19.7.
So then this Book contains in it the wonderful love, and mutual affection
betwixt our Savior Christ and his Spouse, the true Church of God, and every
true Believer. This may serve touching the Book it self; we will now come to
the words of the Text.

Tell me, O thou whom my Soul loves.
IN the beginning of this Chapter, the Church beginning to speak to Christ, and
being ravished in heart with his love, desires more earnestly to be embraced of
him, that she might be joined unto him, prefering Christ Jesus with the
Blessings and Benefits she reaped by him, before all other things in the World.

In the fourth Verse she confesses her inability and want of power to embrace
Christ; and therefore she desires him to draw her heart by his Word and
Spirit, whereby she shows her earnest desire to receive Jesus Christ.

Verse 5. She removes an objection that might be made; for it might be said,
Alas, thou art black and deformed: how can thou hope that he will take any
pleasure in thy Beauty, seeing that he is the most Pure, Blessed and Glorious
Son of God: To this she confesses, that though by Nature she be black and full of
blemishes, and natural Corruption, by reason of^her Original Sin, Natural
Pollutions, and actual Transgressions, yet notwithstanding, being Washed in
Christ's Blood, Clothed with his Righteousness, and being Decked and Beautified
with the Graces of his Spirit, Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Zeal, Patience,
Love, Obedience, etc. She is fair and Comely.

Now in the Seventh Verse, she puts up an earnest request to Christ, that he
would in mercy show her where he feeds his Flock, and where he provides
comfort for them in the time of Trouble. For Christ being the great Shepherd,
his Church on Earth seeks only after him for Food, resting assured that there
is but one true Shepherd, who feeds all his Sheep with wholesome Pasture.

In these two Verses, are two things to be considered, viz.

1. The Request and Petition which the Church makes unto Christ, Verse 7. 2.
The most kind and loving Answer of Christ unto his Church, directing and
comforting her, according to her Petition. Verse 8
In the first of these, we are to consider two things.

First, The Request: And,

Secondly, The Reason of the Request.

In the Request, note first the Person whom she implores, O thou whom, etc.

Secondly, The Request it self, which is twofold.

1. That Jesus Christ would show her where he feeds his Flock, with his holy
Word and Sacraments; to the end that he would feed her, as he fed the Flocks of
former times. 2. Where he provides shelter and shade in the heat of
Persecution? At the manner of Shepherds was in these hot Countries, to drive
their sheep to shade in the heat of the day.
And lastly, The Reason, For why should I be as one that turns aside by the
Flocks of thy Compansons? So that if Christ do it not, it will not be for his
Honor, nor yet for her good.

First, For the Person to whom she seeks for direction and sure comfort, it
is Christ Jesus the Savior and Redeemer of his Church and People; whom she
describes thus: O thou whom my Soul loves, etc. That is to say, O Lord Jesus
Christ, my only Savior and Redeemer, whom I love with all my Heart; yea whom I
love most earnestly above all the World: So as if the Question were asked, what
I love best in all the World; I speak it from my heart, It is thou Lord alone,

Hence we learn, with what affection every Child of God, and true Believer must
love our Savior Christ: Namely, with the greatest and strongest affection of
love they can; So as if it were asked, what or whom do thou love most? Thou
can truly say with the Church here, The Lord Jesus Christ O hou whom my Soul
Loves So ^^d S^ Peter ^^se Love was so great, that he died for Christ: So that
he might very well say to Christ when he asked him ^^ is Question whether he ^d
love ^^m or no? Yea L^^^ Thou know that I love thee. Joh. 11 15. The like is
to be seen in Mary, whose Love was so great to Christ, that in Testimony
thereof she washed his feet with the Tears, and wiped them with the Hair of her
Head; so that Christ gives this Testimony of her to ^her everlasting Praise,
That she loved much: So does the Church and Spo^se of Christ (...) fit her love
to her Husband in diverse places of this most worthy Book calling Jesus Christ
her beloved, My Beloved spoke and said etc. And again, Stay ^e with f^aggons,
and comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of Love, Can^ 2.5. Yea, it is a
precept given by the Lord God himself, that he must have the chiefest Love, and
the first from in our Hearts Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
Heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might, Deuteronomy. 6.5. The Lord will not
be satisfied with the Love o our Eyes, to behold his Works; the Love of the
Ear, to listen to his Word; the Love of the Tongue, to talk of him; the Love of
the Feet to go to the Sanctuary; but the Lord requires all these Loves together
in one. So as a Man may truly say with David the Prophet, Whom have I in Heaven
but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides that, Psalm 73 25
The Lord allows not that a man should have two Hearts, one for God, and another
for the Devil; We cannot serve God and Mammon: We must not part our Love to the
World, the Flesh and the Devil; divided it must not be, Christ must have it
all. Now the Reasons are diverse, to show with what an ardent affection we must
love Jesus Christ.

First. Because he is our Husband, and we are his Spouse, for so says the
Prophet, Isa 54 5. For thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name:
And again, Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the Marriage
of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready Rev. 10.7. Now our
Spiritual Services and Worship of God (is as it were) ascertain Marriage of our
Souls unto God when we take upon us the profession of Jesus Christ, as in
Baptism, then we betroth our selves to Christ as to an Husband, entering into
Covenant with Christ, to keep only to him unto our lives end. So then, by this
means the Lord is become our Husband, and we his Spouse. Now then, as an honest
man cannot endure that another should have an interest in his Wife, so will not
Christ endure that another should have with him any interest or portion in his
Church. For he is a jealous God, Exodus 20 4, 5. So then the force of the Reason
stands thus: God's People which are Married unto Christ, must love Christ
alone, because we are linked and Married unto him alone, as a Wife to her
Husband, unto whom ^one she is bound.

Therefore if we forsake the Lord, and break the Promise we made to him in
Baptism, and betroth our selves unto others, then will he cast us off, give us
a Bill of Divorcement, as shameless Strumpets, and punish us for our
unthankfulness.

Secondly, He loved us first and best, and according to that of St. John 4.19.
We love him, because he first loved us. Yea he loved us first when we were his
Enemies, and had made a voluntary separation between him and our Souls,
committing Spiritual Fornication with Sin and Satan. Yea, as the Apostle Paul
witnesses, Ephesians. ^ 1. You has he quickened who were dead in Sin. And lest he
should any whit doubt of his love, he has manifested it in that He washed us
from our Sins in his own Blood, Rev. 1.5. O then greater Love than this can no
man show? Christ loved us first; And he invitesus to love him; and shall not we
love him again? It is a great sin of ingratitude, not to love where we are
beloved for our good: And therefore seeing Christ has loved thy Soul so
dearly, as to suffer a cursed death, yea to shed his own Blood to save thy
Soul, O how ought thou to love Christ again? If a Man were taken by the
Turks, and put to extreme slavery and bondage, where he should remain for ever,
unless a great Sum of Money were paid for his Ransom, which he is never able to
pay, how miserable and grievous were the estate of this Man! But if one should
come out of mere love and affection unto him, pitying his M^er^ and M^fortune,
and should pay his Ransom, and set him free, who can express how much this poor
Wre^ch were bound unto him? We are all taken Prisoners, and that not by the
Turks, which only can hold, us in Temporal Bondage, but by the Subtilty of
Satan the Prince of Darkness: where we should have endured not a Temporal, but
a Spiritual and Eternal Bondage and Slavery, and that, in Hell for evermore;
and nothing but only the Blood of the Son of God could pay our Ransom.

Oh how should this work upon the affections of every Christian Man and Woman,
and even bind us to love Christ again: Now, what could bind Christ, but only
his love to give himself to death for us? Surely nothing that was in us. But
God who is rich in Mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when
we were dead in sin, has quickened us together with Christ, by whose Grace ye
are saved, Ephesians. 2.4. And again, 1 John 3.26. Hereby perceive we the love of God
because he laid down his life for us. In whom (said the Apostle) we have
Redemption through his blood, Ephesians. ^.7. And therefore the love that Christ
Jesus has first showed unto us, must constrain us to love Christ again.

And last of all, because Christ Jesus is the most excellent in himself, and
therefore most worthy of our respect, for so says the Church of God; My
Beloved is white and ^uddy, the chiefest of Ten Thousand. In the World we see
it common, that some are beloved, because they are fair and beautiful, some
because they are rich and wealthy; some because they are Eloquent and Wise, and
some because they are honorably descended: Now Christ Jesus has all these:
For whatsoever may affect a man's Heart, and any way procu^e love, the same is
our Savior Christ fully and absolutely, without any shadow of mutability or
change. For Wisdom he is the Fountain; for Truth, he is the Author; for Mercy,
he is the Store House; for Riches, he is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, even the
Store House of all durable Riches; and for Beauty, he is the most Holy and
Blessed Son of God, full of Grace and Truth.

Oh let this serve to reprove all carnal and profane Hypocrites, Worldly men,
Covetous Cormorants, who love any thing more than Christ Jesus, and his
Glorious Gospel? Like the Gadarens, who preferred their Hogs before our
Savior: Yea, one mess of Pottage with Esau, that can be content with Judas to
sell Christ for less than Thirty Pence, that love their salthy Pleasures,
Eating, Drinking, Pride, Uncleanness as Dives did, etc. more than Christ and
their own Souls; or like the Bethlemites, let Christ lie in the Stable amongst
Beasts, for they cannot afford him one corner in their Hearts.

Again, It is the sin of Thousands that profess Christ to be their Husband, and
Savior, that yet break their Baptismal Covenant, and serve the World, and the
Flesh; that pretend they love the Lord Jesus Christ, and yet betroth themselves
to the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and serve them. Now how could that man
be content with this, that his Wife should say she loves him, and yet sets her
Heart upon another Man? So how can we think that God will take it at our hands,
if we make a show that we love Christ, and yet are dallying with the World,
Christ's Enemy; Oh he is a jealous God, and will never endure it at our hands.

And lastly, By the Rule of this Doctrine, are the Papists here no less to be
reproved, who rob God of his Honor in calling upon Saints, and praying to the
Virgin Mary before Christ himself, giving Honor and Adoration to Saints and
Angels, making them Mediators and Saviors. They shall find one day, that God
will not put up this Robbery at their Hands, but will show his Jealousy, and
terrible anger and wrath against them, as most Sacrilegious Persons and Robbers.

It must stir up every Christian man to labor to find his heart ravished with
the love of our Savior: So as he can say out of the affection of his Heart, O
thou whom my Soul loves! So if the Question were demanded, what I love best? I
can truly say, I love Christ more than the whole World; yea, I account all
things as dross and dung to win Christ. And where Men find this true affection
and love of Christ in them, it is a certain sign of their Salvation, that God
has cast his love on them, so that the love of God draws love to him again. As
the light of the Sun lights on the eye, and by it we see the Sun again. And as
by the Impression in the Wax, we know the Seal, so by our love to God, we know
his love to us. Oh how should this cause every Man and Woman amongst us, to
examine their love toward Christ, that so they may gather some Assurance to
their Souls, that Christ has cast his love upon them. And to do this, ask this
Question of thy Soul. Do thou desire with the Apostle Paul, to be loosed and
to be with Christ? Is it Meat and Drink unto thee to do the Will of Christ? Is
thy hand ever ready (according to thy ability) to bestow any thing upon Christ,
and for the advancement of his Glory? Do thou labor in the place where thou
live, to advance the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ? Can thou be content
to undergo Shame, Disgrace, Troubles, Persecution and Bonds, yea, Death it self
for Christ's sake? Does the remembrance of his Coming to Judgment, cheer up thy
heavy Soul? And do thou cry with the Spouse of Christ, Come Lord Jesus, Come
quickly? And forsake the delights of the world with a detestation and scorn,
saying with Solomon, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. These are the marks and
tokens whereby you may discern whether you love Christ or no.

But because all Men are ready to say, that they love Christ, or it were pity
that they should live, when indeed the love of Christ is not in them; I will
yet proceed a little further, and observe a few notes and marks, of this pure
and hearty love to Christ, which are most certain signs of Grace.

First, If we love Christ, we will love his Word, delight in it, and esteem it
above Gold and precious Stones. O how I love thy Law, says David, it is my
meditation all the day. Yea, it is altogether impossible for a Man to be
religious, to fear God, and to love him, that has (...) found love or delight
in the Word of God; so that by our love to his Word, we may judge of our love
to Christ; no love nor delight in the Word, surely no love nor delight in
Christ; great love to the Word, great love to Christ. In the Valuing of this
Pearl, David's practice is notable, who made the Testimonies of God his
Heritage, and the Joy of his Heart, and esteemed them above Gold, yea, above
fine Gold And (therefore seeing most men have no delight in the Word, seldom or
never hear it, (unless it be for fashion sake) read it, or meditate on it day
or night; it is a certain token that the love of Christ is not in them.

Secondly, If we love Christ Jesus with all our hearts, we will love those whom
he loves, his blessed Members, True Christians. Hereby (says St. John) we know
that we are passed from death unto life; because we love the Brethren? 1 John
3.24. David testifies of himself, all my delight is in thy Saints. It is our
duty to love all, but we must love the Saints with a peculiar and special love;
as Heirs with Christ, and Members of the same Body with us; therefore seeing
men generally hate the Members of Christ, contemn and despise them; does not
this make it very apparent, that the love of Christ is not in them, for the
World loves her own. But because ye are not of the World, but I have chosen you
out of the World, therefore the World hates you, John 15.19.

Thirdly, If we love our Savior, we must show it by obedience to his Word and
Holy Laws. For so says Christ, If ye love me, keep my Commandments, John
15.14. Little Obedience, little love; No Obedience to Christ's Will, no Love;
hearty Obedience, hearty Love. And therefore seeing generally men rebel against
his Word, and break his Commandments; though these men should swear they love
Christ, yet they are Liars, and the love of Christ is not in 'em; for who can
believe that a Traitor can Love his Prince.

Fourthly, If we love our Savior, we cannot endure to hear him blasphemed, his
Word contemned, or his Sabbath profaned, but it will grieve us at the very
heart; and we will (to the (...) of our power) defend his cause, as a loving
Child the cause of his Father, and a faithful Servant the credit of his Master;
and withal it will make us be content to endure some Trial and P^rs^cution for
his sake, yea, loss of Liberty, Wealth, Riches, as Job did; Yea, Life itse^f;
who has so loved (...), that he shed his Blood for us. Thus much of the
affection of the Church toward Christ Jesus.

Now to come to the Petitions themselves.

Tell me, O thou whom who^ my Soul loves, where thou Feedest, etc.
THE Church here, as in many other places of Scripture, compares Christ Jesus
to a good and faithful Shepherd, as the Prophet Isaiah descri^es him, Isa.
40.11. He shall gather the Lambs with his Arms. And again, Ezekiel. 34.10. Behold
I with require my Flock of the Shepherds, and I my self wi^ feed my Sheep, and
cause them to rest quietly. (...) is acknowledged of the Prophet David, Psalm.
22 1. The Lord is my Shepherd I shall not want. Yea, Christ does thus Entitle
himself, saying, John 10.11. I am the good Shepherd, etc.

Now the Church of Christ puts up her request to this great Shepherd and Bishop
of his Church, that he would be pleased to tell her where he feeds his Sheep,
with the Preaching of the Word; and the use of the Sacraments that she may join
with them, there to be fed and comforted.

Quest. But was not this the true Church, that moved this Question? What is
then that other Church or Flock she enquires after?


Answ. Though the Church of God is but one in all the World, yet it has diverse
parts; as the Sea, though but one, yet it is called by diverse Names, according
to the place where it lies; even so the Church of Christ, though but one, yet
it has diverse parts, as the Holy Spirit distinguishes of it, writing to the
seven Churches which are in Asia Now of the whole Church of Christ, some parts
of it are at peace and quiet, free from Persecution, when other parts may
suffer Persecutions and Molestations. Now in this place the Church of God, in
persecution and great affliction, desires to know of Christ, where he feeds
his sheep, that is, where the Church is at rest and peace, where the Word is
purely preached, the Sacraments duly administered, and Discipline duly
performed, that she might join with them in the Service of Almighty God.


From this Request and earnest suit of the Church to Christ, to know where he
feeds his Sheep, we may learn: That it is a true note of a Sheep of Christ
Jesus, to hunger and thirst after the Word of God, to enquire where Christ
feeds his Flock, where the Word is truly and faithfully preached; and the Holy
Saments duly administered. And this our Savior himself observes to be the mark
of his Sheep, Joh. 10.27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me: But the voice of a Stranger will they not hear. This Affection was
in Godly David; O Lord, how amiable are thy Tabernacles! How does my Soul long
after they Altars, O when shall I come and appear before the Lord in Sion! And
this duty is imposed upon every Christian, for to have an earnest affection to
the Word of God. As when a man is hungry, the Veins sucking moisture at the
bottom of the Stomach, he feels a pain that makes him desire meat; even so our
Souls void of Grace and nourishment unto eternal life, should hunger and thirst
after Christ and his Righteousness; after his Word, which is the true Spiritual
food of our Souls. As till a man be hungry he wants no meat, so till we see our
wants, we never seek to have our silly Souls fed with the Word of God. Now in
that so few desire the Word of God, and so few esteem of it, it shows that very
few feel their want of food, very few can discern their misery and wretched
estate, but most men run on in sin, joy themselves in their evil ways, and
never say, Alas! What have I done? Jer. 8.6. We must desire the sincere Milk of
the Word, as the Infant does the Mothers Breasts, and as the Heart does the
River of Waters, Psalm. 42. And as the Church does here. Tell me where thou
feedest thy Flock. We should do as the Earth does in time of drought; she opens
her mouth, begging and gaping until the Lord send Rain. The Beggar never begs
so earnestly, till he feels his own want, and then he will spare no time,
labor, nor words: So till we see our own wants, we never seek for the
Spiritual food of our Souls. But they are blessed which hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, Mat. 5.6. Though we think we are happy when we feel no want: And
it is common to say, I never doubted of my Salvation, I would be loath my
Conscience should so trouble me, etc. But sure it is the beginning of Grace to
find our selves want Grace. Those that eat upon a full Stomach, it does them
least good: So they that are full, and feel not the want of the Word, it does
them little good.

And the Reason is, that if we do not hunger and thirst after the Word of God,
we can never enjoy the Variety of all those good things which are laid up in
the Word, for as all good things we have, and enjoy in this present life, are
appendences to the Word, by which Word, and by Prayer, they are sanctified unto
us. Now it is got and obtained no other way, but by thirsting after it, as the
blessed Virgin says in her Song, Luke 1.53. He fills the hungry with good
things, and the rich he sends empty away. Which may serve to comfort the
distressed Children of God, which show their thirsting Affection, by their
great labor and travel to hear the Word preached, though they meet with
mocking and sc^ffing for it, by such as are far from thirsting after it
themselves.

Secondly, If we should not eagerly seek after the Word of God, we should never
know how much we are beholding unto the Lord, for the manifold Graces and
Blessings which we receive every day from our most merciful God thereby. For so
says Solomon, The full Soul loatheth the honey comb; but unto the hungry Soul,
every bitter thing is sweet, Prove. 27.7. So that when we see our Spiritual
Poverty, it will then make us prize the excellency of that benefit we enjoy,
when we have, the Word truly and sincerely preached and taught among us.

Seeing this longing desire after Christ and his Word, is the badge and mark of
the Sheep of Christ, and of the true Church and Children of God: This Doctrine
then makes a plain distinction betwixt the Sheep of Christ, and the Go^ts of
Satan. The Sheep of Christ, long after their Shepherd, desire to be instructed
by him, hunger after the true Word preached and taught, with for the Sabbath,
Enquire where Christ ^oth feed his Sheep, in the green Pastures of his Word and
Sacraments* But the Goats loath the Word, and the preaching of it, Ezekiel. 34.8.
They tread down the pasture of the Sheep, etc. Yea, they are weary of it, they
will not go to the door to hear, Mat. 2.13. They can be content as well to want
it, as to have it; so that hereby we may judge our own Estates, whether we are
the true Sheep of Christ, or the Goats of Satan; the Children of God, or Limbs
of the Devil: Do thou love the Word of God more than thy appointed food? Tell
me, do thou desire to be taught in the Word? E^q^irest thou where Christ does
feed his Sheep with good pasture? And do thou delight in his word? Joh.
19.27. These are the marks of Christ's sheep, and may minister comfort unto thy
Soul, if thou art one of those that belong unto his fold; but if on the
contrary thou loath and abhor the Word of God, and have no desire at all to
tread in God's House, but spendest the Sabbath irreligiously, vainly and,
profanely at Dice, Cards, Bowls, or Tables, etc. O deceive not thine own Soul,
it is a sign that thou art none of Christ's Sheep, but one of the stinking
Goats of Satan; and there will come a day of separation, when Christ Jesus the
great Shepherd will divide the Sheep from the Goats: When he shall set the
Sheep on the right hand, and the Goats on the left.

The same Doctrine serves to reprove three sorts of men.

First, Atheists, that think it lost labor to be Religious, and that there is
no good got by hearing Sermons, nor leading a Godly Life. Oh it has ever been
the cursed thought of a man's heart to think so, as was used in the time of the
Prophet Malachy, ^ it is l^st labor to serve the Lord. And what good comes
there by serving of God? O then let such be warned betimes, that if they look
to have any comfort in Death and after Death, now they labor to be approved
for sheep of the fold of Christ.

Secondly, The Papists which keep poor men in ignorance and blindness: And all
others, which seek by all means possible, to hinder Christ's Sheep from
endeavoring to be taught which ^therwise would enquire^ Where Christ (...) his
Sheep, where the Word is truly preached and taught, and the Sacraments duly
administered. These are like the Scribes and Pharisees, who shut up the Kingdom
of Heaven, and will not enter themselves, nor suffer those that would: Whereas
the Scriptures do require of all men the Spirit of discerning, 1 John 4.1. Tr^
the Spirits, whether they be of God; that so they may allow of those things
which are good: and be without offense till the day of Christ: Otherwise, if
they follow their false Teachers, they are sure to perish, Mat. 15.14. For if
the blind leads the blind, they both fall into the ditch.

Thirdly, All carnal and secure Worldlings* who although they do enquire where
they may buy a good bargain, or get a good purchase, and labor for that, yet
never enquire, Where Christ feeds his Sheep. Oh! it is a wonder to see how men
covet pleasures, profits and preferments; these they seek with might and main;
surely by this they declare to the World, that they are none of Christ's Sheep
^ for if they were, they would hear his voice, and follow him, Joh. 10.27,

Seeing the true Church of God does here seek unto Christ Jesus to be taught
and directed, we learn that it is the Duty of the true Church of God to
acknowledge Christ Jesus alone for their great Pastor and Shepherd, the only
Head and chief Bishop of his Church, and therefore to be ruled by him, and his
Word alone, to be content to be led and governed by this great Pastor and
Shepherd of the Church. Joh. 10 14. I am the true Shepherd, and know my Sheep,
and am known of mine. This is acknowledged by Peter, in the behalf of his
Disciples. John 6.68. Master, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of
eternal life, Mat. 28.20. And Christ has promised to be present with his
Church even to the end of the world. And again he says, That where two or
three are gathered togethe^ in my Name, I will be in the midst of them.

And the reason to be marked and well considered, which serves likewise for the
confirmation of this point of Doctrine unto us is, because the work of
Salvation is wholly and only wrought by him, and no part thereof reserved to
any Creature; as the Apostle witnesses, when he says, That amongst men there
is no other Name given under Heaven whereby we may be saved, but only by Jesus
Christ. And likewise St. Paul says, wherefore he is able to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him.

This condemns the Church of Rome, as no true Church of God, first, because
they will not content themselves with our Savior Christ to be their great
Pastor and general Shepherd, but they set up the Pope as his Vicar, and prefer
him before Jesus Christ: Nay, they will not be content with that Pasture which
Christ allows for his sheep, the green pasture of his Sacred Word, and clear
streams of his blessed Gospel, but they will feed upon the trash and filthy
dregs of their own d^visings, the foolish devices, inventions and traditions of
Men, of the Popes and Cardinals: and by this they declare to the World, they
are no Sheep of Christ, in that they will not hear his voice, and follow him,
Joh. 10.27. Nor be content with the food he has prepared for them, but feed
upon filthy Puddles of Men's Traditions.

This may serve to admonish all the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, which
stand in his stead. that they teach nothing but the truth of God, wholesome
Doctrine, not their own Devices and Dreams to please their Auditories Ears, but
not profit their Souls: So on the contrary, you that are the hearers, must
content your selves with the pastures of God's Word the plain and pure
Preaching of the Word of God, and not to be carried away to listen after
strange Shepherds; that teach erroneous Doctrine, that may corrupt, or the
devices of Man, which may tickle the Ear, and not work Grace in the Heart. And
such are the wicked Doctrines of the Church of Rome, which will poison Men's
Souls, rather than edify them; as their Doctrine of Merits, Invocation of
Saints, and praying for the Dead, etc. Which because they have no footing in
God's Word, are here condemned as no wholesome Pasture for God's Sheep to feed
upon.

And thus much for the Churches first Request; the second follows.

And where thou make thy Flock to rest at Noon.
FOr the better understanding of these words, we must know that it was the
custom of the Shepherds in those hot Countries, to drive their Sheep to the
Pastures in the Morning; and when the Sun waxed hot, to drive them to the
Water, and at Noon to carry them to some shade, where they might rest, in the
heat of the day, lest they should be annoyed with the scorching heat, and Beams
of the Sun.

So here the Church of God, and the Spouse of Christ, compares Christ Jesus to
a faithful and true Shepherd, and entreats him to tell her where he feeds his
Flock, that is, his faithful People, to ^^nd shelter and comfort in the heat of
Persecution, when the Sun is hottest at Noonday; that is, in the greatest and
hottest Persecution of the Church of God, in the most dangerous and troublesome
Trial, and Times of great Extremity, as it was in Queen Mary's Days: which is
here meant by Noonday, when the Sun is most hot and scorching, according to
that of our Savior, speaking of a sort of evil Hearers: And when the Sun was
up, they were scorched and for lack of rooting, it withered away.

From whence we observe a twofold Instruction. 1. That the Church of God
sometimes is in the very heat of Persecution. 2. That Christ the good Shepherd,
even then forsakes not his; but at Noon day, even in the extremity of the same,
provides a shade and place of comfort and refreshing for all those that are his
sheep.

First, We are taught here, that it is the Will of the Almighty, that his
Church sometimes should be tried. And it is his Will that sometimes his own
People should undergo Persecutions, according to the rule of the Apostle St.
Paul, 2 Timothy 2.^0. This is expressly taught by the Prophet David, Psalm. 34.19.
Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
them all.

This was the condition of the Israelites in Egypt, Exodus 1.12. who remained a
long time in cruel bondage, under Phar^^h. And in Queen Esthers time, Hos.
2.23. how were the Children of God in the heat of the Persecution? This was the
estate of the whole Church of the Hebrews, described thus; That some were
wracked, and would not be delivered, that they might receive a better
Resurrection; and others have been tried by mockings and scourgings; ye^,
moreover by bonds and imprisonments: They were stoned, they were hewn asunder,
they were burned, slain with the Sword, wandering up and down in Bear-skins, and
in Goat Skins, being d^st^tute, structed, tormented, whom the World was not
worthy (...) etc.. This we might further consider in the example of Paul, Job,
Joseph, David, Jeremiah, and the like whose lives are a plentiful (...) to
test^fie this truth, that the people of G^d many times endure terrible
afflictions, and d^ve^s and sundry Trials. And this have we had experience of
in this Land, as in the days of Queen Mary, when the Sun did parch, and that
the fire of Persecution was great, to the wasting of the Bodies of many Learned
Divines, and dear Children of God; so that if we hope to live with Christ in
the Church Triumphant we must first die with him here in the Church Militant:
For none shall Reign with Christ there, that have not suffered with him in this
World; nor none shall have their Tears wiped from them in the Kingdom of
Heaven, that have not first shed them on the Earth. T^us having seen the
Doctrine, that is the states and condition of God's Church here upon Earth, to
undergo sometimes many and grievous Afflictions; now let us see the Reasons,
that so the Doctrine may leave the greater Impression in every one of our minds
and affections.

In regard of God's Enemies themselves, which know not the Father, nor his Son
Christ Jesus, they have nothing to stop their cruel Rage and Devilish Malice,
as our Savior witness^th when he says, They shall Excommun^cate you. yea, the
time shall come, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
service: and these things will they do, because they have not known the
Fathermor yet me: So that it is no marvel though the enemies of God's Church
strive against the Servants of God, being stirred up thereunto by the
instigation of Satan, seeing that they know not God, nor Jesus Christ, but have
their eyes blinded by Satan, the Prince. of the World, and the pleasures of
this life.

The Lord suffers his Children many times to undergo some sharp and bitter
Trials of affliction, and to suffer even the scorching heat of Persecution, to
make known the Patience, Virtues and Graces of his Children; as St. Paul says,
it is necessary that affliction should come, that the Elect may be manifest Who
they be. As it is impossible to know the Valor of a Soldier, if he lies always
in the Garrison, and never comes unto the Field; so it is impossible to know the
Patience, Obedience, and Love of God's Children, till Trial comes. And
therefore GOD would have Abraham tempted to make his Faith known. So Jobs
Patience, David's Piety, and Paul's Courage, etc. The Earth which is not
titleband plo^ed, (...) nothing but Briars and (...); and Vines wax wild if
they be not (...) and cut. Even so the unruly affections of our heart, (...)
many noison^ weeds, would quickly overrun the whole m^^, if the Lord (...)
^^^^ictions should not manure us. (...) (^^th Jeremy) Lam. 3.27. for a man to
bear the yoke in his youth, and in another place, the same Prophet says, Noah
has kept his scent, because he was not poured from vessel to vessel, but has
been it rest ever since h^s youth, Jer. 48.11. There are diverse other reasons
why the Lord does thus exercise his dear Children in this Life with many
crosses and affl^ctions, to humble them for sins past, and to prevent i^ for
the time to come: because when we perceive that the only weapon whereby Satan
wounds our Souls, is sin, it should make us repent of sins that are past, and
be weary of Sins for the time to come; and also humble the pride of our hearts;
for knowledge pusseth up, and in whatsoever we excel our Brethren, naturally we
wax proud of the same. Now when the Lord Almighty by these afflictions, like a
skilful Physician, lets out the superf^^ous Humor of pride and vain glory,
then we shall perceive what we are by Nature.

Use 1. Well, Let us then make some use of this Doctrine. We have had a long
Morning, and yet we are all in peace and rest, but it will not always be
Morning, the Sun will arise, and it will be Noonday; the Lord will have a time
of Trial. It is the Lord's usual dealing after a long time of peace, to bring
some Trials, that the Elect and true Christians, may be truly discerned. The
Lord cannot endure that his sacred and glorious* Gospel should be contemned and
despised, as it is at this day amongst us. O then seeing we must look for a
Trial, let us prepare and furnish our selves with all needful Virtues, with
Patience, Courage, and Zeal, etc. Alas, we think any thing will serve our turn
now; and that to be a Christian is a small matter; but if in the time of Trial
we shrink, or yield unto the Enemy, then we shall show our Hy^p^crisie and
cowardice. O then let us be good Soldiers; now in the time of Peace, and
provide and sharpen our weapons against time of War. Let us reckon what it
would cost us to be the sheep of Christ, loss of Lands, Livings, Liberty,
Country, yes, Life it self; yet to resolve by the help of God, never to be
ashamed of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; let P^rsecution come never so fierce or
hot upon us.

Use 2. Secondly, We learn hereby not to promise our selves worldly peace and
prosperity, while we continue here. For this Life is the time of a Christ^an
m^ns warfare, neither must we look to find Heaven upon Earth; for if we will be
Christ's Disciples, we must take up his Cross and follow him; we must not dream
of a Vict^ry before we fight. For it is the Lot of the Godly to suffer
Persecution Yet this may be the comfort and stay of a Christian in the midst of
them all, that the Lord will so order them, as that they shall work for the
best to them that love God, and never depart from him, so that we shall be sure
to gain more in the Spirit, than we can lose in the Fl^^h.

Use 3. Thirdly, Seeing it is the will of God that his own true Church and
faithful Children shall be tried, and undergo the heat of Persecution; Let us
hence Learn to be wise and circumspect, and neither think the worse of the
Gospel of Christ, because the Cross and Trial goes with it. We are ready to
think that the Lord loves us not; or that the Gospel we profess, is not good or
Orthodox, because we see it is scandalized by them of Rome. Well, it is that
which God will have, it was the condition of our Savior Christ before us; and
unless we look the Servant shall be greater than his Master, it must be our lot.

Secondly, We Learn from hence, that though it may be sometimes Noon Day with the
Church of God, hot and bloody Persecutions, yet Christ has ever a shelter,
shade and comfort for his chosen people; he is ever present with his Church and
People, in the hottest time of Persecution and Afflictions, to comfort, refresh
and deliver them. This the Lord expresses, Isa. 54 8. For a little time have I
forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee; for a moment in
mine anger, I hid my face from thee, for a little season; but with everlasting
mercy have I had compassion on thee. This the Prophet David makes manifest,
that notwithstanding the rage or malice of God's Enemies, Psalm. 2.4. He that
dwells in Heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the LORD shall have them in
^^rision. This comfort is excellently set forth by the Prophet. Isa. 43.^. But
now thus says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O
Israel, Fear not, for I have redeemed thee: I have called thee by thy Name,
thou art mine: When thou passes through the waters, I will be with thee, and
through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the
fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I
am the Lord thy God. What mischief had Herod invented against the Messiah, Mat.
2.12. so privately, that he disclosed the secret of his heart to none, but
pretends to the Wise men, that his intent was to worship him, yet the Lord
brought his devices to naught, and Joseph and Mary, with the Child Jesus, was
delivered. Peter being cast into Prison, should the next day have been
executed, yet through the Prayers of the Church was delivered.

This Doctrine is further cleared by the Examples of Joseph, Job, the Church in
Egypt, Daniel, Shadrath, M^^hach and Abednego, who for a time endured the ^hame
and reproach of the Cross, yet afterward the Lord Returned to them, when the
time of Refreshing came: So that although God's Children may be under the heat of
Persecution for a time, it shall be but for a Time, he will not leave them
destitute of help for ever, but will in the end deliver them.

The Reasons to confirm this Doctrine are manifest.

First, Consider the Title by which God is called: A Father, to show the care
that he takes over his Church, as his Children, to provide for them and govern
them. For what Father will not save his Child, if possi^^e he can, from fire
and water, or any other imminent danger? Now if we that are evil, know how to
help our Children; how much more shall our Heavenly Father, that knows all
things, g^ve good things unto his Children? Again, Christ is called a Shepherd,
as the Church does confess in this place. Now will the Shepherd see the Sheep
go astray, and not bring the^ into the R^ght way again? O^ suffer the Wolf to
devour, and not rescue them? And what shall we think that Christ the true
Shepherd of his Church, will be more careless of his Flock, whom he has
purchased with no less price than his own hearts blood, than an earthly man is
of his sheep. Seeing then that Christ Jesus is the King of his Church, and the
Shepherd of his sheep, we need not doubt but that he will defend his Church,
and save his sheep, so that none shall be able to destroy them, nor take them
out of his hands.

Secondly, Our weakness and natural corruption are not hid from the Lord: He
knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but lust: And therefore
says the Apostle, GOD is faithful, that he will not suffer us to be tempted
above that (...) we are able; but will even with ^he temptation make a way to
escape, that ye may be able to bear it, 1 Cor 10.13. So then, whether we
consider the Office of Christ, as a Shepherd to keep his Church, or the mercy
of Christ, that is over ready to cover the wants of his servants, making their
afflictions to be but momentary; in these two respects we may easily gather
that the Lord never forsakes his Children, but provides for 'em both shelter
and comfort, when they shall find the heat of Afflictions hot^est upon them.

Use 1. The Use serves to direct us to whom we shoulst go in time of Trouble
and great Distress, for if Christ be our Shepherd, we are to flee to him, he is
a faithful Preserver of them that trust in him. Shall we go to Saints and
Angels? Isa. 16.63. Doubtless, Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us
not. What then, shall we trust in our Chariots, or in our Horses? Doubtless a
Horse is counted a vain thing to save a man? Psalm 47.1. Surely we cannot
honor him more than when we depend on him, and Rest upon his Mercy. Thus David
behaved himself in all his extremities, flying unto God as a sure Refuge, Psalm.
9*1, 2. I will say unto the Lord, O my hope, and my fortress, he is my God, in
him will I trust. He will deliver me from the snare of the hunter, and from the
noisome pest^lence. His Ears are always open to the cries of his Children, he
puts their tears into his Bottle. So long therefore, as we have a voice to
call upon God, or a heart to sigh and groan unto him, we have comfort and
assurance to be delivered, and that he will not leave us nor forsake us in
danger.

Use 2. Here is matter of endless comfort unto the Church and Children of God,
that they know that the Lord Jesus Christ promises and will provide a place of
comfort and refreshing a shade even at noonday, in the heat of of bloody
Persecution. Many indeed are our infirmities, fears, cares, sorrows and
troubles, yet in the midst of them all, the Children of God may say with the
Prophet, Why art thou cast down (O my Soul) and why art thou disquieted within
me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his
Countenance, Psalm. 42.5. O then let us be constant, and comfort our selves in
Christ Jesus; let us not for fear deny Christ and his Gospel? for Christ will
be a shelter to refresh and deliver us.

Use 3. This shows the woeful and desperate Estate of all wicked and ungodly
Men, who being out of Gods favor, nor believing in Christ, nor repenting of
their sins in time of persecution, when the Sun waxes hot: Alas! they shall
not know where to hide their heads, for they shall find no shelter, nor
comfort, nor place of refuge; for Christ is a shelter only to them that believe
in him, and obey him. And therefore thou which art a wicked man, an impenitent
sinner* a profane Person; alas, what will thou do? And which way will thou
turn thee in the time of trouble and calamity, when the Sun waxes hot in the
heat of persecution and scorching Trial? Whither will thou run for shelter?
Alas, thou shall then be as a beast, which in the heat of the day runs up and
down, and finds no covert. So shall all wicked and impenitent sinners have no
place or succor, but lie open to all God's Judgments, to be scorched, yea,
even consumed with the fire of God's displeasure; when the righteous, those
which are in Christ Jesus, shall find shelter.

Now follows the Reason which she uses to move the Lord Jesus Christ to
grant her Request and Petition, taken from the great peril and danger she was
like to fall into; namely, lest being left without his direction (...) comfort,
she be constrained, to turn aside to the Flock of thy companions. That is to
say, to leave the true Church and Worship of God, and join with the false
Church, to common Idolatry, called here, The Flock of thy companions Not for
that they are either Christ's Companions, or the Companions of his Church and
People; but because they account themselves so; and imagine themselves Christ's
Companions: And if this thing should come to pass, through want of Christ's
assistance to direct and comfort her in Persecution, then it shall not be for
his honor, nor her good. This is the substance of her reason.

Hence we are taught, That it is altogether impossible for men and women ever
to stand the brunt of Persecution, unless they be taught of God, and comforted
and assisted by his Spirit. And hence it is that the Prophet David, a Man after
God's own Heart, and endued with a signal portion of God's Spirit, earnestly
craves at God's hand the enlightening of his holy Spirit, desires to be taught
of him: Open mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law. And
again, Teach me thy statutes. And again, make me to understand the way of thy
precepts, etc. Yea, Christ tells the Jews which murmured against him, (because
he said, That no man could come unto him, unless his Father drew them) that all
the Elect are taught of God, Joh. 6.45.

And this made Paul to pray for the Ephesisians, Ephesians 2. That God would give
them the Spirit of wisdom, and enlighten their minds that they might know their
calling, and what the riches of his glorious Inheritance.

A notable direction to all sorts of men, how to behave themselves, when they
come into the House of God; namely, not to rest on any natural gift, whatsoever
it be, Wisdom, Learning, Wit, Memory, etc. 2 Cor. 1.12. For the Wisdom of the
F^^s^ is enmity with God. But to go out of our selves, and to seek the Lord
with humility, and self denial, and then the Lord will give us a discerning
Spirit, that we shall not be deceived. If any man (says Christ) will do my
Fathers Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, Joh 7.27.
And again, Christ promises his Disciples, being now to leave them, and go to
his Father, that the spirit of truth shall lead them into all truth.

And the Reasons are,
First, We are blind, and by nature can hardly see into the truth, unless God
direct us by his Spirit; for so says Solomon. Prove, 14.12. The ways that seen
right unto us; the issues thereof are the ways of Death. It is a part of our
misery, that we are turned every one to his own way.

Secondly, When we know it alas! we are of our selves so weak, and flesh and
blood will be so unwilling to suffer for Christ's sake, that unless the Lord do
assist us, we shall not be able to undergo the least temptation that shall be
laid upon us:

And lastly, The Enemies of God's Truth are in their Generation, so wise and
subtle coming to us in S^eeps clothing to deceive us, that of our selves we
shall easily be drawn away to believe ^^^s. In all these respects, we may
safely conclude, that it is impossible for us to hold out in the day of Trial,
unless we be assisted by the Lord's Holy Spirit.

Use 1. This shows, that if Trials do come and Persecutions shall arise for
Christ and the Gospels sake: that alas it is to be feared most men would yield
to Popery, Idolatry, Superstition, to the Flocks of his Companions, to the
Church of Rome, to (...) Idolatry: For alas, those that know not the truth,
they are not taught of God; they are blind and ignorant, and will easily
believe and embrace any Religion.

Use 2. This may stir up every true Christian Man and Woman to pray to Christ,
as the Church does here, that he would teach us by his Spirit, that he would
open our eyes, that we may see the truth, and that ^s would give us hearts to
believe it, to love it, and to live and die in it; that he would gave us the
Spirit of discerning, to try the Spirits, whether they be of God, that we may
discern truth from ^a^^hood: Yea, we must so labor to be grounded in the
truth, that no affliction of any kind may remove us; that we be sure to lay a
good foundation, that we dig deep into our hearts, and build on the Rock Jesus
Christ.

Though the Papists say, they are the true Church, and the Communion of Christ,
yet they are the Synagoge of Satan: The main points of their Religion, bring
clean contrary unto the Word of God, as their Doctrine of Merits, Invocation of
Saints, and worshipping of Images, Praying for the Dead, Sacrifice of the Mass,
that so we may for ever stand out against the Doctrine of the Church of Rome:
Yea, let us entreat the Lord, that he would never suffer it to get a ^e^^ again
in this Land, notwithstanding we have deserved as great a Judgment; but
especially that he keep us, that we may never join with 'em in that bloody
Religion,

Use 3. It condemns all who are ready, either for fear of Persecution, or by
blindness or ignorance to embrace any Religion, or join with any Church, who to
keep their Livings, hold their Lands to enjoy their Honors and Pleasures,
would turn as does the wind, and embrace any Religion; join with Papists, Jew,
Turk, yea, the Devil himself for advantage.

Oh, the true Church of Christ fear themselves and their weakness, that they
should be drawn a way, and seduced to embrace a false Religion: And therefore
they doubting the worst, and fearing the corruption that is in their own
hearts, pray Christ that they may not be left unto themselves, but that they
may find strength from him to withstand it.

Cant. 8.
WE have heard before of the earnest request and petition of the Church, to
Christ, that he would in mercy show them where he feeds his Flock, and where
he provideth comfort them in time of trouble. Here is the most kind, loving and
gracious Answer of Christ Jesus, to the request of the Church: In which note
three things.

1. His exceeding love and kindness, in that he calls her, The fairesh among
Women

2. His gen^^e reproof of her. If thou know not. ^uoth he: This is very strange
that thou which art the true Church should not know where Christ feeds his
sheep.

3. His direct answer to her request, wherein he answers her to the full: If
you would know where I feed my Sheep, and would feed with them, and and find
consolation to thy Soul, Then you must go in the steps of the Flock. You must
embrace the Faith, Religion, Worship and Service of God, which my ancient
Servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, have done, and tread in their Steps.
Secondly, Thou must plant thy Tents where the Shepherds have done the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles of Christ, and their doctrine taught before.
This is the substance of Christ's Answer to his Church.

First, Observe here how Christ describes his true Church and Spouse, giving
her a most kind and loving Name, expressing his kind and singular Love unto
her, O thou fairest among Women.

Quest But this may seem strange, for the Church confesses before, that she
was black and Sunburnt, deformed, etc How then can Christ call her, Fairest
among Women.


Answ. The Church and every true Believer, are black and deformed in
themselves, vile and deformed by Nature, and they can see no beauty in
themselves, but are blemished; yea, and stained with Sins Original and Actual.
But as they are sanctified by his Spirit, washed with his Blood, and clothed
in his Righteousness, they are Fair and Beautiful in the sight of God, because
Christ has washed them from all their sins in his Blood; etc. covered them
with the pure Robes of his own Righteousness.


Here mark the endless love of Christ Jesus to his poor Church and People, that
esteems so highly of them, as if they had no spot of sin and uncleanness,
though they in themselves be black, deformed, and polluted; yet all those who
truly repent, embrace Jesus Christ, and believe in him, that are washed from
their sins, Sanctified by his Spirit, and obey his Will, all these are Fair;
Yea, most Beautiful in his Eyes. This is confessed by wicked Balaam, when he
saw no policy nor device could take any place against the Church of God.
Hereunto come the titles and commendations given to the Church so often in this
most excellent Book of the Canticles: She is the Rose of the Field, the Lilly
of the Valley, the fairest among Women, an Orchard of Pomegranates, a Well of
Springing Waters, the Spouse and Sister of Christ, the Beauty of the Earth, the
Glory of the World, a Lilly among Thorns, etc. These and the like serve to
confirm the everlasting truth of this Doctrine unto us, how dear and precious
the Church is in Christ's sight, that of all Societies and Assemblies of Men in
the World, none are more excellent and worthy, more amiable and lovely, none
more beautiful and precious, than the Church of God, the Spouse of Christ.

And the Reason of the Doctrine is apparent. Man was first cast out of Paradise
for sin, neither is there any thing that does hinder his return, but only sin;
for it is sin that separates and hinders all good things from us. For so long
as sin remains, it is a weighty burden to press down a sinner into Hell, and the
wages of it is Eternal Death, Therefore if sin be pardoned, as it is to all the
Elect, what should hinder their happiness? God has against them no
displeasure, the Obedience of Jesus Christ being imputed unto them, Heaven
cannot be denied them, but they must needs be saved.

Secondly, Christ Jesus does esteem highly of his Church, and the Church is
most excellent in her self, because in it, alone Salvation is to be found, and
no where else. When the LORD brought the great and general Deluge over the face
of the whole Earth, what place was there left more excellent than the Ark, in
which Noah and his Family were saved, and the whole World besides Perished?
What was the Ark but a type and figure of Christ's Church, wherein Salvation is
to be found, and out of which is no Salvation to be looked for. Seeing
therefore, that Remission of sins is proper only to Christ's Church, and that
therein is Salvation and Eternal Life to be found, we may safely conclude, that
the Estate of Christ's Church, and every Member thereof, is most excellent and
Blessed.

Use 1. The Use of this Doctrine is Excellent, (...) the Nature of the Church
is.

First then, seeing that Christ will pass by the sins of his Children and judge
them Fair, without spot or blemish of Sin, if they truly Repent, and embrace
him and his Righteousness by Faith: Here is matter of endless comfort to every
poor Child of God.

Do thou Repent of thy Sins, and art truly humbled for 'em? Do thou embrace
Christ Jesus for the Pardon of them? Has God Sanctified thy Heart by his
Spirit, so that thou hate every wicked way, and desire and endeavourest to
obey God's Will in all his Commandments? Then comfort thy self, and cheer up
thy Soul, Christ Jesus will cover all thy Sins: they shall never be laid to thy
charge, but he will cloth thee with his own Righteousness, whereby thou shall
appear Fair and Beautiful in his sight. Indeed many a poor Child of God looking
upon their own infirmities, and manifold corruptions, see themselves to be
black indeed, deformed and stained with sin; it grieveth them that they hang
down their heads and go drooping all their days, striving and struggling with
their rebellious Hearts, and vile corruptions, thinking that Christ Jesus cares
not for them, cannot love them, being so defiled with sin.

But be not discouraged; for if thou repent of them, believe in Christ, hate
thy sins, and prayest often to God, to give thee power to withstand them, using
all godly means so to do, Christ Jesus will cover, and pass by them all, as he
dealth with David, Peter, etc, Oh then! What care ought all men daily to take
to be members of this Society, that they may have a part in all these excellent
Prerogatives? And then though the World esteem them not, but count them
miserable, grinning and nodding at them with their Head, and every way
contumeliously reproaching them, yet they are most dear and precious in the
sight of Christ, who has redeemed them with the Ransom of his own Blood.

Use 2. Let us learn by Christ's Example here, that if we see any good thing in
a Child of God, to commend it, and embrace it. And if we see any blemish or
infirmity, that we wink at it and cover the same with a cloak of Love; and not
as the manner of Wicked and Urgedly men is, who, though they see many good
Gifts and Graces in Gods Children, as Obedience, Faith, Patience and Love. pass
by all that; and if they espy but one blemish and weakness, they blaze it
abroad with open mourn; blast their Reputation, calling them Puritans
Hypocrites, and the like, Reviling them in a most odious manner, like the Horse
Fly pass by many Flowers and sweet Herbs, and lights upon some noisome Weed:
These are not like to Christ, but to the Devil.

Thus much of the exceeding Love and Kindness of Christ Jesus (...) Church, in
that he calls her by this (...) appellation, The Fairest among Women.

Secondly, His gentle Reproof of her; If thou know not (quoth he:) This
seems strange thou should be ignorant where I feed my Sheep, where my
Truth and Gospel is purely preached, and soundly professed; but if thou know
not, I will direct, and show thee how to find it out.

Hence we are taught, that the Church of God and true Believers, may sometimes
be so blind, and left to themselves, that they are at a stand, and hardly know
which is the true Religion, Where Christ does feed his Flock, where the Word is
faithfully preached and professed; for we are all ready to err by Nature. How
apt are we in matters that concern our Souls, to be mistaken through our
carelessness in not searching of the Truth, and trying of the Spirits: And also
by the subtle policy of the Devil, who apes the Almighty in many things, as
that it is hard to discern his slights and falsehoods; Wicked men, false
Teachers, and lying Prophets, set such a face and show on their Errors, and
hear them out with such a countenance and Authority; and the Truth is so
neglected, plain and simple men trodden under foot, that it is hard for a man,
yea, the true Church of God sometimes to discern where Christ feeds his Flock.

When Elijah was left alone, and Baal had five Hundred and fifty Prophets, who
could almost then discern the true Worship of God from Idolatry, when all was
corrupted? So when M^caiah told the Truth, and Ahab had four Hundred false
Prophets, it was hard to discern the Truth of God from the lying of Satan.

In Christ's time, how did the Scribes and Pharisees confound Religion, dim and
(...) the Truth? For the which our Savior himself did often Reprove them? And
in our T^^^s how do many labor to obscure Religion? How boldly and impudently
do they defend their own Traditions and Constitutions? Mat. 15 9.

How should this stir up every Christian Man and Woman, to study the
Scriptures, that so knowing the Truth: and believing the Doctrine of God we may
be able to discern between Light and Darkness, Truth and Falsehood, Idolatry,
and the Service and Worship of God. Secondly, to entreat the Almighty in all
Humility, to open our eyes to discern the Truth, to give us his Holy Spirit to
lead us into all Truth, to give us the Spirit of discerning to try the Spirits,
and the Doctrines, whether they be of God or not; for otherwise we may be led
away; and take Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light.

Let us then confess our Ignorance and Blindness, and bewail it: Let us strive
against our carelessness: Let us prove the Doctrines by the Touchstone of the
Word, if they be according to the Law and Prophets, else abhor them. Let us do
as the Men of Berea did, Entreat the Lord to give us the Spirit of discerning,
that we may cry all things, and hold the Truth: And if ever we had need to pray
for the Spirit of Discerning, now is the time. We see how bold the Devil is,
how willing to deceive us; and for the Papists, they are so so impudent and
shameless, to thrust upon us their cursed Idolatry; and tell us, it is the
Worship of God; their abominable Mass, their Merits, Purgatory, Prayers for the
Dead, Worshipping of Images, Calling upon Saints unknown Verities, their vile
Traditions fi^^hy Abobominations, their Constitutions and vile Decrees, as if
they were the written Word of God.

Now unless we have knowledge, and are able by God's Spirit to discern the
Spirits: Alas, we shall drink in Poison, Idolatry and Superstition. O then let
us labor to know the Word of God, believe it, obey it, be reformed by it,
confess our Ignorance, and with all humility pray to God to open your Eyes, to
give us the Spirit of Discerning: To know and discern the true Religion from
the false; which if we do, certainly the Almighty will reveal his Truth unto
us. And thus much shall serve for our Savior Christ's gentle Reproof,
concerning his Church.

Christ's Answer to his Church.
The third and last point is the direct Answer of Christ to the Request of the
Church; she desires to know of Christ where he fed his Flock, and comforted
them in the time of Persecution, that so she might join with them, and be
defended with them from false Worship, and the Idolatrous Church. Here Christ
answers her to the full: If thou know not, O thou fairest among Women, get thee
forth by the Steps of the Sheep, and feed thy kids by the tents of the
Shepherds. His counsel stands in two parts: To show where he feeds: Quoth he,
Would thou know where ^ feed my Sheep, and where I cause them to lie down at
Noon, that thou might feed with them, and be in my Fold, to be defended and
protected by me* Then I counsel thee, First, to walk in the steps of the Sheep,
that is, thou must walk in the steps of the faithful Servants of the LORD*
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; thou must embrace that Faith, Religion, and Worship
of the Lord which they did; that is meant by the Steps of the Sheep. Secondly,
thou must feed thy Kids, that is, thou must embrace that same Doctrine which
the Ancient Shepherds, Fathers, Prophets and Apostles have taught and
delivered* And if thou thus tread in the steps of the Sheep, as Peter, Paul,
etc. and embrace and obey the Doctrine taught by the Prophets and holy Apostles
in the Old and New Testament, thou shall then know where I feed my Sheep, that
thou may feed with them, and receive me for the true Shepherd.

A Direction to know which is the true Church.
From this Answer of Christ, we learn a clear direction to know true Religion,
and the true Worship of God, from false Religion and false Worship. If any Man
desires to know where Christ feeds his Sheep, and God is truly and rightly
worshipped, where true Religion is, we must then tread in the steps of the
sheep; that is, we must worship God, as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob did, as Moses
and the Prophets did, tread in their steps, and follow their Godly Examples,
believe, repent, and walk with God by Faith, as Enoch did. Such as these are
the true Sheep of Christ; for of them our Savior speaks here, and not of a
company of Popes, which greatly boast of their Succession, which we will not
deny to be a Succession of Heretics, as Cardinals, Jesuits, and the like of
that Rabble; of whom to think that they belong to this Fold, I know not from
whence I should fetch my Charity. Again, we must embrace and believe the
Doctrine taught by Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, who were
the true Shepherds, and the faithful Pastors of the Church of God. To the Law
and the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because
there is no light in them. And again, Thus said the Lord, stand in the ways,
and behold and ask for the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein,
and you shall find peace and rest for your Souls.

So then, if we desire to know the true Religion, and the true Worship and
Service of God, this is the way which I here teach, and deliver from the Lord
Jesus Christ, against the Doctrine of Rome: viz. To enquire of the Faith, true
Religion, and manner of Worshipping performed by Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the
Patriachs and Prophets, Christ and his Apostles; believe that, embrace that,
and rest your Souls on that.

This then may serve to decide a great Question, and a long Controversy,
between us and the Papists: They affirm, That they are the true Church, and we
Heretics: We believe and hold, that we are the true Church of God, and that
they are not, but Babylon, and the Synagogue of Satan. This then is the main
Question, whether they or we are the true Church? Who should judge? Even the
Lord Christ Jesus himself in his own Word; we must rest upon him, and flee unto
him, and if the Papists would do so too, they would never have run into a
Labyrinth of Controversies, as they have at this very day; for Christ would
quickly have put an end to all. For he says, they are the true Church which
tread in the steps of the Sheep, and feed by the tents of the Shepherds. That
is, those People that believe the Worship of God, as Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
did, and that old Religion, which they believed and embraced, is the true
Religion ^ For that was taught by the holy Servants of the Almighty, who were
the faithful Shepherds and Pastors, sent of God unto his Church. Now let us
try, whether the Papists or the Protestants, the Church of Rome, or the Church
of England do thus. For the Papists, although they call their Religion the old
Religion; yet alas, it is newly devised, the greatest part of it within these
four or five Hundred years.

They teach such Doctrine as was never known to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses,
or the Prophets; it was never known to Christ or his Apostles: They have lost
the steps of the Sheep, and the tents of the Shepherds, and have got a new
Religion of their own devising; they walk not in the steps of the Flock, but in
the steps of the proud Popes, covetous Cardinals, leacherous Friars, lascivious
Monks: They have devised a thousand things in the Service and Worship of God,
against his Word, and against the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles; merely
for their own gain. Where shall we ever find, that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
the Prophets, prayed unto Angels and Saints, Worshipped Images, prayed for the
dead, looked to be saved by their own Works, by vowing of chastity, or by their
Poverty? If they can show me, any soul mouthed Jesuit of them all, but any one
Example in the whole Book of God, or any of God's Children, that have performed
'em, ^ will then lay my hand upon my Mouth. In the mean time give me leave, O
ye Papists, to tell you, that you are none of Christ's Church, you are none of
Christ's Sheep, for you have left the steps of the Sheep, and the tents of the
Shepherd: The Doctrine taught by the Prophets of God, Christ and his Apostles;
and therefore are no better than the Whore of Babylon, the Synagogue of Satan:
And as there has been a succession of Popes and Cardinals, so they are a
succession of Heretics, that seduce ignorant people for their own private
gains.

But as for the Church of England, we believe, and firmly embrace that old and
true Religion, that is, the same Faith which Abraham, Isaac and Jacob used. We
^old that Doctrine taught by the Prophets and holy Apostles of our Lord and
Savior, without adding or diminishing: And if we should dare ^o devise a new
kind of Faith, Religion, and Worship of God, not used nor known to the ancient
Prophets, Patriarchs, Christ and his Apostles, as the Church of Rome does, it
were to leave the steps of the Sheep, and the flocks of his Companions, even to
shake hands with Idolaters.

Well then, let us ever stand out against the Antichrist of Rome, and as Christ
says, come out of her, join ^ot with her in her false Religion and Idolatrous
Service of God, left ^e partake of her plagues: But let us hold fast the true
Religion of God. Tread in the steps of the Sheep, fed by the tents of the
Shepherd. Let us live and die in the true Church of God, and for ever hold fast
the true, ancient and holy Religion, which we have received from the holy
Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, the Prophets, and all the holy
Apostles of Jesus Christ, and then we shall be safe and sure, yea, blessed and
happy for evermore.

Holy Living and Dying.
I. Direction how to live well.
IN the Morning awake with God, and before all other things Offer up unto him
thy Morning Sacrifice of Prayer; wherein remember, First, to give hearty Thanks
unto him for all his Mercies, Bodily and Spiritual; and namely, for thy late
Preservation. Secondly, Make an humble Confession of thy Sins, with an earnest
desire of Pardon. Thirdly, Ask such Necessaries as are requisite for thy Soul
and Body, with fervent: Request to be relieved in them; and namely desire his
Blessing upon thy Labors in thy Calling in the day to come.

In what place soever thou art, let this Persuasion abide in thy Heart, That
thou art before the Living God; and let the Remembrance hereof strike thine
Heart with Awe and Reverence, and make thee afraid to sin.

Make Conscience of idle, Vain, Dishonest, and Ungodly Thoughts; for these are
the Seeds and Beginnings of Actual Sins in Word and Deed.

Have a special care to avoid those Sins which thou find thy Nature most
prone unto, and ^schew those Provocations which were wont to prevail against
thee.

Follow with Faithfulness and Diligence thy lawful particular Calling in which
thou art Placed.

Think evermore thy present Estate and Condition to be the best Estate for
thee, whatsoever it be, because of the good Providence of God.

Look well to thy Carriage in Company, that thou do no hurt, by Word or
Example; nor take any thing from others, but endeavor rather to do good.

Use civil Honesty toward all Men: A good Conscience and good Manners go
together.

If at any time, against thy Purpose, thou art overtaken with any Sin, lie not
in it, but speedily recover thy self by Repentance.

When any good Motion or Affection does arise in thine Heart, suffer it not to
pass away, but feed it by Reading, Meditating or Praying.

Esteem of every present Day, as of the Day of thy Death; and therefore live
now, even as though thou were now Dying; and do those good Duties every Day,
which thou would do if this were thy Dying Day.

At the end of the Day, before thou lie down so thy Bed, call to mind how thou
have spent the Day that is passed: Thy Misdoings Repent, and Praise God for
assisting thee with his Grace in the Duties which thou have performed.

Sleep not at Night, before thou have commended thy self, by Prayer into the
Hands of God; as thou know not whether (fallen asleep) thou ^^alt rise again
alive.

Let Prayer be the Key to open the Morning and (...) to shut in the Evening.
Walk as the Children of Light.

As the Just live by Faith, so the Just live the Life of Faith. Now they that
live the Life of Grace, one Day shall live the Life of Glory.

II. Directions how to Die well.
THink that the greatest Work thou have to do in this World is to Die well, and
to make an happy Departure out of this World. They which Die well, Die not to
Die, but to Live Eternally.

Be every Day ready to leave this Life. That Man does finish his Days in best
sort, that every Day esteems the last Day of his Life to be present and at
hand.

Endeavor before Death come upon thee, to pull out his Sting, and take from
him his Power and Strength, by humbling thy self in the time present for all
thy Sins past, and by turning thy self unto God for the time to come. That man
can never Die ill, that has a Care to live well.

Inure thy self by little and little to Die before thou come to that Point that
thou must ^^eds Die. He that leaves the World before the World leaves him,
gives Death, the Hand like a welcome Messenger, and departs in peace.

Chiefly when thou art Visited with Sickness, or Old Age, think either of these
a Summoner, Warning thee ^^e long to appear before the Great Lord, Judge of all
the World: Therefore now prepare to set all things in good order, and make
thing Accounts ready.

Make a new Examination of thy self, and Conversation passed. Make a new
Confession unto God of thy new and particular Sins: As God sends new
Corrections and Chastisements, make new Prayers, and more earnest than ever
before, for Pardon of thy Sins, and Reconciliation with God in Christ; by all
means avoid those Sins which thou find and feel increase the Wrath of God
against thee.

Seek Reconciliation with thy Neighbor, by free forgiveness of them that have
offended thee, and earnestly desire to be forgiven of all that have offended
thee. Set thine House and Family in order, by disposing of thy worldly Goods in
thy Will and Testament; thereby thou shall Die not the more quickly, but the
more quietly, and prevent the Brawls and jars that otherwise (when thou art
gone) may arise from thine Heirs. Thou partest with earthly Possessions, and
art going to take Possession of Heavenly.

In the last Agony of Death, when all things, in and of the World do fail and
forsake thee rest thy self by Faith on the Favor and Mercy of God in Christ,
and Comfort thy self in the Lord thy God. What shall separate from the Love of
God in Christ? Not Life nor Death.

Let thine Heart and Tongue be still employed in Prayer to the Lord: First, for
Patience in thy Trouble. Secondly, For Comfort in thine Affliction. Thirdly,
For Strength in Weakness. Fourthly, For Deliverance at his Pleasure: Yea,
endeavor to Die Praying. When thou art in the depth of Miseries, and at the
Gates of Death, there is a depth of God's Mercy, which is ready to hear and
help thee. Misery must call upon Mercy.

Be willing and ready to depart out of this World without murmuring or
repining, whenever, wheresoever, or howsoever it shall please the Lord to
call thee. For why should thou unwillingly suffer a short Death that will
bring thee to the Fruition of Eternal Joys? Persuade thy self, that if thou
live by the Mercy of God, thou shall do well; but if thou Die, doubt not but
thou shall do better. And with a free Heart speak it, Come, Lord Jesus.

Lastly, When thou feel Death approaching, commend thy departing Soul into
the Holy Hands of God: He gave it, to him surrender it again. So laying thy
self down to sleep and rest, God shall make thee to dwell in everlasting
Safety. The Grave is ready for me.

A good Life till Death, and a good Death after a good Life, are the best means
to attain an eternal happy Life in Heaven. As Death leaves thee, so shall
Judgment find thee. Christ is to me both in Life and Death advantage.

To preserve thy Body in Cleanness.
Often meditate of God and good things. Carefully watch over thine outward
Senses, chiefly thine Eyes, and thine Ears. Be always doing something that is
good.

To Preserve the Tongue from Sin.
Fore think whether it be lawful and fit to be spoken.

Avoid all super^^uity of Words and needless Speeches.

Affirm no more than thou know to be true.

To keep thy Life in Holiness.
Do all things as in God's Sight.

Eschew the Company of those that are ill disposed.

Think daily of thy Death, and that last great Account.

A Dialogue between a BEGGAR and a DIVINE.
THere was a certain Divine famous in Learning and Piety, that did earnestly
importune God by Prayer, for some time together, conceiving that he had not the
true knowledge of the ways of God, notwithstanding his much Learning attained
by long Studies; degging that God would give him to know more of Him, and
himself, and that God would direct him to some that would teach him the way of
Truth; And being inflamed at a certain time with Vehemence of desire, a Voice
as was supposed, spoke thus to him: Go forth into the Church Yard, and there
thou must (...) a Man that can teach thee the way. And going forth, he found
there a certain Beggar with patched and torn Apparel, and filthy dirty Feet,
whose Coachs were not worth Three half pence, whom he spoke thus unto.

Divine, God give thee a good Morning.


Beggar, Sir, I do not Remember that ever I had an evil one.


Div. God make thee fortunate and prosperous; why speak thou in this manner?


Beggar, Neither was I unprosperous, neither was I ever unhappy.


Divine, God save thee; speak now plainly.


Beggar, Truly Sir, I will do it willingly: Sir, Thou did wish me a
prosperous and good Morning, and I answered, I never had an evil one; for when
I am pinched with Hunger, I praise God; if I suffer Cold, if it Snow, if it H^l
or Rain, if the Weather be Fair or Foul. I prase God, and therefore there never
happened any sad or evil Morning unto me. Thou did likewise wish, that I
might be fortunate; I said I was never unfortunate, because whatever God gave
me, whether it were agreeable to me, or otherwise; were it sweet or bitter to
me, I gladly received that his Hands, as the best: and therefore I was ^^eaer
unfortunate. Thou said moreover, That God would be pleased to make me happy:
whereunto I likewise answered, That I had never been unhappy; for I am fully
resolved (through his Grace) to adhere and cleave unto the Will of God,
(abandoning mine own Will) into which I have so wholly poured out my Will, that
whatsoever he will, I may will the same; and for this Cause, as I said, I was
never unhappy being that I will cleave to his Will only, and have wholly
resigned mine own proper Will.


Div This is very strange! But what I pray thee, would thou do, if the Lord
of Majesty, should cast thee into the bottomless Pit? Could thou be content
with his Will?


Beggar, Drown me in the bottomless P^e? Why certainly if he should I have two
Arms by which I would still embrace him; the one is true Humility, and that I
lay under him, and by him I am united to his Sacred Humanity: the other, that
is the Right one, which is Love, which is united to his Divinity: and also by
his Love from himself I hold him so fast, that he would go down to Hell with
me: and it is much better for me to be in Hell with God, than in Heaven without
him.


By this the Divine learned that the most compendious way to God, is a true
Resignat on with profound Humility Hereupon the Divine spoke again to the
Beggar, and asked him.

Div. Whence come thou?


Beggar, From God?


Div. Where foundest thou God?


Beggar, Even there where I left all the Creatures


Div. I pray thee, Friend, who a^ thou?


Beggar, Who am I? Truly, I am a King. And Jesus himself C^^^ned me with Peace,
Power, and Rest.


Div. A King! Where is thy Kingdom?


Beg. The Kingdom of Heaven is in me, that is, in my Soul; and I can now, and
do by his Power (not mine own) in me so govern and command all my inward parts
and Senses, that all the Affections and Powers of the Old Man in my Soul, are
conquered, and are in subjection to me; which Kingdom no Man can doubt but is
better than all the Kingdom and Glories in the World.


Divine, What brought thee to this Perfection?


Beggar, My sublime Meditations and Union with that Great God of Peace, and
Improvement of Mercies to his Glory, and by growing in Grace, adding one Grace
unto another; and I could rest in nothing less than an Assurance of God's Love,
and this I have found. I have forsaken the unquiet World, and in him I have
Peace of Conscience, and therein I rest.


FINIS.

