Mr. Cotton's Lecture-SERMON At BOSTON, Occasioned by the EARTHQUAKES.

GOD's awful Determination against a People, that will not obey His Voice, by
His Word, and Judgments. A SERMON PREACHED At the Public Lecture In Boston,
Feb. 8. 1728. AFTER Repeated SHOCKS OF THE Earthquake.

By John Cotton, V. D. M. Published at the Desire of many of the Hearers.

Amos III. 8. The Lion has rored; who will not fear? The Lord GOD has spoken,
who can but prophesy?

BOSTON, Printed by GAMALIEL ROGERS, for SAMUEL GERRISH at the lower End of
Cornhil, and THOMAS HANCOCK at the Bible and Three Crowns near the Town-Dock.
1728.

PREFACE.
THE very serious and awful Sermon here presented to the Reader, seems to have
been prepared and uttered, as it was also received, by a great and good
Audience, under a reverend Regard to those Words of the Apostle Paul to
Timothy, These things command and teach, let no man despise thy Youth. It is a
pleasure to every attentive Observer in the Churches of New England at this
day, to see with what Gravity and Authority the rising Ministers among us bring
the solemn Warnings and Messages of CHRIST to his Churches, and with what
Reverence they are heard. And doubtless it has been a pleasure to many in some
late Lectures in Boston, preached by the Author of the following Discourse, to
see the Name and Spirit of the famous JOHN COTTON revive and shine in this his
great (...); in Whom and in his worthy Brethren among us, may GOD please still
further to build the House of his Servant, and speak Good to his Churches here
for times to come.

THis is the second Essay of the Rev. Author, since the great and terrible
EARTHQUAKE, which surprised and astonished us on the 29 of October last, (the
Tremors consequent upon, which do continue to this Day) by the Will and
Blessing of GOD to fasten suitable (...) on the hearts of fearing Saints and
(...) Sinners; and to warn those of some more dreadful Stroke from the Hand of
an angry GOD, who (...) to continue in their provoking Impenitence.

AND certainly the whole Story of GOD'S righteous Judgments through the Holy
Bible admonishes us of this, from the days of Noah to Jerusalem's second
desolation.

THE Old World was endured and waited on by the Long suffering of GOD, for how
many Ages, under the Warnings of Enoch and Noah, but at last the Fountains of
the great Deep were broken up to overwhelm them. They saw the Ark building,
they were told for what, but they carelessly and obstinately quenched the
striving SPIRIT of GOD; and the Flood came and drowned 'em.

Sodom afterward sinned against the Means of Grace in the Nei'bourhood of
Melchisedek and Abraham, and when they would not be reformed by the Doctrine,
Example, and Reproofs of those Holy Men of GOD, but gave themselves over to the
fire of lust, the Fire of GOD fell upon them and consumed them.

So it fared with the (...) Canaanites. Abraham and the Patriarchs were sent
among them, (...) Sojourners, to enlighten, teach, reprove and warn them:
Melchizedeck and his religious People dwelt among them: The Candlestick seems
to be removed when Jacob went down into Egypt: Then the Iniquity of the
Amorites filled apace, and they were rooted out by the Sword of the LORD and of
Joshua.

THE Story of Israel and Jerusalem would be too long to enter on: What Means of
Grace they were distinguished with; How loath the HOLY ONE was to make them as
Admah and set them as Zeboim; How often his Repentings kindled together; But
their Overthrow was at last with a Vengeance greater (as the Prophet though it)
than the Punishment of Sodom, which perished in a moment, and no hand stayed on
her.

WE now are like Instances and Monuments of the Patience and Longsuffering of
CHRIST, striving with us by his awakening SPIRIT, under the Ministry of his
Word, and the Judgments of his Providence; And because the common and ordinary
Means have had so little power and effect on us, GOD has used One altogether
new and extraordinary. He has roared out of Zion in a way that we never heard
before; even out of the bowels of the Earth, and as from the very belly of
hell, we have heard his terrible Voice; like the Trumpet from the burning and
shaking Mountain, at the sound whereof very one in the Camp trembled and
quaked, even Moses himself; Who warns us to take heed to our selves and keep
our (...) diligently, lest we forget the Things which our Eyes have seen, and
lest they depart from our Hearts all the days of our life.

THIS Judgment is a great Deep. From what a depth below, did this Blast of GOD
come? Six hundred Leagues off GOD shook the Islands BARBADOS and MARTINECO.
in the midst of the Ocean one day, to their great Terror; and this vast
Continent (as it were) the next! Who has an Arm like this? or a like thundering
Voice! What a length of Sea is there between us and Barbados? and yet it may be
one and the same Blow (but probably not the same) set Them and Us, and the deep
Waters between us, a trembling all at once. Ships sailing on the mighty Deep
felt the Shock, and stayed and shivered in their Course; the Mariners supposing
that they had struck upon some Whale. At this may our hearts well tremble, and
be moved out of their place. With GOD is terrible Majesty and Might Say unto
Him, "How terrible art Thou in thy doings to the Children of Men! The Waters
saw thee, O GOD!the Waters saw thee! the Depths also were troubled! the Earth
trembled and shook! Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the great Waters
(and underneath them) and thy footsteps are not known! Thou art the GOD that
do Wonders: Thou have declared thy Strength unto thy People Psalm 77. ult.


IN all this Majesty and Power and great Terror GOD passes before Men in
fearful EARTHQUAKES; and the Meaning of his Providence is to awaken in guilty
Sinners a fear and dread of his Wrath and righteous Judgment. This therefore is
the Design of the following Sermon, which answers the Mind of the HOLY GHOST in
the following Job 9.5, etc. 26.11, etc. Isai 13. Psalm. 60
Scripture passages. He removes the Mountains and they know it not, He
overturneth them in bis Anger: He shakes the Earth out of her place, and the
Pillars thereof tremble. He looks on the Earth and it trembles; He touches
the Hills and they smoke. He does great things past finding out, and Wonders
without number. They also that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid at his
Tokens. He divides the Sea by his Power, and by his Understanding He smites
through the proud. With an overflowing Flood he will make an utter End, and
darkness shall pursue his Enemies. -- "Howl ye for the Day! it shall come as a
Destruction from the Almighty: All hands shall be faint and every Man's heart
shall melt: Pangs and Sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be amazed one
at another, their Faces shall be as flames: And I will punish the World for
their Evil, and the Wicked for their Iniquity: I will shake the Heavens, and
the Earth shall remove out of her place, in the Wrath of the LORD of Hosts, and
in the day of his fierce Anger.

BUT we remain escaped this day, the Monuments of Divine Patience, and let us
fear the LORD and his Goodness; be driven and led to Repentance by all his
Terrors and his greater Mercies, of which it is that we are not consumed.

NOR let us fail to insert our solemn thankful Praises to GOD for those Tokens
of SAVING MERCY which are upon many of his People through the Land, since this
awakning Providence. If these continue our Mourning will be turned into Songs
of Thanksgiving.

YET this also should be humbling to us, that there should need an horrible
EARTHQUAKE to bring us to CHRIST and to his Table! that we should need this
shaking of the Earth under us, to make us spring in trembling, like the Jailour.

NEVER the less I trust that as to the far greater part of Those who are now
joining themselves to the Churches of CHRIST among us, the Earthquake has only
been a Means in the Hand of GOD to awaken and bring into Act, those
Impressions, Desires and holy Purposes, which the SPIRIT of GOD had before
wro't in Them, by his Word and other Providence. It has been thus in all the
Admissions I have acted in to this day; Else I should have had, much less
pleasure in them. Where the Heart has been touched before under the Word and
made render, there such a Providence is like to enter deep: Yea and where the
Heart is Stone it should be eno to break the Rock in pieces.

LET us deprecate the going off of these Awaknings without a saving Effect;
lest our hearts like glowing Iron suddenly drenched in Water be doubly hardened.

BUT let those especially be warned of their Danger who have been little
affected, alarmed and moved by such a Threatening of sudden Destruction. Nay,
may the Sinners below be ready to say, "but if the Earth open before them, and
threaten to swallow them up, they will repent! But alas! even this will not do
where Men will not hear CHRIST in the Ministry of his Word. -- Beware lest that
come upon you which is written, Behold ye Despisers! and wonder and perish:
after the Work that I have wro't in your days.

WHEN Daniel stood astonished under the Visions of GOD's fearful Judgments, he
cried out, O my Lord, What shall be the End of these things? The Answer was,
"Go thy way, -- Many shall be purified and made white, but the wicked shall do
wickedly. We must leave the (...) both (...) to particular (...) and Places,
when we (...) faithfully given the Instructions and Warnings of GOD; waiting
and hoping to rest, and to sta^^ in our Lot in the end of the days.

BUT the meanwhile we must not cease to pray, "That the LORD who has rored out
of Zion will be the Hope and Strength of his People; and that the Desire of the
Nations (after He has thus shaken us and the Places round about us) will come
among us, and fill his House with Glory and give Peace in this Place. Amen.

Benjamin Colman.
BOSTON, March 7. 1728.
THE Danger of not obeying the Voice of GOD.
ZEPHANIAH III. 2, 7, 8. SHE obeyed not the Voice: she received not Correction:
she trusted not in the LORD: she drew not near to her GOD. I said, surely thou will fear me: thou will receive Instruction: so their dwellings should not be
out off, howsoever I punished them: but they rose early and corrupted all their
doings. Therefore wait ye upon me, says the LORD, until the day that I rise up
to the prey; for my Determination is -- to pour upon them mine Indignation,
even all my fierce Anger, for all the Earth shall be devoured with the Fire of
my Jealousy.


SINCE whatsoever Things were written aforetime, were written for our Learning,
i. e. for our Instruction and Admonition on whom the Ends of the World are
come, it certainly, greatly concerns us to hear Counsel, and receive
Instruction, by the Calls of GOD, and to take Warning by the Denunciations of
His Wrath against His Covenant professing People in former Ages of the World:
By doing so, we should make a wise and good Improvement of the Lord's terrible
Dispensations toward them. Would to GOD, we might be enabled to such an
Improvement of the solemn Reproofs, and awful Warnings dispensed by the holy
Prophet, who spoke the Words I have now read: He was sent from GOD, was
authorized and commissioned by Him, to reprove sharply, all Ranks and Orders of
Men, for their Sins; for their Idolatry, Apostasy, Forgetfulness of GOD, and
their Duty, and the sinful Fashions of too many in their Habits, and the
violent Oppressions of many, which with many other provoking Evils were found
in the midst of them, and were abounding among them, for which they were
threatened with severe Punishments, yea, and with an utter Desolation, with the
like Desolation that had been brought on other Nations and People, not far from
them; these terrible Examples the Prophet sets before them, to move and excite
them to consider, repent, and amend their Ways, and so prevent the Infliction
of threatened Judgments, which without such a Repentance and Reformation, would
certainly, and suddenly be brought upon them. The Prophet therefore does most
affectionately exhort and urge them to Repentance, by the Examples of those
whose Impenitence added to their Iniquities ruined them.

BY many gracious Promises and Encouragments, He excites them to look and hope
for Mercy, upon their hearkening to His Counsel, that He would then preserve a
Remnant of them, amidst all the wasting Calamities and Judgments, that should
follow them, who should rejoice in the GOD of their Salvation, because GOD
would in the midst of Judgment remember Mercy for them.

IN the beginning of this Prophesy is foretold the approaching Desolation of
Judah and Jerusalem; I will utterly consume all Things from off the Land, says
the Lord: I will consume Man and Beast, I will also stretch out mine Hand upon
Judah, and upon all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. It intimates that by some
immediate and awful Stroke of His holy Hand, He would bring a dreadful
Destruction upon them, and not only upon the idolatrous Worshippers of the Host
of Heaven, but upon such as have turned back from the Lord, and those that have
not sought the Lord the Lord, nor enquired after Him: i. e. Such as have
forsaken the Lord and His pure Worship, or that have turned Atheists; in their
Hearts say, and by their Practices declare, That there is no GOD, and therefore
will not call upon His Name, nor stir up themselves to take hold of Him; such
also are doomed to Destruction.

THE Prophet then calls upon them in such awful Terms as these, Hold thy Peace
at the Presence of the Lord GOD, for the Day of the Lord is at Hand, And it
shall come to pass in that Day, that I will punish all such as are clothed with
strange Aparrel. An Expositor says upon this Place Pool.
, That the wanton Jews were wont to imitate the Garb of Foreigners. They were
doubtless some very indecent Fashions, and it is probable very extravagant, that
they run into, for which GOD so awfully and particularly threatens to punish
them. [But such Threatenings it is to be feared were not much regarded then, and
will be very little now, by those who are most criminal and faulty in such
Extravagance. It is sadly evident, there has been too much of it in almost
every Town in the Land, as well as This; I wish those whom it most concerns,
would consider seriously of it, and so adorn themselves, as to prevent such an
extravagant Expense, as too commonly attends some vain Ornaments. Though I don't
think this to be the most crying Sin of this Land; yet I believe many who are
so clothed, may do well to think seriously with themselves, whether
notwithstanding this Threatening in my Context, and that also in Isai. 3.18.
which they may read at their Leisure, they can think themselves wholly without
Blame? When GOD so solemnly and particularly threatens to punish for strange
Aparrel, and speaks of a Day a coming, in which He will take away the bravery
of some Ornaments, too much like those I am speaking of, I am sure, such as are
serious and thoughtful, will be not a little concerned, lest a holy GOD should
be offended by their Excess in this Regard. I will conclude this Digression,
with that seasonable Exhortation to us all; 1 Timothy 2.8, 9. I will therefore
that Men pray every where, lifting up holy Hands, without Wrath and Doubting.
In like Manner also, that Women adorn themselves in modest Aparrel, with
shamefacedness and Sobriety, and not with costly Array, but (which becomes
Women professing Godliness) with good Works.]

I go on now to show, What GOD foretells there shall be immediately after He
had said, That He would punish such as were clothed with strange Aparrel; It
shall come to pass in that Day, says the Lord, that where shall be the Noise
of a Cry, and an Howling, and a great crashing from the Hills; (probably, in a
dreadful, tremendous EARTHQUAKE) which the Prophet says, should make them cry
alo^^ and bitterly; then the Lord declares, He will punish the Men that are
settled on their Lees: Such as were always deaf to the Voice of GOD by His Word
and Judgments, and refused to receive Correction, would not be reformed by all
the dreadful Judgments of GOD, but went on incorrigibly in their evil Ways;
such shall be now severely punished, and made to see and know, that there is a
GOD that judges in the Earth, and that it shall be well with the Righteous, and
ill with the Wicked.

THE Prophet goes on and declares, The great Day of the Lord is near, it is
near, and hastes greatly, even the Voice of the Day of the Lord, the mighty
Man shall cry bitterly: The most valiant, and stout hearted, their Hearts shall
in that Day fail them for Fear, of what may be coming upon them: Their Flesh
shall now tremble for Fear of GOD, and they shall be now afraid of His
Judgments: Fearfulness and Tremlling will now come upon them, which will make
all their Bones to shake; and Destruction from the Lord, shall be a Teyyor to
them, so that their Outcries shall be very vehement, there will be Bitterness
of Heart, and bitter Wailing; for that Day, the Prophet says in the next Verse,
will be a Day of Wrath, a Day of Trouble and Distress, a Day of Wastness and
Desolation, a Day of Darkness and Gloominess, a Day of Clouds and thick
Darkness. The Prophet here heaps up Words of much the same Sense, to express
the grievousness of those Troubles, that should suddenly come upon them, most
distressing Troubles, none knowing how to bear them, or where to hide from
them. In the next Verse but one, he says, I will bring Distress upon Men,
because they have sinned against the Lord; because their Sins have been many
and greatly aggravated, and so the more provoking to Me; He then declares that
neither their Silver, nor their Gold shall he able to deliver them in the Day
of the Lord's Wrath; but the whole Land shall be devoured by the Fire of His
Jealousy, for He shall make even a speedy Riddance of all them that dwell in
the Land: They must now feel the terrible Impressions of the Wrath of a
righteous Judge, for their Sins; that Fire being kindled thereby, that none
could quench: Though GOD had with wonderful Patience waited and born with them,
He would now wait no longer, but speedily execute His terrible Threatenings of
Wrath upon them.

THE holy Prophet now earnestly exhorts them to Repentance before the threatened
Judgments should be inflicted; he therefore thus calls upon them, Gather your
selves together, yea, gather together, O Nation n^^ desired, call a solemn
Assembly, proclaim a Fast; Let all the People know of it, and when assembled,
search your selves, your Hearts and Ways, and Repent: It was repeated, it is
probable, to affect them the more, and quicken them to their Duty and make them
more serious, and in good earnest in the Work of Repentance. O Nation not
desired! Not desirous of returning to GOD, though you have fallen by your
Iniquities; unwilling to return, and unworthy of being received upon your
Return: Yet gather together, and do what you possibly can for your Safety;
before the Decree bring forth, before the Day pass as the Chaff, before the
fierce Anger of the Lord come upon you, before the Day of the Lord's Anger
coure upon you: GOD is just ready to bring down deserved Vengeance upon you, be
therefore speedy in your Repentance, before the terrible Day arrives, the Day
of His righteous Displeasure, which will carry the wicked away, as the Wind
carries the Chaff away for the Fire, while the good Grain shall be gathered and
preserved. It is here called fierce Anger, which means the heat of GOD's Anger;
In the first Chapter, It is called, Jealousy like Fire, and here it is called
the Heat of that Fire, intimating the greatness of GOD's Anger: It shall come
upon you, as a Storm, with irresistible and destructive Violence, and the
Waining is doubled to make them take the more Notice of it.

HE then calls upon the Meek of the Earth to seek the Lord, to seek
Righteousness, and Meekness, for it may be, they should be hid in the Day of
the Lord's Anger. He calls on them thus to seek for pardoning Mercy, and engage
in a Course of Obedience to the Laws of GOD, to seek the Knowledge of GOD, and
their Duty, and comply therewith; to fear and serve the great GOD. But mind,
it is the bumble that are here called on, such as had not hardened themselves in
Wickedness, as other stubborn, proud, idolatrous Sinners had done; he seems to
call on such who trembled at GOD's Word, and at His Judgments, who had some
Year and Concern of Soul about their Danger and escaping his fiery Indignation;
that they would humble themselves yet more under the mighty Hand of GOD, and
hope in His Mercy, and wait on Him for His Salvation: It may be, you may be
hid, this is sufficient to raise your Hope, peradventure the Lord will be
gracious; if it be not certain, yet it is not impossible, but that you may be
hid under the Shadow of His Wings, in the Day of His Anger, be taken under His
Care and Protection, and so have rest in the Day of Trouble; or have the
threatened Calamities and Judgments averted.

HE further tells them, that it is high time to make GOD their Refuge, and
repair to to Him as such; for their Neighbors as well as they should be
destroyed, there should therefore be no Refuge for them among their Neighbors,
that therefore if they would not fear the Lord, who is terrible in His Doings,
Desolation would quickly come upon them.

THE faithful Prophet therefore in the beginning of this Chapter containing my
Text, threatens them with destroying Judgments. From the dreadful Spectacle of
Nineveh's Ruin for her Sins, He would have them take a Prospect of what was
coming upon Jerusalem, which would also er'e long be full of Woes, because full
of Sin. And in the Words I have read, He gives the Reasons for it; She obeyed
not the Voice, the Voice of the Law, or Prophets, of GOD's faithful Messengers,
nor His Voice by His Mercy or Judgments, crying aloud, warning, inviting and
persuading to return. She received not Correction or Instruction, as it may be
read; she did not learn, she would not be instructed; it indeed means more than
is expressed, even that she hated Instruction, and trusted not in the Lord,
would not make Him her Refuge, or in Distress draw near to Him by Prayer.

I said surely, thou will fear me; I thought or concluded (speaking after the
Manner of Men) what I might justly expect, that after the many and terrible
Judgments executed upon others, which they have seen or heard of, they would
fear so as to sin no more, lest the like come upon them. That they would
receive Instruction, learn their Duty and comply with it, their Danger, to
prevent it, their Sins, that they might repent of them, their Ways, that they
might amend them, that so their Dwellings might be preserved. Howsoever I might
otherwise punish them, Whatever I had done against them, however I had
chastised them, had they been bettered, humbled and amended, I would have
spared, and not destroyed them utterly. But they rose early and corrupted all
their Doings; They grew worse and worse, more eager in the Pursuit of their
vile Courses; as if the Day would be too short for their Sins, they rise early
and begin betimes; they designedly and out of set Purpose, did worse and worse,
though they were smitten, yet they revolted more and more. Therefore wait ye
upon me, says the Lord, until the Day that I rise up to the Prey; Since you
will not be reformed by all that I have already done unto you, but grow worse
and worse; You that are thus stubborn and incorrigible, both Rulers and People,
attend to my Resolution, for I am resolved what I will do, and have set a Day
for it, when as an Enemy I will come out of my Place, rise up against you, and
by my Judgments destroy you. For my Determination is to pour upon them mine
Indignation, even all my fierce Anger; It is my fixed Purpose, that which I
have unalterably resolved upon, to execute the Fierceness of mine Anger upon
them, if they continue in their obstinacy and incorrigibleness, for this will
inkindle mine Anger against them; for all the Earth shall be devoured with the
Fire of my Jealousy; that Jealousy wherewith I am jealous for my own Glory,
for my Statutes and Ordinances, which they have notoriously violated.

HAVING thus opened and paraphrased upon the Words; I might mention a Variety
of useful Observations they afford unto us, and such as the Providence of GOD,
at this Day, calls us to think much upon. I shall mention four.

OBSERVE. I.THE professing People of GOD, are too often chargeable with the
Guilt of not obeying the Voice of GOD. OBSERVE. II. THAT GOD may justly expect
that we fear Him, and receive Instruction by His Judgments. OBSERVE. III. DID
we so, we might hope to be saved from destroying Judgments, however otherwise
GOD might punish us. OBSERVE. IV. IF notwithstanding, we go on incorrigibly in
our evil Ways, we may be assured, that GOD has determined to pour out His
Indignation upon us, even all His fierce Anger, and even to devour the Earth
with the Fire of His Jealousy.
THESE Observations, I think, ly plainly before us in the Text; I shall as the
Time will allow speak to each of them. I begin with the first,

OBSERVE. I. THE professing People of GOD are too often chargeable with the
Guilt of not obeying the Voice of the Lord.

THIS Charge was exhibited against GOD's Covenant professing People of old, and
there is too much Reason to fear, it may be so, against us His visible
professing People now.

HERE I would say particularly,

I. MULTITUDES do not obey the Voice of GOD by His written Word. Though the
great Things of GOD's Law are written to is, yet by how many are they accounted
as a strange thing; such is the Corruption and Wickedness in the Hearts of
many, that they practically say to Almighty GOD, Depart from us, for we desire
not the Knowledge of thy Ways; And, what is the Almighty, that we should serve
Him and obey His Voice? Their Hearts rise against a strict Observance of the
pure and holy LawsofGOD, particularly, such as do most thwart their beloved
Iniquities, which are as near and (...) to them, as a right hand, and a right
eye; and therefore they cannot tell how to hearken to the Call of CHRIST, to
cut them often, and pluck them out --; It is a hard Saying, and they cannot tell
how to bear it, and so persist in their Disobedience to all the Laws of GOD,
though they are all holy, just, and good; so that they may now come before GOD,
and make that Confession, in Dan. 9.5. We have sinned, and committed Iniquity,
and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy Precepts,
and from thy Judgments.

Again,

2. THERE are Multitudes among the professing People of GOD, that do not obey
His Voice by His Ambassadors. And no wonder it is so, when the Voice of GOD by
His written Word, is not hearkened to; from the very same Principle of Enmity to
GOD and His holy Laws and Precepts, they will not hearken to GOD's faithful
Messengers; Though they cry aloud, and lift up their Voice like a Trumpet, when
they would sound an Alarm to an impenitent and wicked World, and spare not
faithfully to show to such a People their Transgressions and their Sins, their
Sins of Omission, and of Commission they indulge themselves in, to the
Dishonor of GOD, and enkindling His holy Anger and Displeasure against them,
that they must therefore confess and forsake them, though they have been never
so near and dear to them, even that, which they may have rolled as a sweet
Morsel under their Tongues, that they must else look for fiery Indignation and
Wrath to devour them: Yet how many of the professing People of GOD, such as are
Christians in Name, and by Profession, when they are thus warned by the
Messengers of the Lord, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear,
are ready to dislike such Messages and Warnings, they don't like to hear so
much of them: Unto all such the great GOD commands His Prophets; Isai. Chapter 30.
from the 8. Verse, to go and write it before them in a Table, and note it in a
Book, that it may be for Time to come, for ever and ever; that this is a
rebellious People, lying Children, Children that will not hear the Law of the
Lord, which say to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophesy not unto
us right Things, speak unto us smooth Things, prophesy Deceits, get you out of
the Way, turn aside out of the Path, cause the holy One of Israel (...) from
before us. The Disobedience of ^o many to the Voice of GOD, is too often sadly
evident, by their despising the Words, and even the Messengers of GOD
themselves; this was a provoking Sin found among GOD's professing People of
old, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. The Lord God of their Fathers, sent unto them by His
Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending them, because he had Compassion on
his People. But they mocked the Messengers of GOD, and despised his Words, and
misused His Prophets; so that they had Reason to cry out, as in Nehem. 4.4.
Hear O GOD, for we are despised. When the faithful Messages of GOD by His
Servants are disregarded, such do not obey the Voice of the Lord, and have
Reason in their Humiliations and Confessions before GOD from one Time to
another, to say, as in Dan. 9.6, 10. Neither have we hearkened to thy Servants
the Prophets, which spoke in thy Name, neither have we obeyed the Voice of the
Lord our GOD, to walk in His Laws which He set before us, by His Servants the
Prophets.

Again,

3. THERE are too many that do not obey the Voice of GOD by His Judgments
inflicted, or threatened. Though there be a Voice of GOD, and a mighty Voice, in
all such Judgments, both to the Town, and Country, especially when the Great
GOD does by His Voice shake the Wilderness, and threaten to bury us, and our
Houses, and all we have, in the deep Places of the Earth, from whence His Voice
has come with a dreadful Sound in our Ears; yet are there not too many, that do
not so hearken even to this awful Voice, as they should, or else they would
have seared and trembled more before that GOD, who so terribly roared out of
Zion.

Again,

4. MANY do not obey the Voice of GOD by His Mercies. There is a Voice in
these, as well as in His Judgments. The Goodness and Mercy of GOD to us in the
various Instances of it, do call, and should lead us to Repentance, as well as
His judicial Dispensations. The innumerable Favors of GOD vouchsafed to us do
call upon us to love, and serve, and live devoted to the GOD, who is so loading
us with His Benefits; all signal Preservations do yet more especially do so;
Preservations from Thunder and Lightning, Storms and Tempests, and terrible
Earthquakes, in a particular Manner, which might, and so often have proved
fatal and destructive unto Multitudes. How many populous Places have been
destroyed by the amazing Judgment of the Eartkquake, and Multitudes swallowed
up quick in the Pit, while the Lord has only shaken the Earth under us, and no
Damage done, either to Man or Beast: So mavelous has been the Deliverance and
Salvation granted to us; But may it not be feared, that many have not duly
hearkened to the Voice of GOD in such a remarkable Deliverance, have not been
duly thankful to GOD for it, and concerned to answer His Expectations in so
sparing them? Such as have not had a due Solicitude of Soul about this, may be
said, not to obey the Voice of the Lord.

Again,

5. MANY do not obey the Voice of the Lord by His Spirit. Though the Spirit of
GOD does many Times by His secret Motions, convince Men of their Sloth and
Negligence as to the great Concerns of their Souls, and Eternity, and their
utter Unpreparedness for Death and Judgment, and does sometimes evidently
excite them to enquire, as the Jaylour did after the Earthquake, What must I do
to be saved? And so to seek the Lord, while He may be sound, and to call on
Him, while He is near, and to work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling,
and delay doing it no longer; yet how many do not cherish and pursue such
Convictions? Yea, Do not too many knowingly oppose and resist the striving
Spirit of GOD, thus at work upon their Hearts, and thereby make it evident, at
least to themselves, that they do not obey the Voice of GOD?

I might say again,

6. MANY do not obey the Voice of GOD by their own Consciences. Though their
enlightened Consciences are so far awakned, as to do their Office upon them, and
charge home Guilt lying on them, with respect either to Omissions of Duty, or
Commissions of Evil, or both, they have allowed themselves in; Though their
Consciences do sometimes suggest to them, they have gone on in foolish and
hurtful Ways, to the Dishonor of GOD, and the wounding of their Souls and
Bodies, Name and Estate, and thereby laid in for a bitter Repentance, and that
there must be sooner or later a Reformation, and a more holy circumspect Living
and Walking than there has ever yet been; yet have not many persisted in their
evil Ways under and after such evident Convictions and Admonitions from their
own Consciences? all such do not obey the Voice of the Lord.

Finally, IF we don't receive Correction, and trust in the Lord, and draw near
to our GOD, we do not obey His Voice. If we do not cheerfully submit to the
Discipline of His Rod, acknowledge His Justice and Righteousness in His
judicial Dispensations, and set upon correcting the Errors of our Lives, and
then repair to GOD, as the Hope of His People, and their Savior in the Day of
Trouble, and call upon Him in such a Day: In short, If we are not brought
nearer to GOD by His awful Visitations, if we don't become more prayerful than
ever, we are chargeable with the Guilt of not obeying the Voice of the Lord;
and may it not be feared, that many are in these Respects, guilty before GOD,
for which He may be justly angry with them?

BUT so much for the first Observation. I proceed to the second.

OBSERVE. II. GOD may justly expect that we fear Him, and receive Instruction by
His Judgments.

I said, surely, Thou will fear me, then wilt receive Instruction.

THE judgments of GOD have a wonderful Tendency to excite us to fear and
tremble before Him, and He always sends them, or threatens the Infliction of
them to excite a holy Fear of Him in the Hearts of His People, and when they
don't attain this End, He complains of such a People, and exhibits that awful
Charge against them, Jer. 44.10. They are not humbled, even unto this Day,
neither have they feared. Fear is sometimes put for religious Worship, and
sometimes for the whole of Religion, but here in my Text, it is probable, it may
be rather taken for that Passion, or Affection of the Mind called Fear. There
should be a holy Fear of GOD and His Wrath, a Trembling at His Judgments: We
read, Psalm. 65.8. They that dwell in the uttermost Parts are afraid at thy
Tokens. The holy Psalmist says, Psalm. 119.120. My Flesh trembles for Fear of
Thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. And the holy Prophet Habakkuk, Chap.
3.16. When I heard, my Belly trembled, my Lips quivered, I trembled in my self.
GOD expects that we fear, and tremble before Him, under the Apprehensions of
present, and impending Dispensations of His Wrath, but more especially under
the Sense of whatsoever provoking Evils have enkindled His Displeasure, and
caused Him to shake His Rod over us. We read, Ezra 9.4. How they assembled
every one that trembled at the Words of the Lord, because of the Transgressions
of His People, and how the Prophet sat astonished until the evening Sacrifice:
And in the next Chap. How all the People sat in the House of GOD trembling
because of this Matter. So Jehosaphat that excellent Governor, feared upon the
Threatening of a terrible Judgment, and set himself to seek the Lord, and
proclaimed a Fast throughout all Judab. When GOD sends His Judgments they are
to excite in us a reveren^^^ Fear of Him, and awful Dread of His Wrach. Hence
under the Judgments of GOD, that is the Call of GOD unto us, Isai. 8.13.
Sanctify the Lord of hosts Himself, and let Him be your Fear, and let Him be
your Dread.

AND as the Lord may expect to be feared, (for when the Lion roars, who will
not fear, we shall be more stupid than the Beasts of the Field, if we tremble
not,) so may He justly expect that we hear and receive Instruction thereby,
that we learn to adore and magnify His infinite and almighty Power, together
with His undeserved sparing Mercy, that we see how much it concerns us to make
the Lord our Refuge, and to get under the Shadow of His Wings, that we may not
perish in the Day of His Indignation, that being warned of GOD as Noah was, we
may prepare an Ark, in which we may be saved from being overwhelmed with the
Floods of divine Vengeance, that may come down in an horrible Tempest upon a
wicked World: That we therefore make haste to CHRIST, that we may have Rest in
such a Day of Trouble. GOD may justly expect, that we do in these Regards Fear
Him, and receive Instruction. This is GOD's great End and Design in threatening
to bring down His awful Judgments on us, and they are a loud Call to all to
fear Him, and to tremble at His Presence; to give Glory to His Name, to publish
His Name, as Moses speaks, by ascribing Praise to our GOD, and then to learn
all those Lessons, such Dispensations call us to. GOD has implanted this
Affection or Passion of the Mind in us, to be exerted upon proper Objects being
presented to us, and all those Dispensations that carry Terror in them, may
well work upon our Fears, unless our Hearts be harder than the Rocks and
Mountains that quake at Him, and are thrown down by Him. And He has made us
capable of receiving Instruction, of thinking on our Ways, of remembering this,
and showing our selves Men, unless we will be like the Horse and Mule which
have no Understanding.

WE have many desirable Helps and Advantages for the knowing our Lord's Mind
and Will, if we are truly desirous of doing it. So then we must certainly
conclude, That GOD may justly expect, that we fear Him, and receive Instruction.

AFTER He has inflicted any Judgments on us, or threatened the Infliction of
more and greater, He may well say concerning such a People; Surely thou will
fear me, thou will receive Instruction.

I pass to the third Observation.

OBSERVE. III. THAT did we fear the Lord, and receive Instruction, we might hope
to be saved from destroying Judgments; so that our Dwellings should not be cut
off, however otherwise GOD might punish us.

WE should by fearing the Lord, and receiving Instruction answer His righteous
Expectations concerning us, and so remove the Grounds of His Controversy with
us. When GOD brings His Judgments upon a People, or threatens to dispense
terrible Things in Righteousness to them, it is because they will not fear Him,
will not lay His Judgments to Heart, and see and own their Sin and Folly in
their vile Departures from Him, and therefore He will make them to feel the
doleful Effects of His vindictive Wrath: So much we plainly learn from the
Tenor of the divine Threatenings throughout the Book of GOD.

BUT now if the People of GOD under His Judgments inflicted or threatened,
maintain a holy Fear of GOD upon their Hearts, and give to GOD the Glory of His
divine Perfections therein displayed, and acknowledge His Sovereignty, Justice,
and Mercy, in His Dispensations, and make it their sollicitous inquiry, What
means the Heat of His Anger? What have I done, and how much have I provoked
the holy GOD to come out of His Place, and threaten even on utter Desolation? I
will now therefore search and try my Ways, and by the Help of His Grace will
now turn unto the Lord, that He may have Mercy upon me, and pardon me, and not
execute the Fierceness of His Anger. Were this our great Solicitude under the
threatening Visitations of GOD, we should have comfortable Grounds of Hope, that
the Lord would stay His Hand, and spare us, in the Multitude of His tender
Mercies; yea, that He would repent Him of what further Evil He had thought to
have brought upon us. Such a repenting and returning GOD, has assured us, will
keep off, or avert impending Judgments: Hence after the holy Prophet Joel had
in terrible Manner spoke of GOD's uttering His Voice, in the Day that should be
great and terrible, and none could abide it: He immediately exhorts in the Name
of the Lord, to turn unto the Lord, Joel 2.12, 13, 14.
Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your Heart, and
with Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning, and rent your Hearts, and
not your Garments, and turn unto the Lord your GOD: for He is gracious and
merciful, slow to Anger, and of great Kindness, and repents Him of the Evil.

IT is spoken after the Manner of Men, to represent how ready the Lord is upon
a sincere Repentance, and through Reformation, to change the Course of His
Providence toward His People, and not inflict those Judgments, He threatened to
bring down upon them; yea, He further says, Then will the Lord be jealous for
His Land, and pity His People, yea, the Lord will answer, Fear not, O Land! Be
glad and rejoice, for the Lord will do great Things, and I will pour out my
Spirit etc.

IN a Word here; GOD has often spared His People, upon their thus returning to
Him; He has upon their Humiliations and Intercessions granted them a Reprieve,
and so He is ready to do still; if we will also fear Him and receive
Instruction. Hence we have that Warning from the Lord, Jer. 6.8. Be thou
instructed O Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart from thee, lest I make thee
Desolate, a Land not inhabited. Be thou instructed or corrected, as it may be
read; By the Correction thou have felt already, and which is further threatened,
be persuaded to repent before it be too late; Let the Rod and Reproof teach
thee Wisdom. Nor were they at any Loss what to do in this Case, well knowing
what the Lord had said to them by the same Prophet, Chapter 18.7, 8.
from which we shall see the Truth before us further confirmed, At what Instant
I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to
pull down, and to destroy it, If that Nation against whom I have pronounced,
turn from their Evil, I will repent of the Evil, I thought to do unto them.

BUT so much for the third Observation.

I pass to the fourth and last, viz.

OBSERVE. IV. THAT if after all, we go on incorrigibly in our evil Ways, we may
be assured GOD has determined to pour out His Indignation upon us, even all His
fierce Anger, and even to devour the Earth with the Fire of His Jealousy.

NOTHING can more provoke the holy and righteous GOD to do so, than
incorrigibleness under His Judgments. And therefore the holy Prophet says
concerning such, Jer. 5.3. O Lord, thou have stricken them, but they have not
grieved, thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive Correction,
they have made their Faces harder than a Rock, they have refused to return, and
then it follows, He has poured upon them the Fury of His Anger etc. If
inflicted, or threatened, Calamities don't attain the End for which they are
sent, viz. to humble, reform, and do us good, if we will not be reclaimed, but
go on impenitently still, we may fear, that, that will be quickly the Lord's
Determination concerning us, Ezekiel. 24.13. Because I have purged thee, i. e.
used Means for thy Reformation, and thou wast not reformed, Thou shall not be
purged from thy Filthiness any more, till I have caused my Fury to rest upon
thee. So GOD told Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.16, 17. That if they brake His Covenant, His
Anger should be kindled against them, and He would forsake and hide his Face
from them, and they should be devoured, and many Evils and Troubles befall
them, so that they should say, Are not all these Evils come upon us, because of
our evil Doings? So Joshua said, Chap. 24.20. If ye forsake the Lord, then He
will do you hurt and consume you, after that He has done you good. GOD has
been very terrible in the Execution of such Threatenings upon His covenant
People. We read in the 78th Psalm, how they were a rebellious and stubborn
Generation, that kept not the Covenant of GOD, and refused to walk in His Law,
and notwithstanding all His mavelous Appearances for them, yet sinned more
against Him, by provoking the most High in the Wilderness: Yea, they spoke
against GOD, therefore the Lord heard this, and was wroth, so a Fire was
kindled against Jacob, and Anger also came up against Israel: The Wrath of GOD
came upon them, and slew them, He cast upon them the Fierceness of His Anger,
Wrath and Indignation, He made a Way to His Anger, He spared not their Soul
from Death, but gave their Life over to the Pestilence, and smote all their
Firstborn; -- But yet, we read again, that they tempted and provoked the most
high GOD, and kept not His Testimonies, but turned back and dealt unfaithfully
like their Fathers, they were turned aside like a deceitful Bow, they provoked
Him to Anger, and moved Him to Jealousy, when GOD heard this, He was wroth,
and greatly abhorred Israel; so that He forsook their Tabernacle, delivered
their Strength into Captivity, and their Glory into the Enemies Hand, He gave
His People over also to the Sword, and was wroth with His Inheritance, the Fire
consumed them etc.

THEY are exhibited as a most terrible Example to deter us from perfisting in a
Course of Impenitence and Disobedience: Hence the Prophet Jeremiah says, Jer.
7.12, 13, 14.
Go ye now to my Place which was in Shiloh, and see what I did to it, for the
Wickedness of my People Israel; And now because ye have done all these Works,
says the Lord, and I spoke unto you, rising up early, and speaking, but ye
heard not, therefore I will cast you out of my Sight, and my Fury shall burn,
and shall not be quenched, says the Lord, ye have forsaken me, and therefore
have I also left you. I might multiply many such awful Threatenings of Wrath
against an incorrigible People, for our Warning, and so for the Proof of the
awful Observation, I am upon; I will mention one more, that in Jer. 44.10, 11.
They are not humbled even unto this Day, neither have they feared, nor walked
in my Law, nor in my Statutes that I set before you, and your Fathers,
therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, Behold I will set my Face against you
for Evil. What terrible Displeasure does this Threatening carry in it, nothing
short of this, that His Jealousy will burn against such a People, and He that
made them will have no Mercy on them, that He will laugh at their Calamities,
and mock when their Fear comes; that He will not only reject their Prayers, but
answer them by terrible Things in Righteousness, until He has consumed them
utterly, so that there shall be no Remnant, nor escaping. Thus has the
Observation before us been confirmed from many dreadful Instances of the Wrath
of GOD, poured out upon an impenitent and disobedient People, in the many
Cities and Countries, that have been said waste and desolate for their Sins:
How was Babylon the great destroyed, as GOD overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah,
Jerusalem also, and the Jewish Nation, their Land made an utter Desolation! And
this has been the dreadful Fate of many Churches that were once beautiful and
flourishing in the Christian World; What evident clear Convictions do such
Examples give us of the Truth of this Observation? So that we may certainly
look for such Desolation and Ruin, if we are alike Guilty before the Lord: And
therefore such Judgments upon others are recorded for our Learning, and
Admonition upon whom the Ends of the World are come. Sodom's Ashes, Shiloh's
Fire, Jerusalem's Desolation are Uses of Instruction and Warning to all the
Inhabitants of the Earth: They fell by their Iniquity, and such as tread in
their wicked Steps, may expect to fall by the like Judgments; for GOD is
uniform, and of a piece with Himself in his judicial. Proccedings: It Is a Rule
of Justice, ut parium Par sit Ratio; that the equally Guilty should be punished
alike. Luke 13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

I might have mentioned several good Reasons, why the Lord should come to such
a Determination concerning an impenitent and disobedient People, I might show,
how the Honor of His own Narie calls for it, and how much His Glory is
concerned in it, they Glory of His Holiness, and of His Faithfulness, Wisdom
and other Attributes, and particularly, How the Honor of His Justice calls for
such a Determination: For GOD will be weary of repenting, and be obliged to say
concerning us, as of Jerusalem of old, For who shall have pity upon thee, O
Jerusalem, or, who shall (...) thee, Thou have forsaken me, says the Lord,
thou art gone backward, therefore will I stretch out my Hand against thee, and
destroy thee; I am weary with repenting. When GOD has waited a long Time, and
been visiting with lighter and lesser Judgments, and then brought greater, if
we will not be reformed by these Things, His Anger may well burn against us,
and His Fury be poured out like Fire, to consume us. We are indeed ripe for
Ruin, For shall not the Lord visit for such Things, and His Soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this? But I proceed to some brief Application of what we have
heard.

APPLICATION.
USE I. THE first Use might be by Way of Examination, to put us upon a solemn
Trial of our selves, Whether we are not chargeable with what the Prophet
Zephaniah here charges upon Jerusalem? Have we not been disobedient to the
Voice of GOD, in all those Ways, wherein we have heard, He has been calling
aloud upon us? Oh that Conscience would do it is Office, that Deputy of GOD in
thy Breast, and charge home the Guilt lying on thee for thy past Disobedience
to the Voice of GOD from one time to another: Let that Preacher follow thee
Home, and make Application, of what has been said, and see that thou reverence
the Dictates of thy enlightened and awakned Conscience, as ever you hope or
desire to have Peace of Conscience now, in Death, or at the Judgment.

USE II. A Second Use might be by Way of Reproof, to the impenitent and
disobedient, who have hitherto refused to fear GOD and receive Instruction. GOD
has said concerning you, Surely they will now fear me, and receive Instruction.
But you are yet Strangers to a holy Fear of Him, and you are going on in your
Ways of Disobedience and Rebellion still; you are not humbled and reformed to
this Day: The Voice of GOD to such, is that in Jer. 5.21, 22. Hear this now, O
foolish People, and without Understanding, which have Eyes and see not, which
have Ears and hear not: Fear ye not me? says the Lord: Will ye not tremble at
my Presence?

USE III. LET our past Stupidity and Disobedience, to the Voice of GOD, be this
Day, bewailed with Bitterness of Heart. We have hereby frustrated GOD's just
Expectations from us, and have laid our selves open to His fiery Rebukes, even
to have our Dwellings cut off, and we destroyed with them.

USE IV. WE hence see how much it is our Interest to hear and fear, and receive
Instruction. We may then be assured of the divine Care and Protection still,
that GOD will then remember Mercy in the midst of Judgment, and the Fruit
thereof shall be to take away Sin, to purify and refine us: He will not cut us
off, with our Dwellings, however otherwise, He may punish us.

USE V. HENCE we learn, what we are to look for, if we do persist in our
Impenitence and Disobedience, under the threatening Tokens of the divine Anger.
We read, Amos 3.8. The Lord has spoken, who can but prophesy? If we will not
hear what He speaks, we may without pretending to much of a prophetic Spirit,
foretell, what will be the awful Issue of such Disobedience: The 29th Chap. of
Proverbs and 1. Verse, as well as my Text tells us what it will be.

It will be very awful indeed if after the Respit we have had, we should any of
us harden our Hearts, and hearken not! We may well tremble to think of its
being so with respect to too many in this Place, and throughout the Land: We
have awful Instances of such in Scripture, I will only mention that in the 8th
Chap. of Exodus. GOD brought a dreadful Judgment upon the Egyptians and
Pharaob's Heart was to moved at it, he seemed to be under such good
Impressions, that he called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Entreat the Lord,
that He may remove this Judgment. He seemed earnestly desirous for that Time,
that GOD would stay His Hand, and not destroy them immediately, and then he
made Promises and Resolutions what he would do, if GOD would hear and answer,
What now was the Issue? GOD was entreated for them, and did according to the
Word of Moses. But in the next verse, we read, Treat when Pharaah saw that
there was Respit, he hardened his Heart, and hearkened not unto them.

THE Lord grant, this Word may (...) fulfiled with Respect to any in this
(...), or in this Land.

Wherefore,

USE VI. LET us all do our utmost, that the Lord may not proceed to such a
Determination concerning (...), as this in my Text. Let us again hear it, and
surely you will not hear it without fear and trembling. Therefore wait ye upon
me says the Lord, until the Day that I rise up, for my Determination is to
pour upon them mine Indignation, even all my fierce Anger, for all the Barth
shall be devoured with the Fire of my Jealousy. Who knows but that the Great
GOD may have come to this Determination already, That He will quickly come to
take Vengeance on His Adversaries, that the Day we read of in the first Chapter
of Nahum's Prophesy, may be hastening greatly, when when the Mountains shall
quake at Him, and the Earth be burnt at His Presence, yea the World, and all
that dwell therein, when with an overrunning Flood, He will make an utter End
of the Place, and Darkness shall pursue His Enemies. What do we imagine against
the Lord? He will make an utter End, Affliction shall not rise up a second
Time; for while they be folden together as Thorns, and while they are drunken
as Drunkards, they shall be devoured as Stubble fully dry.

WHAT Hearts are ours, if they are not moved within us, when we read such
terrible Denunciations of Wrath against the Enemies of GOD? They are harder
surely than the very Rocks, that are thrown down by Him, if they don't tremble
at His Presence, For who can abide the fierceness of His Anger, when His Fury
is poured out like Fire?

OH let us then in this Day of Fear and Trembling, repair to the Lord as a
strong Hold, if we would have Rest in the Day of Trouble.

LET us in our several Places and Stations, do what we possibly can to prevent
the Lord's proceeding to such a Determination concerning this People. The Lord
seems as though He were loath to give us up, and make an utter End of us, as
yet; and therefore He has been only shaking His Rod over us, and giving us and
Alarm, an Warning of what we may expect, if we will not hear, and return unto
Him.

IF the Majesty and Greatness of GOD don't awe and terrify us, yet shall not
the sparing Mercy of GOD melt us! That though He threatened us with a sudden
Destruction, He spared us from going down quick into the Pit, and has given us
the space of now more than three Months, to repent in! This our Honorable
Rulers, who not long since, called us together, made a particular mention of,
to the Glory of the infinite Patience and Mercy of GOD, toward a sinful
unreformed People; And shall we not by all be led to Repentance? Shall
Multitudes in this Land, (or any in this Place) continue still going on in Ways
of Profaness, of Pride, and Sensuality, and other heinous GOD-provoking Evils,
which have brought the surprising amazing EARTHQUAKE upon us? Shall we keep one
Day of solemn Humiliation, Fasting, and Prayer after another, and the same
heinous Iniquities prevail and abound, still? Shall there be no more of a
general Repentance and Reformation of these Evils? If we should remain thus
unreformed still, I dread to think how those Days, will be Days of Provocation
to GOD, and make Him very speedily come into this awful Determination
concerning us: Nothing can provoke Him to do it more.

BUT GOD forbid, He should ever declare thus concerning us; if we would prevent
it, let each one, lay his Hand on his Mouth, and his Mouth in the Dust, each
one smiting on his own Breast, and crying, GOD be merciful to me a Sinner: Let
us set our selves to seek the Lord, before the Decree bring forth, before the
fierce Anger of the Lord come upon us; nothing but a sincere Repentance, and
thorough Reformation will stay GOD's Hand: And Oh if there were such an Heart
in this People, to fear GOD, and receive Instruction, it should yet be well
with us; GOD would return in Mercy, and would yet spare us, and our Children,
and our Dwellings, and not devour the Earth with the Curse: And so this
terrifying Dispensation would be the most useful one of our whole Lives; we
shall have Reason to bless GOD for it all our Days.

WE have been (as we were directed, by those who feared, and proclaimed the
late Fast) crying to GOD, that it may be a happy Means of the saving Conversion
of many to GOD, and that in Order hereunto, the Awakning Impressions that have
been made on the Minds of many in this Land, may be followed with the gracious
Influences of His Spirit. We herein see the pious and earnest Solicitude of
our Rulers, for our Reformation, yea, for our saving Conversion, because they
are afraid of further and more terrible Dispensations of divine Anger, and
shall not we be concerned herefor, our selves? I trust through Grace, a
considerable Number are, Our Hearts Desire and Prayer is, that All may. And,
blessed be GOD, there are such Numbers made to hear and obey His Voice in other
Places: we hope there shall be yet greater Numbers made to do so. And if the
Labors of His Servants may at all contribute to it; let the free and sovereign
Grace of GOD have the Praise of it.

HOWEVER it shall be, Let us still wait on GOD, with whom is the residue of the
Spirit, for more plentiful outpourings of it, upon us, and ours, and all Flesh
in the midst of us, For this, let us continue lifting up our Hearts with our
Eyes and Hands unto GOD in the Heavens, with a believing Expectation, and
encouraging Hope, that GOD has Mercy in Store for us, and will yet think upon
us, that we perish.

REMARKABLE is the Example of Nineveh for our Encouragement, who were threatened
with a speedy and utter Ruin and Desolation, Jonah Chap. 3d. from the 5th Verse.
They believed GOD, and proclaimed a Fast, and put on Sackcloth from the
greatest of them, even to the least of them; The King arose from his Throne,
and laid his Robe from him, and covered him with Sackcloth, and sat in Ashes,
and caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh; and exhorted them
to cry mightily to GOD, and to turn every one from his evil Way; Who can tell
(says he) if GOD will turn and repent and turn away from his fierce Anger, that
we perish not. And GOD was entreated for them, as we see in the next Verse; And
GOD saw their Works that they turned from their evil Way, and GOD repented of
the Evil, that He had said He would do unto them, and He did it not.

WOULD we have the Lord to stay His Hand, and not cut us off, with our
Dwellings? Let us this Day, hear and obey His Voice, and now draw near to Him.

BY the astonishing Dispensation of the EARTHQUAKE, may we not hear the Great
GOD calling on us, as in Isai. 26.20, 21. Come, my People, enter thou into thy
Chambers, and shut thy Doors about thee: hide thy self as it were for a little
Moment, until the Indignation he overpast. For behold the Lord comes out of
his Place to punish the Inhabitants of the Earth for their Iniquity.

IF we should call off Fear, and restrain Prayer before GOD, and persist in our
Disobedience to His Voice, we shall be in greater Danger than ever of His
dreadful Judgments, and of EARTHQUAKES in a particular Manner; and if the Lord
should arise and shake terribly the Earth again, you would then it may be, many
of you, fear and tremble more: But Oh can nothing but EARTHQUAKES make you fear
and tremble, can no other Dispensations of GOD bring you to your Knees, humble
you to the Dust, and make you cry and plead for Mercy? If they may do so, it
will be well for you, that Fearfulness and Trembling should again come upon
you, and your Bones, as well as your Houses shake: You read how the Jaylour
sprang in trembling and crying out, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? And that
Day, Salvation came to him, and his House, he and all his were strait-way
baptized Acts 16.29, 30, 33.


On when shall we see you trembling and astonished, and making the same Inquiry?

IF you were pricked to the Heart, you would be going and weeping, and seeking
the Lord your GOD; you would pray more, more humbly, earnestly, and
importunately, as well as more frequently for your Conversion; and that you
might be prepared for all the great Events of Providence, and even for the
coming of the Day of GOD. Yea, you would not let the Lord go until He look down
from Heaven with an Eye of Pity on you. You will be never easier than when in
your Chambers, seeking for the Mercy of GOD to your selves, and yours;
especially when you can solace your own Souls with any comfortable Grounds of
Hope GOD has heard your Prayers, and will not turn away His Mercy from you. And
how can you live with any Comfort, if you have no Hope of this?

OH that Men would seek the Lord, while He may be found, and call upon Him
while He is near, and give Glory to GOD before their Feet stumble upon the dark
Mountains, when all Entreaties for Mercy will be too late!

IT may be feared, that desolating Judgments are hastening upon us, that the
Inhabitants of the Land, are ripe for them, and it may be, for a destroying
EARTHQUAKE that shall lay some Parts of it waste and desolare. And shall not
this awful Consideration excite and move us to cry for Mercy? GOD shakes His
Rod over us, to bring us to do so, and from His sparing Mercy to this Hour, we
may be assured, This is the Language of His Heart concerning us Hosea II. S, 9.
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall
I make thee as Admah? and set thee as Zebeim? Mine Heart is turned within me,
my repentings are kindled together, I will not execute the Fierceness of mine
Anger, I will not return to destroy you. But verily, if we will not obey His
Voice, He will return in Anger, and more terrible EARTHQUAKES than those of the
last Week Jan 28 and Tuesday following.
may be looked for still.

In looks, at present, as if the Voice of GOD had not been enough hearkened to,
that the Great GOD should so continue roaring from the deep Places of the
Earth. He seems to be conning nearer to us; and if we shall now be visited as
our Neighbors in the Northern Parts of the Province have been, the Lord grant,
the like Impressions may be made on our Minds, that have on such Numbers there.

IT may be, we shall go on, many of us, in our Disobedience to the Voice of
GOD, and Conscience, till we feel more terrible Convulsons of the Earth under
us; and we shall even then, if we don't hear also, the still small Voice of His
Word and Spirit.

METHINKS, I now find my self brought by the Hand of the Lord, into the midst
of the Valley, which is full of Bones To allude to Ezekiel. 37, 1, -- 12.
where there are many very dry, and hear the Lord saying, Can these Bones live?
To which I make the Answer prepared for me, O Lord GOD, thou know.

WE have prophesied upon these Bones, and said unto them, O ye dry Bones, hear
the Word of the Lord, and may the Lord GOD now say, unto these Bones, Behold I
will cause Breath to enter into you, and ye shall live, and ye shall know that
I am the Lord.

WHEN we prophesy as we are commanded, May there be a Noise and a Shaking, and
then the Spirit of GOD which is the Wind that blows where it lists, come
and breathe upon these Slain, that they may live, and stand up upon their Feet
an exceeding great Army. We have reason to pray, and hope for it.

LET none then, now say, especially such as are under Convictions, Our Bones
are dried, and our Hope is lost, we are cut off, for our Parts.

TO conclude, LET us now hear the Word of the Lord, unto us, in Jer. 13.15, 16.
Hear ye and give ear, Be not proud: for the Lord has spoken, Give Glory to the
Lord your GOD, before be cause Darkness, and before your Feet stumble upon the
dark Mountains, and while ye look for Light, He turn it into the Shadow of
Death, and make it gross Darkness. And that Word also, in Mal. 2.2. If ye will
not bear, and will not lay it to Heart, to give Glory unto any Name, says the
Lord of Hosts, I will even send a Curse upon you, and I will curse your
Blessings: We trust GOD has not yet said, and Oh that He never may, as in the
remainder of the Verse, Yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay
it to Heart.

I shut up all with that Exhortation, in Heb. 12. from the 25th Verse to the
End. See that ye rofuse not Him that speaks; for if they escaped not who
refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away
from Him that speaks from Heaven: Whose Voice then shook the Earth, but now
He has promised, saying, yet once more, I shake not the Earth only, but also
Heaven. And this Word yet once more, signifies the removing of those Things
that are shaken, as of Things that are made, that those Things which cannot be
shaken may remain. Wherefore, we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let
us have Grace, whereby we may serve GOD acceptably, with Reverence, and GODLY
FEAR. FOR OUR GOD IS A CONSUMING FIRE.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 9.1.4. after His, read, gracious. P. 21. 1.7. for, Praise, read,
Greatness.


