Mr. Colman's Funeral Discourse Upon the Death of the very Reverend and Learned
Dr. COTTON MATHER.

The Holy Walk AND Glorious Translation OF Blessed ENOCH. A SERMON Preached at
the Lecture in BOSTON, Two Days after the DEATH of the REVEREND and LEARNED
Cotton Mather, D. D. and F. R. S. Who departed this Life, Febr. 13. 1728.
Aetat. 65.

By Benjamin Colman.

BOSTON: Printed for J. PHILLIPS, at the Stationers Arms on the South side of
the Townhouse, and T. HANCOCK, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Ann Street.
1728.

The Holy Walk AND Glorious Translation OF Blessed Enoch.
GENESIS V. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.


SINGULAR in the Old World was the Person and the Thing here spoken of; the
holy Life and the happy End of blessed Enoch. He was the most remarkable and
distinguished among the Patriarchs before the Flood; for his eminent Godliness
and excelling Piety; for his short and fervent Life, and God's taking him to
Heaven without seeing Death. He was a Man of God, a zealous Prophet of the
Lord, and preached earnestly to the sinners in his day of the Coming of Christ
to Judgment See Jude v. 14, 15.
. And God rewarded his excelling says, sanctity and labors, with a
distinguishing Exit, or departure hence.

MY Text speaks three things of him, That he walked with GOD, that he was not,
that God took him. It is a short Record of three very great and copious things;
of his heavenly life on earth and of his glorious removal to a better World.

THAT he was not means not that he died; but the contrary, that he died not.
The Apostle to the Hebrews tells us how God took him, Heb. 11.5. By faith Enoch
was translated that he should not see death, and was not found because God had
translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony that he
pleased God. Walking with God is the thing that pleases him. This is the fruit
and evidence of the Faith of God's Elect. They that walk with God in this
world, he will in a little while take to himself in a better life.

BUT Enochs walk with God was in such a singular manner, and was so singularly
pleasing to Him, that God distinguished him from the rest of Mortals, and the
Angels of God took him up in the body, as they did Elias afterward, and as they
do the Souls of other Believers now, and carried him to the Presence and
Paradise of God.

THIS must be resolved into the Good pleasure of God, his wise and Sovereign
will; and to be sure it was not for any Merit or desert in Enochs holy walking
with God. Enoch deserved to have died for his Sins, as well as any before or
after him. He was born in sin as well as other Sons of Adam, and could never
say I am pure from sin till his glorious Change passed on him, as he was caught
up. Elias was a Man of like passions with others, and asked to die; yet he was
translated as well as Enoch. It was not due to the Righteousness of either that
they were taken without seeing Death. Before that God formed them in the belly,
he designed them their Translation.

Never the less God doubtless meant hereby to put eminent honor on singular
Piety, and to excite others to labor after Eminence therein. So God crowns his
own Work, his own Gift. The Lord is well pleased in his own Righteousness in
his Saints, and for his own Names sake magnifies and honors it. Singular Zeal,
Diligence and Devotion in degenerate times shall receive a distinguishing
Reward. As Elias was alone in the cause of God in a most corrupt time, so in
Enochs day the flood of Infidelity and Impiety begun to break in upon the old
World.

THEN God saw it a fit time to give Mankind an Ocular Testimony of that Eternal
Life which he has prepared for them that love and please him. Adam was but just
dead, as it were, before the Translation of Enoch; and some think that Adam
himself was the first Instance of a natural death; (for as to Abel he died a
violent one) and the World by reason of the rarity of Death and the long life
of Mankind might grow into a strange degree of unbelief, profaness, sensuality
and injustice before the death of Adam. Now I take Enochs translation to have
been meant and ordered by God as a Testimony to the very Senses and common
Understanding of the Men of the Old World, First, that there is a blessed
Immortality for pious and holy Persons in an unseen and eternal World;
Secondly, that they shall live and be blessed there both in body and soul
united; and consequently Thirdly, that there shall certainly be a Resurrection
of the Bodies of Saints to a blessed Life and glorious Immortality.

NOT that I think the Patriarchs before Enoch were without the Doctrine and
Hope of the Resurrection of the body: I believe much the contrary, namely, that
God revealed this to Adam, and that Enoch had walked in this Faith, Others
before him, But the World, now a thousand year old in sin, began to languish
under a miserable decay of Faith, and needed some remarkable Testimony from
Heaven to the Doctrine of a future Life and the Resurrection of the Body.

AND as to Enoch's being taken so soon from his holy walk on earth to the
heavenly World; for he lived not half the days of Adam, or his other gracious
Progenitors, I might suggest,

THAT God hereby testified his delight in early Piety, diligence and
proficiency; That he poured contempt upon long life on earth, in comparison of
the Eternal Glory; That he let the other Patriarchs and holy Men see that eight
or nine hundred years here was not the right, the privilege not reward of their
eminent Piety; and that they should by no means depend on it or take up with
it. In a word, Enochs translation was the more like to be taken notice of in
the Age that then was, by his being translated young. If he had lived his nine
hundred years it is likely the thing had been less observed and talked of and
laid to heart.

SOME The Rev. Mr. Boys of Dublin.
have observed that as Enoch was the seventh from Adam, so Adam and five more
were subjected to natural death, but He the seventh was translated, to point
out to us the Time when the blessed Resurrection of the Just might be expected:
Soil. That as Death should reign over the race of Adam for six thousand years,
so the seventh would restore all the spiritual seed of the second Adam to a
state of glorious Immortality.

Mr. Henry observes, That Enoch lived just a Year of years, which as Men lived
then was to go in the midst of his days; for the Patriarchs before the Flood
did more than double that Age; and God took them so soon because the World was
grown corrupt and was unworthy of him; or because he was so much above the
World and weary of it, and desirous of a speedy removal out of it: Or because
his Work was done, and done the sooner for his minding it so closely. God often
takes them soonest whom he loves best, and the time they lose on earth is
gained in heaven, to their unspeakable advantage.

I have held you too long it may be on the Person and Thing in the Text, the
Patriarch Enoch and his glorious Translation. The plain Doctrinal Observation I
shall now speak to is this,

DOCT. THAT God will undoubtedly take those to Himself in another and better
World, that walk with Him in this World. As he did by Enoch who prophesied of
the Coming of CHRIST in the great Day, so he will by all others that look and
wait for his Appearing. In Enochs character and reward, all Men may learn their
duty, and Saints their property and privilege.

HE walked with God: He set God always before him; kept his eye continually
upon God, and considered himself always under the eye of God; observed by him
and accountable to him. He was a follower and imitator of the blessed God,
studied his glorious Nature and Perfections and his holy Will, and conformed
his heart and life to both, as far as he could attain. He made it his constant
care and business to please God, for can two walk together except they are
agreed? He was wholly devoted to the Service of God, and the Felicity he
proposed to himself was Communion with God here and the Enjoyment of him for
ever. He did not walk after the course of this world, with the men of that
wicked age; No, but contrary to them; his fellowship was with the Sons of God,
in whom was all his delight, and among whom he shone a burning light. He
preached against the wickedness that then began to prevail over the earth with
great zeal and courage, and warned them of the Day when God would judge 'em for
their ungodly deeds. Thus he walked with God, exercising himself unto
Godliness, and making Religion the business and joy of his life, God's glory
his ruling End, and his own Salvation his great and chief care.

IN all this we must take him for our Example, to walk even as he walked; in
the same Spirit and in the same Stops. -- We must walk by Faith as Enoch did,
by which the Just do live, and without which it is impossible to please God. So
Abraham walked before God and was perfect, and so Moses walked as seeing him
that is Invisible, and having respect to the Recompense of Reward. --

BY Repentance we must return to God, and walk humbly with him, the wicked and
impenitent are walking contrary to God, and he walks contrary to them. But how
did the Son of God on earth seek out humble Penitents, walk and converse with
them, and joy in them? -- To walk as Christ walked is indeed to walk with God.
He always did those things that pleased the Father, whose Soul was ever highly
pleased in him. He has given us an Example that we should follow his steps. --
We must walk with God in the daily and continual duties of Prayer and Praise,
in all stated and occasional Exercises of religious Worship, solitary and
social, private and public. We must walk with God in our Closets, with our
Families, and in God's house, in all his Ordinances, blameless. -- To walk with
God means, in all the parts and instances of a sober, righteous and godly Life;
and constancy therein all our days. We walk with God in a sincere, universal
and persevering Obedience to the written Word and revealed Law of God: And
blessed are the undefiled in the way that walk in the Law of the Lord. We walk
with God in a reverential Submission to him in all his Providence. Then God is
with us and says to us, When thou passest through The Office and Work of the Holy
Spirit from p. 237.
the Waters I am with thee. It is good having God with us when our way is
cloudy and dark, and in the night of afflictions, going before us, holding us
up, leading us on, and keeping us safe. When the three Worthies were thrown
into the flaming furnace the Son of God came down and walked there with them.
-- Indeed to walk with God is a Phrase that speaks Eminence in Religion; but it
especially and strongly implies Progress, proficiency and perseverance in every
thing that is holy just and good. To walk is not to take a step or too, nor is
it for a day or a year, but for the whole life, all our days. We must walk and
work while the day lasts; the light is given for this. The way is but short, a
few steps up-hill, in a strait and narrow path, that leads to eternal life. We
read of Walking in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. That is to walk with God: A Spiritual
life; the most excellent and noble kind of life, under the continual vital
Influence of the Holy Spirit? This walking (says the Rev. Mr. How on that Text)
does more directly and formally denote a self-motion, a voluntary motion, an
orderly motion, a pleasurable motion, a continued and progressive motion. This
can only be in the light of the Spirit, and in his power. Hence in the progress
in Spirituality Thus How.

AND now let us consider, What an honnarable thing this is, to walk with God!
What an honor should we account it, if our earthly Prince would allow us to
walk after him in his Garden? Only a few select and favorite Nobles have the
honor done them. What the is Man, that God magnifies him in speaking of his
walking with the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible! Will God in very deed walk
with us on earth? Behold Heaven, and the Heaven of heavens cannot contain him?

How peasant must this be, to walk with GOD? Such was Eden, the Garden of God,
in man's first stare; and such is the Paradise of God above. Such are all the
ways of Wisdom and Holiness, ways of pleasantness and paths of peace.

How safe and secure must they be that walk with God? guarded by his Power,
covered with his Wing, protected by his Providence, and desended by his Angels:
As Jacob on his way when God's Hosts met him. O the Security and Serenity of
this way! living and dying such are safe.

YEA everlastingly happy and blessed are all such in the World to come. They
are going to God, to be with him, and blessed in him, for ever and ever: Going
where Enoch is, and to be as be is: Not indeed as he went, without dying, but
it is all one in the end, at the Resurrection: Gohriel, and Enoch and Abraham
and Moses and Elias there walk together. In the presence of CHRIST; and are one
in Line, Glory and Blessedness.

BUT this leads me into the Proof of the Doctrine, That if we do walk with God
here in this life, he will take as to himself for ever. As truly as he took
Enoch, so will he all them that walk in Enoch's faith and piety. It will be
shortly said of every one of them, He is not, for God took him. Took him!
whither? why where he took Enoch, up to himself in heaven. As truly as Enoch is
there, you shall be shortly there also if you walk with God.

To state this easy Truth it must be said,

1. NOT bodily and alive to heaven, without seeing and tasting death, as Enoch
was taken. No such matter; and it matters not much. The Godly die as well as
others. Two only of the Saints have been translated, one before the Flood, and
one under the Law; and for Gospel days the Resurrection and Ascension of our
Lord Jesus may abundantly suffice, to strengthen and uphold the faith of
Saints. That glorious Son of man became obedient to death for the sake of his
Elect, to teach them to expect a dissolution, and how to pass comfortably as
well as holily through it, having the sting of it taken away by his dying. He
died not to purchase for them a Translation; no, but a Resurrection. Every
Saint may take up Jobs words, and say to God with holy Submission; Job. 30 23.
For I know that thou will bring me to death, the house appointed for all the
living. But although no Saint looks to be taken bodily to heaven, as Enoch was
without seeing death, yet

2. GOD takes the Souls of them to himself at death, who have walked with him
in this life. The Soul is the Person; if that be taken up to God it matters not
though the body be laid for a time in the earth, Eccl. 12.7. The body returns to
the earth as it was, but the spirit returns to God that gave it. The Spirits of
the just made perfect are in the same Heaven, the same Paradise, where Enoch
and Elias are in their Spiritual bodies. Thither the Angels carried the Soul of
the gracious beggar, Lazarus, when he died at the rich man's gate: And thither
they carried the happy Spirit of the penitent thief, when it left the body upon
a cross; And thither the holy Soul of Christ went for the three days that he
left his body in the grave: To his Father he said, Intothy hand I commit my
Spirit. -- So God took Moses and Aaron from the Mount in the day they were
unclothed and buried; and so Jesus took the Soul of Stephen while the bruised
flesh fell under the cruel stones. Devour men took up the precious remains and
buried them, with great lamentation.

GOD as truly takes the Soul by dying and at death, as he took Enoch without
seeing death. If the Soul be but taken to the Regions of the Blessed all is
well, wherever the body be dropped, in the sea, or on the dry land. God shows the
Soul the path of life, and the flesh rests in hope. The soul is absent from the
body to be present with the Lord: it departs and is with Christ: To whom else
should it go? whither else would it be taken? When the Lord himself was going,
he thus comforted his sorrowing Disciples, Joh. 14. init. I go to prepare a
place for you and I will take you thither, that where I am there you may be
also.

3. THE Godly that are found alive at the coming of Christ shall be changed as
Enoch was, and raised Saints shall be caught up with them to meet the Lord in
the air. So we are expressly taught, and a special attention to the thing is
required of us; 1 Cor. 15.51, etc. Behold I show you a mystery; we shall not
all sleep but we shall all be changed; in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
at the last Trump; for the trumpet shall sound and the dead shall be raised,
and we shall be changed: For this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and
this Mortal must put on Immortality. This mystery relates to the Godly that
shall be found alive at Christ's coming; They will not undergo the pains or
change of death, a dissolution of Soul and body; No, but the easy and happy
Change of Enoch. Their bodies by the power of Christ will be rendered spiritual
and incorruptible in a moment of time in order to their ascending up into the
air, to meet their descending Lord. And because of the Certainty and Importance
of this Truth it is repeated to us, 1 These. 4.15, 17. For this we say unto you
by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the Coming of
the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep: For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel and of the
trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive
and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, etc. Compare
here the state and privilege of redeemed Saints in the Resurrection day: Some
will have the singular privilege of not dying, not sleeping: The rest have all
fallen asleep in Christ, and have undergone the change of death. Now one would
be ready to think the advantage much on their side who do not die at all. But
that it may not seem too much so, those that are to sleep in Jesus are informed
and made to know, "That the Redeemers first care will be about his dead
Saints". They that are found alive at the coming of Christ shall not prevent
them that sleep; No, the dead in Christ shall rise first: Christ will raise his
dead Servants before the great Change passes on them whom he shall find alive.
So that if these last seem in one respect to have the advantage, the other will
have it in another respect, that there may be at last an equality; For the one
being changed into spititual and glorious Bodies in the instant after that the
Dead in Christ are so raised, they will both together be caught up to meet the
Lord in the air. As blessed and joyful a moment to them all, as the Change and
Translation of Enoch was to him! and as true and real a Translation.

4. WHEN the Judgment is over Christ will return to the Third Heaven, the
eternal Seat of the Blessed, with all his Elect and Redeemed, glorified in soul
and body, to walk with him in white for ever more. So we read in the place last
cited, 1 These. 4.18. And so shall we be ever with the Lord. Now where will He
be after the Judgment day? He will return to his Throne at the right hand of
God in the highest Heaven, and his Redeemed will be there with him about his
Throne for ever and ever, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24. Every man in his own order; Christ
the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming: Then comes
the End, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father;
having destroyed the last Enemy death. He will therefore carry up his redeemed
with Him, and will present them unto God his Father, to be blessed by Him and
in Him to all Eternity.

So he has prayed for them, and his Prayer is granted, Joh. 17.23. Father, I
will that they whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may
behold my glory which thou have given me. And this he has also promised to 'em.
Joh. 12.26. If any man serve me let him follow me, and where I am there shall
my servant be.

To this end our Lord both died and rose again, even to purchase and to receive
this power, to take up all Believers into Glory with him: Joh. 17.3. As thou
have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life unto as
many as thou have given to him.

THIS Eternal blessedness is described by the Holy Ghost in those words, Rev.
2.4. And they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. The walk is
begun on earth in the life and exercise of Grace, but it continues and is
perfected in the light of Life and Glory for ever. Holiness and Joy is that
glorious White wherein the Saints walk with Christ in Heaven. They are
conformed to Him, both as to Soul and Body, in purity and splendor; fashioned
according to his glorious Body and Soul. This white is the righteousness of the
Saints; their priestly and kingly Attire before the Throne of God; for they are
made Kings and Priests unto God. Such a garment of Glory was put upon Christ in
the day of his Transfiguration, when his raiment became white and shining as
the light, and such a Robe he will put upon his Saints at their Resurrection,
and they shall walk with him therein for ever more. -- In this white Enoch has
been walking before the Throne of God from the Day wherein he was translated;
and in the same will all Believers walk and shine to all Eternity.

BUT this for the Proof and Illustration of the Doctrine. That God will take
all such to Himself in another and better World, that walk with him in this
World.

USE.
I come now to apply what has been said, and I might go into a very copious
Application, but I must limit and restrain my self.

WILL God indeed take those to himself in another and better World that walk
with Him here?

1. THEN first, Let us all be exhorted and excited to begin, and go on and
persevere in a holy and blessed walk with God. Has there not eno' been said,
though little on so glorious a Subject, to persuade and prevail on us to enter on
a walk with God? View only the blessed End of it, to be taken up by God unto
himself for ever and ever. O unknown happiness and immense felicity! which eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man to
conceive of! Or if Paul after his rapture into the third heavens were to speak
of to us, he could only say, that the things were neither lawful nor possible
to be told us.

How much does it concern us then to ask our selves, Whether we have indeed
begun this walk with God and to him? Whither are we going? what are we doing?
how do we live and act? and what will become of us a few days hence? Will God
take us? take us on the wings of Angels and in their Arms to his own Presence
and Glory? or will death drag us out of the body, and devils take us away to
their abodes of darkness and of fire unquenchable!

O let it be a loud call to Sinners, to walk no more in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor go any further astray from God; but to return speedily to God with
sincere and deep repentance, and go in the way of good men and the blessed
paths of the righteous; for the way of the ungodly shall perish, and their
stops take hold of hall; They are going down to the pit, the pit of devils, and
God will cast them from his face for ever, unless they repent. But if you have
made a Covenant with death, and are at agreement with bell; if you would
renounce God and Heaven, and are content not to be taken up to him when you go
hence and are here no more; then walk on, walk on in the ways of Sin and fie
down in sorrow.

O how would the late Servant of Christ and of Souls (who now lies by the Wall
(as we speak) and his Mouth is stop by Death from speaking to us any more, and
whom we hoped when he last spoke in this place to have heard again the next
Week) how would he if he now stood in my place, have played the Artillery of
Heaven, upon careless and insensible Sinners; and set all the Terrors of God in
array before them; and told them how far they are from the blessedness of Enoch
in his end, being strangers to his walk with God? alienated from such a life,
they must never be where he is; but on them his Prophesy is to take place for
ever, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execuls Judgment
on them for their ungodly deeds, Jude v.15.

O you that are walking in the road to hell, after the prince of the power of
the air, and whose fellowship is with devils; hear your doom from the mouth of
Christ in the last Day, Depart from Me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels. -- Go on now if you dare: God will take
you away in his wrath. -- So when Enoch had been long taken up, the Sinners
whom he warned, but they would not believe or repent, sunk down together as a
stone in the Flood. Even so at the end of the World when the Godly shall be
caught up to meet the Lord in the air, the world of the ungodly (left below)
will fly to the rocks and mountains to cover and hide them. -- O awful and
amazing difference between Man and man at the coming of Christ! Luke 17.34, 35.
In that night two men shall be in one bed, the one shall be taken and the other
left; two women shall be grinding together, the one shall be taken and the
other left; two men shall be in the field, the one shall be taken and the other
left.

BUT we are persuaded better things of many who are here present before God,
even the Things that do accompany Salvation. Let those that (through Grace) are
walking humbly with God, ask themselves how they go on in it? how far they are
got in that blessed way? and let them ever keep their eye upon their End, the
end of their faith, the Salvation of their Souls; which is nearer than when
they first believed. -- O let them humble and chide themselves that they have
walked no more closely with God; that they have so often sadly wandered and
strayed from the path of God's Commandments; that they have made so many stops,
yea so often lain down and slumber'd and slept: that they have been so slow and
dull at times in this heavenly walk, so sorrowful and heavy in it, yea so often
weary and faint; too uncertain and unsteady at the best. We need to stir up our
selves, take hold of God and follow hard after him. Let your loins be girt and
your lamps burning, and be you as Men that wait for their Lord. -- Be we
followers of them who through Faith and Patience do inherit the Premises. And
having so great a cloud of Witnesses before us, to lead us on, let us lay aside
every weight, and the sin that does most easily beset us, and let us run with
patience the race that is set before us; looking unto Jesus the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, and our great Example.

BUT this for the first Use, which was to exhort, to persuade and excite all of
us to begin, go on and persevere in a holy Walk with God. The other Use is,

2. OF Comfort, Support and great Consolation to all them that have begun and
are going on in a holy Walk with God. The Chariots of God are before them, even
those that took Enoch up, to carry them to the Mansions in their Fathers House.
This should carry them above the fears of Death, and comfort them in the death
of their godly Friends.

1. WALK on with God, and be carried above the fears of death. It is the Wisdom
of mortal Man to fear and prepare for his dying hour; and it is the true
Happiness of Man here in the body to be ready for death and live above the fear
of it. A walk with God is the way to both these. And though many of those that
walk humbly with him, are all their life time subject to bondage through fear of
death, yet it is their weakness and infirmity; and the Angel of the Lord would
say to such, as he once did to the Women, Fear not ye, for I know that ye seek
Jesus that is risen from the dead. -- Why was Enoch taken up, and why is Christ
riser and ascended, but to rebuke such fears? You may face Death, while you are
walking with God, and see in it the face of on Angel, coming to take you to God
for ever. You may walk on with God down into the valley of the shadow of Death,
and say, I will fear no evil for thou art with me. While you walk with God you
may say with Christ, I walk to day and to morrow, and on the third day I shall
be perfected. -- Do you think that God will leave him at the hour of death,
that has been walking with him through this life? No, the Angel of God, whose
thou art, and whom thou servest, will stand by thee in that hour of darkness;
the Angels of Jesus will gather about thee and bear thee up in their Arms. --
Or if thy Friend and Father should withdraw from thee for a moment, as he did
from Christ, thy Faith has him still to look and cry to, My God, my God. --
Allowance must be made for timorous Saints, yea the strongest Saints, both
while they live and when they come to die. What a mighty Prince before God was
Hezekiah? and how did his Faith and prayer prevail? yet when he came to die he
remembered how he had walked with God and wept sore, Isai. 38.3. Well, let the
holy Tears run, they will be soon wiped away for ever. Some are thus taken up
weeping to the pleasures for ever more. -- Let the fearing Saint consider, that
Dying after a holy walk with God is in a manner as good as Enoch's being taken
up. Where is the difference between the Chariots and horses of light that took
up Elijah, and the Angels that carried the beggars Soul to the bosom of
Abraham? Should God leave it to a Saints own choice, which way he would be
taken, me thinks he would resign the matter back again into the pleasure and
will of God; "Lord, as thou please, and may be most glorified, one way or
the other: they come to one and the same End.

2. It should yield us the highest Consolation in the death of our Godly
friends, that they have walked with God, and are not, for God has taken them.
Had Enoch any mourners? think you: Or how could they weep for him? or for
themselves? Surely only for themselves As when the Disciples saw Jesus ascend
up into Heaven, they returned home with great joy. Or as the Sons of the
Prophets that foresaw the Ascension of Elijah, spoke of it with admiration and
delight as to his part in it, and not with grief. Truly so there is abundant
Comfort to affectionate Survivors in the way and in the end of every godly
Person: They have walked with God and He has taken them to his Glory. Thus to
live is Christ and to die is Gain. Whether to choose we know not; let God do it.
Enochs honor have all the Saints; praise ye the Lord. The Apostle rebukes
immoderate sorrow over a Saints grave, 1 These. 4.13. I would not have you
ignorant, Brethren, concerning them that are asleep, that ye sorrow not as
those that have no hope: For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose again even
so also them that sleep in Jesus God will bring with him.

WE must remember the holy walk of our departed Friends and comfort our selves.
We must remember where they now are: They are gone from us; God has taken 'em;
they are with Christ which is far better; and when Christ shall appear they
shall appear with him in glory, -- What would any Believer have or wish more
concerning those he loves, while they live or when they are dead? As our Lord
said to his sorrowing Disciples, Joh. 14.28. If ye loved me ye would rejoice,
because I go to the Father.

Go not to the grave to weep there: Why should you seek the Living among the
dead? Lift up your head and eyes, look up to Heaven and rejoice: Thither the
precious Soul is taken, and there it is for ever comforted.

WHEN Elijah was taken up, there were some of his Friends and Sons that would
go seek his body; It may be (said they) the Spirit of the Lord has dropped it
here or there: No, said Elisha; Indulge no such fear or care about One whom God
has taken. Yet they went and sought in vain. So you may mourn and afflict your
selves needlessly about such as God has taken up by Death, after a holy life and
walk; But you ought rather to realize their Translation, by a Faith which is
the Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things unseen.

THIS is one way of following our Godly Friends to Heaven; which should be our
mournful care; that we may walk with God as they did, and that when we have
finished our Course God may take us up to be with them; where they are
beholding his Face for ever.

AND now all that are here present very well apprehend the Reason and Occasion
of this Discourse. God has this Week taken up from us ONE whom he enabled by
his Grace in a singular manner to walk with him. We mourn the Decease from us
(not his Ascension to God) of the first Minister in the Town, the first in Age,
in Gifts and in Grace; as all his Brethren very readily own. I might add (it
may be without offense to any) the first in the whole Province and Provinces of
New England, for universal Literature; and extensive Services. Yea it may be
among all the Fathers in these Churches, from the beginning of the Country to
this day, of whom many have done worthily and greatly; yet none of them amassed
together so vast a Treasure of Learning, and made so much use of it, to a
variety of pious Intentions, as this our Rev. Brother and Father, Dr. COTTON
MATHER.

HIS Name is like to live a great while among us in his printed Works; but yet
these will not convey to Posterity, nor give to Strangers, a just Idea of the
real Worth and great Learning of the Man. His Works will indeed inform all that
read them of his great Knowledge, and singular Piety, his Zeal for God, and
Holiness and Truth; and his desire of the Salvation of precious Souls; but it
was Conversation and Acquaintance with him, in his familiar and occasional
Discourses and private Communications, that discovered the vast compass of his
Knowledge and the Projections of his Piety; more I have sometimes thought than
all his Pulpit Exercises. Here he excelled, here he shone; being exceeding
communicative, and bringing out of his Treasury things new and old, without
measure. Here it was seen how his Wit, and Fancy, his Invention, his Quickness
of thought, and ready Apprehension were all consecrated to God, as well as his
Heart Will and Affections; and out of his Abundance within his ups overflowed,
dropped as the honeycomb, f;ed all that came near him, and were as the choice
silver, for richness and brightness, pleasure and profit.

BUT here Love to Christ and his Servant commands me to draw a Veil over every
Failing: For who is without them? Not Ascending Elijah Himself; who was a man
of like Passions with his Brethren the Prophets; and we have his Mantle left us
wherewith to cover the Defects and Infirmities of Others after their
Translation in Spirit. These God remembers no more, and why should we? and He
blots out none of their good Deeds, and no more should we.

I trust therefore we may go on freely to say, That my Text was happily
Exemplified in Him, even in his Walk with God from his Youth up: In his Closet
the witness of his Prayers and Vigils and Tears; in his hard and constant
Studies and preparations for the Pulpit and for the Press: in his Family, where
the daily Sacrifices of Praise and Prayer were followed with much of God and
Christ and Heaven, in an edifying and pleasant Conversation. His Visits to his
Friends, and theirs to him, bear witness for him how much the Love of Christ
was in his Heart and on his Tongue. Much more his more religious Visits to the
Sick and Afflicted, to the Bereaved and to Mourners, to the Tempted and wounded
in Spirit, or theirs to Him, may be supposed to bear witness for him. Not to
omit his many charitable Visits to Prisoners under the Sentence of death, and
his Labors with them, to save their Souls from the second Death.

IF we follow him to his public Labors, stated and occasional, on Lord's Days
and Lectures; how servent was he and unwearied, in Prayer and Preaching, in
Intercessions and Exhortations? Here he showed a flaming Love to Christ and
Souls, and a vehement zeal against Sin and for Truth and Holiness. Among the
Ministers in all their Meetings, he was very much the Mouth of God to them as
well as theirs to God. The whole Israel of God, his Cause and Interest in a
wicked World, lay always much upon his heart, and so did the Protestant
Succession, the Civil and Religious Liberties of Great Britain, and those of
his own Country. He truly loved his People, and had just notions of their true
Interests. He was in the Gap for them on all Occasions, and wrestled in Prayer.
He was a zealous Adorer and Assertor of the Godhead of Christ; all his hope of
Salvation standing on it, and the whole Mystery of Godliness. -- His
Resignations to the Will of God were wonderful under great Trials; and it
seemed one of the chief Aspirations of his Soul to honor God by Sacrifices,
and to have his own Will swallowed up entirely in the Will of God. This he
pressed vehemently on others in an evil and dying World, and this he practiced
himself. One of the last Words I heard him speak was in Admiration of the Grace
of God in some of his near Relatives, in their exemplary Patience, Resignation
and Devotion, under a great and sore Bereavement: He lift up his feeble Hand,
and raised his sunk Voice, and earnestly said with a faultring Tongue, "O they
do gloriously, they do gloriously, to honor God as they do with such a
sacrificing Spirit". He sought not this World, but was very liberal of his
little, in uses of Piety and Charity. His heart was too good and big for
earthly things, and too spiritual not to be set on higher and better; namely a
more enduring Substance, a Treasure in Heaven that fails not.

NOTHING was more familiar and frequent with him than Death and Eternity. These
he was ever speaking of with pleasure and desire, as one always ready and
willing to be offered. And agreably he entertained all his Sicknesses with
Constancy and Serenity, Tranquillity and Peace; not shaken in mind nor afraid to
die. He told me on the last Lord's Day in the Evening, with what a singular
Satisfaction he had received the notice of Deaths approach that Morning, hoping
to have been with Christ that Sacrament-day.

I shall only add, That according to the best Judgment I am able to make from
mary years Observation and Conversation with him, he has seemed to enjoy a
fixed Peace and full Assurance of Faith, as to his Interest in Christ and a
better Life; And this continued with him to his last breath.

I leave it to Others to relate the holy Breathings, and abundant gracious
Words that flowed from Him to every one that came about him, all the time of
his Sickness and in his last Day and Hours; which whenever we see or hear they
will be (it may be) one of the brightest Accounts we yet ever had of Grace and
Peace, and living Comforts in dying Moments.

THUS he walked with God, and now he is not, as my Text says of Enoch. That is
to say, He is no longer with us. Your eyes that have so often seen him in this
Desk shall see him here no more, and this Place that has known him, and shown
so much of him, shall know him no more. No more shall he be heard again in this
Lecture, where he has ran so long and shining a Course: No more will he here
weep over perishing Souls in Prayer; no more scatter the thunders and
lightnings of God in flaming Sermons; no more like another Enoch warn the
ungodly of the Lord's coming and judgment: No more is he to weary and spend
himself, as we have often seen him wearied and spent for your Souls; "never
weary of his work, but often wearied in it.

WHEN he stood last in this Place he was in weakness made strong; feeble in
body but fervent in Spirit; he spared not himself nor us; profuse of his own
life for the lives of our Souls.

WE have no reason to doubt but God has taken him to Himself, where he longed
to be; taken him to the Tree of Life, his last desire. He would not be bear
again, unless for your Souls; And so Angels come down gladly, and for ought I
know so may a Separate Soul too.

HE is reaping (we believe) a glorious Harvest of all that he here sowed: He
sowed bountifully and we believe reaps bountifully; appearing to have had an
abundant Entrance into the Joy of his Lord.

AND if so, then He is as much taken up as Elias was, though not in the body. He
freely went at God's Call, was not taken away by force, was willing to go, went
placid and serene; Enoch himself could scarce do more. And to me it seems a
greater thing to die gladly and ascend only in Spirit, than to step joyfully,
without dying, into Enochs Car. For who could do other than willingly mount the
Chariot of light if he saw it come down for him with his bodily eyes? but to
meet ghastly Death, when he comes to take us out of the Body, and willingly go
with him, leaving the body behind us to dust and worms; is something greater.
To be able to walk down cheerfully to a Grave, is a greater thing than to go up
joyfully in the Body. -- The Saints that shall never die may seem to come short
of some of their Brethren in this; that while they are only caught up into the
Air to their Lord, their Brethren have passed through Death to go to him. Verily
holy dying is a great and blessed thing.

THE bereaved Family and Flock I leave to the Directions and Comforts, which
their surviving Pastor The Rev. Mr. Ges.
may bring them by the help of Grace. May He be strong in the Lord and in the
power of his Might. May his bow abide in strength, and his Arms be made strong
by the Hands of the mighty God of Jacob: From thence is the Shepherd, the stone
of Israel. May the God of Israel say to him, as he did to Joshua after the
death of Moses: My Servant is dead, now therefore Arise Thou.

HIS Brethren in the Ministry here are bereaved and weak with him. God has
taken their Father as well as his, from their heads this day. He was a Pastor
in the Town when the Eldest of the present Pastors were but Children, and long
before most of them were born. They are weak indeed when he that is now
speaking to them is the first in years among them, in all respects else the
least. What a matter of humiliation this, both to me and them! -- But thanks be
to God my Younger Brethren have by his Grace, most of them come old into the
Ministry; Young Men and strong in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus. The
Deceased saw this and was glad: He joy'd in them, and in his prospects through
Grace from them; and could with comfort leave the Churches in such hands, and
them in the hands of Christ.

THE Call to us, both Ministers and People, is to walk more with God, looking
for the Grace and Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal life. The Deaths
of your Ministers should be the loudest Sermons to you; and the death of this
Minister the most affecting Lecture you ever heard in this place. God make it
so to us all; that for the few days to come, if indeed a few more may yet
remain to us, we may more than ever pray and preach and hear and communicate as
dying Persons.

AND this word comes nearest to my self, under manifest decays, and next in
order of time to the Deceased, and therefore ought to expect next to die: Pray
for me, and for my Brethren your dear Pastors, that we may so walk with God as
the Deceased has done before us, and that in God's time we may be taken as he
has been; that after some like Usefulness we also may depart in the like
blessed Peace, by the free Grace of God. -- Our God is able to supply all our
Needs, according to his riches in Glory by Jesus Christ. Now unto God and our
Father be Glory, for Ever. Amen.

APPENDIX.
THE Learned Monsieur SAURIN in his Dissertations upon the Old Testament says,
"That this only Expression is the most beautiful of all Elogies, Enoch pleased
God. -- He adds, That we have a very strong Presumption of this Fact, that
Enoch was indeed translated and did not see Death, because Moses at the End of
the Lives of those Patriarchs that both preceeded and followed Enoch has this
Expression, that he died. He does as it were affect this Style; and it may be
presumed that he would not have altered it just upon mentioning Enoch, if that
holy Man had the same Destiny. Besides, the manner in which Moses speaks of the
Assumption of Enoch makes it appear as a favor granted to his great Endeavors
of pleasing God: Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.

IT was a more singular thing in that First Age of the World, that a Man of
distinguished Piety should live but 365 years, while the greatest part of the
Patriarchs came nearer to a thousand. This made so great an Impression upon a
Robin who undesstood it to mean no more than an ordinary Death, that he chose
rather to blast the Memory of this Patriarch than to suppose that God would
take a good Man so in the midst of his days, in that Age of the World. "Enochs
Righteousness (says the Robin) was but ambulatory and fleeting, and this was
the Reason that God precipitated his Death". An ignorant and base Reflection.

IN each of the three great Periods of the Church, there has been an Instance
of a Man taken up to Heaven in Body and Soul; for the supporting the Hopes
conceived by all the Faithful, of arriving at the same happiness: Enoch before
the Law, Elijah under it, and Jesus Christ under the Gospel Economy. 'Twas a
favorable Prejudice for the Faithful of the First World, to see a good Man
vanish away, and after his sojourning upon the Earth to be lodged in some other
place than a Tomb. 'Twas yet a stronger Presumption in favor of those that
lived in the second Period, to see the Heavens opened for the Reception of one
of their Prophets, who was carried up thither in a Chariot of Fire. But it is a
Demonstration to Christians, and as it were a taking Possession of their
expected Happiness, to see the Author and Finisher of their Faith passing through
those vast Spaces that divide Heaven from the Earth; and to hear the Church
Triumphant Summoning the Gates of the Palace of Glory to be opened, and to
receive Him who was going before to prepare the Places that He had allotted for
them in those happy Mansions. Such an High Priest became us, who is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, and made higher than the Heavens".

FINIS.

