The CURSE causeless. A SERMON Preached at EXON, Jan, 30th. 1716/1717. By JAMES
PIERCE. The Sixth Edition.

BOSTON, N. E Printed for Bennet Love, near the Drawbridge. 1728.

THE PREFACE.
IT will seem strange to some to meet with a Sermon of mine upon this occasion.
I never could see reason to think the Sin of the day was a national one, that
should oblige us to fast yearly so long a time after it. And the chief purposes
to which it is generally applied, were never any encouragement to me to fast
with them, or pay any religious regard to the day.

BUT it happened this year to fall on the day of our weekly Lecture, when it
was my turn to preach. I thought therefore it would not be improper to say
somewhat in our own vindication, at a time when we were every where insulted,
and abused. The Sermon was composed and preached without the least intention of
printing it; but being earnestly desired by many of the hearers to let it
appear in the world, I have given way to their importunity.

PROVE. XXVI. 2. As the bird by wandering, as the Swallow by flying; so the
Curse causeless shall not come.
IT IS the custom of his pretended Holiness, the Man of Sin, once a year to
curse us, among the rest of those, whom he is pleased to count Heretics, in the
most solemn manner, by Bell, Book, and Candle. I wish his example was followed
by none but those of his own Church. But, alas! it is sad to observe, how
addicted furious and angry men are to love cursing, rather than blessing; and
with what pleasure some men thunder out their severe Censures, and bitter
imprecations, against their innocent neighbors. And did they scatter their
fire brands, arrows and death, only when they were in sport, and over their
profane cups, and in their merry meetings, their impiety would be far less
than it is, when they attempt to sanctify their malice, by bringing it into
their Worship, and venting it in the name of GOD himself. It has been for a
long time the custom of many to fast this day in the year for strife and
debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness. And we, all of us, are
generally represented as the vilest miscreants, and the abomination of GOD,
with a design to inflame against us the hatred and vengeance of men. And in
this case, when the foundations of justice and charity are over-turn'd, What
shall the righteous do? Or, where shall they seek for refuge and comfort, but
in the providence of the great GOD, who keeps the ordering all events in his
own hand; and who will not entrust men with an arbitrary distribution of all
the Curses, they would be as glad to inflict, as they are to denounce?
Vengeance belongs to him, and be will recompense, Heb. 10. 30. And there is no
evil in the city, and the Lord has not done it, Amos 3. 6. Neither the rash
judgments, nor the false representations, nor the cruel Imprecations and
threatenings of angry men shall be able to hurt us, if we are secure of GOD's
favor. A conscience void of offense will make us easy in our expectation of a
Blessing, when we are stunned with the loudest noise of Cursing. For, as
Solomon asserts in the Text, The Curse causeless shall not come. It Is upon this
clause of the Verse I intend to insist, for our encouragement and comfort on
the present occasion. But the connection of it with the former part of the Verse
being obscure, and the latter clause having some ambiguity in it; I think it
will be necessary to give some account, in the first place, of the general
meaning of the words.

IN the Hebrew there is often a difference between the Text and the Margin, the
Che^^^^ and the Keri: and Translators take the liberty of following sometimes
the one, and sometimes the other: and it is often hard to judge which is best,
the Jews pretending both to be owing to the inspired Writers. Thus it is in the
last clause of the Text, which, according to one reading of the Original, may
be rendered thus: So is the Curse causeless, it shall not come. And according
to the other reading, thus: So is the Curse causeless, it shall come upon him;
that is, upon the person, who without cause denounces it. Now the meaning of
the former clause of the Verse will be different according as we fix upon the
one, or the other reading of the latter. If we read it: As the bird by wandering,
as the Swallow by flying; so is the Curse causeless, it shall not come: the
sense will be this: That the Curse causeless is a wild and uncertain thing, as
much at random, as the flying of a bird; that it as easily flies over our heads
without doing us any hurt, as a bird does; or, that it is as easily avoided by
us, as a snare is by a bird that is upon the wing. But if we take the other
reading of the words: As the bird by wandering, as the Swallow by flying, so is
the Curse causeless, it shall come upon him: the meaning will be: That as a
bird by wandering exposes itself to danger, so does a man by causeless cursing
of his neighbor, the mischief falls upon himself. And we may observe, the wise
man represents elsewhere the nest, as a place of safety for a bird; and speaks
of it as exposed to danger, by leaving (...) wandering from its nest: As a bird
that wan^^^eth from her nest; so is a man that wandereth from his place Prove.
26. 8. Either of these senses is most just and true, and we need not to be
solicitous which to prefer. I confess the latter seems to me more agreeable to
Solomon's use of the comparison here mentioned. But then that sense implies the
other. For if the curse falls upon him, who denounces it; then it does not upon
him, against whom it is denounced.

IN speaking therefore to the Text, I shall,

I. INQUIRE, When a Curse may be said to be causeless?

II. I SHALL show you, That the Curse, with which we are ordinarily loaded on
this day, is causeless.

III. I SHALL endeavor to set before you the comfort, which the Text holds
forth to you; that this causeless Curse shall be mischievous, not to them who
are cursed, but to the Cursers themselves.

I. I SHALL inquire, When a Curse may be said to be causeless? Now there are
four cases, wherein a curse may be causeless.

I. WHEN the pretended ground, or reason of the Curse, is something really good
and just; or, however harmless and innocent, and so there is no occasion for
any cursing at all. The Curse causeless is the Curse, which is undeserved; and
certainly nothing can be more undeserved than a Curse, when a man's actions are
such as merit commendation and praise.

2. THE Curse is causeless, when though the occasion of it is evil, yet the evil
is too inconsiderable to deserve such a Curse, as is denounced upon the account
of it. There are degrees of evil, as well as good; and it is not a man's being
sure there is evil in any action, that will justify him in passing the most
severe and rigorous sentence upon him who is guilty of it. A Father, a Master,
or a Magistrate would be very unjust, if he should punish every offense with
equal severity. A proportion is always to be observed, and men are to be dealt
with severely or mildly, according to the nature of the crime they have
committed. And so far as the doom, or Curse men pronounce, exceeds the desert
of the offense, so far is it without doubt causeless. Besides, the law of
charity should teach us to make all the allowances we can, for those
circumstances, which may alleviate persons guilt. Our common infirmities may,
one would think, incline us to follow this rule. We often need ourselves those
charitable constructions, which our neighbors expect we should put upon their
actions. And it would be hard and causeless to curse a person, as doing that
wilfully and maliciously, which he did through mistake or inadvertence. This
indeed cannot be alleged in cases plainly and grossly evil, where every man's
conscience must needs inform him: but without all question, great regard should
be had to such circumstances in all intricate and disputable matters, wherein
good men have been found to take both sides of the question.

3. THE Curse is causeless, when the person against whom it is levelled is
innocent, and had no hand in the occasion of it, however grievously evil and
wicked it was. For in this case, though the Curse may be deserved; yet it is
evident, it is not by him who is cursed. And men should be as careful to acquit
the innocent, as they are to condemn the guilty.

4. THEN is the Curse causeless, when the person who denounces it, is equally
guilty with him, whom he curses, For whatever the crime is, yet he must with a
very ill grace curse others for it, who has himself an equal share in the
guilt. And he that curses another, for what he does himself, virtually curses
himself. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
judge: for wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thyself; for thou
that judge, do the same things. Romans 2. 1, 2. And though the Curse may not in
this case be causeless in it self; yet it manifestly is so in the person, from
whom it proceeds.

I SUPPOSE there can be no difficulty in perceiving the Curse is causeless in
these several cases. I proceed therefore to the next part of my Discourse,

II. TO show, that the Curse with which we are ordinarily loaded on this day is
causeless; and that our Adversaries have no reason to abuse, revile, and
condemn us at the rate they do, upon this occasion: And here I need only
consider, how applicable those several things already mentioned, which show a
Curse to be causeless, are to our case.

1. A Great part of the matter of our charge, and the reason why we have such a
heavy doom past upon us, is so far from being criminal, that it is truly noble,
and deserves much praise and commendation. I speak now only of what was done by
the Parliament, and those who joined with them against the King, or rather
against his evil Counselors. As to what followed, when several of the Members
were secluded, and a few only were suffered to be present, and give their Vote;
I shall never reckon that to be the Parliament's Act. But a great load is
thrown upon us, for what was the Act of the Parliament, and all the troubles of
that unhappy time are ordinarily laid at our door: But the troubles were really
owing to those, who put the King upon invading the rights of his Subjects; and
that brave Parliament is worthy of an honorable and everlasting remembrance,
who stood up nobly in the defense of them. All the world must own, it properly
belonged to the Parliament to take notice of, and redress such grievances, as
the Nation then groaned under. They are the ^ence and bulwark of our civil
Liberties, against the encroachments of an arbitrary Power. The wisdom of our
ancestors had provided, that Parliaments should have an opportunity of looking
into, and redressing the Nation's grievances, by reserving to them the Power of
supplying the Prince with money. And when there was no such Law, as has been
since made, for the frequent meeting of those Assemblies; there was no other
way to secure to the Nation their Privileges, but by a stiff defense of their
right to refuse to part with their money, unless it was given in a
Parliamentary way. 'Twas this began those troubles, and all the world must
justify that Parliament, for standing up in defense of the right of the
Subjects; and taking the opportunity to redress the mischiefs, which were owing
to as corrupt and vile a Ministry, as ever had before harassed the Nation. And
doubtless, while the Parliament stood up in defense of the Subjects Liberties,
it was the duty of the Subjects to stand by them and defend them. And to that
noble Stand, that was then made in the days of our Forefathers, we are
indebted, that we their Posterity are not a generation of Slaves to the
Arbitrary Power of our Kings, and the lusts of such a vicious, fawning Clergy,
as then carried all before them.

2. SUPPOSING the proceedings of the Parliament, and the Nation (for I as yet
meddle with no more) were in some respects evil and unjustifiable; yet were
there such circumstances in their case, as must be allowed to go a great way in
excusing them, and should therefore lighten the censure men pass upon them.
It Is indeed very hard for the best of men to manage a long quarrel, that rises
to a considerable height, without deserving some blame. Though we allow, there
were some things amiss in the conduct of those, who stood up for the Liberties
of the People; yet every one must see, their end and design was very good, and
that the methods they took were generally so too. And this will go a great way
in excusing, even when it will not wholly justify. If their Jealousies and
suspicions ran too high, and if the terms they stood upon seem to have been
sometimes a little extravagent, let their circumstances be considered. They had
seen what advances had been made to set up Tyranny, both in Church and State;
they had the Massacre of 200,000 of their Brethren in Ireland before their
eyes, and the threatenings of the like usage were loud in their ears. And in
such a case, who can blame them, if they insisted upon an extraordinary
security? If their suspicions were beyond the true designs of those they had to
deal with, they may thank themselves who gave them too much reason to entertain
them. Our Senators could not have been faithful in the trust their Country had
lodged in them, if they had not done their utmost to secure the safety of the
Nation. And if it was a fault, 'twas certainly a very pardonable one, that they
thought it much better to lay a restraint upon the Power of the Prince, than to
hazard the utter ruin and destruction of the Community. And therefore, as to
what was a national act, that is, what was then done by a free Parliament at
that time, posterity should, and I doubt not in a little time will, judge more
calmly and impartially concerning it; and not load as brave a set of men, as
ever the Nation had, with their censures, for a conduct, which derives so many
advantages and benefits to their Successors.

3. IT IS most evident, the Curse which is usually on this day denounced against
us, is causeless; because we are perfectly innocent, and had no manner of hand
in the pretended occasion of their cursing us. Let the transaction of the day
be as black and horrid as they please to represent it, what is that to us? What
reason have they to raise such an outcry against us upon that account? It Is
now sixty-eight years ago since the thing was done; and it is a question whether
there be any person left in the Nation, who had directly, or indirectly, the
least hand in the King's death? Is it not then causeless, for them to run out
with so much intemperance and extravagance in cursing us, for a matter of which
we are wholly innocent, and which was transacted, if not before we were born,
yet at least before we were capable of having any hand in it?

Obj. I. BUT say they; If you had no hand in it, your fathers had, and the
Curse is due to you for your fathers sins.

Ans. THE putting the King to death was the act of a very few; and the families
who can in this respect be concerned in it cannot be many. The act was far from
being national, but was committed by a Juncto of men, who oppressed the nation,
and enslaved the Parliament. And though they don't care to own it, yet they know
very well, that the Leaders of the People, the Sea Vindication of the Ministers
of the Gospel in and about London, 1648.
Ministers at that time, earnestly, and with the hazard of their all in this
world, openly protested against the fact, to the very face of them who did it.
One would think, they who pretend to embalm the memory of that King, should
treat those, who appeared his friends at that time, with somewhat more of
decency. If they were not able to save the King from death, yet they showed
their good will to do it; and when they could do no more, through the domineering
power of a few, they heartily protested against it, when we could tell them,
who stood by without speaking a word in his behalf.

Obj. 2. HOWEVER, say they, though you had not a personal hand in that fact, your
principles are the same with theirs who had, you are all of you for destroying
Kings, and will gladly do it upon every opportunity, and therefore we justly
charge you with the wickedness, and curse you for it.

Ans. IT IS very much, I confess, we should have such had principles as they
charge us with, and not know it: and that they should be better able to tell us
what our principles are, than we can tell ourselves. Though such bold assertions
may delude their easy followers, who receive them with an implicit faith; yet
certainly it must be very hard for them to convince us, or indeed, any
indifferent persons, that we don't know our own principles. If the law of the
land has established them as a Church; yet I suppose neither that, nor the law
of GOD, has established 'em as Inquisitors and searchers of men's hearts. This
pretense of the badness of our principles, with respect to civil Government,
has been artfully played against us. Our Schools have been represented as
dangerous, and not to be allowed. And who can doubt they must be so, if what
they say be true? For why may not a man as well be supposed to teach, as to
hold, base principles, without knowing any thing of the matter? But if these
Inquisitors will condescend to us so far, as to give us leave to know our own
principles, allow us to be able to give a more faithful account of them, than
they can do for us; we do not doubt to justify our principles against all the
senseless clamours of those who would run us down.

WE think it then our duty to live peaceably and quietly under that Government,
which the providence of GOD, and the laws of the land have set over us: that we
are bound to be subject to it, and according to our stations to maintain it, so
long as it answers its true end, without troubling ourselves about the
particular form of it. If we don't believe the unalienable indefeasible Right,
or the jus divinum of Kings, and an arbitrary Government, they may thank
themselves for it; since they never produce any sufficient Charter for it,
while they pretend to have one. In short, we distinguish between Kings and
Tyrants; those who make the good of their people, and those who make their own
pleasure, the rule of their administration. The former we think ourselves bound
in conscience to obey; and the latter we should think we were great fools, if
we did not to our power withstand and resist. Such are our principles, that no
good King need, or ever did, distrust us: and we count it not a dishonor to
us; that bad ones are always jealous of us; and we wish our Adversaries did
not, by endeavoring always to improve the jealousy of such, convince the world
they are the only ones for their turn. If we don't complement our Princes with
the promise of obedience without reserve; yet we think ourselves bound to be
subject to them in all civil things, while they make the Laws of the land their
standard. And as to our consciences in religious matters, we protest it is, and
hope it ever will be our principle, to keep them sacred to the direction of a
higher and greater Prince, who alone has a right to prescribe to them. And he
must be a bad Prince with a witness, who will not be content with our rendering
to him the things that are his; or, who will not allow us to render unto GOD
the things that are GOD's.

AS to kingly Government in particular, we are unreasonably charged to be
enemies to (...). Men may fancy one Government to be more perfect than another,
and the world has always been divided in their speculations upon that head; but
I believe we are all in general pleased with, and thankful to GOD for, such a
Monarchy as ours, which is so limited by the Laws. So that we are perfectly
innocent i^ the matter, for which our adversaries are so very free in cursing
of us.

4. THE Curse which they denounce against us is causeless, since they who
denounce it, are themselves the most guilty. I don't now run back to
transactions, wherein neither we, nor they had any hand. I consider what is
fresh in all our memories. Rebellion is the pretended occasion of the charge
brought against us, and the High Generation are the managers of it, who take
upon them very solemnly to read our doom. But have they not now for ever stopped
their own mouths? Will they blame us for standing up for our Liberties, when we
had the Parliament, one part of the Legislature, on our side; and yet think
themselves innocent in inviting over the Prince of Orange, to rescue their
Liberties, when they acted only in a private capacity? If the rights of Kings
are so unalienable, if their persons are so sacred, that they can never be
resifted, but upon pain of that damnation which they thunder out against us on
this occasion; What must become of them, who invited a Prince to drive away K.
James, and joined with him afterward in waging a war to keep him out? According
to their notions, there was not a sword drawn, or a pistol fired against K.
James in Ireland, but what was a lifting up the hand against the Lord's
anointed, and as truly a conspiring his death, as any thing they were ever
guilty of who actually put his Father to death.

BUT to come yet nearer: Who were they that hatched the late Rebellion, that
took up arms against the best of Kings, and that fought in the open field
against him? Were any of those, they have been so long cursing as enemies to
kingly Government, and as Rebels against all Kings; were any of those their
associates? Who were the Generals, the Soldiers, or the Chaplains, in the
rebellious Host? They cannot pretend that his Majesty, King GEORGE, had no
right to the Crown; we have their oaths to the contrary: and if we may not
believe 'em when they are upon their oaths, I cannot see why we should much
regard what they say at any other time.

WHEN therefore these men, according to their usual Cant, reproach you with
Sedition and Rebellion; request them, that they would please to explain
themselves, Whether they mean, those of Oxford, Manchester, Birmingham,
Bristol, and other places they have made too many to be mentioned? Or, Whether
they mean those of Preston and Dumblain? Desire them to oblige you with the
names of the Presbyterian Ministers, Justices, Generals, Captains, and other
Officers; the Presbyterian Soldiers, or Mobs, that appeared or acted upon any
of these Occasions. They will soon be weary, if they attempt to give you the
characters of the actors in that villainy; unless they will deny it to be such,
because it is sanctified by the Church, for whose sake they pretend it was
designed.

IF, according to their usual custom, they twit you with 1641, without asking
them, Whether they mean the murdering 200,000 Protestants by their good friends
in Ireland? you may tell them, You need not be at the trouble of going half so
far back as 1641, to meet with 1715, or 1688; and that the Church of England
has in these two latter, more than equaled all that the Presbyterians did in
the former.

SINCE then these very men are so notoriously guilty of that crime, for which
they pretend to condemn us: the cursing us must needs be causeless as to them,
if we had actually deserved it; as I have shown you we have not. And they, of
all men in the world, have the least reason to make such an outcry as they do,
with the infamous Athaliah: Treason, treason, 2 Kings 11. 14. But it is time for
me to hasten to the last general Head of my Discourse.

III. AND I hope I have now by showing you, that the Curse against you is
causeless, prepared you to receive the comfort which the Text may afford you:
which is according to the different readings, either, it shall not come; or it
shall come upon him that denounces it, and be most mischievous to himself.
There is so much of reason and truth in either reading, that it is hard to tell
which is to be preferred, and therefore I shall briefly speak to both.

I. THE Curse causeless shall not come upon the persons, at whom it is
levelled. And if this be true, and we are sure we are innocent, we need not
much distress ourselves, whatever the treatment is we meet with at the hands of
our enemies. They may revile and abuse us, and say all manner of evil falsely
against us; but this shall not really turn to our prejudice. And to evidence
this, consider,

(I.) THAT GOD has not left it in the power of such persons to execute their
sentences, they are pleased to pass upon others; or, the designs and purposes
they have laid against them. They are often ready to flatter themselves into an
opinion of their own power, and to be confident of the success of their own
projects; that they shall be able to wreck their malice upon their enemies, and
to make them as miserable, as they would wish them to be. But, as they are not
blessed, whom they bless; so, neither are they cursed, whom they curse. There
is a supreme LORD over them, and an their designs, who will not suffer them to
proceed according to their hearts lust, but directs all with a different view.
He makes the wrath of men to praise him, Psalm. 76. 10. and whatever is over and
above that, be restrains. He disappoints such, when they seem to think
themselves nearest to the execution of their purposes, and when they are most
confident of crushing the objects of their hatred and spite. Thus it has been
seen of old, and thus have we seen in the city of our GOD. Let it be recorded
for the generations to come, that they may remember, and praise, and trust in
the LORD.

(2.) As they have not in their power, to make whom they please cursed; so
neither does a holy and righteous GOD regard their Curse, to execute it. GOD is
indeed a GOD of recompenses; but where the Curse is causeless, and undeserved,
his Justice no way obliges him to fulfill it. If the Curse causeless takes
effect, it must be through the power of those from whom it proceeds, which we see
it cannot; or else through the vengeance of GOD, in answer to their desires. But
there can be no reason to be afraid upon any such account. GOD hears not
sinners; and he who has made love, charity, and forgiveness, so essential to
true religion, cannot be thought to be pleased with the wrath, malice, and
cruelty of angry men, or to delight to execute all their rash and hasty
judgments. We need not therefore distress ourselves, when we know that profane
men curse us, or wish our confusion in their cups; no, not when it is done with
more gravity and solemnity, and religion it self is prostituted, to set off
envy and malice to the greater advantage. GOD is too much displeased with a
censorious, damning humor, ever to do any thing to gratify it.

(3.) IT IS a sure evidence that the Curse causeless shall not come, since a
good GOD has, by his promise, secured us a Blessing instead of it. GOD is the
patron of the innocent and oppressed; and the more any are abused and run down
wrongfully, the greater is his compassion and favor toward them. GOD will not
have fellowship with the workers of iniquity, nor take part with them in their
spite, so far is he from this, that he has made this very treatment an argument
of their blessedness. Blessed are ye, says Christ, when men shall revile you,
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.
Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven: for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. The best of men, who have
gone before us, have met with the like usage. Nay, which is much greater, the
Son of GOD himself was thus treated. He, as well as his followers, was traduced
as a seditious person, and used with the utmost spite and malignity. But those
who were cursed of men, were reckoned by GOD to be blessed, and actually were
blessed in his favor. And GOD's favor and love is a security of blessedness
to his people, in spite of all the ill will and malevolent designs of their
enemies. Observe how GOD speaks concerning the enemies of his people: They
hired Balaam, the son of Beor of Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee.
Nevertheless the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam: but the Lord thy
God turned the Curse into a blessing, because the Lord thy God loved thee.
Deuteronomy. 28. 4, 5. GOD made the wretch, that intended a Curse, to pronounce a
Blessing; and the more forward men were (...) curse them, the more inclined GOD
was to bless them. And the very Curse of the wicked is sometimes a Blessing and
an advantage. For when their wickedness is brought to light, and has rendered
them odious and abominable; it is natural for men to apprehend, there must be a
more than ordinary goodness in those who are the objects of such men's greatest
hatred and the most angry of our adversaries, I hope will not be displeased
with us, if we observe and admire the steps of divine providence, in this
respect, toward ourselves.

2. THE Curse causeless, according to the other reading, shall come upon him;
that is, shall recoil upon the Author. The greatest mischief it does, is to
him, out of whose mouth it proceeds.

AND this cannot be thought strange, since the Curse causeless is a palpable
wickedness. And who is most hurt by any wickedness, but the person who commits
it? He that sins against God wrongs his own soul. Prove. 8. 36. By this, as well
as all other wickedness, men provoke the anger of the Almighty; and that is, of
all others, the most dreadful curse. And I may further add, that this is a very
aggravated wickedness, and therefore may the rather be supposed likely to fall
heavy upon them, who are guilty of it.

THE thing is not only contrary to a gospel temper, and a true christian
spirit; but is likewise a most daring invasion of the prerogative of the
heavenly King; which must be most notorious in those, who pretend, above all
men, to be tender of and zealous for, the prerogative of earthly Kings. Rash
and censorious judging, is a bold aspiring to his prerogative of searching the
hearts of men: and Christ has warned men, what to expect in this (...) Judge
not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged; and with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again. Mat.
7. 1, 2. So that our Savior himself has determined the case, that the Curse
causeless, the harsh and cruel sentences men pass upon their neighbors, shall
be executed upon themselves.

AND this is further an invading GOD's prerogative, in as much as it is a taking
vengeance out of GOD's hand into men's own. Vengeance is mine, faith the Lord,
and I will recompense. Heb. 10. 30. But when men become thus daring, GOD may
convince them of their error, and satisfy them, to whom vengeance belongs, to
their cost. And all the world must own, there is a righteousness in the
procedure, when men are dealt with according to the verdict they pass upon
their neighbors. What more just, than that he should have judgment without
mercy, that has showed no mercy? Jam. 2. 13. And that such a sentence should
take place: As be loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as be delighted not
in blessing, so let it be far from him: As be clothed himself with cursing,
like as with his garment; so let it come into his bowels like water, and like
oil into his bones. Psalm. 119 17, 18. And very applicable here are the words of
the Apostle: Romans 2. 3. And think thou this, O man, that judge them that
do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God?
God is known, says the Psalmist, by the judgment which he executes: the wicked
is snared by the work of his own hands. Psalm. 9. 16.

AND certainly the conduct of divine providence has been very admirable in our
time; we have seen the men, who were so zealous in asserting the doctrines of
Passive Obedience and Non-resistance, and in damning such as opposed them; we
have lived, I say, to see them forced to renounce both the principle and
practice, and take up arms in defense of their Liberties, when they were
themselves attacked. And for their acting thus at the Revolution, if the thing
be considered abstractly from their before avowed principles, I am far from
blaming them. But if there was any edge in the severe sentences they used to
pass, it is evident from that time it became turned against themselves. We have
seen the men, who doomed us as Rebels to destruction in this world, and the pit
of hell in the world to come; them, I say, even them, have we seen left, by a
just and righteous GOD, to act the Rebels in the open field, against a
Government, which had never given them the least cause of complaint; and which
they themselves, in the solemnest manner, had testified to be rightful and just.

AND now, what shall we say, but that the Curse causeless is come upon the
Curser? Behold be travaileth with iniquity, and bath conceived mischief, and
brought forth falsehood. He made a pit, and dug it, and is fallon into the
ditch which he made. His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his
violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate. Psalm. 7. 14. etc.

I Have but a few things to add briefly concerning our Duty on this occasion.

1. WHEN we observe this conduct of providence, it should excite our praise and
thanksgiving. So the Psalmist, upon his having mentioned the wicked falling in
the mischief they intended for others, in the Psalm just now referred to,
immediately adds: I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness, (there
is a righteousness in the procedure, that well deserves to be the subject of
our praise) and will sing praise unto the Name of the Lord most high. When the
enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lust
shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them;
but GOD blew upon them with his wind, Exodus 15. 9, 10, 11. and confounded them:
then Moses and the children of Israel celebrated it with a song; then they
extolled him as beyond compare; Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the
gods! who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders! There is a charming beauty in the course of providence, that calls
often for our admiration and praise. GOD often displays his righteousness, in
overruling the sins of men to the accomplishment of his own purposes; and his
justice is displayed in his letting wicked instruments, by wicked methods,
bring about a terrible vengeance. And these works of the Lord are great, sought
out of all them that have pleasure therein. His work is honorable and
glorious; and his righteousness endures for ever. He has made his wonderful
works to be remembered. Psalm. 11. ^, 3, 4. And therefore well may I say with the
Psalmist, in the first verse of the Psalm: Praise ye the Lord, I will praise
the Lord with my whole Heart, in the assembly of the upright, and in the
congregation.

2. WE may from hence satisfy ourselves of the reasonableness of our bearing
such treatment with patience. Our enemies are not able to take the least step
without the divine permission. They are limited in every thing they attempt,
and would set about. However they may curse us causelessly, yet they cannot
inflict their own Curse; and since the Curse causeless does not take effect
upon those, against whom it is designed, there can be little reason for our
being very much disturbed and disquieted by it. It Is indeed provoking to a
person, to be so treated, when he has given no occasion for it, and it may be
some trouble; but this trouble is more easy to be born, than many others. And
it is a sign we are little acquainted with the great duty of self denial, and
the bearing the cross, if we cannot take patiently such reproachful language.
If we cannot bear hard words, how shall we resist unto blood? Besides, as they
are not able at their own pleasure to inflict their causeless Curse, so neither
can they so much as curse, without a divine permission. And if we consider the
trouble, as under GOD's ordering, there is the more reason to bear it
patiently; as David did when cursed by Shimei: Let him curse, because the Lord
has said unto him, Curse David. Who then shall say, Wherefore have thou done
so? 2 Samuel 16. 10. And the ^ather may we bear it patiently, since such
treatment has been the lot of good men in all ages. David I mentioned, and
Jeremiah complains, that though he had given them no cause, yet every one of the
people did curse him. Jer. 15. 10. And the thing is most notorious in the
Apostles, and especially in our LORD himself.

3. WE may hence be directed in our conduct toward them. We have more reason to
pity them, than to be enraged by them. Poor souls! little do they think, what
they are doing, when they are causelessly cursing their neighbors. They will
not be able to do us a thousandth part of the hurt, which without fail they do
themselves. We have no need to return them their own usage. They will have
enough of their own cursing, and need no addition of ours. Let us then follow
the direction of our Lord: But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray, for them which
despightfully use you, and persecute you. Mat. 5. 44. Our business is to pity,
and pray for them, that the Curse they imprecate upon others, may, by their
timely repentance, be prevented from ever falling upon themselves.

4. LET us hence learn our duty to trust in GOD, and be the more careful to
perform it. We ought to trust in him, to keep us from the mischief our enemies
would be glad to see fall upon us. Thus David encouraged himself in the LORD
his GOD, when (...) cursed him: It may be the Lord will look upon my
affliction, and that the Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day. 2 Samuel 17. 12. Let their malice drive us to our refuge, and make us the more
confident in our prayers to GOD for his Blessing. The more sincerely and
heartily we trust in him, the more easy we may well be: for this is a certain
method of turning their curse to an advantage. And therefore let us say with
David: Let them curse, but bless thou. Psalm. 109. 28.

FINIS.

