THE DECREE In the Case of Solomon De Medina, Mosesson and Company, Merchants
in LONDON, AN^ Roderigo Pacheco, Jacob De Lara and Manuel de Costa, Bearers of
their ORDERS, COMPLAINANTS AGAINST Rene Het and the Executors of Andrew
Fresneau, Deceased, DEFENDANTS, In Cancellaria Nova-Eborac.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford in New York, 1728.

Advertisement.
FOr the better understanding the following Decree, the Candid Reader is
desired, when he comes to the 17th page, where he Proofs of the Charges begin,
before he reads the Proof of each Charge, to return back and first read the
Charge it self over again, and then to read the Proof thereof; from thence to
turn to the 32d page, for the Opinion of the Court upon the Charge and Proof
thereof.

The Reader is also desired, where th^^e's References to Arguments used
elsewhere in the Decree, to turn to the Arguments so refered to, and read them
again upon that Point: For Example, In page 19. in the Proof of Charge ix. the
Arguments of the 3d of June are referred to, at which place the Reader is to
turn back to the Proceedings of the 3d of June, which he will find in page 8.
below the middle of the page.

And where the Numbers of the Articles of Hett's Account are mentioned, you are
desired to turn to the 3d and 4th pages, to see what the Articles are.

Some few Errors have escaped the Press, which the Reader is desired to correct
with his Pen, viz. page 6. xv. Charge, line 2, for done read due* p. 7. l. 9,
for Warrant read Writ. p. 8. l. 24, for some failing in, read since filing* p.
9. l. 40. for agrued read argued. p. 10, l. 24, for an read no. There are also
some Litteral Escapes, which the Candid Reader is desired to amend, when he
meets with them. Its to be observed also, that the Pointing is in sundry places
wrong; which its hoped the Reader will Excuse.

Solomon De Medina, Mosesson and Company, Merchants in London, and Roderigo
Pacheco, Jacob De Lara and Manuel vaz De Costa, Bearers of their Orders,
Complainants. AGAINST Rene Hett and the Executors of Andrew Fresneau, Deceased,
Defendants.
In Cancellaria Novae Eborac.
The Decree.
WHEREAS heretofore on the 14th of October, Anno Domini 1726. Solomon de
Medina, Mosesson and Company, Roderigo Pacheco, Jacob De Lara and Manuel vaz de
Costa, Complainants, Exhibited their Bill of Complaint into this High and
Honorable Court of Chancery against Hester Fresneau, Peter Morine, Mary Morine
and Judith Jamain, Executors of the last Will of Andrew Fresneau, deceased, and
against Rene Hett, Defendants, thereby setting forth.

I. Charge. That in the Month of March in the 5th year of King George, Capt.
Jacobs of the Diamond Man of War, took and brought into the Port of New York,
the Ship Victory, belonging to the India Company of France, and commanded by
Capt. Christopher d' Rossel, having on board, amongst other things, 2217 Bags
of Tobacco in Snuff, and sundry quantities of Tobacco in Rolls and Hands, great
part whereof had been loaded at the Havana for the King of Spain, then an
Enemy, to be delivered at Cadiz in Spain, on payment of 13000 Pieces of Eight,
Freight. Which Tobaccoes the said Capt. Jacobs Libelled against, as Lawful
Prize in the Court of Admiralty of New York, and against many other Goods in
the said Libel mentioned, and the Suit there Depedned till the 26th of October,
1721* when it was by the said Court Decreed, That the Tobaccoes and Goods
aforesaid, be acquitted and discharged from the said Caption, from which Decree
Capt. Jacobs appealed to the High Court of Admiralty of Great Britain:
Whereupon, by Order of the Court of Admiralty of New York, the said Tobaccoes
were deposited in the hands of the said Andrew Fresneau and Rene Hett, upon
security to pay to Capt. Jacobs the apprized value thereof, or return him the
Tobaccoes, in case the Decree should be Reversed, as by the Proceedings in the
Admiralty, referred to, appears.

II Charge. That Hett and Fresneau, by their Letter to the India Company of
France, dated the 22d Day of March, 1721-2. acknowledged they had received in
all 1998 Bags of the said Tobaccoes, in Snuff, weighing 379845 Pounds, also 108
Rolls of Tobacco weighing 14309 l. Also, of Leaf Tobacco 9628 Pounds, Damaged
and Undamaged. That the said Decree being Confirmed, the India Company
acquainted the King of Spain, that he might dispose of his said Tobaccoes,
paying them their Freight and Charges; whereupon Mons. Lawles, Ambassador of
the King of Spain, in France, by orders from his Master, adjusted the
Pretensions of the India Company for Freight and Charges at 15365 Pieces of
Eight and two Rials; and by his Letter dated the 6th of February, 1725. Ordered
the India Company to give their Directions for the Delivery of the Tobaccoes to
the Complainants, Medina and Company, who would pay the Sum agreed on. Pursuant
to which Letter, by Articles of Agreement at Paris, dated the 8th of May, 1725.
the said Sum was secured to be paid to the India Company, as also all the
Charges of the Prosecution of the Appeal, and the India Company thereby agreed
to give directions to the said Hett and Fresneau to deliver the said* Tobaccoes
to Medina and Company, or their Orders, being Reimbursed all the Charges they
had been at, which should not be found to be comprehended in the aforesaid
Account of Charges, and paying them the Commissions that should be due to them.
And to put Medina and Company in a way to cause Hett and Fresneau to account
for the Tobaccoes, the India Company delivered the Letters and Accounts of Hett
and Fresneau concerning them; Which Agreement the bearers of the Orders of
Medina and Company were to accept of at New York, otherwise it was not to be in
force. And accordingly the same day the India Company, by Letter to Hett and
Fresneau did Direct the delivery of the said Tobaccoes to the bearers of the
Orders of Medina and Company; and to make no difficulty therein upon their
acceptance of the said Agreement, and paying them their Charges and Commissions.

III. Charge. That Medina and Company, by their Letter subjoyned to the India
Companys, direct the Delivery of the Tobaccoes, to the Complainants, Roderigo
Pacheco, Jacob De Lara, and Manuel vaz de Costa, bearers of the said Letters.
That on the 17th of November, 1725. the said bearers delivered the said Letters
to the Defendant Rene Hett, (Mr. Fresneau being dead) who in the presence of a
Notary, accepted thereof, and promised Compliance therewith, if the bearers
would do what on their part was to be done; and accordingly the said bearers
did, before a Notary, on the 19th of said November, accept of the said Articles
of Agreement, and promise what on their part was to be done, as by an Act of
Richard Nicholls, Notary, signifying the same acceptances and promises,
referred to and proffered, might appear; which Promises and Acceptances, by the
Law of Merchants, obliged Performance by each party to the other.

IV. Charge. The Bill then Charges, That on the bearers desire of the Defendant
Hett's Account of Charges and Commissions, he told them, It came to about
Fourteen Hundred Pounds, but refused to show them any Account for what, and
told them, if it was not paid in three days, he would protest against them, and
not deliver the Tobaccoes. Which behavior in demanding of so great a Sum in so
short a time, and denying to show for what, so contrary to the Custom of fair
Merchants, surprised the said bearers, and brought them into a great strait.
That on the 25th day of November aforesaid, the day insisted on for payment of
the said Sum, the bearers, in the presence of the Notary, Counted out the said
Fourteen Hundred Pounds, to the Defendant Hett, who then did, and not till then
would, show his Account; the Balance whereof amounted to 1397 l. 18 s. 3 d
which Sum he then received and gave his Receipt for it.

V. Charge. The Bill further charges, that the Account is extravagant, false
and fraudulent, in the greatest part of the Articles thereof. And that though
three times as much as the Commissions due, were therein Charged, yet no sooner
he Received the said Sum, but he trumped up a new pretense, and showed a Bond
of 1500 l. with condition to pay Five Pounds for every Hundred Pounds worth of
Snuff he should deliver, to be computed at the rate of Eleven Pence per Pound,
telling them, they must execute that or they should have no Snuff, but if they
would, they might begin to weigh to morrow, whereupon the bearers executed also
that Bond.

VI. Charge. That afterward, the said Hett delivered to the bearers 1691 Bags
of Snuff, great and small, damaged and undamaged, weighing 315400 l. and a
half, 101 Rolls of Tobacco, weighing 10412 l. and no more, as by the deputy
Weigh-Masters Certificate appears, and then said, he had no more to deliver,
when by his Account to the India Company, there remained undelivered 307 bags
of Snuff, weighing 64424 Pounds, 3875 Pounds of Tobacco in Roll, and 9628
Pounds in Leaf Tobacco, and upwards, which he still denied to deliver, and
therefore on the 9th of March there-after, the bearers, in the presence of the
Notary, demanded it of him, and upon his denial, protested, according to the
Custom of Merchants, in the like case.

The Bill then objects, first in general, and then to particular Articles of
the Defendant Hett's account, affixed to the Bill, which Articles thereof
objected to, are as follows.

On the Debtor side.
1721. l. s. d. No. 1 Oct. 28. To Mr. Hamilton for what Capt. D'Rossel owed him
180 0 0 2 To ditto for his Fees till the adjudication, 200 0 0 3 To ditto for
his Extraordinary Expenses, 40 0 0 7 Jan. 26. To Charges by Andrew Fresneau and
Rene Hett, 48 14 1 11 To the Naval Officer, 15 0 0 21 To Abraham Governeur, for
what Capt. D' Rossel owed him, 40 0 0 22 To Mr. Wileman, Register his Account,
46 0 0 23 To Ditto, 27 10 9 24 To Ditto, 48 11 1 25 To Ditto, 19 13 4 26 To
Sundry Expenses with the Lawyers, 65 0 0 27 To Gratifications to sundry
Gentelmen, 60 0 0 28 Aug. 25 1724. To the Pilot of the Victory, 10 0 0 29 To
sundry petty Charges, 10 0 0 33 April 24 1725. To Abraham Governeur, French
Interpreter, 40 0 0 34 To ditto as Solicitor for these five years and writting
several Letters and advice, 50 0 0 35 To a bag of Snuff to Capt. Jacobs's
Agents, 5 12 6 36 To two ditto to sundry Officers 400 l. 12 10 0 37 To 50 l.
ditto to Abraham Governeur, 1 11 3 38 To a Roll of Tobacco to an Officer, 1 10
0 39 To Mr. Wileman and other Lawers for sundry services, 30 0 0 40 To Negro
hire for removing the Snuff and turning the same from time to time, 230 days,
40 0 0 41 June 7. To mending the Bags, 40 7 7 42 To 3230 Yards and half of
Ozenburghs at 14 Pence per yard, 194 11 8 43 To Postage of Letters, 15 0 0
Total, with the Articles not objected to, is 2130 12 2 44 To Commissions for
paying said Sum at 5 per Cent. 106 10 7 45 To Commission and Storage of 11490
l. 5 s. 7 d. at 7 and half p. Cent 861 15 4 3098 18 2 46 To the Balance of the
above Account in my favor ^294 7 9 47 To the Interest thereof for one year at
8 per Cent. 103 10 5 Due to me 1397 18 3

Articles objected to on the Credit side are as follows.
No. 1 By Snuff given to Capt. Jacobs's Agents, 5 l. 12 s. 6 d. 2 By ditto to
sundry Officers 400 l. 12 10 0 3 By ditto to Abraham Governeur 1 11 3 4 By a
Roll of Tobacco to an Officer, 1 10 0 5 June 29. 1721 By 102 Bales Snuff sold
Nathan Simson, weight neat 18324 l. at 7 d. 572 12 6 6 Feb. 12. By 9 Bales to
Rodrigo Pacheco 1588 l. at 8 d. 56 4 10 7 22. By 77 C. 1 qr. o Tobacco in
Manoques sold Mr. Mordecai Gomez, at 27 s. 6 d. 106 11 3 8 By ditto to ditto,
19 C. Damified at 22 s. 6 d. 21 7 6 9 March 5. By 15 Bags Snuff sold Mr.
Augustus Jay, 2699 l. at 8 92 15 6 10 By 9 Bags to John Waldron, 1519 l. at 8
d. per l. 50 12 8 11 June 10. By 6 Seroons roll Tobacco 7 C. 1 qr. 16 l. at 36
s. 13 9 4 12 By 200 l. Sterling drawn on the Company at 60 per Cent. 320 0 0 13
April 19. 1724. By 137 Bags Snuff to Andrew Fresneau and Rene Hett 20628 l. at
7 d. 644 12 6 1899 9 10 14 To Commission for Sale at 5 per Cent. 94 19 6 1804
10 4

Which Objections Charged, are in Substance,

VII. Charge. 1. Objection, That this Account was no ways conformable to the
Accounts that had been kept of the said Tobaccoes (which the Complainants pray
to be produced) but that the same was lately framed and devised by the
Defendant Hett, and Abraham Governeur.

VIII. Charge. 2. Object. That the Complainants have often, in a friendly
manner, requested the Defendant Hett, to come to a fair account, and to leave
their Differences to Merchants, but that he absolutely refused so to do, and
instead thereof, put the said 1500 l. Bond in Suit, and caused the Complainant
Pacheco, to be taken and arrested thereon.

IX. Charge. 3. Object. That D' Rossel left Money or Goods in the hands of Hett
and Fresneau to bear the Charge of the Defense of the Tobaccoes, and to pay the
Articles of his Debts.

X. Charge. 4. Object. That the Law Charges were as well expended in Defense of
the French Goods, as the Spanish Tobaccoes, and therefore the Charges ought to
be proportional.

XI. Charge. 5. Object. That the Articles of D' Rossels Debts could not be
chargeable on the King of Spain's Tobaccoes.

XII. Charge. 6. Object. That Many and great parts of the Articles were
Extravagant, and not paid by Hett nor Fresneau, and that some of their Reciepts
were much more than what they actually paid.

XIII. Charge. 7. Object. That the 35 th, 36 th, 37 th and 38 th Articles by
the face of the Account, appear to be Imbezlements, and are placed on both
sides of the Account, by means whereof 17 and half per Cent. Commissions are
charged for making these Imbezlements.

XIV. Charge. 8 Object. That many of the Payments pretended to be made, not
being made, the 44 th Article of 5 per Cent. Commissions for paying, ought to
be reduced to the Sums actually paid.

XV. Charge. 9. Object. That Commissions of 5 per Cent. for Receiving, and of 5
per Cent. for delivering the Snuff were not in this case, of a Deposit done
either by the Laws of England, the Law of Nations or of Merc^^nts. That as to
the two and half per Cent. Commissions of Storeage, they objected not, nor to
what might be reasonable for any Trouble or Pains that has been taken about the
Snuff; and if Store Rent exceeded the Commissions of storeage, they had no
Objection against allowing what it so exceeded them.

XVI. Charge. 10. Object. That the Sales of the Tobaccoes and Snuff, so
deposited as aforesaid, were so many Frauds and Breaches of Trust, and the more
Fraudulent for that they accquainted not the India Company of the making of
them; but after the greatest part of them were made, drew Bills of Exchange
upon the India Company for the Charges they had been at, and desired leave to
sell, which was refused them, but the Company promised to reimburse them their
Charges; and their Sales being unlawful, they ought not to have Rewards for
committing these unlawful Acts.

XVII. Charge. 11. Object. That when the Quantity of Snuff delivered to the
Complainants (315382) and the Quantity for which Credit is given, as sold,
taken to themselves, and gifted away (46448) are both subtracted from the
Quantity of Snuff deposited in Fresneau and Hetts hands (379845) there appears
still to be wanting above Eighteen Thousand weight of Snuff, which the
Defendants refuse to Account for or deliver, and charge, that greater
Quantities of the Snuff have been sold, and for greater Prices than what Credit
is given for, and demand the Accounts of the Sales of all, and Credit for the
Prices sold for.

XVIII. Charge. 12. Object. That the Defendants had Clandestinely concealed
great Quantities of Snuff in Barrels, and other things, in private Places, and
had Clandestinely shipped off great Quantities thereof in Barrels, and other
things, and demand the Delivery of what is thereof in their power, and an
Account for the rest.

XIX. Charge. 13. Object. That by the Defendants unlawful Sales, they had
deprived the Complainants of great Gains by the said Snuff, and that the
Defendants had reaped great Profits by trading with the Money arising by these
unlawful Sales, to which they are not entitled; but the Price sold for, and
the Profits thereof ought to be Accounted for to the Complainants, in lieu of
the Snuff it self.

Therefore, and for that the Complainants could have no Remedy herein at Law,
being matters of Fraud and Discovery, they prayed the aid of this Court to
Compel the Defendants to a Discovery of the Premises, by Answer upon Oath, and
to produce the Books of Accounts that were kept of the said Tobaccoes, and to
come to a fair Account, and deliver up the said Bond and the Snuff remaining in
their hands, and that the Complainants might have such other and farther Relief
as is agreeable to Equity and good Conscience.

And farther prayed, a Warrant of Injunction to stay Proceedings at Law on the
said Bond, and a subpoena to appear and answer the Premises. Which being
granted, and the Defendants served therewith, they appeared, and on the 25th
of October, 1726. they were ordered to Answer the Premises in eight Days,
according to the course of the Court; which time being expired, at the prayer
of the Defendants, further time was granted them, by the favor of the Court,
until the 12th Day of December, there-after. At which time the Defendants filed
an Answer, Plea and Demurrer to the said Bill, which Plea and Demurrer came to
Hearing on the third Day of February, there-after, when after hearing of the
Arguments of the Council of both sides, this Court did conceive the said Plea
and Demurrer were not sufficient to bar the Complainants of Relief in the
Premises, and therefore overruled the same, saving to the Defendants
nevertheless, any benefit they could make of their Plea at the hearing of the
Cause.

And the Complainants Excepted to the Answer, as Insufficient, and Evading the
Discovery of the matters prayed in the Bill to be Discovered, and delivered
their Exceptions to the Defendants Clerk, setting forth the Points in which the
same Answer was Insufficient and Evasive, in order for the Defendants to Answer
to the points defective in Eight Days, according to the course of the Court;
which time being elapsed, and no Answer to these Points put in, the
Complainants Jacob De Lara and Manuel vaz de Costa, on the 14th of February,
made Oath to this purpose, That they came from England hither to receive the
said Tobaccoes, and that ever since October, 1725. they have been here without
any other business, and have no other business here whatsoever, than the
obtaining the said Tobaccoes, and Justice in this Cause. And the Complainant
Pacheco, made Oath, That he had pressing Affairs in Europe, which required his
Presence there, and that he had put his Affairs in order here for Departure,
Except only the obtaining the said Tobaccos and Justice in this Cause. And the
said De Lara, De Costa and Pacheco having, by their Petition (with Affidavits
to the purpose aforesaid, thereunto annexed) set forth to this Court, sundry
Causes that induced them to believe the Defendants affected delay in this
Cause; That Delay of Justice in this cause, in their Circumstances, might prove
as prejudicial to them, as the Denial thereof: That great Delays were commonly
used upon the References of Exceptions to Masters, and therefore prayed that
their Exceptions might be either heard by the Court without reference thereof,
as sometimes has been done to prevent Delays; Or that the Master, to whom they
should be referred, might have special Directions for Dispatch. Which Petition
and Affidavits were presented to this Court on the 14th of February, the
Defendants having been first served with Copies thereof, and a Hearing on the
Merits thereof, was appointed on the 16th Day of the same Month: At which Day
the ^^rits of the said Petition and Affidavits being fully argued and debated
by Council of both sides, this Court was of Opinion, that the Complainants
Circumstances entitled them to the Expediting of Justice in this Cause, and
that if need (...), their Exceptions should be heard in Court without
reference. But the Defendants Council admitting their first Answer not
sufficient, and denying any Intentions of Delay, and Promising to make a full
and perfect Answer, if a Fortnights Time was allowed them for the doing thereof
(the same being twice the time allowed for that purpose by the Course of the
Court) which time being elapsed, at the Prayers of the Defendants, and further
Promises of their Council, to make a full and perfect Answer, further times
were allowed till the 20th Day of March, there-after, when the Defendants filed
their second Answer; to which the Complainants again excepted, as entirely
Evasive and Insufficient. Which Exceptions, being delivered, and no Answer put
in to the Points Excepted to, they, by Order, came to be heard in Court on the
5th Day of May, 1727. At which Day, upon arguing and Debating the same, by the
Council of both sides, this Court was of Opinion, That the said Answer was very
Evasive and Insufficient in many Points, and therefore ordered a further Answer
to these Points. Which not being done in the Eight days (the time allowed for
it by the course of the Court) and further favor of Time being conceived not
due (the Circumstances of the Complainants and long Times before granted on the
first and second Answers, being considered) the Defendants were in Contempt of
the Court; And therefore on the 19th of the same Month of May, Attachments
issued to take the Defendants for their Contempt: who on the first Day of June,
1727. filed their third Answer. Afterward, on the same first Day of June, the
Defendant Hett, by Affidavit, set forth, That he had discovered some failing in
his ad Answer. That the Forty Bales of Snuff, the sale of which Capt. D' Rossel
acknowledged to be just, and said in the said Answer, to be part of that for
which Credit is given in the Defendants Account, was a mistake, and that he
believed it was that Sale of forty Bags sold to pay Coll. Lurting his
Store-Rent, before the Snuff was delivered to him and Fresneau, and by
Pitition, prayed leave to amend his second Answer, by razing these words out of
it (which is part of that for which Credit was given in this Defendants
Account.) Whereupon it was Ordered, That the Prayer of the Petition be granted,
unless cause sufficient was shown on the 3d of June, to the contrary. At which
day the said Petition and Affidavit came to be argued, in presence of the
Council of both sides, when the Council for the Complainants produced a
Certificate under the hand of the said Coll. Lurting, who is one of the Masters
of this Court, that only Twenty Four Bags had been sold to pay his Store-Rent,
and from thence concluded, that could not be the Sale of 40 Bags which D'
Rossel approved of. That D' Rossel's Letter, by them produced, bearing date
eight Months before the King of Spain's Tobaccoes were acquitted by the
Admiralty, acknowledging a Sale of 40 Bales of Snuff to be just, was a strong
Presumption, that such a Sale was made by them, to whom the approbation was
given, and also a strong Presumption, that they had Snuff of his to sell, and
that it was not a Sale of the King of Spain's Snuff, because it was then in the
Custody of the Court of Admiralty, and so not in their Power to sell any of it:
Which compared with the proceedings of the Admiralty, by which it appears, that
D' Rossel claimed as his own Property, a great Quantity of the 2217 Bags of
Snuff Libelled against; That what he claimed, was acquitted about two years
before the King of Spain's was, and before his departure from hence; and that
there were only 1998 Bags of Snuff Delivered to Hett and Fresneau, as the King
of Spain's; and from thence concluded, That D' Rossel had Snuff of his own to
leave in their hands, out of which that Sale might have been made. And further
insisted, That it appearing, that at D' Rossel's Departure, they undertook to
pay sundry Debts for him, and to be at the Charge of the Defense of the King of
Spain's Snuff, it was improbable they would undertake this without his leaving
something in their hands to do it with, especially seeing he had enough to
leave with them, even of Snuff; and considering how precarious a Fond the King
of Spain's Snuff was, to repay them at that time, it being then as likely to be
Condemned as Acquitted; and had it been Condemned, the Difficulty of their
recovery of D' Rossel, a Sea-fairing man of another Nation; and if acquitted,
there could be no reason that the King of Spain's Snuff should pay D' Rossel's
Debts. Which compared also with the great Sum allowed the India Company above
their Freight, even when the Snuff was not Delivered at Cadiz, as it ought to
have been: And from thence inferred, That there was a great Probability that D'
Rossel left Effects in their hands to pay these Debts and Charges of the
Prosecution, and that this Sale of Forty Bales, so approved of by D' Rossel,
was a part of what he so left in their hands, and of consequence, Credit ought
to have been given for it in the Defendants Accounts, and for all that he so
left in their hands, and the rather for that the Defendants still refused to
produce their Books of Accounts, though expressly demanded by the Bill, and twice
since by the past Exceptions to the Answers. Upon the whole, That this was a
Discovery accidentally dropped from the Defendants, which has with the utmost
Care been endeavored to be Concealed, and that no part of it ought to be
withdrawn, and the rather, in this case, because it is not shown by the
Affidavit, that he was surprised into it, and any Reason there appearing, would
serve as well to stifle any Perjury, when perceived as this: And as it was an
Evidence affecting the Credit of what the Defendant Hett should set forth in
his Answers, they had a Right to the Preservation thereof, and the granting the
Defendants Petition would be a Depriving them of it; and the rather, it ought
to stand, because the Defendants third Answer was still insufficient, and to
which the Complainants had Excepted; and so the Defendant Hett would have an
opportunity by a fourth Answer, to add what salvo he thought proper to this
matter. Upon Consideration whereof, and hearing all that could be said by the
Council of both sides, the Prayer of the said Petition was then disallowed;
Nevertheless, if the Defendant Hett, had not the opportunity of a fourth
Answer, and if he would then apply further, the Court would farther consider of
the matter. And the Complainants having Excepted to the Defendants third
Answer, still as Insufficient and Evasive, in many Points, the 14th Day of June
was appointed, by order of this Court, for hearing the said Exceptions. At
which Day the same came to be debated and agrued, in the presence of Council of
both sides; and the 16th of the same Month was then appointed for a further
hearing of the same, when the Exceptions were further Debated and argued by the
Council of both sides* on each of which Days the said third Answer was found
Insufficient and Evasive in sundry Points; and on the said 16th Day, a further
Answer was ordered to these Points; To which Points the Defendants filed their
fourth Answer on the ^^th Day of June. To all which four Answers the
Complainants, on the first Day of July, 1727. replied, offering to prove the
Charges of their Bill, and denying the Defendants Defenses in their Answers, to
be true. And the Defendants being subpoened to Rejoyn, they filed their
Rejoinder on the 12th Day of the same Month, denying the Replication, and
offering to prove their defenses in their Answers. And on the 13th of the same
Month, the Defendants were served with a Rule to produce their Witnesses, in
order to Examination of them. Afterward, on the 15th day of the same Month,
the Defendants, by Petition prayed for a Writ of N^ Exeat Provinciam against
the Complainant Pacheco, to compel him to give security for the Costs of this
Suit, and for the Payment of the said 1500 l. Bond, in case the Complainants
were cast; which accordingly was granted, and the Complainant Pacheco taken and
arrested thereon, and to which he gave in security in Two Thousand Pounds
accordingly. Afterward, to wit, the 18th Day of the same Month of July, the
Complainant Pacheco, by Affidavit set forth, That the Defendant Hett, had for
several Weeks past absconded; that he had great reason to believe, that Abraham
Gouverneur was the chief instrument, and a party in carrying on the Frauds
complained of in the Bill. That he was informed, and believed, that the
Defendant Hett had made over the greatest part of his Estate to his Son-in-Law
William Smith, and his Daughter Sarah Hett, on purpose to Defeat the
Complainants of their Relief in this Suit: That he verily believed, on a fair
Account, in this Suit, the Defendants would be found indebted to the
Complainants, above three Thousand Pounds; and that he feared that if the said
Abraham Gouverneur, Wm. Smith and Sarah Hett were made Parties to the Bill,
they would not abide the Judgment of the Court, and had a like fear of Mrs.
Fresneau. Wherefore by Petition, setting also forth, That it appeared by the
Answers, that the said Abraham Gouverneur had received sundry large Sums of
Money, part of what the said Hett had defrauded the Complainants of, and for
which the said Gouverneur could render an Account. Which Petition being annexed
to the said Affidavit the Complainants thereby prayed Ne Exeats against the
said Abraham Gouverneur, Wm. Smith, Sarah Hett and Hester Fresneau, and that
the Complainants might have leave to make the said Abraham Gouverneur, Wm.
Smith and Sarah Hett Parties to the said Bill; and (because they were averse to
that Charge, unless of an unavoidable necessity of doing it, or of losing their
Money) they prayed time for the doing thereof, until the then Defendants have
been ten days in Contempt for not complying with such Decree as shall be given
in this Cause, if any such shall be given against the Defendants. Whereupon the
Prayer of the Petition was granted, restricting the Security on the Ne Exeats
to Two Thousand Pounds. And the said Abrah. Gouverneur, William Smith, Sarah
Hett and Hester Fresneau were taken on the Ne Exeats, and gave in Security
accordingly. On which same 18th of July, the Complainants, by another Petition,
prayed (for avoiding of delay) that both sides might make their full proof
before the hearing of the Cause, and be concluded from Examining after the
hearing: And on hearing of the Council of both sides on the merits of the said
Petition, this Court did not see sufficient cause for the granting thereof,
therefore disallowed the Prayer of the same. Afterward, on the 21th day of the
same Month, the Defendants were served with the Rule to Examine their
Witnesses, and the Complainants proceeded to Examine their Witnesses.
Afterward, to wit, the second day of August, 1727. the Defendants, by
Petition, without Affidvit, prayed Commissions to London, to Examine George
Ch^^ot, and the Complainants De Lara and De Costa, who were gone there* and
(...) France to Examine Capt. D' Rossel and Mons. Durand, Mons. L^vod^s,
heretofore Lieutenants of the Victory, and Mons. Baraule Clerk of the said
Ship* On which Petition, Council of both sides being heard, those for the
Complainants insisted,

1 st, That before the granting the said Petition, this Court ought to be well
Convinced of the absolute neccessity thereof, in so far as the granting of it
would be, in effect, hanging up the Cause forever, because most of the Persons
prayed to be Examined, being of another Nation, and Sea-fairing Men; and
therefore probably scattered into different places unknown to the Defendants;
it probably would be many years, if the Defendants did their utmost Endeavors,
before they could be found to be Examined* but if this was intended purely for
Delay, they would take care that they should never be found to be Examined; and
so from time to time, obtain new Commissions, for which Pretenses enough might
be found.

2 dly, That it was evident from common Reason, and the Practice of the Court
of Chancery at home, then shown, that the facts on which any thing is prayed,
ought to appear true, and sufficient for granting the thing desired; and
therefore the Defendants must be irregular inmaking this Petition, without any
Proof of the Necessity of Examining these Witnesses.

3 dly, That to make that Necessity evident, it ought to appear, by Affidavit
or other-wise, what Points each Witness can depose to, and that the Petitioner
knows of none here to prove the same Points, whereon the Court might and ought
to consider, whether these Points were material, that Delays, by unnecessary
Examinations, might be avided; and that, with this agrees the Practice of the
Court of Chancery at Home, as appears in the Book of Orders thereof, page 207.

4 dly, That should the Court thereon be convinced that the Points were
material, and that these Witnesses could depose to them, yet the other Party
had the Liberty of admitting these Points, as proved, which the Complainants
would certainly choose, in this case, rather than be delayed; and played, That
for the irregularity of this Petition, being without any Affidavit or Proof of
the facts thereof, it might be dismissed. Whereupon, and upon hearing what could
be said by the Council of both sides, this Court did order, That on or before
the 2 d day of September, the Defendants do file the Points to which they want
to Examine beyond Sea; and by the 8th of the same Month, that they make it
evident by Affidavit, or other-wise, that the Witnesses can materially depose
to these Points. Afterward, to wit, the Ninth day of August, 1727. the
Complainant Pacheco, by Affidavit, set forth, That he had information that the
Defendant Hett and one John Lafont, had privately packt a large Quantity of the
Snuff in dispute, into Barrels, and concealed the same; that it was lately
carried in the night to, and concealed in the Cellar of one Mrs. Bieu, the Wife
of a Mariner; and by Petition therewith, set forth, That the Defendant Hett,
having absconded, and the burden of this Suit being like to fall on the Widow
and Children of Fresneau, the Discovery hereof would so much (...) them; and
that the Widow had prayed, That all means might be taken for the discovery and
Recovery thereof, therefore prayed the Court to do therein what might be
agreeable to Equity and Justice. Whereupon this Court did Order the Examiner of
this Court to go to the Houses of the said Bieu and Lafont, and to Examine them
to the Truth of the said Information; and if upon Examination it appeared
(...)* Then that Robert Lurting, one of the Masters of the Court, do take the
Snuff into his Custody, (...) the further Order of this Court. Pursuant to
which Order, the said (...) day reported to this Court, that he Examined Mrs.
Bieu to the truth of the Information aforesaid, set forth in the said Petition,
on Oath; to which she answered in the Negative, and declared that she knew
nothing of the matters therein contained. That he in like manner Examined Mr.
Lafont to the same, upon Oath, to which the said Lafont also answered in the
Negative, and declared, he knew nothing of the matters there in contained: But
being informed that Mr. Lafont had considered better of what he had said, and
that he would declare the whole truth, if he were Re-Examined, he the said
Examiner returned to Mr. Lafonts, and in the presence of Coll. Lurting, one of
the Masters of this Court, Examined him to the same Points he had before done,
to which he then replied, That there was a private Cellar in the House of Bieu
beforementioned, that there were many Barrels of Snuff lodged in said Cellar;
That he had packed three or four Barrels of said Snuff; that the same was there
lodged by Mr. Rene Hett, or his order, and marked for Beef; and that said
Cellar was hired by said Hett for that purpose. The said Examiner further
reported, That after he had gone from Mr. Lafonts House, but some few Steps,
Mr. Lafont followed him, and desired him to Observe, that he did not know that
the said Snuff belonged to the Cargo of the Ship Victory. And the said Master
Reported, That having been present at the said Last Examination of Lafont, he
went with Elias Pipon, Son-in-Law of said Lafont, with the Consent of said
Lafont, to the Cellar of the said Bieu, within which Cellar, along the Wall on
the left side, there were Stanchions put up, and boards behind those
Stanchions, which Mr. Pipon having beat down, behind them then appeared a small
door nailed fast, which he opened, within which was a small Cellar, where lay
Twenty Casks of Snuff, which he the said Master took into his possession, to
wait the further order of this Court concerning the same: Which Twenty Casks
weigh 3697 Pounds neat. Robert Lurting, M. C. Afterward, to wit, the 24th Day
of the same Month of August, the Complainants by Petition, set forth, That they
had credible information of sundry more Quantities of the said Snuff, which was
quickly to be Transported to the Defendant Hett, who still absconded in another
Province, to avoid the Justice of this Court, and that they had given notice of
Examining sundry Persons, who they had reason to believe, were privy to the
said Concealments, and design of Transportation of said Snuff, and therefore
prayed Relief of this Court herein; Whereupon it was ordered, That if the
Examiner upon the Examination of the Witnesses in this cause, does therefrom
discover any more Quantities of Snuff, so concealed by the Defendant, Hett,
That the Examiner acquaint this Court thereof, And if his Excellency should be
absent, that Robert Lurting, one of the Masters, do take it into his Custody,
to wait the further Order of this Court.

Afterward, pursuant to the Order of August 2d, the Defendants filed the
Points they would Examine to beyond Sea, which in substance are,

1 st, That Capt. D' Rossel agreed to pay Fresneau and Hett all the Commissions
they charge.

2 dly, That he ordered them to pay the necessary Charges of the Snuff, and
what Debts were owing by him, and to sell a part of the Snuff for that purpose;
and that by his Power of Attorney, in the Answers mentioned, he intended fully
to enable them to that purpose.

3 dly, That he ordered them to pay Mr. Ham^^^^^ ^0 l. when the Snuff should be
acquitted, for Services he had done relating to the Snuff.

4 thly, A like Order as to 40 l. to Abraham Gouverneur.

5 thly, That he ordered them to pay for Mr. Baraules Maintenance at New York.

6 thly, That he ordered them to act with the Advice of Abraham Gouverneur in
the whole Affair, and to pay him for his Trouble.

7 thly, That he ordered them not to part with the Snuff to the French Company,
without a precise Order from him.

8 thly, To Examine D' Rossell whether his Letter of the 13 th of February,
1721. was not upon Notice of the Seizure of forty Bags of Snuff for Store-Rent.

9 thly, To Examine Mr. Chabot in London concerning the Quantity of Snuff sent
in the Duke of Portland.

10 thly, To Examine De Lara and De Costa, as to an Agreement about the Account
and Bond set forth in the Answers.

And the Hearing of this Matter being put off to the 15th day of September,
1727. at which day the same coming to be heard, in presence of Council of both
sides, the Council for the Executors of Fresneau disowned the said Petition for
Commissions, and prayed that this Court would proceed without delay to the
Determination of this Cause. And by the Council for the Defendant Hett, it was
insisted on, That these Points were material, and proper to be examined to in
Foreign Parts, in so far as most of these Points were by the Answers asserted
to be True; and that these ^^^sons, who from the nature of the thing, must have
been Transacting them, or privy thereto, must be presumed to be the most proper
Evidences thereto.

To which it was answered by the Complainants Council, That they conceived them
not very material, and rather than to be put to the Delay of Commissions, would
admit every one of these Points to be true. And then in part, but more fully
afterward; on the hearing of this Cause, insisted That as to the first Point,
This is the very first time that in all this Cause this thing was broached, and
a matter of such Moment as the Defendants would make it, cannot (were it true)
have slipped the Defendants Memory, during all the four Answers. But yet, there
is nothing to that Purpose in any of the Answers; and as by the Answers, no
such thing was asserted or put in issue, they could not, by the Practice of the
Court, examine to it. Again, it cannot well be presumed, that such a thing
could be without some Writing, or Letter, or Paper, or some Persons here who
have heard it; and yet, no such thing do they pretend there is: But further
insisted, That were such agreement confessed, it would be no way binding, for
by the Law of Nations, and of Merchants, no Master of a Vessel (as D' Rossel
was) nor even the Owners (as the India Company were) could (either alone or
both together) charge the goods freighted with them (as this Snuff of the King
of Spain's was) with any thing beyond the Freight agreed on, further than the
Expenses that are absolutely necessary for the Preservation thereof: Again,
were that Agreement good and binding, then if Hett had the same but one Night
in his Custody, he must have had so much for it as now; and whatever Power D'
Rossel had to make that Agreement with him, he had a like Power to make it with
another Person; and so, after it had been a Night in Hetts Custody, might have
put it into anthers Custody, upon like terms, and the like with a third,
fourth, fifth, etc. Persons; how absurd and contrary to common Reason, and the
Laws of Nations and of Merchans this would be, needs not further enlarging
on. And therefore either such an Agreement never was; but if it had been, the
same is void.

As to the 2 d Point, the Complainants never did or will dispute the payment of
necessary Charges about the Snuff; but as to D' Rossel's Debts, no Order of his
can, in Law or Reason, make another persons Good liable to the payment of them:
And as to his Power, it could not empower them to do what neither he nor the
India Company themselves could do, to sell another Persons Goods, unless an
absolute Necessity had happened, of selling a part for the Perservation of the
rest; which Necessity has no way appeared in this case.

As to the 3 d, 4 th, 5 th and 6 th, the proving or not proving of these
Orders, cannot be material or affect this Cause, for the Reasons before; nor
can it be material to prove the 7 th Point, for its only proving that D' Rossel
gave them an Order, which neither Law nor Reason could justify them in obeying:
For as by the Law of Nations and of Merchants, the Owners of a Ship are
answerable for the Master, and all Persons to whom he shall entrust the goods
freighted in their Ship, it must be in their Power either to change the Master
or Keeper of those Goods, for such Persons as they shall choose rather to trust
them with.

As to the 8 th, They acknowledged, it might be material, and rather than be
delayed, they would choose to admit it to be true.

As to the 9 th, Mr. Chabot could not be the proper Evidence of what was Shipped
in the Duke of Portland, but the Custom-House-Books, the Master and Owners
here, must be proper Evidences of the Quantity Shipped, and Chabot, could only be
of the Quantity Delivered him.

As to the 10 th, Every thing material concerning the Agreement and Bond, in
the Answer set forth, was as well transacted with Mr. Pacheco, as De Lara and
De Costa, so that they could Examine Mr. Pacheco here upon the Spot, to that
matter, who was ready to Answer any Interrogatories to that purpose; and it was
asserted, They might have Examined De Lara and De Costa before they went, they
having given public Notice of their going, in the Secretary's Office,
according to the Custom of this place. So that upon the whole, they insisted,
This pretense of want of Commissions to Examine beyond Seas, was only a pretext
to delay Justice in this cause, and the rather, for that it has been public
fame here, these many Months past, that D' Rossel was Ship-wreckt and lost in a
Voyage for Quebeck, and his Officers being Seafaring Men, could not be
supposed to be easily found, to be Examined. And further insisted, That though
the Points had been material, and were set forth in the Answer as true, yet it
could no way be inferred from thence, that these Persons set forth in the
Petition, could prove these Points, Nor that there were no Persons or means
here to prove them; both which they conceived ought to appear to this Court,
before such a delay, as almost a mounted to hanging up the Cause forever, were
granted, and which, by the Reason and Practice set forth in the former hearing
on this matter, ought to appear to this Court; And therefore prayed, the said
Petition for Commissions might be Rejected.

And upon hearing what was alleged by the Council of both sides, this Court
was of opinion, That sufficient Reason did not appear to grant the Commissions
prayed for. And thereupon the Council for the Defendant Hett, produced an
Affidavit made by him, to this purpose, That he is advised by his Council, that
its material and Necessary for him to Examine Witnesses in foreign Parts, to
prove the aforesaid ten Points, and that he believes that D' Rossel can prove
all that is material for him to prove in the first eight Articles; and that
about fifteen Months ago he had a Letter from him, and has not received any
account of his Decease since that time, but does believe, he is still alive:
That Baraule, Durand and Livodes were acquainted in some measure with the
affairs relating to the Cargo of the Victory, and believes they can materially
depose to the matters contained in some of the said Articles: That he believes
Chabot can Evidence the 9 th Article, and De Lara and De Costa, the matters
referred to in the 10 th Article; and that he is advised and believes, it is not
safe to go to hearing without Examining them to the aforesaid Articles; and
that he believes the Interest of the Defendants is concerned in such
Examination to the value of Two Thousand Pounds. Which Affidavit was read,
after some opposition to the reading thereof, by the Complainants Council, for
that it had not been filed with the Register before hand, according to the
practice of the Court, in order that they might have got a Copy thereof, and
been prepared to speak to it.

And thereupon it was Ordered, That the same be spoke to that Day three Weeks.

Afterward, to wit, the sixteenth Day of the same Month of September, the
Complainant Pacheco, made Oath, by Affidavit filed, That there are sundry
Facts, which he is advised are material, to Cross-Examine the Defendant Hett
upon, concerning the Points of the said Commissions and Affidavit, and that he
believed the Defendant Hetts Answers to Interrogatories for that purpose, would
in a great measure avoid the Reasons adduced for granting the said Commissions;
and that he knew not how otherwise to prove those Facts, than by the Answers of
the Defendant Hett, to such Interrogatories. And on the 18th of the same Month,
upon Notice duly given, the Complainants Council moved, that a Day might be
prefixed for Cross-Examining the Defendant Hett, as aforesaid; and offered the
Interrogatories, that the Court might judge whether they were material. And
Because the said Defendant had not purged his Contempt herein beforementioned,
moved further, That a day might be prefixed for him to appear and purge his
Contempt, or that (according to the Practice of the Court of Chancery at home,
to grant no favors to Persons while in Contempt) the Petition for Commissions
be Rejected. And that to prevent surprise (as three weeks were given for a
further hearing, on the Defendants Petition for Commissions) if any further
Affidavit or matter of Proof, the Defendants will use to support it, moved
further, That they might file it with the Register a week before hearing.
Whereupon, the Defendant Hetts Council, answered, That it was unprecedented to
Examine the Defendant in any such Case; and that as their Affidavit was a
voluntary Affidavit, which they might have chosen to make, or let it alone
(...) they may choose to be Cross-Examined, or let it alone, and are not
Compellable thereto. And as to the Contempt, they had paid the Costs thereof to
the Complainants Council, which were accepted of by them, and so they had no
right to move any such thing. And as to the filing such further Affidavit, as
moved, they had no Objection thereto.

It was Replied by the Complainants Council, That as to the Contempt, though they
had no right to move it, yet as no Satisfaction was made to the Court,
according to the Rules, the Court might, if they pleased, give order for the
purging of the Contempt, and hoped the Court would, in so far as the Defendant
Hett had for so long time absconded, to avoid the Justice of the Court; and
that if he did not appear, the Proceedings thereof were like to be of little
effect in this case, except only against the Fatherless Children and Widow of
Fresneau.

Whereupon, and upon hearing of what was alleged by the Council of both sides,
this Court was of Opinion, That as the Defendants Affidavit was voluntary, he
is not compellable, but may choose to be cross-examined concerning the Facts
thereof, or not: But at the same time the Defendants declining such
Cross-Examination, takes off the Force of the Affidavit, in so far as the
Exception to the same seems just. And in regard the Defendant absconds, to
avoid the Justice of this Court, and the Practice at Home appears to be, as
alleged by the Complainants, it is Ordered, That unless on Friday fortnight
next, be Personally appear in this Court, to purge his Contempt aforesaid, his
Petition for Commissions be Dismissed. And it is further Ordered, That the
Defendant file with the Register such further Matter of Proof as shall be used
to support the said Petition, a Week before the day of further Hearing thereof

Afterward, to wit, on Friday the sixth day of October, 1727. the Defendant
Hett not appearing to purge his Contempt, according to the last Order, it was
moved, That the said Petition of the Defendant, for Commissions, be Dismissed.
And (according to Notice given) it was further moved, That a short Day might be
appointed for Publication in this Cause, in regard the Complainant Pacheco only
waited in this Province for the Issue of this Suit, as by Affidavit appeared.
Whereupon it was alleged by the Council for the Defendant Hett, That neither
the said Rene Hett, his Council, Solicitor or Clerk in Court, had been served
with the last Order, and therefore the Defendant Hett's not appearing
Personally in Court, ought not to bar him from having Commissions to Examine,
as prayed by his Petition. To which it was Replied by the Complainants Council,
That the said Order having been made in the presence, and upon full hearing of
all Parties, there could be no need of Service thereof. And upon hearing what
was alleged of both sides, it was Ordered, That the time for the Defendant
Hett 's appearance, be enlarged for four Weeks; and that seeing no further
Proof has been filed to support the said Petition, if the Defendant Hett will
claim any Benefit by his Affidavit for that purpose, he do then submit himself
to be Examined to the Interrogatories exhibited by the Complainants, concerning
the Facts in the said Affidavit; Or, That the Petition be then finally
dismissed. And at the humble prayer of the Complainants, his Excellency will
take the Trouble of the Examination aforesaid.

Afterward, to wit, on Friday the third day of November, 1727. neither the
Defendant Hett appearing, according to the last Order, nor any of his Council,
though it appeared by Affidavit filed, that the said Order was duly served on
them, and no further matter being filed with the Register to Support the said
Petition for Commissions; and it also appearing by Affidavit, That Notice had
been given them, That Days for Publication and Hearing would now be again moved
for, if the said Hett did not appear. Upon Motion of the Complainants Council
(the Council for the Executors of Fresneau being present, and not opposing
thereto) Its Ordered, That the Petition of the Defendant Rene Hett, for
Commissions to examine Witnesses in foreign Parts, be finally Dismissed, and
that Publication pass in this Cause in Eight days; and that this Cause be heard
on this day five Weeks.

Afterward, to wit, the fifth day of December, 1727. upon the Petition of the
Complainants, setting forth the Absconding of the Defendant Hett, by which they
could not serve the Subpoena to hear Judgment, upon him; and that by the course
of the Court, the time was now too short for it, before the day already
appointed for hearing; It was therefore Ordered, That the Service of the said
Subpoena on his Clerk, be good, and that the Hearing be on the 21 st Instant.

Afterward, to wit, the same 21 st day of December, this Cause, by the Order
aforesaid, came to be heard; and the Council for the Complainants, and for the
Defendants, the Executors of Andrew Fresneau appearing, but none for the
Defendant Hett (though by Affidavit filed, it appeared that the Subpoena to hear
Judgment, had been duly served, pursuant to the Order on the Petition, of the 5
th of this Instant) The Bill was opened, and the four Answers of the Defendants
entirely read, as also the Depositions taken in this Cause, on the part of the
Complainants (None having been taken on the part of the Defendants) and the
Exhibits; by which it appears as follows,

Proof of Charge I. By the Proceedings of the Admiralty of New York, it
appears, and by the Defendants Answers, its Admitted, That the Victory was
owned, commanded, Loaded, taken, and her Loading Libelled against, and the
Tobaccoes of the King of Spain acquitted, and the Acquittal Appealed from, and
the Tobaccoes of the King of Spain deposited in Hett and Fresneaus hands, by
the Court of Admiralty, as herein before is set forth.

Proof of Charge II. Its admitted by the Answers, and it appears by the Letter
it self proffered, That Hett and Fresneau wrote such Letter of the 22d of
March, 1721-2. And by the Answers its admitted, and by the Proceedings of the
Admiralty of England, it appears, the Acquittal of the King of Spain's
Tobaccoes was confirmed, as herein before is set forth. And by Notorial Acts
made at Paris, which by the Answers are admitted to be Evidence by the Law of
Merchants, the Ambassadors Letters to, and the Transactions and Agreements
with, and Orders of the India Company of France, appear to be, and by the
Answers are admitted to be, as herein before is set forth.

Proof of Charge III. By the Answers it is admitted, That Medina and Company,
gave such Orders to the Bearers, and that the Bearers delivered the India
Companys, and Medina and Companys, Orders to the Defendant Hett, as herein
before is set forth. And by the Act of Richard Nichols, Notary, referred to and
proffered in the Bill, the Acceptances and Promises appear, as therein fully,
and herein before, in short, they are set forth; but the Defendant Hett, in his
first Answer, fol. 30 Denis, That to his belief, there is any Act of Richard
Nichols, Notary, to such purpose as in the Bill; and in his second Answer, from
fol. 30 to 36. the Receiving the Letters and Orders, and Promise of Compliance
with them, in presence of the Notary, are confessed by him, as charged in the
Bill; and he confesses the Act of Acceptance was drawn with his consent and
directions, and that he had no Objections thereto, and that he believes the Act
produced, is the Act of Richard Nicholls, and that Faith and Credit is to be
given to such Acts.

Proof of Charge IV. By the first Answer, fol. 20, and second Answer, fol. 44.
it appears, The Defendant Het told the Bearers, there was first 1700, and then
1400 Pounds due for Charges; and in fol. 50. of 2 d Answer, its admitted, the
Account was not delivered till the Money was paid; which, considering the
Improbability that any one would go about to pay Money without knowing, or at
least demanding and doing Endeavors to know, for what it was to be paid;
joined with the deposition of Richard Nicholls, Notary Public, who therein to
the 22d Interrogatory, says, That sometime before the Payment of the Money,
Mr. Pacheco told him, That Mr. Hett had demanded a large Sum of Money, and
threatened to Protest, and not deliver the Tobaccoes, if not paid; and that it
was hard to raise so large a Sum in so short a time, and that it was hard he
could not see the Account; and that he had asks Mr. Hett for it; And further
says, That he believed that from certain Passages at the Tender and Payment of
the Money, none of the bearers had seen the Account; That when the Money was on
the Table Mr. Pacheco said, Mr. Hett, you may now let me see the Account, for
the Money is on the Table, or to that purpose; upon which Hett produced the
Account. Which matters considered together, do more than to a Probability, make
good the Substance of the fourth head charged. And as to the Payment of the
Money for the balance of the Account, it appears by the Act of Richard
Nicholls, and it is admitted in fol. 49 and 50. of the Defendants 2 d Answer.

Proof of Charge V. It is said by Richard Nicholls Deposition to the 23d
Interrogatory, That immediately after the Money of the Account was paid,
Abraham Gouverneur pulled a Paper out of his Pocket, and read it to the
Bearers, and said, They must enter into a Bond of the same Conditions; and Hett
then said, If they would Execute that Bond, they might begin to Weigh, if it
was the next day; That Pacheco, said to the Deponent, he thought the Snuff
should be delivered as soon as the Payment was made, and that now he was at a
Loss what to do, or to that purpose. Which compared with the pretended
Agreement set forth in the first Answer, from fol. 19 to 27. and pleaded in
fol. 44. in which, by the Defendant Hett's own showing, no more Commissions of
any kind were mentioned, or pretended to be agreed about, than Five per Cent.
and even that, Pacheco said, was too much; That by that pretended Agreement,
the Complainants were only to pay the Charges in Cash, and Hett was to take
Bond for the Commissions, but by the Defendant Hetts Account, it appears more
than Five per Cent. of Commissions is therein charged and Received, and
therefore taking a Bond still for more, must be an Imposition. Which compared
with what hereafter shall be said on the 15 th Charge concerning Commissions,
makes good the purpose of the 5 th Charge.

Proof of Charge VI. As to this, the Defendant Hett, says, in his 2d Answer,
fol. 55. That he Delivered 1691 Bags of Snuff, weighing 316623 Pounds; but as
he neither offers, nor has made any Proof of the Delivery of so much, the
Deputy Weigh-Master (who its confessed weighed the same) his Certificate
determines the weight delivered to be only 315400 Pounds as Charged; which
compared with what Hett and Fresneau acknowledged to have been deposited in
their hands, makes the Wantage appear to be, as its charged. And that the
Complainants protested, for not delivery of what was so wanting, the Notorial
Act of Richard Nichols to that purpose, makes appear. All which compared with
the Sales and Concealments of the Snuff herein after-mentioned, make good the 6
th Charge.

Proof of Charge VII. As to which, the Defendant Hett says, in his 2 d Answer,
fol. 125. That the Account whereby the Complainants were charged, was drawn up
from loose Papers and Receipts relating to this affair, and that no Books of
Accounts, with respect to the same, were regularly kept by the said Hett or
Fresneau; which answer to the matter charged and Demanded, being found Evasive
and insufficient, the Defendant Hett in his third Answer, fol. 28, 29 says,
That the Papers and Memorandums were kept by Mr. Fresneau, who at the stateing
of the Account of Disbursements, on account of the Snuff and Tobacco, did
produce the same, and read them over to Mr. Abraham Gouverneur, who Entered the
same in the Account; but what became of them after-wards, the Defendant knows
not, he having never seen them since. Which Answer to this matter being also
found Evasive and Insufficient, the Defendant Hett, in his 4 th Answer, fol. 19
and 20. says, That the Account that Abraham Gouverneur entered the Articles
in, that were read to him by Fresneau, was that Account, from whence the
Account delivered to the Complainants was drawn; and this Defendant has
applied to Abraham Gouverneur for the said Original Account, and he says, he
has applied the same to a very common use, long before this Suit commenced, and
that it cannot be produced; and the Defendants, and every of them deny, that to
their knowledge or belief, they or any body for them, or either of them, have
or has any Book or Books regularly or irregularly kept, or Accounts, other
than in this and their former Answers has been set forth. Again, John Scott
(who lived with and did business for Mr. Fresneau) in his Deposition to the
20th Interrogatory, says, That Papers and Memorandums were kept by Fresneau
and Hett concerning the said Snuff, and that the Transactions concerning the
said Snuff, such as shipping it off, paying the Charges concerning it, and the
Sales of it, were entered in a Memorandum Book, which Entries were made by him
the Deponent, and says, That all the Papers relating to this Affair, were kept
in a bundle together at Mr. Fresneaus, until a little before Fresneau's Death,
and then Mr. Hett took them, as he told this Deponent; but whether he had them
all, or not, he cannot Depose. And Joseph Jamain, in his Deposition to the
Twentieth Interrogatory, says, That John Scot had the care of Mr. Fresneau's
Books, and believes he kept a Book on purpose for the Snuff, and where that
Book is, he connot tell.

Proof of Charge VIII. As to which, the Defendant Hett, in his 2 d Answer, fol.
126. says, That frequent Applications have been made to him to come to an
Account with the Complainants, and to leave the Matters in Difference to
indifferent Men, but he thought he was not accountable to the Complainants, and
therefore refused to come to an Account with them; the putting the Bond in
Suit, is also admitted in the Answers.

Proof of Charge IX. As to which, the Defendants in their 3 d Answer, fol. 7
and 8. deny it to their knowledge or belief; but in their 4 th Answer, fol. 7
and 8. deny it in the most express Terms; Whereupon the Complainants Council
insisted, on the Matters and Arguments of the Third of June last, against
amending the Defendants 2 d Answer, which they Enforced by the Deposition of
Andrew Hamilton, who to the tenth Interrogatory, says, That for his Services
as Council for the French Goods and Snuff in the Admiralty, before D'Rossel's
departure, he received Eighty Pounds in Money of D'Rossel, and a Note for other
Eighty Pounds, payable upon account of said Rossel, by Hett and Fresneau, or
one of them, upon the Issue of the Cause: That he always understood those Sums
to be as well for the Defense of the French Goods, as for the Spanish, and that
he does believe That Hett and Fresneau, or one of them, had Effects in their
hands for the Payment, because they constantly promised the Deponent, that
whatever should be the Issue of that Cause he should be satisfied; and that
they actually paid to him the Deponent Forty Pounds, some time before the
Determination of the Suit in the Admiralty, concerning said Snuff, as a Reward
for coming to this Place from Philadelphia, to attend an hearing, when there
happened none, which he understood to be out of the Effects of D'Rossel, then
in the hands of Hett and Fresneau. Which being Compared with the Facts
appearing on the (...) Charge, viz. That the Accounts and Memorandum Book kept
of the Snuff, (...) made away with, which might have made this Matter clear,
were they produced; and that compared with a Case parallel in Vernons Reports
in Chancery, page 452. where a Demand of 2300 was Dissallowed, upon the
possibility only of making away with some Writings which might have given Light
into the matter. And upon the whole insisted, that all the Charges on the
Tobaccoes, at D' Rossel's departure at least be disallowed in the Defendants
Account, unless the Defendants will, as yet, produce the said Memorandum Book,
in regard of the improbability they should undertake to pay them, without
Sufficient from D' Rossel to do it withal.

Proof of Charge X. As to which, it appears by the Admiralty Proceedings, That
the French Goods and Spanish Tobaccoes were jointly Libelled and Proceeded
against, and the Depositions were taken jointly concerning both; which, with
Mr. Hamiltons Deposition aforesaid, That the Note of Eighty Pounds to him, was
as well for his Services as Council for the French as Spanish Goods; it was
insisted made out this Charge, and that therefore the Charges ought to be
proportioned, so far as they related to both French and Spanish Goods.

Proof of Charge XI. This affects 1 st, 21 st and 28 th Articles of the
Account, and it was insisted, That these were Debts, either not upon the
Account of the King of Spain's Snuff, or upon the Account of it: If the first
of these, then no Law or Reason could charge the King of Spain's Tobacco with
them, especially to those who knew that it was not D'Rossel's Snuff; and if
contracted, on account of the Snuff, then for the Matters under the 9 th
Charge, it cannot well be supposed, but that he left in Hett and Fresneau's
hands sufficient to pay them; and if not, yet only a proportion ought to be
bore by the King of Spain's Tobaccoes according to the Matters in the 10 th
Charge.

Proof of Charge XII. This affects the 1 st, 2 d, 3 d, 21 st, 22 d, 23 d, 24
th, 25 th, 26 th, 27 th, 28 th, 29 th, 33 d, 34 th, 39 th, 40 th, 41 st, 42 d
and 43 d Articles of the Account, of which particularly. And as to the 1 st, 2
d, 3 d, 21 st and 27 th Articles, the Defendants in their 2 d Answer, 69. say,
That the 1 st, 3 d and 21 st, were paid by the order of D' Rossel, and in fol.
71. say, That the first Article was paid to Mr. Hamilton for his coming to
New York from Philadelphia, and for his ears and pains in Managing, Pleading
and Advising in and about the Defense of the Snuff, for which sum these
Defendants have a Receipt ready to be produced, which Receipt being produced,
it appears thereby, that on the 27th of October, 1721. (which is the day after
the Acquittal of the Snuff) he Received of them 180 Pounds, whereof (he therein
says) Eighty Pounds was due to him by order of D'Rossel, and One hundred Pounds
was for his Attendance and Services done at that time, on the Hearing and Trial
of the Cause of the Snuff. By which Receipt it appears, it was not 180 l. that
D' Rossel owed Hamilton, as in the first Article of the Account, is charged but
only Eighty Pounds. And that his Fees at the Adjudication were not 200 l. as in
the 2d Article is charged, but One hundred Pounds and that both of these come
to no more than 18 Pounds, though in the first and second Articles they charge
380 l. for these very Services. Again, the Defendant Hett says, in his 2 d
Answer, fol. 6, 62. That Fresneau told him, he paid the 2d Article of 200 l. to
Hamilton, and that he, the Defendant Hett, paid one half of it to Fresneau; and
that Fresneau told him, it was for using his diligence in getting a Judge of
the Admiralty in the room of Coll. Heathcote, and that he had not taken a
Receipt for it. Again, the Defendant Hett says, in his 2 d Answer, fol. 72.
That the 27th Article of God called Gratifications to sundry Gentlemen, was
paid all to Mr. Colby Naval Officer, only; who refused to deliver the Snuff
without it. And in his 3 d Answer, from fol. 9 to 12. says, That Mr. Colby
demanded of Fresneau and him 200 l. to deliver the Snuff, and that some days
before the Payment of the 60 l. be went with Mr. Fresneau to Mrs. Shepherds,
where Mr. Hamilton then lodged, to know his Demands for his Services in
procureing the Appointment of a Judge of the Admiralty, and they offered him a
Hundred Pounds, which he treated with Contempt, and being out of Cash, they
borrowed 300l. of Mrs Funnel upon Interest, and Hett took One Hundred, and went
with it to Colby, and prevailed with him to take 60 l. and Fresneau went to Mr.
Hamilton, and paid the other Two Hundred Pounds, (as the Defendant Hett was
informed by Fresneau, and believes) and when he met Fresneau, he told him, that
he had better Luck than himself, for he had saved Forty of his Hundred, but he
had been forced to deliver to Mr. Hamilton the whole of his Two Hundred. Upon
which was observed, the Improbability of the Truth of these Matters, that Mr
Colby should insist on so much Money when the 11 th Article was ordered him by
the Court, and no more, for th^s^ Services, and for which only, the Court would
have compelled him to deliver the said Snuff; and that, were it so, it was a
very improper Title in the Account, to call it Gratifications to sundry
Gentlemen, when all was paid to one; and that it was rather to be presumed, as
most probable, that the Defendant Hett not knowing how to account for this
Article, thought it most safe to lay it on the back of a Person who was dead
and gone, as Mr. Colby was, and so could not deny his Affections. That by
saying, the 200 l. was paid to Hamilton at the same time the 60 l. was paid to
Colby, sh^ws that it was after the Adjudication, and before the Delivery of the
Snuff to the Defendants; which compared with the Name they give the 200 l. in
their Account, viz. Mr. Hamilton's Fees till the Adjudication, and Compared
with the said Receipt ^f Mr. Hamilton, and the date thereof, which shows it to
be at the same time, do fully demonstrate the improbability of the Defend* ^^s
Pretenses concerning this: which is further enforced by Mr. Hamilton's
Deposition to the 11th Interrogatory, who says, That he nor any other Person
for him, ever received any Sum of Money (besides the Forty Pound and the 180l.
for which he gave his Receipt) of the said Hett and Fresneau, upon account of
the said D' Rossel, or any Saviors done either for the French or Spanish Goods,
or upon any other Account whatsoever, or of any other Person for them. And as
to the Third Article, Mr. Hamilton's Deposition to the 10th Interrogatory, set
forth under the 9 th Charge, shows for what it was paid him. And as to the 21st
Article, the Defendant Hett says, in his 2 d Answer, fol. 69. That he has a
Receipt for that Sum, and that it was for Services relating to the Snuff; which
being Excepted to because no Order appeared in writing for payment thereof, as
for Mr. Hamilton's 80 l. ow^ng him by D'Rossel, and because it appeared not for
what Services that Sum was owing, the Defendant Hett in his 4 th Answer, fol.
9, 10. says, He has applied to Mr. Gouverneur, for an Account of the Services,
but he cannot render a particular account of them.

As to the 22 d, 23 d, 24 th, and 25 th, Articles, to Mr. Wileman, Register of
the Admiralty, its said in the 2 d Answer, fol. 62. That these Payments were
made by the Defendant Hett and Andrew Fresneau, deceased, and for which
Receipts have been taken, ready to be produced. Which Receipts being demanded
to be produced, and none given, and Exceptions being taken hereto; the
Defendant Hett, in his 3 d Answer, fol. 33, 34. says, That an account of Forty
two Pounds two Shillings and six Pence paid to Mr. Wileman for Registers Fees,
with a Letter wherein the said account was Enclosed, Directed to Andrew
Fresneau, whereby the said Fresneau was desired to pay Nathan Simson Forty Six
Pounds on his Account, are in the Defendant Hetts Custody, and ready to be
produced when Demanded. And also, the Defendant has Lately procured an Account
of Particulars amounting to Twenty five Pounds six Shillings more; also,
another of Ten Pounds one Shilling and six Pence more, which are also ready to
be produced, which is all that he can obtain, or the said Wileman give, as he
has been informed by said Wileman. Which Papers being demanded to be produced,
and Copies thereof given, it appears that the Accounts of 25 l. 6 s. and 10 l.
1 s. 6 d. were for the Registers Fees in the year 1719. as well on the account
of the French as Spanish Goods, and for which D'Rossel being then on the Spot,
must be presumed to have paid, especially seeing the Defendant offers no
Receipt for these Sums, and the rather still, for that the Defendant Hett, in
his first Answer, fol. 32, says, That to his knowledge D'Rossel sold several
Hundred Pounds worth of Goods to defray the Charges of the part of his Cargo
that was Cleared of the Caption before his Departure. And it was farther hereon
Observed how little Credit ought to be given to the Defendant Hetts Account or
Pretenses, even upon Oath, seeing he has adventured by these four Articles to
Charge 141 l. 15 s. 2 d. as paid to Mr. Wileman (an Inhabitant in the Town, and
who might Easily Justify this matter if true) and upon Oath to say, by Receipts
ready to be produced, and when put to it, can show no Receipt, and but only a
Probability of Payment of 42 l. 2 s. 6. d. on this Affair. The other two
Accounts being, for the Reasons above, most probably paid by D'Rossel, at least
nothing is pretended that can show they were paid by the Defendants.

As to the 26 Article of 65 l. the Defendant Hett says, in his 2 d Answer, fol.
63. That it was sundry Tavern Expenses paid at sundry times in Treats of the
Court Lawyers, and others concerned in this Affair, and that the whole was
Computed by himself and Fresneau to amount to 65 l. Which being excepted to,
for that the 7th Article of 48 l. 14 s. 1 d. was not disputed by the
Complainants for Charges, and that it could hardly be that they were put to
both these Sums in Expenses, therefore the Defendant Hett, in his 3 d Answer,
fol. 2. says, That the 65 l. Charges accrued after the 7th Article had been
allowed of by the Court of Admiralty, which by the procedings thereof appear to
be on the acquittal of the Tobaccoes. And thereon it was Obesrved, That in the
nature of things, it was hardly Possible, and far from Probable, that after
sentence, when either Court or Lawyers had little to do in the Affair, the
Defendants could be at so much Charge in treating of them: Which compared with
the Deposition of Andrew Hamilton, to the Twelvth Interrogatory, who says,
That he does not remember that he ever put said Hett and Fresneau, or either of
them, to any Expense in a Tavern, unless that one night he was at a supper,
which he thinks might be some very small Expense to them. And that all this
taken together, shows the Improbability of so much being Depended, as is said
in this Article.

As to the 28 th Article of Ten Pounds paid to the Pilot of the Victory, the
Defendant Hett acknowledges in fol. 76. of his 2 d Answer, That he only paid 4
l. 10 s. though he took a Receipt for Ten Pounds.

As to the 33 d, 34 th, 39 th, and 43 d, Articles, the Defendant Hett says,
They were paid, or he was liable to pay them; the 33 d and 34 th, he conceived
Abraham Gouverneur deserved for these Services, and had applied to him for an
Account, but he could give none. The 39 th was paid one half to Mr. Wileman,
and the other half due to Mr. Clows, he had asked an Account of Wileman, but
could get none, but proffers Mr. Clows's: And the 43d he believed came to more,
but had no account of it.

As to the 40 th, 41 st and 42 d Articles, on the face of the Account, it
appears that 230 days Negro-hire, does not come to 40 l. as charged in the 40
th Article, As to which the Defendant Hett says, in his 2 d Answer, fol. 83 and
86. That Cartage and Posts to support the Warehouse must be included, and that
the Negro-hire was to turn the Snuff after a Storm, that much damaged it, and
denis it was done with the fraudalent view of choosing the best Snuff to Ship
off for Holland and England. And in his 3d Answer, fol. 14. he says, He paid
about one half of the Negro-hire, and Fresneau the other half, but no account
was kept of it. And as to the 41 st, the Defendant Hett says, in his 2d Answer,
fol. 98. That he paid so much for mending the Bags to one Bon Repos, and that
there was a Necessary for that Charge, because of the Storm. And in his 3d
Answer, fol. 16. he say, He can get no account of Bon Repos, but he paid him so
much.

As to the 42 d Article, the Defendant Hett says, in his 2d Answer, from fol.
92, to 94. That Ozenbrigs were then 15 d. per yard, That he bought them a
Pennyworth, and being a Shopkeeper might take a reasonable Advantage on them;
confesses he bought 771 Else thereof of Mr. Delancy for 12 d. per Ell, and 967
Else of Nunez at 12 d, and the remainder of Bryer at 16 d, and some Tents were
used to this purpose. And in his 3 d Answer, fol. 14 and 15. confesses Bryer's
Ozenbrigs to be 367 Else, and had 40 Tents for Fifteen Pounds, and thirty Tents
for Thirteen Pound Ten Shillings; and for six Tents, Twelve Pounds, and that he
believes all said Ozenbrigs and Tents were applied to making, mending, patching
and repairing the Bags, and that one sound Tent would make about five or six
Bags, but some were in part rotten. And in his 4 th Answer, fol. 11 to 13.
confesses of whom the Tents were bought, and when they and the Ozenbrigs were
paid for, and that what was said in his 3 d Answer, to be Six Tents, Twelve
Pounds, should have been for Twelve Tents, Six Pounds. As to which, John Scott
in his Deposition to the 18th Interrogatory says, That no Ozenbrigs that he
knew of were used about the Bags, but a cheaper sort of Linen, called
Hartfords, and some old Tents, and that said Linen and Tents were used for
patching and covering said Bags; and he says, that many Bags were needlessly
covered, and some were covered which wanted only patching; and he says, That
such as at first wanted Patching or Covering, were patched and covered by the
joint order of Mr. Hett and Fresneau; and afterward, Mr. Fresneau observing
that Mr. Hett would have more Bags covered than wanted it, did oppose the doing
of the same, to which Mr. Hett replied, I will cover my own half, and put the
Profit in my own Pocket; and that Fresneau said, he could not Answer the doing
so. And Joseph Jamain in his Deposition to the same Interrogatory says, That
he believes the Snuff might have been preserved without covering the Bags a new
with new Stuff, but cannot tell who ordered said Bags to be new covered, but
has heard that Mr. Fresneau did oppose the new covering the same, and that he
told Mr. Hett, That it was not fair to put Money in his Pocket thereby. And it
further appears by the Certificate herein-before-mentioned, of the Deputy Weigh
Master, That there were 804 of the Bags delivered to the Complainants, which
were covered, and no more; and upon the whole of these three Articles, it was
observed, there was not only a very great Over-charge, but hardly fair dealing
in Hett concerning them; and that by the Law of Nations, of Merchants and of
Common Reason, no more than the necessary Charge ought in this case to be
allowed.

Proof of Charge XIII. As to which, the Defendant Hett says, in his 2 d Answer,
fol. 90. That D' Rossel gave directions to make such Presents as ^h^y should
think fit. Whereupon it was observed, That D'Rossel had no power himself to
make Presents of another Persons Goods, and so if they could show directions
from him to this purpose, they could be of no use; and had they any such
directions, it would have been reasonably supposed they would have had them in
writing, which they don't pretend to have; and that 17 per Cent. Commissions
are charged for making these Imbezlements, is apparent by inspection of the
Account.

Proof of Charge XIV. Its admitted by the Answers, there can be no dispute but
that the Commissions ought to be so reduced.

Proof of Charge XV. As to this matter, the Defendant Hett, in his first
Answer, from fol. 20 to 27. sets forth, That Commissions at Five per Cent. were
talked of with the Complainants before the acceptance of the Agreement at Paris,
That the Complainant Pacheco said, It was too much, but said, if he could prove
that any Merchant in New York, had so much he should have it; that he
after-wards showed them a Cetificate of two persons that they had Five per
Cent. for Delivery, with which its there said, the Complainants were satisfied.
On which it was observed, That no Proof being of this matter, it is as if no
such thing had been; and it was thereon further observed, That no other
Commissions whatsoever are mentioned in the first Answer, than that Five per
Cent. and would the Defendants have been satisfied with that, it would not have
been a Dispute here. Again, the Defendants in their 2 d Answer, fol. 79. say,
They do believe, that by the Custom of Merchants Two and a half per Cent. is
usually allowed for storeage, though the goods received by the Factor were
immediately sold and Delivered, and never actually put in any Storehouse, but
here the Store-Rent came to more than the Storeage. Again, the Defendant Hett,
in fol. 90. of 2 d Answer says, That by the Custom of Merchants, he believes,
its usual to charge Five per Cent. for receiving, and Five per Cent. for
Delivery, and Two and half per Cent. for storeage, though perhaps the goods are
not detained one day in the Custody of the Factor. On which it was observed,
That no Proof was of this, and that if there had been, yet it must be when
Goods are sent to a Factor to sell, and if those Goods he should happen to sell
the same day he receives them, and make Returns of the Price the same day, then
Five per Cent. for the Sales, and Five per Cent. for the Returns, and Two and a
half per Cent. for the Storeage, its agreed is usual; but this is no such Case;
for these Tobacco's were never put into their hands for any such Purpose as to
sell or make Returns of them, and for no other purpose, but the safe-keeping of
them till called for, and Commissions for the safe-keeping, and no other, could
or ought to be demanded in this case. That if barely for receiving and Delivery
Ten per Cent. Commissions were due, then every Person through whose hands goods
once came, ought to have the same, the Consequence and absurdity whereof, could
not be hard to see.

Again, the Defendant Hett, in the 2 d Answer, fol. 102 and 103. says, That by
the Custom of Merchants, he believes he can fully Justify his demand of Seven
and a half per Cent. for Commissions and Storeage, and says, That the
Complainants did freely, and without Compulsion, agree to pay the same before
their Acceptance aforesaid, in manner as in first Answer is set forth.

Whereupon it was observed, That the Defendant here brings the Agreement of the
Complainants to support that Custom of Merchants; but, as was observed before,
there is not a word mentioned in the first Answer of more Commissions than of
five per Cent. And as to the Custom of Merchants, it was insisted, That none
such was proven, and for the Reasons before, no such Custom could be.

Again, the Defendant Hett, in fol. 105. of the 2 d Answer, says, That he
verily believes, and doubts not but that he shall be able to prove, that it is
agreeable to the Usage of Merchants in New York, in such cases where goods are
received, though they are not sold, but delivered over by the Order of the
Employer, to a third Person, to charge so much as he has charged.

Upon which it was observed, That no sucn Usage appeared; but if it did, it
could only be when Goods were put into a Merchants hands to sell, and in that
case, though not sold, yet as he was willing to sell them, and had been at pains
to show them (perhaps to many People) for Sale, it was but reasonable in that
case to charge the Commissions for storeage and Sale, (which is Seven and half
per Cent.) upon delivery over of the goods to the owner or another Factor, if
no default was in him that they were not sold before. And that the Custom might
be so, in that case, they admitted; but that this Case was not like it, the
goods here being never put into their hands for Sale, nor could they be at any
trouble in showing them to buyers, or bargaining about them, which is a great
part of the cause for which Commissions are drawn; and therefore if this were
proven, it would not justify Seven and a half per Cent. in this case, and far
Less Twelve and a half per Cent. as is charged; and insisted, that the knavery
appearing in this case, and the not keeping or making away with the Accounts,
ought in Reason to Deprive them of Commissions (were they otherwise due) for
Commissions would seem only due to those who have honestly performed, or
endeavored to perform, the service for which the Commissions are demanded. And
further, the Complainants Council insisted on the Arguments herein before set
forth, on the first Point, to which the Defendant Hett prayed Commissions to
Examine beyond sea; and on the whole, insisted, That only Commissions of Two
and a half per Cent. for storeage, and what the storeage might exceed the
Commissions, and what was reasonable for Pains, care and labor about the
Snuff, ought to be allowed of, in this Case.

Proof of Charge XVI. Upon this the Defendants in their 2 d Answer, from fol. 9
to 16. set forth, a Letter of Attorney to Fresneau and Hett, dated the 29 th of
August, 1719. from Capt. D' Rossel, whereby he makes them his Attorneys to
receive all Moneys, Goods, etc. due to him in this Province, and to prosecute
the Suit in the Admiralty, about the Snuff and Tobacco, as also sundry Sums of
Money and Ambergreefe, and to use all lawful, means for the Recovery thereof,
and upon Receipt thereof, to dispose of the same for his use, and to pay and
discharge all Costs and Charges relating to and concerning the same; and that
by virtue of that Power, they disposed of sundry Parcels for defraying the
necessary Charges.

As to which, it was insisted, from the Reasons of the Argument of the 15 th of
September last, upon the first Point which the Defendant Hett would have
examined to beyond Seas, That neither the India Company nor D' Rossel could
themselves sell any of the said Tobacco's, unless in case of an absolute
Necessity of selling a part for the Preservation of the rest; and therefore
their Letter of Attorney could give no more Power than they had.

Again, the Answers set forth, That Hett and Fresneau, by the Custom of Mer^ts,
had Power to sell to pay necessary Charges.

Upon which it was observed, That in cases of absolute Necessity, for
Preservation of the rest, a part might be sold: or if the Owner will not, upon
proper application, pay Freight and necessary Charges: in these cases the
Custom alleged, was admitted, and denied in any other. But here was neither an
absolute Necessity to sell a part for the Preservation of the rest, nor any
refusal of Payment of Necessary charges, but on the contrary, it appears in 2 d
Answer, fol. 17 and 18. by a Letter from the India Company, there set forth,
dated the 14 th of January, 1722. wherein they Promised to Hett and Fresneau,
that they should be exactly reimbursed all their Charges concerning the said
Tobacco's.

And it further appears by the Account and Answers, and the Letters of Hett and
Fresneau, that they on the 22d of March, 1721-2. drew Bills for Two Hundred
Pounds Sterling, on the Company, which its confessed were paid; and from thence
it was inferred, that as the India Company Promised to reimburse them, and so
far as they drew, paid; There nothing can appear but that the India Company
would in like manner have paid all the other charges.

As to which, its set forth in the 2 d Answer, fol. 21. That though the Bill for
Two Hundred Pounds was paid, yet it was not till about ten Months after the
Company had Promised to pay it, which discouraged them from drawing any more
Bills, and from that time forward, Sold Snuff here to raise Money, instead of
drawing Bills.

As to which, it was observed, That the greatest part of their Sales by their
own showing in the Account, were made even before the 22 d of March, 1721-2.
when the Bill was sent, and by the Answers and Schedules, it appears, that a
great part of the rest was sold and shipped often for Holland before ever they
could have an answer from the India Company; so that the not payment of their
Bill in time (which still no way appears to be so) could not be any cause of
these Sales; but the said Hett and Fresneau must have been Conscious to
themselves of their breach of Trust, in making these Sales, seeing neither when
they drew that Bill nor afterward, did they acquaint the Company of these
Sales, as appears by their Letters; and is confessed in the 3 d Answer, fol.
30. and 4 th Answer, fol. 21, 22, which Consciousness still further appears by
the 2 d Answer, fol. 24. wherein they confess, they wrote two Letters to the
India Company for leave to sell, being willing to secure themselves in the
Sale, by the express consent of the Company, as well as by D' Rossel's Power;
which leave was not granted, but the India Company, by their Letter, set forth,
in fol. 22. of the 2 d Answer, dated 17 th of August, 1724. say, They had been,
informed that 150 Bags of the said Tobacco had been sent into Holland, they
could not believe they had sold so much, but desired them to sell no more
without an Express Order. And upon the whole, concluded, that the 16th Charge
was fully made out, and therefore that the Defendants ought not to be allowed
the Article of Commissions of Sales.

Proof of Charge XVII. As to this, the Defendant Hett affixes to his 2 d
Answer, a Schedule, which in fol. 119. he says, He believes to be a true and
full Account of the Snuff received by the said Fresneau and Hett, and applied
to their use, allowances being made for the Damage thereof. Which Schedule
contains 137 Bags, weighing Neat 20628 l. whereof above eighty of the Bags
appear to weigh under one Hundred and a half, many only one Hundred, and none
of them above two Hundred. To which also is affixed an Account of Sales of ten
Bags of them by Vanwys and Clarkson at Amsterdam, weighing there gross 1934.
Also, another Account of Sales of 50 Bags by Abraham Terbosh at Amsterdam,
weighing 9248 gross; in which two Accounts of Sales many of the Bags weigh
above 200, and sundries 240 Dutch Weight, and one of them 266, and none of them
so small as 150. Also, another Schedule, which is said to be the weight of 20
Bags sent per Capt. Thody, but that the account of Sales is lost or mislaid,
which makes the 20 Bags appear to weigh only 3027 Neat, which twenty Bags by
the Entry out thereof, in the Custom-House of this place, and by the Oath of
Robert Elliston proving the same, appear to weigh 4126 Neat. Also, an Account
of 31 Bags sold to Richards and Clarkson, here at the Mast, weighing Neat 5511.
Upon which it was insisted and observed, That when the account should come to
be settled before a Master of this Court, they were able to prove the Dutch
Weight to be Eight per Cent. heavier than the English, and if so, then it would
plainly appear, that these four Articles being only 111 Bags weighed more than
the whole 1^7 Bags, whereof they are said to be a part, by the weight of four or
five Bags, and that therefore short Credit of about 30 Bags is given in this
one Article of the 1^7 Bags, and that upon the pretense of taking it to
themselves, and making allowances for damage.

To the Second Answer, the Defendant Hett also annexed another Schedule, called
the weight of 13 Bags, sent per the Unity to Holland, amounting to 1803 Neat,
whereof the Account of Sales is lost or mislaid. As to which, the Defendant
Hett says, he sent no more in the Unity, and does not know or believe that any
more was sent by Andrew Fresneau or himself, though by the Entry of the
Custom-House here, on the 13 th of February, 1721. and by the Depositions of
John Scott and Robert Elliston, it appears that 36 Bags of Snuff were Entered
Our by Fresneau in the Unity. The Defendant Hett also affixes an Account of 13
Bags sold to a Stranger, weighing 2235 Neat, and says, in fol. 120. of his 2 d
Answer, That these were the several Parts of the number of 137 Bags mentioned
in the Account. And in fol. 142. says, He has given a full Account of the
Tobacco and Snuff that has been sold by him, or that he knows or believes was
sold by Andrew Fresneau, deceased, or any Body for them, or either of them, or
any other way disposed of by either of them. And it appearing by the several
Schedules aforesaid, that the said Snuff was sold for higher Prices than that
given Credit for in the Account, It was insisted on to be ^raud to conceal
that, on pretense of taking the Snuff to themselves at a lowe^ ^rice; and that
they ought to account for the Neat Produce thereof, accordi^^ to the Sales; and
that, had they Power to sell; by the Laws of England, a^^ of Merchants, they
would have been Bound to this; and much more in this case, where their Sales
were breaches of Trust, which the Laws of all Civilized Nations do discourage;
and some have extended that discouragement even to the taking away the Life, in
case of breach of Trust, in selling things deposited.

The Second Answer being found Insufficient and Evasive to the Matter in the 17
th Charge, the Defendant Hett, to his third Answer affixes Schedules of the
Sales of the 5 th, 6 th, 7 th, 8 th, 9 th, 10 th and 11 th Articles of the
Credit side of the Account, by which sundry short Credits appear to have been
given in those Articles; And from fol. 17 to 23. of the 3 d Answer, denies,
that he does know or believe there was any more Snuff or Tobacco sold or
bartered by him (...) Andrew Fresneau, deceased, than is contained in said
Schedules; and says, (...) allowed in the One hundred and thirty Seven Bags
were (...) at Ten, some at Twelve, and some at Twenty Pounds per Bag, but (...)
Quantity does not know, of the allowances made for damages, either (...) ^^ole
or in part more fully, the allowances having been made at the Beam (...) no
particular account kept of it.

And the third Answer, being also found Evasive and Insufficient in this Point,
the Defendant Hett, in his 4 th Answer, fol. 16, 17 and 18. says He does not
know or believe that there was any more Snuff sold or bartered by him and
Fresneau, or any body for them, or either of them, than in the schedules to
their Answers is contained; and confesses, the Snuff taken to themselves was
weighed at the beams of Hett and Fresneau, and that they themselves made these
allowances to themselves. Upon which it was observed, That it does at last
hereby appear, that they took to themselves, On this pretense of allowances,
what of the Snuff they pleased, and called it what weight they pleased: and
that how faithful they were herein, to their Trust, and how Agreeable this was
to the character of Honest men, could not be hard to determine. And that from
the schedules to the 2 d Answer, it plainly appears, it was not Ten, Twelve or
Twenty Pounds per Bag that satisfied them, in so far as not one of the 137 Bags
weighed above Two Hundred, and yet of the particulars of the same 137 Bags, one
bag weigh's 266 l. Dutch weight, which makes to a Demonstration the allowance
on that bag above Sixty Pounds, and that the rest will appear to be near the
same Proportion, in so far as a little more than 100 Bags of the particulars of
the 137 Bags will appear to weigh as much as what the Defendant calls the
weight of the whole 137 Bags: That these Allowances were not made at the Beam,
but that the Contrivance is of a later date, there is some probability appears
from the Deposition of Joseph Jamain to the 21 st Interrogatory, who says, that
the Defendant Hett showed him two Weigh Notes of Snuff, and desired him to
alter the one to the weight of the other, but he took no pains to come at Mr.
Hetts m^^ning, thinking if not just; remembers something of thirty or two and
thirty Bags, and believed it would be dangerous to alter a Weigh Note, Hett
obliging him at the same time to secrecy, which made him willing to get rid of
Mr Hett; and says, he never came near Mr. Hett afterward: But a much stronger
Probability appears; that this Contrivance was not at the Beam, by the
Deposition of John Scot to the 19th Interrogatory, who says That of the Snuff
shipped off by Fresneau and Hett, they sometimes picked a bag and sometimes
took it as it came, but threw aside the damnified, and that they did not choose
for the best Snuff, but for such as was not damnified, and of a yellow color,
being advised that such Snuff would answer best; and says, they generally chose
the largest Bags, there being some Advantage in the freight, or Duty in
Holland. And to the 20th Interrogatory, he says, That he Entered the
transactions concerning the Snuff in a Memorandum Book, such as shipping it
off, paying charges, and Sales: From whence its to be presumed, no such
Allowances were then made, there being none of the Damaged bags taken, or if
there had been any Damaged taken, Entries would have been made of it, and the
Allowances thereon, in the Memorandum Book, which Book Hett, as before is set
forth, has got into his hands, and made away with. And that notwithstanding the
Defendant Hetts denial upon Oath, as aforesaid, of the Sale of any more Snuff
than what is in the said schedules, and saying, he had given a full account, yet
it appears by the Deposition of John Waldron, that the nine bags sold to him,
credited in the account, he bought at Eight pence half penny per Pound; By the
same Deposition, it also appears, that John Waldran bought afterward of
Fresneau and Hett fourteen bags at Nine pence per Pound, and that both parcels
he had out of Coll. Lurtings Storehouse, and understood by Hett and Fresneau,
that it was of the Cargo of the Ship Victory; and for which nine bags he gives
Credit only at Eight Pence; and for the fourteen bags, no Credit is given, nor
discovery thereof made, by the Answers or schedules. And notwithstanding the
Defendant Hett says in his 2 d Answer, fol. 26 and 27. That he and Fresneau
since the 17 th of August, 1724. have not nor either of them has sold any
Tobacco or Snuff, yet it appears by the Deposition of the said John Waldron
that since the Death or Fresneau (who by the Depositions of Hammond and Goelet
herein after-mentioned, appears to be living Long after the 17 th of August,
1724) he bought of the Defendant Hett six bags of Snuff weighing 1151 at Nine
Pence half penny per Pound, which he understood to be of the Victorys Cargo, as
aforesaid. And by the Deposition of John Lafont it appears that in the Month of
November, 1725. he bought of the Defendant Hett one bag weighing One hundred
three Quaters and six Pounds at Eleven pence per Pound, and that Hett told him,
it remained in his hands on the Account of D' Rossel. And by the Deposition of
Jacobus Goelet it appears, that in the year 1725. about May or June, he bought
a bag of Snuff of the Defendant Hett, and that Mr. Fresneau was not present
when he bought the same, for which he gave Fourteen Pounds Eleven Shillings,
and Hett b^d him tell no body that he so bought it, for that it was sold to pay
charges of Storeage. By which it appears, that these last Eight bags have been
sold by Hett himself, since the said 17 th of August, 1724. and no Discovery
made by him or Credit for any part thereof, but again and again, he has denied
these Sales, upon Oath, as aforesaid.

Proof of Charge XVIII. The Defendants do say (in fol. 35 and 36. of the first
Answer) that each of them delivered to the Complainants all the Tobacco and
Snuff in each of their hands, or in the hands of any other Person for them, or
any of them, at the time of the Acceptance of the Companys Orders aforesaid,
and do absolutely deny, that any of them has directly or indirectly detained,
imbezled or transported to any place, or otherwise disposed of any part or
parcel thereof, except a few Cannisters thereof to some Persons to whom he the
said Rene Hett was oblidged for service, relating to the said Snuff, since the
Receipt of the Letter of August, 17 th 1724. whereby they were ordered to sell
no more Snuff. And in fol. 21, 23. of third Answer, the Defendant Hett denies,
that he, or any body for him, sent any Snuff belonging to the Cargo of the Ship
Victory, in Barrels or other things for containing the same, than what is
mentioned in the schedules, to be sent by the Unity, Content and Duke of
Portland, for England and Holland, nor in any other Vessels, or to any other
Place or Places. And in fol. 26. of the third Answer, the Defendant Hett denis,
that he Clandeslinely kept back great Quantities of the Snuff and Tobacco, by
putting the same in private Places, or has any way concealed the same from the
Complainants, by not rendering an account thereof, or otherwise.

Yet notwithstanding these several Denyals upon Oath, what appears by the
Reports of the Examiner and Master, of the 9th of August last, herein before
set forth, and by the Deposition of Jean Lafont, who says, That the Twenty
Barrels found at Bieus, were marked by Mr. Hett, Pork and Beef, and that he was
desired by Rene Hett to keep the same secret, and told him, it remained in his
hands upon the account of Mr. D'Rossel; That the Barrels were filled before he
came to Mr. Hetts house, and that Hett desired him to close up the Barrels
after they were filled: That he and Mr. Hetts Negroes shut up the Snuff in the
Cellar, where it was found by Coll. Lurting; and That he was desired by Mr.
Hett to keep the said Barrels secret. And by the Deposition of Elias Pipon, he
says, To the best of his knowledge Rene Hett did tell him that the Snuff found
at Bieus, and taken by Coll. Lurting, was part of a parcel he had bought of
D'Rossel, one Durong and one Ashton: He says, he has seen the Barrels, but did
not take much notice of the Mark, but believes that one of them was marked with
a (B) says, That the Snuff was lodged in a small Cellar at Bieus, and that
there was a door to that Cellar, but that the same was Concealed by Boards, and
another Door laid across the same, and that stancheons were placed so as to
secure the said Boards and Door from falling; and that he believes the same was
intended to be kept secret. And all which being compared with what appears upon
the 9 th Charge herein beforementioned, and other Circumstances of this
Affair, make it evident, That these twenty Barrels of Snuff were part of the
Snuff in question, clandestinely concealed by the said Defendant Hett. And as
to shipping off more Snuff than in the schedules mentioned, and to other
places, it appears by a Letter, duly proved to be in the hand writing of Sarah
Hett, Daughter of the Defendant Hett, and signed by the said Defendant Hett's
own hand writing, bearing date the 27th of August, 1725. and directed to Mr.
Peter Funnel of Boston, That the Defendant Hett thereby sent him the Invoice
and Bill of Lading for four Barrels of Snuff, whereof the Bill of Lading
mentions Flour; that he says, he had reasons for that, and desired him to keep
it secret, and Ship it off for London or Amsterdam, and to tell him whether
there was any difficulty about that Ware, because he designed to send him more
of it; and that he might send it to London, if there was no danger in making it
pass for Snuff of the English Plantations; and that the four Barrels were
before the Mast, in the Sloop. And it also appears by another Letter, proved to
be written and signed as the last, bearing date the 19 th of October, 1725.
That the Defendant Hett, therein sent to the said Funnel a Bill of Loading for
four Barrels of Flour, Marked M. and desired him, when he shipped them for
Amsterdam, to mark them from 4 to 11. And it also appears by another Letter,
proved to be of the same hand writing with the former two Letters, but signed
Rene Hett, by the writer of the Letter, and directed also to said Funnel dated
the 15 th of April, 1726. by which he desires said Funnel, when he shipped the
Eleven Barrels for Holland, to fill the Bills of Lading with the name of
Blanch Dubois; and to be so kind, not to tell who sent them to him. And it
appears by another Letter from the said Peter Funnel, to the Complainant
Pacheco, dated at Boston the 27 th of August, 1727. and duly proved to be his
handwriting, That he therein says, That all the Snuff he had received of the
Defendant Hett, was Eleven Flour Barrels full, which he shipped last year, per
his Order, on board the Boston Pink, William Roby Master, for Amsterdam; that
the Bills of Lading were filled up by his Order, in the name of Blanch Dubois,
the reason of which he would see by one of Hetts Letters there enclosed; And
that he had likewise enclosed two more of them, by which he would see the
weight of Eight Barrels of the Snuff; and for the weight of the other three, he
had not sent him it. And that as he found Mr. Hett was acting the unjust part
by him, (as well as by the Fatherless Children of Mr. Fresneau) was the
occasion of sending Hett's Original Letters, that it may bring the Affair more
easily to light. And by the Deposition of William Beekman, Mariner, it appears,
the Defendant Hett, sent about two years ago four Barrels, for which he gave
Bills of Lading as Flour, and carried them to Boston: That his Negro, by his
order, rolled them out, and came afterward to the Deponent, and told him, that
the Barrels blowed much, and made him sneeze, and that he was sure it was not
Flour, but Snuff; whereupon the Deponent complained to Mr. Funnel, to whom they
were sent, of the Risqueing his Vessel, by sending Snuff instead of Flour; who
replied, He knew not what to think of it; and says, that to the best of his
Remembrance, Mr. Funnel told him, it was Snuff: And further says, That one
Rolls, a Mariner, told him, That about two years ago the said Hett had sent
four Barrels by him, as Flour, to Boston; and that in the Impost-Office at
Boston, it was discovered to be Snuff, which put him to trouble there. And by
the Deposition of Thomas Hammond, it appears, that in the year 1724* on or
about the Month of October, Mr. Rene Hett in Company with Mr. Fresneau,
proposed to him, That if he would take any Snuff on board, on his, Hett's
account, the Deponent should have half of the neat produce of what he sold for,
not mentioning any quantity, that being left to the Deponent to take what he
pleased: That the Deponent replied, He would not do any such thing, for the
consequence thereof would be dangerous to his Captain and himself. Upon which
Proofs, it was insisted, That though they don't expressly prove that the Snuff so
shipped off for Boston, and offered to be shipped, as above, was of the Cargo of
the Ship Victory, deposited as aforesaid, yet considering so great a Wantage
there is of it, as before appears, and the several fraudulent and secret
Circumstances by these Proofs, and other the Proofs before, to the other
Charges, appearing, and that there is no Proof that the Defendant Hett had, or
that this was of any other Snuff, and that had it been of any other Snuff,
there was no need of such disguises and secrecy; for no Man can be afraid or
ashamed to own what is his own; and that People are generally more saving of
their own Effects, than to offer one half of the neat produce for the Sale of
them; and that from thence, there is the most violent Presumption (which amounts
to full Proof) that this, as well as the twenty Barrels concealed at Bieus, was
of the Cargo of the Victory, deposited as aforesaid; and also, there is a like
presumption, that the rest of the Snuff wanting, has been in such fraudulent
manner concealed and made away with; and that therefore Notwithstanding of the
several positive Denyals upon Oath, by the Defendant Hett, in his Answers, of
the matters of this 19 th Charge, the same appears fully to be made good.

Proof of Charge XIX. As to this, It appears confessed by the Defendants
Answers, That Merchandise was bought in Holland for the price of the Snuff
shipped by Hett and Fresneau; that they had other Moneys there at that time,
with which goods were also bought, and so it came to be mixed in their Trade
afterward, so that they cannot render an Account of the Profits by Trade
therewith. And from Authorities shown, it was insisted on to be apparent, That
it was the ancient Law of England, and that its now the continued Course of the
Chancery at home, to compel Executors and Trustees trading with the Testators
or Entrusters Money, or letting it to Interest, to account for the Profits of
the Trade, or to pay such Interest; and that the Laws of Nature and Nations,
and of common Reason, were accordingly: And that all the Reason of these cases,
was here, and much more, in so far as so great a number of Frauds, Perjuries
and foul-Dealings do Evidently appear in this case, beside what further may be
presumed; and so great a number of Contrivances of Delay and Vexation to tne
Complainants, in the Course of this Suit, to hinder the coming at Justice, that
the like of both, has not in any one case, in all Probability, ever appeared.

Upon the whole, and hearing what could be alleged by the Council for the
Complainants, and for the Executors of Andrew Fresneau (the Defendant Hetts
Council not attending, as aforesaid) and upon mature Deliberation had thereon,
this Court was of Opinion, and did Order and Decree accordingly.

Charges 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Decreed on. THAT the first Eight Charges in
the Bill appeared to be sufficiently made good, and therefore, that the
Defendants do come to a fair account with the Complainants.

Charge IX. Decreed on. That Notwithstanding the Probabilities, Reasons,
Arguments and Case cited, to make good this Charge, this Court cannot determine
that D'Rossel did as is charged.

Charge X. Decreed on. That what Charges appear to have accrued upon the French
Goods separately, ought not to be charged upon the Spanish Tobacco's; but what
was jointly upon both, this Court sees no method by which a proportion can be
made; and had not the French Goods been joined, it appears not but that there
might have been the same Charge upon the Spanish alone.

Charge XI. Decreed on. That such Debts as were contracted by Charges in
Defense of the Spanish Tobacco's, by D'Rossel, and paid by the Defendants since
his departure, ought to be Chargeable on the Spanish Tobacco's, but his other
Debts not Chargeable thereon.

Charge XII. Decreed on. That such part of the Articles as appear to have been,
bona fide, paid on account of the Spanish Tobacco's, be allowed.

Charge XIII. Decreed on. If, bona fide, given for services concerning the
Spanish Tobacco's, the gifts to be allowed, but not the Seventeen and a half
per Cent. Commissions, otherwise than as herein after directed.

Charge XIV. Decreed on. No Dispute about.

Charge XV. Decreed on. That neither the Five per Cent. for Receiving the Snuff
and Tobacco, nor the Five per Cent. for the Delivery thereof, ought to be
allowed the Defendants, but that what is Reasonable for their Pains, Care and
Labor about the same, be allowed, with Reasonable Storeage.

Charge XVI. Decreed on. That the Sales of the Tobacco and Snuff appear to be
Fraudulent, and made without sufficient Power, and no absolute Necessity of
making them for the Preservation of the rest; and therefore no Commissions, for
making the Sales, ought to be allowed.

Charge XVII. and XVIII. Decreed on. That the Defendants be accountable for all
the Snuff that came to the hands of Fresneau and Hett, and not delivered to the
Complainants, reasonable Allowance being made for Wasting and Dusting: And that
the twenty Casks of Snuff, now in the Custody of Robert Lurting, one of the
Masters of this Court, which was concealed in the Cellar of Mrs. Bieu, by the
Defendant Hett, be delivered to the Complainants, as part of the wanting Snuff.

Charge XIX. That the Defendants shall not account for the Profits they made by
Trading with the Moneys arising by their Sales of the Snuff in Holland and
England, But for the neat Produce thereof, and the Interest of so much thereof
as over paid them from such time, as it may be reasonably supposed the said
Moneys arising by the said Sales, might be received here, until they shall pay
the same; and that the Defendants be allowed Interest for the Moneys advanced
by them, till they were repaid the same. And that such Sum or Sums of Money as
appear wrongfully to have been received by the Defendants, from the
Complainants, or any of them, that the Defendants account for the same, with
Interest from the time the same was received, till it is repaid. But that the
Executors of Fresneau be chargeable with no more of the Thirteen hundred and
Ninety seven Pounds eighteen Shillings and three Pence, paid by the
Complainants to the Defendant Hett, than for what came to the said Executors
hands.

Further Orders of the Court.
And this Court was further of Opinion, That what appears to be the separate
Transactions alone of Hett, he alone is to be accountable for the same; and in
like manner of Fresneau; But that, what shall not appear to have been
seperately Transacted, they shall be jointly and severally chargeable therewith.

And in regard that it appears by the Defendant Hett's own showing, in his
first Answer, that no more Commissions than that of Five per Cent. was
pretended to be agreed about, between him and the Complainants, and that he was
only to receive the Charges in Cash, and to take Bond for the Commissions, and
that the 1397 l. 18 s. 3 d. was pretended to be the charges, and yet above
Seven and a half per Cent. Commissions do appear in the body of that account,
which Account, by the further Answers and Proofs, appears not to have been
shown to the Complainants, till paid by them, and therefore had there been such
an Agreement as is set forth in the first Answer (which is not proved) it was a
mainfest Fraud and Imposition, first, to take Seven and a half per Cent. in
Cash for Commissions, when only Five per Cent. was (pretended to be) agreed
about, and afterward to insist on and take Bond for the same thing, so before
paid in Cash, and over paid; and it being agreeable to the Rules of natural
Equity and Justice, that no man take benefit by his own Frauds, Impositions and
unjust Actions, and to Relieve Persons deceived, from Cheats and Impositions
put upon them; and it being shown to this Court, by the continued Practice of
the Court of Chancery of England, that Relief is there had against Bonds, Deeds
or any other Writings whatsoever, where Fraud and Imposition was the Cause of
the making them; and that in Cases much Less apparent than this, and because
none of the matters set forth in any of the Defendants four Answers, appear
proved to justify this pretense of Ten per Cent. Commissions for Receiveing and
delivering the Tobacco's deposited with Hett and Fresneau (for Five per Cent.
whereof, its confessed, this Bond was granted) and for that the pretense of an
Agreement by D'Rossel to pay those Commissions, set forth in the Defendant
Hetts Affidavit, in order to entitle him to Commissions to Examine beyond Seas,
seems very Improbable, in so far as no Writting or Proof is pretended to
prove that Agreement, but the Examining of D'Rossel; and that had such an
Agreement been, its unlikely that it should have been forgot in every one of
the four Answers of the Defendant Hett; And for that were it proved, its
apparent, that neither the India Company nor D'Rossel had Power to charge these
Tobacco's with any thing further than the necessary Charges concerning the
same, and so such Agreement would be Void, as being made by one who had no
Power to make it. And upon the whole, this Court was further of Opinion, and
did therefore Order and Decree, That the Bond entered into by Pacheco, De Lara
and De Costa, in 1500 l. to the Defendant Hett, dated the 25th of November,
1725. Conditioned for the Payment of Five Pounds for every Hundred Pounds worth
of Snuff he should deliver to them, for the use of Messieurs Solomon De Medina,
Mosesson and Company, remainder of the Cargo of the Victory, every Pound weight
of Snuff to be accounted at Eleven Pence, and that within three Months after
the delivery thereof* Be, and the same Bond then was Decreed to be, utterly
void and of none effect; and the Defendant Hett then was ordered and decreed to
bring, or cause the same to be brought into this Court to be Cancelled and
Destroyed; and the same Defendant Rene Hett then was Ordered and Decreed for
ever to desist, from any further or other Prosecution whatsoever, of, or upon,
or concerning the said Bond, and perpetual Injunctions were Decreed to issue
accordingly. And it was further Ordered and Decreed, That the Sheriff of
New York do bring into this Court to be Cancelled, the Bail Bond entered into
by the Complainant Pacheco, and his Securities, upon the Prosecution there
against him, upon the said Bond to Hett; and that the Ne Exeat against the said
Pacheco be dissolved; and that the Sheriff do deliver up the Security, taken
thereon, to be Cancelled; And that the Defendant Hett, do pay to the
Complainants, their Costs at Law, and in Equity, occasioned by the Prosecution
of the aforesaid Bond and Ne Exeat; and that the Defendants do pay to the
Complainants the full Costs of this Suit.

And it was then referred to Robert Lurting and Cadwallader Colden, Esqrs. to
settle the said Accounts, according to the directions of this Court, and to tax
the Costs, and to make Report thereof to this Court, with all convenient
Expedition.

Which Matters so Decreed and Ordered, as aforesaid, were ordered to be
Absolute, in so far as the same was against the Executors of Fresneau; But in
regard that no Council for the Defendant Hett appeared, the same were only to
be Absolute against the Defendant Hett, if no sufficient Cause was showed,
either to this Court, to the contrary, on the Twenty third Day of the said
Month of December (his Excellency being to depart the next day thereafter for
his Government of New Jersey) Or to the Masters to whom the said Matters were
referred, upon their Second Summons.

Afterward, to wit, the Twenty third Day of February, 1727-8. the said Masters
filed their Report concerning the said Accounts, which Report is in the Words
following, To wit,

To his Excellency William Burnet, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief
of the Provinces of New York, New Jersey, and Territories thereon depending in
America, and Vice Admiral of the same, etc.
In Cancellaria De Medina and al. verse. Het and the Executors of Andrew
Fresneau.
IN Obedience to your Excellency's Orders in Chancery, of the 21 st and 22 d
days of December last, referring to us the Settlement of the Accounts in this
Cause, According to the Directions of the said Orders, We proceeded to the
Settlement of the same, and the 30 th day of December last, was appointed by a
second Summons from us, for the Parties to attend us, for that purpose; when
the Council for the Defendant Hett, showed Cause against the Decree, by a
Writing by them delivered to us, in these words, viz.

First, Because he has not Examined his Witnesses, to prove the several
Matters alleged in his several Answers, being deprived of that Privilege, by
the Dismission of his Petition presented to the Court for that purpose, whereby
he was utterly disabled to make his Defense, which being yet allowed, would
enable him fully so to do.

Secondly, Because the twenty Casks of Snuff, now in the Custody of Robert
Lurting, Esquire which are said to have been concealed in the Cellar of Mrs. Bieu,
by the Defendant Hett, are ordered to be delivered to the Complainants, as part
of the wanting Snuff, whereas it does not appear there is any Snuff wanting,
reasonable allowance being made for Wasteage and Dust; and also, because the
said Twenty Casks are no where mentioned in, nor prayed for by the Bill, nor
does it appear that they are any part of the Snuff pretended to be wanted in
the said Bill of the Complainants.

That as to the first of these Causes, we conceived our selves no ways obliged
to take any notice thereof, being a thing set forth to have been adjudged by
your Excellency. As to the Second Cause, It appears to us by the Proceedings in
this Cause, before hearing (and which by the Orders aforesaid, are said to have
appeared on hearing) that after allowance for Wasting and Dusting, and other
proper allowances, and after substracting the twenty Casks of Snuff concealed
at Bieu's, there still remains 2532 Pounds Weight of Snuff wanting, as more
fully appears by the Account of the Snuff hereunto annexed, Marked No. 1. And
therefore, that the Second Cause was of no weight. We therefore gave a third
Summons for the Partys to attend us on the Eighth day of January last, and a
fourth to attend as on the Twelfth day of the same Month; on all which
Summonses the Complainants Council appeared, but none in behalf of either of
the Defendants, at any of these times, except on the second Summons, to deliver
us the Writting aforesaid, though every of the said Summonses appeared to us by
Oath, to be duly served. That therefore we proceeded to settle the Accounts Ex
part, as they appeared, gathered from the Proceedings in the Cause, according
to the Directions in the Orders of the Court aforesaid, except in this, that
the Complainants and their Council did allow of sundry Articles and parts of
Articles to stand charged in the Defendants Account, without making any
objection to them, though no sufficient Proof appears in the Proceedings, that
these Sums were paid, nor of any reasonable cause for which they might have
been paid, and that only from the Possibility that some such Sums might have
been paid by the Defendants, for these purposes; and also, Except in this, that
it not appearing clearly when the Sums paid out by the Defendants, were paid
out; and it also not appearing clearly by the Proceedings, when the produce of
the Sales came into the Defendants hands, and because of the Intricacy that
must of course arise therefrom, to compute the Interest to the Partys to whom,
from time to time, a Balance was due: By the consent of the Complainants and
their Council, we have not considered of this Article, further than to find
that the Balances were mostly against the Defendants, and that seeing the
Complainants were willing to wave that advantage, we were wiling to save our
selves the trouble of computing how much the Interest of the Balances amounted
to until the payment of the 1397 l. 18 s. 3 d. by the Complainants to the
Defendant Hett, before which, we find, there was a Balance due to the
Complainants of Eighty two Pounds and One Penny, the Interest whereof the
Complainants were also willing to wave till the date of the Decretal Order (the
Complainants however protesting that these Allowances and Wavings of theirs
might be no Bar to them to Dispute these Matters, if the Defendants appeared,
but that they might insist on their whole Due, if they should then so think it
proper) and therefore we have only computed Interest upon the said 1397 l. 18
s. 3 d. till the Decretal Order; and upon the whole, considered, as aforesaid,
we find that on the twenty second day of December last, the Defendants owed the
Complainants (besides the Delivering up of the 1500 l. Bond for Commissions of
Delivery) the Sum of Seventeen hundred and Eleven Pounds, Seventeen Shillings
and One Penny, as the Balance of the Accounts stated, as by the Account
annexed, marked No. 2. Plainly will appear.

We do also find, that the Defendant Hett was solely chargeable with Fourteen
Hundred and Seven Pounds Fourteen Shillings and Four Pence half Penny of the
said Balance of Seventeen Hundred and Eleven Pounds Seventeen Shillings and
One Penny, and that the Executors of Fresneau, deceased, are solely Chargeable
with the Sum of Two Hundred and Ninety One Pounds Ten Shillings thereof.

And we find the Defendants, jointly and severally Chargeable with Twelve
Pounds Twelve Shillings and Eight Pence half Penny, the remainder of the said
Balance, as plainly will appear by the Account annexed, marked No. 3.

The Accounts having appeared to us in substance, as aforesaid, we on the
Fourteenth of this Instant February, issued a fifth Summons for the Parties to
attend us on the Sixteenth of the same Month, in order to the final Settlement
of the Accounts, and making our Report thereof: which Summons being duly
served, the Council for the Complainants appeared, as did those of the
Defendant Hett, to whom the Accounts, so far as then Drawn out in form, were
then shown, and they desiring a Copy of the same, we answered, that giving
Copies of a part would cause an unnecessary Delay, but as soon as the Accounts
should be finished, they should have a Copy (if desired) of the Accounts, and
of our Report together, to make their Objections to them. They were likewise
requested by the Complainants Council, to stay, but they went away before the
said Accounts were finished. And afterward, on Saturday the Seventeenth Day of
the same Month of February, we issued a Sixth Summons, for the Parties to
attend us on the Monday following, in order to see our Report, so far as
related to the stating and settling of the Defendants said Account, and also to
proceed on the Taxation of the Complainants Costs, In order to complete tne
Matters referred to us by the aforesaid Orders, which Summons being also duly
served, the Council for the Complainants attended, but neither the Defendants,
nor any body for them appeared. Whereupon we finished this our Report, which is
humbly submitted to your Excellency's Consideration, by

Your Excellency's most Obedient Humble Servants, Cadwallader Colden, Robert
Lurting.


( Numb. 1.)
Snuff of the Cargo of the Ship Victory, Deposited in the hands of Rene Hett
and Andrew Fresneau, by the Court of Admiralty of New York, Dr.
To the Quantity deposited, 1988 Bags, 379845 Pounds. Contra Cr. By the
Particulars following, viz. Pounds Bags. Weight. Sold thereof to Simpson, 0102
18324 To Rodrigo Pacheco, 0009 01588 To Augustus Jay, 0015 02699 To John
Waldron, 0009 01519 More 0000 0040 To Richards and Clarkson, 0031 05511 To
Tenbrook, 0013 02235 To Waldron, 0014 02520 To ditto, more 0006 01151 To
La^ont, 0001 00202 To Golet, 0001 00202 Shipped thereof per Wolf, 0001 02039 per
ditto 0050 09738 per Thody, 0020 03895 per the Unity, 0013 02327 Delivered
thereof of Medina and Company, 1691 315382 Given in Gifts, 0003 00630 Tare of
the 294 Bags sold and shipped, as per the above Account, at 4 pound each, 01176
One pound per Bag allowed for wasting and dusting, 01998 20 Casks found at
Bieu's, weight neat 03697 Tare of twenty Bags, 00040 Wantage in the whole,
02532 1988 379845

( Numb. 2.)
Rene Het and the Executors of Andrew Fresneau, deceased, Dr To Solomon De
Medina, Mosesson and Company, R^d^^go Pacheco, Jacob Delara, and Manuel Vaz D.
Cost, Bearers of the Orders of the India Company of France, concerning Snuff
and Tobacco of the Ship Vi^^ory, Capt. Christopher D'Rossell Commander. l. s.
d. To an Over-Charge to Mr. Hamilton, in the 2 d Article of (...) Account, 200
00 00 To Abraham Governor, on account of Capt. De R^ss^l. in Article 21. 040
00 00 To an Over-charge to Mr. Wileman, in Art. 23, 24, 25, 095 15 2 To an
Over-charge in Expense, Article 26. 45 00 00 To ditto, said to be paid to mr.
Colby, on Expenses and Gratifications to several Gentleman, in Art. 27. 060 00
00 To an Over-charge for Pilotage, Article 28, 005 10 00 To ditto to Mr.
Governeur, for 5 years Clerk ^ap, Article 34, 020 00 00 To a Bag of Snuff to
Capt Jacobs Agents, Art. 35. 005 12 06 To Snuff to sundry Officers, Article 36,
012 10 00 To ditto to Abraham Governeur Article 37, 001 11 03 To an Over-charge
on Negro-hire, Cartage etc. Article 40, 020 00 00 To an Over-charge on
Ozenbrigs, Article 42, 065 07 08 To ditto on Postage of Letters, Article 43,
010 00 00 To ditto on Commissions for paying, 029 01 04 To Commissions and
Storeage of 11490, 5, 7, at 7 (...) half per Cent. wholly disallowed by the
Chancellor, 868 15 4^ 1482 03 04 Anno 1721.
June 22. To 102 bags Snuff sold Nathan Simpson, weight near 18324, at 7 d.
half penny, 572 12 06 Feb. 12, To 9 bags ditto to Rodrigo Pacheco, weight 1588,
at 8 d. half penny per pound, 056 04 10 Feb. 22, To 77 and one quart pound
Tobacco in Monaco's sold Mr. Gomez at 27 and 6 d. per C. 106 11 03 To 29 C.
ditto damnified, to ditto, at 22. and 6 d. 21 07 06 1738 19 05 Anno 1721.2
March 5. To 15 bags Snuff sold Augustus Jay, weight 2699 at 8 d. Farthing, 092
15 06 1722, To 9 bags ditto sold John Waldron, weight 1519, at 8 d 050 12 08
June 1^. To 6 Scroons Roll tobbaco, 70c. 1 qt. 16 l. at 36^. per Cent. 013 09 4
To 2^0 l Sterling. draw on the Company at 60 per Cent. 320 00 00 To 3c. 2 quart
4l. of Monaco Tobacco short Credit in a parcel sold M. Gomez as appears by Mr.
Hets 3 d Answer, at 27 (...) per Cent. 004 17 03 To 3c. ^ qr. 27l. of said
(...) that was damnfied, (...) to said Gomez (...) and ^ d. per Cent. as per 3
d Answer of (...) 0^3 13 1 Carried O^^^ Rene Hett. etc. Per Contra Cr. l. s. d.
By the full ammount o^ Mr. Hets Account, 3098 18 02 By the Storeage of the
Snuff four years, at 60 per Annum, 0240 00 00 By the Trouble and Care looking
after the Cargo for four years, 0250 00 00 By the Storeage of the Roll Tobacco,
four years, 20 00 00 3608 18 02 Balance due is 1711 17 01 L. 5320 15 03

( Numb. 3.)
Of which Balance of 1711 l. 17 s. 1 d. We conceive Mr. Hett chargeable with
the following Articles, viz. l. s. d. To six bags of Snuff sold after Mr.
Fresneau's Death, to Capt. Waldron, 0045 11 2 To one bag to Lafont, 009 05 02
To one ditto to Jacobus Goelet, 014 11 00 To what he detained in his hand of
the Money he received of Pacheco, out of the Sum of 1397 l. 18 s. 3. d. 1147 18
03 To the Interest of that Sum till the Decretal Order, 190 08 09 1407 14 4 And
we conceive the Executors of Fresneau, chargeable with the Sum of 250 l. of the
said sum of 1397 l. 18 s. 3 d. acknowledged before Robert Lurting, Esquire to have
been received by them from Hett, 250 00 00 To the Interest thereof till the
Decretal Order, 41 10 00 291 10 00 And we conceive them jointly and severally
chargeable with what remains to make up the balance, which is 12 12 8 1711 17
01 Rene Het and the Exers. of Andr. Fresneau Dr. Brought over, To short Credit
in 9 bags of Snuff sold to J. Waldron, said to weigh 1519 l. at 8. d. per
pound, which by Mr. Hets 3 d Answer, is 9 bags Snuff, weight 1599l. and a half,
at 8 d. half penny per pound, the difference is 004 11 11 ^/^ To 2. Tents, etc.
paid Het by Capt. Waldron, 001 01 09 1724, April 19, To 31 bags Snuff sold
Richards and Clarkson, with. neat 5511 l. at 8 d. half penny, 195 03 7 April 20,
To 18 ditto to Abraham Penbrook, 1235 l. for 77 10 00 To 14 bags Snuff sold by
Fresneaus and Het to John Waldron, by computation each bag 180 l. is 2520 l at
9 d. 094 10 00 To 6 ditto sold by Mr. Het since M. Fresneau's death, to said
Waldron, 1151 l. at 9 d. half penny, 45 11 2 1725, December. To 1 bag Snuff sold
by Mr Het to John Lefont, with. 1 c. 3 qr. 6 l. at 11 d per pound, 09 05 02 1725.
To 1 ditto sold to Jacobus Goelet, 14 11 00 1724, July 22, To neat proceeds of
10 bags Snuff shipped by Mr. Het in Capt Wels for Holland, weight 2039 neat, sold
by Messrs. Vanwys and Clarkson, as per the Account, 844 Guilders 19 Stivers,
which accounted at 2 s. 9 d. per Guilder, is 166 03 72 1724, July 10, To net
Proceeds of 50 bags of Snuff, shipped by Capt. Wolf, 3 fifths on account of Mr.
Andrew Fresneau, and 2 fifths on account of Mr. Het, weight net 9738 l. sold in
Holland by Abraham Terbourch for 3735 Guild. 15 Stiv. at 25. 9 d. per Guilder,
is 513 13 3 To 20 bags Snuff shipped by Het and Fresneau, by Capt. Thody for
London, and from thence sent to Holland, and there sold at 12 stivers per pound
(the weight and particular Charges not to be found, we make the proportion as
the 50 that were sold for 513 l. 13 s. 3 d. 3 farthings, which was sold at 10
stiv. and a half, (for todefray the charges in London we having deducted 1
stiver and half) the net proceed i, NB. computed to weigh 3895, English weight,
105 09 04 To 13 Bags of Snuff shipped by Het and Fresneau per the Ship Unity, for
Holland, of which no particular Account, but we compute them at 184 l. per Bag,
which makes English weight net 2327l. was sold in Holland (as we have computed)
for 2049 l. that weight at 8 stivers and half per pound, when all Charges
deducted, amounted to 684 Guilders, which at 2 s 9 d. per Guilder is 094 01 00
To Wantage in the weight of snuff (after allowace for dusting) as per Account
thereof hereunto annexed 2532l of Snuff at 9 d. per pound, 94 19 00 To Cash
paid by Mr. Pacheco to Mr. Rene Het, the 25th of November, 1725 1397 18 03 To
Interest of the said Sum at Eight per Cent. per Annum, from the 25th of
November, 1725. till the Decretal Order, the 22 d of December, 1727. is 2 years
and 27 days, which amounts to 231 18 00 L. 5320 15 03

Afterward, to wit, the 2 d day of March, 1727-8. Capt. Matthew Norris,
Commander of his Majesty's Ship Lowstaff, Presented a Petition to this Court,
setting forth, That the Complainants in this Suit, sued as Agents for the King
of Spain, That he had Orders to seize Spanish Ships and Effects, as in time of
War, that he had lately Seized 4OO Bags of Snuff, part of the same Cargo, and
Libelled it in the Court of Admiralty, and after regular Proceedings there,
that it no way appeared the Property was altered from the King of Spain, and
therefore the same was Condemned; and therefore Prayed, That what might be
Decreed in this Suit, might be to his Majesty's Use. Whereupon it was Ordered,
That Cause be shown, on Friday then next, Why the Prayer of the said Petition
should not be granted? And now at this Day, to wit, the 8 th day of March,
1727-8. upon Notice duly given, it was moved, That the Report of the Masters
aforesaid should be read, Which being accordingly read, it was moved, That the
same be absolutely Confirmed, and that this Court would Decree accordingly.
Which Motion Joseph Murray and William Smith, Council for the Defendant Hett,
appearing, did oppose, and insisted upon their Exceptions to the Decree in the
said Masters Report. To which it was Answered by the Complainants Council, That
it was entirely irregular to Offer any thing to that purpose at this time, in
so far as they have had time enough to file their Exceptions to the Masters
Report, according to the course of the Court, if they conceived their Clyent
wronged thereby; And that it was unprecedented to Offer any thing against a
Report, without Exceptions thereto first duly filed. However this Court did
order the Depositions and Proofs in this Cause to be brought, and so much
thereof as related to the Exceptions in the said Masters Report, to be read;
And the matter being debated by the Council of both sides, this Court was of
Opinion, That the said Report do stand Confirmed, if no further matter appeared
why the same should not. Whereupon the said Joseph Murray, of Council for Capt.
Norris, moved and insisted, that James Alexander, Council for the Complainants,
should be ordered by this Court as Advocate-General of of this Province, to
support the said Petition of Capt. Norris.

Whereupon the said James Alexander Surrendered to his Excellency his
Commission as Advocate General, and prayed his Surrender might be accepted of,
and that he might not be so Compelled. Which Surrender being accepted of, Cause
was showed why the said Petition should not be granted, viz.

As to the first Fact therein alleged, That it appeared by the Bill and 2 d
Answer, That this Suit was for Relief to Medina and Company, for the Snuff
wanting, and to the bearers of their Orders, for the 1397 l. 18 s. 3 d. and the
1500 Pounds Bond in their own Right, and not as Agents to any Persons.

2 dly. As to his Orders, it appeared they were from the Admiralty, who had no
Jurisdiction or Power beyond High Water Mark, and therefore his Orders of no
further extent; and that he could not by virtue thereof Enter into any house
here lawfully, to Execute his Orders, by seizing upon any thing; and that it
was notorious, that the Preliminary Articles of Pacfication were signed on the
part of England long ago, and that we have had several accounts that they are
now so on the part of Spain; for both which Reasons, though the matter in
question had been the King of Spains, (which they expressly denied) he ought not
to intermedle himself in this Affair; and as no other Person here had any
Orders or Power to seize or affect the matter in question, then nothing could
lawfully affect it.

3 dly, As to the Property being in the King of Spain, and that the Admiralty
could see nothing that had altered it; It was insisted, That was no Reason why
this Court, or any other Court, might not see Evidence to prove it was altered.
And thereupon it was insisted, That the Ambassador of Spain's Orders to the
India Company, to cause the Tobacco's to be delivered to Medina and Company,
with their Orders accordingly, and the acceptance of them by the Defendant
Hett, was by the Laws of Nature, of Nations, and of Merchants, a sufficient
vesting of the Property in Medina and Company, unless there was an express
Trust proved; which in this case appeared not. Whereupon Joseph Murray, of
Council for Capt. Norris, prayed further time to Answer the Causes showed
against the said Petition.

And it appearing to this Court, that as to the 1500 l. Bond, and the 1397 l.
18 s. 3 d. and Interest thereof, Relief could only be due to the Complainants
Pacheco, De Lara, and De Costa, for the same, not as Agents to any body, but in
their own right.

Therefore this Court as to so much, and the Costs, did Order the matters
herein before Decreed and the said Report to stand absolutely Confirmed and
Decreed, to be Observed and performed, and the Moneys found due by the said
Report, to be paid to the Complainants with Interest by all Parties, according
to the true intent and meaning thereof.

And it is this present Day, to wit, the Eighth Day of March, in the first year
of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord George the Second of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith etc. By his Excellency William Burnet,
Esquire Capt. General and Governor in Chief of the Provinces of New York,
New Jersey, and Territories thereon depending in America, and Vice Admiral of
the same, in this High and Honorable Court of Chancery, and by Virtue of the
Power and Authority thereof, Ordered and Decreed accordingly.

And that as to the remainder viz. 82 l. 0 s. 1 d. and the 20 Barrels of Snuff
in the Custody of Robert Lurting, that the same Report and Decree do stand also
absolutely Confirmed and Decreed, unless sufficient cause is shown why the same
should not by Monday next, on the part of Capt. Norris.

And it was further moved; because Cadwallader Colden Esquire was gone out of Town,
that Robert Lurting, Esquire do make the Report of the Costs to this Court, with
all Expedition. Which was Ordered accordingly.

Afterward, to wit, the Eleventh day of March, 1727-8. the said Petition of
Capt. Norris came further to be heard, and Debated, in the presence of Council
learned on both sides. And upon hearing of all that could be alleged by Joseph
Murray and William Smith, of Council for the Petitioner, and David Jamison,
James Alexander, and John Chambers, of Council for the Complainants, this Court
was of Opinion, That no Order ought to be given by this Court concerning the
said Petition, and that sufficient matter did not appear there from, to hinder
the Decree aforesaid, from being absolute. It is therefore this present Day, to
wit, the Eleventh Day of March, 1727-8. Ordered, That the said Report of the
Masters of this Court do stand absolutely Confirmed and Decreed, in all the
parts thereof, to be Observed and performed, and the Moneys found due by the
same, to be paid to the Complainants with Interest by the Parties found by the
said Report to owe the same, according to the true intent and meaning thereof.
And it is Ordered, That Robert Lurting, Esquire do deliver to the Complainants the
20 Barrels of Snuff herein beforementioned to be in his Custody, and this
Court does dispense with the Order herein-before-mentioned to the Sheriff of
New York, to deliver the Bail Bond at the Suit of Hett at Law; and because it
fully appears to this Court, that the Defendant Hett absconds to avoid the
Justice of this Court, On motion of the Complainants Council, the Defendant
Hetts Council being present, and showing no sufficient Objection thereto, it is
Ordered. That service of the Decree in this Cause at the late Dwelling House of
the said Rene Hett, in the City of New York, be a good service thereof, if he
cannot be found to serve the same Personally on him; and that if Process of
Contempt shall be necessary to issue against him, for Compelling the
Performance of this Decree, that the directing the fame to the Sheriff of
New York, shall be good.

Perused and Examined with the Proceedings in this Cause, by David Jamison,
James Alexander, John Chambers,
OF Council for the Complainants.
Per Cur. RICHARD NICHOLLS, D. Regist. WILL. SHARPAS, Clerk.

W. Burnet.

Afterward, to wit, the 12th day of March, Robert Lurting, Esquire one of the
Masters of this Court, filed his Report of the Costs in this Cause. Which
Report follows, in these words, viz.

To his Excellency William Burnet, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief
of the Provinces of New York, New Jersey, and Territories thereon depending in
America, and Vice Admiral of the same, etc. in Chancery.
De Medina and ali. con. Het and the Executors of Fresneau.
IN Obedience to your Excellency's Orders in Chancery, of the 21 st and 22 d of
December last, referring to Cadwallader Colden, Esquire and Me, to state the
Accounts and tax the Cost in this Cause; and after stating the Accounts we
proceeded to taxing the said Costs, but none of the Defendants Council attended
to object against any of the Articles thereof, though it appeared to us, that
three Summonses had been duly served for the Defendants to attend us for that
purpose, as by Affidavits appeared, the last of which Summonses was to attend
us on the 27 th of February last, at which time we proceeded together, so far
to the considering of the several Articles of the Bill of Cost, produced to us,
amounting in the whole to the Sum of Eight Hundred and Twenty Three Pounds, and
we then considered and moderated the several Articles thereof, except what
depended on the length of the Decree, and what have accrued since that time.
And this day I have considered of the Articles thereof, not before considered
of, and have moderated the same; and upon the whole, I do humbly conceive, and
Report to your Excellency, That the same is moderated to, and taxed, as
aforesaid, at the Sum of Five Hundred and Sixty Six Pounds One Shilling and
Eleven Pence half Penny, whereof Rene Het is solely chargeable with the Sum of
Six Pounds four Shillings, for the Charges of the Prosecution of the Fifteen
Hundred Pound Bond, and of the Ne Exeat against the Complainant Pacheco, and
with the remainder thereof, the said Defendants are jointly and severally
chargeable. All which is nevertheless humbly Submitted to your Excellency, by

Your Excellency's Most Obedient Humble Servant, Robert Lurting, M. C.
New York, March 12. 1727.
AND now at this Day, to wit, the Twentieth Day of March, in the first year of
his Majesty's Reign, upon reading of the said Report, and of an Affidavit, That
Notice was duly given of the fileing thereof, upon the day the same was filed;
and of an Affidavit of Notice on the 16 th, of the Motion for Confirmation of
the said Report; and of a Certificate from the Register, That no Exceptions
were filed to the said Report, nor Copy thereof, or of the Bill of Costs
demanded of him by the Defendents, or either of them, It was moved by the
Council for the Complainants, That the said Report do stand Confirmed.

Upon Consideration whereof, and that no sufficient Cause was showed against
the same, It is therefore by his said Excellency, William Burnet, Esquire Ordered,
Adjudged and Decreed, That the said Report, and all the Matters and Things
therein contained, as to the Sum of Four Hundred and Ninety Seven Pounds
Eighteen Shillings and Three Pence half Penny thereof, do stand Ratified and
Confirmed by the Order, Authority and Decree of this Court, to be observed and
performed, and the Moneys thereof paid by all Parties, according to the tenor
and true meaning thereof; but as to the remainder, that the same is Disallowed
of.

Richard Nicholl, Rigist. Will. Sharpass, Cl. per Quer.

W. BURNET.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford in New York, 1728.


