God's Mercy surmounting Man's Cruelty, etc.
REmarkable and many have been the Providence of God rewards his People for
their Deliverance in a Time of Trouble, by which we may behold as in lively
Characters, the Truth of that Saying* That he is a God nigh at hand, and always
ready to help and assist those that fear him, and put their Confidence in him.

The Sacred Writings give us Instances of the Truth hereof, in Days of Old, as
in the Case of the Israelites, Job, David, Daniel, Paul, Silas, and many
others. Besides which, our modern Histories have plentifully abounded with
Instances of God's Fatherly Care over his People, in their sharpest Trials,
deepest Distresses, and sorest Exercises by which (...) may know he is a (...)
that changes not, but is the same Yesterday, to Day and for ever.

Among the many modern Instances, I think, I have not met with a more singular
One, of the Mercy and preserving Hand of God, than in the Case of Elizabeth
Hanson, Wife of John Hanson of Knoxmarsh in Kecheachey, in Dover-Township, in
New England, who was taken into Captivity the 27th Day of the 6th Month, called
August, 1724, and carried away with four Children, and a Servant, by the
Indians; which Relation, as it was taken from her own Mouth, by a Friend,
differs very little from the Original Copy, but is even almost in her own
Words. (what small Alteration is made being partly owing to the Mistake of the
Transcriber) which take as follows,

AS soon as they discovered themselves (having as we understood by their
Discourse, been sculking in the (...) some Days, watching their Opportunity
when my dear Husband with the rest of our Men, were gone out of the Way) two of
these barbarous Salvages came in upon us, next Eleven more, all naked, with
their Guns and Tomahauks came into the House in a great Fury upon us, and
killed one Child immediately, as soon as they entered the Door, thinking thereby
to strike in us the greater Terror, and to make us more fearful of them.

Then in as great Fury the Captain came up to me; but at my Request, he gave me
Quarter; there being with me our Servant, and Six of our Children, two of the
little Ones being at Play about the Orchard, and my youngest Child but Fourteen
Days old, whether in Cradle or Arms, I now mind not: Being in that Condition, I
was very unfit for the Hardships I after met with, which are briefly contained
in the following Pages.

They next go to rifling the House in a great Hurry, (fearing, as I suppose, a
Surprise from our People it being late in the Afternoon*) and packed up some
Linen* Woollen, and what other Things pleased them best; and when they had
done what they would, they turned out of the House immediately, and being at
the Door, Two of my younger Children, One Six, and the other Four Years old,
came in Sight, and being under a great Surprise, cried aloud, upon which one of
the Indians running to them, takes one under each Arm, and brings them to us.
My Maid prevailed with the biggest to be quiet and still; but the other could
by no Means be prevailed with, but continued screaking and crying very much, in
the Fright, and the Indians to ease themselves of the Noise, and to prevent the
Danger of a Discovery that might arise from it, immediately before my Face,
knocked its Brains out. I bore this as well as I could, not daring to appear
disturbed, or show much Uneasiness* lest they should do the same to the other:
But should have been exceeding glad they had kept out of Sight till we had been
gone from our House.

Now having killed two of my Children, they scalp'd 'em (a Practice common with
these People, which is, whenever they kill any English People, they cut the
Skin off from the Crown of their Heads, and carry it with them for a Testimony
and Evidence that they have killed so many, receiving sometimes a Reward of a
Sum of Money for every Scalp) and then put forward to leave the House in great
Haste, without doing any other Spoil than taking what they had packed together,
with my self and little Babe Fourteen Days old, the Boy Six, and two Daughters,
the one about Fourteen, and the other about Sixteen Years, with my Servant Girl.

It must be considered that I having lain-in but 14 Days* and being but very
tender and (...), being removed now out of a good Room well accommodated with
Fire, Bedding, and other Things suiting a Person in my Condition, it made these
Hardships to me greater than if I had been in a strong and healthy Frame; yet
for all this, I must go or die. There was no Resistance.

In the Condition aforesaid we left the House, each Indian having something;
and I with my Babe and three Children that could go of themselves. The Captain,
though he had as great a Load as he could well carry, and was helped up with it,
did for all that, carry my Babe for me in his Arms, which I took to be a Favor
from him. Thus we went through several Swamps and some Brooks, they carefully
avoiding all Paths of any Track like a Road, lest by our Footsteps we should be
followed.

We got that Night, I suppose, not quite ten Miles from our House, on a direct
Line; then taking up their Quarters, lighted a Fire* some of them lying down
while others kept Watch; I being both wet and weary, and lying on the cold
Ground in the open Woods, took but little Rest.

However, early in the Morning, we must go just as Day appeared, traveling
very hard all that Day through sundry Rivers, Brooks and Swamps, they as before,
carefully avoiding all Paths, for the Reason already assigned: At Night I was
both wet and tired exceedingly, having the same Lodging on the cold Ground in
the open Woods. Thus for 26 Days, Day by Day, we traveled very hard, sometimes
a little by Water over Lakes and Ponds; and in this Journey we went up some
very high Mountains so steep, that I was forced to creep up on my Hands and
Knees, under which Difficulty the Indian my Master, would mostly carry my Babe
for me, which I took as a great Favor of God that his Heart was so tenderly
inclined to assist me, though he had, as is said, a very heavy Burden of his own;
nay, he would sometimes take my very Blanket, so that I had nothing to do, but
take my little Boy by the Hand for his Help, and assist him as well as I could,
taking him up in my Arms a little at Times, because so small, and when we came
at very bad Places, he would lend me his Hand, or coming behind, would push me
up before him: In all which, he showed some Humanity and Civility more than I
could have expected: For which Privilege I was secretly thankful to God as the
moving Cause thereof.

Next to this, we had some very great Runs of Water and Brooks to wade through,
in which at Times* we met with much Difficulty, wading often to our middle, and
sometimes our Girls were up to their Shoulders and Chins the Indians carrying
my Boy on their Shoulders. At the Side of one of these Runs or Rivers, the
Indians would have my eldest Daughter Sarah to sing them a Song: Then was
brought into her Remembrance that Passage in the 137th Psalm, By the Rivers of
Babylon there we sat down, yea we wept when we remembered Zion; we hanged our
Harps on the Willows in the midst thereof; for there they that carried us away
captive required of us a Song, and they that wasted us, required of us Mirth.
When my poor Child had given me this Account, it was very affecting, and my
Heart was very full of Trouble, yet on my Child's Account, I was glad that she
had so good an Inclination, which she yet further manifested in longing for a
Bible, that we might have the Comfort in rreading the Holy Text, at vacant
Times, for our Spiritual Comfort under our present Affliction.

Next to the Difficulties of the Rivers, were the prodigious Swamps and
Thickets, very difficult to pass through; in which Places my Master would
sometimes lead me by the Hand a great Way together, and give me what Help he
was capable of under the (...) we went through; and we passing one after another,
the first made it pretty passable for the hindmost*

But the greatest Difficulty that deserves the first to be named, was Want of
Food, having at Times nothing to eat but Pieces of old Beaver-Skin-Match-Coats,
which the Indians having hid (for they came naked as is said before) which in
their going back again they took with them, and they were used more for Food
than Raiment: Being cut out in long narrow Straps, they gave us little Pieces,
which by the Indians Example we laid on the Fire till the Hair was singed away,
and then we eat them as a sweet Morsel, experimentally knowing, that to the
hungry Soul every bitter thing is sweet.

It Is to be considered further, that of this poor Diet we had but very scanty
Allowance; so that we were in no Danger of being overcharged. But that which
added to my Trouble* was the Complaints of my poor Children, especially the
little Boy. Sometimes the Indians would catch a Squirrel, or a Beaver, and at
other Times, we met with Nutts, Berries and Roots they dug out of the
Ground, with the Bark of some Trees: But we had no Corn for a great while
together, though some of the younger Indians went back, and brought some Corn
from the English Inhabitants, the Harvest not being gathered, of which we had a
little allowed us: But when they caught a Beaver, we lived high while it
lasted, they allowing me the Guts and Garbage for my self and Children: But not
allowing us to clean and wash them as they ought, made the Food very irksome to
us, in the Conceit of our Minds, to feed upon, and nothing besides pinching
Hunger could have made it any way tolerable to be born. But that makes every
bitter Thing sweet.

The next Difficulty was no less hard to me; for my daily Travel and hard
Living made my Milk dry almost quite up, and how to preserve my poor Babe's
Life was no small Care on my Mind, having no other Sustenance for it, many
Times, but cold Water, which I took in my Mouth, and let it fall on my Breast,
(when I gave it the Teat,) to suck in, with what it could get from the Breast;
and when I had any of the Broth of the Beaver, or other Guts, I fed my Babe
with it, as well as I could: By which Means, through Care to keep it as warm as I
could, I preserved its Life till I got to Canada, and then I had some other
Food, of which more in its Place.

Having by this Time got considerably on the Way, the Indians part; and we must
be divided amongst them. This was a sore Grief to us all: But we must submit,
and no Way to help our selves. My eldest Daughter was first taken away, and
carried to another Part of the Country far distant from us, where for the
present, we must take Leave of her, though with a heavy Heart.

We did not travel far after this, before they divided again, taking my second
Daughter and Servant Maid from me, into another Part of the Country: So, I
having now only my Babe at my Breast, and little Boy six Years old, we remained
with the Captain still: But my Daughter and Servant underwent great Hardships
after they were parted from me, traveling three Days, without any Food, taking
nothing for Support, but cold Water; and the third Day, what with the Cold, the
Wet, and Hunger, the Servant fell down as dead in a Swoon, being both very cold
and wet, at which the Indians with whom they were, were surpised, showing some
Kind of Tenderness, being unwilling then to lose them by Death, having got them
so near home, hoping if they lived, by their Ransom to make considerable Profit
by them.

In a few Days after this, they got near their Journey's End, where they had
more Plenty of Corn and other Food: But Flesh often fell very short, having no
other Way to depend on for it, but hunting (...) when that failed, they had
(...) short Commons. It was not long ere my Daughter and Servant were likewise
parted; and my Daughter's Master being sick, was not able to hunt for Flesh:
Neither had they any Corn in that Place, but were forced to eat Bark of Trees
for a whole Week.

Being almost famished in this Distress, Providence so ordered that some other
Indians hearing of their Misery and Want, came to visit them; (these People
being very kind and helpful to one another, which is very commendable) and
brought unto them the Guts and Liver of a Beaver, which afforded them a good
Repast, being but Four in Number, the Indian, his Wife and Daughter, and my
Daughter.

By this Time my Master and our Company got to our Journey's End, where we were
better fed at Times, having some Corn and Venison, and wild Fowl, or what they
could catch by hunting in the Woods; and my Master having a large Family, being
Fifteen in Number, we had at Times very short Commons, more especially when
Game was scarce.

But here our Lodging was still on the cold Ground in a poor Wigwam, (which is
a kind of little Shelter made with the Rinds of Trees and Mats for a Covering,
something like a Tent.) These are so easily set up and taken down, that they
often remove them from one Place to another: Our Shoes and Stockings being done,
and our other Clothes wore out in that long Journey through the Bushes and
Swamps, and the Weather coming in very hard, we were poorly defended from the
Cold, for Want of Necessaries; which caused one of my Feet, one of the little
Babe's, and both the little Boys to freeze, and this was no small Exercise, yet
through Mercy, we all did well.

Now though we got to our Journey's End, we were never long in one Place, but
very often moved from one Place to another, carrying their Wigwams with them*
which they could do, without much Difficulty. This being for the Convenience of
Hunting, made our Accommodations much more unpleasant than if we had continued
in one Place, by reason the Coldness and Dampness of the Ground, where our
Wigwams were pitched, made it very unwholesome and unpleasant Lodging.

Being now got to the Indian Fort, many of the Indians came to visit us, and in
their Way welcomed my Master home; and held a great Rejoicing, with Dancing,
Firing Guns, Beating on hollow Trees, instead of Drums, shouting, drinking and
Feasting after their Manner, in much Excess for several Days together, which I
suppose, in their Thoughts, was a Kind of Thanks to God put up for their safe
Return and good Success: But while they were in their Jollitry and Mirth, my
Mind was greatly exercised toward the Lord, that I, with my dear Children
separated from me, might be preserved from repining against God, under our
Affliction on the one Hand, and on the other, we might have our Dependence on
him who rules the Hearts of Men, and can do what pleases in the Kingdoms of the
Earth, knowing that his Care is over them who put their Trust in him; but I
found it very hard to keep my Mind as I ought, under the Resignation which is
proper to be in, under such Afflictions and sore Trials, as at that Time I
suffered, in being under various Fears and Doubts concerning my Children, that
were separated from me, which helped to add to, and greatly increase my
Troubles: And herein I may truly say, my Afflictions are not to be set forth in
Words to the Extent of them.

We had not been long at home ere my Master went a hunting, and was absent
about a Week, he ordering me in his Absence to get in Wood, gather Nuts, etc. I
was very diligent, cutting the Wood, and putting it in Order, not having very
far to carry it: But when he returned, having got no Prey, he was very much out
of Humor, and the Disappointment was so great, that he could not forbear
revenging it on us poor Captives. However he allowed me a little boiled Corn
for self and Child, but with a very angry Look threw a Stick or Corn-Cob at me,
with such Violence as did bespeak he grudged our Eating. At this his Squaw and
Daughter broke out in a great Crying. This made me fear Mischief was hatching
against us: And on it, I immediately went out of his Presence into another
Wigwam; upon which he comes after me, and in great Fury tore my Blanket off my
Back, and took my little Boy from me and struck him down as he went along
before him; But the poor Child not being hurted, only frighted in the Fall, he
started up and ran away, without crying; then the Indian my Master left me; but
his Wife's Mother came and sat down by me, and told me, I must sleep there that
Night. She then going from me a little Time, came back with a small Skin to
cover my Feet withal, informing, that my Master intended now to kill us; and I
being desirous to know the Reason, expostulated, that in his Absence I had been
diligent to do as I was ordered by him. Thus, as well as I could, I made her
sensible how unreasonable he was. Now, though she could not understand me, nor I
her, but by Sgns, we reasoned as well as we could: She therefore makes Signs
that I must die, advising me, by pointing up with her Fingers, in her Way, to
pray to God, endeavoring by her Signs and Tears to instruct me in that which
was most needful, viz. to prepare for Death, which now threatened me; the poor
old Squaw was so very kind and tender, that she would not leave me all that
Night, but laid her self down at my Feet, designing what she could to assuage
her Son-in-law's Wrath, who had conceived Evil against me, chiefly as I
understood, because the Want of Victuals urged him to it. My Rest was little
this Night, my poor Babe sleeping sweetly by me.

I dreaded the tragical Design of my Master, looking every Hour for his coming
to execute his bloody Will upon us: But he being weary with his Hunting and
Travel in the Woods, (having toyled for nothing) went to Rest, and forgot it.
Next Morning he applied himself again to hunting in the Woods; but I dreaded
his returning empty, and prayed secretly in my Heart, that he might catch some
Food to satisfy his Hunger, and cool his ill Humor. He he had been gone but a
little Time till returned with Booty, having shot some wild Duck; and now he
appeared in a better Temper, ordering the Fowls to be dressed with Speed; for
these kind of People, when they have Plenty, spend it as freely as they get it;
spending in Gluttony and Drunkenness in two Days Time, as much, as with prudent
Management might serve a Week. Thus do they live, for the most Part, either in
Excess of Gluttony and Drunkenness, or under great Straits for Want of
Necessaries. However in this plentiful Time I felt the Comfort of it in Part
with the Family, having a Portion sent for me and my little ones, which was
very acceptable. Now, I thinking to my self the Bitterness of Death was over
for this Time, my Spirits were a little easier.

Not long after this, he got into the like ill Humor again, threatening to take
away my Life. But I always observed whenever he was in such a Temper, he
wanted Food, and was pinched with Hunger. But when he had Success in hunting,
to take either Bears, Beavers, Bucks or Fowls, on which he could fill his
Belly, he was better humoured, though he was naturally of a very hot and
passionate Temper, throwing Sticks, Stones, or whatever lay in his Way, on
every slight Occasion. This made me in continual Danger of my Life: But That
God whose Providence is over all his Works, so preserved me, that I never
received any Damage from him that was of any great Consequence to me; for which
I ever desire to be thankful to my Maker.

When Flesh was scarce, we had only the Guts and Garbage allowed to our Part;
and not being permitted to cleanse the Guts any otherwise than emptying the
Dung, without so much as washing them, as before is noted, in that filthy
Pickle we must boil them, and eat them, which was very unpleasant: But Hunger
made up that Difficulty, so that this Food which was very often our Lot, became
pretty tolerable to a sharp Appetite, which otherwise by no Means could have
been dispensed with. Thus I considered, none knows what they can undergo, till
they are tried: For what I had thought in my own Family, nor fit for Food,
would here have been a Dainty-Dish and a sweet Morsel.

By this Time, what with Fatigue of Spirits, hard Labor, mean Diet, and often
Want of Natural Rest, I was brought so low, that my Milk was dried up, my Baby
very poor and weak, just Skin and Bone; for I could perceive all its Joints
from one End of the Babe's Back to the other; and how to get what would suit
its weak Appetite, I was at a Loss; on which one of the Indian Squaws
perceiving my Uneasiness about my Child, began some Discourse with me, in which
she advised me to take the Kernels of Walnuts, and clean them, and beat them
with a little Water, which I did, and when I had so done, the Water looked like
Milk; then she advised me to add to this Water, a little of the finest of the
Indian Corn Meal, and boil it a little together. I did so, and it became
palatable, and was very nourishing to the Babe, so that it began to thrive and
look well; which was before more like to die than live. I found that with this
kind of Diet the Indians did often nurse their Infants. This was no small
Comfort to me: But this Comfort was soon mixed with Bitterness and Trouble,
which thus happened; My Master taking Notice of my dear Babe's thriving
Condition, would often look upon it, and say, when it was fat enough, it should
be killed, and he would eat it; and pursuant to his Pretense, at a certain
Time, he made me to fetch him a Stick that he had prepared for a Spit, to roast
the Baby upon, as he said, which when I had done, he made me sit down by him,
and undress the Infant. When the Child was naked, he felt its Arms, Legs, and
Thighs, and told me, It was not fat enough yet; I must dress it again until it
was better in Case.

Now though he thus acted, I could not persuade my self, that he intended to do
as he pretended; but only to aggravate and afflict me: Neither ever could I
think but our Lives would be preserved from his barbarous Hands, by the
overruling Power of him in whose Providence I put my Trust, both Day and Night.

A little Time after this my Master fell sick, and in his sickness, as he lay
in his Wigwam, he ordered his own Son to beat my Son: But the old Squaw, the
Indian Boy's Grandmother, would not suffer him to do it: Then his Father, my
Master, being provoked, catches up a Stick very sharp at one End, and with
great Violence threw it from him, at my Son, and hit him on the Breast, with
which my Child was much bruised, and the Pain, with the Surprise, made him turn
as pale as Death; I entreating him not to cry, and the Boy though but Six Years
old, bore it with wonderful Patience, not so much as in the least complaining,
so that the Child's Patience assuaged the Barbarity of his hard Heart: who, no
Doubt, would have carried his Passion and Resentment higher, had the Child
cried, as always Complaining did aggravate his Passion, and his Anger grew
hotter upon it. Some little Time after, on the same Day he got upon his Feet,
but far from being well. However, though he was sick, his Wife and Daughter let
me know, he intended to kill us, and I was under a Fear, unless Providence now
intercepted, how it would end, I therefore put down my Child, and going out of
his Presence, went to cut Wood for the Fire, as I used to do, hoping that would
in Part, allay his Passion; but withal ere I came to the Wigwam again, I
expected my Children would be killed in this mad Fit, having no other Way but
to cast my Care upon God, who had hitherto helped and cared for me and mine

Under this great Feud, the old Squaw, my Master's Mother-in-law left him; but
my Mistress and her Daughter abode in the Wigwam with my Master; and when I
came with my Wood, the Daughter came to me, whom I asked, if her Father had
killed my Children, and she made me a Sign, No, with a Countenance that seemed
pleased it was so; for instead of his further venting his Passion on me and my
Children, the Lord, in whom I trusted, did seasonably interpose, and I took it
as a merciful Deliverance from him, and the Indian was under some Sense of the
same as himself did confess to them about him afterward.

Thus it was a little after he got up on his Feet, the Lord struck him with
great Sickness, and a violent Pain, as appeared by the Complaint he made in a
doleful and hideous Manner; which when I understood, not having yet seen him, I
went to another Squaw, that was come to see my Master, which could both speak
and understand English, and enquired of her if my Mistress (for so I always
called her, and him Master) thought that Master would die? She answered Yes, it
was very likely he would, being worse and worse: Then I told her, He struck my
Boy a dreadful Blow without any Provocation at all, and had threatened to kill
us all in his Fury and Passion; upon which the Squaw told me, My Master had
confessed the Abuse he offered my Child, and that the Mischief he had done, was
the Cause why God afflicted him unto that Sickness and Pain; and he had
promised never to abuse us in such Sort more* And after this he soon recovered,
but was not so passionate; nor do I remember he ever after struck either me or
Children, so as to hurt us, or with that mischievous Intent as before he used
to do. This I took as the Lord's Doing, and it was mavelous in my Eyes.

Some few Weeks after this, my Master made another Remove, having, as before,
made several: But this was the longest ever he made, it being two Day's
Journey, and mostly upon the Ice. The first Day's Journey the Ice was bare, but
the next Day some Snow falling, made it troublesome, very tedious and difficult
traveling; and I took much Damage in often falling, having the Care of my
Babe, that added not a little to my Uneasiness; and the last Night, when we
came to encamp, it being in the Night, I was ordered to fetch Water: But having
fate a while on the cold Ground, I could neither go nor stand; but crawling on
my Hands and Knees, a young Indian Squaw came to see our People, being of
another Family, in Compassion took the Kettle, and knowing where to go, which I
did not, fetched the Water for me. This I took as a great Kindness and Favor,
that her Heart was inclined to do me this Service.

I now saw the Design of this Journey; my Master being, as I suppose, weary to
keep us, was willing to make what he could of our Ransom; therefore he went
further toward the French, and left his Family in this Place, where they had a
great Dance, sundry other Indians coming to our People, This held some Time,
and while they were in it, I got out of their Way in a Corner of the Wigwam as
well as I could: But every Time they came by me, in their Dancing, they would
bow my Head toward the Ground, and frequently kick me with as great Fury as
they could bear, being sundry of them barefoot, and others having (...)
Mocossons: This Dance held some Time, and they made (in their Manner) great
rejoycings and Noise.

It was not many Days ere my Master returned from the French; but he was in
such a Humor, when he came back, he would not suffer me in his Presence*
Therefore I had a little Shelter made with some Boughs, they having dug
through the Snow to the Ground, the Snow being pretty deep. In this Hole, I and
my poor Children were put to lodge, the Weather being very sharp, and hard
Frost in the Month called January, made it more tedious to me and poor Babes.
Our Stay not being long in this Place, he took me to the French, in Order for a
Chapman; and when we came among them, I was exposed to Sale, and he asked for
me 800 Livres: But the French not complying with his Demand, put him in a great
Rage, offering him but 600, he said in a great Passion, If he could not have
his Demand, he would make a great Fire* and burn me and the Babe in the View of
the City, which was named Port Royal. The Frenchman bid the Indian make his
Fire, and I will, says he, help you, if you think that will do you more Good
than 600 Livres, calling my Master Fool, and speaking roughly to him, bid him
be gone. But at the same Time, the Frenchman was very civil to me; and for my
Encouragement, bid me be of good Cheer, for I should be redeemed, and not go
back with them again.

Retiring now with my Master for this Night, the next Day I was redeemed for
600 Livres, and in treating with my Master, the Frenchman queried, Why he asked
so much for the Babe's Ransom, urging, when it had its Bellyful, it would die;
My Master said, No, it would not die, having already lived 26 Days on nothing
but Water, believing the Babe to be a Devil. The Frenchman told him, No, the
Child is ordered for longer Life; and it has pleased God to preserve it to
Admiration. My Master said, No it was a Devil, and he believed it would not
die* unless they took a Hatchet, and bent its Brains out. Thus ended their
Discourse, and I was, as aforesaid, with my Babe, ransomed for 600 Livres, my
little Boy, likewise at the same Time, for an additional Sum of Livres was
redeemed also.

I now having changed my Landlord, my Table and Diet, as well as my Lodging,
the French were civil beyond what I could either desire or expect. But the next
Day after I was redeemed, the Romish Priests took my Babe from me, and
according to their Custom, they baptized it (urging if it died before That, it
would be damned, like some of our modern pretended reformed Priests) and they
gave it a Name as pleased them best; which was Mary Ann Frossways, telling me,
My Child, if it now died* would be saved, being baptized; and my Landlord
speaking to the Priest that baptized it, said, It would be well now Frossways
was baptized, for it to die, being now in a State to be saved. But the Priest
said, No, the Child having been so miraculously preserved through so many
Hardships, it may be designed by God for some great Work, and by its Life,
being still continued, may much more glorify God than if it should now die. A
very sensible Remark, and I wish it may prove true*

I having been about five Months amongst the Indians, in about one Month after
I got amongst the French, my dear Husband, to my unspeakable Comfort and Joy,
came to me, who was now himself concerned to redeem his Children, two of our
Daughters being still Captives, and only my self and two little ones redeemed;
and through great Difficulty and Trouble he recovered the younger Daughter: But
the eldest we could by no Means obtain from their Hands, for the Squaw, to whom
she was given, had a Son which she intended my Daughter should in Time be
prevailed with to marry; the Indians being very civil toward their captive
Women, not offering any Incivility by any indecent Carriage (unless they be
much overgone in Liquor, which is commendable in them so far.

However the Affections they had for my Daughter, made them refuse all Offers
and Terms of Ransom; so that after my poor Husband had waited* and made what
Attempts and Endeavors he could, to obtain his Child, (...) we were forced to
make homeward, leaving our Daughter to our great Grief, behind us, amongst the
Indians, and set forwards over the Lake, with Three of our Children* and
Servant-Maid, in (...) with sundry others, and by the Kindness of Providence we
got well home on the first Day of the Seventh Month, 1725. From which it
appears I had been from home amongst the Indians and French, about Twelve
Months, and Six Days.

In the Series of which Time, the many Deliverances and wonderful Providence
of God unto us, and over us, have been, and I hope will so remain to be as a
continued Obligation

on my Mind ever to live in that Fear, Love and Obedience to God, duly
regarding, by his Grace, with Meekness and Wisdom, to approve myself by his
Spirit, in all Holiness of Life, and Godliness of Conversation, to the Praise
of him that has called me, who is God blessed forever.

But my dear Husband, poor Man! could not enjoy himself in Quiet with us, for
Want of his dear Daughter Sarah, that was left behind; and not willing to omit
any thing for her redemption which lay in his Power, he could not be easy
without making a second Attempt; in order to which, he took his Journey about
the nineteenth Day of the Second Month, 1727, in company with a Kinsman and his
Wife, who went to redeem some of their Children, and were so happy as to obtain
what they went about: But my dear Husband being taken sick on the way, grew
worse and worse, as we were informed, and was sensible he should not get over
it; telling my Kinsman, that, if it was the Lord's Will he must die

in the Wilderness, he was freely given up to it. He was under a good Composure
of mind, and sensible to the last Moment, and died, as near as we can guess, in
about the Halfway between Albany and Canada, in my Kinsman's Arms, and is at
rest, I hope in the Lord: And though my own Children's loss is very great; yet
I doubt not but his gain is much more; I therefore desire and pray that the
Lord will enable me patiently to submit to his will in all things he is pleased
to suffer to my lot while here, earnestly supplicating the God and Father of
all our mercies, to be a Father to my fatherless Children, and give unto them
that Blessing which makes truly rich, and adds no sorrow to it; that as they
grow in years they may grow in Grace, and experience the Joy of his Salvation,
which is come by Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior. Amen.

Now though my Husband died, by reason of which his Labor was ended, yet my
Kinsman prosecuted the thing, and left no Stone unturned that he

thought, or could be advised, was proper to the obtaining my daughter's
Freedom; but could by no means prevail; for as is before said (she being in
another part of the Country distant from where I was) and given to an old
Squaw, who intended to marry her in time to her Son, using what persuading she
could to effect her end, sometimes by fair Means, and sometimes by severe. In
the mean time a Frenchman interposed and they, by persuasion enticed my Child
to marry, in order to obtain her Freedom, by reason that those Captives married
by the French, are by that Marriage made free among them, the Indians having
then no pretense longer to keep them as Captives, she therefore was prevailed
upon, for the reasons before assigned, to marry, and she was accordingly married
to the Frenchman.

Thus, as well, and as near as I can from my memory, (not being capable of
keeping a Journal) I have given a short, but a true Account of

some of the remarkable Trials and wonderful Deliverances, which I never
purpo(...) to expose; but that I (...) the merciful Kindness (...) (...)oodness
of God may be (...), and the Reader hereof provo(...) with more care and fear
to serve him in Righteousness and Humility and then my designed End and Purpose
will be answered.

E. H.


FINIS.



