^HE Mystical Marriage.

A Brief ESSAY, ON, The GRACE of the REDEEMER ESPOUSING The SOUL of the
BELIEVER.

By the Late Reverend Dr. Cotton Mather.

Approved by Several PASTORS of our Churches, as a Present, proper to be
offered unto our YOUNG PEOPLE: And very particularly when the Celebration of a
MARRIAGE affords an Agreeable Occasion for it.

BOSTON. N.E. Printed for N. Belknap, and Sold at his Shop near Scarlet's
Wharf, MDCCXXVIII.

Preface.
THE Venerable Author of the ensuing Discourse, who was forever devising Good,
thinking how serviceable and glorious it would be, if when Matrimony is
Solemnized, it might be done with Devotion and Religion, and with a Concern
that, when the Hands are joined and so the united Hearts are signified, there
may be a Desire of their Souls and a Consent of their Wills, that their SAVIOR
may be theirs, espoused unto them and concerned for them: I say, the Venerable
Author, reflecting on these things, prepared the following Discourse for the
Direction of ( all indeed, but more especially) those engaging in this useful
and Heavenly Institution.

The Sermon was preached and fitted for the Press some Months before the
Author's Death, who composed it for an agreeable Present unto the Candidates of
Wedlock; and as such it is approved by several Ministers, who hope, with me,
that the Discourse will answer the pious Intentions of the Writer; while he is
above rejoicing in JESUS CHRIST, the Bridegroom of his Soul.

S. M.

A Soul Espoused unto a SAVIOR.
The most Mavelous Proposal that ever was made among the Children of Men,
calls now for a most Admiring Attention from us.
It Is that in, Romans VII.4. That ye should be MARRIED unto HIM who is Raised from
the Dead.

CAN such a Thing be heard without Astonishment! -- Sing O Heavens, and be
Joyful, O Earth, and break forth into Singing, O Mountains; For, Oh! how
astonishing are the Comforts which the Glorious Lord has for his Chosen People.

Married unto a Glorious Christ, Raised from the Dead, and so taken up to, and
sitting down on, the Throne of GOD. O Wonderful! O Wonderful! The Soul of a
poor, Foolish, Filthy Creature; the Soul of a Miserable Sinner, -- Married unto
the Only Begotten Son of God, who has all the Angels in the Heavens forever
Ordered by Him, and Adoring of Him! To be Commanded by Him, is a Dignity; To be
Employed for Him, is an Advancement, beyond what we can desire. But then, to be
Married unto Him! -- Seems it a light matter unto you, O Children of Men!
Verily, it is a matter which cannot (be sufficiently wondered at! But it is a
matter, which we now have in prosecution and in expectation.

Behold, an lllustrious Demonstration, That Believers on a Glorious Christ are
delivered from the Dominion of Sin. The Evil principle which disposes us to
Sin, is mortified and extinguished in Believers, to such a degree, that though
the Continuance of it is an Intolerable Vexation unto them, yet it has not a
Dominion over them. While we remain under the Covenant of Works, or the
Covenant made with the First Adam, as the Head of his Natural Offspring, we are
under a Law which requires a perfect Obedience from us, but at the same time it
affords us no Strength for that Obedience: No; our Corrupt Nature is thereby
irritated unto Rebellion rather than annimated unto Obedience, and [the Evil
Principle gains the Force of a Law upon us. The Law which in it self is Holy,
and just and Good, in the Event is turned into, a Law of Sin and Death unto us.
If we read a few Lines more, we cannot but stand amazed at the Blindness of
them, who exclude the Moral Law of the Ten Commandments from the meaning of the
Apostles, and expound it only for the Law of the Mosaical Ceremonies, when here
we read of being Delivered from the Law. But now, our Blessed Jesus is a Second
Adam. And by our being united unto HIM, we are brought into a Covenant of
Grace. In that Covenant the Redeemer, to whom we are united, makes Atonement
for our Trespasses, against the Law, answers the Demands of the Law in our
stead, and conveys into us by his Good Spirit a principle of Life, which
quickens us to endeavor a perfection of Obedience, and Strengthens us to make
a Gradual Progress toward a perfection of Holiness in the Fear of GOD. Thus we
become Dead unto the Law! Our Hopes of obtaining the Justification of Life by
our own doing of the Works which the Law requires, are all Dead. We have laid
aside all Hopes of coming to Life, on those Terms of the Law, Do and Live. The
Law is also Dead unto us, and can make no more claim upon us, to adhere unto
those Terms of, Do and Live, than a Dead Man can upon one that he was once by
Marriage a Master of. Christians, You have the very Substance and Marrow of the
Gospel, and a plain Gloss upon a famous Paragraph of the Sacred Scriptures, in
these few Communications. But what is our Condition in this Change of our State
before the Lord? And what is it that brings us into this Happy Condition? It Is
this Mavelous Felicity; Our Marriage with a Redeemer that is Raised from the
Dead. Of this I am now to Entertain you with a DOCTRINE, that brings unto us
those Consolatioas of GOD, which, O Hard-Hearted we, if they be Small unto us!

A Soul Married unto a Jesus Raised from the Dead, is an Happy Soul. And it is
by Marrying of us unto Himself that a Glorious CHRIST brings us to all the
Happiness, which He has purposed and purchased for us. Our Apostle, Speaking of
a People by his Ministry brought home unto GOD, and made an Happy People, says,
2 Cor. XI.2. I have Espoused you unto one Husband, that I may present you as a
chaste Virgin unto CHRIST. This, This is the main intent and business of the
Evangelical Ministry. The Ministers of the Gospel are those Friends of the
Bridegroom, that have a Work to do upon that Noble Design; To Espouse the Souls
of their People, unto a Glorious Christ, who is willing to become an Husband
unto them. Now to bring about this Blessedness to the Souls, with and for whom
we are concerned, we are going to lay before you the most Important Things,
that ever you were addressed upon; And we make our Address to you, with such a
pathetic Observation, Hearken to me, that GOD may hearken unto you another Day.

I. The Glorious REDEEMER makes unto your Souls, O our Gospelized People, a
Proposal to make you Happy in an ESPOUSAL unto Himself.

Can our Souls be any other than swallowed up with Admiration at the Mystery.

The Infinite Son of GOD, Espoused the Nature of Man, when the Word was made
Flesh, and he condescended so far as to take a Man in One Person with Himself.
The Almighty King, overlooking all the Tribes of Created, and even of Angelic
Beings, Espoused unto Himself a Queen, from the Family of Mankind. -- Lord what
are we? And what is our Fathers House? This He did, though He saw the Depravation
which Mankind by a Fall from God comes to Sink into. A Thing which, Oh! how
should we celebrate the Grace! Grace! that we see shining in it! What an Honor
does it put upon the Humane Race! And how should it Encourage our Approaches
unto our GOD.

But now, the GOD-MAN, or Immanuel, is upon the Glorious Design of Espousing to
Himself a Church of People, culled and called out of Mankind, into the Faith of
Him. There is a CHURCH of Believers on Him, a People formed for himself, to
show forth his praise, whom in a Mystical MARRIAGE He reckons Himself Espoused
unto. This Church is by that Lamb of GOD Expressly called, his WIFE: And
Effectually bringing this People into a Reconciliation with God, He says, Jer.
III.14. I Marry my self unto you. Th^se with whom we are principally now
concerned, would be little edified; with the Traditions among the Jews, of the
Marriage between Tipheret and Maleuth, [So the Jewish Thrology calls the
Messiah, and his Church] which we apprehend represented in the Song of Solomon,
and in the Forty-fifth Psalm of his Father David, which that Song was built
upon. It Is enough to say, That People bro't into the Life of GOD, have that word
fulfilled unto them; Hos. II.18, 19. I will espouse thee unto me for ever; yea,
I Will espouse thee unto me in Justice, and in Judgment, and in
Loving Kindness, and in Mercies. I will even espouse thee unto me in
Faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord.

But then, What we would more particularly insist upon, is, That every
particular Soul brought home unto God, is Espoused unto the SON of God. GOD the
KING Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, makes a Marriage for His SON in the
Conversion of a Sinner to Him. In the moment that any of you make the Flight of
a Distressed Soul unto your SAVIOR, who has in Him the Only Name, [even the
Name of JEHOVAH] whereby we must be saved, and entreat of Him, and rely on Him,
for His Great Salvation, from that Moment thou art Espoused unto Him, and in
whatever part of the Earth He finds thee, His Voice to thee, is that, Isa.
LIVE.5. Thy Maker is thy Husband; and thy Redeemer; the G0D of the whole Earth
shall he be called.

This, This is the Espousal, unto which, O Soul Enjoying the Joyful Sound of
the Gospel, thou art now therein Solicited.

The Method of coming into the unparalleled Espousal, and so unto Everlasting
Happinses, is briefly this.

There is a COVENANT of Life, wherein the SON of GOD has engaged these Two
things unto his FATHER, on the behalf of his People which are in the Eternal
Election of GOD given unto Him: The First That he will by answering the Law of
GOD for them, furnish them with a Sacrifice and a Righteousness, on the
pleading whereof they shall be Forgiven and Accepted with Him: The Second, That
He will write the Law of GOD in their Hearts, and Heal all that is amiss in
them, and work in them what is well pleasing in the sight of GOD, and having by
a Sanctifying work upon their whole Man, prepared them for the Inheritance of
the Saints, bring them to the Spiritual Blessings of the Heavenly places. A
Soul desiring to be comprehended in the Engagements of this COVENANT, and
consenting that a Glorious CHRIST should fulfill for it and in it, all this
Good Pleasure of His Goodness, is brought into the COVENANT of Grace, and is
therein Espoused unto the Lord.

This Transaction appears under the Character of a Marriage, because from this
Time, there is an UNION, and not only a Legal Union, but also a Vital Union,
between the Redeemer and the Believer. It comes to that, Joh. XIV.20. You in
Me, and I in You: As upon an Espousal, the Married Couple becomes One flesh, so
the Redeemer and the Believer become ONE, both in point of Interest, and in
point of Influence. The Debts of the Believer ly on the Redeemer, and the
Redeemer pays them all. The claims of the Redeemer are imparted unto the
Believer, and the Believer is Entitled unto His precious Benefits; What He has
bought belongs to thee, O thou Blessed of the Lord. At the same time the
Redeemer does Converse with the Believer; and follow him with Goodness and
Mercy all his Days, and receives him into the Mansions of His Fathers House at
the proper period of his Days, and Show, Oh! What Wonders to the Dead! The
Believer does depend on the Redeemer for all the Blessings of Goodness, and pay
Him all possible Affection and Obedience; Delighting in Communion with Him; and
Resolving to be for Him and not for another. He is thy Lord, and, O Loyal and
Faithful one, Thou do Worship Him.

That which gives yet a further Appearance of a Marriage in this Grand Affair,
is, Its conformity to what passed in the Case of Adam and Eve, and the First
Marriage, even that which was made in Paradise. An Apostle of GOD Writing of
that Marriage says, Ephesians. V.32. This is a Great Mystery: But I speak about
CHRIST and his Church. Adam was thrown into a sort of a Swoon, wherein GOD as I
conceive, Extracted from his whole Inward, (which we render his Rib) the
Substance, which He framed into the Shape that He gave to Eve, and which was
Bone of his Bones, and Flesh of his Flesh: So that she became his Consort, who
was also his Offspring. Accordingly a Glorious CHRIST having passed through the
Agonies and Convulsions of Death for it, has those produced for Him, and for a
most Intimate and Endearing Fellowship with Him; who are also produced from
Him, and are indeed His Offspring. He Sees His own Seed in them, and He owns
them for Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones. And as the
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy GOD rejoice over thee, O Soul,
willing to be the Lord's.

This then is the Thing proposed by our SAVIOR to us. Yea, Hear this O all ye
People, Every one of you! It Is to Every One of You all, that our SAVIOR does
propose it; and this is the Gospel to be Preached unto Every Creature. Soul, be
willing to come into an UNION with thy SAVIOR.

II. O you to whom there is the Word of such a Salvation sent; Your Compliance
with the Proposal of your Glorious REDEEMER for your ESPOUSAL to Himself, does
declare you Espoused unto Him, and render you interminably Happy in Him. It Is
the Speaking of ONE WORD, upon an overture of a Marriage, which determines the
Matter. Soul, It Is the Hearty Speaking of ONE WORD which will Marry thee unto
thy SAVIOR. That ONE WORD, Receive me to thy Mercy, and thy Glory O my
SAVIOR. That ONE WORD, O my SAVIOR, make me thy own forever. That ONE WORD,
Lord, I am Thine, Save me. The People Espoused unto the Redeemer, are called,
Psalm. CX.3. His Willing People. It Is their being made Willing to be His that
makes them such an Happy People. Soul, when thy SAVIOR makes His Proposal,
Shall I take thee, and make thee my own, and Feed thee and Cloth thee, and
Lead thee, and Shield thee, and use thee as my own, and bring thee to be all
that I would have mine to be! Let thy conquered Heart comply with it, and
Reply, O my SAVIOR, I resign my self unto thee; do thou take possession of me!
Lo, It Is done! It Is done! This ONE WORD fetched from thy Heart by the Victorious
Grace of GOD has Eternally Saved thee. The SPIRIT of GOD inclining the Soul to
say unto the SAVIOR, the Justifier, the Sanctifier, Oh! when will thou come
unto me! He does thereby make that Soul a Bride for the SON of GOD. It is the
Bride that says COME! He waits for that Voice of His Dove: Oh! Let not the only
Comforter that can relieve my Soul be far from me: Let there no longer be a
distance between me and my SAVIOR; and let not my Sin hide His Face from me.
Upon this He says, O my Dove, I take thee into the Clifts of the Rock: Thou
shall be under the shadow of my Wings forever. It may be Illustrated from the
Espousal of Rebeckah unto Isaac. When the Glories and the Desires of the
Excellent Person, and of his Father, had been told her, and it was demanded,
Will thou go unto him, and be his? Her answer of Compliance, I will go, Settled
all; there needed no more to be said. Soul, The Word of Truth, and Gospel of
thy Salvation, tells thee, The SON of GOD is a Person beyond all Imagination
Glorious, and He is The Lord of all. He would gladly make thee His own: And His
FATHER sends His Gospel, to inform thee and assure thee of it. Art thou willing
to Go and live with Him, and prize Him, and serve Him, and Be what he would
have thee to be? That answer of Compliance, I will go, This will settle it; And
His Holy SPIRIT will make a sweet Seizure on thee; and He will have thee and
hold thee for His own forevermore. Is it possible to reject such a Motion! --

But then, in Complying with it, most certainly, it will not be possible to be
any other than inexpressibly Surprised at it. All the Surprise that was
expressed by the Lady unto whom David sent the Motion of her becoming his, must
fall far short of thy Surprise, and Marvel, and Rapture, upon this motion from
the Son and Lord of David. -- What? The King of Glory Stoup at this rate! The
King of King's take such an odious Leper into his Bosom, and one so full of
putrefying Sores! The Infinite GOD, look with such an Eye, upon such a Worm of
the Dust* The High and Lofty one who inhabits Eternity, Espouse unto Himself
this poor, Humble, Contrite and self abhorring Soul. The Match between the
Thistle and the Cedar in Lebanon, had no Disparity comparable unto this. One
fetched from a Generation of Vipers, to be a Bride for the Lamb of GOD! He that
is of purer Eyes than to behold evil and cannot look upon Iniquity, with such
tender Eyes to behold one so full of Evil, and look so tenderly on one
abounding with Iniquity! Lord, When thou feast me such a Loathsome wretch, cast
out unto the lothing of my Person, as in the Day that I was born, is this the
time of thy Love! Will thou now Enter into Covenant with me, and thoroughly
wash me, and gird me about with thy Fine Linen, and adorn me with thy Jewels,
and put thy Crown upon my Head, and make my Beauty perfect through thy Comeliness
which thou will put upon me! Is this the manner of Men, O Lord GOD! -- I could
never have believed it; But, Thy Thoughts and Ways are not like ours. Now,
Lord, I believe it, help thou my unbelief! But, O ye Heavens, be you forever
filled with the Praises, the Praises, the High Praises of this peerless Grace.
Let the whole Earth be filled with the Glory of it.

-- I return.

And I add, In our Compliance, with such a Gracious motion, two things must not
be forgotten. Remember This. We must resolve to be forever and entirely at the
Disposal of our SAVIOR; and comply with every thing that He will have to be
done either on us, or by us. Our compliance must be without Reserve. And
Remember This. If we comply with our SAVIOR, we must own it is His Work that
has drawn us and brought us and helped us to it. Our Compliance must not be
ascribed unto the Free Will, of an Heart that is Desperately Wicked.

III. In your ESPOUSAL to the REDEEMER, who is now making of you Happy in His
Espousing of you to Himself, you must particularly consider Him as one Raised
from the Dead. The Resurrection of our Blessed JESUS from the Dead, has, we
find, Act. I. 3. Many Insallible Proofs. Never any matter of Fact in the World
had such Infallible Proofs!

But now, in your Espousal to Him. considering Him, as one Raised from the
Dead; You are first of all made sensible, That the Glorious Gospel of the
Blessed GOD, Which aims to make you Happy in Espousing you unto Him, is no
Cunningly devised Fable. No, it has received such an indisputable Confirmation,
in the Resurrection of our JESUS from the Dead, that it is no longer to be
doubted of; it cannot without most Criminal Blasphemies be doubted of. Tempted
unto any Infidelity, or unto the least Suspicion of the Truth in any thing
which the Gospel has Reveled unto us, you need no more to Silence the
Temptation but This, My JESUS it Risen from the Dead. The Fiends will fly
before this Faith, as at the Voice of Thunder. O Soul Espoused unto thy
SAVIOR, thou can not but say upon every Article of it, Lord, I believe it,
and I am sure of it! Lord, it is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
Acceptance.

But then, Your Espousal unto your SAVIOR, must feel yet more particular, and
most moving and melting Encouragements from this consideration.

Consider This. O Glorious JESUS, Raised from the Dead, Thou art gone up to,
and sat down at, the Right hand of GOD. All the Caelestial Powers are thy
Subjects and Servants; There is no Numbers of thy Armies. Yea, All Power in
Heaven and Earth is given to thee; the Government of the whole World is in thy
Almighty Hands. O my Soul what a SAVIOR art thou to be Espoused unto!

Consider this. O Glorious JESUS, Raised from the Dead, thou have had a Release
from the Prison to which thou wast Committed for my Offenses. Thou have been
Acquitted from every Charge, which the Violated Law of GOD had against those
that belong unto thee. If I am thine, I am one of those for whom the Triumph is
made, who can lay any thing to the Charge of GOD's Elect. O my Soul, what a
SAVIOR art thou to be Espoused unto!

Consider this. O Glorious JESUS, Raised from the Dead, thou art the Prince of
Life; and thou do bestow Life upon, infuse Life into them that belong unto
thee. If I am thine, thou will Be and Act as a principle of Life in me, and
Quicken me to Live unto GOD: The Best thing that can be done, for a Soul Dead
in Trespasses and Sins! O my Soul, what a SAVIOR art thou to be Espoused unto!

Consider this. O Glorious JESUS, Raised from the Dead, thou will Require, but
thou will also Procure my walking before GOD in a Newness of Life. Thou do
Rescue from the Dead Works of the Old Man, and from a Vain Conversation all
that belong unto thee. If I am thine, thou will make a New Creature of me. And
being Renewed in the Spirit of my Mind, thou will enable me to lead a Godly and
Sober and Righteous Life before thee. O my Soul, what a SAVIOR art thou to be
Espoused unto!

Finally, Consider this. O Glorious JESUS, Raised from the Dead; my Head is
Raised from the Dead; then I shall be so too. Thou will bring me to be where
thou art, and there behold thy Glory. Yea, thou will bring me to be as thou
art, where I shall behold thy Glory. If I am thine, I shall be fetched up into
thy Holy City; and when thou, O Great KING, have brought me into thy Chambers,
How Great, How Great is the Good which I shall find laid up for me there! O my
Soul, what a Savior art thou to be Espoused unto! Behold the Notes of the
Epithalamium, or, Wedding Song to be Sung on this occasion!

IV. O! Happy the People, that are in such a Case! Happy the People whose GOD
is the Lord! Yea, who, who is there Qualified Sufficiently to declare the
Happiness of such a Marriage!

O Soul Espoused unto thy SAVIOR, can thou be more Happy than such an
Espousal cannot fail to make thee? The Day of Espousal is called, Can^.III. 2.
The Day of the Gladness of the Heart. Be sure, The Day of thy Espousal to thy
SAVIOR may well be the Day of the Gladness of thy Heart. It is the very Spirit
of Genuine PIETY, To Rejoice in CHRIST JESUS. Verily all the joy that can be
wished for, belongs unto thee, if thou art Espoused unto CHRIST JESUS. Thou art
now Espoused unto One, who is the Most High Possessor of Heaven and Earth;
Espoused unto One, who has unsearchable Riches. O Wealthy Soul! O Happy Soul!
The Great GOD now sends this Advice unto thee, Be of good Cheer; thy Sins are
forgiven thee! The Spouse of his own SON cannot ly under a Sentence of Death.
Yea, He has taken all thy Filthy Garments from thee; and being the KINGS
Daughter, he makes thee All Glorious within, and thy Covering is of Spangled
Robes which are Inlaid with Gold; In Robes of Needle Work, thou shall be
brought in unto the King. He that sits on the Throne of G0D calls thee His
Hephzibah, and says, my Delight is in thee. Yea, He will make all the Heavens
to know that He has Loved thee. O Happy Soul! Being Espoused unto thy SAVIOR,
His FATHER becomes thy FATHER; His GOD becomes thy GOD. And who can comprehend
what is contained in that Ravishing word! Romans VIII.17. Children; Then Heirs;
Heirs of GOD, and Joint Heirs with CHRIST. What a vast Jointure have thou! That
Word has the Deed in it; All things are yours, and ye are CHRIST'S: Of His
Fullness thou shall receive, having a Right now unto it; Receive even Heaps of
Grace upon Grace; the Favors of Heaven even heaped upon thee. O Happy Soul!
What may thou promise to thy self now from such an Espousal! Even all the
Good that is laid up in the exceeding great and precious promises of the
Gospel: All the Promises that are the portion of the Overcomer, who shall
Inherit all things: All the Promises relating to the Life that now is, and the
Life that is to come. In the Life that Now is, thy Espoused LORD, will not
suffer thee to want any thing that shall be good for thee; will make All things
to work together for thy Good; will employ His Angels to be thy Guardians, and
His Ministers in unknown Good Offices for thee. But, Oh! For the Life that is
to come, -- Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, there has not been any Ascent
high enough in the Heart of Man to conceive, what thy Espoused LORD intends to
do for thee. What an easy Lodging, will thy SAVIOR provide for thee in His
Paradise, when thy expired Spirit is turned out of Doors! But what a Body will
He endow it withal, when He shall bring thee with Him, at His descending to
Burn and Judge and Rule the World! What will thy SAVIOR do for thee, in His
Heavenly Jerusalem; when He will present thee Faultless before the presence of
His Glory with exceeding joy; and all that He has ever helped thee to do for
Him, shall from His Book of Remembrance be published unto Praise and Honor and
Glory; and have unutterable Rewards assigned unto it. What will thy SAVIOR do
for thee, when he has thee forever with Him in a Deathless and Sinl^ss World;
where the overwhelming Testimonies and Emantions of His Everlasting Love, shall
be multiplied in a Boundless Variety and an endless Eternity upon thee, and He
shall in Ways that will well become an Omnipotent GOD, make Thee and all His
Holy ones, to know that he has loved thee! O Happy Soul! O Happy Soul!

But now, the Conclusion of the matter! O Solicited Soul, No longer, No longer
continue Stouthearted and far from Righteousness and Happiness. No longer, No
longer, delay to Ascertain thy Espousal to thy SAVIOR. Oh! May our Young
PEOPLE be so wise unto Salvation, as to think of no other Marriage till this
Espousal be brought about! Yea, may those that are too Young to have a Marriage
for them talked of, yet come into this Espousal. Soul, though yet in thy,
Minority get out of that Estrangement from thy SAVIOR, wherein thou have the
Wrath of GOD abiding on thee, and thou art in Hourly Danger of Dying in thy
Sins -- which if thou do -- it had been good for thee, that thou have never
been born. Thy SAVIOR again Repeats his PROPOSAL; Art thou willing to be mine,
and willing that I should bring thee to all that I bring my chosen to? Heaven
is waiting to hear thy Answer. Oh! Let thy Immediate ANSWER be, My dear
SAVIOR; made me willing; thou have, thou have made me willing. Let my Beloved
be mine, and let me be his forevermore. Is this the ANSWER? O Happy Soul; There
is Joy in Heaven over thee. The Morning Stars now sing together; the Sons of
GOD shout for joy, upon thy SAVIOR thus Espousing of thee!

But it must be Remembered; That if thou art Espoused unto thy SAVIOR, it will
be made evident in thy bringing forth fruit unto GOD by him; yea, in thy
hearing the Fruits of Righteuosnes, which are by JESUS CHRIST unto the Glory
and praise of G0D.

[COROLLARY.]

And as the Espoused of the LORD, Count all His Precepts concerning all things
to be right, so such as are in the MARRIED STATE of Life, and bear a Conjugal
Relation to one another, if they are Espoused unto the Lord, this will be found
among the Fruits of it; They will Study in their Good Carriage toward one
another to exhibit a Lively Emblem, of what passes between the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, and His CHURCH.

Unto a MARRIED COUPLE it is impossible to do any thing more Seasonable and
Serviceable, than to Recommend unto them a serious and frequent Meditation
[First on their own Latter End, and then] on the Latter End of the Fifth
Chapter in the Epistle to the Ephesians. My Friends, the Sum of your Duty lies
in this. Let the HUSBAND (...) How wondrously does my SAVIOR love his (...)
and show compassion to it, and make provision for it? Let the WIFE a^te^ think,
How does the CHURCH study to Gratify her SAVlOUR, and give Him cause to call
her Hephzibah, and say, my Delight is in her.

And then, Do as all that are truly Espoused unto their SAVIOR, will easily
do; and practice on the Golden Maxim, Do as you would be done unto. O
RELATIVES, [or, Are you not Really too Near and even too much ONE, to be called
so] change Stations each of you with your CORRELATES. Let the HUSBAND think, If
I were the WIFE, what Goodness would I look to be treated with! Let the WIFE
think, If were the HUSBAND, what Kindness would I look to be treated with! I
think, I have said much in a little. I hope, I need say no more.

FINIS.

