Mr. Gee's SERMON On the DEATH of the REVEREND Dr. Mather.

ISRAEL's Mourning FOR AARON's Death. A SERMON Preached on the Lord's Day After
the Death of the very REVEREND and LEARNED Cotton Mather, D. D. and F. R. S.
Pastor of the North Church in BOSTON: Who departed this Life, February 13.
1727, 8. AET. LXVI.

By Joshua Gee, M. A. Pastor of the same Church.

Acts xx. 38. Sorrowing most of all -- that they should see his face no more.

BOSTON in New England: Printed for S. Gerrish at the lower End of Cornhil, and
N. Belknap, near Scarlets-Wharff. MDCCXXVIII.

Israel's Mourning FOR Aaron's Death.
NUMBERS XX. 29. AND when all the Congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they
mourned for Aaron thirty days, even all the House of Israel.


THE verses preceding give us the history of the death of Aaron the
high priest upon mount Hor: and our text is an account of the general and
public lamentation to which the LORD'S people thought themselves called upon
that occasion; And when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they
mourned for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel.

THESE words are chosen to employ our meditations, at a season when GOD in His
Providence is ^^^bling us under His mighty hand; and calling our whole land to
mourn for the death of ONE, who was a very signal blessing to it: but such are
the impressions of this providence on a mind, which from a natural weakness is
too easily overborn and disordered by lesser occasions of grief and sorrow;
and such also have been my bound infirmities, as allow me to give you but a few
broken and imperfect tho'ts upon them.

IT would have indulged my prevailing temper, if, for a while at least, I might
have appeared among the silent mourners in this house; to hear you entertained
by my fathers and brethren, with that which might do greater honor to the
dead, and service to the living than, at the best, I may think my self capable
of. But I dare not indulge the tho'ts of this; from a lively persuasion of it,
that for me to faint in the day of adversity would be as truly my sin, as for
me to despise the chastening of the LORD. It Is therefore my desire to be found
in the course of my duty, running with patience the race set before me, and
looking up to JESUS for strength to perform it; that His strength may be
glorified in my weakness.

IN such a temper I would now proceed to a more particular consideration of the
words of my text; without any solicitude for a critical exactness in the
handling of them. And here, 1. THE congregation saw that Aaron was dead. 2.
THEY mourned for Aaron thirty days. 3. ALL the congregation, even all the house
of Israel, were such mourners for him.


A few brief reflections upon these things observable in the words, may prepare
us to take a more particular notice of the mournful occasion, which in the
providence of GOD has made them a proper subject for our contemplation.

AND

1. THE congregation saw that Aaron was dead.

A few verses before our text we read, that he went up with Moses and Eleazar
into mount Her, in the sight of all the congregation: who now understood, by
the report of Moses and Eleazar, and by other signs, that Aaron was dead: sad
and awful news, like this, would run quick through the camp of Israel, and it
could not be long before all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead.

AARON the Saint of the LORD was a person extraordinarily furnished, spirited,
and called to do service for GOD, and His people in the church of Israel. He
was an eloquent man; concerning whom GOD Himself bore witness, that he could
speak well Exodus 4.14.
: well for GOD to men, and well for men to GOD. He was the LORD's high priest;
and his family was betimes advanced to be at the head of the ecclesiastical
order Exodus 28 1
: when GOD entered into covenant with the Jewish nation; governing them, as His
church by more fixed methods, than were known under the partriarchal state; and
establisting a regular priesthood among them. He was a person whose character
and authority GOD had asserted and evidenced against all that reviled and
opposed him: his rod miraculously budded and blossomed Numb. 17.8.
; and his brethren that murmured against him were most remarkably punished Number.
16.
. He was an illustrious pattern of the humblest resignation, when the judgments
of GOD came near to himself Lev. 10.3.
; silently suffering the sorest bereavements, and turning his losses into
spiritual sacrifices* while he was at the same time as great a pattern of quick
dispatch and fervent importunity in his offerings and intercessions for others;
to avert the divine judgments that were ready to devour and swallow them up
Number. 16.
. He was a man justly affected with their folly, sin and danger who were for
making them a captain to return into Egypt Number. 14.
, and who by murmuring and dispising the good land provoked the LORD to destroy
them in His anger. He was helpful to Moses, by holding up his hands in faith
and prayer against the enemies of the LORD'S people Exodus 17.12.
. He was one of them who were appointed, as chief magistrates, to judge Israel,
and keep the peace and good order in the congregation; when Moses was called up
into the mount to receive the tables of the law Exodus 24.14.
: and this speaks his reputation for wisdom and faithfulness.

THESE, I think, are the main strokes of Aarom character, as it appears
dispersed in the sacred history. The time will not allow us, as we pass along,
to take a particular notice of all the agreeable circumstances by which this
character might be illustrated. But from these general touches it is evident
that, not-notwithstanding any events wherein he discovered himself to be a man
of like passions with others, he was truly an extraordinary person: a bright
ornament and singular honor to the church of Israel; one whom they greatly
needed to continue among them; and whose departure from them must necessarily
be accounted a great and uncommon loss indeed.

BUT after all, as few infirmities as he had, and as great an ornament and
defense as he was to the church and people of Israel; yet he was not suffered
to continue by reason of death: and all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead

AND just so it is with the most eminent ministers of the church of GOD in
every generation. However distinguished with gifts and graces, activity and
usefulness, as might tempt the world from a principle of self-love to wish they
might never see death; yet our fathers where are they? and the prophets, do
they live forever? They dwell in houses of clay like other Men; and their
labors often wear and dissolve the earthly tabernacles. Sometimes GOD calls
them home; because they are ill treated, as pilgrims and strangers, in a world
that is not worthy of them. Sometimes they are taken away from evil to come:
they are called up to enter into their chambers, that they may not see the
indignation that is coming on a sinful people. But if these things were
entirely out of the case, yet they are men: and it is appointed for them to die:
and they are such men as have been laying up their treasures in heaven; their
reward is there, and thither they unit go to receive it.

II. I pass now to the next thing observable in the words; which is, That when
the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaron thirty days.

WE may not expect to arrive at any certainty about the ceremonials of their
mourning. In the original it is, they wept thirty days: but weeping, which is
there evidently to be understood in a larger sense for mourning, takes in all
the proper methods whereby men express their sorrow for the loss sustained in
the death of those whom they had reason to love and honor.

AND it has ever been allowed, that when GOD takes such persons away from us by
death, it is our duty to mourn for them; not only to have an inward sorrowful
sense of the loss we have sustained, but in all proper and decent ways to
express the grief of our hearts.

(...).
THE manner of mourning for the dead has been various, according to the several
customs of countries. The better to express their sorrow for the loss of
departed friends, it has been common with the world to differ as much as could
be from their ordinary habit and behavior. A most usual method has been to
refrain from every thing that occasioned mirth, and looked gay and pleasant; as
what was unfit to be received among mourners: to refrain from the comforts and
conveniences of life's and to fast and wear habits not only differing in color
from their ordinary apparel, but also in value, as being only of a cheaper and
courser stuff. These are observed to be customs practiced among the ancients,
in the eastern countries; where they would also sprinkle dust upon their heads,
nay, fowl in the very dirt Fience we find so frequent mention of peniten's
lying on the ground, and putting on sackcloth and ashes. They were so far from
wearing the best apparel, that they frequently burned their richest goods and
clothes, as well as tore what they had off their backs, on the first news of
any great calamity. So Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth on his loins,
and mourned for his son many days, Genesis 37.34. And the scripture-history
affords many instances of this mourning in sackloth and ashes. But these tokens
of grief were accompanied also with mourning tears; which not only express our
love to a friend, and our sorrow for the loss of him, but tend to moderate our
passions, and allay our concern. And weeping for the dead is so far from an
unjustifiable weakness, that we find examples of it in the greatest and best of
men. How did Abraham Genesis 23.2.
weep and mourn for his Sarah, Joseph Genesis 50.1, 10, 11.
for his father Jacob, and David 2 Samuel 232
for his Children? And not to multiply instances, did not our blessed SAVIOR
weep over the grave of Lazarus 33, (...) 11.35.
whom he loved, as well as over obstinate Jerusalem Luke. 19 41.
whose desolation he foresaw coming on her? Which is enough to satisfy us, that
as GOD has given us natural affections, we may use them aright, and yet let
them reach to the memory as well as life of them we love, and break out in
mourning tears. And thus we should weep and mourn for our dead friends: we
should be grieved for their death, and suitably express our grief according to
the decent customs of the times and places where we live.

WE should likewise mourn for the death of all good and useful men, according
to their respective characters and stations. So when GOD takes away pious and
useful persons in a private capacity; when the righteous perish, and merciful
men are taken away; whose good works, prayers and holy example were of great
service in the places where they lived: this calls for sorrow and mourning. And
it does so more especially, when he takes away such men of a public character,
singularly qualified for, and faithful in their several posts and stations.

BUT our subject leads us more particularly to be sensible of our obligations
to mourn for the death of eminent, holy and useful ministers; as the
congregation mourned for Aaron. They mourned not upon his account, as if it
were not better for him to depart than to abide in the flesh: but for their own
loss in his death. For though the blessed hope was not so clearly revealed to
them, as it is to us under the Gospel; yet they had light enough under that
dispensation to keep them from mourning without hope in the death of such
faithful servants of the GOD of Israel. Much less can we think ourselves called
thus to mourn for the death of eminent, holy and useful ministers; since life
and immortality are brought to light by the gospel, through JESUS CHRIST who is
the resurrection and the life. No, as for them, the day of their death is
better than the day of their birth; for by death GOD takes them to Himself.
When they depart, it is that they may be with CHRIST; which is far better than
to abide in the flesh: they enter into rest; Blessed are the dead which die in
the LORT, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labors and their works do follow them Rev. 14.13.
And we are well assured, that the time and manner or their death is ordered by
infinite wisdom and infinite goodness, as shall be truly best for them. Instead
therefore of mourning for them, we have cause rather to be thankful for their
deliverance from so great, and such manifold evils as we are here exposed to,
whom they leave behind them in this sinful world.

BUT though we have such cause to rejoice in their gain, yet we must mourn for
our own loss, and the great loss we have sustained in their death. For the
taking away of the prophet, i. e. such as minister in holy things, dispense the
word of GOD to us, and treat with us in His name, upon the great points that
concern our spiritual and eternal interests; this is to be reckoned among the
frowns of Heaven, as well as the taking away of the mighty man, the man of war,
and the judge: and it may be though it the greater loss to them who are left
behind. We should not fail therefore in all proper methods to express our
sorrow upon such occasions: like them who wept sore, sorrowing for the words
that Paul spoke, that they should see his face no more Act. 20.33.
. This is an honor due to their memory; however we treated them in their
lives. For such eminent holy and useful ministers are great blessings to their
people, while they live; and all under their charge, if it be not their own
fault, must receive great benefit from them. But whether we have received such
advantage or no; and if we have abused the blessings, and through our own fault
have lost the benefit; yet still we are bound to mourn for their death and
departure from us.

AND here an inquiry into the special grounds of mourning upon the death of
eminent, holy, and useful ministers would offer it self to our more particular
consideration: but I may not enlarge upon it.

1. ONE special ground and reason of it may be taken from the opportunities and
advantages for receiving good by their ministry, which are lost in their death.
We are commanded to remember those spiritual rulers, who have spoken to us the
word of GOD, Heb. 13.7. But how do we comply with this command, unless we
remember the gifts and graces that were in them, with all the good we have
received by their means, and what opportunities and advantages we should still
have had for getting good by them, if GOD had spared their lives? And is it
possible for us to remember them after such a manner, without finding it work
upon our affections in a sense of our want, and in grief for our loss? While
GOD spares their lives, whom He has eminently gifted and qualified for the
ministerial office, and makes faithful in it, they are spiritual shepherds and
watchmen to the souls of their people. On the account of their doctrine and
example, our SAVIOR teaches us to call such men the salt of the earth, and the
lights of the world: For as the virtue of salt lies in seasoning other things,
and keeping them from corruption: so by their life and doctrine, such eminent,
holy, and useful ministers do season the manners of men and keep them from the
putrefaction of sin. And as the sun dispells the mists of darkness which
overspread the earth, and enables men to walk and act after such a manner as
may best answer the ends of life: so they, by their doctrine and example,
dispel the darkness, and cure the blindness of men's minds; and enlighten them
with knowledge and holiness. And how many and great are the blessings, which
they who live under their charge have opportunities and advantages for
receiving by their ministry?

BUT now all these opportunities and advantages are lost, when such ministers
are taken away by death. Such a time therefore is to be regarded as a time of
suffering, and on that account a time of mourning. For does not the hand of the
LORD seem to be out against us, when He takes away such advantages and
opportunities from us? Is not such a bereavement to be considered as a token of
divine displeasure? And should we not therefore be sorrowfully affected and
mourn under it? What stupidity does it argue to be unaffected under GOD's
afflicting hand: if we are not grieved when He strikes us, but refuse to to
receive correction? Jer. 5.3.

BUT then no man is to consider himself alone under such bereavements. And if
natural affection and humane tenderness will lead us to consider the part which
our nearest relatives, children, and friends may bear with us in them; the
principles of christianity will take into our concern and sympathy all that may
be called to mourn with us; though related neither by the bonds of nature nor of
grace. The death of such ministers should be grievous also to them who are not
immediately bereaved, but only see what reason others have to mourn under their
sufferings and losses. For as we should rejoice with them that rejoice: so we
should mourn with them that mourn. And persons are often called to mourn for
the death of ministers, by way of christian sympathy with others who are
therein bereaved of signal opportunities and advantages for getting good.

2. ANOTHER special ground and reason of mourning upon, the death of eminent,
holy, and useful ministers may be taken from the neglect or abuse of such
opportunities and advantages, while they were enjoyed under their ministry. In
the death of such ministers GOD may punish the sins of their people; who under
such a bereavement should always suspect themselves, and consider, whether GOD
is not now bringing their sins to remembrance. And in order to find out
wherefore GOD contendeth with them, they ought seriously to examine themselves,
whether the opportumities and advantages which now they have lost, were not
sinfully neglected or abused. Now it is impossible for us at such a time to take
this method, but we must necessarily discover sufficient grounds of mourning
upon the death of eminent, holy and useful ministers: as the very best of us,
upon a serious examination, must see and own that we have not come up to our
duty in the entertainment we gave to them, and to the messages which they bro't
us in GOD's name. For if we call our selves to a strict account (as GOD expects
we should) how we have attended their ministry; how we have received the
doctrines of godliness which they delivered; how we followed the holy example
which they set before us; how we delighted in their usefulness; and how we have
glorified GOD in them, by considering them only as instruments, and ascribing
to Him the glory which is due to His name, for all the excellencies which
adorned them, and made them so desirable and useful in the World: I say, if we
duly reflect upon these things, the very best of us will find, that the
opportunities and advantages for receiving good by their ministry have been too
much neglected or abused. And according as we have been guilty in one or both
of these regards, we should humble our selves, and mourn with godly sorrow
before the LORD; confessing that He is righteous to take away the blessings,
which we received no better, and employed no more to His glory, while we had
them.

BUT then if it could be supposed, that any particular persons should upon a
just enquiry find themselves entirely clear and innocent in these respects; yet
they have the sins of others to mourn for; if they would not be partakers with
them. When we think how opportunities and advantages of getting good by
eminent, holy and useful ministers have been neglected and abused, we have
reason to fear that GOD has taken them away in his anger: the apprehensions of
which should make us mourn for our loss; whether we apprehend it inflicted as a
punishment upon our selves or upon others.

3. ANOTHER ground of mourning on the death of such ministers is, That we can
be no longer delighted with beholding their eminently-useful lives, in the
exercise of those gifts and grace which GOD had bestowed upon them. They who
are governed by the refined and exalted spirit of christianity, cannot behold
others act up to their character, and glorify GOD by employing their gifts and
graces according to their several callings and relations, without finding a
very high delight and pleasure in it: like the Apostle Paul who joyed to behold
the order and the stedfastness of their faith, wherewith the Colossians
glorified GOD Col. 2, 5.
; Such a pleasure will naturally result from the principles of our holy
religion, while we observe the numberless projections and essays to do good
wherewith GOD is glorified by eminent, holy and useful ministers. And this
pleasure will increase upon beholding the success of their labors, in
proportion as we have reason to think, that glory redounds to the name of GOD,
and good is done to the souls of men. But the death of such men puts a period
to the pleasure of beholding their useful lives; which will be considered by
wise and good men as one special ground of mourning for it.

THUS we have taken notice of our duty to mourn for the death of eminent, holy
and useful ministers: as the congregation mourned for Aaron.

BUT the congregation mourned for Aaron thirty days: which may lead us to this
remark upon it; That when we mourn for the death of good and useful men, whom
we had reason to love and honor; we should have regard to their special
character and station. The congregation did not content themselves to mourn for
AARON seven day, which was the time appointed for persons of a private
character; by they mourned thirty days; which, the learned tell us, was the
time of mourning allotted for men of a public character Drus and Ainsw. in loc.
. Eminent minister are to be considered as public persons: and as GOD has
furnished, spirited, and employed them while they lived; we should accordingly
mourn for them after an extraordinary manner when they are dead. The death of
private persons is not so great and extensive a loss, as the death of such
ministers: the death of these therefore should raise a greater sorrow in our
hearts, and calls for a greater degree of mourning than the death of private
persons. If we should mourn for the one sort seven days, we should mourn for
the other sort thirty days: As the congregation mourned for Aaron; having a
special regard to his eminent character and station.

In shall make only this one remark more upon the second thing observable in
our text; That we may often find reason to mourn for the loss of these persons
when they are dead, who were not justly valued and well treated while they
lived. Mourning for the dead was always accounted honorable: And here they
mourn for Aaron thirty days, when they had dishonored him by rebelling against
him forty Years. And it is the lot of many of the servants of GOD, to have more
honor after their death than in their life, says Mr. Ainsworth. In like manner
Mr. Henry notes upon the place: and with his words I shall conclude this head.
"It Was a debt owing to their high priest to mourn for him. While he lived they
were murmuring, at him upon all occasions; but now he was dead, they mourned
for him. Thus many are taught to lament the loss of those mercies, which they
would not learn to be thankful for the enjoyment of. Many good men have had
more honor done to their memories than ever they had to their persons; witness
those who were persecuted while they lived, but when they were dead had their
sepulchers garnished". Thus the congregation mourned for Aaron thirty days.

III. BUT the third thing to be observed in our text is, That all the
congregation, even all the house of Israel mourned thus for Aaron. 'Twas common
for all the congregation to mourn for the death of public persons; even all the
House of Israel, women as well as men, and person of every rank and condition
Drus and Ainsw. in loc.
. When the LORD of hosts took away from His people the mighty mand and the man
of war, men who were as the shields of the earth, the guards upon their
valuable interests; or the judge and the prophet, men who were as gods upon
earth to instruct the world, to maintain peace and order, and execute justice
among men: it has been thought a proper time for general lamentation. In 2 Samuel
3.31, 32. we read that upon the death of Abner, a mighty man of war, David said
to all the people, Rent your clothes and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn
before Abner. And king David himself followed the bier. And they buried Abner
in Hebron: and the king lift up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and
all the people wept. And upon the death of Samuel that PROPHET of the LORD, who
JUDGED Israel all the days of his life, we read 1 Samuel 23.1. That all the
Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him. So Aaron being a man of a
public character, and one that adorned the eminent station which GOD set him
in; we find that all the congregation, even all the House of Israel mourned for
him.

AND this one remark may be made upon it, That the death of eminent, holy and
useful ministers in the church of GOD is a public loss, and calls for general
and public lamentation.

FOR SUCH men, while they live, are an honor and ornament to their country.
They not only reflect honor upon men who are of the same character and
profession with themselves: but they gain credit and reputation to the whole
land. They recommend themselves to strangers, who will give themselves an
opportunity to be well acquainted with them; and are serviceable to procure a
good name abroad for the places where they live, and for the whole people among
whom they shine as lights in the world. So that in the death of such Persons a
people may see a considerable part of glory departing: which will be esteemed a
just ground of public and general lamentation by all, excepting only such as
are wholly destitute of that shining virtue, The love of ones country; without
which men deserve to be denied all the benefit of humane Society.

AND it is matter of general and public grief and mourning, that the churches of
GOD are bereaved of the presence and use of such men. Nor may we think it
possible for any to refrain from mourning on the death of eminent holy and
useful ministers, who place any part of the beauty and glory of a country
in-it's ecclesiastical and religious interests: which, as far as they are
agreeable to the divine institutions, are indeed the great beauty and glory of
any country; and used to be more generally esteemed as the glory of New England.

MOREOVER by taking away such men GOD gives us reason to fear approaching
judgments: and this further evidences it to be matter of general and public
lamentatation. For ought we know, such eminent men are taken away in order to
some public evil, which will come sooner when they are gone. The smaller the
number of such men among a people, will they not the sooner fill up the measure
of their iniquities? Such men have great influence with heaven to avert the
tokens of divine displeasure. Like Moses and Aaron, they will not let GOD
alone, that he may consume a people. We may fear therefore that when GOD is
calling them from us by death, it is to make way for the execution of His
judgments. When Elisah was taken away in a very evil age, Elisha cried out, My
father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof! -- "What
will become of Israel now thou art gone"! And where a people are not called to
entertain such dark apprehensions from the death of any one great and good man
among them; yet there is never any one such death, which does not weaken and
expose them: much more does many such, within a short space of time, lay afe
undation for the most uneasy apprehensions among a sinful people. How often has
GOD's calling up His servants into their chambers of rest been the sad
prognostic, that the divine indignation was just breaking out against a people?
If the righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart; is it not a sign, that
they are taken away from evil to come? When GOD therefore is taking away
eminent, holy, and useful ministers we should think our selves called to mourn
for it, with general and public lamentation.

THUS the several things observable in our text have been briefly considered.
We see, That as the most eminent of GOD's ministers die, and are called up from
us, it is our duty to mourn for them; and why the death of such men gives just
occasion for public and general lamentation.

AND now from the foregoing discourse we may learn, what reason the people of
GOD in this land have to mourn before Him.

FOR among the various judgments inflicted for our sins, what breaches does he
make in the wall of safety round about us, by taking away men of great worth
and service, not only of the civil but sacred character? And especially if we
view the ecclesiastical order, the breach he has made upon it, is great like
the sea; by the removal of our spiritual fathers from us, one after another:
men of superior rank and character for age and experience, learning,
reputation, piety, wisdom, fidelity and usefulness in the sacred calling.

WITHIN a few months past, we have been called to lament the deaths of two such
aged servants of the LORD The Rev Mr. Samuel Danforth of Taunton, who died
November. 14. And my honored father-in-law the Rev. Mr. Peter Thacher of Milton,
who died Dec. 17.1727.
: while the days of mourning were scarce over, for the breach He had made upon
the sacred order in this town, by the death of a truly pious and faithful
minister My dearly (...) friend (...) William Waldro (...).
, in the midst of his days and usefulness. And now it has pleased Heaven once
again to break open the fountain of our grief: for we are now called to take a
more special notice of the occasion which we have to mourn before GOD, in the
death of the very reverend Dr. COTTON MATHER, our faithful and beloved pastor,
who in the sovereign wise and holy providence of our LORD, is called up from us.

I own that a little modesty will forbid me to attempt an exact character of so
great a man. But piety toward GOD obliges every one of us to have a proper
sense of the uncommon loss we have sustained, that after a suitable manner we
may humble ourselves and mourn for the frown of Heaven in this dispensation:
while my character and relation to this beloved flock of CHRIST infer the
strongest bonds upon me, to endeavor that you may have just impressions from
divine providence; and at the same time, a concern for the honor of CHRIST,
and a principle of love and gratitude to His deceased servant, with whom for
some years I have been called to serve as a son in the gospel, are powerfully
working in my breast, as incentives to act up to my duty upon this mournful
occasion.

IT will therefore be expected, that in representing to you the providence of
GOD, which calls aloud upon us to mourn this day, I should consider it, as it
affects others besides our selves; and demands the general and public
lamentation of all the land. For in this death of one who made so bright an
appearance among the excellent of the earth, the whole land has lost a very
considerable part of it is strength and glory. Truth and justice have lost a
champion, who was able to defend and maintain them: Learning has lost an
eminent patron, who was ever ready to promote it: The churches have lost a
pastor, who was a pillar in the house of his GOD. Now men of such a character
with strength and courage stand in the gap, to keep off judgments; and, by
lifting up of hands in faith and prayer, are prevalent with the LORD against
the enemies of His people: They must therefore be always acknowledged, as the
ornaments of our country, and the strength and defense of it too: like the
chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof, whose spiritual weapons are mighty
through GOD. And without any further reasoning upon the point, will not this be
thought sufficient to put the congregation of Israel, even our whole land, into
mourning for the death of such a great and good man, who was set for the
defense of our dearest interests, civil and sacred?

BUT then what abundant reason have all in the same sacred office to mourn and
lament the loss we have sustained? If some few have lost a brother, the most of
us by far have lost a master and a father, whose assistence, encouragement, and
counsel were always with pleasure afforded, in the weightiest cases of doctrine
and of discipline. He was a bright ornament and singular honor to the
ministerial order and profession: shining as an instance and pattern of natural
acquired and gracious endowments. The capacity of his mind; the readiness of
his wit; the vastness of his reading; the strength of his memory; the variety
and treasure of his learning, in printed works, and in manuscripts which
contain a much greater share; the splendor of virtues, which, from the
abundant grace of GOD with him, shone out is the constant tenor of a most
entertaining and profitable conversation; his uncommon activity in the service
of CHRIST; his unwearied application to all the different exercises of the
pastoral function; his extensive zeal and numberless projections to do good on
all occasions: these things, as they were united in him, proclaimed him to be
truly an extraordinary person; and united to make it difficult to find his
equal, among men of like passions with us. He was pious, but not affected;
serious without moroseness; grave, but not austere; affable without meanness;
and facetious without levity. He was peaceable in his temper: but zealous
against sin. He was a strenuous nonconformist to uninstituted ceremonies
imposed upon conscience, as terms of communion among saints; which he
considered as violations of christian liberty, and snares to the souls of men:
He strictly adhered to congregational principles of church order and
government; which he though it most agreeable to the rule of GOD's word, the laws of
society, and the rights of mankind: He was a vigorous defender of the reformed
doctrines of grace, and of the mysteries of revealed religion; which he ever
regarded as the excelling glory of the christian dispensation: And yet he was
catholic in his charity to all good men, though differing from him in
circumstantials and modalities; desirous to have churches resemble the kingdom
of Heaven; willing to receive all men, as CHRIST receives us to the glory of
GOD; and pleading for no terms of communion among saints, but the terms of
salvation. He was abundant in liberality to the poor, both for soul and body;
but careful to distinguish the proper objects of it: and obliging to strangers,
though often ill-required.

THESE are some of the shining parts of his character: which made him an honor
and ornament to the sacred office among us; and render his death so great a
loss, to all whom he has left behind him in it. And these things do likewise
constrain all that knew him to mourn for his removal from us: if they have any
pretense to resemble him; as a scholar, a divine, a christian, or a gentleman.

THUS religion and humanity are conspiring to force a sigh or a tear, from all
that do not so far live beneath the dictates of reason and conscience, as to
render their most favorable regards for any, but the blemishes and wounds of
honor and reputation. And could I imagine, that any in this assembly belong to
that herd of abandoned mortals, whose sport it has been to reek their venom
upon a faithful servant of GOD, in profane and ungodly scorn and derision; I
would, in compassion to their poor souls, turn my discourse to them and say, --
Mourn, O forsaken wretches, mourn at length the death of that saint, who
endeavored, by his holy exhortations and fervent prayers, to keep you from the
damnation of hell fire, and turn you to the wisdom of the just; while he lived
above the reach of your envy and malice, and, in imitation of his great master
JESUS CHRIST, was grieved for the hardness of your hearts. If you will not
mourn at his death; GOD only knows how soon, if He ever have mercy on you, you
will be constrained to it at your own: like some others already, who have found
it impossible to take comfort in the hopes of the mercy of GOD; till they had
repented and bewailed their abuse of His servant.

BUT that which most nearly concerns me at present is, to persuade you of this
church and congregation duly to humble your selves and mourn under the mighty
hand of GOD; that in due time He may exalt you. And there is no need of running
over the topics devised in the art of persuasion, in order to move your
passions here: You have a living spring of sorrow in your hearts, which
naturally breaks out into mourning upon this occasion. For what rendered your
excellent pastor so desirable to virtuous and good men, of every order
profession and character, could not but exceedingly endear him to you; in whose
special service it was, that his light shone before others. It is enough
therefore to say, You are called to mourn the death of an able minister of the
new testament; a master in our Israel, a workman that needed not to be
ashamed, a most accomplished divine, who rightly divided unto you the word of
truth, as it is in JESUS; the life and sweet of whose ministry it was to preach
JESUS. You are called to mourn the death of a tender and faithful Shepherd; a
pastor after GOD'S own heart, who looked well to the state of his flock, and
fed you with knowledge and understanding, who fed the sheep and fed the lambs.
You are called to mourn the death of a spiritual father; by whose learned,
painful, and flaming ministry, many of you have been begotten again to GOD. You
are called to mourn the death of a wise builder; who could raise a strong and
beautiful superstructure upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets,
JESUS CHRIST Himself being the chief corner stone; and who was the blessed
instrument of your edification in faith and holiness. You are called to mourn
the death of a most vigilant watchman; who gave you warning of spiritual
enemies, and roused you up to put on the whole armor of GOD and resist them;
and who was always concerned, that you might know and shun your danger. You are
called to mourn the death of a skilful guide to your souls; who held forth unto
you the word of GOD, as a lamp to your feet, and a light to your path, in
passing through a dark world; whose care it was to direct your holy walk in the
paths of truth and peace; and who from the constraining love of CHRIST would
take the sweetest delight in exposing himself, that he might help you forward
in the way to everlasting life. You are called to mourn the death of a man of
prayer; who delighted in his effectual fervent intercessions to carry all your
important concerns to the throne of grace, and put them over into the hands of
a more powerful intercessor there; and who took all opportunities to promote
and encourage the societies, wherein that holy exercise of religion should be
principally regarded. You are called to mourn the death of ONE whose natural,
acquired, and gracious endowments were vastly a greater treasure, than GOD
commonly puts into earthen vessels; and who faithfully employed them all in
your service, In a word; you are called to mourn the death of ONE who, though his
learned and useful labors were acknowledged with distinguishing honors abroad
A doctorate in the university of Glasgo in Scotland, and a fellowship with the
Royal Society in London.
, yet counted it by far a greater honor to see them blessed with success, for
the good of your souls: and GOD was graciously pleased to crown them with this
greater honor, in some measure according to the abundance of them; for how
many that hear me this day, and how many that are gone to heaven before us,
have often blessed him in their souls, when they heard the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth; and will ever bless GOD for him, as an instrument
of their everlasting happiness!

I am well assured, you have not only been overborn with an easy though strong
conviction of the certain truth of all these particulars, as we passed over
them: but could easily of your selves enlarge upon them all. And is not such a
plain and artless enumeration of them enough to make the inward spring of
sorrow rise, and overflow in mourning tears, like waters poured out before the
LORD?

MOURN for your loss. And how great a loss have you sustained in such a death
as this! So great and heavy, that mourning is the best description of it:
mourning not for him who has been called up from you; but for your selves and
for your children who are left behind. Doubtless, if your deceased pastor could
now speak to you, it would be in thole words of our blessed Savior to the
daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your
children Luke 23.28.
GOD is now saying, your eyes shall see your teacher no more, and the places
that have known him shall know him no more: you shall no more hear his pleasant
voice, in doctrine for your instruction; in warnings for your caution; in
exhortations for your quickening and comfort: you shall enjoy no more of his
delightful and profitable conversation, of his fervent and prevalent prayers,
or of his bright and moving example among you: his painful and laborious
services for you are over and at an end forever: and he is gone to reap his
reward. Oh! how should you be affected when you consider your loss as a matter
and ground of mourning!

BUT then mourn for the sins which may have occasioned this affliction and
frown of Heaven upon you. For as our sins do often hinder good things coming to
us: so they often provoke GOD to take away His blessings from us: when
therefore He is taking away mercies, it becomes us to consider whether we have
not been sinning against mercies. And there are sins against eminent, boly, and
useful ministers, which may provoke GOD to take them away from a people: as
when they are overvalued, and set in GOD's stead, or when they are too lightly
esteemed, and the earthen vessels are despised, though there is much treasure in
them; or when a people are unthankful and unfruitful, barren and unprofitable
under their enlightening, awakening, and powerful ministry: when they who are
in a state and course of sin, will not repent and reform; and when they who
profess more religion continue cold, formal, indevout, and will not be
quickened. Now then is a time for us to consider what sins of ours may have
provoked GOD, and to make them the matter of our mourning and lamentation
before Him. Let us now think seriously with our selves, whether we may not take
up the lamentation of the church and say, The crow is fallen from our head; woe
unto us, that we have sinned. Lam. 5.15.


AND should we not mourn from apprehensions of repeated troubles? One stroke
many times makes way for another. And when such a breach is made upon us, do we
not lie open to other evils, which (if GOD prevent not) will rush in upon us,
like a flood? This is a consideration which further calls for our mourning
before the LORD: especially when our deceased pastor expressed his tender
concern for (...) this very regard; during his last agonies. Amidst the
convulsions of nature, with a faultering tongue he observed to me, what a
difficult time we should (...), if the (...) flock should be broken with (...)
and confusions. And while he was beginning to give his last advice for
preventing of it, before the first sentence was pronounced, his voice failed
him and never pronounced a sentence more.

BUT while I persuade you to your duty, I am not unmindful of my own. Pity me,
O my friends, for the hand of the LORD has touched me, more heavily than you
can be supposed to feel it in this providence. The LORD has taken up my master
from my head, and heard me cry after him, my father, my father! And besides the
peculiar share which I have in the common loss, sustained by the land, by the
ministerial order, and by this church and congregation; I have extraordinary
reason to lament his death, and to love his memory. He was an instrument of
spiritual good to me, in his ministry, from my early days; and very much
assisted and directed my youthful studies: He excited me to public service in
the ministry; and accepted me to serve with him, as a son in the gospel: He
bore with my infirmities; and helped me under difficulties: He quickened me to
my work; and showed me an example: He instructed, admonished, and exhorted me
as a father; while by his condescending goodness he raised me to the level of a
friend and a brother. And as I truly loved him from my early childhood: so I
loved to honor him in suitable acknowledgments of his excellencies and my
obligations; till death has parted us. But this love has been made stronger by
death: for what I beheld in his last Sickness and dying hours, has raised my
affections higher than ever; and I value the blessing in the want of it, even
more than in the enjoyment.

FROM the beginning of his confinement, he discovered a strong persuasion that
it would prove his last sickness: but he had not left the great work of
preparation for death to such a time. As GOD had made him a remarkable instance
of early piety: so from his youth he had been walking with GOD, and walking
much in the light of His countenance. And now his great concern was for a soul
entirely resigned to the will of GOD: which was but the perfecting of a most
refined temper of christianity, that appeared to prevail in him through his life;
and whereby he had been often enabled, after a wonderful manner, to glorify
GOD: especially under such bereavements as were most difficult to be born with
a profound resignation. He several times told me, that he had been favored
with bright and clear views of GOD and CHRIST and Heaven; though not so many or
lasting as were granted him in former sicknesses I will take this opportunity
to give the reader several passages, relating to a former sickness; as they
were communicated to me since the Doctor's death, by a gentleman who was
himself a witness of them. Boston, January 26th (Thursday) 1720, 1.
A SPEECH of the Rev. Dr. Cotton Mather to some of his church and neighbors,
when under threatening sickness; penned down by one of them immediately
afterward
I am singularly advantaged in two or three respects r. I have learned to
esteem patience under sickness, to be better than health it self. 2. I am sure
my sins which have been many and mighty are all pardoned, for the sake of the
sacrifice of CHRIST. I am sure CHRIST's blood has been applied to me, because
of it is purifying efficacy on me; and that His death has been for me, because I
live unto GOD. 3. I am, through the grace of CHRIST, got above the fear of death:
I am a conqueror, yea more than a conqueror over that king of terrors: and if I
was assured, I should die this very night, I could entertain death as the best
friend I ever met withal. And then as to the things which men generally trouble
themselves about, as worldly estate, children, etc. I can leave all in the
hands of a dear SAVIOR, whose watchful providence will graciously take care of
them -- - And this happy frame I ascribe to my having conversed much with a
glorious CHRIST, etc. I speak not this in the least from any proud or
vainglorious tho'ts: but to let you know, that the principles I have so often
insisted on in my ministry, will support a man under the apprehensions of
death. When a friend at parting said, I hope it will be but a light affliction;
he replied, I know it will work for me a far more exceeding and an eternal
weight of glory.

A few days after, he said to one of the same persons, -- I have in this time
of sickness been often examining into my desires of life. The most men desire
to live, either, 1. Because they are afraid to die: but now that will never do.
What! after so many years under such rich advantages, and be afraid to die! By
no means. But, I bless GOD, that point through our LORD JESUS CHRIST is well
provided for. Or, 2. Because they have such a strong affection to, and delight
in creature comforts: but now this will not do neither. What! be loath to leave
streams, and go to the fountain! What! love the creatures more than the
Creator, in whom all good is originally and transcendently! The only plea then
is, My advantages to do good: I am in working case, and may, by GOD's blessing,
be instrumental to bring some small honors to GOD's name: and whenever GOD
shall please to put an end to this, I am resigned; and have no more to say, but
wait His good pleasure.



and particularly when he was brought down to the gates of the grave last
spring. But Child, said he, GOD is now trying my patience; and my great concern
is that that may have it is perfect work. I am laboring, and I hope with
success, to have my will entirely swallowed up in the will of GOD. And, said he
more than once with peculiar emphasis, When once I can come to this that my
will is entirely resigned to the will of GOD, then farewell all friends below;
I shall have nothing more to do here. Accordingly a few hours before his death,
calling for me to pray with him, upon a little revival in his last agonies, he
expressed a most admirable patience under them, as the appointed way of going
to CHRIST: and after prayer he said to me, Now I have nothing more to do here;
and explained it to me by adding, My will is now entirely resigned to the will
of GOD.

FOUR days before this, when we thought him dying, and he though it himself to be
so; he said to me before prayer, Give thanks that I am not afraid with any
amazement, at the apprehensions of a dying hour; and for all the help which GOD
has favored me with in the service of CHRIST; and that He has new given me
so good a prospect of the end of my pilgrimage, that I can rejoice in the hope
of His glory, even with joy unspeakable. Upon a little revival, he then told
me, there were some special services for the kingdom of GOD, which he had been
projecting; and that on the account of them he was willing to live: but, said
he, if the Lord of my life has determined otherwise, I hope I can truly say,
Thy will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven. And then in a most composed
and quiet frame, he gave his dying charges and directions to those about him: I
heartily pray, that I may always use the diligence and industry, which he
recomended to me, in the service of CHRIST; and be influenced by the motive
wherewith he urged it: one of a weak constitution, like yours, said he, by the
diligent improvement of time may do much service for CHRIST, in a short life.

THE same happy temper continued with him all along: resigned when he spoke of
living to serve CHRIST: but cheerful under the apprehensions of death, as
becomes a saint. To one of his brethren in the ministry, who asked him How he
did, I remember he said with a cheerful air and voice, I will give you Mrs. A
Manyr in the reign of K. Hen. 8 Fox's Acts and Mon. Vol. 2. p. 576.
Askew's answer, As merry as one bound for heaven. When an honorable person of
his church asked him, Whether he desired to die by this sickness, his answer
was; Sir, I dare not say, I do not: and I dare not say, I do. My great concern
is to have no will at all about it: but to be entirely resigned to GOD. When he
looked upon me in his last struggels and said, walk on according to the same
rule, by which we have walked together; and when upon my desire of his dying
blessing, he turned to me and said, A CHRIST for you, and that is blessing
enough: the cheerfulness and serenity with which he spoke, were beyond
description.

IT were easy to collect many other instances, wherein he discovered his
resignation, faith, hope and joy in the LORD. But of the many affecting
passages which I have had from very good hands, I will mention these few
following.

WHEN he first perceived the stroke of death, he expressed much satisfaction
and tranquillity; and with an undaunted voice said, I know whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded that he can, and will keep that which I have
committed to him. When something was applied to cool his eyes, which were
inflamed by his fever, he said, In a little time all tears will be wiped from
my eyes. When something was offered to quench his thirst, he said, I am going
to drink of those rivers of delight, which flow from the throne of GOD, and of
THE LAMB. When the physicians intimated to him, that there was now no prospect
of his life, he listed up his hands and eyes, and with a particular pathos
said, Thy will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven. When he was informed,
how much the people of GOD prayed for him, he seemed greatly pleased with a
though it arising from that, The prayer of the upright is His delight. He though it it
worth being sick, only that the infinite GOD might have the delight of the
prayers preferred by such numbers of upright ones. To his gracious and beloved
consort he said, You and I must never any more retire and pray together, as we
used to do: but you may now, when you go alone and pray, think that I am at
that very time praising and blessing and singing halelujahs, before the same
throne of grace. I Will meet you there as often as you please. And upon hearing
her remark it, that he pleasantly smiled upon her, while she was looking on him
with tears at his bedside, the day before his death, he said, Why should not I
smile, when every thing looks smiling upon me. Seeing his nephew Mr. Byles in
the room, he called him to come near, laid his trembling hands on his head, and
pronounced his dying blessing -- My dear child, and my son, my son, I bless
you; I bless you; I wish you all manner of blessings! I know not what better to
wish you then this: Be strong in the grace with which our LORD JESUS CHRIST
will always furnish you. I know not what better to wish you than this: That you
may be a blessed instrument of displaying to others the beauties and the
glories of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. I know not what better to wish you than this:
That you may be very fruitful in projections and essays to do good: That it may
be your great ambition to bring forth much, much of the fruit by which our
heavenly father may be glorified. You have been acquainted with my poor manner
of living, even in the more secret strokes of it: follow what you have found in
it, according to the pattern of a glorious CHRIST. My dear son, I do with all
possible affection commend you to the blessing of our dear LORD JESUS CHRIST.
Take my hands, and my heart full of blessings. Feeling the pangs of death
proceed with the greatest violence; and when the standers-by apprehended him to
be in the most painful agonies, he said, with a sort of triumph in his air and
accent, And is this dying! This all! Is this what I feared when I prayed
against a hard death! Is it no more than this! O I can bear this! I can bear
it, I can bear it!

THIS last passage leads me to mention it, that from the strong reluctances of
nature against the bitter cup of a very painful death which had been given to
several of his venerable ancestors, and passed down from them to diverse of his
fathers gracious children, he was often heard to deprecate it, in the time of
his health. And with what earnestness he has cried to GOD in this place for an
easy death -- for an easy death -- for an easy death, with such a repetition of
the cry, many of you here present are the witnesses. But he was graciously
heard, in that which he feared; and when it was observed to him, that GOD had
heard his prayers for an easy death, I think his answer was in this one word,
Grace! the last word, as I remember, that he was heard to speak.

THUS was he kept in perfect peace, with a mind stayed upon his GOD and
SAVIOR: till he lifted up his eyes toward heaven; and sweetly resigned his
spirit into the hands of JESUS, without a struggle or a groan. Lord, may we
thus die the death of the righteous, and our latter end be like his!

AND I cannot forbear saying here, that I was never so affected with a view of
the hope which the righteous have in their death, and the peace which is the
latter end of the upright, as when I saw them in the last sickness and dying
hours of this servant of GOD. To behold a saint with all the tokens of a divine
calm in his breast, not only daring to encounter the king of terrors, but
rising above all fears into joyful views of immortality; and in such a frame
giving the exactest orders and directions to all about him, according to their
several characters and relations, that they also may be over-comers and win a
never-fading crown in the kingdom of heaven: This is a spectacle inconceivably
greater and more glorious, than a bold and venturous hero in a campaign, who
fearless and unshaken exactly directs the battle, when environed with fire and
death. O how much greater is it, to see a humble sinner, through the grace of
CHRIST possessed with a full persuasion of the favor of GOD, biding adieu to all
the charms of this world, encountering a death disarmed by the redeemer, looking
after all the inconceivable glories of the heavenly world, and expressing a
divine concern for the eternal happiness of others: How much greater, I say, is
this, than to see a guilty creature, for the fading honors of this life, rush
into all the hazzards of future misery, when GOD and JESUS are not in all his
thoughts, and thousands of immortal souls are made the tools of his ambition!
But as great a spectacle as this is, the religion of JESUS has often produced
it; and, we may speak it to the glory of the free grace of GOD, we have seen it
in the death of our paster.

Now then, beloved, you may well think how much I feel, (may GOD keep me from
sinking under) the loss of such a father and such a friend. I freely join my
griefs to yours, to make up the mourning that heaven calls us to this day: and
I desire to join with you in all the sentiments, tempers, resolutions, and
actions, whereby GOD may be glorified upon this occasion. O that our forrowing
and mourning may be after a godly sort; from holy principles, and for religious
ends! O that we may be deeply humbled under the mighty hand of GOD, and lay our
selves low at His feet; under a sense of our sins and provocations, and of the
divine displeasure! O that while we thus humble our selves, we may by faith
repair to the great sacrifice for the priesthood and for the congregation, and
repent in dust and ashes! O that we may hold on crying mightily to GOD, for his
pardoning mercy, sanctifying grace, and comforting spirit! And let us never
give over mourning before Him, till He turn away His anger; and by showing us
the tokens of His favor in CHRIST, quicken (...) our resolutions to serve and
glorify Him in holm is all our days.

AND among the other methods of glorifying GOD, as this providence requires. I
desire to join with you, in expressing a christian sympathy with the bereaved
family and relatives. If upon a just sense of our loss, we find such cause of
mourning for it; how great then must theirs be, to whom the servant of GOD was
endeared by all the ties of natural affection, as well as grace and goodness?
But I shall not attempt to describe their loss; lest I aggravate their sorrow.
Instead of this, I address my self unto you, beloved, and say, I am confident
of it, that you will show the kindness of GOD to the bereaved family; in
remembrance of the kindness which GOD has often dispensed to you by means of
His servant, who is now called up from us: And I am confident, that the hearts
of this whole people are united with mine, in fervent wishes to the GOD of all
grace, that these mourners may be comforted.

WE wish then that you, Madam, who have lost an excellent husband, may now more
than ever have the assurances of it, that your maker is your husband, whose
name is the LORD of hosts; and find Him giving more and more of the brightest
evidences of your espousal to Him. He alone can make the widow's heart to sing
for joy: and while you trust in Him as your GOD in covenant, you may depend
upon it, He will give you songs in the night of your affliction; when your
prayer is to the GOD of your life. And as in His holy providence deep calls
unto deep, his billows are rolling over you, and you have sorrow upon sorrow:
now remember, it has pleased the FATHER that all fullness should dwell in
CHRIST, as the head of His people in His covenant; of whose fullness you may
receive, and grace for grace.

WE wish that you who have lost an excellent parent, may by happy experience
find, that when your father forsakes you, the LORD will take you up. With Him
the fatherless (...) mercy: and your hearts receive comfort in hearing him
speak to you that word: whom the LORD loves, He corrects, even as a father
the son, in whom He delights Prove. 3.12,
-- And for you, my brother, who are left among us to bear up a name which from
the beginning has been among the chief of the families of New England, we
earnestly pray, that you may inherit a double portion of the good spirit, which
rested on your venerable ancestors. While you choose their GOD for your GOD, and
follow them as they followed CHRIST, you will be a worthy son of such a father;
and be made a blessing, like him, in the service of the gospel, which you are
entered into with peculiar advantages.

MAY such as are bereaved of an excellent brother, take comfort in the though it of
this: that our LORD JESUS CHRIST does most graciously invite their
consideration of Him, as their elder brother; and that He is the resurrection
and the life.

MAY all the bereaved hear an alsufficient GOD saying to them, I will never
leave you, nor forsake you. May His everlasting arms be underneath them to
support them: and as their affliction abounds, may the consolations which are
not small abound likewise through CHRIST JESUS; who can give the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garments of praise for the spirit of heaviness.

AND now may we all press after such a lively exercise of strong faith in the
wisdom, goodness, and faithfulness of GOD through our LORD JESUS CHRIST, as will
enable us to glorify Him; by the most becoming resignation to His will, under
all the changes that come upon us. In this we shall take the most effectual
method, to have our mourning turned into joy.

WHEN the excellencies of creatures might no longer comfort us, the deceased
servant of GOD would always lead us to CHRIST the fountain of them all; through
whom we may say, blessed be the name of the LORD, when He takes away, as well
as when He gives. And whither should we go, but to the fountain, when streams
are dried up?

Now therefore let us remember, how we have received and heard: and while we
are bewailing our loss, let us realize it, that all the excellencies which
rendered our pastor so dear to us, were but a little stream (and to the glory of
the divine fullness we may say, but a little drop) from the infinite and
overflowing fountain of all good in CHRIST JESUS. Then, if our mourning this
day be from a godly sorrow that works repentance, we may see what grounds we
have to hope in Him, with whom is the residue of the spirit; that He will
thrust forth laborers into His harvest, and maintain a succession of them who
shall be the blessed instruments of building up His kingdom among us: and then,
whoever is taken from us by death, we may comfort ourselves, and glorify Him by
singing that song, The LORD lives: and blessed be my rock: and exalted be the
GOD of the rock of my salvation.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1 l. 27 r. grief. p 3 l. 24. intercessions. l. 28 despising. p. 4 l. 17.
continue. p. 5 l. 31 coarser. p. 6 l. 29 r. wherein. p. 7 l. 34 dele here p 8.
l. 2 dele and. p. 14. l. ult. r. their glory, p. 15. l. 20 lamentation. p. 28
l. 12 struggles.


