A Friend's Discourse, Delivered at an Yearly Meeting of the Quakers, In
Boston, on Friday the 30th of August, 1728.

Taken down in Short Hand, exami^^^ by several that heard it, ^^d now at their
Desire made ^^blick.

Note, This Discourse was distinctly read over (...) several of the Friends,
(at their Desire) and allowed by them to be Verbatim as it was delivered.

BOSTON: Printed for N. Belknap, and sold at his Shop, near Scarlet's Wharf, at
the North End. 1728.

A Friend's Discourse, etc.
BUT this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call Heresy, so
worship I the God of my Fathers. For to this Effect was the Confession of one,
when he was had before the Rulers. It seems that there were in ancient Days
that were accounted Heretics, and yet according to what we find written in the
Word of Truth, were the true Worshippers of God. May you all that are here
present become such, is the desire of my Soul. Let Men account of you whatever
they may, yet if you are those true Worshippers of God, you will not be ashamed
to confess it before the Children of Men; though you may be scorned and abused;
when you are sensible that you are those that worship God, and are right, will
not be backward. But if it should so happen, that you come to be Sufferers, and
to be had before the Rulers, and to be falsely accused in diverse respects, as
the Followers of Christ were in the Apostles Days yet dare not to deny that you
are the Worshippers of God. And we find Christ our blessed Lord, informing the
Woman of Samaria at Jacob's Well, which way to worship God, and let us see that
we are found in this way, is acceptable to God, in our Worship and Service unto
him this Day, and all our Days, that we may have the Spirit, and then no
Question at all, but when it shall please God to put a Period to our Days here,
we shall find acceptance with him: For though we may be rejected by the
Children of Men, and slighted, and ill used, yet those that are found true
worshippers of God, let them go under what Denomination whatsoever, they shall
find acceptance. And indeed in their Offerings unto the Lord, he will in no
wise reject them that are fearers of God, and workers of Righteousness,
whatsoever their Names may be, for God is no respecter of Persons, but all
Nations that work Righteousness shall be accepted by him. May you and I be of
this Number, and in order to that we ought to wait upon God, for what are we as
the Apostle says, of our selves we can do nothing, unless we are abilitated by
the Spirit of God; that we may keep to it and wait for it. And it is the desire
of my Soul, although many of the Children of Men so scandalize it, that People
wait for the Spirit of God, and they dare not Preach, and they dare not Pray,
until they feel and are abilitated by his Power Divine, for we know not how to
Pray as we ought, but the Spirit in us with sighs and groanings, that may not
be heard by Mortals, being yet Divine; but he hears, and he knows, and he knows
in whose Heart it is to Fear and to Serve him. I hope there is a number though
small, a number gathered together, that are desirous to worship the Lord in
their Days and Generations.

But as I said before of the Woman of Samaria by Jacob's Well; when we find our
blessed Lord came to her, at that same time we may find that they fell into a
Case, or as it were a Discourse about the worship of God and the like. And he
informed her as we may read, if I Am not mistaken, in the fourth Chapter of
John, that the true Worshippers should worship the Father, in Spirit and in
Truth, and such was God seeking to worship Him: He further informed her of all
that ever she had done, and she went away convinced, that it was our blessed
Lord and Savior; and she was made to make some Publication of it, and she went
away. -- And come see a Man that told me all that ever I did. Well, she seemed
to be in earnest, and invites and many Believed, not only because of her saying
it, but they went and saw for themselves. Now what we invite the Children of
Men to, is to make some proof, and come and see for themselves, if they have
not something that will be of force unto them all; they will have the Spirit,
and he will Instruct them for that end. They have had a Spirit that has been
contrary to the Divine Will and Pleasure of God; for he indeed does show unto
Men and Women, what influences them in order that they may forsake the evil of
it; and cease to do evil and learn to do well. And although their Souls have
been as Scarlet, and as deep Crimson, yet upon ceasing to do evil, and learning
to do well, he will wash them as white as Snow, and as Wool: may we all come to
be washed, from the evil of our doings; for we must confess we have all sinned,
as the Apostle says, and come short of the Glory of God. Therefore this Remnant
have applied themselves to the great Physician, who is willing to pardon the
Children of Men, and to blot out their Iniquities; and now being washed, and
now being cleansed, and now being sanctified, for as we may read in the
Scriptures of Truth, know ye not that no unrighteous one shall inherit God's
Kingdom. And he reckons up, Evildoers, Idolaters, Effeminate, and Adulterers,
yet says he, such were some of you: But yet, had the Lord mercy on such, that
were not fit for his kingdom? Yes, for now are ye washed, and now are ye
cleansed, etc. Here was a spiritual work manifested unto them, and we must come
to, and now being cleansed, and now being born of the Spirit, and now being
born of Water, and now being cleansed, otherwise we shall never be fit for
God's kingdom, according to the foregoing Chapter, as we may read in the 3d. of
John, Our blessed Lord informed Nichodemus that was a Ruler, and that came to
Jesus by night, if I mistake not he informed him, and told him that unless a
Man was born again, he could not see the kingdom of God. How can this be? says
Nichodemus, Can a Man enter a second time into his Mothers Womb? It seems he
was carnally minded, and applied the speech of our blessed Lord carnally, and
then he further explains it, Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit,
etc. Now I believe many have had the Work of the Spirit of God on their Hearts,
as well as he; May we all apply our selves to him for all our Doubts, that he
would teach us the way we should walk in, and if we do, he will no doubt
dicover to every individual of us what way we may come to be born again.

I confess my self I had my Education amongst those called Quakers, yet when
the Lord was pleased by his great mercy to visit me, and to bring me under a
concern to know what I should do to inherit eternal life; I was ready to submit
to every thing that I was made to know was my Duty, and if it was any outward
Ceremony my Parents came short of, yet I knew I must do my work my self: thus
when I read that passage of our blessed Lord to Nichodemus, I was ready to
submit to the Ceremony of Water, which can only wash the outward Man, from
hence 'twas practiced from him, and it was the same that had done it, and those
that were commanded to do it took it from Christ: And thus I was for some time,
and applied my self unto God that I might not miss of the salvation of my Soul.
And I desire none to take up Religion from Education, of what Form soever, but
that we may know of our being fitted for God's kingdom, perhaps we shall never
be fit for his kingdom. I hope there are many of the Children of Men thus
informed, and as you keep up that appearance you have in your selves, although
some times it seems very small, even like a grain of Mustard Seed, yet if you
have Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ which teaches you at times and seasons, to
deny all ungodliness and lusts of the World. We find the Apostle Paul was very
positive when he wrote to Titus, and says, the grace of God which brings
salvation, has appeared unto all Men, he will's not the Death of a Sinner, but
had rather that he turn and live, and the good Spirit of God teaches you to
deny worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly; may you keep
the teachings of it, you need no teaching but the holy anointing in you,
teaches you, and therefore it is that we call upon the Children of Men, and
invite them to come and see and live. I remember I saw one that was very
ancient in years and stricken, and he had lived to that time he had lost his
sight, and he had a visitation, and he expressed himself a little before his
departure, He was not one that made Profession with us as a People, yet he
humbled himself before the Lord, and was made to possess the Sins of his Youth,
and all that ever he had done was brought to his remembrance. I wish the
Children of Men would consider, and apply themselves to God for mercy, and not
justify themselves in any thing short of a Justification in the sight of God. I
have known such a one, and I hope and believe there are many that have applied
themselves to God; I can say, that while I speak unto you, I have applied my
self unto the Lord; the Lord have mercy on me, the Lord wash me, and make me
clean. I was sensible he was to lead me by his judgments, and as I waited on
the Lord I can say, that it was the comfort of the Lord when I was made
sensible, that when the wicked Man that has lived unrighteously, turns from his
unrighteousness, all his wickedness that he has done shall not be remembered.
I vow my spirit was humbled before the Lord, and many times when I am employed
my self in the Assemblies of God's People, I was desirous of God the Lord to
search me and to prove me: It was the language of a good Man in ancient Days,
that God would search him and try him. And although they may be accounted
Heretics, and the way they Worship called Heresy, yet I find for I can say it
is not my manner, to prepare any thing for to deliver to any People, but to
wait on the Lord, and this Passage of holy Scripture came into my Remembrance,
how that one made a Profession, in the way which they called Heresy.

And because you be those that thus worship the God of your Fathers, I believe
that many have been godly concerned, when they have believed that they might
worship God acceptably. And I am glad I can say to see you thus but some who
frequently come to scoff in Derision, and mocking, yet blessed be the Name of
the Lord the Lord will visit, and influence the Children of Men, and will not
lay unto their charge that they may be ignorant. I remember the Apostle Stephen
when he was stoned, and persecuted; there was a Spirit in him, and he prayed,
Lord, lay not this Sin unto their charge, And I have charitable Thoughts that
some have been ignorant, and hardly knew what they did, yet blessed be the Lord
Truth does spread, and is predominant: And if you do as those that are
Professors ought to do, do but live answerable to your Profession, according to
the influence of the Light you make a Profession of, you will be as Way-marks
to the Children of Men. For we are People that make a Profession of the Light
of Jesus Christ, that has lighted every Man that has come into the World,
though some say it was insufficient, but the Apostle Paul says it was not
insufficient; but the Grace of God, he might have said the Light of Christ,
has appeared unto all Men; and what did it discover? why it teaches them to
deny all Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, etc. May you keep the teachings of it,
and may I, is the desire of my Soul, whenever we appear before the Lord. May
we call upon him, and breath unto him, that he would abilitate us, to perform
acceptable Service unto him; so I desire for my own Soul that I may thus
worship God aright, which is performed in Spirit and in Truth, as I have
mentioned before, for God seeks, such to Worship him in this latter Age, as
well as when his Son was upon the Earth, in that Body prepared by the Father to
do his Will, and I am sensible that there is a Remnant here at this time,
desirous to wait upon him and cry unto him, that he would abilitate them to
Worship him. That they may acceptably Worship him, is not only to bow the Head,
but it is to bow the Heart to; and I must confess Mary Magdalen Worshipped the
Lord, when she washed his Feet with her Tears, and wiped them with her Hairs.
There was great Love in her Heart to her Savior that had Mercy on her, and
indeed where is much forgiven there is great Love. Do you consider the kindness
and goodness of God unto you, he has strengthened you daily, and he has strived
with you as with Jerusalem, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, how often would I have gathered you but you would not. Friends, the
Mercy of God was extended in a large degree unto them, and so it has been unto
the Inhabitants of New England, may not you requite Evil for Good, but cry unto
him that he might prepare you that you might serve, to prepare your Hearts that
you may serve to Worship him acceptably in your Generations: For indeed some
Men may meet with difficulties which they are not aware of in Duty, though it
has been thus that many have had wherewithal, and have been thus, and have had
free liberty to worship and serve the Lord according to their Persuasions; yet
we know not how the Lord may work, and what overturnings may come. We have to
bless the Name of the Lord, that he has thus wrought for the remnant of his
People, by his Spirit. I desire my Brethren, and Sisters, in all humility
before God, to reverence him and to be thankful, that he has thus ordered, and
has thus worked on the Hearts of those in Authority, that we have free liberty
to work toward our Maker. I can tell you it has sometimes humbled me, and that
sometimes when my Head has been upon my Pillow, to God that has thus wrought:
May we offer unto him, the Sacrifices of a broken Heart, and of a contrite
Spirit, which he will not despise.

The End of the first Discourse.
Part of a Second Discourse, Delivered the same Day, By another Friend.
I Would in Charity hope, and do believe, that the Intent and Designs of our
Mind generally is; I speak unto such as are come unto Years of understanding,
we all intend one way, and the Intent of our Minds generally is, that, when the
Period of time, shall be put unto us, and unto our being here, to enjoy a
Heavenly Inheritance; I say, I cannot choose but in Charity thus believe, thus
all design undoubtedly, and since the Case is so, that we are designed one way
in our judgments and thoughts, that is at last to obtain Heaven and Happiness,
let our Names be what it will, and let your Forms of Religion be what they
will, I make no doubt but this is your design for all. We are all undoubtedly
of this Opinion, although I must confess, that various is the judgments of the
Children of Men to obtain it. You are sensible Men and Women, of you, I am
speaking to, I make no doubt, and therefore you can assent to what I say in
this respect, I make no question at all.

And indeed I must confess to, that it is commendable for all the Children of
Men to be thus engaged, considering the sad loss, all of us shall light of that
miss this forementioned Happiness. We are of this Opinion no doubt, and we
believe that Woe will be the Portion of those that miss of this end; and
therefore it is the wisdom of all the Children of Men, that design to take wise
steps to obtain this: for I will tell you Friends, that all that have had
experience in this Travail, and all that are Witnesses, and all that have had
any assurance of a better World, they have had no small exercise here; it has
been a narrow Path though all have travailed in it, that have come to any
assurance of this glorious inheritance. And therefore I would have us be
engaged in this as much as in us lies.

On the other hand, though we cannot see alike in sundrys, and agree in
sundrys, yet for all that we may dare to maintain Charity unto one another, so
far as truth will allow. I can truly say, I envy no Man that cannot see as I
do, I pity all that I see out of the way, and my Soul mourns many times for
them, I am far from having any bitter spirit against any Man, for since the
Case is so to all that miss this way, it will be enough for them, to miss what
they expected in another World: And it is pity, that any should be so
malicious, against those that cannot say with them, for they are sensible Men
as I said before, and he must have some ground for his Belief. For I must tell
you Friends, I don't value that Belief that has no grounds or reasons for it,
for I know very well that Men must believe, according to that Belief that is
forced into them; for true Belief does arise from the Divine Convictions in the
Soul, and from the Divine sight. And therefore it is very hard for Men to bear
hard one upon another, because they cannot see alike, for I am sensible that
what most Men have differed most about, has been since the want of the Spirit,
and since the Apostasy, and since the Church has gone away, and since it went
into the Wilderness. It has been about light things in themselves, and it has
not been about the life of Religion. Many have been so zealous as to kill one
another about Religion, and some of them have been only about the outward
things in Religion, as you may read in ancient History. You know this very
well, and it may be better than I can tell you; yet I have had some
considerable share in the Church History, and I have observed that it has been
commonly, that the difference has been about shadows that would not save Men,
and that Men might be saved without, and therefore I would descend into a
consideration with you now, about these shadows that Men have been so concerned
about, and therefore I shall consider the Thirtieth Chapter of Jeremiah, The
Lord says by the Mouth of his Prophet, behold the day is come says the Lord,
and I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of
Judah, not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the
Wilderness, which Covenant they broke. And here you see what he says, I will
write my Law in their Hearts, and put it in their inward parts.

You are Men that read the holy Scriptures, and what this Covenant is, the
Author to the Hebrews tells us, in the 9th. Chapter, which stood only in Meats,
and Drinks, and diverse Washings, and carnal Ordinances: And here you see it was
a new Covenant that was to be made; the first was that that consisted in the
Ten Precepts, written and engraven in Stone, and was carried into the Ark in
the Wilderness, in that Ark was the first Covenant. It was an external outward
Covenant, a Covenant of works, and therefore the Lord says, Behold the day is
come, and I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, etc. I believe
that this was the Gospel Dispensation that was there pointed out in this new
Covenant, and I suppose that all agree in this Gospel Day that we are under the
Gospel Dispensation. That, that was written and engraven on Stone you see that
was done away, therefore the first Ministration. But the second was the
Ministration of Righteousness, and exceeded the same in glory. Therefore the
new Covenant is that I would a little speak to, that you may know where this
must be if ever you are acquainted with it: you must come to this new Covenant
and well where is it, the Apostle tells you in the second Epistle to the
Corinthians and the second Chapter. He was writing to the Church, and he writes
unto them after this manner; Ye are our Epistle, read and known of all Men,
etc. Not the Tables of Stone as the first Covenant was, but the fleshly Tables
of the Heart, is now I believe this new Dispensation where the Covenant is, for
God will write his Law on their Hearts, and they shall not say every one to his
Neighbor and to his Brother, know ye the Lord? for ye shall all know me even
from the least unto the greatest, says the Lord, and I will teach them of my
ways. And here the Lord becomes a Teacher unto his People under the Gospel
Dispensation.

But I will return a little again unto, what the Author says unto the Hebrews,
this first Covenant consisted in diverse Meats, and Washings, and carnal
Ordinances, that is in carnal Ordinances imposed on the Children of Men, until
the time of the Reformation. Well Friends, I believe that the first Covenant in
point of Obligation is done away in Christ Jesus. He blotted out the Hand,
writing of Ordinances, and he took it out of the way and nailed it unto his
Cross, yea the first Covenant of Ordinances ceased there; for you know that
what, is nailed is commonly supposed to be fastened, and to be fixed, and to be
designed to stay there. This first Covenant did consist in outward performance,
but this consists in a more Heavenly and Spiritual substance, for I will tell
you Friends, all the Ordinances of God, instituted by God under this first
Covenant, were very noble Figures, and Shadows: nay before the Gospel was
preached; by these diverse Washings and carnal Ordinances. For I suppose you
will confess that there was no Remission of Sin, nor Supplication by these, for
the Apostle tells us, that it was impossible for the blood of Bulls, and Goats,
and the ashes of an Heifer to purge away Sin, there was no Washing by these
that were but legal Purifications, they did not wash the Souls of Men, for that
was represented by these outward Signs and Figures under that Dispensation, and
therefore I believe during the time of that legal Dispensation, it was
necessary for these things which were a Pattern.

N. B. The Writer had particular Business which obliged him to omit taking down
the latter part of this Discourse.

ERRATA.
Page 2. line 11. for is, read that is.


