Mr. Colman's SERMON after the late bloody Duel.

DEATH and the GRAVE without any Order.

A SERMON Preached July 7. 1728. Being the LORD'S DAY after a tragical Duel.
AND MOST lamented Death.

By Benjamin Colman.

Prove. ii. 15, 16. My Son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot
from their path: For their feet run to Evil, and make haste to shed BLOOD.

BOSTON in New England: Printed for JOHN PHILLIPS and THOMAS HANCOCK, near the
Town Dock. 1728.

Death and the Grave without any Order.
JOB X. 22. -- Without any Order.


THE Words are spoken by holy Job of Death and the Grave, which he though it just
before him, and where he wished to have been, by the Will of GOD. " I go (says
he) whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness and the shadow of
death, WITHOUT ANY ORDER, and where the light is as darkness.

WHAT a dark and melancholy, not to say dismal Description is here of the
visible state of the Dead? and how are the gloomy words doubled and trebled to
represent the thick Darkness; a darkness to be felt and seen; not by the dead
that neither see nor feel, but by the living who lay it to their heart.

BUT it is not the darkness of the Grave that I am now to insist on, only as
one part of the darkness lies in the words of my Text, Without any Order.
Indeed Order is not to be expected in darkness. Darkness implies disorder, and
the place of Order is where Light dwells. Were the light of the Sun put out,
what disorder would presently follow upon Earth? Such a Connection is there
between Order and Light in the nature of things, and between Darkness and
Disorder.

BUT to drop the connection of the words;

JOB seems to speak here, 1. of the time and manner of Deaths coming on one and
another, that we can observe no Order in the thing: 2. of the visible State of
the dead, the Grave, where we find no Order at all; natural, civil or
religious. It is a land of darkness without any order.

DOCT. DEATH seems not to us to observe and keep any Rule and Order in it is
taking away one and another; and the visible State of the dead is without any
Order.

PROP. I. DEATH seems not to us to observe and keep any Rule and Order, in its
taking away one and another. I say not, that it does not observe the best and
most exact Order, but that this Order does not appear to us.

IT certainly has its Order from GOD as to every one it takes away, when and in
what manner they shall die. It certainly proceeds in a wise and good Order by
his Will and Direction. Yet we are not sensible of any fixed Rule that it goes
by. -- To be sure every one dies in his own Order; in his appointed time and
hour, which is ordered exactly and performed by GOD as it should be: whether in
Judgment, or in Mercy.

DEATH has it is Order from the LORD OF LIFE, the just Rewarder and the
righteous Judge. There is an appointed time to Man upon Earth, the number of
his months and days are with GOD; his bounds are determined to an hour and a
minute, which he cannot pass. Not a Sparrow, and much less any Child of Man,
falls to the ground without the will of our FATHER in Heaven Job vii. 1. Matthew.
x. 29.
.

AND be sure the Maker and GOD of our Spirits does all things well, in perfect
Wisdom and Order. Death is kept in GOD'S own hand, or (which is the same thing)
it is put into the hand of CHRIST, the Only-begotten of the FATHER: It is in
the best Hand: Never the less we cannot observe the Order that it keeps;
either, 1. As to the Time, or 2. As to the Manner of ones dying and another.


1. As to the Time of Death's coming to one and another, it seems without any
Order. We cannot observe any natural Order, nor moral, nor political in the
approach of Death, here or there.

1. No natural Order. By which I mean, according to the course of Nature; as to
us it would seem orderly for the Elder to go before the Younger, and Parents
before their Children. But Death observes no such Order of Nature and Age.
Younger Persons do often die before their Elders, and Children before their
Parents. At the next door again, the Elder dies before the Younger; the Parents
before the Children.

SIN that bro't in Death broke in upon this seeming natural Order, and the
natural Desires both of Parents and Children. For Parents naturally and
strongly desire, if it may please GOD, that their Children may outlive them;
and Children naturally hope and expect to outlive their Parents, by the Will
of GOD. But the first Death we read of broke this Order, namely Abel's; and how
many more of their Children Adam and Eve lived to bury we know not. But this we
know that the best among their fallen Offspring share in this Grief after them.

SOMETIMES the youngest Children of the Family die first, the Youth dies before
the Adult, the Adult before the Aged, and the Hoary Head follows many an Infant
to the Grave. But neither is this Order kept to by Death, for sometimes an
Isaac and a Jacob die in a good old Age, with their Sons about them.

2. DEATH seems not to regard or keep any Moral Order in its approach to one and
another. The Good die before the bad, and the bad again before the Good; here
the Righteous before the Wicked, and there the wicked before the Godly. Here
the wicked is driven away in his wickedness, and there he lives old and is
mighty in power. Here the Godly die young desired and lamented, and in the
midst of their usefulness; and there their hoary head is a Crown of glory in
the ways of Righteousness. The least worthy and fit to live, as we are ready to
think, do often outlive their betters; and those of whom the World is not
worthy, a Josiah, the Baptist, a Stephen, are taken away young; lamented and
bewailed. Good Men are ready to call this without any Order, while they mourn
the early Deaths of the wise and prudent, the pious and godly, the useful and
profitable; and while they groan under the useless and hurtful prolonged Life
of the wicked.

3. DEATH seems not to regard any Political or Civil Order among Men, in its
approaches to one and another. It regards no Distinction, Rank, or Degree of
Men, in State or Church. The Noble and Ignoble, the Lord or the Slave, the
Master and the Servant, are treated just alike by Death. There is no Precedence
kept to. The Prince does not go first here, and his Nobles next; nor do they
affect or desire it.

If the first in Quality and Rank were first to die, 'twould spoil all the
Order and State and Glory of the World that now is; and turn it upside down.
Crowns would grow cheap, and Men would shun the Honors they now court and
pride in. The Order that Courts and Parliaments would be ready to make, if they
had power to Enact about the Time of Death, would be for the poor and low to go
to the Grave before their Superiors. But Riches profit not, nor Dignity and
Power, in the day of Death. None of 'em can by any means deliver Himself, nor
redeem his Brother. Princes die young, in the midst of all their Bloom and
Hopes, or of their Fame and Glory; and Peasants live old in their low and
homely Cottages. This is without any Order, in the account and eye of this
World.

BUT this for the Time of Death's coming to one and another, without any Order.

2. As to the Manner and Circumstances of one and another dying, Death keeps
to no Order. The rich and the poor, the high and the low, the Parent and the
Child, the young and the old, the Friend and the Enemy, they die alike; or
quite differing one from the other: some a natural Death, some a violent, or by
evil Accidents. The moral Characters of Persons are no security here, All
things come alike to all, there is one Event to the righteous and to the
wicked, to the clean and to the unclean; as is the good so is the sinner, Eccl.
9.2. The Sons of Job, and those of Aaron were struck dead, as well as Onan and
Ananias in their Sin. The same Fevers or Dropsies, the same Consumptions, or
the same Stupors and Lethargies, seize and carry off one and another. The same
Pains and Torments rend and tear Persons of the most different Characters;
whether on worldly Accounts, or on moral and religious. And the same noisome
Diseases corrupt the Bodies, and destroy the Lives of Saints and Sinners; of
Lazarus and of Herod. The hard and the easy Death, is common to good and bad,
young and old, rich or poor, Parent and Offspring. Queens in their Palaces and
fine linen, and Beggars on the dunghill and in their rags, die of the same
Sores and Ulcers. Kings die by evil Accidents, and by the hand of Violence, as
well as others; and one as well as another prolong their days and die in their
nest.

ONLY let us except here the last and utmost Disorder in Death, the dying as a
fool dies, wickedly and wilfully by his own hands, or impiously in brutal
DUELS; which is but another way of SELF-MURDER. These unnatural and detested
ways of dying are not to be named or supposed, when we speak of the Manner and
Circumstances of one and another Death. Let these be proper for the impious
and ungodly, and to them alone if you will, and out of the present Argument, as
they ought not to be once named in the World; how common soever they have been
in it.

BUT this for the first Proposition: Death seems not to observe and keep any
Rule or Order in its taking away one and another, whether we consider the Time
or Manner of its coming.

PROP. II. THE visible State of the dead, that is, the Grave, is without any
Order.

AND this seems to be the meaning of the Text, A land of darkness as darkness
it self, without any Order. But here we speak only of the visible State of the
dead, not of the invisible.

FOR if we look by Faith into the invisible World and State, there we behold
the most perfect and glorious Order. The good and the bad, the godly and the
wicked are in their proper place; Judas in his, and the repenting Thief (through
Grace) in his; namely the Paradise of CHRIST prepared for Penitents from the
foundation of the World. The Servants of Sin and of Satan deceased, are gone
accursed into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, but the
Dead in CHRIST are in the Mansions in the FATHER'S House. This is most exact
Order, without respect of Persons, every Man according to his Works; the
degrees of Reward and Punishment bearing a just Proportion to the degree, of
Grace and labors of Love, and to the measures and degrees of Sin and
Wickedness done in the Body. This is the bright and shining Order in the unseen
and eternal State: Matthew. 25. ult. These shall go away into everlasting
Punishment, but the Righteous into Life eternal. Dan. 12.2, 3. And many of them
that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, some to everlasting Life, and
some to Shame and everlasting Contempt: And they that be Wise shall shine as
the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever.

BUT if we look, with these mortal Eyes, into the visible State of the dead,
both the godly and ungodly, it it is altogether without any Order. All go to
one place, and all ly mixed and confused there. All turn to dust again, and ones
dust has no Pre-eminence to sight and sense above another, no Distinction from
the others: Alike do they sleep in the dust, and are covered in darkness.

INDEED a Gravestone may here and there inform you whose Body was laid in this
place, and whose in that; that this was once Noble or Royal, and that vulgar
and common, but take away the Monument and no appearance remains of Family and
Blood, nor of Order civil or sacred among the dead. There Kings and Counselors
of the Earthly in their desolate Places, and there lies the hidden and untimely
Birth, that never faw the light: There lies the Tyrant and Oppressor, and there
his Prisoners are at rest together by him: The small and the great are there,
and the servant is free from his master, Job 3.18, 19. There ly the Ashes of
the wise, the learned, the virtuous and religious, and there the fool and
brutish Person, that had neither Head nor Heart for any thing great and good,
Like Sheep they are laid in the Grave, Death feeds on them, and the Worm is the
only Relative that remains to them.

YET again, The Order of the Universe ceases in the Grave. There is neither
Light nor Darkness, Heat or Cold, Day or Night, Summer or Winter known there.
There is no Knowledge, Work or Device the^^, no Good or Evil, Joy or Sorrow
done or felt there: Neither is there Friendship or Enmity, Love or Hatred
there. Eccl. 9.5, 6. The dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a
Reward, also their Love and their Hatred and their Envy is perished; neither
have they any more a Portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun.

Finally, THERE is no religious Order in the Grave; no not in the Tomb of
Abraham, and among the bodies of the Just. There is no Worship, no Praise or
Prayer, in that place of silence no Sabbath there, though a continual Rest and
quiet. This was the Darkness and Disorder of the Grave to the pious King, Isa.
38. I said in the cutting off my days, I shall no more see the LORD even the
LORD, in the land of the living; I shall behold Man no more with the
Inhabitants of the Earth: -- For the Grave cannot praise thee, Death cannot
celebrate thee, they that go down to the Pit cannot hope for thy Truth: The
Living, the living he shall praise thee, as I do this day; the Father to the
Children shall make known thy Truth.

WORSHIP is the holy Order and Beauty both of this World and of that to come:
This therefore is the Darkness of the Grave, that there is nothing of this holy
Order in it, the Beauty of Holiness: Psalm 30.9. When I go down to the Pit,
shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy Truth? Psalm. 115. ust. The
dead praise not the LORD, neither any that go down into silence; but we will
bless the LORD from this time forth and for evermore.

WE have looked thus into the visible State of the dead, and we find it without
any Order; without Sun or Stars, Sense or Motion, Relation or Condition,
Worship or Sabbath.

I come now to make some USE and IMPROVEMENT of this Meditation. And if this be
one point in the Darkness of Death, that it is without any Order?

First then, We see something very valuable in the Land of the living, and that
is Order; and we learn, on the contrary, that next to Death is Disorder and
Confusion.

THE Beauty of the Universe, of the natural and moral World, the Usefulness of
things in it and the Felicity of the Creatures, depend upon the excellent Order
that GOD has constituted. The LORD is a GOD of Order. His Works declare it, his
Word and Law prescribe and require it. Decency and Order go together, and so do
Order and Right. Every thing is beautiful and right in its time and order.

WHAT was the Work of Creation? but GOD'S bringing the Heavens and Earth into
that beauteous and useful Order which we behold, out of a Chaos and State of
Confusion? Genesis 1.2. And the Earth was without form and void, and Darkness was
upon the face of it: And the SPIRIT of GOD moved upon the face of the Waters:
And GOD said, Let there be Light, and there was Light: -- And GOD divided the
Light from the Darkness, and GOD called the light Day, and the darkness He
called Night: And GOD said, Let there be a Firmament, and Lights therein, and
let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for Days and for Years. Thus ORDER
was the glorious Work of GOD in the beginning, and by it all things consist:
the Sun and Moon and Stars, in their various Distances, Magnitude, Motions,
Influences and Benefits, are bright and shining Instances of glorious Order.
Their Line is gone through all the Earth, and their Words to the End of the World.

AMONG Men on Earth, GOD has appointed Rule and Order, and made them necessary
to our comfort and safety, in private and in public Society. Family Order is
the foundation of our Peace and Welfare, of good Nei'bourhood, of Justice and
Righteousness, of Brotherly-kindness and Charity; of civil Government and of
joint public Worship.

THE whole Law of GOD to us is comprehended in this one word Order; prescribing
first our orderly Subjection and Behavior toward GOD, and then to one another
in our several places and Relations; as Superiors, Inseriors and Equals.

IT is ORDER that requires Children to honor their Father and Mother, which is
the first Commandment with Promise. Order teaches them to rise up before the
hoary Head, and to honor the Face of the Old Man. Order teaches Servants to
obey their Masters according to the flesh, and Masters to give unto their
Servants that which is just and equal. Order teaches Men to do Justice, to love
Mercy, and to live Soberly, and Righteously; and whatsoever we would that Men
should do unto us, to do the same unto them. Order teaches every Soul to be
subject to the higher Powers, to obey Magistrates, and to be ready unto every
good Work. And Order teaches Rulers to be just Men, ruling in the Fear of the
LORD. Order teaches all Christians to know them that have the Rule over them in
Things sacred, and to submit themselves as unto them that watch for their
Souls: The younger likewise that they submit themselves unto the Elder; yea all
of us to be subject one to another, and to be clothed with Humility. For GOD is
not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, in all the Churches of the Saints
Ephesians. vi. 2. Lev. xix 32. Col. iii. 22. Titus ii. 9 Micah vi. 8. Mat. vii. 12. 1
Cor. xiii. 1. Titus iii. 1 2 Samuel xxiii. 3. Heb. xiii. 7, 17. 1 Pet. v. 5. 1
Cor. xiv. 33
. Thus Order is of GOD, and is the fulfilling of his Law, the Rule of a
religious and godly Life.

BUT next to Death, or worse than Death is Disorder and Confusion. All the
Misery of Man, both in this Life and in that which is to come, comes of it. If
subverts Families, Schools, civil Government, and all Religion. This was the
State of the old World before the Flood, and it was high time for the end of
all Flesh to come. Order required their Destruction, and the bringing on a new
World. This was Sodom's wretched State; they were past all Order, Decency and
Right; and it was time they were burnt up. And Jerusalem was come to the like
Crisis, as Josephus reports, before their last Ruin. The Seditions and Strifes
within were worse upon them, than the Arms of the Romans from without. I may
add, That even Hell it self is forced to submit to some Order; For if Satan
cast out Satan, and be divided against himself, how should his Kingdom stand?
So Pirates and Robbers, that band together by Sea or Land, declaring against
all Order and Law of GOD or Man, yet are forced to make and observe Orders of
their own, for their Preservation and Strength.

DISORDER is as much the Misery and Ruin as it is the Deformity of Societies,
private or public, civil or religious. It is as a broken Bone, or a Limb out
of joint, which renders the Body useless, as well as fills it with Pain and
Dolor. Or suppose a Body without a Head, or without Eyes, Hands or Feet, or
these inverted and out of place; such is Disorder in Society.

WE should be very thankful therefore for the Order that there is in the World,
as being the wise and good Establishment of GOD for our present and future
Well-being: And we should be very careful to preserve it in our places, and to
do what we can to promote it every where. Psalm. 34.14. Depart from Evil and do
Good, seek Peace and pursue it.

LET us reverence and prize the good GOVERNMENT over us, and all the good
Orders and Laws enacted for the Defense and Security of our common Peace,
Rights and Properties. Let us be very thankful to GOD for the heavenly Rules
and Benefits of Church Order, established by GOD for our spiritual and
everlasting Good. See Ephesians. 4.I, -- 16. And let all the blessed Precepts
respecting Family and School Order, and a good Conversation in CHRIST, be
regarded by us with like religious Esteem. Let us study to be quiet, and to do
our own Business. Let us render to all their Dues; Honor to whom honor is
due, Fear to whom fear, Tribute to whom tribute. And owe no Man any thing, but
to love one another I These. iv. 11. Romans xiii. 7, 8.
.

I might go on and observe to you the dreadful Punishment of Sin, in all the
Disorders and Confusions which it has bro't upon Mankind in this wretched and
mortal State; on Persons, on Families, on Provinces and Kingdoms; as by Deaths
common and uncommon, so by the great Transgressions that do often bring on
strange and tragical Ends.

I had though it also to call on sober and thinking Persons, as well as on the vain
and inconsiderate and irreligious, to expect, fear and prepare for unknown and
innumerable Disorders and Disasters in such a World as this is; and sometimes
for things worse than Death, which come upon one Family and other without any
Order observable to Man; and how often in the most surprising and amazing
manner.

O that old and young, high and low, rich and poor together, would consider
seriously of the Truth before us and prepare to die, ( without any Order, shall
I say?) not knowing the Time or Manner of their End! We may well be dumb with
silence this day, and hold our peace, even from good, and our sorrow be
stirred. Well may our Heart wax hot within us, and while we are musing the Fire
burn; and we speak with our Tongue, "Lord, make me to know my End, and the
measure of my days, what it is; that I may know how frail I am!

AND O that mortal Men would not value themselves, and much less vainly build
on any worldly Order, which Death forbids them to do, and Satan beguiles them
into! For what outward Circumstance is there in this World, or indeed what
state of Grace it self, that can give any Security against the sudden-Arrests
of Death? or against Sorrows and Calamities more bitter than that? Let the
Godly look on themselves as liable every Day, to every kind and manner of
Bereavement; or for living Sorrows more killing and lasting than those which
mere Death has in his power to inflict.

BUT at the same time let the Godly remember for their Comfort, that the
Resurrection-Day will bring all things into Order again. That Day of the
Restitution of all things, will put an End to all the Disorders that Sin and
Death have bro't into the World. -- Indeed the Confusion of the wicked will be
great in that glorious Day, their Fear and Shame and Anguish of heart; and they
would rather still have been in all the disorder of the Grave: But this will
not at all hinder the shining Order of the illustrious Day. For the SON OF MAN
will come in his Glory, with all his holy Angels; then shall He sit upon the
Throne of his Glory! And before Him shall be gathered all Nations; and He will
separate them as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats; and then shall
the KING say unto them on his right Hand, Come ye blessed of my FATHER, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World.

O in what solemn glorious Order will the Godly and ungodly then appear before
the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, and about his Throne! See the Glory and read the
Order: St. Jude v. 14, 15. Behold the LORD comes with ten thousand of his
Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly of
their Deeds and hard Speeches. Dan. 7. 9, 10. I beheld till the Thrones were
cast down, and the ANCIENT OF DAYS did sit, whose Garment was white as Snow,
and the Hair of his Head like the pure Wool: His Throne was like the fiery
Flame, and his Wheels as burning Fire: A fiery stream issued and came forth
before Him: Thousand thousands ministered unto Him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before Him: the Judgment was set and the Books were opened. Once
more read the ORDER and the GLORY: Rev. 20.11, -- 15. I saw a great white
Throne, and Him that sat on it, from whose Face the Earth and the Heaven fled
away: And I saw the Dead small and great stand before GOD, and the Books were
opened, and the Dead were judged, according to their Works: And Death and Hell
were cast into the Lake of Fire: This is the second Death.

AFTER this manner I might probably have ended my Discourse; leading the Godly
into the New Heavens wherein shall dwell Righteousness, Peace, Purity and
perfect Order, and leaving the wicked in their place of everlasting-Misery,
disorder and Confusion; Where there is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of
Teeth.

BUT the sad and dismal DISORDER, which the righteous GOD permitted to fall out
among us the last Week, horrible to mention, and to be bewailed with Tears of
blood, leads me into a more particular Address unto our Young People, and to
their Elders with them; that the like abominable and detestable Disorder may
never again be heard of among us, by the Will of GOD.

SEE, see my beloved Hearers, a criminal Disorder big with the most heinous
Guilt, and tragical Death! See the hasty and cursed Fruit of criminal
Disorders, in the double Murder of a late hopeful and promising Youth, who was
heretofore of Us, a Child of great Expectation; but he went out from us, and
ran himself into the Paths of the Destroyer and an untimely Death. See what a
disorderly Conduct may presently bring the most sober, discreet and well
tempered of our Children to; if as they grow up they abandon the good Rules and
orderly Ways of Virtue and Piety, wherein they have been educated and
instituted by their good Parents and Guardians, and run themselves into the
Corruptions that are in the World through lust.

LET me therefore take this sad Occasion with a heavy Heart, to warn our Young
People in the Name and Fear of GOD, against bloody and unnatural DUELS and all
the train of vicious Courses that lead to it; to a miserable End here, and to a
fiery Hell for ever.

DUELS are the Devil all over, who was the Murderer from the beginning; and as
they come of him, so they represent him to the life, in all his Disobedience
and Enmity to GOD, and in all his Pride, Rage, and bloody Hatred of the life of
Man. Duels are both kinds of Murder united: There Is the Murder of a Man's Self
in it, and the Murder of his Nei'bour also: And alas! as there is the Murder of
the Body in it, so of the Soul also. In every Duel Men fly in the face of GOD,
the Lord of Life, the GOD of the Spirits of all Flesh, the GOD in whose hand
our Breath is; and who has given no Man power over his own Life, no more than
leave to Kill his Nei'bour; but has forbid both on pain of the greatest
Damnation.

BUT I hope I need not use many words to give our Young People horror at the
Though It of this Crime; the Tragedy of the last week will of it self do this, I
trust. Let me therefore rather warn them, of those ungodly Lusts and brutal
devilish Vices, which lead Men into furious DUELS: And as you would shun the
Effect, dread the fatal Causes.

AND first, Drinking. Few of our People are like to fall into any such Crime,
as DUELS, till they have debauched themselves with drinking Companions. Wine is
a Mocker, strong Drink is raging; as Solomon admonishes us: And in the wisdom
of GOD he cautions and exhorts the young Man; Prove. 23.19, 20, 29. Hear thou,
my son, and be wise, and guide thine Heart in the way: Be not among
Wine-bibbers, among riotous Eaters of Flesh: For who has woe? who has sorrow?
who has Contentions? who has Bablings? who Wounds without cause? they that
tarry long at the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Drink.

CHILDREN, Beware of forming your selves into nightly or daily Tavern-clubs; or
even into such weekly or monthly Societies, for meeting and spending your
Evenings in drinking together and gaming; whether at home or abroad. It is not
for you, our Sons, no it is not for you, to drink wine and strong drink; lest
you drink and forget the Law and Covenant of the LORD your GOD, and run into
every excess and riot. Give the strong Drink to him that is ready to perish,
and the wine to them that be of heavy Hearts.

GAMING and Wine incite and inflame to Duels. So it was in the late lamented
Calamity. What a hideous Story is it? for Children that are beginning the
World, it may be before they have fifty or sixty Pounds to show of their own
getting, by the favor of GOD in a lawful and industrious way; to raffle away
such a Sum in a loose and careless Night! No account can be given for such a
piece of Distraction, if the Bottle did not stand by and first take away the
Sense and Reason. And then the Passion rises at the Loss, before or after the
Wine is out, and the inward Vexation produces fierce Words, foul Names, Cursing
and Bitterness, Hatred and Revenge, and the Heat ends in one another's Blood.

WILL you not say, my Son! Come not into their Company O my Soul, for in their
Rage they slew a Man. It is the play of Abner, (only they were Enemies in open
War) when he said to Joab, Let the young Men arise to play before us, twelve
against twelve, and they caught every one his Fellow by the head, and thrust
his Sword into his Fellows side, and fell down together. Such Murderous Fellows
and Companions are Gamesters like to prove, if GOD restrain not the Devil from
a full Possession of them.

SAY not, foolish Child, There is no such danger from us and our Gaming
together: Why not as much as there is found to have been in the late bloody
Game that has put the Town in Mourning? Leave off Strife, and so Drinking and
Gaming, before it be meddled with; which is Solomon's advice; meaning that we
never begin or venture on in such Courses, whereof we know not the End, and
think not the Tendency of them.

LEWDNESS often accompanies the Glass and the Game. The harlot's House may be
the place of the Game; and her House takes hold of Hell, and leads down to the
Chambers of Death. Duels have often been fought in the cause of a Strumpet, and
Blood has been often shed and Lives sacrificed to the fury of Lust. Prove. 2.28.
Her House inclines unto Death, and her Paths unto the dead. 5.4. Her End is
bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a two edged SWORD; her feet go down to Death, her
steps take hold of Hell. 7.25. She has cast down many wounded, and strong Men
have been SLAIN by her.

IN a word, As you would avoid Duels and Bloodshed, shun Drinking, shun Gaming,
beware of Drunkenness and Whordom, beware of Pride and Haughtiness, beware of
Passion, beware of Swearing and Cursing and profane speaking, and beware of
Sabbath-breaking, which insensibly betrays Men into one violent Way and End and
another, as many have confessed at the Gallows: Beware also of the Contempt of
Superiors, and of breaking loose from the Admonitions and Restraints of your
wise and loving Parents: For the Eye that mocketh at his Father and refuses to
obey his Mother, the Ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young
Eagles shall eat it.

IN an especial manner, Let the Sons of this Country, and of these Churches
beware of these Sins of Sabbath-breaking, and of Disobedience to Parents, and
of forsaking the good Ways and Principles wherein they have been educated and
institured, either in point of Doctrine, Worship or Manners. Let them beware of
forsaking the Guide of their Youth, and of fogetting the Covenant of their GOD,
lest Strangers devour them, and they give their Years to the cruel. It is a
dreadful word of GOD to the Children of his People, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. If thou seek
him he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him He will cast thee off for
ever.

YOU see Children this day, what comes of leaving these Chruches after an
Education in them: Even Duelling and Bloodshed and Flight from Country and
Friends, may come of bursting the Bonds of GOD asunder, and going after
Strangers, and into the Manners, Customs and impious Maxims of the World.

RETURN, distracted and besotted Children! return and save your selves from
this untoward Generation. Forsake the foolish and live, and walk in the way of
Understanding. The ways of Sin are nothing but Disorder and Misery, the way of
Godliness, Righteousness and Sobriety is the Way of Order, Safety and Felicity.
Let Wisdom enter into thy Heart, and Knowledge be pleasant to thy Soul;
Discretion shall preserve thee, Understanding shall keep thee: To deliver thee
frow the way of the evil Man, from the Man that speaks froward things, who
leave the paths of Uprightness, to walk in the ways of Darkness; whose ways are
crooked, and they are froward in their Paths.

LET Solomon tell you the Tendency of wicked Company unto Bloodshed: Prove.
1.10, -- 19. My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not: -- Their seet
run to Evil, and make haste to shed Blood: -- They lay wait for their own
Blood, they lurk privily for their own Lives: so are the ways of every one
that is greedy of Gain, which takes away the Life of the Owners thereof.

I turn me now to the Elders of my People, to Parents and Masters, and the
worshipful Justices of the Peace; and also to the Keepers of Public Houses; in
a few words.

LET Parents carefully educate and instruct and charge their Children, restrain
and govern them, rebuke and correct what is Evil in them, and encourage them in
what is virtuous and pious and praise worthy. Make'em to know that they depend
upon you, and ought to submit unto you in the LORD; and must do so if they will
have your Favor, Countenance and open Hand. While the Mother adjures them from
evil Companions, What, my Son! and what the Son of my Womb! and what, the Son
of my Vows! Let the Father command and forbid them on pain of his highest
Displeasure, and on pain of GOD'S, which is infinitely greater.

INDULGE not their Vanity and Corruption in seeking to feed as Lambs in a large
Place, which is the first step to their running wild into the Woods, to be
devoured there by the Beasts of Prey. Have no hand, no not by criminal Easiness
and Gentleness, like Eli, in their making themselves vile; lest GOD be provoked
to judge both You and them. Have no hand (shall I say) in their Blood; that of
their Bodies, nor that of their Souls: But if they will come unto dreadful
Ends, let their Blood be upon their own heads.

TWO things let me beseech of Parents and Heads of Families: One is that they
frequent not Taverns themselves, which will certainly encourage your Sons to do
the like, while they want your Years and Prudence whereby to govern themselves
in such a Liberty. The other thing I would entreat is, Not to suffer Cards or
Dice in your Houses, nor take the liberty to play those insnaring and
Enchanting Games before your Children. You will herein consult the good Order,
Virtue and Religion of your Households, your Happiness in your Children, their
Preservation from and through an evil World, and your own Peace living and dying.

BUT from private Houses let me step into those that are public, and drop a
Word of Counsel and Warning to the Inn and Tavern Keepers. We beseech You not
to suffer Persons or Companies to sit idling, tippling and much less gaming and
carousing in your Houses. You know the Laws of GOD, and good Orders of Men in
this Case; but if you escape the Cognizance of the Magistrate and Officers of
our Peace, you cannot escape the Notice and Judgment of GOD. May the Blood of
dissolute Youths never come upon any of your Houses, by your indulging them in
evil and forbidden Practices, and at forbidden Hours. It calls for a great deal
more Virtue, Courage and Prudence, to keep a Tavern well, then we are ready to
think of.

BUT the Care of public Houses belongs also to the MAGISTRATES, Justices and
Officers in the Town, to whose Wisdom and Prudence, Integrity and Fidelity, I
commend it in the Fear of GOD. The Earth and all the Inhabitants of it would
dissolve, if good Rulers did not in their Legislative and Executive Power, hold
up the Pillars thereof. Let it strengthen your Hands to know, that you are
ministering to the Honor of GOD and the good Order of the World; the common
Happiness and Peace of Mankind.

LET the Wicked be afraid of the POWER; for He bears not the Sword in vain;
but is the Minister of GOD, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does
Evil. But let the lovers of Peace and Right and Order reverence and love the
POWERS which GOD has ordained; For Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but
to the evil: Do that which is Good and thou shall have praise of the same.
Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience
sake.

FINIS.

