A Just and Impartial ACCOUNT OF THE TRANSACTIONS OF THE Merchants in LONDON,
FOR THE Advancement of the Price of TOBACCO.

About the latter End of the Year 1727, and Beginning of 1728.

By HENRY DARNALL. Who was present at most of them.

IN A LETTER FROM HIM, To the Inhabitant, of MARYLAND Dated September 18, 1728.

ANNAPOLIS Printed and Sold by W. Parks.

A just Account of the Transactions of the Merchants, for the Advancement of
the Tobacco-Trade, etc.
Gentlemen, Sept. 18. 1728.
I AM fully persuaded, that I cannot furnish my Friends and Countrymen with a
more agreeable Entertainment, than in acquainting them with what was done by
the Merchants in London, who tr^de to Maryland and Virginia, whilst I stayed
there, for the Relief of our most deplorable Trade. And, as the only effectual
Means to communicate to the Public a just and impartial Account of those
Transactions, is, to have Recourse to the PRESS, I have therefore taken this
Method to inf^rm them, that (upon a due Consideration of the melancholy St^te
of our Trade) I thought I could not better employ my Time, for the Service of
my Country, my Self, and Posterity, than by using my utmost Endeavors to bring
the Merchants there, to frequent Meetings together, in order to consider of
some Means for our Relief, which I was the more induced to attempt, as I was
well ass^red from the Gentlemen themselves, that one of the chief Causes of the
melancholy St^te of our Trade, was owing to their Disagreem^nt am^ngst
themselves. Therefore, I took some (...) to preva^l with them, to unite
themsel^es into a (...) and to act in Concert for the future* And though those
Endeavors were attended with some Difficulties, which were chiefly occasioned
by the Diffidence they had in one another; (for which they all complained there
was too much Reason, from the Experience of their former Meetings, when the
Measures then concerted, and Agreements made, were continually broke through,
whereby those who intented honestly to keep them were the Sufferers, and the
Trangressors not only run away with the present Advantage there, but also with
the Applause and Encouragement from hence) Yet, as this seemed to be the chief
Objection, it was at length removed, by representing to them the Necessity they
were under, to make one more Experiment, in hopes that Agreements would now be
better kept than they have been heretofore; or that such Persons who would not
come into, or bre^k Measures, after they had agreed to them, would certainly be
here distinguished, and thereby occasion them to suffer in their Interest: But
above all, by the assiduous Endeavors of Mr. John Falconar, who seconded my
Attempt very vigorously, and took true Pains to get them together, which was at
length effected; and, upon the Seventh Day of March last, I had the Pleasure to
b^ present with all the Gentlemen in our Trade* (excepting Two or Thre^ that
were either out of Town* or out of Order) When the first Thing agreed upon,
was, a Resolution to have regular and constant Meetings once every Month; after
That was concluded, They came to a Resolution to continue the former Charge of
3 Pence per Hogshead, and to have all Arrears of that Charge duly collected,
which had been for some Time neglected and omitted. This Fu^d was generally
agreed on to be the B^sis and Support of their U^ion, not only as it was
necessary to defray their own Expenses, as a Society at these Meetings, but
also to raise a Fund to en^ble them at any Time to make Application to the
Parliament, when they shall think it necessary, for the Good of our Trade.
Af^^^ this was agreed on, Mr. Falconar was called upon, t^ declare what it was
he had to lay before them, since it was at his Instance they were met: He
answered That he had much to say; but, that he though it more regular to
appoint a Committee of Six o^ the Mar^land, and Six of the Virginia Merchants,
t^ meet between that and the next General Meeting to consult and make a Report
of their Thoughts, as well in relation to the Evils they apprehended the Trade
to labor under, and the Remedies that occurred to them necessary for its
Relief; as upon some Rules for their own Regulation, as a Body or Society.
Which Proposal was agreed to, and the following Gentlemen were appointed to be
of that Committee, viz. For Maryland.
Mess. Samuel Hyde. Robert Cruckshanks. I^seph Adams. John Handbury. William
Hunt. John Falconar.
For Virginia.
Micajah Perry. Edward Randolph. Humphry Bell. Jeremiah Quare. James Pradly.
Thomas Hyam.


THIS Committee met upon the 13th of March, when Mr. Falconar laid the
following Representation before them:

A COPY of the Representation, delivered in Writing by John Falconar, the 13th
of March, 1727-8, to the Committee, appointed by a General Meeting of the
Merchants, trading to Virginia and Maryland, to take into their Consideration
the State of the Tobacco-Trade; and to report their Opinion thereon, to the
General Meeting.
THE General Meeting of the 7 th Current, having been unanimously of O^inion
the Trade was in a bad Condition, and having (...) ^^nsider of W^ys and Means
(...) to put my Thoughts in Writing, which I now offer to the Committee, for
their Correction, Approbation or Rejection; which Last shall not at all
displease me. I aim at nothing but the Good of the Trade in general, in which
every Man's particular Good is included: Therefore, if the End aimed at be but
obtained, I shall be very Thankful to any Gentleman, for communicating his
Thoughts, though never so different from mine: So without farther Apology will
come to my Matter.

IT is well known to us all, that the chief Cause of the Depression of the
Trade, is from the great Ascendant the French Agent has got over us, which
Ascendant is very natural; For, he being but One, and so very considerable a
Buyer, must have a great Advantage over so many Sellers, acting without any
manner of Consultation, or Agreement among our selves: Whereas, did we act in
Concert, we might make our selves equal to him, and so keep up Tobacco at a
living Pri^^, which is all I aim at. I am by no Means for running up Tobacco to
an extravagant Price, or any other Way discouraging the French Trade, which is
a valuable Consumption, and ought to be encouraged; but then it ought to be
upon such Terms as the Planters and Others concerned, may live by their Labor;
which of late Years we know they have not done, and all along with the French
Agents* who, every one of them, in their turns, have been (properly speaking)
Sellers as well as Bavers: It has not been what Price we pleased, but They that
have set the Price, and we could not help our selves, which has been of the
worse Consequence, because all other Buyers govern themselves by what Price the
French Agent gives; so that the good or ill Fortune of the Trade, depends
altogether upon what Measures we take with the French. (...) the T^^de of
Fran^e is in a Company, and (...) what Price they please upon what they sell to
their own People, or rather have a fixed Price, from which they do not vary,
let them buy Tobacco here never so cheap; and as they constantly employ but one
Agent at one Time, I think we might fall into a Method, so to incorporate our
selves, as to treat as one Man with that Agent, for fixing the Price for such a
Time as may be thought convenient; and so from Time to Time, to rise or fall
the Price as the Circumstances of the Trade may require; which I wish to be
done with all Civility, by Way of Contract, with the French Agent, by a
Committee of the Trade specially appointed for that Purpose, at a General
Meeting: And when the Time contracted for, is expired, or near expiring, then
the same (or a new Committee) may be appointed, after Consultation in the
General Meeting, to renew the old, or make a new Contract, according to what
shall be agreed upon by a Majority in the General Meeting. I cannot but think
the French Agent, would willingly come into such a Method, as it would make
Things easy to him; and being done by Treaty with himself, will not look like
Compulsion: As the Price will then be fixed and known, every Body will far^
alike, and the French Gentleman will then have nothing to do, but please
himself with the Quality of the Tobacco.

THIS Agreement I think ought only to be for James River Tobacco, which is
almost only proper for the French Market, and such Part of Maryland Tobacco as
is likewise proper for the French Market.

AS for all other Sorts of Or^^n^ko Tobacco, I think the Price cannot be fixed
other, than that I think some certain Price ought to be fixed for a certain
Time; within which Time, no Tobacco, even the worst of Scrubs, should be sold
under that Price: Not that I suppose we may obtain such a Price for ordinary
Scrubs; but I think it will be the Interest of the Trade to have a Price fixed,
below which, no Tobacco shall be sold, without Consent of a General Meeting.

I do not think it reasonable to attempt debarring the French Agent from Buying
whole Ships Loads, or any Pa^cel of Tobacco, not proper for the French Trade*
in that he ought to have his Liberty equal with other Buyers.

BUT I think 'twill absolutely be our Interest to Sort our Tobacco; and what is
specially proper for the French Consumption, not to sell that under the Price
contracted for with the French Agent: If he will buy other Sortments, the Price
must be governed by what other Buyers will give; only remembering to sell no
Tobacco under the Price fixed for Scrubs.

HAVING now spoke my Mind, as to what is proper to be done respecting the
French, shall come to what immediately respects our selves, as a Society; in
which I am in some Measure prevented by the good Harmony that appeared at last
General Meeting, in which Meeting a Foundation was laid for (I hope) a good
Understanding in Future, by agreeing upon Four Fundamentals, to a regular
Society, viz.

I. THAT there shall be a General Meeting of all the Trade, once in every
Month, therein to consult upon what may concern the Trade. I am glad so
commendable a Method is revived, and shall be heartily glad it may never more
be discontinued: The only Seeing and Conversing with one another, may be of
Advantage; but more Benefits may be expected from the collective Body of the
Trade, will they agree upon some certain Rules to proceed by.

ONE of the Chief, I think to be, That all Matters in Debate, be decided by a
Majority of Voices; without that, we shall be a mere P^lish Diet, which seldom
e^ds but in Confusion: A b^re Majority may be thought too strict, but I am
content so a Majority do but decide how the Majority be limited, whether to two
Thirds, or three Quarters of the Whole; and sure if so great a Part should be
of one Mind, the remaining Third or Quarter, will acquiesce, so far as
passively, to comply with what shall be determined.

BUT if some particular Members will not agree, neither actively nor passively,
or after Agreement shall break through Engagements. I would not have that disolve
the General Agreement, but that the Majority may still keep together, true to
their Engagements one to another: If that could be accomplished, I am of
Opinion the Refractory would in Time see their Error, and find it their
Interest to join themselves to the Body; for, in Time, the Majority will
certainly gain the Victory, and govern the Trade.

BUT if some Particulars, for private Interest, or Humor, will not come into
Society, or break Agreements after made, I think the Majority should, in
Justice to themselves and their Employers, acquaint the Gentlemen of Virginia
and Maryland what they have done, and intended to do, for Advancement of the
Trade; but that they are obstructed by such and such, (mentioning the F^cts,)
and desiring their Assistance to prevail with such Persons to join with the
Generality: Our Principals are so sensible what they have suffered by our
Disagreement, that I make no doubt they will find out better Methods than we
can, to make us Unanimous. As I would have This one of the Preliminaries of our
Settlement, as well as carrying by Majority of Voices, no (...) can* in reason,
be offended; because, if the Committee be of Opinion to report to the
Generality these Two Particulars to be a proper Foundation of Society, and the
s^m^ be agreed to by the Generality, then it will be a Law of every Body's
making; and so no Person ought to find Fault with what they themselves have
assented to.

II. THE second Thing agreed to at last Meeting, was, The Continuing Three
Pence per Hogshead on all Tobacco, which I very much approve of* without such a
Fund we shall not be able to defend our selves against many Encroachments, or
Hardships, that may be offered (as in Times past) to be afresh put upon the
Trade: That Duty has been a Means of uniting us so, as to ward off Foreign
Evils that affected us only in common with our Fellow Subjects; but
henceforward I hope a Part of that Duty will be employed so, as to ward off
Evils immediately relating to our selves, by begetting a friendly Acquaintance
and Society, toward which, Monthly Meetings will very much conduce.

AND therefore I propose Two or Three Guineas be appropriated to defray the
Charge of each Monthly Meeting: And, supposing so much may not be actually
spent at each Meeting, I wish all the Savings may be kept distinct by it self;
and when it amounts to a Sum sufficient, may be bestowed upon a Dinner, once or
twice a Year, for the whole Trade. What I am at by this, is to beget a good
Friendship and Harmony among the Merchants; which Eating together, does more
often produce among Mankind, than bare Drinking.

III. THE third Thing agreed at last Meeting, was, Continuing our Treasurer,
Alderman Perry, than whom I think we cannot have a better.

IV. THE Fourth was Confirming the former Managers, and filling up the Number
to Twelve in all. This I think is a very good Part toward a regular Society,
(...) they are a Control upon the Treasurer, for all (...) expended, and are a
sort of Guardians for the Trade, to watch against all Foreign Attacks.

BUT, in my Opinion, they may be made still more useful, were they appointed to
take the immediate Care of the Trade into their Thoughts: And, for that and, to
have fixed Meeting^ every Fortnight, between the Monthly Meeting, and so make
Report to the General Meeting, and their Expenses to be allowed* so that the
some do not exceed one Guinea each Meeting, or Twelve Guineas per Annum; and
the Savings to be expended once or twice a Year in a Dinner for the M^nagers. I
am the more for Eating as well as Drinking, in our Society, in hopes
Conversation may unite us in Affection as well as in Interest, and then our
Work will be easy.

BUT, I am of Opinion, there is one Thing still wanting to cement us ^e^rer
together, and without which I am afraid we shall grow cool and negligent, as in
Times past: What I mean, is a proper Person for a Secretary, one that should be
a common Serv^nt to the Trade* and have a S^lary for so doing, paid out of the
Public Stock. I think we cannot employ our Money better, and such a Person may
h^ve full Employment; for I would have him attend ^ll M^etings of the Trade,
take Minutes, and keep the Records in good Method, he might collect the Three
Pence per Hogshead, and pay it to the Treasurer; and many other Things may fall
under his (...), some of them occuring to my present Thoughts I shall mention,
vi^.

I think he should keep an exact Account of all Tobacco imported into London,
and also of all Exports or Sales that (at a View) we may at any Time know what
Tobacco is at Market.

THE like I think we should have from all the Out-Ports in Grea^-Britain, which
may be obtained by settling a Correspondent in every Port, to transmit Accounts
thereof (by Post) to our Secretary, and he to record them in Books for that
Purpose, to be (...) before the Managers at their Meetings.

I think (...) also wo^ld be much for our Government, had we a Regist^r kept of
all Ships bound to Vir^inia and Maryland, with the Time of (...) Departure from
all the Out-Ports, as well as London, which may be transmitted to our Secretary.

BY knowing what Tobacco there is upon ^and at any Time, and the Number and
Burden of Ships gone out for the ensuing Year, we shall be enabled the better
to judge what Measures to take in respect to the Price.

WE might also settle a good Correspondency with the Merchants in the
Out-Ports, by communicating Thoughts and Advice, by Letters directed to each
Port, prepared by our Secretary, and Signed by some of the Managers, or by
their Direction, only by the Secretary, who must keep Copies of them* and all
Letters from the Out-Ports, to be directed to the Secretary, to be by him
communicated to the Managers.

I think we should, as a Body, settle a Correspondency with our Principals. I
know not how it is in Virginia, but in Maryland I am told there are settled
Clubs in every County, where they talk over Affairs. With these Clubs, I think
would be our mutual Interest to communicate Councils. I make no doubt what
Advice they should have from us, as a Body, would have a great Weight to
remedy many Evils we have long complained of, which only lies in Their Power
to cure; as, mending the Quality, and ^essening the Quantity of Tobacco, giving
the Ships better Disp^tch, and better Freight too; which I am hopeful they
would not begrudge, when they saw us so much in Earnest to adv^nce Tobacco, and
put the Trade upon such a Foot as they may live comfortably by their Labor. I
make no doubt when they feel the good Effects of our Agreement, they will think
it unreasonable we should be so great Sufferers by our Ship^ (...) we have been
of lat^ Years, which put nothing in their (...) it has taken ^ (...) of ours,
and chiefly by the unaccountable (...) extra^^g^nt Charge in (...): The (...)
been many Ways to their Detriment as (...) as our^, the Tobacco spoilt by
hanging so long in the House, damaged by coming home in the W^nter, as well
(...) the Ships tore to Pieces. Ships coming thus, all the Year round, is
enough to distract any Market, and has cost them themselves very dear in the
Sales, ^^om what they might have had in the Summer. I am jealous a great Part
of the Delay has proceeded from the ill Opinion our Principals in Maryland have
had of our Management at London: Therefore am in hopes, when they see us doing
all in our Power to retrieve Things, they will be-friend us, in giving the
Ships all Possible Dispatch, as well as a Frieght that will maintain the Ships,
which Seven Pounds per Ton will never do.

ANOTHER and main Advantage by such a Correspondency with the Clubs in Virgin^^
and Maryland, will be (...) among us at London: For, upon acquainting them of
such Persons that either will not come into, or break Agreements after m^de,
they will find an easy and natural Way to make such Persons sensible of their
Error; and, I think, nothing but Reason it should be so; for we are the
^epresentatives or Delegates of a great many Thousand People, whose Bread (or
at least a comfortable Livelihood) depends upon our good or bad Management. It
is a melancholy Consideration, how much Money has been lost to Virginia and
Maryland, by the low Price of Tobacco for some Years past; which, in a great
Measure is owing to our Disagreement.

I am not (...) many Objections may be made to what I now propose* As, That the
French will be out of Humor, and so go to the Out Ports for Tobacco, which
will give those Ports the Opportunity of cleaning their Hands, (...) burdened
with a Lord upon our Hands; I know (...) prove so: Even allowing that, I think
we should try the Expe^^me^^. I make no doubt, when the Gentlemen of the
Out-Ports find such a Demand come upon them, they will know how to make use of
it; and the more, that their To^acco is mostly their own Property.

BUT, on the other Side, we know the French cannot supply themselves at the
Out-Ports with the Quantity they want; nor in Quality equal to Tobacco at
London. But should they drain the Out-Ports, I fancy that would be an Advantage
to us, we shall in that Case have the Dutch Market all to our selves* which may
more than make us Amends. But as I do not propose ever to run Tobacco up to
very high Prices, I cannot see what should induce the French to desert London;
No, not for a Time. They can be served so well no where else.

BUT to provide against the worst (expecting a Stop may happen for a Time, and
may be inconvenient to some of our Number to keep their Tobacco looked up so
long,) I think 'twill be the public Interest to supply any such Person with
what Sums of Money may be absolutely necessary for them; which may be done
without any Charge or Hazard to the Body of the Trade, who I would have be the
Lenders, upon Security of the T^bacco; the Borrowers to pay the Interest: Which
Money may be raised by a voluntary Subscription among the Trade, and deposited
in one, two, or three Hands, as shall be agreed upon* to be lent out in their
Joint Names to the Borrower, upon giving them Security upon their Tobacco, o^
oth^^w^^e as shall be agreed between the Lenders and (...).

WERE we once established upon some certain Basis, as here hinted at, (...)
Things would come under Consideration not now ^hought of.

AT last Meet^ng it was observed* we were looked upon as a formid^ble Body* by
the little Agreement that has been among (...), were we thus united, we should
be a ^^^m^dable ^ody indeed, always c^pable to support and defend the Trade.
Such an Establishment will, I think, absolutely require a hired Secretary to do
the common Business, and also be a Means of keeping us together.

AT present I call not to mind farther, than that I think 'twill be very much
for the Good of the Trade, that every Body refrain from sending Tobacco to
Holland for Sale, but (...) the Dutch come here for it. There is a great
Difference between us that are Importers upon other People's Accounts, sending
Tobacco to Holland, and such as buy it here to make their Money of it again:
Such if they have (as they will have) the Market in their own Power, if we
forbear sending, will be careful how they part with their Tobacco without
Profit, the End of Trade.

THOUGH I was not forward in last General Meeting, to declare my Sentiments,
yet now (to this Committee,) I have been very frank and open, submitting all to
your Correction* and wishing every Gentleman will as freely declare his Mind,
that out of the Whole something may be digested, to be reported to the General
Meeting, as necessary to be come into, for advancing the Trade, which is only
what I have at Heart.

London, March 9, 1727-8. John Falconar.

SINCE I wrote the Foregoing, some other Things h^ve come into my Mind, which I
am now willing to communicate* in Order (if possible) to bring us into a strict
and regular Society, as the only Way to support the Trade.

FIRST then, Whatever shall be agreed upon, as the Articles of our Union, I
propose may be fairly recorded in a new ^ook, by our Secretary, and Signed by
every Merchant in the Trade; as thereby ratifying and promising to be obedient
to those Rules and Constitutions.

FOR the orderly conducting our Meetings, in every one of them, I think there
should be a Chairman; and as there are Twelve Managers appointed, one of them
may be the President in the Monthly Meetings; and so, by Rotation, may go through
all the Managers in a Year.

AND as I propose the Managers to have a Meeting between such Monthly Meeting,
which I will call the Two Weeks Meeting* He that was Chairman of the last
Monthly Meeting, to be Chairman of the next Two Weeks Meeting following that.

TO keep us together, I propose that every Merchant, at his Signing the
Articles, deposit with the Treasurer, Three Pounds for the Use of the Mon^^ly
Meeting. And that each of the Managers, at the same Time, deposit in the Hands
of one of their own Number, to be chosen by Majority among themselves. Thirty
Shillings for the Use of their Meeting.

AS the First Thur^day in every Month is already appointed for the Monthly
Meetings, so I would have the Hour of the D^y also appointed; and every
Person's Name that appears at each and every of those Meetings, be minuted down
in the Book by the Secretary, those that come before the Hour, first, and under
their Names a full Black Line to be drawn; and below that every Man's N^me that
comes into the Room after the Hour appointed.

THOS^ that stand above the Line, to have Five Shill^ngs* Part of their Three
Pounds paid them back at every M^eting.

THOSE whose Names stand below the Line, to have only Half a Crown returned:
Those who appear not at all, to forfeit Five Shillings, Part of their Three
Pounds, for every Monthly Meeting they are absent.

ALL the Forfeits for Nonappearance, and the Half-Crown Forfeitures, to be
applied as the Majority of the Monthly Meeting shall direct.

AT the End of every Year, each Member to deposit a fresh Three Pounds for the
like Use.

THIS, in my Opinion, would be a likely Method to keep up our Monthly Meeting,
and no Man need loose his Money except he pleases; he will have it all back at
the End of the Year, if he gives due Attendance.

SICKNESS, or any lawful Excuse, to be allowed of by the Meeting, I think ought
to excuse from Forfeiture.

THE like Regulation to be for the Two Weeks Meeting, or Managers Meeting; only
as they deposit but Thirty Shillings, those whose Names st^nd above the Line,
to have Half a Crown (...) each Meeting, and those below the Line but Fifteen
Pence.

THE Forfeitures at the End of each Year, to be disposed of as a Majority of
the Managers shall determine.

BOTH in the Monthly and Two Weeks Meetings, a Majority of those present to
decide all Matters in Debate, and what there agreed upon to be Signified in
Writing by the Secretary, to each and every Person absent, that they may
conform themselves to what agreed upon.

THAT no Person be esteemed one of us, but such as shall Sign the Articles, and
deposit his Money.

THAT upon any Emergency, any Three of the Managers have Power to summon^ a
General Meeting.

THAT the Treasurer be new chosen or confirmed every Year.

THAT the Managers be new chosen or confirmed every Year, or which I like
better, That Four of them go out every Year, and the like Number of new Ones be
appointed in their Room; so that every Merchant in (...) Trade, may by Rotation
have a Share of the chief Management.

THUS have I put down in Writing what occurred to my Thoughts, which I did not
begin to do but since last Meeting* That w^ll, I hope, atone for the
undisgested Method they appear in; and so I shall for this Time conclude, with
only one Observation more.

AND that is, -- I am well informed, Abundance of People in Virginia* and more
in Maryland, that used to Consign their Tob^cco to London, h^ve (of late Years)
declined Shippi^g, and Sold their Tobacco in the Country* which his given the
Out-Ports a greater Weight in the Trade than they used to have, and subtracted
so much from London: Which ought* ^or the Interest of the Country, to be the
chief Mart and Port* for that Commodity.

IF we be so happy to ^ome into the proposed Method and Regulation* I question
not but the People of Virginia, and Maryland, will find it more their Interest
to Consign their Tobacco as they used to do, for their own Accounts* than to
sell it to the Purchasers* and to Consign it to London, preferable to any other
Port; which m^st certainly will be greatly their Interest, as it will take
Weight out of the S^ale of the Out-Ports, and add a double Weight to the S^^le
of Lond^n, who will thereby have it better in their Power to keep the Trade in
due Order.

IN my Opinion, the Tobacco-Trade, though now at so low an ^bb, is capable to be
made as Flourishing as any Trade belonging to England. But it can never be
without Unanimity, and good Order among our sel^es* and a settled
Correspondence between us and our Principals in V^r^inia and Maryland* who, by
communicating Councils from one Side to the other, may regulate every Thing
amiss on either Side, and make one another easy and happy in all Respects, by
mutual Consent, and Agreement. Which is the hearty Wish and Desire of

London, March 11, 1728. John Falconar.

AS I intend to confine my self pretty much to a (...) Relation of Matters of
Fact, I shall make no Remarks on this Representation, but leave the Reader to
draw his own Inferences and Conclusion from it; and proceed to acquaint him,
that after the Committee's Consideration of the said Representation, they were
of Opinion that before they could think of proper Means for the Relief of our
Trade, it was first necessary to form the whole Body of the Merchants residing
in London, that were in that Trade, into a Society, under some Rules and
Regulations: They therefore ^greed upon the following Report* as the first
Thing necess^ry; which was by them delivered into the General Meeting, on the
21st Day of March; and is a^ follows, viz.

A COPY of the Report made by the Committee, appointed by a General Meeting of
the Merchants trading to Virginia and Maryland, to consider of the State of the
Tobacco Trad^, del^vered by the said Committee to the General Meeting, the 21st
of March, 1728.
To the General Meeting of the Merchants Trading to Vi^^inia and Maryl^nd.
WE your Com^ittee, according to your Appointment of the ^th Cour^^t, have met
and taken ^nt^ (...) Consider^tion the State of the T^b^cco Trade, and ^re
unanimously of Opinion, t^is in a very declining Con^^tion* and has been so for
some Time past, which we attribute in a great Measu^^ to proceed from the
discontinuing the Meet^ngs of the Trade, wherein we used to communic^te
Thoughts and Councils, which has been, and will always be of good Consequence
to the Trade.

THEREFORE we are also unanimously of O^^nion, that as it was agreed at last
Gener^l Meeting* so hence^^rwards, there may be constant and regular General
Meetings of the Trade, on the First Thursday in every Month, throughout the
Ye^r; and for the more orderly carrying on and con^inuing those Meetings, We
think the following Articles necessary to be agreed to.

I. THAT a well qualified Person, be chosen and appointed to act as our
Secretary, and to have a Salary paid him out of the Public Stock: We think it
the more necessary to have a hired Secretary or Clerk, as he ^^ll be a common
Ser^ant to the Trade, and so under Command to attend all our Meetings and
Committees and transact many other Affairs, that c^nn^t so well be done but by
a Person who shall wh^lly devote his Time to our Service.

II. AS there are already Twelve Managers appointed, we are of Opinion, they be
c^ntinued for this Courant Year* And that the First Thursday in A^r^l in every
Year, in Time coming, there be a Choice of Managers.

III. FOR the more orderly carrying on Debate* (...) the General Meetings, we
are of Opinion there should be a Chairman, and that one of the 12 M^nagers
should preside in each of those Meetings, in the Absen^e of the Treasurer.

AND that the C^^irman have a small Mallet lie (...) Order.

THAT every Member when he wants to speak, (...) and direct his Discourse to
the Chairman, and when he has done to sit down, that other Members may have
liberty to speak in their Turn, without Interruption.

IV. WE are of Opinion, that every Question in D^b^te* be determined by at
least Two Thirds of the Persons present.

V. (...) propose that every Merchant in the Trade* do pay i^to the Hands of
our Treasurer, T^ree Pounds Yearly on the First Thursday in April, for the Use
of the General Meeting.

AND that Five a Clock in the Afternoon, be the Time for the General Meeting.

AND that all such as come into the Room before that Hour, their Names to be
wrote down in a bo^k by our Secretary.

THAT as soon as the Hour is past, a Line be drawn under the Names of those
present, and under that Line all the Names of those that shall come into the
Room after the H^ur.

BY this Method we shall always know who were present at each Meeting.

AND for Encouragement for every Body to be punctual, and to keep up our
Meetings* we are of Opinion* every Pers^n whose Name stands above the Line*
shall h^^e Five Shillings, part of his Three Po^nds, paid him back it each
Meeting.

THOSE whose Names are below the Line, to have only half ^ C^own, part of their
Three Pounds ret^rn'd ^t each Meeting.

THOSE who appear not at all, to forfeit Five Shill^ngs part of their Three
Pounds, for every General Meeting they are absent.

THAT no Person who shall appear at any of those Meetings, depart before the
Business be done, without Le^ve first obtained from the Chairman.

VI. (...) are of Opinion* it will be much for the Good of the Trade, (...) the
M^^^gers have a constant Meeting by t^emselves, on every Third Thursday of the
Month throughout the Year* that they may take care of and order every Thing
necessary, that may fill out in the Interv^l^ of the General Meetings; and make
Report to the next General Meeting.

THIS Meeting of the Managers, to be under the like Regulation as the General
Meetings, in respect to our Chairman, and^.

THAT every one of the Managers, pay into the Hands of one of their own Number,
Thirty Shillings Yearly.

THAT Half a Crown, Part of that Thirty Shillings, be returned to each Member
whose Name shall stand above the Line; and but Eighteen Pence to those whose
Names shall be below the Line.

THAT every one that appears not at those Meetings shall forfeit Half a Crown.

VII. THAT T^ree Guineas be appropriated for the Expenses of each General
Meeting, to be paid out of the Public Stock.

THAT One Guine^ be appropriated for the Expenses of each of the M^nagers
Meetings, to be likewise paid out of the Public Stock.

THAT what of the Three Guineas shall happen not to be expended in the General
Meetings, the Savings thereof, with all Forfeiture belonging to that Meeting,
be expended in a Din^er, once a Year, or oftener; to t^e^t the whole Tr^de. By
this Meth^d we are in Hopes to create a Friends^ip and good ^nderst^nding among
all the Merchants: Which is much to be wished for.

THE One Guine^, or Twelve Guineas per Annum, to be allotted for the Managers
Meeting* the Sa^ings thereof, with all Forfeitures* among themselves to be in
the like manner expended upon a Dinner once in the Year, o^ oftener, to treat
themselves.

TH^S^ Rules we (...) necess^ry for a Foun^at^on of a good (...) among our
selves; and is what in the first Place we think ought to be agreed to as the
Basis of our Union, and to be standing Rules.

VIII. ANOTHER Thing we think Esse^tial to our Constitution, if we hope to reap
the Fruits intended by our thus Associating our selves, is, That whoever of our
Number, will not come into this Agreement, or hereafter acts contrary to what
he has agreed to, or has been agreed upon by such a Majority as aforesaid, that
such Person be esteemed none of our Body: And that the Majority, who we wish to
keep together, notwithstanding One or a Few may take their own Courses; may, if
they think proper, acqu^int our Principals in Virginia and Maryland, in a
public Man^er, of such Person or Persons acting contrary to what was judged by
the Majority to be for the common Interest of the Trade, and of our Principals.

AND that all Rules, Agreements, and Constitutions, may be copied fair in our
Book; and every Merchant sign the same, as ass^^ting and consenting thereto;
and promising to keep the same faithfully.

THUS much we thought proper to Report to you, to l^y ^ firm and reasonable
Foundation of a friendly Society.

WHEN that Foundation is once laid, we think it will be then, and not 'till
then, a proper Time to proceed to other Considerations.

London, March 19, 1727-8. Mi^^ja Perry, Edward Randolph. Hu^phry B^ll. Ro^ert
Cru^kshanks. S^muel H^de. John Fal^^nar. Jeremiah Quare. I^s^ph Ad^ms. James
Bradley. Thomas Hyam: William Hunt. John Hanbury.


AFTER a due Consideration of this Report, the Merchants agreed upon the
following Resolutions, viz.

A COPY of the Resolutions come into, by the General Meeting of the Merchants,
after reading the Report from the Committee.
Black-Swan Tavern, March 21, 1727-8.
AT a General Meeting of the Merchants trading to Virginia and Maryland* a
Report was made by the Committee appointed to take into Consideration the State
of the Trade.

UPON taking the sai^ Report into Consideration, the following Resolutions were
agreed to, and ordered to be entered fair into the Book, to be signed at next
General Meeting; and adjourned to the Fourth of April next.

THAT Mr. John Walkley be appointed to act as our Secretary, and have a Salary,
to be fixed at next General Meeting, paid him out of the Public Stock.

AS there are already Twelve Managers appointed, they are continued for this
courant Year, and that on the First T^ursday in April in every Year in Time
coming, there be a Choice of Managers.

FOR the more orderly carrying on Debates in the General Meetings* there be a
Chairman; and that on^ ^f the Twelve Managers should preside in e^ch of th^se
Meetings* in the Absen^e of the Treasur^r* and that the Chairman have a small
Mallet ^e (...) him to keep Order.

THAT every Member when he wants to speak, (...) Discourse to the Chairm^n* and
when he h^s do^e, to sit down* that other Members (...) have Liberty to speak
in their (...) without Interruption.

THAT the Number to make a General Meeting, be at least Twenty Five; and that
every Question in Debate, be determined by at least Two Thirds of the Persons
present; and a Summons to be left at every Member's House, the Monday before
the General Meeting.

THAT every Merchant in the Trade, do pay into the Hands of our Treasurer,
Three Pounds Yearly, on the first Thursday in April, for the Use of the General
Meeting: And that Four a-Clock in the Afternoon, be the Time for the General
Meeting, from the first Thursday in October, to the first Thursday in March;
and Five a-Clock in the Afternoon, from the first Thursday in April* to the
first Thursday in September. And that all such as come into the Room before
that Hour, their Names to be wrote down in a Book by our Secretary, and the
Secretary to determine who comes in Time; that as soon as the Hour is past, a
Line be drawn under the Names of those present; and under that Line, all the
Names of those that shall come into the Room after that Hour.

AND for Encouragement for every Body to be punctual, and to keep up our
Meetings, every Person, whose Name stands above the Line, shall have Five
Shillings Part of his Three Pounds, paid him back at each Meeting. Those whose
Names are below the Line, to have only Half a Crown, Part of the Three Pounds,
returned at each Meeting. Those who do not come within an Hour after the Time
prefixed, shall receive nothing.

THAT no Person who shall appear at any of those Meetings, depart before the
Business be done, without Leave first obtained from the Chairman.

THAT the Managers have a constant Meeting by themselves, on every Third
Thursday of the Month througho^t the Year, that they may take care of and order
every Thing necessary that may fall out, in the Intervals of the General
Meetings, and make Report to the next General Meeting.

THIS Meeting of the Managers, to be under the like Regulation as the General
Meetings, in respect to our Chairman, etc.

THAT every one of the Managers pay into the Hands of one of their own Number,
Thirty Shillings Yearly.

THAT Half a Crown, Part of that Thirty Shillings, be returned to each Member,
whose Name shall stand above the Line; and but Eighteen Pence to those below
the Line.

THAT every One that appears not at those Meetings, shall forfeit Half a Crown.

THAT Three Guineas be appropriated for the Expenses of each General Meeting,
to be paid out of the Public Stock.

THAT One Guinea, or Twelve Guineas per Annum, be allowed for the Managers
Meetings to be likewise paid out of the Public Stock.

THAT what of the Three Guineas shall happen not to be expended in the General
Meetings, the Savings thereof, with all Forfeitures belonging to that Meeting,
be expended in a Dinner once a Year, or oftener, to treat the whole Trade.

THE One Guinea, or Twelve Guineas per Ann. to be allotted for the Managers
Meeting, the Saving thereof with all Forfeitures among themselves, to be in the
like Manner expended upon a Dinner, once in the Year, or oftener, to treat
themselves.

THESE Rules we judge necessary for a Foundation of a good Society among
ourselves; and is what in the first Place we think ought to be agreed to, as
the Basis of our Union; and to be standing Rules.

THAT all Rules, Agreements, and Constitutions, be Copied fair in our Book; and
that every Merchant Sign the same, as assenting and consenting thereto; and
promising to keep the same f^ithfully.

Mi^ajah P^rry. William Hunt. Robert Cru^ckshanks. Jonathan Pearth, and Son.
Samuel Haswell. John M^ynard. William (...). Humphry Bell. Thomas M^r^er. Hugh
Ar^uthnott. William T^rver. Thomas Hyam. Henry Stevens. James Buchanan.
Jeremiah Quare. I^seph Ad^ms. Robert Carry. John Peele. Job W^lk^. William
Black. Samuel Woodlaw, for Thomas Colmore. Richard Burbydge. Thomas Sandford.
Jonathan Forward. Chapter Smith. Samuel Hyde. James Bradly. Io^n Falconar. John
Berry.

N. B. (...) Resolutions were confirmed at a General Meeting the Fourth Day of
(...), 1728; and then Signed by the above Persons, who were all that were
present.



THESE Resolutions are (I believe) agreed upon by every Merchant in the Trade;
whereby the Reader will see, that they are under good Regulations, for orderly
and frequent Meetings; and I Have very great Hopes, that those Meetings will be
attended with very g^od (...), though there was little more done when I left
London, than appears by the foregoing Resolutions, unless it was the Settling a
Salary of Forty Pounds per Annum, on Mr. John Walkely, their Clerk, to be paid
him out of the Public Stock: And a positive Resolution and Agreement among
them, that not any Tobacco, even the worst of Scrubs, should be Sold under Two
Pence Half Penny per Pound. But as I came from thence the 29th D^y of April,
and a General Meeting of the whole Trade, was to be on the Second of May
following, Mr. Samuel Hyde, gave me a Project, that he had formed to lay before
that Meeting, which he apprehended would be very much for the good of the
Trade, if it should be agreed to, which Project is as follows, viz.

That the Price of the Oroonoko Tobacco, be fixed at the General Meeting,
according to its Nature, viz. Fine Color. Second Ditto. Dry Tobacco. Worst
Scrubs. First Loaf. Second Ditto. Third Ditto.


THAT the Managers or any Five of them, be appointed to view every Loading of
Tobacco, as soon as Landed, and before Sold.

THAT they sort the Tobacco according to its Nature as above described, viz.
Three Sorts Color and Dry Tobacco, Three Sorts Leaf, and and the very worst of
all.

THAT the Manag^^^ report in Writing, the Quantity and Quality of each Ships
Loading.

THAT the Merchant or Importer, be obliged to make good to the Proprietors of
the Tobacco, the Price settled, and as much more as the Tobacco Sells for.

THAT the Tobacco now on hand, be viewed, sorted and valued by the Managers;
and a Report thereof made to the next general Meeting.

THESE Proposals were accordingly l^id bef^^e the whole Body of the Trade, on
the Second of May* And by a Letter of that Day's Date from Mr. Hyde to me,
which I received in (...) ^owns, he says, That my Proposal, as it stands in
Blank, was received and referred to the Consideration of the Managers, with
less Opposition than I expected, though a great many Objections were raised,
which I am sure I can answer. And therefore I desired the Gentlemen to take
Copies, and hope they will gi^e their Opinions in Writing. As we proceed, you
shall be advised by the first Opportunity.

THUS far are the Words of the aforesaid Letter; by which it appe^^s, that this
Project was referred to the Managers Consideration, to report their Opinion of
it to the next General Meeting. I heartily wish Thi^, or something like it, may
be agreed upon; it being, in my Opinion, the most effectual Method that can be
thought of, to oblige every Body to keep Agreements, or to discover those that
break through them: For, if this Method be agreed on, I know it is intended to
send to the Collector or Naval Officer of every District, to be by him
communicated to the Public, an Account of the Value fixed by the Trade on each
sort of Tobacco; under which V^lue those Sorts must not be sold; and also the
Mark and Numbers of every Ship's Loading; with a particular Account how the
Managers that were the Viewers, have sorted it* by which Means every one will
see what Sortment his Tobacco is in; and will know that such a Sortment must
not be sold under such a certain Price; whereby it will be easy to discover
whether each Man's Correspondent complies with that Agreement, or not. This
would therefore be full as effectual a Way to discover whether Agreements were
kept or not, and who the Transgressors are, in case of their breaking Measures;
as That which was proposed in Mr. Fal^onar's Representation, and the
Committee's Report of jointly writing and informing us, who broke Measures, or
would not come into Agreements; which was rejected by the Body of the Trade:
And without one of these Methods, I fear it will be very difficult for us to
make a just Discovery who they are that transgress: For, by what I have seen
and heard amongst them, of their ^laming and censuring each other for breaking
Measures in Times past, where each accuses the other of the very Facts, which
occasioned the Breach of all their former Agreements, I conclude, that there'^
no Reg^rd to be h^d to their private Accus^t^ons and Letters, if any of them
should take that Method; therefore I heartily wish Success to this Pr^posal, as
it will be an effectual Means both to adv^nce the Price of Tobacco, and oblige
the Gentlemen there, to abide steadily to their Agreements; yet I find it will
meet with great Opposition: For, since my Arrival here, I received a Letter,
d^ted the 15th of May, from Mr. ^al^onar, with his Objections to this Pr^ject
enclosed; which were to be given into the ^ext Meeting of the Trade, in ^ very
few Days: Which Objections are as follow, viz.

A COPY of John Falconar's O^^^ctions and Thoughts, upon a Scheme proposed ^y
Samuel Hyde.
THE Proposal given in, the Second Current, by Samuel Hyde, to the General
Meeting, being by them referred to us their Man^gers, to consider thereof; and
to report our Opinion to the next General Meeting; I intend now to give you my
Thoughts upon that Project, which I here put down in Samuel Hyde's own Words,
viz.

I. THAT the Price of Oroonoko Tobacco be fixed by the General Meeting,
according to its Nature, viz. Fine Color. Second Color. Dry Tobacco. Worst
Scrubs. First Leaf. Second Leaf. Third Leaf.


II. THAT the Manager^ (or any Five of them) be appointed to view every ^oading
of Tobacco, as soon as landed, and before (...).

III. THAT they sort the Tobacco, according to its Natures as abo^e described,
viz. Three Sorts Color and Dry Tobacco; Three Sorts Leaf, and the worst of all.

IV. THAT the Managers report in Writing, the Quantity and Quality of each
Ship's Lading.

V. THAT the Merchant, or Importer, be obliged to make good to the Proprietors
of the Tobacco, the Price settled, and as much more as the Tobacco sells for.

VI. THAT the old Tobacco now on Hand, be viewed, sorted, and valued, by the
Managers; and a Report thereof made to the next General Meeting.

HAVING now put down the Scheme; my Opinion upon the Whole as it stands, is,
that it will be impr^cti^^ble, and in Part is unnecessary.

FOR the Impracticability, I need only mention, what a l^borious Work it will
be, to view, sort, and v^lue, all the Oroon^ko Tobacco imported into the Port
of Lond^n. I cannot think the Managers will undert^ke such a Task.

FOR, to come up to the Strictness of this Scheme, they must t^ke the Marks and
Numbers of every Sortment by it self, with the Price annexed.

ELSE, How shall we know whether the Possessor of the Tobacco, does not sell
under the Prices fixed: or, if for more than the Price fixed, whether the
Proprietor has that made Good to him.

TO know that, I can see no other W^y, than that the Viewers should take a
particular Account of every S^rtment, and those Accounts be recorded in Books
for that Purpose, which will require at least One Clerk to keep those Accounts.

FOR, to comply with this Scheme, the Sellers ought also to gi^e in particular
Accounts of all Tobacco, when sold, that by comparing their Accounts with the
Managers Report, we may see if Argeements be kept to.

THIS, if there were no other Objection, I think will be enough to deter the
Managers from undertaking such a Task, unless they will be content to neglect
their own private Affairs.

But were They to be content, I am afraid the other Merchants will not be
willing to Submit all the Tobacco they have, come to the View and Directions of
any Number of their own Body, for Reasons that need not be here mentioned.

NOT to say any thing of the Hinderance, such a Method will be to Business, at
a Time of brisk Demand, when supposing the Seller may have very good Offers,
yet must stand still, until he can get Five of the Managers together, which
will be no easy Matter to do; besides the Time that will be lost in Sorting,
Viewing and Valuing the Tobacco, and taking the Marks and Numbers; for without
taking them, I cannot see how this Scheme can be complied with, to answer the
End aimed at.

WERE this Method to be come into, I think it should not be the Manager, nor
any of the Merchants that should be the Viewers, but Men specially appointed
for that Work.

BUT where to find Men in all respects well qualified, I profess I know not.
Such Viewers ought to be Men of nice Judgment in Tobacco, to put it into the
sundry Sortments, and be able to carry in their ^ye or Mind the different
Qualities, so as to make the like Sortments at one Merchant's House, correspond
with those at another Merchant's House; without doing of which, to Exactness,
we shall not be upon an Equality, and some will be oppressed, while others get
their Hands clear; and the more so, should such Viewers act with Partiality, or
be corrupted by private Interest.

THESE are some of my Reasons against this (...) t^king it in the Gross: But
some Parts there^f, I think may and ought to ^e p^t in Practice.

WHAT Part I think needless, is the Bright and Colored dry Tobacco, the Value
of such Sortments being so various according to the several Degrees of Color,
it will be no easy Matter to ascertain the Price, that depending upon the Fancy
of the Buyer; so that instead of Three, there had need be more than Thirteen
Sortments made of such Tobacco.

BUT in my Opinion, it is not That Sort of Tobacco that does us the Mischief,
because for Colors we have many Buyers, and sundry Markets; so that if one
Market will not answer, another may, and if one Buyer will not give a Price,
another will; so that in that Case, it is more the Sellers Fault, than the
Buyers, that the Price is run down.

IF this be granted, and I think it can hardly be denied, it will be easy to
fix from whence the Evil we l^bour under proceeds.

IN my Opinion, it proceeds altogether from the L^afy Sortments, for which in a
Manner, we have but one Buyer. I need only appeal to our own dear-bought
Experience, for the Truth of this.

WE very well know, the Price of all other sorts of Tobacco has risen and fell,
in Proportion to what Price was given for Tobacco by the French; that has
governed the Market, and no doubt will do the like for the Future, or at least
as long as those Sortments are in Demand, (almost only) for France: It Is true,
were Leaf in Demand at other Markets, the Case would be altered; but as it is
chiefly France that consumes that Sort, if the Trade of that Kingdom continues
as now it is, in a Company, and that Company continues to employ but one Agent,
to buy all the Tobacco they have from London, it must be what Tobacco that
Agent buys, that will for ever govern the Market, as in Times past it has done,
and it is very natural it should be so.

FOR he being a great Buyer, all others Buyers govern themselves by what he
does, and he being but one, has a mighty Advantage over so many Sellers, w^o
(...) to have acted without any Correspondency among themselves, so that it has
not been what Price we pleased* but that Gentleman has set his own Price; and
if so^e refused to take it for a T^me, others* perhaps but o^e Person^ has
complied to take the Price set, and then immediately every (...) else have been
obliged to d^ the same* some (...) one Reason, and some for another. One of the
best Reasons I ever heard alleged, was, that if they did not take that Price
now, by and by the Fren^h would f^ll their Price* and then they should not get
(...) much* which made every one crowd to offer their Tob^^co, and that
n^turally led the Fren^^ Age^^ to f^ll his Price, if he had not before thought
of doing of it* th^s I think is an evident Pr^of, that it has not been us, but
that Gentleman that made the Price upon what Tobacco he bou^ht.

THINGS being thus, I think it cannot be denied, but in this or any other
Trade, where there shall be one S^le Gr^nd ^^ver, of a particular Commodity,
what ever Price t^^t Buy^rs gives, or can be obtained from him, will govern all
other Buyers of that Commo^ity, though there may be some Difference in the
Q^^lity of that Comm^d^ty: That this is our Case wi^h the ^ren^^* I think I
need not use more Arguments to evince.

THEREFORE in my Opinion, all we have to do is to pro^i^e against this Evil*
but how that is to be ^one, I own is not so easy to find out.

YET I am strongly of O^inion, a Cure must be found, else the Trade must drop;
it cannot long subsist upon the Term^ as it has been for Years p^st, (...)
Pl^nters h^^e ^ot been able to live by their L^bour* and h^w it h^s been with
us that have acted eit^er (...) I need not mention; e^^ry (...) to D^structi^n,
and all owing in my Opinion, to the Ascend^^t the French Agents, have every One
in their Turns, exercis^d over us: I need not ment^on Particulars; we all know
h^w it has been; and s^ing One Person, I do not know One Merchant* but ^scribes
the Dec^y of the Trade, to the same Cause that I do.

THEREFORE I am hopeful, now the Cause is so well kno^n, every Body, both for
their own S^kes* and the I^terest of their Empl^yers ^ill join their Hearts and
Hands* to relieve themselves* and Friends, from so great Oppression. We ar^
striving for Nothing but our Livelihoods* and the Livelihoods of many Thousands
wh^m we represent, and whose Bread de^^nds upon our good or bad Management.

THEREFORE, ^s we ^re only striving to live, and ^re willing to let live, I
think no Person can* with Reason, be offended at what we have been doing, or
shall do, to attain so reasonable in End.

BUT how to come at this End, is the great Q^^stion: (...) it is possible to be
come at, is without Question. The Necessity of endeavoring a Remedy, admits I
think of ^s little Doubt: But the M^nner how* is to be co^si^ered.

TO willing M^nds, every Thing will be e^sy: Let every One but ^im at the same
Mark, and yield to one another, both in Opinion, and their separate Interest:
For (...) Laws, and public Agreements, what may be good for the Whole in a
public Capac^t^* may (...) upon some private Interest, in the (...) or
Execution. If that be not sacrifi^e^ to the Public Good, no Society can
prosper. Could we on^e come into this Fr^me ^f M^^d and unite our Endeavors,
we should soon surmount all Difficult^^s.

FROM the united Councils of ^ll the Merchants, (...) may be (...).

AS I am One of the Socie^y, I think my self bound in Duty to offer my
Thoughts* I wish every Other would as freely declare their Minds.

THE first and most natural Way, and what I chiefly wish may take Effect, or at
least may be Essayed, is, that the French Agent, and we, may come to a fair
Treaty. He is so reasonable a Man, that were he made rightly sensible of the
only and we aim at, I cannot but think, so far from being offended, he would
think it reasonable every Body concerned should live by their Labor, and come
into an Agreement with us, that would make both himself and us easy.

THEREFORE I earnestly wish this Way be tried; and in the most genteel Way we
can think of: If that should, as I am hopeful it may, take Effect, all other
Methods will be needless to mention.

IF we do come to such a Treaty, I shall mention some Things proper to be
thought of in such an Agreement, viz.

I. THAT the Price to be agreed for, be only for those Three Sorts of Leaf he
sends to France, which he usually marks ABC; we all know what Sortments they
are.

II. THAT the Agreement be for One whole Year, and no more.

III. THAT the Price be either upon all Three Sortments in an Average,

IV. Or Three Prices, according to the Three different Qualities.

THE last I think is the most equitable Way, as it gives most Encouragement to
the Planters to take Pains in handling their Tob^cco.

BUT in this I own there is a Difficulty* for although at the S^ale they make
three Sorts ABC, and so do in the Samples, when they look upon them at our
Houses:

YET before bought* what we call A, they call B, and so B a C; and by that
Means, (...) Buying, make very few A's, though at Weighing off, I know they are
not so nice.

TO prevent all Disputes about the different Qualities, I think we had better,
to the French, make but Two Sortments of Leaf: For such as they call A's, will
bear no Proportion to B and C, hardly Five such Hogsheads coming in an Hundred.

SO that were we to make Three Sortments, ABC, in equal Quantity, and let the
middle Price be the Avarage Price ^or the Whole, I doubt that would be very
difficult, if not impossible; the Seller and Buyer will so differ about the
Quality.

TO preve^t such Disputes, I can think of no better (...), than to put the
Tobacco into Three Sortments, viz.

THE very best superfine Leaf, which will be but a few, into the first A* all
the other Leaf to be very good, but inferior to the A's, to be the Second
Sortment, (or rather the First Sortment to the French) called B.

THE Third, (or as I would have it,) the Second Sort, to be called C, and to
consist of good Tobacco, proper for the French Use.

I would have a greater Disproportion made in the Price, between A and B, than
between B and C; which two last Sortments, may be made pretty near in Number
and Quantity to one another; always allowing the Advantage to the Buyer.

WHATEVER Agreement shall be made with the French, I propose may be only for B
and C, and then whether the Price be made upon both Sorts together, or each
separate, will break no Squares.

AS for Instance, Should the B's be put at Three Pence Farthing, and the C's at
Two Pence Three Farthings* the Average Price will be Three Pence; which I think
^s as low as the Planters can live by*

IF those be the Prices fixed for the B's and C's* I think the A's should not
be under Four Pence at least.

ACCORDING to this Division* if the B's and C's should be unequ^l; by putting
some of the A's to them* may make them equal.

BUT I should like better to have each Sortment sold by it self, 'twould be a
great Encouragement to the Planters; then such as took Pains with their
Tobacco, would reap the Benefit thereof: Whereas now they ^omplain we make
hardly any Difference between Good and Bad.

THUS much I thought proper to hint, in case we should come to an Agreement
with the French Agent.

BUT if he will not come t^ an Undert^king with us, I think we are bound by
Duty, and Interest, to think of other Methods*

NO doubt, Methods may be found out* for we know the French want and must have
our Tobacco, as much (...) we want their Money.

THEREFORE the only Dispute will be, which of us will have most Patience. I
m^ke no doubt the French will endeavor to tire us out. If we have less
Patience than them* they will gain the Victory. On the other Side, if we can
stand it out but a while, the French must comply* for they cannot long let
their Four Factories at Mo^l^eux* (...), Have^d^^ra^e, and St. Vale^^, stand
still* And those Four Factories, I am well informed, work up ^ighty Hogsheads
of our British Tob^cco* each and every Wo^king Day througho^t the (...)*
besides wh^t Euro^^an Tob^cco to ^^se* and well it may be so, all Fr^n^e being
suppl^ed from those Four F^ct^ries.

HOW then (...) be long without buying; (...) being d^ily wanted* and (...) to
(...) King which m^st be (...) out of ou^ Tobacco: So that there is for them no
long standing still. Every Body is guided by their Interest, and no doubt that
will induce them to comply with our reasonable Requests.

BUT should they be stiff, so I think should we be; whate^er Hard^^ips for the
present it may put us under. We are not striving for that vain Thing c^l^'d
Glory, but for our Live^: And, if any War be lawful, I think Self D^fence to be
so.

THEREFORE let us, as one Man, put our Shoulders to the Work, and endeavor to
encourage and ^ssist one another in any Thing may be wanting. W^ys may be foun^
to m^ke keeping our Tobacco a Time, not over burdensome to any of our Number.

AS we have made a Beginning, and gone so far: should we now ^^ag and recoil,
our latter End will be worse than our Beginning; our ^^sks will be doubled, we
shall be laughed at for a foolish, unsteady People; and only fit to be made
Burthen-Bearers.

THEREFORE, if we must think of other M^thods th^n a friendly Treaty* I shall
like Sam^el H^de's Propo^^l very well, so far as it relates to the several
Sor^s of Leaf. I will for my own P^rt readily come into it* I don't care who
are the Viewers.

AND I hope every other Merchant w^ll do the like: It will certainly do the
Work, and may be done, with no great Trouble.

FOR every Merchant may himself, from his other Tobacco sort o^t the Three
Sorts of Leaf, and have them ready for the View.

THAT can hinder no great Time; for, upon Notice over Night, Three of the
Managers, or whoever shall be appointed for that Work, may the next Morning be
^t his House, and do what they need do in a small Time: For, in Res^ect to
Leaf, I do not t^^nk it necess^ry to take M^^ks and Numbers, the Q^^ntity and
Qu^l^ty of each Sortment, will be (...), we must take o^e another's Words and
Honor, for faithful Performance of Agreeme^t^.

BESIDES, ascertaining the Price of Leaf, which I judge to be the most
essential Point of all; as what the French cannot have so good at (...) of the
Out-Ports* and must, of Necessity, have from London.

I think we should still keep to our first Agreement, Not to sell the worst
Scrubs under Two ^ence H^lf-Penny per Pound* that will make better Tobacco go
off.

AND if at the End of the Year, some Refuge Stuff should be left, that would
not fetch that Price, we may then consider what to be done with it: We had
better ship off a Hundred Hogsheads or Two at the End of the Year, and sink
them in the Sea* than to sell them at a very low Price, to hurt the Market.

LET us but keep to the Price already fixed, below which none shall be sold,
and fix the Price of Leaf: All other Sorts will find their own Way, there is n^
Need of conf^^^ng them.

BUT if this last mentioned should not be come into by the General Meeting*

AT present I can think of no other, than that every Body put their Leaf into
one Man's Hand, to sell it to the French, and ^^en One to One will be a fair
Match.

I know many Obje^tions may be made to entrusting one Man* but rather than
suffer our selves to be undone, we ought to submit to any Thing.

AND even this Expedient of One Seller* may be so modelled as to please every
Body.

I wish we had Two or Three good Houses of Warehouse Men, as in former Times,
that would remove the Cause of all our Complaints, and make our Business much
easier th^n it i^ to us.

AS the public Inte^^sts of the Funds is so much reduced, I believe many Men
would be glad to employ their Mon^y to better Advantage in Trade.

IT may not be unworthy our Consideration, to try if some proper Persons, may
not be induced to come into that way of Trade.

John Falconar.
London, May 15 th, 1728. P. S. IF after Trial, we find the French Agent, will
not come into reasonable Measures with us, but that we must be Obliged to stand
it out with him, I think we ought in Justice to our selves, to acquaint the
Merchants of the Out-Ports, with what we have been doing, and what we aim to do
f^r the Good of the Trade. I make no doubt they will gladly come into the like
Measures with us. In short I think it will be our Interest to settle a
Correspondency with the Out-Ports, as hinted in my Representation given into
this Meeting the 13 th of March last.

John Falconar.



I am not a Judge, whether the Difficulties that attend the Execution of Mr.
Hyd^'s Project, be ^nsuperable or not, as seem to be suggested in these
Objections, but will only remind the Reader, that Mr. H^de, in the Paragraph of
his Letter before recited, promises to Answer any Obje^tions that can be made
to his Scheme. Whether he will do it in such a Manner, as to give Satisfaction
to the other Gentlemen, we must leave to Time to discover* in the mean Time I
can only (...), that I really believe, howe^er th^se Two Gentlem^n may dis^gree
upon the M^^ns for the Relief of the Trade, yet that they have both the some
good (...) it H^^rt, and I should be very ^ j^st to ^ll (...) in the Trade, if
I did not say, that they unanimously appeared (whilst I was there) to aim
heartily at the same Thing, which Endeavors of the^^s I am in Hopes may be
attended with good Success, if we on our Parts concur to ^o good a Work, which
I Have no reason to doubt, both as it is for our Benefit, and as I Have had the
Pleasure to see how readily every Body Signed the Letter lately formed to the
Merchants, which was by the^r own Desire, and conformable to their Directions,
as w^ll manifestly appear to the Reader upon his Perusal of this Narrative:
Such a Letter as this, they were of Opinion was the First Thing necessary for
us to do; what further will be required of us, we shall see when we receive
their Answer. In the mean Time, I cannot Omit communicating to the Public, the
Paragraphs of several of Mr. Falconar's Letters, in which many Things are
contained worth N^tice, which I shall del^ver in his own Words. In his First
Letter, of the 16th of April, to me in London, are the following Paragraph^,
viz.

Herewith then h^st Copies of the Three Papers desired, viz. My Repre^entation
to the Committee, the Committee's Rep^rt to the General Meeti^g, and the
General Meeting's Resolutions after Consideration of that Report. My
Representation contains, the very Root Cause of ^ll the ^vil, which is no other
than the Ascendant the ^ren^h Agent has got over us; if that Gentleman be
suffered to go on as he has done, the Tr^de can never ^^^ive, he will for ever
keep it under the Hatches; his ^^ving whole Ship Loads, and sending P^^t
thereof to Holland, is the most mi^chievous Method could have been thought of;
for ^t is pl^^ to a Demonstration, that by throwing away Two Thousand Pounds in
Holland Yearly, he may for ever keep down that Market, and consequently keep
down the Market in London, and at all the (...) in Great Britain, is in fact
has been the (...) for some Years past* For, by w^^t Tobacco he has sent to
Holland, he has by Public Sales, thick upon Public Sales, kept continually
feeding that Market, and forcing the Tobacco off ^t any Price, (no matter what)
brought that Market to a very low (...), which has discouraged all other
Buyers, and that was what he aimed at* by that Means ^e is in a Manner, become
the sole Buyer, and has had Tobacco at his own Prices, upon Pretense of the
Lowness of the Dutch Market, complaining how much he lost by what he sent to
Holland, and (...) at the same Time will not forbe^r sending to Holland, well
knowing should he do that, that Market would soon get up, which would spoil his
Project, by which I believe his (...), the East India Company in France, ^^ve
Yearly from Forty to Fifty Thousand Pounds Sterling.

Fran^e (...) Yearly I belie^e, not less than Twenty Thousand Hogshea^s of our
Tobacco; now suppo^ing they were to buy none but what actually went to Fran^e,
which is the Leafy Sortment, and were to give Three Pence Half Penny, and so up
to Four Pence, which formerly used to (...) the Medium Pri^es, the (...)
between those Prices, and Two Pence F^^thing, the now Current Price, would, I
think, ^a^l not much short of my Computati^n; so that the French are much in
the Right, to or^er their Agent to go to work the Way he does; for without any
Loss to them, he can keep the Dut^h Market low enough, and supp^si^g they
should loose Five Tho^sand Pou^ds, by what went to H^lla^d, they will (...) Ten
Times as much, by what they consume themselves in (...), and that is Tem^tati^n
enou^h, and too pl^inly the (...): By these Methods, the (...) not only rob you
of so much Money Yearly in wh^t they buy themselves, but likewise upon all the
Tobacco imp^^t^d into Great Britain, for what that one Man does, governs all
other Buyers; therefore our main Point consists in well Managing the French
Agent, which I believe would be done, did all come heartily in, but of that
I Have small Hopes, unless they are forced to have the Good of the Country more
at Heart, by express Orders and Requests from Maryland. Indeed without that,
all we have been doing, will come to nothing, we shall soon flag and fall back
into Indifferency.

THEREFORE, if your People have any Regard to their own Welfare, now is the
Time for 'em to help themselves, we have done much more than ever I expected
would have been done by us of our selves, without their Help. Indeed I thought
the good Work now begun, must of necessity have commenced on your side; but as
Things are, we have much shortened your Work; nevertheless a good deal remains
for you to do; what that is, I need not mention to thee, I know thou have it
much at Heart. I need only wish the People may be so wise, to come into what
thou intendest to propose; they never had such an Opportunity, and I am afraid
never will again, if now neglected; the best Time to strike, is when the Iron
is hot; we are now stirring, and in a Ferment, if we be suffered to co^l, I
much fear shall never be sured up to such a Temper again, at least not in
Haste. Whereas if you second what we have begun, we shall be encouraged to
proceed; and such as now keep back, or endeavor to puzzle the Cause, will be
obliged to come in for fear of your Displeasure.

I AM sorry the ^ighth Article in the Committ^e's Report, was not agreed (...)
by the General Meetting. In my (...), that Article should have been (...) of
o^r Fundamentals, as the only Penalty in our Power to (...) on Delinquents* ^t
would (...) (...) the (...) stand in Awe, and I Am sure (...) necessary for your
Welfare; but as it was rejected, I think you ought to supply, that Deficiency,
by letting us know, that notwithstanding we do not care to inform you in a
Public Manner, who breaks Agreements, or will not join with the Majority, for
the Good of the Trade, yet you will find Ways to inform your selves, and that
you will show your Resentment against such Persons. In the same Article was
rejected the Settling a Correspondence between you and us in a Public manner,
as from Body to Body, which would have been of vast Advantage, (indeed the Life
of the Whole,) therefore I hope, you will begin it on your side; if you write to
us, we must answer you, and that will create a Correspondence, whether we will
or not. Could we have such Letters from every County in Maryland, would be
best, but as every Thing must have a Beginning, I shall be glad to see it come
from Mar^^ro^, as that is the chief Place of Patuxent, will have great Weight,
and be a g^od Example to other ^laces, and the sooner something comes to us
from you, will be the better.

I^ is absolutely necessary the whole Country should be appr^^^d of the Evil*
and the Methods how to help themselves; and that cannot well be done, without
Printing. If That be thought necessary, I am content my Representation be
printed, which I wish to be done (...): And also the Report of the Committee*
(...) the Resolutions of the General (...) Order of Time as they passed, with
(...). I make no doubt thou will ^dd (...) and Ad^ice proper to the (...) will
be the greatest Good that ever (...) the Country, if they will (...) good
Council. (...) endeavor to make your People sensible, what they (...) their
Tobacco coming Home so late; especi^lly the People on the Eastern Shore, and
about P^^taps^o. If they do not endeavor to have their Tobacco at Market, as
soon as their Neighbors of Vir^inia, they (...) have a Price.

YOUR Ass^mbly can do n^thing to so Public a Good, as (...) limit a Day, after
which no Tobacco shall be shipped for (...) Year. I think Mid-summer should be
the longest Time allowed for Shipping, and from that Day to Christmas Day, no
Tobacco to be shipped on any Pretense. This would obl^ge People to get their
Tobacco ready betimes, and then it would come Home in the Summer with a double
Advantage: First, in better Quality free from Damage, and Secondly to the
Summer Market, which is always the b^st. In this C^se, you would be upon a
Level with V^rg^nia; and we should, in some certain Time, know when we h^d all,
and the Buyers done expecting for that (...)* Ships coming as they have done of
(...), all the Year round, have distracted ^ll our Buyers, and made Things so
bad as they have been.

Among the rest of the Advices I would have come from you; One should be to
request us to be sparing in sending Tobacco to Holland for Sale, or rather that
you may absolutely prohibit us to send any of your Tobacco there, unless has
been so long upon H^nd, that must be shipped to (...) the Dr^wb^ck. This I Am
sure will be your Interest. Did the Buyers once know we were so restrained*
where there is now One, we should have Twenty Buyers; and that of it self would
advance the Market.

IT would render my Work very tedious, were I to make such Observations on this
Letter as (...) to me: But as the Sense is ob^ious, and as I am ^nwilling to
depart from the Method I have (...) to my self, ^f only gi^^ng a (...)
Narrative of (...)* I shall therefore leave it to the Reader's own (...)
Observation* and only remind him, that he will find the Restraint (...) upon
the Merchants not to send any Tobacco to Holland, in the Letter l^tely sent
'em, is here recommended. The next Letter from him was of the Second of May,
directed to me in the ^owns: Some Paragraphs whereof are as follow, viz.

I am just come from the Meeting* where we stumbled at the Threshold, and had
like to have broke all to Pieces: The Dispute happened upon a Question proposed
by Samuel Hyde, in the follow^ng Words, viz.

THAT such Persons who have collected or charged the Three Pence per Hogshead;
and refuse to pa^ the some, ought not to vote ^t any of our Meetings, 'till
they have discharged their Arrears.

THIS Question raised very great Debates and ^eats; Some abs^lutely ref^sing to
pay any Thing for Years past, although they both owned they had received and
charged the Three Pence per Hogshead in their Accounts to their Friends. This,
by those that were w^lling to pay all Arrears, wa^ thought very unreasonable,
that any Body should pretend to con^ert to their own private Use, the Three
Pence per Hogshead that they had collected from other People, for the Public
Stock. (...) Tho^ be^^ pr^^^nt, I Am persuaded this Opposition would not (...)
been (...)* which shows the Necessity of some Gentlemen from Maryland b^^ng
here Ye^^ly, to over l^ok our Behavior: We shall stand in Awe of their
Pres^nce. (...) Dispute makes me wi^h* That in your intende^ Lett^rs t^ the
(...) Meeting, you will (...) Desire, that (...) may make no (...) in paying the
Three Pence per Hogshe^d; being the very B^sis and Foundation of our Union, and
without which, we cannot subsist.

BY this Letter it appears how necessary it was to recommend a punctual
Discharge of the Three Pence per Hogshead to 'em. It also shows this
Gentlem^n's Opinion, That One from the Country to be always present with them
would be of Use; and evinces the Necessity there was, of some such Letter as
that lately sent 'em. In the next, of the Sixth of May, are the following
Words, viz.

I fear all our People are not yet in Earnest. I expect no other, but before
the Year is out, we shall be to Pieces, and the French have Reason to laugh at
us: Nevertheless if it should prove so, if it pleases GOD to spare my Life, I
will the next Year strive to roll the Ball up the Hill again; but it must be
upon this Proviso, that the Assistance desired comes from your Side, that may
awaken our Folks; and without that it will be Labor in Vain.

THIS is plain, and needs no further Comment than to acquaint the Reader, that
the Assistance here hinted at, is no more than some such Letter from all Parts
of the Country, as is already signed by great Numbers, and sent from some
Places. His last Letter of the 15th of May, which covered his Objections to Mr.
H^de's Proposals before recited, has what follows, viz.

WE are come to a Crisi^: The French Agent declares he will break our
Combination (as he calls it.) By the Uneasiness he expresses ^t what we have
been doing, he shows how it pinches him. That I think should be Reason
sufficient for us to go on to unite our selves: But really I Am much afraid,
That Gentleman will prevail upon some of us to break the Agreement: My self was
tempted that Way Yesterday; and Hi^ts given, That if I would give Way, I should
find my Account in it. My Answer was Resolute, I would not. So I expect no
Fav^ur from him. The whole Trial will depend upon which Side has most Patience.
I make no Doubt the French will refrain Buying as long as they can; but very
long they cannot: I wish our People may but have Patience until they are forced
to Buy; in that Case we shall gain the Victory: That I should not despair of,
were we all Unanimous; but That I doubt: And the more, for that I perceive a
great Alteration in some, for want of thy Presence: That Restraint seems now to
be taken off.

THOU WILT see by the enclosed Objections to Samuel Hyde's Proposals, that I have
expressed my self with all the Earnestness I well can; I can but do my Part; I
wish every Body were of the same Mind; but we are too many to do Good: Were we
fewer, would be much easier to agree.

THUS far Mr. Falconar. -- But it still remains to acquain^ the Readers* That
one of the greatest Difficulties the London Merchants apprehended they had to
encounter, was, to bring the O^t Ports into some such Measures as they
themselves were going upon; without which their ^ndeavours would be re^dered
ineffectual. To obvi^te Thi^, they had writ to all the Out Ports of England and
S^otland, to which any Tobacco is Imported, and had received Answers from most
of them before I (...)* wherein they said, they were very glad (...) that the
London Merchants were endeavoring (...) the (...) of T^^de; and (...) them
that they would (...) with them ther^in; (...) ^dd^d, that (...) it (...) not
be do b^^d, but that they (...) re^dily (...) the^r Power to ^dvance Tobacco,
since what came to them was chiefly their own; which is so good a Reason, that
I think there is no Room to doubt their Sincerity. So that I conclude, they
have already in all the Out Ports of Great Britain, formed themselves into
Societies, under some such Regulations as the Merchants in London have done,
and consequently that That Difficulty is removed.

I have now plainly and sincerely published what is come to my Knowledge of
this Affair, without any Remarks of my own; which I could not have forbore,
were I not sensible that these Things alone, would make this Piece longer than
I could wish it: But, as the Sense in all the foregoing Recitals, is clearly
expressed, there is the less Necessity to repeat, or put it in other Words.
Yet, I hope, the Reader will excuse me, if I do Justice to those Gentlemen that
have distinguished themselves by their assiduous Endeavors for our Interest;
who those are, I hope will evidently appear by the foregoing Narration: And I
can further testify, That Mr. Falconar, particularly, has taken true Pains to
promote what he conceived would be for our Advantage: -- And Mr. Hyde's Scheme,
for the same End, manifestly evinces his Earnestness to help forward so good a
Work, and I hope all the other Gentlemen mean the same Thing, though they had not
made it so much their Business; I can only say that they appeared to do so
whilst I was with them.

I should here conclude; but I believe it will be observed how solicit us Mr.
Falconar is, that the People of this Country may have some Regard to what I
shall Propose to them, which he apprehends would be much to their Advantage; so
that I conclude, some Proposal from me will be expected: To comply therefore in
some Manner with that ^xpectation, I shall only say, that the first Thing I had
to Propose* and indeed the only Thing that can be done by the Country, without
the Assistance of the Legislature,) was no more than Writing some such Letter
to the Merchants from all Parts of the Country as is already so Universally
approved, and signed in all Places, where it has yet been offered: What appears
to me to be further necessary, and may be worthy of our Legislature's
Consideration, is chiefly contained in Mr. Falconar's Letters before recited,
in Relation to the fixing a certain Time for the Shipping off our Tobacco: The
many Advantages and Conveniences that would attend such a Thing, are there so
amply explained, that I need not add any Thing further to enforce them. And as
lessening the Quantity, and mending the Quality of our Tobacco, is what every
Body is already satisfied would be for the Universal Good* and as I have
formerly, and several other Gentlemen since, proposed such Methods as appear^d
to us most Necessary, and Equitatable for attaining that End, I Question not
therefore, but our Legislature, will take the Whole under their Consideration,
and do therein what is best for the Country. But as the Evil we labor under,
proceeds very much from the Discord amongst the Merchants, to whom we Consign
our Tobacco, which they themselves allow, I would therefore particularly
recommend it to the Consideration of our Legislature, Whether some effectual
Means may not be found to oblige 'em to a strict and steady Union. What (...)
to me to be necessary for that Purpose is, to restrain every Master of Ship,
from taking any Tobacco on Board, under severe Penalties, until he produces an
authentic Certificate, that his Owner has bound himself in a Bond, under what
Penalty the Legislature shall think convenient, to Mr. (...) Per^^ for
Instance, or some other principal M^n of (...) Community, to abide by, and
conform himself to (...) eve^ shall be agreed on, by such a Majority (...)
Number, as they have already agreed, shall determine all Debates amongst them:
And that their Masters be likewise empowered and so secured by his Principal,
That each and every one of them may also enter into Bonds to the Country here,
That his Owner shall punctually and faithfully comply with his Bond, for that
Purpose passed in London, before he be permitted to take Tobacco on Board. If
it be objected to this, That it will be a Hardship on the London Merchants to
be so restrained, whilst the Out Ports have their Liberty: I answer, That the
Out Ports must also be under the same Restraint; that is, That they, and their
Masters, be likewise bound in the same Manner, to abide by such Agreements as
they have or will come into, in their respective Ports. For, as I informed the
Read^r, It Is not to be questioned, but that they have formed themselves into
Societies by this Time, as well as the London Merchants; if not, some such
Method as this, will oblige them so to do. After all, by this Method, we do not
lay them, or the London Merchants, un^er any Restraint: We only use Means to
oblige them punctually to comply with what they have, or shall restrain
them^el^es to: So that it can be no Hardship upon any of them to be bound to
abide by the Determination of Two Thirds of their own Number, who will not
surely lay themselves, and the other Gentlemen of the Trade, under such
Diffi^ulties as cannot be complied with; or if by ^xperience they find, that
what they had agreed upon in any of their Meetings, was like to be I^convenient
to the Trade in general, there is no doubt but that at the next Meeting* they
would (...) it. So that upon the (...), I hope it will not appear unreasonable
to oblige them to stand (...) to what they themselves ^^ree to* for (...) more.
I shall only add, That in (...) approved of, a re^son^ble (...), before it can
(...) place, (...) conform themselves to it. I wish any Thing of this Kind, may
be found, upon due Consideration, to be practicable: If so, I am possitive it
would effectually convince them, that we are in Earnest, and oblige them to
keep their Agreements; which would alone (as some of those Gentlemen are of
Opinion) be at least Forty Thousand Pounds per Annum, in this Province's Way:
It is certainly worth trying, to save so much Money to the Country.

I now conclude, with assuring my Countrymen, That if further Particulars
relating to this Affair come to me, which I think may be useful, I shall in the
same Manner communicate them to the Public; and shall only add, That if in any
Thing I have been able to do herein, either in London or here, I have rendered
any Service to my Country, I shall think my Time well employed; if not, I shall
still enjoy that Peace of Mind, which always attends an honest Man, who is
conscious of having used his utmost Endeavors in so l^udable a Cause as the
Good of his Country; which was the sincere Intention of,

My Friends and Countrymen, Your assured Friend and Servant, HENRY DARNALI.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE Reader may perhaps mistake those Twelve Gentlemen that were appointed to
be of the Committee upon the first Meeting of the Trade, for the Managers:
Therefore I have Under-noted those that are appointed Managers for this Year,
viz. For Maryland.
Mr. Samuel Hyde. Mr. John Falconar. Mr. James Bradly. Mr. William Hunt. Mr.
Jonathan Scarth. Mr. Joseph Adams.
For Virginia.
Mr. Micajah Perry. Mr. William Dawkins. Mr. Samuel Haswel. Mr. John Maynard.
Mr. Edward Randolph. Mr. John Willis.
N. B. There Is to be a new Choice of Managers every Year.

To all the Inhabitants in MARYLAND.


