Mr. Breck's Election-SERMON, May 29th. 1728.

At a Council Held at the Council Chamber in Boston, Thursday May 30th. 1728.
Voted, THAT Nathanael Byfield and Paul Dudley Esqrs; be Desired to give the
Thanks of this Board to the Reverend Mr. Robert Breck, for his SERMON preached
Yesterday before the General Assembly, and to desire of him a Copy thereof for
the Press.

J. Willard, Secr.

The only Method TO Promote the Happiness OF A PEOPLE AND THEIR POSTERITY.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable the Lieut. GOVERNOR, the COUNCIL, and
Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, May
29th. 1728.

Being the Day for the ELECTION of His Majesty's COUNCIL.

By Robert Breck M. A.

Pastor of the Church in Marlborough.

Eccl. xii. 13. Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty
of Man. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by B. Green, Printer to his Honor the
Lieut. GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. Sold by T. Hancock, at the Bible and Three Crowns
near the Town-Dock. 1728.

AN Election-SERMON.
DEUTERONOMY V. 29. O that there were such an heart in them, that they would
fear me, and keep all my Commandments always; that it might be well with them
and their Children forever.
HAPPINESS is what all Mankind are in an eager pursuit of, in this there is an
unanimous agreement: But where it is to be found, wherein it consists, and by
what Methods to be obtained; has been a controversy agitated by those, who have
been under the sole conduct of the dim light of Nature. The greatest Sages in
the Rolls of Antiquity, the brightest Philosophers (however successful in their
enquiries after and discoveries of Nature) here have been various and perplexed
in their Schemes, for want of that additional light of Revelation, which we
through the distinguishing Goodness of GOD enjoy. This is our great advantage
that unto us are committed the Oracles of God. Romans 3. 1, 2.
The sacred Volumes wherein are contained the Writings of the Inspired Penmen,
set this matter in a clear and shining light, this not only informs what and
where it is, but how we may attain to it, directs to the measures by which we
may, and without which we cannot arrive to the enjoyment thereof. This happiness
and Blessedness is to be found in GOD alone, agreeable to that of the Psalmist
Psalm. 144. 15.
, Happy is that people whose God is the Lord. For there is no other Object that
has that durable and substantial Goodness, as to be able to satisfy the desires
of a Rational and Immortal Being; and in this does true happiness consist, viz.
in the acquiescence of the Soul in such an Object. Those that have sought after
it elsewhere have or will find their mistake, and in the end subscribe
Solomon's conclusion Eccl. 1. 1.
, Vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

The acquiring of this Happiness, is what every Rational Being will endeavor,
unless he renounces his reason, and submits to the conduct of a vitiated
will, and corrupted affections.

There is another desire (besides that of their own happiness) in which Men
almost universally agree; soil the Good and Welfare of their Posterity. This
seems to be an Impression stamped on the whole Rational World; yea and in some
degree on the Brutal too, by the GOD of Nature: and the want of this Natural
Affection in any, is by the Apostle ranked with the most odious and detestable
Vices Romans 1. 31.
Such Monsters in humane Shape Nature has sometimes produced; and whose
detestable Names are upon record to their eternal infamy: such an One was
Liberius whose common saying was Dion. Lib. 57.
(...). When I am dead let heaven and earth be all in flames, I regard it not:
but Nero that blemish and scandal to humane Nature mends it with,(...). Yea
while I live, let it be so Sueton.
But these are exceptions and their sayings were a renunciation of humanity,
whose Names ought not to be mentioned but with abhorrence; nor written except
to render them odious. But this is a truth that for the general is undeniable,
That Men have a concern for the good, and prosperity of the succeeding
Generations. They do not only enquire after, and seek for their own personal
felicity, but are desirous to lay a foundation for Posterity to be happy upon;
that it may be well with their Children after them. So that it is a matter of
importance, and that which concerns us all, what steps to take, what methods to
pursue, that we may secure to our selves and to Posterity, a durable and
permanent happiness.

Now this is what our Text directs to, viz. To fear God and keep all his
Commandments always'. This we are told if we do, (which GOD of His infinite
Grace grant we may do) it shall be well with us and our Children for ever.

The words in our Text may be considered, (...) ^ther,

1. As expresive of the gracious desires of a bountiful and merciful GOD; for
the happiness and welfare of the Children of Men. O! that there were such an
heart in them, etc. The manner of Speech plainly denotes the greatness of his
concern for the Obedience and Happiness of His People, and their Posterity. The
Grace and Goodness of GOD terminates not on the present, but extends to
succeeding Generations; and his desires are not only that they would serve Him,
fear Him, and keep His Commandments; but that it might be well with them for
ever. And GOD does not absolutely and unconditionally will their perpetual
felicity, but that they may arrive to it in the ways of his appointment, by an
universal and constant Obedience to His Commands, which are Holy, Just and
Good* There is an inseparable connection between these, so that whoever aspires
after happiness by any other Methods than that of Obedience, will assuredly
meet with disappointments, and miss of the end proposed; and on the other hand,
whosoever serves the LORD with a perfect heart and a willing mind, and
persevereth therein to the end, shall most certainly obtain that bliss and
happiness, which GOD of His infinite Grace has promised to reward His faithful
Servants and Followers with. Thus GOD was graciously concerned for His people
of old, and no less are His regards to His Vovenant People now; and herein
appears that Grace, that Goodness, that Condescension, as gives us just cause
to say, Lord what is Man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of Man
that thou make account of him? Man who is like to vanity, whose days are as a
shadow that passes away, Psalm. 144. 3, 4.


2. These words may be considered as expresive of the duty of GOD's People,
viz. To fear God and keep his Commandments all, and always, and as a Motive to
urge and constrain to the practice of their Duty, viz. That it may be well with
them, and their Children for ever. So holy are the Commands, so perverse the
Wills, and corrupt the Hearts of the Children of Men, that renders necessary
the most powerful perswasives, the most alluring motives, and most forcible
arguments, to bring them to Obedience, and to yield an entire submission to the
Will of their most Rightful Lord and Sovereign: who might have exacted homage
of His Creatures, without promising of any Reward; but He is nevertheless from
the plinitude of His goodness, encouraging them to their Duty, by the gracious
offers of peace and prosperity, both in the present and future world* and
agreeably we generally find His holy Commands and gracious Promises together in
His Blessed Gospel: and thus He chooses to draw us as with the cords of a man,
and the hands of love, Hos. 11. 4.
None shall serve the LORD for naught, but He will be a bountiful rewarder of
them that seek Him Heb. 11. 6.
, which should stop those vicious and blasphemous Mouths who say, What is the
Almighty that we should serve Him, and what profit: should we have if we pray
unto Him? Job 21. 15.
Though some may say, We have labored in vain, and spent our strength for naught
and in vain. This is only with reference to Men. They may also further say, My
judgment is with the Lord, and my work or reward is with my God, Isa. 49. 4.


As to the Duty in our Text pressed upon Men, and the reward promised, both as
to the Nature of it, and its extensiveness; they shall be considered hereafter.
And from the words as expressive of GOD's gracious Desires concerning us, and
our Children: And of our Duty which we owe to GOD, in order to secure to our
selves and Posterity a lasting and abiding Happiness, I shall make these two
Observations, which are proposed to be the subject of our ensuing Discourse.

OBSER. I. GOD is not only desirous to be honored by the Service and Obedience
of His People, but of the welfare and happiness of them, and their Posterity.
OBSER. II. That to Fear GOD and Keep His Commandments, ought to be the great
concern, as it is the great Duty of His People, because their Own, and
Posterity's Happiness depend thereon.
We shall begin with the first of these Observations which is,

THAT GOD is not only desirous to be Honored by the Service and Obedience of
his People, but of the Welfare and Happiness of them and their Posterity.

This shall be spoken to under these following Positions.

1. That GOD desires and seeks his own Glory. For this He spoke a World into
Being, and by His Almighty Power and Resistless Arm, does so rule and govern
all the things contained, and all the actions by His Creatures done therein, as
to show forth the honor and magnify the power, and wisdom of their Creator.
The things which He has made show forth His Eternal Power and Godhead Romans 1.
21.
, and all things show forth the Praises of the most High. For this end, the
Lord, agreeable to the saying of the wise Man Prove 16 4.
, Made all things for himself, i. e. The ultimate and supreme end and design of
GOD in making of them, was the advancement of His own Glory: And indeed it
would be below and inconsistent with a Perfect Being, to have any other than
this, as His principal aim and end. The most Perfect Being will have the most
perfect End and Designs in all His Actions. And it is incompatible with the
Divine Nature, to do any thing, that shall derogate from His most Glorious
Perfections; so is it likewise to Him to form any other principal End in His
Actions, than His own Glory. That which was in appearance, a dishonor done to
the Divine Nature; (I mean its union to the Humane Nature in the person of our
blessed Lord, Who appeared in the form of a servant) was in reality the
greatest and brightest manifestation of the Glory of GOD that ever was made to
a sinful world. So many times in the Divine Actions, though we don't see how GOD
consults His own Glory; for Clouds and Darkness are round about His Throne: Yet
in the Event it shall be made apparent, that nothing short of an Infinite
Wisdom could so have ordered and disposed of all things and actions, for the
accomplishing of that great and glorious end. It Is true that some of His
Rebellious and perverse Creatures refuse to give Him Glory Actively, but GOD
will make their perverseness and Rebellion to serve the same great Design, and
will Glorify Himself upon them passively, who refuse to give that Tribute of
Honor and Praise to Him, to whom its due.

2. That GOD is honored and glorified by the service and obedience of His
People.

As we have said before, for this end they were made to Glorify GOD; so this is
the way by which they do Him Honor. Not that there can be any addition made to
His Essential Glory, for that is Infinite: but by the Obedience of His People,
the Divine Honor and Glory is declared in the World. Though this Essential Glory
cannot admit of or suffer diminution, yet His Declaritive may; with respect to
the former, it may be said, that neither our Obedience nor Disobedience cannot
affect it. It is as high as heaven what can thou do? Consonant to what Elihu
says Job 35. 6,7,8.
If thou sinnest what do thou against him; or if thy Transgressions be
multiplied what do thou unto Him? Or if thou be Righteous what give thou
him; and what receives he at thy hand? Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou
art, and thy righteousness may profit the son of man. But although it cannot be
diminished as to its Essence, yet as to its Manifestation, it may suffer an
Eclipse. As the light of the Sun, is not lessened by the interposition of the
Moon between us and that, where by its rays are intercepted; yet the
manifestation of that light to us, is. When we by a constant course of
Obedience have our light to shine before men: They by that light have
manifestations of the Divine Glory, and will glorify our Father which is in
Heaven Mat. 5. 16.
And indeed the way of Obedience, is the only way by which we can give an
Active Glory to GOD, and for this end He gave us Being; and such a service and
obedience are His just and righteous expectations from us: and which we cannot
deny, without laying our selves open to the severe rebukes and hot displeasure,
of an injured and incensed Deity.

If any should Object, That since our services and our iniquities cannot really
make any additions to, nor abridge, his Glory and Happiness; wherefore should
He be desirous of our Obedience, or resent our transgressions of His laws?

To which this may be replied, That notwithstanding the making GOD more or less
Glorious or Happy, be out of the reach of any created Being: yea, and in its
own nature an Impossibility, and therefore not to be effected by OMNIPOTENCY it
self. Yet there may be reasons assigned. why GOD should take complacency and
satisfaction in the faithful and sincere endeavors of His People to serve and
honor Him; and to have a holy fire of resentments enkindled in His breast
(though not to the disturbance of the divine Calm, or the discomposure of His
serene Mind, as it too frequently on such occasions discovered in His
Creatures, in their state of imperfection) at the transgressors of His Holy and
Righteous Laws. For the true and just cause of Love and Hatred, is not for any
benefit received, or injury done, but the account and intention where with such
Actions are done, which deserve love and respect, or anger and displeasure. For
a person may accidentally and fortuitously do another a service and benefit,
which had it been done willingly and with a design, had merited his esteem and
favor, but the want of this circumstance entitles him to neither. So also on
the other hand, a Person that mistakenly or by a mere chance injures another in
his Interests, deserves not his Anger, which had been otherwise, had there
been design in it. He deserved no thanks who by stabbing gave vent to an
Impostume, and thereby saved a Life, which was his Intention by that act to
have destroyed; and to bring this to the present case: GOD is not desirous of
the Obedience of his Servants, because of any Advantage acruing to Him, nor
displeased with the Sins of his People, because of any real disservice done
him: but He eyes the Intention and Design of the Agents, and accordingly will
graciously Reward those that design his Honor, and aim at his Glory: While he
will express his Resentments and terrible Indignation, against those that pour
Contempt on his Holy and Righteous Laws, by living in an avowed and open
Transgression of them, though neither really is GOD made more or less happy by
them, but He is the same Unchangeable GOD in his Essence and Glory, Yesterday
to day and for ever Jam 1.17.


3. That GOD is desirous of the Welfare and Happiness of his people and their
Posterity. GOD has given the clearest Demonstration that can be, that he has
our Prosperity and Felicity at Heart. But before we proceed to enumerate those
Instances, by which GOD has manifested this gracious define concerning us, it
will be necessary to enquire in what sense Desires are imputed to GOD. For it
will come near the borders of Blasphemy in thought, and is a giving into, the
pernicious Principles of a Sect unworthy of the Christian Name Socinians.
to ascribe literally and without a Figure those Passion, which are Incident to
imperfect Creatures, to GOD, who is a pure and simple Being Raco^^s and Buddles
Catech.
which far be it from us, to entertain a though it, so derogatory to the Glory, and
so inconsistent with and destructive to the Idea impressed on our Minds. It is
not to be admired that these who ascribe human Shape and Figure to the glorious
GOD, if they assign humane Passions too, but it would be a wild imagination in
such as have formed an Idea of GOD, as an infinitely Perfect Being, completely
and perfectly Blessed in himself, to attribute humane Passions or Affections,
such as Fear, Hope, Anger, Desire, etc. to a Being thus infinitely Blessed in
himself, in the same sense as they are in Man; No, though these are spoken (...),
yet when they occur in holy Writ, they are to be taken figuratively, only in
reference to His outward Works and Dispensations, correspondent and answerable
to the Actings of Men, in whom such Affections are, and under the power whereof
they are, in these Actings. And so here Desire as it denotes a Passion is to be
taken metaphorically, and denotes as such, when ascribed to GOD, that his
outward Dispensation toward his People, are correspondent to what Men are wont
to do when this Affection is working within them for the accomplishment of that
which their Desires carry them after; but it must be granted that this
particular Passion of Desire, may be more strictly than many of the Affections
attributed to GOD, for frequently it denotes GOD's Essential Goodness and
Kindness, which is secondarily manifested by the Effects thereof on the
Children of Men, the same may be said of Love, Joy, etc.

But we shall proceed to show that our bountiful and gracious GOD has in many
ways and instances innumerable, discovered a tender concern for the welfare of
His People, in all Ages of the World.

1. GOD when He created Man discovered this concern in the great and noble
entertainment He made for him: A Paradise abounding with Delights; and in every
thing that had any tendency to render a person happy. He was made Lord of the
World, and all things therein, the Birds in the Air, the Beasts on the Earth,
and the Fishes in the Sea, paid Him homage; all which he might have held to
Eternity, had he not by a fatal mistake hearkened to the delusion of a wily
Serpent, rather than to his great and bountiful Creator, which procured his
Exile from that happy Station, and was justly turned into a maroon'd World
overun with thorns and thistles, with the sweat of his brows to earn his bread,
and in sorrow to eat thereof all the days of his Life; Genesis 3. 17, 18.
and this horrible Ingratitude to his bountiful Benefactor, and vile Contempt
of his Righteous Sovereign, laid the fatal foundation for that Deluge of
calamitous Woes and Miseries which hereupon broke in upon a sinful World, which
his wretched Posterity this day, and shall to the end of time, labor under,
and must have done to Eternity, had not the same gracious Desires in the Divine
Being of the Welfare of Mankind, interposed, and infinite Wisdom contrived a
way for their recovery from that horrible pit, into which the sin of their
prime Ancestor had cast them. But this leads to another instance of the same
gracious desires in GOD, of the welfare of His Creatures.

2. GOD has further manifested the same gracious and merciful Disposition, in
the Methods He took for the delivery of miserable Man out of his lost and
undone estate, by sending His Only Begotten Son, to undertake their Redemption,
and deliverance therefrom. Never was there such a demonstration given, of the
intenssness of the divine desires of Man's Happiness, as in this: the love of
GOD herein manifested passes Knowledge: the length, the breadth, the height,
the depth thereof is incomprehensible Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.
. When there remained nothing for forlorn Man to look for but the dreadful
frowns and fiery indignation of the Almighty GOD, who is a Consuming fire. Then
even then, was a time of love: He spread his skirt over them, and covered their
nakedness; swear unto them, and entered into Covenant with them, Ezekiel. 16. 8.
. Nothing less than a Love as strong as Death, which many waters cannot quench,
nor floods drown; was evidenced by this Undertaking of the Son of GOD, for the
restoring of Mankind to his primitive, or rather a superior happiness, to that
which he had by sin made a forfeiture of. And if we should enter upon a retail
of the particulars and overt acts, by which he gave manifestations of his
gracious Affections toward us, Time would fail, and Eternity not be too long
to enumerate them. But let this in general suffice And we pass to a third,

3. GOD's gracious dealings with his Ancient People the Seed of Abraham, whom
GOD graces with the honorable title of His Friends. There are amazing
instances of the admirable Patience, Forbearance, and long-Suffering of GOD,
toward that stiff-necked and perverse People, which are clear and shining
evidences of GOD's gracious desires toward them; and that there is nothing
more agreeable to Him than to show and exercise his loving kindness and tender
compassions, to promote and further their happiness, and to make his People a
blessed People. If we trace them through the Wilderness, where they had so many
signs of GOD's immediate presence with them by going before them in a Pillar of
fire by Night and of smoke by Day; (for this I must look upon as miraculous
notwithstanding what has been offered by a late numourist to the contrary
Toland.
) His giving them food from Heaven, and springs of water from the Rock, and
innumerable other instances of His goodness with them; we shall see so much of
the Divine Grace, as will fully discover the merciful regards of a
compassionate GOD. And if we on the other hand consider the behavior of that
People under so many tokens of his favor and immediate presence, it will
greatly enhance the Divine Benignity, and fill us with admiration, that their
Idolatry, their Murmuring their tempting of GOD; their vile Adulteries etc. It
boredoms, had not provoked a Holy and Jealous GOD, to have deemed them to Cor^^
and his Comrades fate, to be swallowed up they and theirs. That rebellious
People are a standing Monument of the unbounded Patience of a Righteous GOD.
And after their settlement in the Land of Canaan, notwithstanding their
repeated aggravated provocations, in worshipping of strange gods; the gods of
the Nations round about them; and the major part of the Tribes for many
Generations successively, going a whoring after the Calves of Dan and Bethel;
and the abounding of the most detestable and abominable Wickednesses among
them; yet GOD of his infinite Grace and Mercy had Compassion on them, his
bowels yearned toward them, and he expresses himself infinitely concerned for
their Welfare: He mourns over them, and shows the greatest lothness to part
with them. What could be spoken with a greater Pathos than he utters himself
in? Hos. 11. 8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee
Israel? How shall I make thee as Ad^a^? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? My
heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. And when the
Iniquities of the Jews had arrived to that height, that Divine Justice would
bear no longer, and no other Method but that of Severity would take; GOD
scatters them among the Nations, but still has them in his gracious
Remembrance, and at the expiration of seventy Years, raises them up a
Deliverer, who sends them away in Peace to their own Land; and they are again
received into Favor. And further, though for their final obstinate rejecting
of the Messiah, and the barbarous Crucifixion of the Lord of Life and Glory,
they were cast off* and at this Day are laboring under the Curse imprecated,
His Blood be upon us and our Children Mat. 27. 25.
; I say although they were thus broken off, yet it seems as if that People were
not forgotten, but that there is a time approaching, when they shall be again
ingrafted in. When all Israel shall be saved. Of this the Prophets and the
Apostle Paul gave abundant Confirmation. Besides which their continuing even to
this Day a separate People, not mingling themselves with other Nations, although
dispersed over the face of the whole Earth, seems plainly to point out a Design
in Providence for their Restoration. All which serves to demonstrate the
Goodness and Grace of our GOD, and that he will not hold and retain his Wrath
for ever; Such are his desires of the Welfare of his People,

4. The gracious Calls, Invitations, Requests, Entreaties and Expostulations,
made by GOD and his Servants the Holy Prophets and Blessed Apostles to his
People, is yet a further illustration of the gracious Desires in GOD for the
Happiness and Welfare of Man. Nay the Chastisement and Correction which is
bestowed upon his Children flows from the same Fountain, and is the Fruit of
Paternal Love, and evidenceth his tender concern for them. The very thought of
approaching destruction to his People, so affected the tender Heart of the
Blessed JESUS, as to cause the Tears to run down his Cheeks, and to break forth
in doleful Accents, and in a Language inimitable: O Jerusalem how often would I
have gathered thee Matthew 23. 37.
And again, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong to thy Peace! Luke 19. 41,42.
But there is through the whole sacred Oracles such plentiful discoveries of the
good Will of GOD toward his People, as would be endless to come to
particulars, and should fill us with admiration, and cause us to cry out with
the Psalmist, What is Man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of Man that
thou visitest him.

And if it should be enquired, Whence it is that GOD is thus desirous of his
People's Happiness? Why such low vile and sinful Creatures, should have so much
room in GOD's Heart? compared with whom we are but (...) the drops of the
Bucket and the small dust of the Balance. To which I can only reply it is from
the Essential Goodness of his Nature. It is of the Essence of Goodness to be
communicative. That which gives Rise to all GOD's Desires and Actions, must be
looked for within Himself. It Is nothing in the Creature, I mean no worth or
dignity in them, that is the Cause. Had the Almighty when Man fell, turned him
into the World to shift for himself, and taken no more thought and concern
about him, he then had had as much and more than he deserved. Neither is it any
need that GOD has of us or our Services, that is the cause hereof; for Man
cannot be profitable to God, as ^e that is wise may be profitable to himself Job
22. 2, 3.
It is no Gain to him, though a Man makes his ways perfect, but all must be
referred to God who is essentially Good, and therefore communicative of his
Goodness to his Creatures, who all drink at that Fountain of living Water.

But nevertheless, I know not why it may not be justly supposed, that one great
motive with GOD thus to desire and seek the recovery of Man from his fallen and
miserable State, was to frustrate and disappoint the great Enemy of GOD and
Man, the wicked and malicious Devil, who triumphed over the ruins of the Fall,
and blessed himself in having been Instrumental to deface the Divine Image
impressed on Man, and thereby gratified his accursed Malice against GOD and his
Creature made in his likeness, by which he imagined irrecoverably to have
ruined, and thereby to have brought them in for sharers with him in those
Eternal Flames of Vengeance prepared for the infernal Spirits, and to have
robbed GOD of his Honor, and Man of his Happiness; the very thought whereof
gave Ease and Satisfaction in the midst of that gloom and horror, that
everlastingly adheres to the apostate Angels. Then these fallen Stars sang
together; and these Sons of Perdition shouted for joy. I say that this may be
thought a motive with the Divine Being, to desire, seek and accomplish the
restoration of Man, and thereby to frustrate the great Expectations the Devil
had of the happy success of his Temptation; and thereby also to add to the
Punishment of His and our great Adversary; For the rescuing of Mankind out of
their hands, created such an uneasiness in them, as will not a little add to
the torture, that is inseparable from their malicious and envious breasts: So
that what they proposed to themselves as a Happiness is by the just Judgment of
GOD in the event made an addition to their Misery; and such an addition as
their belying of GOD when they seduced our first Parents, justly deserved. This
Sin of the Deceiver, as well as of the Deceived, deserves punishment. Whether a
Creature in a full state of punishment be under a Law that obliges to
Obedience, and so whether capable of sinning i. e of transgressing a Law, I
shall not now determine; but by the by say, that there are (at least in my
apprehension) stronger Arguments to vindicate Divine Justice, in inflicting
Eternal Punishment on Sinners, than those built on this Hypothesis, soil. Of
their sinning (...). But I think it evident from the sacred Scriptures, that
the apostate Angels are not at present in the full Possession of their
demerited Punishment; for though they are ejected from their first habitation,
and are reserved in chains of darkness, yet it is to the Judgment of the great
Day Jude. ver. 6.
Which plainly intimates, that then they are to enter upon the full Possession
of their deserved Torments. And the speech of the Gadarene Devils, whose Names
were Legion to our Lord when He came into that Coast, is a further
confirmation, (...) thou come hither to torment us before the time? Mat. 8 29.
. And if so, they may justly fall under a law, and be obliged to Obedience; and
for the transgression thereof incur a greater Punishment. But I wave the
further prosecution of this digression, and together with it this Doctrine,
when I have entered,

1. A Caution to all to beware that they do not presume to continue in sin,
because of the tender Mercies and gracious desires that there are (...) GOD, of
our Welfare and Happiness. It is to be feared that there is that baseness in
the hearts of many to take encouragement from the Grace of GOD to go on in the
imagination of their own hearts, to add sin to sin, and to promise themselves
peace and happiness, through a mad presumption on the Divine Mercies, as though the
Almighty had no other perfection to be glorified but this, and that this shall
be magnified at the expense of the other glorious Attributes of the Divine
Essence. Such Presumers may without presumption expect the sword of Divine
Justice; and that the Lord will not spare them, but his anger and jealousy
shall smoke against them; that all the curses that are written in the Book of
GOD shall lie on them, and that the Lord shall blot out their names from under
heaven, Deuteronomy 29. 19, 20.


2. An Exhortation to the People of GOD herein to imitate their heavenly
Father; like Him to be desirous of, and endeavoring the welfare and happiness
of our fellow Creatures. If GOD who is infinitely above Man, is thus tho'tful
of us; How much more should we, seeing they are flesh of our flesh and bone of
our bone. There is nothing renders a Man more unlike GOD, than a narrow
contracted Spirit, whose views terminate on his own dear self, and whose proper
emblem is the Hedgehog, who wraps it self up in its own soft down, and turns
out brizzils to all the World beside. The more communicative and diffusive
persons are, the more noble and excellent they are, and the nearer approaches
they make to the Divine Pattern; who causes his Sun to shine, and his rain to
fall both on the just and the unjust. To be desirous of, to have an eye to, and
in their sphere to seek the welfare and prosperity of a People, is incumbent on
all. But more especially are those that are titular Gods Psalm. 82. 6.
, I mean the Rulers of a People: Their obligations are very singular, to
conform and regulate themselves, in all their Administrations, by the divine
Standard, or Pattern; and this will discover that they do not only bear the
Title of gods, but the Image also of Him that is the Supreme Ruler of Heaven
and Earth, and who judges among the gods. But I must proceed to the second
Observation.

OBSER. II. To Fear GOD and keep his Commandments ought to be the great
Concern, as it is the great Duty of his People; because their own and
Posterity's Happiness depends thereon.

Our GOD is a great, a glorious and an Almighty GOD, therefore to be feared;
his Commandments Holy, Just and Good, therefore to be obeyed: and these two as
the Wise Man says Eccl. 12. 13.
. To Fear GOD and keep his Commandments are the whole Duty of Man. And it is an
Act of Grace that GOD has made our Duty and Interest inseparable the one from
the other; so that by Obedience to the righteous Laws of our Sovereign, we do
both Honor him, and consult our own Welfare and Happiness. While we are in the
way of our Duty, we are in the way to Heaven. GOD as being our absolute
Sovereign might have exacted a Servitude of us, without promising or granting
any Reward; and when we had accomplished the Business he had set us, have
turned us into the dark and silent Grave, from whence there had been no
Resurrection; but through the Bounty of a good and gracious GOD, there are
glorious Rewards for them that diligently seek and serve Him Heb. 11. 6.
. But I speak to this Doctrine under three following Heads.

1. To Fear GOD and keep his Commandments is Man's great Duty. All the bright
and glorious Perfections of the Divine Essence, claim our Fear and Reverence,
and his Sovereignty obliges to Obedience. His giving to us Being, and by the
word of His Power upholding us in Being, gives him a Right to Command, and
brings us under an obligation to fear and obey. It was a proud and haughty
Speech of obdurate and hard hearted Pharaoh Exodus 5. 2.
, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice, I know not the Lord etc. But if
we consider a Circumstance herein it will not appear so black and blasphemous,
as at first sight. For when Moses came to Pharaoh with his Message, he
delivers himself as in the first Verse; Thus says Jehovah the GOD of Israel:
which Name Jehovah we may justly suppose Pharaoh wholly unacquainted with, and
might imagine it to be the Name of some petty Deity, to whom that enslaved
People paid Adoration; and therefore accordingly replies, Who is Jehovah? that
I should obey his Voice! I know not Jehovah neither will I let Israel go: which
consideration softens the expression. By the Fear of GOD in our Text we are to
understand that gracious Habit or Principle in the Soul, whereby the Heart is
inclined or disposed to have an awful reverential regard to GOD, to his whole
Will and all his ways; so as to fear to do what he forbids, or forbear what he
prescribes: Consonant hereto GOD says, I will put my fear in their hearts that
they shall not depart from me: And this Affection is what a glorious GOD has a
just expectation of from his People; and it is the Principle from whence all
sincere and acceptable Obedience flows; and frequently in the Divine Writings
these two are found together. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him.
Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
And in many other Places too many to mention here, as well as in our Text.

And as to the keeping of the Commandments: We must have a Respect to them all,
and persevere therein to the end; agreeable to our Text; All the Commandments.
Which denotes the universality and constancy of our Obedience. There Is no
Command though never so small must be left undone; for indeed GOD has by terrible
and amazing Judgments testified His concern for some of the lesser matters of
his Law. A Fire from Heaven destroys Nada^ and Abihu, because of a failure in a
Circumstance, when in executing their Priestly Office. The Men of B^^^^^^mesh
met with a terrible Destruction from the Lord, because they looked into the
Ark; and Uzzah was smote dead on the spot only because he touched the Ark of
the Lord. All which should serve to instruct us, that we are to have a regard
to all GOD's Commands, and not to leave undone the very least of them.

2. The Happiness of a People and their Posterity, depends on the fearing of
GOD, and keeping his Commands. The Happiness which our Text speaks of is, I
presume, a temporal Happiness, as indeed are many of the Promises of the Old
Testament: I say many of them; for I am far from the opinion of them, that
would have us to believe, that the Mount Sinai Covenant had no other than
temporal Sanctions, and that the Hopes of GOD's People extended no farther than
the Enjoyment of a prosperous State in the earthly Canaan for a moderate Term
of Years An Opinion fit for none but the Sadduces to embrace, who say there is
no Resurrection, Angel or Spirit Acts 23. 8.
. But all the other Sects as well as the Pharisees, confess both. But this, I
say, is a Promise of Temporal Felicity, as is evident from what follows in the
Context, ver. 33. That ye may prolong your days in the Land, ye shall possess.

The way to attain this Felicity is that prescribed in our Text, which is
abundantly confirmed in the sacred Writings, in the Story of GOD's dealing with
Israel, a stiff necked and perverse Generation, who while they served GOD, were
a flourishing People, and GOD made their Enemies to be at Peace with them; No
weapon formed against them prospered: GOD frequently made bare his Arm and took
Vengeance on their Adversaries. When his People hearkened to him, and Israel
walked in his ways, then ^e subdued their Enemies and turned his hand against
their Adversaries, he fed them with the finest of the Wheat, and with Honey out
of the Rock he satisfied them Psalm 81. 13, 14, 16.
. And on the contrary, when they relinquished their Rightful Lord, broke through
his Righteous Laws, and went a whoring after other gods, they were exposed to
the rebukes of an incensed Deity, and suffered the dreadful strokes of Divine
Wrath and Fury. GOD has literally fulfilled, what he expressly threatened them
with in case of Disobedience, and as punctually performed all his Promises to
them; when they hearkened diligently to his voice, and observed and did all his
Commandments; then the Lord set them on high above all nations of the earth,
and his Blessings came upon them and overtook them, when they they hearkened to
the voice of the Lord their God Job 21. 7, 8, 9.
. But whether GOD does observe the same exactness in conferring temporal
Blessings, and inflicting Punishment under the Gospel, as of old under the
Sinai Covenant Administration, may admit of Debate; and whether temporal
Promises and Judgments were not more fulfilled in the Letter, in the times of
the Old Testament, than in the Days of the Gospel, wherein they are often
exchanged into spiritual Blessings and Curses. For how exactly soever they were
then accomplished upon a People considered as a politic Body, there was not
the like with reference to particular Persons. Job takes notice of this, and
expostulateth upon it; Wherefore do the Wicked live, become old, yea are mighty
in Power? Their seed is established in their sight, and their offspring before
their eyes: Their Houses are safe from fear, neither is the Rod of God upon
them. Asaph likewise mentions this, as that which had stumbled him, and made
him envious at the foolish, when he saw the Prosperity of the Wicked Psalm. 73.
2, 3.
. There are Divines of great fame that suppose these Promises are now as
punctually performed to a People, considered as embodied, or a Society, as
then; but it may be questioned whether the Arguments, wherewith they endeavor
to confirm their Opinion, be forcible, and whether it be a Truth that admits of
no exception. As those had drawn a false inference who had concluded that those
Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices, were greater
Sinners than others Luke 13. 1, 3.
; so to infer that a Town, Province or Nation when under heavy and distressing
Judgments, are more Vicious than other Places whom GOD visits not with the like
Calamities, is unjust and uncharitable. No reason can be assigned why a Holy
GOD for wise Ends may not bring great distressing Judgments on Ten Thousand
Good Men, though they are formed into Civil Society, as well as upon Job who was
perfect and upright, by GOD's own acknowledgement. If GOD for the good of his
own Children whom he loves, does sometime chasten them sore, why not for the
Good of a Society? Or is GOD more regardful of the Welfare of Particulars, than
of a whole Kingdom or Nation. But this is what suffices to my present purpose,
that this is the general way of GOD, in his Providence, to Honor those that
Honor Him, and to exalt a Righteous Nation. And further, the fear of GOD, and
Obedience to his Commands not only renders a People Happy, but lays a
foundation for the Prosperity and Welfare of succeeding Generations.

The Virtue and Religion of Ancestry has a great tendency to render their
Posterity virtuous and religious. The Examples of Parents have a wonderful
Influence on Children; They work more efficaciously than their Precepts.
Mankind are generally of a Temper to be led rather than drove. This is more
plainly discovered in the evil Examples which they readily give into; as we
find verified in the sacred Story. So likewise has a good Example and a
religious Education a powerful Influence on Posterity: They frequently inherit
their Fathers Virtues, and in this way a foundation is laid for their
happiness. And again, GOD of His rich and boundless grace, extends His Patience
and long-suffering to a corrupt Posterity, for the sake of their Religious and
Virtuous Ancestors: As GOD visits the iniquities of Father upon Children to the
third and fourth Generation, so likewise on the other hand. Thus GOD for
faithful Abraham's sake, showed kindness to his Posterity. As the vices of
Fathers do bring down Judgments on their corrupt Offspring, so their Faith,
and other graces convey down Blessings of a Temporal nature: For as no Man
shall suffer eternal Punishment for his Fathers sins, so neither shall any
inherit eternal Life for his Fathers Obedience Jerusalem was saved by GOD, in
the siege laid by Senacheri^ for David his Servants sake, many ages after his
Death Isai. 37. 35.
: And the succession of the Line of Jehu possessed the Crown of Israel for four
Descents, for the zeal he exerted against the house of Ahab and Baals
worshippers. Thus we see Posterity may fare the better for the virtues of their
Ancestors. Neither is there any room to charge GOD with partiality or respect
of persons, though He spares a corrupt Offspring from religious Ancestors, and
brings down heavy and speedy Judgments o^ a Generation but equally as corrupt,
that are sprung from vicious Predecessors. For none would bring the same charge
against an earthly Sovereign, in the like case, should he pardon a Treason
committed against his Majesty by one whose forefathers had been eminent for
their loyalty to their Sovereign, though at the same time he should order the
execution of the Son of a treacherous Father, when but equally involved in
(...) same crime with the forementioned. Thus we see, how the happiness of the
succeeding may be promoted by the Religion and Piety of the preceding
Generation, and that the way to their happiness is, to Fear God and Keep his
Commandments.

3. That therefore it greatly concerns a People to fear GOD, and keep all his
Commandment always. This concern David the best of Kings, and a holy Prophet of
the Lord, had so much upon his heart, that when a Dying he gave it in charge to
his People, that they should keep and seek for all the Commandments of the Lord
their God, that so they might possess their Land, and leave it for an
inheritance to their Children after them for ever I Chron. 28. 8.
. The Man that is unconcerned about his own welfare, is stupid and tho'tless,
and seems not only destitute of rational, but sensitive powers. If he that
neglects to provide for his own house is worse than an Infidel. He that is
unconcerned about his own Welfare is worse than a Brute, for these are leaving
no essays, within the reach of their powers, unattempted, to promote their own
comfortable Subsistence. The Law of Self Preservation leads to it, which is not
only impressed on the Rational but the Brutal World too.

And besides this the Welfare of your Posterity has such a dependency
hereupon, as be speaks your great Concern. Our Children which shall succeed us,
when we pass off the stage, will face the better for our Obedience and Fidelity
to our GOD: a care and regard to their Young is discovered in the Brutal Herd,
(which consideration alone (by the way) must satisfy every Man of reason that
they act from a Principle superior to that of tho'tless and unactive Matter,
and for ever baffle the notion that some of our modern Philosophers have
endeavored to impose upon the World, of their being but mere Machines;) and
shall not Man lay himself out, in prosecuting of all those measures* whereby he
may not only make himself Happy, but entail a Blessing on Generations to come.
If we of this Land consider the great Declensions and Apostacies, whose black
and dismal Symptoms appear so fresh and lively upon us, we may, under GOD*
impute the continuance of that degree of Prosperity which yet remains to us, to
that life and power of Religion and Godliness, which shone forth in the Lives
of our Forefathers who were planted in this Wilderness a noble Vine, and
wholly a right Seed. Let us therefore know the Lord God of our Fathers and
serve him with a perfect heart and a willing mind 1 Chronicles. 28 9.
; for if (...) seek and serve Him, he will be found of as, but if we forsake
Him, he will cast us off for ever. Though GOD remembers hitherto the kindness of
our Youth, and the love of our espousal, when our Fathers went after him in the
Wilderness in a land not ^o^n; when our Israel was Holiness to the Lord, and
the first fruits of his increase; and therefore has hitherto extended his
Favors, and dealt with us according to the multitude of his Compassions: yet
seeing we have been a rebellions House, and in some measure are turned into the
degenerate plant of a strange Vine, we cannot expect that GOD will always bear
with us. Though GOD exercised a long Patience toward Judah, for David his
Servant's sake, yet by their continual backslidings, they stirred up his fiery
indignation to lay Judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plummet,
disannulled their covenant with Death and their agreement with Hell could not
stand, when the overflowing scourge pass^d through he trod them down by it. The
like Fate we may look for, seeing we have left our first Love, unless we
remember from whence we are fallen, and repent and do our first works and are
watchful, and strengthen the things which remain and are ready to die. This is
what behooves all Orders of Men, that have at Heart the Prosperity of our Sion,
that by fearing GOD and keeping his Commandments, they lengthen out the
Tranquillity of this Land. To this let us all strenuously apply our selves,
that our Glory may not depart from us, and that GOD write not an lchabod upon
us. And unto this GOD by signal and amazing Providence in the Year past has
loudly called us; for GOD speaks by his Works, as well as by his Word. The
melting Heat, the scorching Drought, the blazing Sky, the stor my Wind, the
thundering Heavens, the pr^^^ing, trembling Earth, have lift up their V^ie^, and
given an Alarm to a sleepy, declining Generation. And let him that has an ear,
(...) As it ought to be the great Concern of all so seek their own and their
Posterity's Happiness, so more particularly, of our Political Fathers in the
Common wealth, whose Authority and Abilities put them into a Capacity of being
more serviceable than others. An affectionate and tender Concern for the
Welfare of those over whom they bear Rule, is what Nature and Grace calls for.
What GOD from whom they derive their. Authority requires, and Man justly
expects, and for to promote and further this, they are in many regards
qualified above others, and have great Advantages put into their hands.

It Is a great Service such may do to the Religious Interests of a People, by
their Examples. There is nothing perhaps tends more to promote Religion among a
People, or has a stronger influence on their Manners, than the virtuous
Examples of the Great and Honorable. Regis ad Exemplum. And on the contrary
nothing more debauches and corrupts a People, than the Precedents of those who
are by title Gods, and by practice Brutes. It has been remarked by some whose
Hearts have been wise to discern Time and Judgment, that it was the Debauchery
of a Court, that brought in such a Deluge of Vice and Profaness upon our
Nation, that neither a Succession of Virtuous Princes, nor all their Societies
for Reformation of Manners have been able to remove. We have abundant
confirmation in the History of the Kings of Judah and Israel, of the readiness
of a People to follow the Examples of their Sovereigns. The Magistrate never
better consults his own Honor and the People's Happiness, than when he leads
them by a virtuous and religious Example. And on the contrary, Dissolute Rulers
corrupt their Manners, and bring down Judgments upon them, (Delirant Reges,
pi^ctuntur A^^i^i,) and fully those Posts of Honor which they sustain.

And further, Civil Rulers may promote the Welfare of a People, by exerting the
Powers which they have received from GOD, to restrain and suppress
Transgressors, by being a terror to evil Doers and a praise to them that do
well: And hereby they will assert the Dignity of their Character, and
Generations to come shall call them Blessed; when by good Examples they draw,
by Good Laws they bind their People, and by Executions strike Terror to the
bold and daring Transgressor. Such show themselves Fathers to their Country,
and pursue the most natural Methods to establish the Felicity of a People, and
to convey it to their Posterity, and procure to themselves the Name of the
Righteous, which shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

BUT I would more particularly in the first place humbly Address His Honor the
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR and Commander in Chief, and the Honorable His Majesty's
COUNCIL for this Province, by whom I am this Day called to speak in the Name of
the LORD.

May it please your Honors,

We esteem it as a Favor from GOD, and our Honor, that we see the first Chair
of Dignity filled, and the Council Board surrounded with the Sons of our Sion,
who are not only bound by Sacred, but also by the bonds of Nature to seek the
Peace and Prosperity of all her Children. Our Hope is (and we bless GOD we have
grounds for it,) That you your selves will fear GOD and keep all his
Commandments always: And that you will improve the Powers that GOD, your KING
and Country repose in you, that those over whom you bare rule may do the same,
and especially those that immediately derive their Power from you, I mean those
that Preside in our Courts of Judicature; Our Judges and Justices that they he
Men that fear GOD, and fear an Oath; that will see the good and wholesome Laws
made for the promoting of Religion duly executed; and whose Religion and Morals
shall have a powerful influence on the Manners of the People; who shall be
equal to the Trust put into their hands, and shall dare to unsheath the Sword
of Justice against the great and bold Transgressor; whom neither personal
Respects, self-Interest, Cowardice or Bribes can prevail with to pervert
Justice, nor be imposed on by the thin Sophistry and Quibbles of those whose
Interest it is to prolong it: Who can say with Job 29. 14. I put on
Righteousness and it clothed me: My Judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem: Who
will be Eyes to the blind, and Feet to the lame: A Father to the poor; and
search out the cause that he knew not: Break the Jaws of the wicked and pluck
the spoil out of their Teeth.

Your Honors are betrusted with our Liberties and Privileges both Civil and
Sacred, which were conferred on us by King WILLIAM and Queen MARY of immortal
Memory; or rather by them restored to us; when they had been unjustly invaded
in an arbitrary Reign* wherein almost all the Rights and Privileges of our
Nation were sacrificed. We trust you will protect us in, and that you will
speak comfortably to our College. Churches and Ministry. We know that your
Justice and Love to your Country, will make you tender of them, and we trust
that you will assert them, and not suffer our Rights to be trampled or broke in
upon, by the Haughty and Insolent; and do us Justice when any vile
misrepresentations are made at Home against us, by those who are the Enemies to
our Constitution both in Church and State. For the Truth of it is, such we
have: We have nourished up in our own Bosom, those who seek the Ruin of both.
These with the greatest Injustice as well as odious Ingratitude, have basely
represented us as though we neither feared GOD, nor honored the KING: concerning
some of whom we may say, as Julius Caesar to Brutus, when together with others
they were basely murdering of him, Et tu quoque ^i Fili. Though we have not
strained the Doctrine of Loyalty to that excessive height which some have
done; nor been Debauched with their Notion of Indefeasible Hereditary Right.
Doctrines never designed for their own Practice, but to impose it as a burden
on the Shoulders of others, and they not touch it with one of their Fingers:
Principles that have been at the bottom and given life to those unhappy Strifes
and scandalous Divisions that have plagued the Nations for a Century of Years.
Yet we can vie with any for Loyalty to our PRINCE: At the Demise of our late
most gracious SOVEREIGN of Blessed Memory, none paid a larger Tribute of Tears;
and at the happy and Peaceable Accession of his present sacred MAJESTY to his
Father's Throne, none more heartily rejoiced, (whom GOD long preserve) which
encourages us to expect his Favor; and that you Great Sir, that have the
Honor to represent Him, and those Honorable Gentlemen that are or may be of
His Council, will seek our peace and guard our Liberties.

I would in the next place humbly Address my self to the Honorable and Worthy
Gentlemen, that are vested with the power of the Elections of this Day.

It is our just and reasonable Expectation from You, that you faithfully
discharge the trust reposed in you by GOD, your KING and Country; that you your
selves seek the Prosperity of this People; and that you make Choice of such to
be of his Majesty's Council, as shall be true to the Temporal and Religious
Interests of this Land. That in your Elections you be not under the influence
of any private or sinister view: That you choose Men that Fear GOD and Honor
the KING; Men of approved Fidelity to their Prince and Country; Men of Courage
and Resolution, that dare assert the Rights and Liberties of the People, and
will give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to GOD the things that
are GOD's; and that will not give into any measures destructive to our true
Interests Civil and Religious, though they should miss of popular Applause, and
endanger a being dropped at the next Election: Men of Wisdom and Skill, equal to
the Province they undertake, and that know what Israel ought to do in such a
Day as this; who shall not tremble at the frowns of the Great, nor have a
fondness for that insignificant toy and trifle, popular Praise: That in your
Choice you be not biassed by personal Respects, nor prejudiced by secret
Suggestions: Nor suppose a Man qualified to set at the Honorable Board merely
because he will be a Tool to promote some particular Design or Interest in
view; but Men of known Character for Piety toward GOD, Loyalty to their Prince
and Probity toward Men; Men who shall act up to their Dignity and scorn to be
under the malign Influences of a Party Spirit, who shall always have the true
Interest of their KING and Country in view, and steadily prosecute all measures
conducive thereunto; whom neither Frowns nor Bribes can divert therefrom.

Your Wisdom, Piety and Zeal for the Glory of GOD, and the Welfare of this his
People are greatly relied upon; and a Unanimity in pusuing all proper Methods
for the accomplishing hereof is much desired and wished for. This will show you
to be Fathers to your Country, and will give us a joyful Prospect that it shall
be well with us and our Children for ever.

I would in the next place apply my self to my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in
the Ministry; not for their Information, but to excite and quicken them to the
industrious Improvement of the Talents, Advantages and Opportunities put into
their hands to promote the Interests of the People that the great Shepherd of
the Sheep has committed to their Charge. We of all Men are the most deeply
obliged to Fear GOD and keep his Commandments, and to lay out ourselves, that
others may do so too; that we may be able, when the chief Shepherd shall
appear, to give up a joyful Account of our selves and them that He has
committed to our Care; and may receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away.
To promote practical Religion should be the great end of our Ministry: This is
what is worthy to expend our Zeal upon, and not in unhappy Jangles about
speculative Opinions that have no influence on our Morals. Though by the Deeds
of the Law, shall no flesh be justified, yet without the Deeds of the Law, can
none be saved: Though a Man be a sound Believer; (I mean Orthodox in the faith)
unless he be a sincere Convert, his Religion is as a sounding Brass and a
tinkling Cymbal. I would not be understood to intimate as if Moral virtues,
were to be i^sisted upon only or principally in our Preaching and inculcated
upon our Auditory; No, Faith in JESUS CHRIST and Repentance unto Life are the
great Doctrines of the Gospel; and which when rightly understood, will be found
to be the foundation of all true Obedience: and these only conduce to make us a
Holy and Religions People. For this end CHRIST, when personally here preached
them: and for this he gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all
iniquity and purify to Himself a peculiar People zealous of good works. And to
prosecute the same glorious End, and by the same Means, is incumbent on Gospel
Ministers who will never more succesfully promote the interests of Religion,
than by Preaching the Doctrines of Faith and Repentance. In this let us labor,
and be unwearied: Though the work be difficult in it self, and many
discouragements attending of it, arising from Hell beneath, and its children
here on Earth; yet we have this to encourage us, that He that has sent us has
promised to be with us unto the End of the World. Our Work is great, our
Strength is small, our Time is short, some of our best and most industrious
Laborers in GOD's Vineyard, are called away to receive their Wages; and we are
left to bear the heat and burden of the Day. All which Considerations should
make us more prayerful, more diligent, more laborious in our ministerial Work,
that we may approve ourselves faithful to GOD, faithful to his People, faithful
to our own Souls; and this will entitle us to an untarnished, unfading Crown of
Glory when the chief Shepherd shall appear.

I shall Conclude when I have briefly addressed my self to the People of this
Land, that they would lay these things to Heart and strenuously apply
themselves to seek their own and Posterities Welfare and Happiness in the way
and method in our Text prescribed. Without you, all that our Rulers in Civil
and Sacred Orders can do, will not avail. Though our Legislators enact never so
many good Laws for the regulation of the Morals of a People, unless You do your
part, and improve the Power and Liberty you are invested with in your several
Towns to make choice of such for your Grand-jurors, Tything men, etc. as are
Men fearing GOD, Men of Truth and Fidelity, Men of Wisdom equal to the Trust
committed to them and have the interests of Religion at heart; who will
carefully inspect the Manners of the People, and bring the Transgressors to
open shame and punishment. I say, unless you are careful and conscientious in
this, all our Laws for the reforming the Manners of a corrupt People, are
insignificant, and our Lawmakers labor in vain. And though the Ministers of the
Everlasting Gospel should set the Doctrines thereof in the clearest and
brightest Light, and with the most cogent Arguments, and forcible Motives press
practical Religion upon their People; unless you encourage their hearts and
strengthen their hands, and join with them in their endeavors to stem that
torrent of Vice and Profaneness which has broke in upon us; They will take up
that Melancholy complaint, we have labored in vain, and spent our strength
for naught and in vain. Oh! that there were such an heart in this People to
Fear GOD and Keep His Commandments: And to exert themselves in their several
Capacities so to promote the Peace and Prosperity of our Church and State: to
put up strong Cries to our Fathers GOD, that He would pour out a Spirit of
Repentance and Reformation on their degenerate Offspring. Then the LORD our GOD
will be with us, as He was with our Fathers, and never leave us nor forsake us.
This GOD of His Infinite Mercy grant for the sake of His only SON our blessed
Savior, to whom be Glory and Praise for ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

