Mr. Prince's SERMON ON The DESTRUCTION of The GRAVE

The GRAVE and DEATH Destroyed, and Believers Ransomed and Redeemed from them

A SERMON AT MIDLEBOROUGH East-Precinct July. VII. 1728. Being the Lord's Day
after THE Decease and Funeral OF Samuel Prince, Esquire THERE.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. a Pastor of the South Church in BOSTON, and One of the
Sons of the Deceased.

Isa. lxvi. 14. And when ye see this, your Heart shall rejoice, and your Bones
shall flourish like (...) etc

BOSTON in New England: Printed for S. GERRISH, at the lower end of Cornhill.
1728.

THE Grave destroyed, AND Believers ransomed.
HOSEA XIII. 14. I will ransom them from the Power of the Grave: I will redeem
them from Death: O Death, I will be thy Plagues! O Grave, I will be thy
Destruction! Repentance shall be hid from mine Eyes.


HAVING lately seen the Bodies both of a pious Father and Son SAMUEL PRINCE,
Esquire who died July 3. 1728. AEt. 80. And Mr. ENOCH PRINCE, who died Aug. 31.
1713. AEt. 23. Both buried in the same Grave.
lying under the Power of the Grave and Death together, and within the view of
this House; what a spring of Consolation are the words before us, both with
respect to them and others who have deceased in the Faith and are lying in
their Graves about them? I will ransom them from the Power of the Grave, I will
redeem them from Death, etc.

BUT who is this that undertakes this mighty Work*

BY the 4th, 5th, 9th and 10th Verses of this Chapter, compared with other
Scriptures, it seems very plain, that the Person here speaking is no other than
He who since is called CHRIST, THE SON OF GOD, THE SAVIOR. For there we read,
-- Yet I am the Lord thy God from the Land of Egypt, and thou shall know no God
but me; for there is no Savior besides me: I did know Thee in the Wilderness,
in the Land of great Drought, -- O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in
me is thine Help: I will be thy King: where is any other that may save Thee?
etc. Characters especially that of a SAVIOR, that are expressly ascribed to
CHRIST, exclusive of others, in the clearer Revelations of the Gospel. And if
we diligently search the Scriptures Genesis XVI, XVIII, XXI, XXXI, XXXII, XLVIII.
Exodus III, XIX, XX. Judges VI. Isa. LXIII. 9. Mal. III. Acts VII. 38. Gal. III.
19, etc.
; we shall find Him sometimes assuming the Appearance and Denomination of a
Man, and sometimes of an Angel, long before He became incarnate, and under each
of these asserting his supreme Perfections and his distinguishing Offices for
his Covenant People.

BUT to show precisely that CHRIST is the great Redeemer here speaking; I need
only mention those illustrative Passages in Heb. 11. 9, 10, 14. and 2 Timothy I.
10. For in the former of those Places, He is expressly called, The Captain of
their Salvation, and the Destruction of him that has the Power of Death, and
the Deliverance of his People from the Fear and Bondage of it, are precisely
attributed to Him: and in the latter, He is said to have abolished Death, as
well as to have brought Life and Immortality to Light by the Gospel.

IT is then the Almighty SON OF GOD, that here says, -- I will ransom them from
the Power of the Grave, etc.

AND it is very observable that in the Parts of the Chapter which both go
before and follow our Text, He is full of dark Predictions of the Temporal
Destruction of the Tribes of Israel: But as if He were weary with the affecting
View, or at least would give a glimmer of Light to support and comfort the
pious Souls among them; He seems here on a sudden to rise into a tender
Resentment of their deplorable Bondage under the Power of Death and the Grave,
and into a fixed Resolution to deliver his People and destroy those their
devouring Enemies. I will ransom them from the Power of the Grave, etc.

To show his righteous and holy Displeasure at the Sin of his People, He first
permits the Grave and Death to get them into their terrible Power and
Captivity: But when He comes to see how cruel are these remorseless Enemies,
and the extreme Destruction they have bro't his People to; He is fired with an
holy Indignation against these Destroyers, He is resolved to be avenged on
them, and to rescue the Prey out of their Mouths.

IT is as if He had said, I am resolved to ransom them from the Power of the
Grave: I am resolved to redeem them from the jaws of Death: O Death! Thou have
been a Plague to my People; I will be a mortal Plague to Thee: O Grave! Thou
have been their cruel Destroyer; I will be thy utter Destruction: Thou have had
no Relenting or Pity on them, and I will have no Pity on Thee, but Repentance
shall be hid from mine Eyes for ever.

WHAT a glorious Friend and Redeemer is this -- Awake and Sing ye that dwell in
the Dust: For thy Dew is as the Dew of Herbs, and the Earth shall cast out the
Dead, as it does the Plants that seem to be perished in Her. Isa. XXVI. 19.
i. e. The Power of CHRIST upon you, like the nightly Dew, shall gently revive
and refresh your languish'd Bodies, and in the Morning make you to rise out of
the Earth and flourish.

BUT our Observations from the Words are these,

1. THAT the Grave and Death have a dreadful and destroying Power, even over
those that are dear to CHRIST or are his Covenant People.

2. THAT this Almighty Savior beholds his People under this dreadful Power,
with a most tender Pity for them, and an holy Indignation at those devouring
Enemies.

3. and lastly, THAT in this active Pity and Indignation, He is inflexibly
resolved to Ransom and Redeem his People from their Power, and to Destroy those
Enemies of theirs for ever.

OBS. I. THAT the GRAVE and DEATH have a dreadful and destroying POWER, even
over those that are dear to CHRIST or are his Covenant People.

THAT they have such a Power over impenitent and graceless Sinners, is no
wonder. They not only deserve it and are under the Sentence of Condemnation to
it; but they are also constantly provoking the most High GOD to abandon them
thereto. But that the sanctified and pardoned, in whom the Image of CHRIST is
formed, in whom He dwells and reigns, and who are dearly beloved of Him; that
Death and the Grave should have such a Power over these, and there should be no
apparent Difference between them and others, seems somewhat strange and
mysterious to us.

To illustrate this I shall therefore show you these Two Things,

1. SOMETHING of the dreadful and destroying Power of the Grave and Death over
true Believers. And,

2. How come they to have such a Power over them.

I. SOMETHING of the dreadful and destroying Power of the Grave and Death, and
the lamentable State of Believers under them.

AND here, though the Power of the Grave be mentioned first, yet inasmuch as
Death is the first that seizes and leads them Captive, we will first consider
this in its dreadful Power, and then the Grave to which it carries them as into
a doleful Prison, from whence there is no Deliverance but by an Almighty Hand.

1. THE dreadful and destroying Power of DEATH.

AND how extremely terrible would this Enemy appear, if we were to survey this
lower World, and either reflect on all its Cruelties through the Ages past, or
could take a view of the numberless Destructions it is even now a making among
the Sons of Men.

IN how many places is it without any Mercy seizing and destroying the render
Infants, even before the Birth: it allows them never to see the Light, and even
turns the Wombs that quickened them into Graves to consume them.

IN how many places is it snatching the pleasant Offspring from the Mother's
Breasts, and from the Fathers Arms, and bearing it away from their Sight for
ever.

IN how many places is it seizing the lovely Child, while it shrieks for help,
and neither the Parents Tears, nor the physicians Skill can save it from the
merciless Devourer.

IN how many places is it stopping the Sprightly Youth in his joyous and swift
Career, and cutting off both his blooming Life and Hopes together.

IN how many places is it utterly parting the dearest Friends: in how many,
rending from the Husband the Desire of his Eyes, and from the Wife her chief
Delight and Guardian.

How many anxious Parents are forced to leave their poor shiftless Children
crying out after them. The Aged bereft of their Sons and Daughters, the
Supports and Hopes of their declining Years: and others whose venerable Aspect
and Piety and Affection for their Children, render them most dear and
desirable, must be made to groan under heavy Burdens* and at last to part
from their mournful Families, and remove into Darkness. Their Eyes that have
seen them shall see them no more; and the Places that knew them shall know them
no more!

IN short, this cruel and irresistible Enemy neither spares the Old nor Young,
nor the Rich nor Poor, nor the High nor Low, nor the Bond nor Free. Not can the
Comely, nor the Strong, nor the Wise, resist his destructive Power; nor will he
spare the Guilty that most earnestly desires an Hour for Repentance, nor yet
the Good that would have an Age to serve the World. No Objects,
Accomplishments, Devices, Skill or Prayers can avail to save them.

AND for the cruel Methods of his destroying the Sons of Men -- they are too
many and various now to think of. I shall only mention a few Particulars.

ON some He lays his iron Hands, and racks them in their tender Joints and
Sinews, till their Souls and Bodies are forced assunder. In some He kindles an
hot glowing Fire that quickly parches and burns up the Life. Some He brings and
keeps in great Distress for want of necessary Length of Breathing, till they
can bare no longer, their Strength and Spirits fail, and their Breath expires.
Some He on a sudden pierces with gashfull Wounds and intolerable Torments:
some He kills as quick as Lightning: some He Strangles, and some He Crushes all
to pieces.

IN such various Methods does this Cruel Enemy express his dreadful Rage and
Violence among the Sons of Men.

BUT let us now behold this King of Terrors as He usually comes on with his
ghastly Looks and destroying Power.

AND here He often first begins to blast their Strength, and then to oppress
and pain their Hearts. He makes them restless Day and Night. He drinks up their
Spirits, and works like Poison, like the Gall of Asps within them. He throws
their inward parts and Juices into great Disorders: and as He comes on nearer,
He binds and chains the vital Powers, He fills the Windows of the Eyes with
Darkness, He makes the Throat to sound with a dismal Rattle, the outward Parts
to chill and stiffen; and the Face that used to bloom and smile, He makes to
look with Distress and Horror.

AND now come on the doleful Groans, the dying Throws and Struggles, the
fainting Gasps for a few Breaths more -- the Strength is gone, the Life
expires, the Soul is vanished, the Jaws fall down, the Countenance turns wan
and horrid; the Corpse becomes as cold as Clay, it quickly runs to
Putrefaction; and by casting out insufferable Smells, it forces us to bury it
in the midst of Grief and Lamentations.

THIS is something of the Power of Death. We proceed now

2. TO consider something of the dreadful and destroying Power of THE GRAVE,
and the lamentable State of Believers under it.

AND here we must leave their Souls that are become invisible to mortal Eyes,
and only view their lifeless Bodies as they lie in that gloomy Cavern.

THERE they are covered up with Earth, and as Job expresses it, their Beds are
made in Darkness Job XVII. 13.
. There they are forever hid from the Sight and Converse of the Living. The
devouring Worms may swarm and seed upon them. Their Skin grows moldy and black
as a Coal. Their Flesh consumes and putrifies; and as it wastes away, it changes
into a muddy Substance, and Rotteness enters into all their Bones.

AND Oh! how hideous is now the Sight of that which was once a lovely and
delightful Body! The Linen that bound the Parts for a while together, is
turned to dirt of the darkest Hue, and the Joints dissolved. The Bones lie bare
and black -- the Eyeballs, the Cheeks, the Lips are eaten out, the Jaws wide
open, the Teeth appearing last, and the mouldering Ribs will let you see that
the Heart and Reins are consumed within them.

THIS is something of the destroying Power of the Grave, and the lamentable
State of the Bodies of Believers under it: and how affecting is it that they
must be there confined as in a doleful Dungeon full of Dead Men's Bones and all
Uncleanness, as CHRIST discribes it Mat. XXIII. 27.
, and even there must lie till they are turned to Rotteness and filthy Earth

AND thus we see Believers, though they are ever so dear to CHRIST, yet in these
respects if we look no further, there is no Destinction between them and
others, and even the vilest of the Sons of Men; and indeed often their very
Bones and Dust are mixed together.

LET us therefore now consider

II. HOW comes this to pass that Death and the Grave have such a dreadful Power
over them.

TO this I must but answer briefly; that we may get out as soon as possible, of
these Sorrowful Contemplations.

Now it is by their Original Sin and Fall in their first Parents, that these
dreadful Enemies have thus gotten them into their Power. And though CHRIST has
purchased them a complete Redemption from every Evil; yet He is pleased for
wise Intentions to apply the Purchase and redeem them by Degrees, till He
brings the Work to its designed Perfection.

FIRST He rescues them from the moral Dominion of Sin and Satan at the very
Instant of their true Conversion. He then delivers them more and more from
their prevailing influence, as they are marching on to the Heavenly Places. At
the Moment of Death, He completely redeems the Soul from Sin and Sorrow, and
puts an utter End to the Polution and Influence of Sin in their Bodies. And
then He suffers the Power of Death and the Grave to prevail, that He might bare
his Witness against the Sin of his People, and that his almighty Power may the
more appear and shine, in raising their dissolved Dust to Life, and forming so
vile a Substance into Glorious Bodies.

BUT in these dark and melancholy Scenes it is now time to come to our

II. OBS. THAT this ALMIGHTY SAVIOR beholds his People under this dreadful
Power of the Grave and Death with a most tender PITY for them, and an high
RESENTMENT against those their Enemies.

THESE mouldering, vile and destroyed Bodies were once inlivened with rational,
active and immortal Souls. Yea they once were sanctified together by the HOLY
SPIRIT, and became his Temples. In them He condescended to reside, and there He
dwelt and wrought with Pleasure. In them He gave a deadly Blow to Sin, and made
an hopeful Progress in their spiritual Life and Purification. He employed them
as active Instruments of Righteousness to GOD, as the Apostle speaks, Romans VI.
13.
and of great Good and Comfort among the Children of Men. In them He showed his
most excellent Wisdom, Goodness, Power and Workmanship, with the alluring
Beauties of Religion. And on them He began to mark the Lines of the Image of
CHRIST.

WITH these Bodies of theirs as well as with their Souls combined, the SON OF
GOD has entered into a sacred Covenant of Union, much like that of Marriage
between a Wife and Husband; but in this it differs, that even Death it self
shall never dissolve it. In them He used to have an holy and delightful
Fellowship, for them He died and rose again, and for them He therefore bares a
constant and most dear Affection.

IN short, He made them the precious Members of his mystical Body; and how
often have they wro't and suffered and spent their Strength and Ease in his
laborious Service? How much have their Eyes been exercised in Reading his holy
Oracles, and surveying his wondrous Works; their Feet in Traveling to his
worshipping Assemblies; their Ears in Harkening to his holy Word; their vocal
Organs in speaking forth his Praises; and their Hands and Arms in a vast
variety of Actions for his Interest and Honor? How often have their Hearts
been oppressed with Grief for the Sins of others and themselves against Him,
their tender Nerves fatigued and pained, and their Lives consumed in Sufferings
and Labors for Him.

YEA, When they gave up the Ghost, they gave it in the Exercise of Love to
CHRIST, of Desires to be with Him, and resigned both their Souls and Bodies
into his Almighty Hands, into his tender Care and Keeping: Hoping that He would
not always leave their Souls in the State of Separation, nor let their Bodies
always see Corruption; but that He would kindly watch their mouldering Earth,
and not despise their broken Image, but in the Morning which shall rise with
his Appearance, that He would then remember and restore their destroyed Bodies,
quicken them with their returning Spirits, make them of an Immortal
Constitution, raise them from the Dungeon of the Grave, and bring them forth to
Light and Liberty; that in their Flesh and with those longing Eyes they might
see Him on the Earth.

AND now the Death of these must needs, as the Psalmist tells us Psalm CXVI. 15.
, be very Precious in his sight, i. e. In their very Death and Dissolution they
are dear and precious to Him. In all their Afflictions, and especially the most
sharp Affliction of this distressing Hour, He must needs, as much as is
consistent with his happy State in Heaven be afflicted also. He has a Fellow
feeling with them in these bitter Sufferings which He once felt Himself when He
lived and dyed among us Heb. IV. 15.
. And if it were consistent with his FATHER'S Will, CHRIST would never suffer
Death to hurt or touch them, and much less to separate those dear Companions
their Souls and Bodies, and bring their Bodies into such a wast and lamentable
State.

CHRIST must needs behold the struggling Contest with great Concern. And when
the vile Body is bereft of Life and Soul, He does not leave it: When it is
carried to the Grave, He goes down with it Thither: His gracious Presence
dwells with it there: and there He tenderly watches over it, that not a Dust
may be lost that may be a convenient material to be put into the Building
again. While the Carcass lies putrefying, in all it is Noisomeness and
Blackness, He does by no means despise it; but He Pities it, and accounts the
Dust of his Temples to be precious while it lies in Destruction and Ruins.

AND from Pitying the broken Remains of his People under the cruel and
inglorious Power of Death and the Grave, He highly Resents the Injuries those
devouring Enemies have done them, and the base Condition they have brought his
beloved People into. Their Souls in Paradise have also a longing Desire for
their destroyed Bodies: And they continually Cry with those under the Altar,
Rev. VI. 9, 10.
to THIS MIGHTY REDEEMER, to rescue them from the Power of these inveterate and
vile Enemies and take Vengeance on them. And with the Sight of the deplorable
Condition of their Bodies in the Grave, and the earnest Cry of their separate
Spirits, HE cannot but be moved with an high Indignation against these their
cruel and remorseless Destroyers.

AND this brings us to the

III. and last OBS. viz. THAT with this active Pity and Indignation, He is
inflexibly resolved to RANSOM, and REDEEM his People from their Power, and to
DESTROY those Enemies of theirs for ever.

HIS Pity to his People remains the same as long as their Bodies he under the
Power of these Destroyers. Even in the midst of all his Glory in the Worlds
above, He will never be satisfied till He sees them delivered. Nor will He
content himself with Redeeming them only; but he will also go on to Avenge
Himself on their implacable Enemies. And as they were inexorably bent on his
People's entire Destruction; He will now have no Mercy on them, but extirpate
them for ever. This is his unalterable Bent and Purpose, and as soon as ever
the FATHER permits Him, He will effectually accomplish it.

AND here we may consider these two things.

1. IN what respect does CHRIST Ransom and Redeem them, and destroy their
Enemies.

2. WHEN and in what Manner will He accomplish this glorious Work.

I. IN what respect does CHRIST Ransom and Redeem his People from the Power of
the Grave and Death, and destroy those Enemies.

Now, Ransoming seems to intimate a sufficient Price laid down for their
Redemption; and Redeeming signifies the happy Action He performs in consequence
of the Ransom paid, and their effectual Deliverance: and these two several
Terms seem plainly then to point to those two various Methods whereby He works
it for them; (1) By his Sufficient Purchase, and (2) By his Almighty Power.
Agreeable to this we read of Ransom and Deliverance, Job XXXIII. 24. Then He is
gracious unto them and says, DELIVER them from going down to the Pit; I have
found a RANSOM. And thus we read of the REDEMPTION of the PURCHASED Possession,
Ephesians. 1. 14. There is first the meritorious Purchase of this Possession, and
then the effectual Redemption of it.

1. CHRIST will meritoriously RANSOM them from the Power of the Grave and
Death, by the sufficient Purchase He has made when He was here on Earth.

IT is for this great End that He the ONLY BEGOTTEN SON of THE FATHER became
incarnate, that He became a Man, a Servant that in our humane Nature He yielded
a perfect active Obedience to the Will of GOD; that therein He suffered the
Divine Wrath to the utmost, due to his People; and at length gave way to Death,
and was led as a Captive into the Grave; though He saw no Corruption there. Heb.
II. 14, 15. Forasmuch then as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood, He
also Himself likewise took Part of the same; that through Death He might destroy
him that had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil; and deliver them who through
Fear of Death, were all their Life time subject to Bondage.

A Figure of this we find in the typical Laws of Moses, Exodus XXI. 30; where we
read of a Ransom for the Life of a Man, to save him from Death: and in Exodus
XXX. 12. of a Ransom for the Soul or Life, to save from the destroying Plague.
But the Redemption of the Soul is precious: and no mere Man can by any means
Redeem his Brother, nor give to God a Ransom for him; that he should still live
for ever and not see Corruption, Psalm. XLIX. 7 -- 9. Nor are they a whit more
able to give a Ransom sufficient to Redeem them from Death and the Grave, when
they have seen Corruption. For this End therefore our Blessed SAVIOR appeared
in our Nature, obeyed and died: and thus he tells us, Mat. XX. 28. Even as the
Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give HIS LIFE
a RANSOM for many.

AND that this Price is sufficient to ransom his People from the Power of Death
and the Grave, is evident from its being of infinite Dignity, and therefore of
infinite Value. For it is no less then the infinitely low Condescension, the
perfect Obedience, the Labors, the Sufferings, the Life of Him that is GOD,
though now most amazingly joined to our inferior Nature: and hence the Apostle
observes, Acts XX. 28. The Church of GOD which He has Purchased with his own
Blood

BY this Price He has therefore sufficiently Purchased the Ransom of his
captivated People, their eternal Redemption from Death and the Grave, and the
Power of exerting his Vengance on those implacable Enemies

BUT then

2. HE will REDEEM them effectually, by the infinite Power of his Godhead.

OF this He has given us an illustrious Specimen, when on the third Day after
He died, He broke the strong Chains of Death: He conquered Him who had the
Dominion of it: He baffled the combined Powers of Darkness: they found it
utterly impossible to hold him a moment longer: He arose to immortal Life: He
broke open the Prison of the Grave: He led Captivity captive: and having
spoiled Principalities and Powers, He made a show of them openly, triumphing
over them in it, Col. II. 15.

In the midst of Thousands of Chariots and Angels, He ascended to Heaven. He
sat down at the Right Hand of the Throne of GOD, far above all Principalities
and Powers, and Might and Dominion and every Name that is named, not only in
this World, but also in that which is to come. And all things are put under his
Feet: and He is the Head over all things to the Church, which is his Body, the
Fullness of Him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 20, -- 23.

THERE He entertains the pure and separate Spirits of deceased Believers in his
blisful Presence. And will one Day come and open their Graves, and enliven
their Sleeping Dust: and then He Will fashion them into Buildings like his own
most glorious Body, by that mighty Power whereby He is able to subdue all
things unto Himself, Phil. III. 21.

AND then

3. and lastly, HAVING thus Redeemed his People, He will utterly destroy the
Power of those Enemies over them.

DEATH with all it hideous Train shall never more subdue or touch them: Nor
shall the Grave consume or swallow them any more for ever. But GOD shall wipe
away all tears from their Eyes: and there shall be no more Death among them,
neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be any more Pain: for the
former things shall be passed away, and GOD will make all things new. Rev. XXI.
4, 5.
Their glorious Life shall be perfected in Immortality, and neither Death nor
the Grave shall be ever seen or heard of more.

BUT

II. WHEN and in what Manner will CHRIST accomplish this glorious Work.

TO which I Answer -- At his SECOND COMING, when He shall appear in Flaming
Fire in these very Heavens, and come down with all the Angels and Spirits
above, to destroy his Enemies and deliver his People.

IN a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, to the great Surprise of the drowzy
World, shall the Trumpet Sound, the Voice of the Arch Angel and the Trump of
GOD. 1 Cor. XV. 52. and 1 These. IV. 16.
The Sun shall be darkened, the Moon shall not give her Light, and the Stars
shall fall from Heaven, and the Powers of the Heavens shall be shaken. And then
shall appear the Sign of the SON OF MAN in Heaven, and the ungodly Tribes of
the Earth shall mourn; for they shall see the SON OF MAN coming in the Clouds
of Heaven, with Power and great Glory, Mat. XXIV.

MILLIONS of shining Angels will make up his Train. He will descend from Heaven
with a mighty Shout. His Glory will inlighten the World, the Fire shall burn
before Him, and it shall be very tempestous round about Him. For behold the
LORD will come with Fire, and with his Chariots like a Whirlwind, to render his
Anger with Fury and his Rebuke with Flames of Fire: and the Hand of the LORD
shall be known toward his Servants, and his Indignation toward his Enemies,
Isa. LXVI. 14, 15.

AND now the Earth shall shake, and the GRAVES fly open and discover their
Slain. The Dust of the Righteous shall immediately fly and join and rise into
glorious Bodies. They that were sown in Weakness, Corruption and Dishonor
shall now be raised in Power, Incorruption and Glory: that were sown mere
natural and earthy Bodies, shall now be raised Spiritual and Heavenly Bodies;
that once bare the Image of the Earthly Adam, shall now bare the Image of the
Heavenly: 1 Cor. XV. 42.
and Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life 2 Cor. V. 4.
for ever.

AND as the Dead Saints shall first be raised incorruptible and immortal; so
the Saints that shall then be found Alive on Earth, shall be Changed
immediately, and made incorruptible and immortal like them. And when this
corruptible shall have put on Incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on
Immortality; then shall be bro't to pass the saying that is written, Death is
swallowed up in Victory: O Death where is thy Sting! O Grave where is thy
Victory! The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the (...); But
Thanks be to God who gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
XV. 52, etc.

THESE are the express Assertions of Divine Revelation. But why should it be
thought impossible or difficult either to Reason or Nature that the Dead should
be raised?

(...) behold an Heap of vile and filthy Earth, suppose the Mould of some dead
humane Bodies, in the early Spring lie bare and void of every Growth -- Let but
the genial Warmth and Dews come on; how many thousands of beauteous and living
Stalks and Flowers will the moving Dust soon rise and form into? And how much
more would it surprise us, were our Eyes but fine and piercing enough to see
the various Particles of the dirty Mass, attracting, moving, joining, and in a
most curious manner ranging themselves in their proper Places, to form, rear up
and perfect such a living Grove of Herbs, as our SAVIOR tells us, that even
Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed like one of these. Mat. VI. 29.
And though they quickly wither, moulder and return to their Dust again; yet when
the following Spring comes on, the very same Materials will again rise up into
a new and living Grove, as beauteous as the other.

NOR does it in the least avail, to say, that these arose from Seeds which
there lay hid, and now their Roots expanded and drew the Parts which were their
proper Nourishment. -- For what are Seeds but tender Plants already formed by
the invisible Power of GOD, and infolded in proper Teguments to protect them
from outward Injuries? And if you were to see their fine Materials running into
the curious Form and disposing themselves along into every Part till they come
to constitute a perfect living Plant in miniature, composed of a vast Variety
of Coats and Vessels; would not this be still as wondrous as the other?

AND is it not as equal with the Power of GOD to cause this Dust to run and
form into an humane Body, as into a curious and beauteous Vegetable? And when
He has formed the Body, to inspire and unite the Soul, as He once has done in
an other way before? He that orders the Course of Nature as He pleases, can in
a moment change the Course, and make it every whit as natural for the Bodies of
Men to rise up out of the Dust as the Stalks of Plants, or as He used to form
the Bodies of Animals out of earthy Substances in their Parents Bodies. And the
one will then be as easily comprehended, and be no more wondrous or
supernatural than the other.

IN short, The Rise and Resurrection of Herbs out of the Mould of Humane
Bodies, or of any other, and the constant Forming these animal Structures out
of earthy Substances conveyed only through their Parents, are lively and
continual Instances of the Future Resurrection. And how easy is it to conceive,
that in the Morning of that illustrious Day, when GOD will come to create the
Earth and these lower Heavens anew, that the same ALMIGHTY SPIRIT who once
formed Adam immediately out of the Ground, will then fall upon and in like
manner move the Dust of Believers and raise it up into glorious Bodies.

AND if the Manner represented in Ezekiel's Vision, be, as it is very likely,
the Symbol of the Resurrection. -- The Graves will first be opened: The Dust
will then form into the larger and lesser Bones; and then behold a shaking* and
the Bones come together, Bone to his Bone, in their several Sockets. Upon this
the Sinews and the Flesh are formed on them, and the Skin covers them: and then
the SPIRIT OF GOD breathes the Soul the Breath of Life into them, that the
Slain may live: and upon this they rise and stand upon their Feet an exceeding
great Army. See Ezekiel. XXXVII. 1, -- 14.

AND when He forms them thus anew, He will leave their Sin, and so their
Frailty and Mortality perfectly out of their Frame and Constitutions. In their
Formation He will fit their Bodies for the pure and perfect SPIRITS that are to
inhabit and rule them. And He will put every Particle of the corporeal
Substance under their absolute and mighty Power, which will be enough to render
them immortal and impassible; and always full of Beauty, Life and Vigor.

AND O! How will the Raised and Glorious Company then Triumph over the Grave
and Death; when they shall be thus redeemed from them, and with joyful Eyes
shall see those cruel Enemies now vanquished at their Feet and destroyed for
ever* The Grave shall no more cover them, nor Death approach them any more. And
then the Ransomed of the LORD shall return and come to Zion with Songs and
everlasting Joy upon their Heads: They shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and
Sorrow and Sighing shall flee a way.

BUT we must Conclude with a brief IMPROVEMENT.

AND

1. WHAT dreadful Havoc then does SIN produce in the World.

WE need only look on the Dying and on the Dead, and open a Grave; and we shall
clearly see it in it is dreadful Horror. Every Funeral and every Grave is a
Monument of it.

2. HOW deeply should this serve to humble us in our sad Subjection to Death,
the Grave and vile Corruption.

LET us but realize that vile and lamentable State, when we shall come to be a
Prey to those Destroyers and to lie down under their prevailing Power; and it
is enough to abase the proudest Mind, whither lifted up with the vain conceit
of its present Splendour, Strength or Beauty. For how can Pride in these endure
the trampling Power of Death, or Honor flourish in the corrupting Grave?

3. WHAT a glorious Person and Redeemer does CHRIST appear, how highly admired
should He be in our Eyes, how gladly welcome to our Hearts, and how exalted
with our Praises.

How glorious did He once appear, when in his own Person He vanquished the
Power of the Grave and Death, and led Captivity captive? But O! how much more
glorious, when He shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in
Flaming Fire -- when He shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe, -- in that Day? 2 These. 1. 7 -- 10.
Then as the Prophet speaks, Isa. LXIII.
He will appear in his glorious Apparel: He Will come traveling on in the
Greatness of his Strength: He Will speak in Righteousness, and He Will be mighty to
Save. He Will tread his Enemies in his Anger: He Will trample them in his Fury* the
Day of Vengeance will be in his Heart, and the Year of his Redeemed come: and
when He sees there is none to help them: his own Arm will bring Salvation to
Him, and his Fury will uphold Him: and He Will tread down all their Enemies in his
Anger, and bring down their Strength to the Earth.

4. OF what vast Importance is it then that we become HIS PEOPLE now, that so
we may be the happy Sharers in this great Redemption.

FOR these alone shall have their part in the First Resurrection: and Blessed
and Holy are they; for on such the Second Death has no Power, but they shall
be Priests of GOD and of CHRIST, and shall reign with Him a Thousand Years. But
the rest of the Dead shall lie under the Power of Death and the Grave till the
Thousand Years expire: and then the Sea shall give up the Dead which are in it,
and Death and the Grave shall deliver up the Dead in them: Rev. XX.
and they shall rise indeed, but rise to Shame and everlasting Contempt. Dan.
XII. 2.
They shall be judged every one according to their Works; and Death and the
Grave i. e. those who are in them, shall be cast into the Lake of Fire. And
their Worm shall never die, and their Fire shall never be quenched Isa. I. VI.
24.
.

5. WHAT a vast ENCOURAGEMENT is here for every true Believer in the near
Approaches of these destroying Enemies.

WHAT though they look with cruel and relentless Rage; you have a glorious FRIEND
that is mightier than they, to Pity and help you, and to crown your Conflict at
last with Victory. He will be with you in the Valley of the Shadow of Death,
that you may fear no Evil. They are only vile and sinful Bodies that shall be
destroyed by them: and this that they may leave their burden some Corruptions
in the Grave behind them, and rise in Glory. And then your solitary Place of
Burial shall be glad for you: it shall rejoice and blossom as a Rose: it shall
blossom abundantly and rejoice even with Joy and Singing: You shall see the
Glory of the LORD and the Excellency of our GOD.

WHEREFORE strengthen ye the weak Hands and confirm the feeble Knees: Say unto
them that are of a feeble Heart, Be strong, Fear not: Behold your GOD will come
with Vengeance, even GOD with a Recompense, He will come and save you. Isa.
XXXV. 1, -- 4.
He will open your Prison Doors, and though you dwell in the Land of the Shadow
of Death, He will cause his Light to shine upon you: He will restore your
wasted Substance and bring you forth, O Prisoners of Hope! into the glorious
Liberty of the Sons of GOD.

5. WHAT a CONSOLATION is there for the Bereaved Friends and Relatives of
deceased Believers in the gloomy Contemplation of the present State of their
decaying Bodies under the dreadful Power of Death and the Grave.

WHILE we sadly mourn to see them with their changed Visage, and to think how
they are putrefying and wasting in the Pit of Corruption; how greatly should it
comfort and rejoice us to hear these words of CHRIST -- I will ransom them from
the Power of the Grave, I will redeem them from Death, etc. Is not this
reviving Voice enough to raise our drooping Spirits, and transport our Views
from their present melancholy Scene to their future joyous Resurrection?

AND has the Widow lost a kind and tender HUSBAND, or have the Children lost a
most affectionate and lovely FATHER, ever concerned and active for our Good and
Welfare; Let us indeed go down to the Grave after Him, and there behold the
lamentable State of His lifeless Body, with that of our dear Son and Brother
lying by it, -- That we may the more admire the Power of CHRIST, which is able
to change these corrupting Bodies, and to form and quicken and make them like
his own; to shine, as those of the Righteous shall, even like the Sun, in the
Kingdom of their Father.

7. and lastly, LET us take care to IMITATE the Holy EXAMPLES of our believing
Relatives that are gone before us.

THEIR Love to GOD and CHRIST, their Zeal for his Glory, their humble
Resignation to Him, their Hatred of all Iniquity, their Family Religion and
Government, their Readiness to show Kindness to Men; and their Love to their
Country, to it is People and Interests both civil and sacred, and the great and
noble Design of our Forefathers hither, for Freedom of Conscience, for
Scriptural Pureness of Worship, and Sobriety of Manners. In such things as
these, and in every Virtue and Excellence; Let us, as, the Apostle exhorts us,
Heb. VI. 12.
be Followers of them who through Faith and Patience are gone before us, and we
trust are now in their Souls inheriting the Good of the Promises.

IN Fine,

LET the CHILDREN of RELIGIOUS PARENTS ever Remember, the many affectionate
Counsels and Warnings given them, the teaching and quickening Examples set them,
the fervent Prayers that have been made in their Ears, the sacred Name and
Covenant they have been Baptized into, their early Devotion to GOD, and the
awful and yet if they are Wise the happy Relation wherein they stand to the GOD
of their Fathers.

LET them be exceeding Careful and beware of Apostasy; least he provoked Spirit
of GOD should desert them, least they become the flagrant Instances of his
fiery Vengeance, and all their great Advantages with their Parents themselves
should rise up hereafter in Judgment against them to confound them and condemn
them and aggravate their destinguishing Punishment.

BUT O! Let them choose the GOD of their Fathers for theirs: Let them openly
acknowledge their Covenant, and devote themselves to his Service: and let them
make it their Business to Praise and exalt Him. And how will their Parents
rejoice among the Angels in Heaven, to hear of their Repentance and Faith and
Profession of CHRIST, of their frequent Meeting with Him at his Table, and of
their agreeable Lives on the Earth? But O! How gladly will the separate Souls of
such Parent and Children meet and salute among the Spirits of the Just made
perfect in the Realms above: and with what higher Exults of Pleasure and Joy
will they Rise out of the Dust together, and shine, and behold each other in
the Morning Light of the Appearance of their great REDEEMER?

FOR then those wondrous Words will come to pass, in Isa. XXV. 7 -- 9. with
which I close -- He will destroy the Face of the Covering, i. e. The Clods of
the Grave, cast over all his People and the Vail of Mortality spread over all
Nations. He will SWALLOW UP DEATH IN VICTORY, and the LORD GOD will wipe away
Tears from off all Faces, and the Rebuke of his People shall He take away from
off all the Earth: For the LORD has spoken it. And it shall be said in that
Day; Lo this is -- OUR GOD, we have waited for Him, and He will save us; This
is THE LORD, we have waited for Him, we will be GLAD and REJOICE in HIS
SALVATION.

Finis.

