Mr. Prince's Funeral SERMON ON THE REVEREND Dr. Cotton Mather.

The Departure of ELIJAH lamented.

A SERMON Occasioned BY the Great and Public Loss IN the Decease OF the very
REVEREND and LEARNED Cotton Mather, D.D. F. R. S. And Senior Pastor of the
North Church in BOSTON: Who left this Life on Feb. 13th 1727,8. The Morning
after He finished the LXV Year of his Age.

By THOMAS PRINCE. M. A. And one of the Pastors of the South Church.

Joh.V.35. He was a burning and a shining Light. BOSTON in New England: ^rinted
for D. Henchman, near the Brick Meeting House in Cornhill.

^

A Funeral Sermon.
LORD'S DAY Morning, Feb. 18. 1727,8.
2 KINGS II. 12. 13. AND Elisha saw it and He cried, MY FATHER MY FATHER, THE
CHARIOT OF ISRAEL AND THE HORSEMEN THEREOF: and He saw Him no more: and He took
hold of his own Clothes and rent them in two pieces: He took up also the Mantle
of ELIJAH that fell from Him.
THE Words contain the passionate Lamentations and Behavior of Elisha, upon
the surprising Rapture of his Master ELIJAH from Him up toward Heaven.

THIS extraordinary Prophet being aware of this approaching Event, He seems to
be scrupulous whether any should be with Him at the wonderful Instant. He
therefore begs even Elisha, who had very faithfully ministered to Him in his
laborious Office and was appointed his chief Successor, to tarry when He set
out from Gilgal, and then at Bethel and Jericho, while He traveled further at
the Divine Direction. But both Elisha and the other Sons of the Prophets had
been by some means or other apprized, that ELIJAH was to be this Day taken away
in an extraordinary manner. And while Fifty of them went and stood on some
eminent Ascent to view afar off and see what would happen; Elisha resolves to
keep Him company to the moment of his Departure.

BUT ELIJAH was to pass the River Jordan in order to his Translation, And when
they came to the Banks, He took his Mantle and wrapped it together and smote the
Waters, and they were divided hither and thither; so that they two went over on
dry Ground. And as they still went on and talked -- And Oh, how divine and
heavenly was the Converse! -- Behold there appeared a Chariot of Fire and
Horses of Fire, which parted them asunder, and ELIJAH went up by a Whirlwind
into Heaven.

THE Chariot and Horses of Fire could be only bright appearances in such
distinguishing Figures. And they were no doubt a sort of pure material
Substances which the Holy Angels made use of to do the greater Honor to this
highly favored Prophet in his triumphant Ascension. Whether it were a peculiar
sort of substance as pure as that of Light, annexed to their Spirits (as our
Bodies are to ours) and they carry always about them for their various and
continual uses; or whether a Substance they occasionally seized for this
particular end; it is easy to imagine, those mighty Intelligences could when
they please put it into such a singular Arrangement and Action as to give it
the appearance of a shining Body, and to dispose it into what Figures were
proper to accomplish their divine Commission.

AND it seems very plain as if Elisha saw ELIJAH ascend into the Chariot. For
wherefore should there be the appearance of such a Medium of conveyance, unless
it were in a visible manner to receive and transport the ascending Prophet? And
even the Vapors of this inferior Atmosphaere are very strongly moved into a
rising Aeddy or Whirlwind, as a suitable Instrument in the safe Hands of Angels
to raise the Prophet as high as the Air extends; and then they would proceed to
carry Him by their more immediate Power.

AND Elisha saw it, and He cried, etc.

HE saw it, -- and happy it was for Him; Inasmuch as this was the Token which
had just before been given Him, that He should have a double Portion of
ELIJAH'S Spirit: and the very Power of Seeing this Angelical Appearance seems
to be a special Favor and Work of GOD, and as much a Miracle at the seeing the
like Appearance afterward by Elisha's Servant when his Eyes were opened, 2
Kings. VI. 17.

AND He cried -- as one that was greatly moved at the Parting of his most dear
and admired Master.

MY Father! My Father! -- As a Declaration of ELIJAH'S great Superiority both
in Age, Graces, Gifts, Authority; and as a filial Expression of the highest
Reverence and Affection for Him.

THE Chariot-of Israel and the Horsemen thereof. He plainly takes the Metaphor
from the present Appearance of the Chariot and Horses before his Eyes. From the
view of these receiving and rising up with the Prophet, He cries out after Him,
as the departing Chariot and Horsemen of Israel; i.e. Their Strength and Glory,
their Defense and Safety. Varii in Pol. Synops.


AND He saw Him no more. --

HE doubtless looked after Him till both ELIJAH and the fiery Chariot had
ascended out of sight; and then He saw Him no more -- a sorrowful Expression,
implying the melancholy Loss of Him whose Company had been the Delight of his
Heart, and whose Presence was his Eyes Desire.

AND He took hold of his own Clothes, and rent them into two pieces. An ancient
Token of great and inexpressible Sorrow. A Passionate Action that signified how
their Hearts were rent with Distress and Anguish, what little Comfort they took
in any thing left, as if they cared not what would become of their Bodies, and
how little they minded the things that were most ornamental or useful for them.
A Jackson on Genesis 37. 29.


HE took up also the Mantle of ELIJAH that fell from Him.

ANY thing left of ELIJAH was dear to Him, and especially the characteristical
Mantle which He seems to have dropped as He was ascending into the Chariot. And
Elisha readily takes it up, both out of Esteem and Affection to Him, as a
precious Remain and Memorial of Him, and as a sacred Instrument He would make
great use of, both for the Glory of GOD and his own Advantage. And thus He
quickly applies it in smiting and dividing the Waters, as ELIJAH before Him,
and returning through Jordan.

HAVING thus descanted briefly on the Text, our OBSERVATIONS may now be these
--

1. EMINENT Ministers have the style of Fathers very properly given them. 2.
THEY are in a great measure the Glory, Strength, Defense and Safety of a
People. 3. IT is a very melancholy thing to loose them and see them no more. 4.
THEIR Departure should be sadly resented and expressed by Survivours. 5. and
lastly, WE Should highly value and carefully improve the Remains of their
Ministry.
Obs. I. THAT eminent Ministers have the style of Fathers very Properly given
them.

THIS on many accounts is one of the most honorable Titles among the Sons of
Men. It originally comprizes in it a Priority in Nature, Existence or Age; a
Derivation of Being and Good things to others; a superiority of Knowledge,
Wisdom, Power, Authority and Government; a gracious, tender and condescending
Affection to those who are under them, are derived from them, or are dependent
on them; a great Concern and Care for their Welfare; and the constant
Expression of this, in Providing for, supporting, desending them, and in
Promoting their Happiness -- as by instruction, Example, Council, Admonition,
Correction, Encouragement, and by all proper measures that can be devised.

SUCH things as these are contained in the complex Term of a Father. And what
more excellent Ideas are found in any humane Title whatever? No wonder then
that the greatest, best and wisest of Princes, Kings and Emperors have chose to
be styled the Fathers of their People; as comprehending and exhibiting every
thing both superior, indearing and desirable in their Relation to them. And
thus even the most Glorious GOD is pleased to entitle Himself the Father of all
Ephesians. IV 6.
: CHRIST is called the Everlasting Father with respect to his People Isa IX 6.
: and the FIRST PERSON in the adorable Trinity, the Father of CHRIST. Ephesians. I. 3.


AND upon many of those accounts above mentioned is this Title applied to
Ministers, and especially the more ancient and eminent, in the sacred Writings
1 Cor. IV. 15. 1 Thef. II. 11. 1 Timothy V. 1.
. Thus Elisha cried out in the Text to his Master ELIJAH -- My Father, My
Father. And the same Title did a great King of Israel bestow on Elisha, a few
years after, 2 Kings XIII. 14. Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness where
of He died; and Joash the King of Israel came down unto Him, and wept over his
Face, and said -- O MY FATHER, MY FATHER! the Chariot of Israel and the
Horsemen thereof.

AND how properly is this Title applied --

FOR as they grow up in Eminence, they grow superior in Age, in Knowledge,
Wisdom and Goodness, and in every Excellence that makes them more esteemed and
venerable. They become the Means of the spiritual Regeneration of many, and so
the spiritual Fathers of many spiritual Children: and for these they have a
very fatherly Affection and Care. They instruct, advise, forewarn, exhort,
reprove, and also chasten with their spiritual Discipline. They govern their
People, not with a lordly, but parental Authority; full of Condescension,
Impartiality, wisdom and Tenderness, as a Father his natural Offspring. In
fine, They Provide for their spiritual Wants, defend them from their spiritual
Dangers, encourage and comfort them, seek after their Salvation and Happiness;
and set such Examples as to draw their People's Affection, as well as raise
their high esteem and Reverence.

IN such respects as these, may eminent Ministers be very properly called our
Fathers: especially when they grow riper with Age, Experience and Goodness, and
come to cast a Veneration round about them.

BUT our

II. Obs. is, That these eminent Fathers are in a great measure the Glory,
Strength, Defense and Safety of their People.

As they are Neighbors with respect to all Mankind, their Views and Cares are
extended to the whole of the Species. They are greatly concerned for the
Welfare of all: And as they are dear to GOD, and have a powerful Interest at
the Throne of Grace, they earnestly Pray for the same, and as far as their
influence can reach they endeavor it. Like the Lights of Heaven, though they
move in their proper Orbs, they send out their Virtues to the remotest Regions.
And in these respects they may well be accounted the Glory, Strength, Defense
and Safety of this lower World.

BUT they are especially so, with respect to the People among whom they dwell.
For all this seems to be signified in their being styled The Chariot of Israel
and the Horsemen thereof. For these are military Terms: and Chariots and
Horsemen, were in ancient Times, the warlike Glory and Strength of Kingdoms, as
well as their Defense and Safety.

INDEED, The great and blessed GOD in CHRIST is these in a most transcendent
manner Psalm. LXXXIX. 17,18 Isa. XXVIII. 5,6. Zech II 5.
And between Him and the most eminent Ministers there is no Comparison. They
derive all they have entirely from Him, they perpetually depend on his
Influence, and they are as nothing and less than nothing before Him. They can
neither preserve, nor defend, nor strengthen, nor move, nor shine, nor exist
without Him: and all that they have and perform is but by a diminutive Ray of
Power and Light streaming forth from Him the Fountain and acting in them.

AND, next to this most Glorious BEING, but in an infinitely lower Degree, we
must ascribe the Honor to his Holy and powerful Angels, who are vastly
superior in Strength and Wisdom to the most eminent Men. They are mighty to
save; and as a flaming Fire they burn, as a flash of Light they fly to do his
Pleasure for his Vovenant People. Psalm. CIII. 20, 21.and CIV. 4.

IN this lower World, in it is present State, they for the most part keep
themselves invisible. But we read of their continual Presence and Agency, in
the Scriptures of Truth: And sometimes they brake out and discover themselves.
Sometimes in the Forms of most lovely Men, and at others they only give us the
blazing Ensigns of their active Presence. Thus they did in the Chariots and
Horses of Fire to these two Prophets; and thus afterward, both to Elisha and
his astonished Servant; when the King of Syria had sent Horses and Chariots,
and a great Host, to seize on Elisha in Dothan, and they came by night and
encompassed the City round about. 2 Kings VI.15-17. And when the Servant of the
Man of GOD was risen early and gone forth, behold an Host compassed the City,
both with Horses and Chariots: and his Servant said unto Him, Alas! my Master!
How shall we do? And He answered, Fear not, for they that be with us are more
than they that be with them. And Elisha prayed and said, Lord I pray thee open
his Eyes that He may see. And the Lord opened the Eves of the young Man, and He
saw: and behold the Mountain was full of Horses and Chariots of Fire round
about Elisha.

THESE Horses and Chariots of Fire were only the visible Ensigns of an Host of
Angels: and the Prophet informs us, they were more in number than the Great
Host that encompassed the City. And by the Story it seems they were at the
same, time visible to the favored Prophet, while they were not so to the
Servant with Him. And this seems plainly to intimate that these powerful Agents
may make a very shining Appearance about us, which may be clearly seen both to
themselves, and those whose Eyes are formed to discern the Vision, while the
Eyes of others in their natural Frame are incapable of it. Thus there are great
numbers of Stars in the Firmament that diffuse their glorious Beams around us;
and some perceive them, while others see nothing in the Places where they
appear but a perfect Blank or Darkness. And there are a great many others of
these heavenly Lamps that pour their Rays into every Eye, and yet are seen by
none till some optical Instrument be set before us, and then we discover them.

BUT yet eminent Ministers are in a great Degree the Glory and Safety of the
People they live with. So Elisha pronounces of his Master ELIJAH, even in the
Presence of Angels that were taking Him up to bare Him away. My Father, my
Father! -- You are got into a glorious Chariot with Horses of Fire -- But THOU
art the Chariot of Israel and the Horsemen thereof -- And what shall we do when
thou art taken away?

NOR was this a Title peculiar to the Prophet ELIJAH. We have the same ascribed
to his Successor Elisha, as He was departing by a natural Death, in that
forementioned 1 Kings XIII. 14. And whatever other eminent Ministers have been
like to them in their Day, among a Vovenant People, may as well be styled the
Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof.

ON what accounts were they the agreeable subjects of this illustrious
Character; but for their shining Light, their burning Zeal, their servent
Prayers, their laborious Endeavors for the Revival of pure and dying Religion
in Israel? By this means they appeared the Glory of that degenerate People,
they kept them from a total Apostasy, they preserved the Life of Religion among
them, they prevailed with GOD to spare them from ruinous Judgments, and often
to prosper them against their powerful Enemies.

AND when there are other eminent Ministers in a degenerate Land, who shine and
burn as they, with an heavenly Life and flaming Zeal, with servent
Intercessions to GOD, and earnest addresses to Men to turn and be saved -- Like
those two Prophets, they must needs be the Glory and Safety of the People they
live with.

AND what though they be Men of like Infirmities and Passions with others; yet
this no more hinders them, from this destinguishing Character than it did
ELIJAH of old. For of Him the Apostle observes in Jam. V. 11. ELIAS was a man
subject to like Passions as we are. He has been styled by some a very zealous
and fiery spirited Prophet. In his Zeal He commanded all the Priests of Baal,
viz. nine hundred and fifty to be slain at once, and would not suffer so much
as one to escape 1 King. XVIII.
He prayed for Fire to come down from Heaven and destroy two Captains with
their Fifties successively, when they were sent by the King of Israel to bid
Him come down to him 1 King. I.
. At othertimes He seemed to be much discontented that He had no better success
and acceptance, and at the Persecution and Hatred of Enemies. In some Hours of
Temptation He was too weary of Life; He wished He might die, and too much
complains of the Hardships and Ill-treatment He met with 1. King XIX.
And yet after all, He was the Chariot of Israel, their Glory and Safety.

AND much less can the Hatred, Reproaches or Persecutions of any debarr them of
this eminent Character. For ELIJAH was called by Ahab the Troubler of Israel, 1
King. XVIII. 16. And Jazebel was his inveterate Enemy, vowed his Destruction,
and made Him fly and hide for his Life, 1 King XIX.6, etc.

IN the midst of all their Imperfections and Sufferings, they live a heavenly
Life, they instruct by their Doctrine, they oppose the Torrent of prevailing
Iniquity, they fight against the Powers of Darkness, they carry the Standard,
and they lead in the van of the Battle: they have a powerful Interest in the
Courts above, they improve it incessantly in importunate Prayers for the People
they live with in a particular manner: and they contrive and try every method
to preserve and advance the Religion of CHRIST, in the Power, Practice and
Purity of it, upon which only depends their Safety and Happiness.

OUR

III. Obs. therefore is this, That it is a very melancholy thing to loose them
and see them no more.

COMFORTABLE indeed it is to think, that since they have left us, they are gone
to Heaven. They have ceased from Sinning and Sorrowing, they are divested of
all their Infirmities, completely purged from their Corruptions, made perfect
in Light and Holiness; released from all their Cares, Pains, Toils and Burdens;
have rested from their wearisom Labors, and their good works have followed
them in a full Retribution of Joy and Glory.

BUT this would have been their Portion if they had tarried longer with us: and
there was no need of their being taken away, in order to secure this Rest and
Happiness. If they had been continued longer, even as long as they could have
been useful to us, either by their Preaching, Conversation or living Examples;
their future Glory would have been in no wise endangered or lessened; a greater
weight and measure had been rather laid up and ready to crown them. It would
have been far more comfortable and advantageous to Us; and even They would have
had their Consolations, and Supports enough even Here, with their future
Prospects, to make amends for all their Labors, Pains and Sorrows while
conversant with us.

To loose them then, i. e. to loose their Company in this Present State, where
we only want it; To loose it in the midst of its delightful usefulness, and to
see them no more -- must needs be very melancholy to those who knew them, who
used to see and hear them, and converse with them.

To see them no more -- is no more to see their grave or smiling Countenance;
no more to see their gracious and reviving Looks; no more to see their decent
and comely Carriage; no more to hear their lively and pleasant Voice, their
flaming Sermons, their Preaching CHRIST, their learned pious most instructive
and entertaining Converse; no more to hear or see them in our Pulpits, to meet
them in our Streets, or to receive them in our Houses! In fine, no more to have
their earnest Prayers, their ready Help, their wise Advices, their great and
quickening Influence in these degenerate times -- But to loose them all, and to
loose them for ever -- O inexpressible Loss! insupportable Bereavement!

To lose a more Private Friend is a sorrowful Providence. But to loose a
Public Friend, a Friend to our Souls, a most able and faithful one, a zealous
and great Promoter of our everlasting Interests: One who studied and laid out
Himself to do us all the Good He could, that appeared to be most earnest for
our Salvation, and that grudged at no Pains nor Labors to secure it to us: An
ardent Lover of the People He lived with; full of Zeal for the Public
Interest, for the Cause of pure, vital and practical Religion among all about
Him; yea for the most extensive Kingdom and Glory of CHRIST, and the bringing
as many as possible to the saving and happy Acquaintance with Him.

THE Loss of such as these must be very great and dismal, especially in Times
of growing Declensions, when we have most need of them. And in proportion to
their Eminence in Gifts and Graces, the greater and sadder the Loss: and this
greater still, when on all accounts there are none left like them.

How dark is the Day when such a burning and shining Light is extinguished
among us, or rather carried out of our sight, to blaze among others in the
Worlds above; but to leave us in these gloomy Regions, and without any Hopes of
it is returning again till the Heavens be no more!

OUR

IV. Obs. therefore naturally follows from this, That their Departure should be
very sadly resented and expressed by Survivours.

So Elisha sets us the agreeable Pattern. He first cries out in an Agony -- My
Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel and the Horsemen thereof -- and when
ELIJAH was gone quite out of sight, and Elisha saw Him no more; then to express
the greatness of the Anguish within Him, He takes hold of his own Clothes and
tares them into two pieces. It was an ancient signification of extraordinary
Grief. And so deeply affected is Elisha with this most sore Bereavement, that
though He was now all alone as to Men, yet He thus rends his Clothes and vents
his Sorrows in the Presence of GOD and his Angels.

ONE would think Elisha had but little Reason to be in such great Distress;
since ELIJAH was now gone to Heaven in so glorious and triumphant a manner,
Elisha had been anointed his next Successor, and promised a double Portion of
ELIJAH'S Spirit to discharge the Office; and now the Great Man was gone that
shone so much above Him, but now had left Him the prime Place of Prophetic
Power and Dignity. But all these Apprehensions are quite swallowed up in the
high Esteem and Reverence He bare to his departed Master. He rightly judged
there was no Man like ELIJAH: and though He himself was to have a double Portion
of his extraordinary Spirit in comparison with other Prophets, was left as it
were his Eldest Son with a double Portion to the Rest of the Children; yet He
expected not the full of his Father's Inheritance. He accounted the Loss to be
in some respects irreparable, and expected not to see so great a Prophet on all
accounts', again, as ELIJAH. For so great a Loss He therefore answerably
grieves and mourns, and expresses his Grief in such a remarkable manner.

IN this as I observed, He is a lively Example to us -- when eminent Ministers
are taken away and we are to see them no more; for this, first to mourn in the
affecting Sense of our heavy Bereavement, and then to express it in a suitable
manner. -- Not by rending our Garments, as Elisha did, agreeable to the Custom
that then prevailed in those Parts of the World; but by such evident Symptoms,
as that all about us may clearly see we are duly sensible of our great Loss
and are deeply affected.

SUCH as a serious, grave and solemn Look; especially when we speak or hear of
the Prophet departed: a Restraint for a Time from our usual Mirth: a speaking
of the eminent Virtues and Usefulness of the Deceased, our past Advantages in
Him, our great Want of Him, and the sore Loss his Departure brings on the
People He lived with: and if we have Tears to shed, let them gently flow.

BUT above all -- We should religiously express our Sorrow to GOD; as in
Humbling ourselves to the Dust under the mighty Blow of his Hand in taking them
away: in Mourning bitterly for all our past Negligence of them, and
Unfruitfulness under their lively Ministry; for all the slights we have cast
upon them, the Discouragements we have at any time thrown in the way of their
Work, and the Wounds and Griefs we have given their Hearts: in fine, for all
the Sins whereby we have provoked the righteous GOD to bereave us of their
eminent Light and Labors; and for all the Prospects of those Evils we have
reason to fear are coming upon us now they are taken away.

AND then, Let our Sorrow brake out in most earnest Prayers for Forgiveness and
sparing Mercy: that the abused SPIRIT of CHRIST may not leave us with them, but
that the same plentiful measures which appeared in them, may be poured out,
both on surviving Ministers and on all the People; that his Work may revive in
these declining Years, and we may return to the LORD and serve Him, continue
his People, and He may never forsake us.

AND in order to this we should also now put in Practice our

V. and last Obs. viz. THAT we highly value and carefully improve the Remains
of their Ministry.

As ELIJAH ascended the Chariot, He dropped his Mantle for the Use of Elisha
and others, as well as a precious Memorial of Him. And now when ELIJAH was gone
out of sight, and Elisha had been rending his Clothes in Agony, and from
looking up after Him toward Heaven, came to turn his Eyes down to the Earth;
How agreably may we imagine did ELIJAH'S Mantle appear before Him? How precious
was the Remnant of his departed Master? How much dearer now than ever? And what
could He think the Mantle was left for, but as a Token of particular Favor, to
support and comfort his distressed Spirit, and for his future Benefit? How
gladly must He therefore see it, how soon take it up? How carefully He carries
it about Him, and makes use of it in smiting and dividing the Waters?

AND does not this most obviously teach us, that the Remains of eminent
Ministers should be highly prized and carefully improved among us?

BY their Remains I mean the excellent Writings they have left behind them.
These like ELIJAH'S Mantle, were one special Means whereby they did such
eminent Service while they lived: and which being consecrated to the same
Design, may through the Grace of GOD have the same Success as well after their
Departure as before.

IN these Works of theirs we may yet in a great measure see them alive. There
they have delivered their Souls: There they shine and burn; they breath and
speak; they still express and publish their Minds; they instruct, reprove,
exhort, persuade; and appear as earnest as ever to promote the Kingdom of
CHRIST, to bring us into it, and to preserve and advance us in it.

AND O! How moving is it to read or hear in our Houses the lively Addresses of
those that are now in Eternity, and that spoke as standing on the Borders of
it? They are speaking from Heaven in the rowzing Discourses they uttered and
left on Earth: And if it had been in their Power, they would have continued
their awakening Voice in our Ears, whenever we had a mind to hear it, as well
as the printed Marks of the wounds to be seen with our Eyes. In brief, they
made them Public, that their earnest Calls might not quickly die with the
noise of their Lips, but continue to move us even after they are got into the
Worlds above. And it may be, There they know and rejoice in the continued Fruit
of their Labors among us: and then their Joys will vastly rise as we continue
to use them, and are bettered by them.

AND as these works of theirs were once composed and delivered with much of the
Influence of the SPIRIT of CHRIST, and it may be He breathed in them on the
Hearts of the Hearers; They are still as agreeable to the same gracious Agent,
and if we come to peruse them with a suitable Frame of Soul, He is as likely to
breath as ever. So He continually breaths in the Writings of the ancient
Prophets, as much, and indeed oftentimes more than when they were at first
delivered.

How highly then should we value, and how carefully improve these remaining
Fruits of their lively Ministry? especially seeing them so full of CHRIST and
Devotion to Him, so full of ardent Love and Zeal for the Glory of GOD, and so
full of Concern and Affection for the Souls of Men. In fine, so full of Light
and Flame together, so full of the most useful Truths inspired in the sacred
Writings, so agreeable to them, and so illustrative of them.

AND since we are now to see or hear these venerable Men no more; how much more
precious should their excellent Remains be accounted than ever, and how much
more carefully improved among us? In fine, They are the endearing Legacies of
our spiritual Fathers, Golden Talents that we are accountable for -- By our
careful Improvement, they will secure our Interest in the same heavenly
Inheritance they are gone to posses; they will ripen us for and in due time bring
us to their glorious Company: And the more we improve them, the greater, when
we meet in the Realms above, will be our mutual Joy.

AND thus having briefly treated of the several things observed, we pass to the

APPLICATION.
AND,

1. Do eminent Ministers in a special manner bare the Title of Fathers -- Then
how should we respect and treat them both in their Persons and Memories.

THE Title we see is full both of Loveliness and Veneration. And when those of
the holy Order carry it as becomes this Paternal Character, as they do when
they are really eminent; how truly venerable, and yet how lovely do they
appear? And when they prove like Fathers; how highly should we reverence and
love them while they are with us, and with what Respect and Honor treat their
Names when they are ascended to Heaven?

THE Infirmities of Fathers should be reverently covered, their Persons
affected, their Honor guarded, their Wants prevented, their Authority revered:
their prayerful Blessings should be highly valued: their Affections, Cares,
Pains and Labors liberally recompensed: And all the Reverence, Love,
Obedience, Beneficence, and Returns of Gratitude and Justice due to our natural
Fathers, are for the like Reasons owing to those who are our Fathers also in a
more spiritual and exalted manner.

AND should the Respect of Fathers cease when they come to die, or are passed
away? No -- it should rather rise the higher -- The very Prospect of their
Removal should excite our Fears, Reluctance and Cries to Heaven. Their dying
Groans should pierce our Hearts. Their faultering Speeches should have our
utmost Attention. When their Light of Life expires, it should look dark and
solitary round about us. Their very bodily Remains should be accounted as
precious Dust, and interred with Tears and Honor. They should be long
remembered and spoken of with tender affection: Their Virtues and good Actions
praised, their Examples followed, their Characters preserved sacred, and their
Names as perfumed ointment poured forth with Fragrancy in every Company.

2. ARE eminent Ministers the Glory, Strength, Defense and Safety of the People
they live with. Then how great is the Advantage of the People to have them, and
how great is the Loss when they are taken away.

THEIR Examples, Doctrines, Advices and Prayers are vast advantages apparent
among us: But their invisible Influence at the Throne above, and their
continual Importunities there, may draw down abundance of Blessings of the
highest Importance, which yet may seem to come on in the Course of natural
Causes. By their prevailing Intercessions with Heaven, even our most Public
Councils may be wisely guided, and our Public Enterprises may be happily
prospered, while we see not the secret but powerful springs from whence they
proceed.

WHEN they therefore depart, our Strength and Glory in a great measure go with
them: and unless there are others raised up like them, we are by so much the
more defenseless and exposed to Dangers.

AN unhappy stop is now put to their earnest Pleading for us, as well as their
lively Preaching to us. They can now no more watch against our dangerous
Enemies: nor contrive, nor labor for our Welfare or Safety. Their various
Opportunities, their great Abilities, their Zeal for serving us, are gone from
us for ever: and even their living Example that use to charm and quicken us, is
disappeared with them.

How wide is then the Gap in our Wall of Defense, how weak our Strength, how
thin our Glory, upon their Removal from us? and how open are we to swift
Inundations of Public Calamities!

3. Is it a melancholy thing to loose them and see them no more, and should
their Departure be sadly resented and expressed by Survivours -- Then how much
should we mourn, and express our Sorrow this Day.

ONE of the greatest of Ministers is fallen in Israel: or rather ascended to
the heavenly Mansions; and left us a weak, exposed and degenerate People.

I may not take up your time in drawing his accurate Character: especially
since I have had Him so much in my Heart and Eye through that Part of the Sermon
I have delivered already, that you could not but think I have been chiefly
speaking of Him, as our Tears have shown; and it would also require a Volumn
for the full Description. I shall only give you a few general Touches further,
to remind us of our extraordinary Loss, and to point us to our present Duty.

HE was, as you know, a Person of a wonderful quick Apprehension, tenacious
Memory, lively Fancy, ready Invention, unwearied Industry: of vast Improvements
in Knowledge, and flaming Piety. Full of Zeal and Activity for the Glory of
CHRIST and the Salvation of Men. Greatly concerned for the Cause of pure and
vital Religion: a strenuous Asserter of Liberty both civil and sacred: and of
extensive Charity.

HE was a zealous Lover of our Churches and People; because He saw so much of
the pure scriptural sort of Religion, with the exercise of Liberty and Charity
in them. He was always careful for them, always ready to espouse their Cause:
and how much are the present and future Generations indebted, for the noble
Care He has taken to preserve the Memory of the great and excellent Fathers of
these religious Plantations, that was just a sinking into Oblivion?

HE seemed to have an inexhaustible Source of divine Flame and Vigor. Nor did
this brake out only in a few particular Streams of Piety, but it unboundedly
diffused it self into every Method that could be devised for the Glory of GOD
and the Good of the World.

HE was a wonderful Improver of Time: and it is almost amazing how much He had
read and studied -- How much He has wrote and published -- How much He
corresponded abroad: not only with the several Provinces in the British
America, but also with England, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, Germany, and even
the Eastern as well as Western Indies -- And yet how much he conversed,
visited, contrived and acted at Home! How many Languages, Histories, Arts and
Sciences, both ancient and modern He was familiarly versed in -- What a vast
Amassment of Learning He had grasped in his Mind, from all sorts of Writings,
of which He had one of the largest and richest Collections that ever was in
these Ends of the Earth -- and which He was at all times ready to use in the
most sudden and extempore manner.

AND yet, what was truly as admirable -- He never seemed to be in a Hurry. He
would say some good and suitable thing to every one that came to Him; and He
would always entertain us with Ease and Pleasure, even in his Studying Hours,
as long as we pleased, or could venture to hinder Him: making use of the most
unseasonable Visitants, both to do more Good, and at the same time even advance
Himself in Learning; by the most artful Repetition of the more agreeable
Passages He had lately been reading, with his own Remarks or Improvements upon
them; whereby He further digested them, and more perfectly made them his own.
-- Never negligent, never heavy, -- Though fatigued in Body, never tired in Mind.
To do all the Good He could to all, even to the remotest Ends of the Earth --
was his Maxim, his Study, his Labor, his Pleasure -- and it is strange to
consider what a vast Variety of Projects He has formed and managed for it.

How lively and earnest was He in his Public Performances -- Here we used to
see his Spirits raised and all on Fire -- What a courageous Enemy to all
Licenciousness! What a Son of Thunder to impenitent Sinners! What a Son of
Consolation to discouraged Souls! What a passionate Pleader with all to come
into the Acceptance of CHRIST, and so into the Life and Favor of GOD! And what
a servent Solicitor at the Throne of Grace!

AND how instructive, learned, pious and engaging was He in his private
Converse -- superior Company for the greatest of Men; condescending and
gracious to the least and meanest of Children. How gentle, free and courteous
in his Treatment of all? How easy and natural did his vast Learning appear in
every Company? In what an artful and entertaining manner would He convey the
most excellent Sentiments into our Minds? How agreably tempered with a various
mixture of Wit and Cheerfulness? The most knowing could scarce ever leave him
without knowing more, the most ungracious without some Impressions of Goodness,
or any without a grateful Pleasure.

I speak not now of his more retired Life, which I have a great deal of Reason
to know was in an eminent manner in the Mount with GOD. By this means He
enjoyed a perpetual Calm: And as He constantly lived, so He died in Peace --
and no doubt is ascended to those heavenly Places where He delighted to
converse every Day.

SCARCE any on Earth have gone through such a great Variety and constant
Succession of extraordinary Trials. But in these He lived a continual
Sacrifice; and improved them, not to dishearten, but quicken Him to bring forth
more Glory to GOD, and to be more useful to Men.

HE was in many respects like the ancient ELIJAH. And wherein He was though it to
be faulty -- It was also much like Him, in a super-abounding Zeal for the Cause
of GOD and his People.

THE Care of the Churches both in this and the Provinces round about, has for
many Years lain chiefly upon Him: as He has been long a Father to the Ministers
in then, and to Him they repaired in their difficult Cases for Light and
Direction.

AND O how happy have been the Pastors of this great Town in having Him at our
Head -- who was ever as diffusive as full of all kinds of Knowledge and Wisdom
-- scarce ever at a Loss in any Emergence -- ready to find out Expedients in
difficult Cases; to solve the most perplexed on a sudden; and in a few Minutes
time, even while we were talking, to draw up, on his Knee, the State of the
Controverly with proper Advices, in an accurate manner. And as we sat at his
Feet as Children; his Speech dropped upon us, and we waited for Him as for the
Rain, as the thirsty Earth for the Rain of Heaven.

AND now, like Elisha and the other Sons of the Prophets, we must see our
Master taken away from our Head, and must see Him no more! How dismal does the
Sound now enter our Ears -- Dr. MATHER is gone, He is now no more among us, who
has been so long an eminent Part of our Light and Glory! He shall return no
more to his House, and the Places of his Studying, Conversing and Preaching
shall know Him no more!

FOR my self, I must always account the particular Intimacy He was pleased to
favor me with, as one of the richest Blessings of all my Life. And I cannot but
reflect with the deepest Regret on the precious Advantages I have carelessly
lost, through a fond Expectation of his continuing longer. Especially when there
was lodged in his Mind a great Treasure of secret and curious History, both of
New ENGLAND and Old, from the Beginning of the Reign of King CHARLES I, to this
Day: which He had strangely gotten from the ancient Fathers of these
Plantations who were living in his Younger times, from our successive Agents
and other Intelligent Persons who have come over hither for this Fifty Years,
and from his vast Correspondence both at Home and Abroad: But is now
irrecoverably vanished with Him.

THIS is Part of the extraordinary Man that is now gone from us. And how does
the City, though full of People, sit sad and solitary! How is she become as a
Widow! She that is great among the Nations and Princess among the Provinces!
Her Priests sigh, her Virgins are afflicted, and she is in Bitterness! For the
LORD has afflicted Her for the multitude of her Transgressions; and from the
Daughter of Zion her Beauty is passed away! She remembers in the time of her
Sorrows her pleasant Things that she had in the Days of old under his flaming
Ministry. But now the LORD has made Her desolate -- He has made Her Strength to
fall -- For these things I weep, mine Eye, mine Eye runs down with Water --
What shall I equal to Thee that I may comfort Thee, O virgin Daughter of Zion?
For thy Breach is great like the Sea: who can heal Thee? And if we look to the
Land; Behold Darkness and Sorrow, and the Light is darkened in the Heavens
thereof!

BUT,

4. and lastly, SHOULD the Remains of our eminent Ministers be highly prized
and carefully improved by us -- Then here we see both our present Advantage and
incumbent Duty.

THOUGH they are gone out of sight, yet they have left their Mantles, their
excellent Writings; which by our due Improvement, may, through the Blessing of
GOD, be as useful among us as ever. By these they continue to bare their
Testimony against the Vices and Follies of Men: They continue to warn us of the
destructive Ways of Sin, and to bare their Witness to the Wisdom and Happiness
of being truly Religious.

AND if now they were suffered to call out of Heaven, as with the Voice of an
Angel and the Trump of GOD; what a great Noise would they make in our Air, and
how surprizingly alarm the World with merely the loud Repetition of what they
have Published to excite and awaken us? And do the Discourses they have left
behind them only want this mighty Sound, this forcible Motion of the Air about
us, to pierce our Ears and reach our Hearts and convert us to God? Are they not
in themselves as suitable to work on our rational Powers without it; To
convince us of the miserable State we are in by Nature, of the dreadful and
imminent Danger of continuing in it, and of the absolute need of hastening to
CHRIST, that we may be certainly saved and happy for ever? -- Surely Yes.

How great is then the Advantage of having these Remains of theirs? And how
should we continue to Read them, that our Souls may live; as others have been
happily made alive to GOD at the Hearing of them?

AND on this Account, how rich is our Privilege, in the numerous and excellent
Writings of that eminent person the Loss of whom we bewail this Day.

IN his Style indeed He was something singular, and not so agreeable to the Gust
of the Age. But like his manner of speaking, it was very emphatical: And in all
his Composures on Divinity Subjects -- with a mixture of various Learning, we
clearly see the Beauty and Life of Religion, in the strongest Colors. The
vital Actings of the Grace of CHRIST inspired into the Souls of Men, and the
manner of Turning and Living to GOD, were the continued Theme of his Preaching,
Conversing and Writing -- as a lively Expression of what He felt in his Heart,
as the only Principle of immortal Happiness, and the most likely means to
kindle the same Flame in others. And He delighted to carry us to the Hights of
Piety.

HE had also a constant Eye to the inspired Writings in all his own. He kept
closely to them as the Light of his Feet; and has made it a principal Part of
his Life to clear and urge them.

AND here I cannot forbear expressing my most earnest Wishes that That
admirable Labor of his, The AMERICAN BIBLE, might soon appear in Public to
enlighten the World. An extraordinary Work, that his Heart has been set on from
his early Days, and has taken Him up almost Fifty Years to compose. And as
scarce any has run through a greater number of Volumns, or could do it with a
greater Swiftness; He has almost continually done it with a particular View to
illustrate the sacred Oracles. He has made all sorts of Authors to conspire to
this: If He met with any in the Catalogues either in England or Holland, that
He imagined might help the Design; He would not rest till He had obtained it:
And He has scarce left a curious Passage in any Writing of Fame, whether
ancient or modern, that has cast a Light on any Part of the Scriptures, but He
has put in it is Place in this most rich Collection. And to these He has added
his own Improvements from his intimate Knowledge of the Original Tongues, of
the most learned Lexicons, and the ancient Customs and Histories of the Eastern
Nations.

BUT I must draw to a Close.

AND now what shall we do; but first admire and praise the boundless Grace of
GOD, that has given such excellent Virtues to Men; and then bewail our Sins
which have made this Earth unworthy of them; and have provoked the most High to
remove so great a Light so early from us, while He continued to shine in his
Strength, and near a Score of Years before He could come to the Age of his
Fathers.

AND upon his Rapture from us, shall we not now look upwards after Him through
Hosts of Angels to the Worlds above? Where all his Hope is turned to Enjoyment,
and all his Faith to the open Vision of that wonderful Person, whom He was
forever admiring when He was here on Earth, and commending to others. And how
shall we come to secure our future Ascension to the same heavenly Places; but
by observing his Councils and imitating his bright Example? Who through Faith and
Patience is gone before us to inherit the Promises. And what shall we do for
Power to follow Him thither, but earnestly cry to the GOD of all Grace that He
would fill us with his lively SPIRIT, uphold us with his mighty Hand, and
conduct us by his perfect Council, till He raises us to the same Inheritance.

AND O! There, let us in the mean while extend our reaching Views! There --
where GOD appears through CHRIST in all his Glory to his People! In HIM the
GODHEAD shines and shows Himself in that World of Light: and There let us
earnestly and continually seek and long to behold and enjoy Him! There his
People shall most openly and clearly view his Divine Perfections, his wise
Designs, his wondrous Works, and the Smiles of his Face full shining on them!
As they are ascending thither, they shall feel themselves Transforming in a
wonderful manner; And when they enter his Presence, to their great Amazement,
they shall appear to be like Him; they shall see themselves to be most agreeable
to Him; and there they shall enjoy a most delightful Complacency in each other
for ever! O astonishing Happiness! beyond our Conception, above our Wonder!
That GOD alone can fully comprehend, and that will take up Eternal Ages for
both Men and Angels to express and admire!

FINIS.

