THE Strait Gate AND THE Narrow Way, Infinitely preferable TO THE Wide Gate AND
THE Broad Way. TWO SERMONS, Upon MATTHEW. VII. 13, 14. Wherein the several
ADVANTAGES and DISADVANTAGES, with the respective ENDS of a Wicked and a Pious
Life are compared. And Unconverted Sinners are (...) upon exhorted and
per^^^^^^ to consider of their Ways, and to turn and live to GOD.

BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN, at his Shop in Cornhill. 1729.

THE STRAIT GATE and the NARROW WAY, infinitely preferable to the WIDE GATE and
the BROAD WAY.
MATTHEW. VII. 13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide (...) the gate
and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat: because strait is, the gate and narrow is the way which leads unto
life, and few there be that find it.


IN these Words, which a^ part of our blessed SAVIOR'S Sermon on the Mount,
HEAVEN under the name's of Life is compared to a House or City, the Way leading
to which is but narrow and, troublesome, and the Entrance into it is through a
strait Gate; so that but few Passengers are found in it: And Helt under the
name of Destruction is compared also to a House or City, the Way leading to
which is broad and easy, through a wide Gate, and has many walking in it.

THE metaphorical Terms in which our Text is delivered, are plain and
intelligible. For what is more usual in the sacred Writings, than to call the
general and common Course or manner of Men's living by the name of a Way? Nor
was this Language unknown among the best ^eathen Moralists; who not only called
our Manner of life by the name of a Way, but also divided this way into a
narrow and a broad one See Dr. Edwards Of the style of the Holy Scriptures. p.
70, 71.
: as our SAVIOR does here. So that by the two Ways here spoken of, we are to
understand two different sorts of Life and Conversation: a holy one, which
leads to the Life and Happiness of Heaven; and a wicked one, which leads to
Destruction and Misery in Hell. And it seems as if, without any strain upon the
Metaphor, we might fall in with that Exposition Dr. Blackall on this text.
, which leads us by the two Gates to understand something different from what
is intended by the two Ways: by the Gate our SAVIOR might mean the first
Beginning or Entrance upon any course of life, whether good or bad; and by the
Way He might mean a Continuance and Progress in the same Course.

THE Scope of our SAVIOR then in our Text is plainly this. He exhorts us to a
godly Life, and persuades us to enter into and continue in it: inasmuch as
notwithstanding all the Difficulties which attend our Entrance into it and
Continuance in it, and the Smallness of the number of them who practice it,
it is the (...) that leads unto Life and Happiness whereas notwithstanding all
the carnal Ease and Pleasure which attend the Entrance into a wicked life and
Continuance in it, and the Multitudes that (...), it is the way that leads to
Destruction and Misery.

THIS general Scope of the Words is the Point which lies before us at present:
and it may be particularly spoken to under these practical ORSERVATIONS
following,

I. THERE are two different States of existence for Mankind after Death, called
here Destruction and Life, in one or the other of which we must all take up our
everlasting abode. II. THERE are two different Courses of life, in this World,
a Wicked and a Holy one; which are the Ways that lead to those different States
of existence. III. THE Entrance into a wicked course of Life, and the
Continuance and Progress in it, are in some sense easy and pleasant; and there
is abundance of Company found walking in it. Whereas, IV. THE Entrance into a
Holy course of life is very difficult; the Continuance and Progress in it
necessarily engage us to encounter many things troublesome and uneasy; and
there are but Few comparatively to be found walking in it. But yet, V. ALL
these things rightly considered, it highly concerns us to enter upon and
maintain a holy course of life.
IN speaking something to each of these Observations in their order, I shall
not be sollicitous to entertain you with any new tho'ts upon them; but as
briefly and plainly as I can to lay together before you and move you to
consider seriously some weighty things which concern our most important and
everlasting Interests, and by the blessing of GOD may advance our true
Happiness, both in this life, and that which is to come.

I. OBSER. THERE are two different States of existence for Mankind after Death,
called here Destruction and Life, in one or the other of which we must all take
up our everlasting abode.

IT IS but for a little season that GOD has appointed any of us to live here
upon Earth; one generation goes and another comes: But we know by Divine
Revelation, that there is a Spirit in Man which will not cease to be, after
this life is ended; that our dead Bodies will rise again and be reunited with
our Spirits; and that the State of Discipline and Probation in this world will
be succeeded by a State of Recompense and Retribution, wherein shall be rendered
unto every one, according as we have done or neglected to do the Work assigned
us by GOD in this life.

THIS State of Recompense and Retribution, according to the infallible Oracles
of GOD is twofold; and comprehends in it the state of Happiness, and the state
of Misery; the latter of which is set forth by the name of Destruction, and the
former by the name of Life in our Text. GOD has appointed a Day in the which
He will judge the World in righteousness, by that Man whom He has ordained;
whereof He has given assurance unto all men in that He has raised him from
the dead Act. 17.
The LORD JESUS CHRIST being revealed from Heaven, and all the holy Angels with
Him, before Him shall be gathered all nations; and as a Jud^^ He shall sentence
them to one or ^th^^ of these States. To some He will (...) blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world:
to others He will say, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels. And this Sentence shall be accordingly
executed: These shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the others into
life eternal Mat. 25.
: The one to a State of dreadful endless Misery, which is represented by a lake
of fire that cannot be quenched, and contains the lot and portion of the Devil
and his Angels; the other to a State of Life and perfect Happiness in the most
glorious dispensation of the Kingdom of GOD.

AND in one or the other of these States we must all of us, without exception,
take up our everlasting abode. For we must all appear before the judgment seat
of CHRIST, that every one may receive the things done in the body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad 2 Cor. 5.10.
. And GOD has taught us nothing of any third or middle State, between the
Happiness of Heaven and the Torments of Hell, after the great a^^ terrible Day
of Judgment is over.

AND since there are two such different States of Existence for Men after
Death, in one or the other of which we must all take up our Everlasting abode;
why do we not realize these things, and make them more present to our minds by
a lively faith! We profess to believe them as they are plainly revealed to us
in the Gospel: and what is more worthy to be believed und thought on? But after
all, how weak is our Faith of them, if we judge by the Influence of it on our
Lives? Should we be just such manner of persons if we had a lively apprehension
that in a little time we must take up our abode in a State of Everlasting
Destruction and Misery, or of Everlasting Life and Happiness? On the one hand,
would not the Happiness of Heaven, which is so worthy of the desire and pursuit
of a reasonable Creature, awaken our more sollicitous Cares, and excite our
earnest and unwearied Endeavors to secure it? On the other hand, would not the
Misery comprehended in an everlasting Destruction fill us with greater Dread
and Horror, and make many more among us appear concerned to fly from the Wrath
to come, and inquisitive what they should do to be saved? Whereas, instead of
this, how unconcerned and unaffected are many, that bear the name of
Christians, about their future State? Whose Lives would rather induce us to
think, they know of no Happiness to be desired, no Misery to be feared in
another World. O that we may none of us indulge this stupid Security, but all
more than ever realize this Truth, That in a little time everlasting
Destruction will be our Portion, unless we make sure of everlasting Life,
before we dye.

LET us therefore make these two future States of existence the subject of our
frequent and serious Meditation, when we lie down, and when we arise, and as
often as we retire for Devotion. This method will be likely to affect us with a
just Concern for our most important Interests; and to excite our utmost
Endeavors to avoid everlasting Destruction, and secure everlasting Life.

AND let none of us any longer defer and put off this Concern about our future
State. For this, if any thing in the world, I mean the taking care of our Souls
with regard to Eternity, is the one thing needful; And through the undeserved
Favor of GOD we have yet a Space allowed us, wherein we may do something to
escape eternal Destruction, and lay hold on eternal Life. But if we consider
what a short and uncertain Space this is, depending at farthest on the Life of
Man, which is but a vapor that appears for a little while, and then
vanishes away; I say, if we consider this, we shall find it cannot be long
before all of us here present are either saved or damned. And when everlasting
Destruction and everlasting Life depend and turn upon a few Moments with us, we
have surely no time for Delay: but whatever our hand finds to do, we should
do it with our might, making haste to get ready for the eternal World; lest a
remediless Destruction come upon us suddenly, in an hour when we think not of
it.

II. OBSER. THERE are two different Courses of Life, a wicked and a holy one,
which are the Ways that ^ead to these two different States of existence.

THIS we are to understand, when our Text speaks of the Way that leads ^o
Destruction, and the Way that leads unto Life. For our manner of life is
commonly called by the name of a Way, in ancient Writers sacred and profane; as
has been already remarked. And that a wicked and a good Course of Life will
end in these different States of Existence, we are assured from numberless
passages of the divine Oracles; all which agree with the Testimony of the
inspired Apostle, Romans 2. That in the day when GOD shall judge the secrets of
men by JESUS CHRIST, He will render to every man, according to his deeds: to
them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality, eternal Life: But unto them that do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish.

BUT let us enter into Particulars.

1. A wicked Course of Life is the Way that leads to Destruction.

THEY that walk after the flesh and mind the things of the flesh, are going
down to Destruction: For to be carnally minded is death -- because the carnal
mind is enmity against GOD; for it is not subject to the Law of GOD, neither
indeed can be, Romans 8.5, 6, 7. So that (...) persons in a natural unconverted
State, who from an irregular and ungoverned Principle of Self-love discover
their Enmity against GOD, by a course of Actions contrary to his holy Law,
should consider themselves as Travelers in the Way that leads to everlasting
Destruction. For the wages of sin is Death, and such a Death as stands opposed
to eternal Life, Romans 6.23.

AND this is the plain Doctrine of the BIBLE, that any one Sin indulged and
continued in will bring a Man to this woeful End. Thus be that believes not the
Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of GOD abides on him Joh. 3.36.
: Sinners by their hardness and impenitent Heart treasure up to themselves
wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of GOD
Romans 2.5.
. Hypocrites who are like painted Sepulchers, having beautiful outsides, and
deceiving the world with a fair show of external Religion, while within they
are full of all uncleanness, have many Woes denounced against them: Our SAVIOR
said to such, How shall ye escape the damnation of Hell? And their Hope shall
be cut off when GOD shall take away their Souls Mat. 23. Job 27.8.
: Drunkards and riotous Livers shall not inherit the kingdom of GOD; but though
Men may bless th^mselves in their heart and say, I shall have peace, though I
walk in the imagination of my heart, to add Drunkenness to Thirst, yet the LORD
will not spare him, but the anger of the LORD and His jealousy shall linoke
against that man 1 Cor, 6.10. Deuteronomy. 29.1920.
; and the time is coming when such shall be tormented without a drop of water
to cool their tongues: Sins of Uncleanness in the House of the harlot are the
way to Hell, going down to the chambers of Death; Whoremongers and Adulterers
GOD will judge Proy. 7.27. Heb. 13.3.
. Covetousness is Idolatry, and Destruction shall be the end of them that mind
earthly things Col. 3.5. Phil. 3.19.
: As GOD resists the proud and will bring down high looks; so Pride goes
before Destruction Jam. 4.6. Prove. 16.18
. And the same is to be said of other spiritual Sins, as Envy, Malice, and
Revenge; which as they are the Image of the Devil, cannot be less hateful to
GOD, and destructive to Men, than the sensual Lusts which are more exposed to
the Reproach of the words of the Apostle, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. The works of the
fiesh are manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lascivio^^sness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath,
strife, seditions, beresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revilings, and
such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have told you in time past,
that they which do such things, (...) not inherit the kingdom of GOD.

THESE Sins are so many Paths in the Road that leads to Destruction: and we
cannot iudulge and persevere in a Course of any one of them, without being
unprofitable Stewards of all our Talents, and guilty of neglecting and
despising the LORD JESUS CHRIST, with all His Benefits revealed and offered in
the Gospel Now at the last day, the LORD will command the unprofitable Servant
to be taken and cast into outer darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth Mat. 25.30.
. And how shall we neglect so great salvation, which at first began to be
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed by those that heard Him Heb. 2.3.
? For he that despised Moses law, died without mercy under two or three
witnesses. And of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who
has trodden under foot the Son of GOD, and has counted the blood of the
covenant wherewith He was sanctified, and unholy thing, and has done despite
to the Spirit of Grace. Verily unto such there remains only a certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation to devour the adversaries Heb.
10.26, 27, 28, 29.


THUS a wicked Course of Life is the Way that leads to Destruction. And,

2. A holy Course of Life in this World in the Way that leads to Eternal Life
and Happiness in the World to come.

GOD has ordained to bring His chosen People to such a Life as includes in it
Faith in the LORD JESUS CHRIST, Repentance toward GOD, and New Obedience: And
they only that live in the Practice of these things, walk in the Way that
leads unto Life.

Now true Faith in the LORD JESUS CHRIST is not a mere Assent to the truth of
the Gospel; but a saving Grace of the HOLY SPIRIT, whereby we are inclined and
enabled to receive JESUS CHRIST, as He is offered to us in the Gospel:
consenting that He should be to us all that He engaged to be to the People of
GOD; and relying upon Him to save us to the uttermost, in the way of the New
Covenant. This Faith works by Love, purifies the Heart, and overcomes the
World: and it is the Way that leads unto Life; For GOD so loved the world;
that he gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on Him should not
pe^ish, but have everlasting Life. Joh. 3.16.

THIS Faith is always accompanied with true Evangelical Repentance; by which I
do not mean a flighty Sorrow for Sin, arising from Fear of GOD'S Anger, and an
Apprehension of Punishment; but a hearty Turning from all Sin to GOD in CHRIST;
attended with Hatred of it, and Shame and Sorrow for having offended a gracious
and holy GOD, and wounded our own Souls; and with a firm Resolution and full
Purpose of Heart to endeavor after New Obedience. This Repentance also is the
Way that leads unto Life. For as unless we repent we must perish; so there is
Mercy promised to true Penitents: and the Repentance not to be repented of, i.
e. true and sincere Repentance, is a Repentance unto Salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10.

BUT then we must not flatter ourselves, that our Repentance is thus true and
sincere; unless it be followed with a Life of New Obedience. And this is quite
another thing than an honest Endeavor to comply with the Will of GOD, by any
natural Strength and Power of our own. It Is an upright and constant and
delightful Endeavor after a Conformity of the whole Man to the whole good Will
of GOD, as revealed to us by CHRIST in the Gospel; arising from a new
supernatural Principle of spiritual Life and Action produced by the SPIRIT of
GOD in a Work of Regeneration. In order to it we must be the workmanship of
GOD, created in CHRIST JESUS unto good works, which GOD has before ordained
that we should walk in them Ephesians. 2.10.
. And that Course of internal and external Obedience, which flows from such a
Principle produced in the Soul, by the gracious and powerful operation of the
HOLY SPIRIT, is the Way that leads unto Life. For the Word of GOD assures us,
that unto them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality, He will render Eternal Life To. 2.6, 7.
that CHRIST is the author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey Him Heb.
5.9.
; and that Blessed are they that do His commandments, that they may have a
right to the tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the city Rev.
22.14.


A Life of this Faith, Repentance and New Obedience is the Way that Jeadeth
unto Heaven: and the only Way that will ever lead us to that happy State. Many
indeed will fondly entertain Hopes of eternal Life and Happiness, because they
are descended from pious Ancestors; or from their Profession of the true
Religion; or from their external Relation to GOD in Covenant; or because they
are highly exalted and distinguished with spiritual Privileges; or from their
moral Honesty and deeds of Charity to the indigent; or from their Sorrow for
Sin and visible Reformation; or from their confident Reliance on the Mercy of
GOD and Merits of CHRIST, although they take no care to secure and evidence a
special Interest therein: I say, many in the world will flatter themselves with
Hopes of Heaven and Happiness upon some or other of these Considerations, or
because several of them are united together in their Character and
Circumstances; when they are all the while destitute of true Faith, Repentance,
and New Obedience. But, alas, all these persons will find themselves dreadfully
mistaken. For all other Ways are but Bypath; which how fair and promising
soever they may appear to them, will in the End lead down to Destruction, and
leave them strangers to the Way of Life.

THUS the Way that leads to Destruction is the Way of Sin: and the Way that
leads unto Life is the Way of Godliness, comprehending Faith, Repentance, and
New Obedience: Ways as different as the States of Existence to which they tend.

AND does it not become us now seriously to examine our selves, which of these
Ways we are walking in; and what future State of Existence we must shortly
arrive to, if we hold on our Course? Not to examine our selves on this head,
but to proceed one day after another, without pondering the Path of our Feet,
will argue inexcusable Blockishness and Stupididity. For how shall we be able
to make out our Claim to the character of reasonable Creatures, if we know that
in a little time at furthest, and this night for ought any one can tell,
wo^^^ust take up our abode in everlasting Happiness, or everlasting Misery, and
yet are unconcerned and contentedly ignorant whither we are going, and what
will be the End of the Way we are in? But now a thorough Examination into this
matter will be of singular Use and Advantage to us: For if we are in the Way
that leads unto Life, the Consideration of it will encourage us to hold on,
quicken our pace, and animate us to run with patience the Race set before us:
And if we are still in the Way that leads to Destruction, will not the
Discovery of it be likely, by the blessing of GOD, to awaken us out of our
carnal Security, to fill us with Fears of the Wrath to come, to put a stop to
our sinful Course, and make us ^^^n our of it into the Path of GOD's
Commandments which is the Way of Life? O that by happy Experience we could all
say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.59, 60. I though it on my ways, and turned my feet
unto thy Testimonies. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

I pass now to the

III. Obs. namely, THAT the Entrance into a wicked Course of Life, and the
Continuance and Progress in it, are in some sense easy and pleasant; and it has
a multitude of Company walking in it.

THIS Observation arises from those words of our SAVIOR, Wide is the Gate,
and broad is the Way, that leads to Destruction and many there be that go in
thereat. For, according to what was hinted before, by the Gate He might
understand the Entrance into a Course of Sin; and by the Way the Continuance
and Progress in it. And we shall be just to the Metaphor, if, by the Wideness
of the Gate, and Br^^dness of the Way, we understand H^^ to mean that Ease and
Pleasure, which attends the Entrance into and Progress in it, to a car^^^man:
or the Allurements and fair Prospects which induce men to enter into and
continue in it; without considering how it will come out at last, and what a
miserable End it will bring them to.

NOT that we may imagine, a Course of sin will always afford the Pleasure and
Satisfaction, which it promises; or which men of corrupt minds promise
themselves in it. For the manner in which it is represented here by our SAVIOR,
is very well consistent with what we are told Prove. 22.5. that Thorns and
Snares are in the way of the froward. As "it affords but little of that
Pleasure which it promises, and is closely followed with Sh^^^ and Remorse, and
is very often the (...) of Infamy, Reproach, Sickness, and an untimely Death^
so it is not so free from Trouble and Perplexity, but that it might with good
reason enough be compared by the Wise Man, to an Hodge of Thorns Prove. 15.19.
which when a man is got into, he can neither continue, nor lie down with Ease,
nor yet get out of it without being scratched and torn." So that indeed the
Pleasantness of a sinful Course is not considerable enough in reason to incline
us to choose it: as we shall have occasion more distinctly to show hereafter, if
GOD please.

AND yet there is a sort of Ease and Pleasure, on the account of which it may
be said, wide is the Gate, and broad is the Way, that leads to Destruction;
and on the account of which many are induced to enter into that Way and walk in
it.

1. WIDE is the Gate: or, The Entrance into a course of Sin is easy and
pleasant to a carnal heart. For we are naturally prone and inclined to Sin, and
have a corrupt Biass and Disposition to indulge the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust
of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. As a Fountain naturally casts forth water;
so from the corrupt Fountain of an evil Heart there naturally flow Streams of
Iniquity, which easy run into any Channel prepared to receive them, or will
forceably make one for themselves. And we are our own Tempters, being drawn
away of our own lusts and enticed Jam. 1.14.


BUT then bad Examples, and wicked subtle Counselors to do evil are not
wanting in the World; which falling in with natural Corruption, and the
Temptations of Satan, render the Entrance into any Course of Sin still more
easy; and make men run into the Way of Destruction, even with Greadiness and
Delight.

IT often happens indeed, that Conscience will check a man, when he is first
entering upon a Course of sin; and he is haunted with uneasy Misgivings for a
while: but yet they who sufficiently know themselves will readily own, That the
natural Bent of a Wicked Heart after the Gratification of corrupt Appetites,
together with the powerful Influence of Temptations from abroad, do often prove
strong enough to overcome the slight Misgivings of Conscience, the Exercise of
natural Reason, and the Force of moral Swasion; and make it a pleasant and easy
thing for a carnal man to enter into a Course of Sin, the Way that leads to
Destruction. And

2. As the Gate is Wide: so Broad is the Way that leads to Destruction; or,
the Continuance and Progress in a sinful Course is pleasant and easy to a
carnal Heart.

IN a life of Sin, there are so many things to be met with, suite to the evil
Appetiles and Inclinations of men, as make it indeed the Broad Way; it is plain
easy grateful and pleasant; and the Continuance in it is even more easy than
the Entrance into it: as the Way is broad^er than the Gate, which opens into it.

IN this Way, how different soever the vicious Inclinations of Men may be,
according to their different Tempers, Ages, Conditions and Employments; and
whatever Changes Men are liable to in any of these respects; there is a Variety
of Paths to suit them all, and offer something pleasant and agreeable to them,
while they indulge the Desires of their own Hearts. And a man may choose what
Path he will: he may walk in the ways of his heart, and in the sight of his
eyes; than which there is nothing more pleasant and agreeable to corrupt
Nature; which hates Restraint, and loves to think, speak, and act with a most
licentious Liberty. This way affords no Rules or Maxims to abridge a man of
taking his Fill of the Pleasures of Sin, and indulging every Appetite: Or a man
may exchange the Kinds of Sin, according to his own corrupt Inclination,
leaving one for the sake of another, which is grown more pleasing to him; for
in the broad Road to Destruction a man is not bound always to walk in one
particular Path of Sin; but he may keep this, or take another, and there is a
Liberty of changing, as he pleases: Or to consult his Interest or Reputation,
he has in this Way a Liberty of cloaking Sin; he may forbear the open Practice
of Sin, and indulge himself in the secret Commission JO it, while he wears a
Cloak and outward Show of Religion; he is at liberty to put on Hypocrisy, if he
cannot so well answer his ends, in the open and undisguised Practice of Sin.
Now what a broad and pleasant Way must this be to a Carnal Heart, which allows
Men a Liberty of running to the highest Degrees of Sin, or changing the Kinds
of it, or co all with a Cloak of Religion, just as they please.

THEN again, in this Way that leads to Destruction, however men are
afterterwards convinced of their Mistake, yet when they have entered into the
wide Gate, the Way before them looks very pleasant; like a plain broad Road at
a distance, promising abundance of Entertainment, Delight, and Satisfaction.
And "the further Progress is made in it, the more pleasant it oftentimes
appears; the Evils and Dangers of it are less observed, and the Love of Sin
grows with the Practice of it: the more habituated men are to an evil Course,
the Checks of Conscience grow weaker; or growing more common are less regarded,
and men grow hardened under them: so that the same sensual Gratifications appear
greater, not being attended with that Remorse which attended them at the first
setting out in a Course of Wickedness. And at the same time that the Way grows
pleasanter to a wicked Heart, the Difficulty of returning becomes greater;
which encourages them to go on still in the course they have begun; and they
can by no means persuade themselves to undertake the Difficulty of returning."

MOREOVER, in the Way that leads to Destruction, Men avoid many Hindrances
and Impediments, which are to be met with in the Way of Life; as may be shown
hereafter. The Psalmist gives that Character of the Wicked, Psalm. 73.15.
They are not in trouble like other men, neither are they plagued like other
men. They have the World on their side: now the World loves its own, and does a
great deal to help and assist them in the Way; so that they often travel on
without that Contempt, Hatred, and Persecution which others meet with.

To all which we may add, that in the Way of Sin Men are suited with Company of
the same evil Dispositions and Inclinations with themselves; which makes that
Way appear still more easy and pleasant to them. For

3. THE Broad Way that leads to Destruction, and a Continuance and Progress
in a Course of Sin, are not only pleasant to Corrupt Nature, upon the
Considerations before mentioned: but Many there be, that go in thereat: there
is abundance of Company that take this Way, and choose to walk in it.

INDEED the greatest part of Mankind have entered into this wide Gate, and are
walking in the broad Way. If we consider, how many are Strangers to the
Christian Name; how many, though they have heard the Name and Fame of CHRIST, yet
do not own Him; how many make a Profession of His Name, and yet hold damnable
Heresies; how many truly profess the Religion of CHRIST, and yet love and live
in open Sin; how many are Strangers to a real saving Work of Regeneration and
Conversion, and know not by Experience what it is to believe in CHRIST, repent
of Sin, and live to GOD in Newness of life: I say, if we consider what
Multit^des come under one or other of these Characters, we need no other Proof,
that many are gone in at the wide Gate, and walk in the broad Way that leads
to Destruction. And as this is the Way that suits with Corrupt Nature, and
wherein men may enjoy the Gratification of their Lus^s; upon which account it
appears an open easy grateful and pleasant Way: so it is not strange that by far
the most of men should take it and walk in it; not considering the woeful End to
which it will lead them.

THUS I have spoken to the Third Observation, namely, That the Entrance into a
wicked Course of life, and the Continuance and Progress in it, are in some
sense easy and pleasant; and it has a multitude of Company walking in it.

AND this teaches us not to look on the Multitude as a safe Guide, nor to
conceive and harbor any Prejudices in our minds, in favor of a Course of Sin,
merely because of the Number of those that follow it: For if we should choose to
live and act as by far the greatest part of the World do, they will lead us
down to Hell and Destruction. Wherefore since that ^^^hibition is so infinitely
reasonable, thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil Exodus 23.2
Let us rather endeavor to affect our selves with the Stupidity and Folly of
the greatest part of Mankind, who go on securely in a lost and wretched state;
out of the way of Life, but insensible of the Danger they are in of being led
dow^ (...) Destruction: So shall we imitate the blessed Apostle Paul who says,
Phil. 3.18, 19. Many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you
weeping -- whose end is Destruction. And being warned to fly from the Wrath to
come, let Destruction from GOD be a Terror to us; and let us beware of the like
Folly and Stupidity. But if GOD, of His infinite Grace and Mercy in CHRIST, has
delivered us from the Way that leads to Destruction, let us abound in
Thanksgiving to Him; by walking in CHRIST JESUS, Col. 2.6
who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, the true Way that leads unto Life:
and let us join with the Psalmist in that Song, Psalm. 103. Bless the LORD, O my
Soul -- who redeemeth thy life from destruction.

I come now to the

IV. OBSER. THAT the Entrance into a holy course of Life is very difficult, the
Continuance and Progress in it, necessarily engage us to enccunter many things
troublesome and uneasy, and there are but Few comparatively to be found walking
in it.

THIS is the Doctrine that (...) SAVIOR teaches in those words, S^ruit is the
Gate, and narrow is the Way, that leads unto Life; and few there be that find
it. By which He gives us to understand in general, that many difficult and
uneasy things are to be met with and endured in the Way of Godliness; which
have such an Influence on the Generality of the World, that but few enter into
and walk in it, though it leads to everlasting Life and Salvation in the End.

NOR is this Doctrine at all inconsistent with the other Representations, which
the Scriptures give us, of the Ease and Pleasure to be found in the Way of
Godliness. What we read Prove. 3.17. Her ways, i.e. the Ways of Wisdom, are ways
of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; and what our SAVIOR tells us,
Math. 11 30. My yoke is easy, and my burden is lights; are very fairly to be
reconciled with what He (...) our Text, Strait is the gate and (...) is the way
that leads unto Life. For a Life of Godliness contains nothing in it, but
what it is infinitely fitting and just for GOD to enjoin, and for us to comply
with: upon which Consideration the Commandments of GOD may not be said to be
grievous in themselves. And then, where a saving Change is wrought in any by
the SPIRIT, there is Strength afforded equal to the hard and difficult things
to be encountered; which have all been surmounted, and may easily be so again,
by Strength derived from GOD through CHRIST; So that CHRIST'S Yoke is easy, and
his Burden is light to a sanctified Soul. Especially if we consider the Peace
and Joy resulting from the Testimony of a good Conscience, and the SPIRIT of
GOD witnessing with our Spirits, that we are His Children. In respect then of
the new Nature, and spiritual Life, produced and maintained in the work of
Regeneration and Sanctification, there is a great deal of Ease and Pleasure to
be found in the Way that leads unto Life eternal.

BUT we must remember, it is in respect of our corrupt Nature and depraved
Appetites, that our SAVIOR says, Strait is the Gate and narrow is the W^^^^
^epresenting many difficult and u^^^y things to be encountered in the Way of a
godly Life. And if we consider the matter thus, it will not only be found a
very difficult thing to enter into this way; but the Continuance and Progress
in it engage men to endure many things troublesome and uneasy: though the more
Corruption is mortified, the less of Difficulty and Uneasiness will be found;
and the more it prevails, and more difficult and uneasy will it be to live
godly in CHRIST JESUS. The Way of Happiness is not so very plain and easy, as
many seem to think it; who expect Heaven without inquiring the Way thither, or
walking in it when clearly marked out to them: but if we inquire into
Particulars it will appear, that strait is the Gate and narrow is the Way that
leads unto Life, and Few there be that find it.

1. STRAIT is the Gate that leads unto Life; or, The Entrance into a Life of
Godliness is difficult and uneasy: for we are still to consider the difference
between the Way and the Gate that opens into it. AND the Consideration of the
same thing which, under the former Head, made the Way of Sin so easy and
pleasant to a carnal Man, will serve to show the Difficulty of entering into a
godly Life; that is, the Consideration of our natural Lo^ and Propension to Sin
and Wickedness. For as Sin is the most genuine Pleasure of corrupt Nature; so
there is nothing which interferes with, and hinders our darling Gratifications,
more than the Practice of a godly Life: Since it is impossible for any to enter
upon this, without giving up and renouncing all the sinful Delights of a Wicked
life; and engaging at the same time in the Practice of things that are most
contrary and irksome to corrupt Nature: For men must not only cease to do evil,
which they love, but learn to do well, which they have a natural Aversion to;
and how difficult and uneasy must this be to Sinners?

BUT then the Case is often so, that in order to enter into the Way of
Godliness, men must not only overcome their natural Proneness and Inclination
to Sin, but the strong Habits of it, which arise from inveterate Custom, and a
long Course of Practice. Now the stronger and more eager our Love and Pursuit
of Sin are become by these means, the more difficult and uneasy still must That
be which restrains and opposes them: So that for Sinners to deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and enter upon a sober, righteous and godly life,
necessarily infers much Difficulty and Uneasiness.

AND indeed the Difficulty of it is so great, that the Scriptures represent the
absolute Impossibility of doing it by any Power and Strength of our own, and
make the Exercise of divine Almighty Power necessary for it. Nothing less than
this can break and open the rocky Hearts of Sinners, and bring forth the Waters
of Repentance and godly Sorrow for Sin. The exceeding Greatness of GOD's mighty
Power, which He wrought in CHRIST, when He raised. Him from the Dead, and set
Him at His own right Hand in the Heavenly Places, is requisite to make Sinners
believe in CHRIST. Nor will any thing less than this make us the Workmanship of
GOD created in CHRIST JESUS to good Works.

IT IS not enought for us to have an external Revelation of the Way that leads
unto Life; but we must have a spiritual Discernment of it, before we can enter
into it: whereas this cannot be rightly discerned, without a supernatural
Illumination by the SPIRIT of GOD, to remove the Blindness of a carnal Mind;
and this Illumination is not produced without a divine Power and Efficacy to
renew and change the Soul in all its Faculties, and pro^^^e that Self-denial
which CHRIST requires of all His Disciples. Now this Self-denial includes in it
things grievous and uneasy to corrupt Nature: for it makes a Sinner renounce
his own Will, to govern himself by the Will of GOD; to renounce his own
Righteousness as filthy Rags, and depend wholly on the Righteousness of CHRIST,
for a Title to the favor of GOD; and to renounce his darling Pleasures, and be
willing to part with the sweetest Enjoyments of this Life for CHRIST'S sake.
But how grievous and uneasy soever these things are to corrupt Nature, the
first Lesson to be learned, if we would forsake the Way that leads to
Destruction, and enter into the Way that leads unto Life, is that, Mat.
16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross, and follow me. Our SAVIOR makes this absolutely necessary, Matthew.
10.37, 38. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me;
and he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. And he
that takes not his Cross, and follows me is not worthy of me. And as the
Entrance into a Life of Godliness is difficult and uneasy; Strait is the Gate:
So,

2. NARROW is the Way that leads unto Life; i. e. the Continuance and
Progress in a godly Life will necessarily engage us to encounter many things
troublesome and uneasy to be born.

BUT here also the Way is not so strait and narrow, as the Gate that leads into
it; that is, the Continuance and Progress in the Way of Holiness are not, in
some respects, so difficult and uneasy as the first Entrance into it. For they
who have a supernatural Principle of Life, instead of hating the Way of
Holiness, are enabled delightfully to choose and endeavor after Progress in it.
And then by Continuance and Progress the Habits of Grace grow stronger and
stronger, to overbalance the Reluctances of Nature, and make the same
Difficulties appear less and less continually.

BUT yet there will always be some Remains of Sin and Corruption in us; and the
difficult Duties of Self-denial and Mortification must be exercised and carried
on, to the End of our Lives. And though the Practice thereof may not continue so
difficult, as it was at first; yet the Flesh will always reluct against the
Spirit, and the Law in the Members war against the Law of the Mind: which will
be a difficult and uneasy Exercise, too hard for us to go through without the
continual Influences of the divine Power and Grace. For a Christian is for ever
denied the licentious Liberty of following his sinful Inclinations, and bound
to govern him, self by the Will of GOD; abstaining from what He forbids, and
attending what He requires, though ever so irksome to his corrupt Affections. Now
this Limitation and Confinement, in a constant Course of Mortification and
Self-denial, make the Way that leads unto Life a narrow Way, and cause many
Difficulties to arise in the Christian Course; both in regard of the Duties and
Afflictions of it.

(1.) IT IS difficult walking in the Way of Life, in regard of the Duties to be
performed in it, through the Course of our Lives; which are Faith, Repentance,
and New-Obedience.

As to Faith, the way of Salvation is so contrived, that a Sinner must see and
own himself indebted for it to the sovereign Grace of GOD, through the Merits of
JESUS CHRIST; and receive it with the deepest Humility, or not at all. Now for
man to maintain a firm Assent to the humbling Doctrines of the Gospel, relating
to CHRIST and the Way of Salvation by Him; to empty himself of himself; and as
a vile loathsome guilty creature, destitute of Righteousness and Strength, to
look to be justified and saved only by the free and rich Grace of GOD, through
the Merits of CHRIST; I say, to live by such a Faith in the SON of GOD, is no
easy thing. For so proud a creature as Man, who would fain be justified and
saved by some Righteousness of his own, rather than stoop to be beholden
altogether to another, must find it hard to lay aside and mortify his high
Opinion of himself. And there is some of this accursed Pride of Nature left
behind even in true Christians: so that they must, in the way of Struggle and
Warfare, continue to lead a Life of Faith before GOD, and find frequent
occasion for that Prayer, Mar. 9.24. Lord, help thou mine unbelief.

ANOTHER difficult Duty to be performed, if we would continue and make a
Progress in the narrow Way, is Repentance. For true Christians have so much
Corruption left in them, as makes it difficult to maintain a Course of
Repentance, that it may have its perfect Work. They have so much Proness to
sin, Self-Love, and Pride, as make it difficult and uneasy to examine their
Lives and find out their Sins; to confess them in all their Aggravations, and
judge themselves before GOD; to humble themselves in the Dust and take Shame to
themselves, on the account of them. Where there is so much remaining
Corruption, who can think it an easy matter entirely to take off our Hearts
from Sin, and form steadfast Resolutions to forsake it? Resolutions never more
to harbor any Sin, though ever so pleasant; or embrace any Temptation, though ever
so urgent; but that we will cleave to the LORD in all holy Obedience to
HisWill. And it is more difficult still to put these Resolutions into Practice,
than to make them: But yet if we continue and make a Progress in the narrow
Way, we must lead a Life of such Repentance.

Non is it so easy a thing, as some may imagine, to maintain a Course of
Evangelical Obedience. For, on the one hand, to be dying daily to Sin; to
contradict the Desires of the Flesh and of the Mind, which are as pressing and
urgent, as they are irregular; to reduce licentious Appetites under the
Government of Reason and Religion; to forsake the most delightful Ways of Sin,
and mortify the most beloved darling ^usts; this is a very difficult and uneasy
Work indeed: like the cutting off a right Hand, or the plucking out a right
Eye. And on the other hand, to be living unto Righteousness, in a hearty
Compliance with the Commands of GOD, and a right Discharge of all the Duties He
requires of us in the Holy Scriptures; to fear, love, trust in Him, and worship
Him in Spirit and in Truth; to maintain Justice and Charity, from Obedience to
GOD, and Love to our Neighbor; to live soberly, in the Practice of Humility,
Patience, Meekness, Temperance, and the like Graces; I say, it is not easy thus
in all things to obey from the Heart. But to be thus holy in all manner of
Conversation, and endeavor after a Perfection of Holiness in the fear of GOD,
includes in it the Crucifixion of the old Man, and such a Mortification of our
Lusts, as renders it a very difficult and uneasy thing. And yet, the Grace of
GOD that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, rightecusty, and
godlily, in this present world: looking for that blessed hope and the glorious
appearing of the great GOD and our SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, who gave Himself for
us, that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.11, -- 14.

THUS it is difficult walking in the Way of Life, in regard of the Duties to be
performed in it.

(2.) IT IS difficult also in regard of the Afflictions and Temptations to be
encountered in it.

THE narrow Way of Godliness is an afflicted Way (...)
It Is craggy, ragged, rough, full of Afflictions and Temptations; and so there
is no walking in it, without much Difficulty: but many Trials of Faith,
Patience and other Graces must be endured in this Way, to fit and prepa^^men
for that everlasting Life which leads unto.

HERE we must expect to find Trouble and Uneasiness, from the many Temptations
to Sin that occur to us in every Calling; and which are administered by the
Enjoyments of the World, and by the Men of the World, and by Saran the great
Adversary, who is unwearied in his Endeavors to divert us from Duty, or molest
us in it, to ensnare us in Sin, and wound our Souls.

AND besides these, many are the Afflictions of the Righteous. Some of which
come from GOD more immediately; when He orders adverse Dispensations in His
Providence, to correct them for Miscarriages, to try their Graces, or to
quicken them in the Christian Course: but many other troublesome and afflictive
things are to be expected more immediately from the Hatred and Malice of the
Men of the World; who cannot bear to see themselves condemned by the holy
Conversation of the righteous, and will therefore scoff at them, reproach
(...), and oftentimes set themselves to ^ersecute and destroy them. Some think
our SAVIOR, by the narrow or afflicted Way, has a special reference to the
Opposition of the World; which was very raging and violent in the first
Beginning of Christianity. But then, as the wicked of the World did revile and
persecute our ^^essed SAVIOR Himself, and the same Spirit of Malignity
remaining in them still, why should the Servants expect to be better of it than
their LORD? He said, Joh. 15.18, 19, 20. If the world hate you, ye know that it
hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love its
own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world bateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you,
the servant is not greater than the lord: if they have persecuted me, they will
also persecute you: if they have kept my sayings, they will keep yours also.

THUS narrow is the Way that leads unto Life; the Continuance and Progress in
a godly Life, will necessarily engage us to encounter many things difficult and
uneasy to be born. And

3. FEW there be that find it: there are but Few comparatively that walk in the
way that leads unto Life.

I say comparatively; because abjo^^^ considered they are not Few, but m^^^ in
Number that find this Way, and shall therein be led to Life and Salvation at
last. The spiritual, as well as the natural Seed of Abraham, are like the Stars
of Heaven for Multitude. In Rev. 7. we find a great multitude, that no man
could number, star^ing before the throne, clad in white robes, with palms in
their bands; whose robes were washed in the blood of the Lamb; concerning whom
we read, That the Lamb, who is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and
lead them to living fountains of water, And GOD shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes. CHRIST who shed His Blood for many, will bring many Sons to Glory,
and has told us, that in His Fathers House there are many Mansions to receive
them.

BUT then, If we compare the Number of the godly, who find the Way of Life and
walk in it, with the Number of the wicked, who walk on in the Way that leads
to Destruction, they are but Few indeed. There was one righteous Noah, who
found grace in the eyes of the LORD, when all flesh had corrupted his way on
the Earth Genesis 6.8, 12.
; And one faithful plain^^ing Micajah among four hundred and (...) ^alse
Prophets 1 Kin. 22.
: So in all Periods (...) time, but Few comparatively have gone in the narrow
Way of Godliness; even among those who have equally enjoyed the Means of Grace.
Nor can we wonder at it: for the Way of Destruction appears to corrupt Nature a
much pleasanter Way to walk in, than the Way that leads unto Life. Is it
strange that a Way which is narrow, cragged and difficult, should have Few
walking in it, compared with a Way that is broad, easy and pleasant? Men are
naturally inclined to walk, not in the Way they should walk in, but in the Way
which they see the most walk in. And our SAVIOR has told us, That many are
called, but few are chosent Math. 20.16. and 22.4.


THUS I have spoken to the IV. Observation, That the Entrance into a holy
Course of Life is very difficult, the Continuance and Progress in it
necessarily engage us to encounter many things troublesome anduneasy, and there
are Few comparatively to be found walking in it.

AND I shall now close my present Discourse, with a Word by way of Counsel and
Caution, respecting what has been said; and that is this: Let us beware ^f
thinking either to go to Heaven easily (...) without Difficulty; or that the
Diff^u^ties in the Way that leads unto Life (...) insuperable.

IN the Way to heaven there are ^^^y Obstacles to be removed, Corruptions to be
mortified, Sufferings to be endured, Temptations to be vanquished, and Duties
to be performed: the Soul must be humbled under a sense of Sin and misery; the
LORD JESUS CHRIST must be embraced on Gospel Terms; we are bound to obey all
the Commands of GOD; and we must endeavor after a Perfection of Holiness in
His Fear. Let us not flatter our selves then with going easily to Heaven;
without being at any Pains, or meeting with any Difficulties in the Way: like
many in the World, who appear to think, that a little slighty external
Reformation, Profession, and Prayer, will be enough; and build their Hopes of
Heaven upon Modes and Forms, and such bodily Exercise as the worst of Men can
perform as well as the best. For however this may suit our corrupt Nature, we
are sure it cannot possibly be the strait Gate, and the narrow Way which our
SAVIOR speaks of: And if we build our Hopes (...) such a sandy Foundation,
they will ^^il us in the time of Trial; and in the End, when it is too late to
return, we shall find our selves to have been in the broad and easy Way that
leads down to Destruction. Wherefore let us beware of such easy Schemes of
Religion, as will tempt us to think of getting to Heaven without any Trouble or
Difficulty.

BUT then on the other hand, we must also take heed, lest from what has been
said of the Difficulties attending the Way that leads unto Life, we be
discouraged, and think this Way so narrow as to be unpassable. For though the
Difficulties attending it be very great, yet they are not insuperable: but the
narrow Way has been often passed, as rough and cragged as it is. It Is true, we
have no Strength of our own sufficient to encounter and surmount those
Difficulties; but there is gracious Provision made for it in the New Covenant:
for though we are ungodly and without strength in our selves, yet being united to
CHRIST by the mighty operation of the HOLY SPIRIT in Effectual Calling, we may
do all things through CHRIST strengthening us; and the same Power and Grace
which has been sufficient for others, will be sufficient for us also. Wherefore
the Consideration of the Difficulties to be encountered in the Way of Godliness
should not discourage us, nor make us think it impossible for us to arrive at
everlasting Life: but should only put us upon realizing our own Weakness and
Insufficiency, and stir us up to secure those divine Influences, whereby others
have been enabled to enter in at the strait Gare, and walk in the narrow Way,
which leads unto Life Eternal.

SERMON II.
MATH. VII. 13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait Gate; for wide is the gate, and
broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat: because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto
life, and few there be that find it.


IN a former Discourse upon these Words, I propounded this as the plain Scope
and Design of them; namely, To exhort and continue in it; forasmuch as
notwithstanding all the Difficulties which attend the Entrance into it, and
Progress in it, and the Smallness of the Number of those who practice it, it is
the Way that leads to Life and Happiness; whereas, notwithstanding all the Ease
and Pleasure which can be found in the Entrance into a wicked Course of life
and Continuance in it, and all the Multitude of those who practice it, it is the
Way that leads to Destruction and Misery.

IT was then proposed to treat upon this Subject, in speaking to these
OBSERVATIONS following; which naturally arise from the Scope and Language of
the Text.

I. THERE are two different States of existence for Mankind after Death, called
here Destruction and Life, in one or the other of which we must all take up our
everlasting abode. II. THERE are two different Courses of Life in this World, a
wicked and a holy Course, which are the Ways that lead to these two different
States of existence. III. THE Entrance into a wicked Course of Life, and the
Continuance and Progress in it, are in some sense easy and pleasant; and it has
abundance of Company walking in it. Whereas IV. THE Entrance into a holy Course
of Life is very difficult; the Continuance and Progress in it necessarily
engage us to encounter many things troublesome and uneasy, and there are but
Few comparatively to be found walking in it. But yet, V. ALL these things
rightly considered, it highly concerns us to enter upon and maintain a holy
Course of Life.
THIS last Observation, which has not as yet been considered, amounts to thus
much, That since a wicked Course of Life, the Way that is broad easy and
pleasant, and has such abundance of Company walking in it, leads to
Destruction; while a holy Course of Life, the Way that is narrow difficult and
afflicted, and has but Few comparatively to be found walking in it, leads
unto Life; we should not be at any loss which of them to choose: but should by
all means avoid the former, and enter into and walk in the latter.

AND that we may be affected with a just Sense of our Interest, as well as
Duty, on this Head, let us enter into a distinct Consideration of the supposed
Advantages and Disadvantages, compared with the different Ends of these Ways,
in order to confirin these two Propositions;

First, THAT the supposed Advantages of the wide Gate and the broad Way, are
not worthy to be laid in the balance, against so great Evil as will certainly
be found in the End of that Way. And

Secondly, THAT the supposed Disadvantages of the strait Gate and the narrow
Way, are not to be compared with the Good which will be found in the End of
this Way. For there will then be no need of taking any time to prove, That it is
the greatest Folly and Madness imaginable, for the sake of any Good, to incur
an Evil infinitely greater and more durable: Or, That it is the highest point of
Wisdom, and the best Course we can take, for us to encounter and uncergo a
lesser Evil, for the sake of an inconceivably greater and more durable Good.

I. THE first Proposition is, That the supposed Advantages of the wide Gate and
the broad Way are not worthy to be laid in the balance against the Evil that
will certainly be found in the End of that Way. And to confirm this let us take
a just View of the supposed Advantages of the broad Way of Sin; and then
reffect a little how they appear, when compared with the End of that Way.

1. LET us take a just View of the supposed Advantages of the broad Way of Sin.
Now these are the carnal Ease and Delight arising from the Gratification of
Lust in the Practice of Sin; and the abundance of Company, which Sinners have
to countenance and encourage them in the Practice of it. And the following
Considerations make these things appear unworthy to be highly esteemed by a
reasonable Creature.

(1.) THESE supposed Advantages are exceeding mean and low in themselves.

As to the Gratification of Lust in the Practice of Sin, it may be considered
with respect to the more sensual or the more spiritual Sins: in one of which
Men do but partake of the Felicity of Bruits; and in the other they make
themselves more like the Devils.

FOR on the one hand, what does a Man by Drunkenness, Uncleanness, and other
Sensualities, but degrade himself beneath the Level of the Beasts that perish?
They also have Senses to gratify, and indeed the Gratification of them is a
sort of Happiness suited to the Rank and Order of their Beings: for they want
the Superior Fa culties, which would make them capa^^ of Happiness in the Way
of Moral Government; and therefore the Happiness they enjoy, how low and mean
soever it is, since it answers the End of their Being, and employs the
Faculties wherewith their Maker has endowed them, is not inconsiderable.
Whereas for Men to abandon themselves to sensual Gratifications as the Center
of their Felicity, is to sink beneath their Natures, and by giving their Senses
the Government over the Superior Faculties of Reason, to fall unspeakably
short of that Happiness for which the Humane Nature is capacitated and
designed. The ^oul being so vastly superior to the Body, and the Powers of
Understanding and Reason so much above the Bodily Senses, the Pleasures of
Sense must be to Men but a low and mean Advantage indeed. How base and sordid
it is for Man, who was made but little lower than the Angels, to make a high
account of those Gratifications which are common to him with the Beasts that
perish! How does he neglect and degrade his highborn Soul, to live and act
worse than if he belonged to the Herd of the mere brutal Creation.

AND on the other hand, how low and mean is the Pleasure, that arises from the
Gratification of Lust, by indulging Pride, Envy, Malice, Revenge and the like
spiritual Sins. For however these may lie more concealed from the View and
Observation of the World; yet they do not in the Sight of GOD, nor ought they
in our Eyes to appear less degrading to our Nature, than a criminal Indulgence
to Sensual Gratifications: which does render Men more like the Beasts, than
those more Spiritual Sins make them like the Devils. And certainly a Conformity
unto those Spiritual Wickednesses in high places, which carries in it so vile
an Abuse and Misapplication (...) our Superior Powers, cannot be less
dishonorable and shameful, than to neglect our Superior Powers by letting the
Senses gain the ascendant over them: but rather such an Abuse and
Misimprovement of them will carry us to a greater distance from GOD, the Center
of our Happiness, than to let them lay by neglected and unimproved; and so is
more degrading to humane Nature.

AND then the pretended Advantages of indulging the Desires both of the Flesh
and of the Mind in the broad Way of Sin, is not more low and mean than the
Company to be enjoyed in that Way There Men may find Company enough; it is true:
but who are they? Why, none but Sinners like themselves: and with with what
face can a Man boast of a great deal of such Company, as it is a shame for him
to associate with? Ignorance, Folly, and the mean and base Qualities to be
found in such Company can countenance and encourage men in nothing but what is
vile and low. We cannot form a just Opinion of such Company, unless we view
them according to the Character and Description given of (...) in the Word of
GOD: by which (...) of judging, we must entertain (...) most despicable
Thoughts of 'em; and shall never be tempted to envy any Man the Advantage
arising from their Society. But,

(2.) THE supposed Advantages in the broad Way of Sin, low and mean as they
are, cannot be enjoyed without such Internations and Mixtures as will ^^der
them (...) ^ore inconsiderable.

^^EY who enjoy most of the ^^^^sures of Sin, find them to be neither
^^nterrupted, nor unmix^^. For Interfering Appeties and Passions cannot
possibly be gratified all at once; and the Impatience consequent hereupon will
produce frequent uneasy Changes in the Pursuits of Life: so that the Sweets of
Sin are but short indeed. Nor can those Pleasures fail of being much and often
interrupted, which are attended with so great a Mixture of Pain and Evil.

THERE is more Pain than Pleasure in the Practice of many Sins: as may be seen
in the Uneasiness and Anxieties of Coveteousness Ambition, and Envy, and the
racking Torments of Malice and Revenge. The many woeful Consequents of Sin give
Men (...) find by Experience, That whi^^ ^^^et as Honey in the Mouth, beco^
^^^ter like Gall in the Belly. The p^^^mg Contrivances and Designs of the
Wicked are dashed with vexing Disappointments in the Execution: They purpose
Ease and Pleasure in this or the other Scheme, and hope and labor for it; but
after all they cannot bring their Schemes to bear, or when they have compassed
their Designs, (...) fail of (...) Satisfaction they so eas^^^ expected. Then
again, the Wicked (...) on meet with some judicial Dispensat^^ of Providence in
the broad Way of (...) effectually to spoil the little mean some Pleasure
attending it. Now what a miserable Case is this, when Pleasures so mean and low
in themselves, cannot be enjoyed, without such Interruptions and Mixtures of
Pain and Evil, to render them still more inconsiderable?

NOR will the Company to be enjoyed in the Ways of Sin, afford a constant and
uninterrupted Delight and Satisfaction. As Fellow-travellers do not always
agree: so the Wicked many times fall out by the Way, though they are Brethren in
Iniquity. And indeed the mutual Love between them depends on a Foundation so
precarious and (...), that how strong and vehement (...) ^^it may be for a
while, it is impo^^^ (...) should be durable and constant. (...) of the
Irregularity and Violence of a Principle of Self-love will not suffer Wicked
Men to seek and delight in one another Welfare, any further than will consist
with their own private Interest: And their clashing and interfering Interests
compel them often to break Friendship. Now when the Wicked once fall out among
themselves, they become the most uneasy Companions to one another: their
Quarrels are most violent, and they do not spare to treat one another after the
worst manner; having no kind and generous Principle to keep them from making
one another as miserable as ever they can. So that notwithstanding all the
Advantages which Wicked Men have from their Company in the broad Way of Sin;
yet they often find the Sweets of Sin to be interrupted and destroyed, by the
bitter and painful things which have their Original even from their Companions
themselves. How inconsiderable then are the Pleasures of a sinful Course, when
they are not only so mean and low, but interrupted and mixed with so much Evil
and Misery?

Moreover

(3.) THE su^^ (...) ^^dvantages in the broad Way can (...) ^^^d, at longest,
but a very little whi^^ (...).

WERE they never interrupted at all, the Rejoicing of the Wicked might truly be
said to be short, and the Pleasures of Sin to be but for a season: for their
Duration is bounded by the Term of this Life. Men can gratify the Desires of
the Flesh and of the Mind, no longer than till Death seperates the Soul and
Body. And how agreeable soever the Company they meet with in the Ways of Sin may
be to them now, it cannot be long before they cease to be so: for when Death
lays it is Arrest upon Sinners, they are called away from their most delightful
Companions; and the dearest Friends must submit to a parting time, never to
enjoy one another in this World again.

THUS having taken a View of the supposed Advantages of the broad Way of Sin,
they appear unworthy of the high Esteem of a reasonable Creature. For who that
would be thought to act reasonably, can set a high Value upon Advantages so
mean and low in themselves, so interrupted and mixed with Pain and Misery, and
which can be enjoyed but so little a while at longest?

2. LET us in the n^^^t place, ro^^^ct a little upon the supposed Advantages,
of the broad Way of Sin, and see bow they appear, when compared with the Evil
in the End of that Way.

Now the Evil to be encountered in the End of the broad Way is Destruction;
which comprehends in it all the endless Misery, that the Word of GOD declares
to be the Portion of the Wicked after Death. And it may seem a needless
Question to ask a reasonable Creature, Whether the supposed Advantages of the
broad Way, which are so low and degrading to humane Nature, which are so
frequently interrupted and mixed with so much Pain and Misery, and which are so
short in their Duration, do contain so much Good in them, as is worthy to be
laid in the balance against the Evil comprehended in the Destruction that will
follow them? But however such a Question may seem to contain a Sarcasm upon
humane Nature, yet such is the Blindness and Stupidity of Sinners as to render
it necessary. For the Generality of Mankind let us know, by their common Choice
and Practice, that they are not much inclined to make a Question of it:
otherwise they would not so readily embrace the Pleasures and Advantages of
Sin, as a Counterballance to the Miseries of the other World. But Men would do
well to put this Question to Conscience, and require a serious Answer to it; in
order to awaken their Consideration, and bring them to a happy Change of Mind
and Practice. For if we reflect and say, Whether the Good contained in the low
and mean Advantages of this Life, is as great as the Evil contained in the
intolerable Pains and Miseries of Hell, Stings of Conscience, Torments from
Devils, and immediate Impressions of divine Wrath? -- Whether the interrupted
and mixed Pleasures in the broad Way of Sin contain so much Good, as there is
Evil in the Uninterrupted Miseries of the other World, where there is Wrath and
Pain without any Intervals, or any Remission of Inconceivable Torment? --
Whether the Pleasures and Advantages of Sin for a Season here, the duration of
which is short and uncertain, are not infinitely unworthy to be set against the
endless Torments of the other World; where the Worm dies not and the Fire is
not quenched; where there is everlasting Fire, and the smoke of the Torment
ascends for ever and ever? I say, if we reflect thus, it must appear, That the
supposed Advantages of the broad Way of Sin are not worthy to be laid in the
balance against the Evil which must certainly be found in the End of that Way.
And being brought to confess the Disproportion between these things according
to that Proposition, what other Conclusion can we make but this, That it is the
greatest Folly and Madness imaginable, for the sake of mean perishing and
pernicious Pleasures in the broad Way of Sin, to expose our selves to the
certain inconceivable, remediless, and everlasting Miseries contained in the
Destruction which that Way leads unto.

OR if it were possible for any still to doubt the truth of that Proposition,
it might be further confirmed by these two Considerations, 1. THE supposed
Advantages in the broad Way tend to hasten on the Destruction which is in the
End of it. For the more these are enjoyed and delighted in, the more provoked
and incensed is the Anger of that GOD, who has threatened to bring Destruction
suddenly and without Remedy, upon them that are wicked overmuch. And 2. THESE
supposed Advantages not only hasten upon the Wicked that Destruction which is
in the End of a sinful Course, but tend to increase the Misery of it. For in
the Pursuit of these pretended Advantages Men do not only treasure up greater
Measures of Divine Wrath, in the way of Provocation and Desert; but fit
themselves also for greater Torments. Inasmuch as hereby they strengthen their
vicious Habits and Propensions, which prepares them for greater Pain and
Misery, in the want of their desired Objects; and furnish Conscience also, that
faithful Witness for GOD, with more and sharper Stings, wherewith, as an
Executioner, to pierce and torment them.


AND can we now reckon those to be valuable Advantages, which not only lead Men
down to Destruction, but the more they are pursued the more they hasten that
Destruction, and tend to increase the Miseries of the other World?

BUT let us now pass to the

II. Second Proposition; namely, That the supposed Disadvantages of the strait
Gate, and the narrow Way are not worthy to be compared with the Good that will
be found in the End of that Way. This may be confirmed after the same manner as
the former: that is, by taking a just View of these supposed Disadvantages;
(...) the^ reflecting upon them, as they appear, when compared with the Good to
be enjoyed in the End of the Way.

1. LET us take a just View of the supposed. Disadvantages of the strait Gate
and the narrow Way of Godliness. Now these are the Difficulties and Hardships
to be encountered, and the Comparative Solitariness of that Way, as it wants
such abundance of Company, as are walking in the other. But these supposed
Disadvantages are not so great, neither do they contain so much Evil in them,
as the World is ready to imagine: which will appear from the distinct
Consideration of them.

First. As to the Difficulties and Hardships of the strait Gate and the narrow
way, which arise either in regard of the Duties to be performed, or the
Temptations and Afflictions to be encountered; these do not contain so great an
Evil in them as the World is apt to imagine. I will mention several
Considerations which tend to lessen the Evil of them in our View.

1. IT IS not expected that we should perform and encounter these things,
without a Power and Assistance equal to the Difficulties and Hardships of them.

A Life of Faith, Repentance, and New Obedience contains very difficult Duties:
but in the narrow Way GOD is pleased, by the gracious Influences of His SPIRIT,
to vouchsafe sufficient Strength for the discharge of them; and whereby all the
Difficulties which attend them shall be mastered and surmounted: For 'tho a
Christian is of himself insufficient so much as for a good Thought, yet through
CHRIST strengthening him he can do all things. The Afflictions and Temptations
also to be encounted in the Way of Godliness are very great: but they shall not
be too hard for the spiritual Principle, which GOD produces and maintains in
the Soul of every true Christian by His Holy SPIRIT. By this Principle the
Christian shall successfully encounter them, and in the End shall join in that
Song of Triumph 1 Cor. 15.57. Thanks be to GOD who gives us the Victory
through our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

2. THESE Difficulties and Hardships are well consistent with Pleasure and
Comfort far superior to any that can be found in the Way of Sin.

THE Pleasures of Piety are very great: and we have the concurrent Testimony of
Scripture and Experience, That the ways of Wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and
all her paths are peace Prove. 3.17.
. Indeed the most difficult Duties of Religion tend to produce the sweetest
Peace in the Soul. And to the conscientious and diligent Performance of them
GOD promises the Consolations of His SPIRIT under the sorest Trials. Nor does
He sail of His Word; but often makes His People wonderfully to rejoice in the
greatest Tribulation, with a sweet and heavenly Joy, which the Strangers to the
narrow Way of Godliness experience nothing of.

3. THESE Difficulties and Hardships are but of a short Duration.

THE difficult and afflicted Way of Godliness is but short; comprehended within
the Bounds of this Life: which what is it, but a Vapor that appears for a
little while? And in a very little time the last Enemy becomes a Friend to the
Godly, and puts a Period to all their Afflictions; and to Sin which is the
Cause of them, and itself the greatest of them.

4. THERE are no Difficulties and Afflictions to be encountered in the narrow
Way of Godliness, but what are ordered for Good, according to the Promises of
the New and Everlasting Covenant.

THIS is a Covenant ordered in all things, and sure: and according to it, GOD's
infinite Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Faithfulness, are all engaged for His
People, and exercised for their good in whatever befalls them. All the Promises
of this Covenant are in CHRIST Yea, and in Him Amen to the glory of GOD: 2 Cor.
1.20.
In Him they are all ratified and confirmed to the true Christian. Let what
will befall such a One, we may rest satisfied, that Good shall come out of
Evil. For we know that all things work together for good, to them that love
GOD, to them that are called according to His purpose. Rom 8.28. The
Difficulties and Afflictions of the narrow Way can last but a little Season;
and while they do continue, they are subservient to blessed Ends and Purposes,
and work for their good; as they prepare them for a glorious and happy State in
the other World. Thus the constant Warfare between the Flesh and the Spirit is
a troublesome and uneasy thing: but it weakens and works out that Corruption
which unfits the Soul for Heaven and Glory: and it confirms and strengthens the
Principle of Divine Life, and those Habits of Holiness which render the Soul
meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. The Afflictions and
Temptations also which the Godly Encounter from the adverse Dispensations of
Providence are sanctified for the like desirable Purposes. For the End of them
is to purge out Iniquity and take away Sin, to prove us and to humble us, and
to do us good in the latter End: they tend to quicken us to those Duties which
are very comfortable to us, as well as honourary to GOD: and they tend to make
us Partakers of His Holiness; for they are the Exercise and Trial of our
Graces, which are thereby strengthened and increased. And they that walk in the
narrow Way of Holiness may greatly rejoice, though now for a Season (if need
be) they are in Heaviness through manifold Temptations. Since it is That the
Trial of their Faith, being much more precious than of Gold that perishes,
though it be tried in the Fire, may be found unto Praise and Honor and Glory at
the Appearing of JESUS CHRIST. 1 Pet. 1.6, 7.

THUS if we take a just view of the Hardships and Difficulties of the narrow
Way, they do not contain so great an Evil in them, as Men are apt to imagine.

Secondly. THIS is true likewise, if we take a just View of the Solitariness of
that Way.

The Smallness of the Number of those who are found Walking in the narrow Way
is not so great a Disadvantage, as Men are apt to represent it to themselves.
For though there are but Few that find this Way; yet they are the most agreeable
Company to wife and good Men, who have the highest Relish for good Society, and
are the best Judges of it. And though their Number is but small, compared with
the Numbers to be found in the broad Way; yet as they have the most endearing
Qualities for Society; so there is a s^^^icient Number of them to make the Way
of Piety really pleasant and delightful, and to countenance, and encourage, and
assist one another in their Progress in it.

BUT if the narrow Way had not so many in it as it has; yet it can be but a
very little while, before it will bring the Travelers in it to an innumerable.
Company of Holy Angels, to the General Assembly and Church of the Firstborn
which are written in Heaven, and to GOD the Judge of all, and to JESUS the
Mediator of the New Covenant in the heavenly World.

So then upon a just View of the supposed Disadvantages of the strait Grate,
and the narrow Way, there are many Considerations to lessen the Evil of them in
our Esteem. And

[2.] LET us now reflect upon them, as they appear, when compared with the Good
to be enjoyed in the End of that Way.

THE strait Gate and the narrow Way, not withstanding all these Disadvantages,
will lead us unto LIFE and Happiness; which will make Amends for all. And could
Sinners apprehend and realize what the Beatific Vision, perfect Service, and
^^^joyment of GOD and CHRIST above, ^^^imply, they would be at no Diffic^^^ty
to allow, that this is infinitely more than enough to out weigh the
Consideration of any Evil, to be encountered in the Pursuit of it. But it is
impossible for any Tongue to describe, or any Heart to conceive, what this
comprehends in it. However that which we have revealed about this Subject, is a
firm Basis, whereon we may erect a lively Hope and Expectation of such a
Happiness as will not only more than balance all our Sorrows here, but
transcends all our vast Imaginations, and most enlarged Desires. One Apostle
says, Beloved, now are we the sons of GOD, and it does not yet appear what we
shall be; but we know, that when He shall appear, we shall be like Him: for we
shall see Him as He is, 1 John 3.2. And another Apostle says, The SPIRIT it
self bear^^^ witness with our spirit, that we are the children of GOD. And if
children then heirs, heirs of GOD, and joint-heirs with CHRIST: if so be that
we suffer with Him, that we may also be glerified together. For I reckon, that
the sufferings of (...) ^^^^sent time are not worthy to be compare^ with the
glory that shall be revealed (...) R^m. 8, 16, 17, 18. And in another (...) the
same Apostle says, Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed
day by day. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.16, 17. Now when we
seriously reflect upon these things, how can the Affliction of this present
Life bear any Proportion to future Glory? -- Light Affliction to a Weight of
Glory? -- Light. Affliction for a Moment to an Eternal Weight of Glory? -- Yea,
to a far more exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory? The Apostle seems at a
loss for Words, wherein to represent how much the Good to be enjoyed by the
Righteous hereafter, is greater than all the Evils of this Life: they are all
to be swallowed up in unutterable Glory.

THUS I have confirmed the Vth OBSERVATION, by showing, That the supposed
Advantages of the wide Gate and the broad Way are not worthy to be laid in the
Balance against the Evil which must certainly be endured in the End of that
Way; and that the supposed Disadvantages of the strait Gate and the narrow Way
are not to be compared with the Good which will certainly be enjoyed in the End
of this. For when Life and Death are thus set before us, what Conclusion can we
make but this, That it is the highest Wisdom and the best Course we can take, to
enter in at the strait Gate, and walk in the narrow Way; to despise the
supposed Advantages of a Life of Sin, and encounter the short and sanctified
Difficulties of a godly Life, which leads into the inconceivable and eternal
Blessedness of the World to come?

WHAT now remains is an earnest EXHORTATION to urge it upon Impenitent Sinners,
that they would make an agreeable Improvement of what has been said. And O be
persuaded to suffer the Word of Exhortation, which calls upon you to enter in
at the strait Gate; that you may walk in the narrow Way, that leads unto Life.

I am not about to treat with you upon a light and trivial matter. No less than
eternal Life with all the inconceivable Glories of it, and everlasting
Destruction with all the inconceivable Miseries of it, offer themselves unto
you by the narrow Way of Godliness, and the broad Way of Sin: the greatest
Interests which it is possible for a reasonable Creature to exercise himself
upon. And can you be so foolish and profane as to disregard these, like trivial
Concerns, unworthy of your serious Consideration?

INSTEAD of this, be persuaded, O unconverted Sinners, to give the most earnest
Attention to the gracious Counsels of Heaven, while you are going on in the
Broad Way that leads to Destruction. Upon hearing that Call, Jer. 3. 22.
Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings; may your
ready Compliance be expressed in the following words, Behold, we come unto
thee, for thou art the LORD our GOD. The Call of GOD to Sinners is that, Ezekiel.
18.30, 31. Repent, and turn your selves from all your Transgressions; so
Iniquity shall not be your ruin. Cast away from you all your Transgressions
whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new Heart and a new Spirit. For
why will ye Dye? For I have no pleasure in the Death of him that dies, says
the Lord: Wherefore turn your selves and live: And that Isai. 55.7. Let the
Wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous man his Thoughts and let him return
to the LORD, and He will have Mercy on Him, and to our GOD, for he will
abundantly pardon. And now what is there in the broad Way that leads to
Destruction, valuable enough to make you continue in it, when you are thus
called upon to turn out of it into the Way that leads unto Life?

MAKE the most of all you can gain in the Broad Way of Sin: and what will it
amount to? You may possibly gain earthly Wealth and Riches; and heaping up
Silver and Gold, which the World call precious Treasure, you may put them into
a Bag with Holes. You may gain a distinguishing Measure of worldly Pomp, and
pride your selves in magnificent Titles of Honor, and be dignified with that
Name of the wicked which shall rot. You may give the Reins to your Lusts,
soften your selves in Luxury, and take up some Time to dissolve in those
Pleasures of Sin, which will bite like a Serpent, and sting like an Adder. You
may follow the Multitude to do Evil, and rejoice with the workers of Iniquity.
And thus you may go on triumphing; 'till Death determines the Pleasures of Sin
to be but for a Season, lays your Honor in the Dust, and constrains you to
take a melancholy Farewell of the Treasures you have been laying up for your
selves upon Earth, and of the beloved Companions, who have been countenanting
and encouraging of you in a Life of Sin. These are the mighty Gains you may
hopefully pursue in the broad Way.

BUT then what inestimable Blessings must you forego, while you pursue these
Gains in the Way of Sin? You must forego that Peace of Conscience which is far
sweeter than the Delights of Sense; that Fellowship with the FATHER and the
SON, the Consolations whereof are not small; that Loving kindness of GOD which
is better than Life: You must forego all the advantage of professed Acts of
Worship, while the LORD hears the Prayers of the righteous, and His Ears are
open to their Cry: You must forego all the spiritual Benefits of CHRIST'S
Purchase, which are promised in the New Covenant, and bestowed in the narrow
Way of Godliness: You must forego all that can afford you Comfort in the
distressing Troubles of Life, and in a dying Hour when you will most of all
need it: Finally, you must forego eternal Life in the Kingdom of Heaven, and a
Crown of Glory that fades not away; and be forever banished from the beatific
Vision, and from the Rivers of Pleasure at GOD'S Right Hand; whereby is
represented a Happiness too great to be conceived and everlasting, in the
Service and Enjoyment of GOD and CHRIST above.

AND as you must forego these inestimable Blessings: so you are incurring the
greatest of Evils and Miseries, all the while you proceed in the broad Way of
Sin. By enslaving your selves to Satan, and diverse Lusts and Pleasures, you
bring on your Souls a Load of heavy Guilt and tormenting Fear, and en^^^ your
Conscience to smart under i^^ ^ashes: You are taking a Course to ^^ary the
divine Patience, to extinguish the divine Pity, and highly provoke that GOD,
who has given this Character of Himself Nah^ 1.2.
GOD is jcalous; and the LORD revengeth, the LORD revengeth and is furious: the
LORD will take Vengeance on His Adversaries, and reserveth Wrath for His
Enemies: and you are bringing on your selves the forest Punishment, as
despisers of Gospel Grace and Mercy; I say the forest Punishment, for (as One
expresses it) the Justice of GOD exasperated and set on by His injured and
abused Mercy, like a Rasor set in oil, will be the sharper for its smoothness.
Those that have made the Mercy of GOD their Enemy, must expect the worst that
Justice can do them. So that you are taking the Way to have at last, and in a
very little while if you hold on your Course, a Portion in the devouring Fire
and everlasting Burnings; whereby the Holy Scripture represents unto us the
future Punishment and Misery of the Wicked, which will be inconceivably great
and without End.

Now consider these things, Ye that are going astray from GOD in the broad Way
of Sin; Consider what inestimable Blessings you are losing, what inconceivable
Miseries you are incurring; and be persuaded to turn your Feet into the Way of
Life: Thus says the LORD, Consider your Ways. If you will but seriously set
your selves to use the Powers GOD has given you, can you help acknowleding,
that such Losses and such Sufferings are too high a Price for any Advantages
this World affords? Can you possibly think it reasonable to purchase worldly
Honor, Wealth, and Pleasure, with the Loss of Peace and Grace and Glory, and
with suffering the Torments of Conscience and the Pains of Hell? Cannot you
apprehend these fading and unsatisfying Enjoyments to be no Equivalent for the
Loss of so great and everlasting Good, and the suffering so great and
everlasting Evil? Cannot you realize it, that you would make a most miserable
Bargain, to forfeit Heaven, sell your selves to Satan, and damn your immortal
Souls, for the Pleasures of Sin which are but for a Season? Can you see no
Reason in this practical Conclusion, That it is better to forego your sinful
Pleasures, and mortify the most beloved Lusts, than to enjoy the one, and
indulge the other for a Moment, and then lose eternal Joys, and enter into
endless Torments? Dare you pretend, that your Conscience tells you, the
Pleasure of a Lust is greater than the Happiness of Heaven; or so great that a
reasonable Creature should think it worth the while to suffer eternal Misery
for it? No; but if you consult your Conscience, it will tell you, That if a
right Eye offend you, it is better to pluck it out; and if a right Hand offend
you, it is better to cut it off, and so maimed to enter into Life, than having
two Eyes and two Hands, to be cast down to Hell.

AND if you can thus reflect, consider and reason the Case with your selves;
then with what Face do you call your selves Men, and pretend to the Rank and
Dignity of rational Creatures, when you refuse to make use of your Powers of
Understanding and Reason, in a matter of infinite Importance to you? GOD does
not expect that Brutes should think and reflect upon these things; because He
has not made them capable of it, nor formed them for any important Interests as
moral Agents: but He has enabled you for it; He calls you to it; and gives you
the strongest Motives to induce you. And will you not then act like Men, and
seriously think of these things? Be exhorted in the Words of GOD by the
Prophet, Remember this, and show your selves Men: bring it again to mind, O ye
Transgressors Isai. 46.6.


THEY who will after all continue thoughtless and inconsiderate about these
things, must be addressed in the Language of the Psalmist, Understand ye
brutish among the people, and ye fools when will ye be wise Psalm. 94.8.
: But by the serious Consideration of your Ways, you will discover your Wisdom,
as well as exercise your Reason. As it was the Wish of Heaven Deuteronomy. 32.29 O
that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their
batter end: so this Wisdom is to be wished for you; O that you may be greatly
affected with an Apprehension of an End of the broad Way, which is leading you
to Destruction.

AND be it known unto you, O Impenitent Sinner, that you must and will be
brought to think of these things first or last. If you will not think of them
now in this Life, while Opportunity and Means and Hopes are left, Death and
Judgment and Hell will bring you to think of them with a Vengeance. But then,
alas, it will be too late for you to reap any good from these Reflections: your
right Tho'ts will but serve to torment you, when your doleful Case is past all
Remedy.

SINCE then you must sooner or later, first or last, come to have right Tho'ts
of the broad Way of Sin, Why should you let the false and treacherous
Advantages of a vain World stifle them now, while the Opportunities of Life and
the Means of Grace are continued to you; and put them off 'till hereafter, when
they may only serve to wound and tormen you? Let me speak in the moving
Language of Another on this Occasion. O the Folly and Stupidity of Men! To be
so transported with present and sensible things, as to have no Consideration of
our Future State, no pity for their Souls, no Sense of our everlasting Abode in
another World; to be so blinded by Sense, so bribed by the Pleasures of Sin,
which are but for a moment, as to forfeit the Happiness of all Eternity! When
the Pleasure is past and gone, and the dear Price comes to be paid down, and
the Soul is leaving this World, and going to take possession of the everlasting
Inheritance of Shame and Sorrow, of Tribulation and Anguish, which Men have
purchased to themselves by their own Folly; how shall they then repent of that
bargain which they have so rashly made, but can never be released from.

IT is our lot who have the Souls of Men committed to our Charge, to see many
of these sad Sights. O my GOD, says he, what Confusion have I sometimes seen
in the Face of a dying Man? What Sorrows on every side, what restless Workings
and violent Throws of a guilty Conscience? And how are we tempted (who are
commonly sent for too late to minister Comfort to such persons) I say, how are
we tempted to sow Pillows under their uneasy Heads, and out of very Pity and
Compassion are afraid to say the worst, and grieved at our very hearts to speak
those sad Truths which yet are fit for them to hear! It Is very grievous to see
a Man in the Paroxisms of a Fever, or in the extreme Torment of the Stone, or
in the very Agony of Death: but the saddest Sight in the World is the Anguish
of a dying Sinner; nothing looks so ghastly as the final Despair of a Wicked
Man, when GOD is taking away his Soul.

BUT whatever Sense Men have of these things, when they come to lie upon a
Sickbed; every Sinner will most certainly be convinced, when he comes into the
other World. Then will they have nothing to divert them from these Tho'ts. They
will feel that which will be a sensible Demonstration to them of their own
Folly. Then will Men curse those false and flattering Pleasures which have
cheated them into so much Misery: but their own Folly most of all for being so
easily abused. Then would they give Ten Thousand Worlds, if they had them, to
recover the Opportunity of a new Choice; but it cannot be: they parted with
their Souls once at a cheap rate; but no Price will then be accepted for the
Redemption of them.

Now then be persuaded, O Sinner, to regard the folemn Warnings of GOD; while
Life and Death are set before you for your Choice, and you are compassionately
called upon to choose Life. Your Ministers, if they have any Faithfulness to GOD
and Love to your Souls cannot, without an aching Heart, behold you walking or
running with full speed in the broad Way, which leads down to Destruction.
Nay, their own Souls are very nearly concerned in this matter. We read, Ezekiel.
33. 7, 8, 9. -- O son of man, I have set thee a Watchman to the house of
Israel: therefore thou shall hear the word from my mouth and warn them from me.
When I say to the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall surely die; if thou do not
speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand. Nevertheless, if thou warn
the wicked of his way to turn from it: if he do not turn from his way, he shall
die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy Soul. Even so we, who are the
Ministers of CHRIST, are appointed Watchmen; and we cannot be faithful to Him,
nor deliver our own Souls, if we do not set before you such awakening Truths as
have been offered; how grie^ous soever it may be for you to hear them. You may
think that we prophesy hard things, when we thus preach unto you the Necessity
of turning out of the broad Way, and entering in at the strait Gate: But how can
we speak smooth things, and cry, Peace, Peace, unto you, when GOD says, and has
bid us say, There is no Peace? Would you have us suffer you quietly to proceed
in the Way of Sin; while we are bound by the Oath of GOD to warn you to flee
from the Wrath to come? But we cannot be so void of Compassion to you, if you
are to us. Wherefore as we say to the Righteous, that it shall be well with
him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings: so we must say it for your
sakes, and we will say it for our own, Woe unto the Wicked it shall be ill with
him: for the reward of his hands shall be given him. Isai. 3.10, 11.

AND O that we might be the happy Instruments of saving your Souls from Death
and Destruction; by converting you from the Error of your Way, and bringing you
into the Way that leads unto Life! As GOD calls, Turn ye, turn ye, why will
ye dye; and JESUS CHRIST calls, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; no man
comes to the Father but by me; Him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast
out; and the HOLY GHOST, says, To day if ye will hear His Voice, harden not
your hearts: so they who have the Care of your Souls committed to them, would
now beseech you in the Bowels of CHRIST, to hear and answer this Call. We
beseech you to forsake your sinful Ways, how alluring soever they be; and no
longer by your impenitent heart to treasure up for your selves wrath against
the day of wrath: We beseech you to renounce your own Righteousness, to
embrance the LORD JESUS CHRIST by a living Faith, and resign up your selves to
GOD through Him; since he that believes not the SON, shall not see Life, but
the Wrath of GOD abides on Him: We beseech you to maintain a Life of Holiness
and new Obedience; because without Holiness no man shall see the LORD. And we
beseech you to make sure of a real unfeigned Conversion to GOD in CHRIST;
because such an Entrance at the strait Gate is absolutely necessary in order to
your walking in the narrow Way, that leads unto Life and Happiness.

BUT I am aware of it, that the great Adversary is always ready with his
Impediments to hinder your turning out of the Way that leads to Destruction,
and entering into the Path of GOD's Commandments; and to discourage you from
using any Means in order unto this. For which end he will be forward to fall in
with your depraved Dispositions, by suggesting Objections to defeat the most
powerful and moving Arguments and Exhortations. And particularly with regard to
the Exhortation which has been pursued at this time, you may be tempted to
excuse or discourage yourselves in the Language of this

OBJECTION. THE Conversion to GOD by which we must enter in at the Strait Gate,
is a thing wholly out of our own Power, and depends entirely on the
supernatural Grace of GOD, and those Influences of His SPIRIT which are
dispensed according to His sovereign Pleasure: Why then do you thus urge and
persuade us to enter in at the Strait Gate, as if we could Change our own
Hearts, and Convert our selves to GOD? This I doubt not, is an Objection
whereby Satan has discouraged many awakened Souls, and defeated the holy
Counsels that have been given to them. And it is likely to have the greater
Force and Influence upon you, because it seems naturally to arise from those
Passages of the sacred Scripture which represent the spiritual Impotency of
unregenerate Sinners, and the Necessity of divine Grace in Conversion.

IN Answer to this Objection, I will not endeavor to represent your natural
Condition as less miserable than indeed it is. Instead of exalting humane
Liberty, and the Power of Man's Free Will to spiritual Good; as is done in some
modern and modish Schemes, which for the sake of that Idol will dethrone the
Grace of GOD: I say, instead of this, let it be reckoned a faithful Saying,
That while unconverted you are dead in Trespasses and Sins; and as unable to
produce that Principle of spiritual Life in your Souls which is necessary to
saving Conversion, as a Man under the power of natural Death, is unable to give
himself a Principle of natural Life and Action. Nor can I conceive, with what
Sense and Meaning they who deny this, can put you upon making such Trayers to
GOD as that, Turn thou me and I shall be turned.

BUT notwithstanding all this, the Objection proposed has no Force in it. For
when Sinners in Scripture are exhorted to turn themselves, and make themselves
a new Heart, and the like, it is evident by comparing such Exhortations with
other Texts of Scripture, that the Design of them is to set forth the Sinners
Duty, and the Necessity of Conversion in order to Salvation; to bring men to a
Sense of their Miserable Impotency; and to put them upon Seeking to GOD that He
would change their Hearts, and turn them to Himself. And so when we set before
you the Misery and Danger of your State in the broad Way of Sin, and exhort you
to forsake it, and to enter in at the strait Gate and walk in the narrow Way,
we do not urge and persuade you, as if you could change your own Hearts and
convert your selves. But who can tell, whether the Spirit of Life from GOD will
not enter into your dead Souls with such Exhortations? And we hope, that being
awakened to see the Necessity of a new Heart in order to your Happiness, and
your own Inability to produce it in your selves, you will enquire after the Way
to obtain it, and seek it of GOD; by attending those Means of Grace in the
diligent Use of which it often pleases Him to bestow it. For thus you ought to
seek it of Him; and thus you may do it with Hope of success.

I think the plain State of the Case may be laid down in the following
Particulars.

I. IF ever you are saved, that Redemption which CHRIST has purchased, must be
effectually applied unto you, by the SPIRIT of GOD, in true Convers^^^. II. GOD
has been pleased to appoint certain Means, in the Use of which He will be
sought unto, and waited on for the gracious Influences of His SPIRIT, which are
necessary in order to this Conversion. And, III. IT IS in your Power, while
unconverted, to attend those Means of Grace seriously, though not with a gracious
Sincerity: such as Reading and Hearing GOD'S Word, Meditation, and Prayer. IV.
IF you do not thus seek to GOD, and wait on him in the Use of those Means, you
can have no grounds to hope for His converting Grace: but If you do, you are in
the Way of this Blessing; for when they are diligently attended, GOD is often
pleased to accompany those outward Means with the saving Influences of HIS
SPIRIT. V. IT IS therefore the greatest Folly imaginable for you not to wait
upon GOD in this Way. For, What? though you cannot find any necessary
Connection between the Use of the outward Means and converting Grace? Neither
can you, between the Means used by the Husbandman and a plentiful Harvest; for
after all he must depend on the Blessing of divine Provi^^^ce, which is not
always granted: and yet you call it extreme Folly in an Husbandman, who depends
on a Harvest for his Livelihood, not to use the Means in order to it; because
without using the Means, it is the vainest Presumption to expect a Harvest. In
like manner, it must be the extremest Folly in you that have nothing but the
sovereign Grace of GOD to depend on for the Life and Salvation of your Souls,
not to wait on Him in the use of the Means of Grace: since in the neglect of
those Means, it is the vainest Presumption to expect that Blessing. VI. NOR can
you pretend, that you have not sufficient Encouragement to hold on seeking to
GOD, and waiting on Him, in the Use of the Means of Grace. For though I cannot
say, you have any Covenanti-Promise to plead for your Success in the Use of
them; yet they are the only appointed Means of seeking the Grace of GOD; and
none could ever yet produce a single instance of a Sinnor that held on in the
serious and diligent Use of them, but after all was denied this Blessing: which
Considerations give you more than a bare Peradventure, even a Probable ground
of Hope, that if you persevere in a diligent Use of the appointed Means, He
will be pleased to bestow upon you His converting Grace. And how strongly
should a Probable ground of ^^pe excite you to the diligent Use of Means, in a
Case which is of such infinite Importance to you, that a bare Possibility of
Success would be a sufficient Motive.
WHEREFORE instead of going above to excuse your selves, or sinking under any
Discouragements from the Consideration of your own Impotency, be persuaded to
shake off your Slothfulness, and concern your selves in earnest about the
eternal Interests of your precious and immortal Souls. For though you cannot give
your selves a new Heart, and convert your selves; ye^ you can seriously and
di^^gently attend upon the Means of Grace: you can read and hear the Word of
GOD, you can meditate, and you can pray to GOD. And since you may do these
things with a Hope of Success, why should you suffer your selves to be idle or
slothful, when the Life and Salvation of your Souls are so nearly concerned?

THE time will not allow me to enlarge by way of Direction: but you have Bibles
in your hands; and if you would consult your Ministers about saving your Souls,
with as much Concern as you do your Physicians about the Health of your Bodies,
you would not want their best Advice and Direction; which they will be glad to
give, whenever you ask it.

YET will I not break off without this one Word of Counsel. If any of you are
made to see the Evil and Danger of the Way of Sin, your Duty and Interest to
turn out of it and live to GOD, and the Necessity of the divine Grace in order
unto this; and have serious Resolutions from this time to be found seeking
those Influences of the SPRAIT of GOD, whereby you may be enabled to enter in
at the strait Gate and walk in the narrow Way; Be persuaded to tal^ this
Method. Often retire and go alone to beg of GOD His converting Grace. Enter
into your Closets, and falling down before GOD acknow knowledge, that you are
of your selves unable to forsake your Sins and return to Him; that you are
unworthy He should enable you; and that He would not be unrighteous if He
should refuse to do it: but cry to Him, and beg of Him to enable you, by His
free and sovereign Grace. There try to bewail your Sins before GOD; to plead
with Him for a Pardon through the Blood and Sacrifice of the great SAVIOR, and
for Acceptance into the divine Favor through His Righteousness; and hopefully to
place your Trust in Him for them. It Is a very moving passage, Hos. 14.1, 2. O
Israel, return to the LORD thy GOD; for thou have fallen by thine iniquity.
Take with you words, and turn to the LORD, say to Him, Take away all iniquity
and receive us graciously GOD not only allows unworthy guilty Creatures to
plead for His Mercy, but He Himself puts the very words into their Mouths. And
will you not then try to look up to Him through CHRIST, and take with you these
Words of His own prescribing, and say, O LORD, take away all iniquity, and
receive me graciously? Hereupon try whether you cannot come to fixed
Resolutions to forsake the broad Way of Sin, and walk in the narrow Way of
Godliness, with a humble Dependence on GOD to work in you both to will and to
do. And try whether He does not graciously enable you to yield the Consent of
your Souls unto it, That your SAVIOR should unite you to Himself, take
possession of you by the SPIRIT of Grace, and enable you to live unto GOD,
through Him living in you. In this way hold on seeking to GOD, and waiting on
Him, and resolve to persevere in this Course, 'till you find a new Heart given
to you; 'till you are inclined and enabled to forsake every evil Way, and press
after an universal Conformity to the Will of GOD, as revealed to you by CHRIST
in the Gospel; in a Word, 'till you have forsaken the broad Way that leads to
Destruction, and find your Heart enlarged delightfully to run the Way of GOD's
Commandments, that narrow Way which leads unto Life.

BUT I must come to a Conclusion -- And now GOD only knows what Entertainment
such Exhortations, Warnings, and Directions will find among you. For Paul may
plant, and Apollos water; but GOD only can give the Increase. Your faithful
Ministers can only speak to the Ear; and must leave the Success to GOD: though
whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, they will not lose their
Reward. It Is an awful passage 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. We are unto GOD a sweet savor
of CHRIST, in them that are saved, and in them that perish. To the one we are
the savor of Death unto Death; and to the other the savor of Life unto Life.
How affecting is it to think of being a sweet Savor in them that perish! O
that we may never be sent unto you, to make any blind Eyes blinder, and hard
Hearts harder! Wherefore as we would not cease warning every man, and teaching
every man, that we may present every man perfect in CHRIST JESUS Col. 1.1.
: so we leave the solemn Warnings of GOD with you. You have often had Life and
Death set before you, and the great Motives of the Gospel earnestly urged upon
you. And if after all, you will go on still in your Trespasses, and walk on in
the Broad Way of Sin, what a dreadful Account will you have to give up at last?
You may expect in a little time to find by sad Experience what the DESTRUCTION
is, which your Way leads unto. And GOD only knows how suddenly that Portion may
be allotted to you: For he will take His own time, just when it pleases Him, to
put that dreadful Threatening into execution, Prove. 29.1. He that being often
reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy. But Oh! when it comes to this, then your Consciences, that witness for
GOD in your Bosom, will witness for your faithful Ministers; who have spoken to
warn you from your wicked Way, and having set Life and Death before you have
besought you to choose Life: I say, your Consciences will then witness for them
against your selves, that they are not guilty of your Blood, but by their
faithful Warnings have delivered their own Souls.

FINIS.
To supply a few vacant Pages, the following HYMNS are added from the Excellent
Mr. WATTS'S.
Christian Virtues: Or, The Difficulty of Conversion.
SRrait is the Way, the Door is strait
That leads to Joy on high;
It Is but a few that find the Gate,
While Crowds mistake, and die.
Beloved Self must be denied,
The Mind and Will renewed,
Passion suppressed, and Patience tried,
And vain Desires subdued.
Flesh is a dangerous Foe to Grace,
Where it prevails and rules;
Flesh must be humbled, Pride abas'd,
Lest they destroy our Souls.
The Love of Gold be banished hence,
(That vile Idolatry)
And every Member, every Sense
In sweet Subjection lie.
The Tongue, that most unruly Power,
Requires a strong Restraint;
We must be watchful every Hour,
And pray, but never faint.
Lord, can a feeble helpless Worm
Fulfill a Task so hard?
Thy Grace must all my Work perform,
And give the free Reward.
The Pilgrimage of the Saints; or, Earth and Heaven.
LORD! What a wretched Land is this,
That yields us no Supply?
No cheering Fruits, no wholesome Trees,
Nor Streams of living Joy.
But pricking Thor through all the Ground,
And mortal Poisons grow,
And all the Rivers that are found,
With dangerous Waters flow.
Yet the dear Path to thine Abode
Lies through this horrid Land,
Lord! we would keep the heavenly Road,
And run at thy Command.
Our Souls shall tread the Desert through
With undiverted Feet;
And Faith and flaming Zeal subdue
The Terrors that we meet.
A thousand savage Beasts of Prey
Around the Forest roam,
But Judah's Lion guards the Way,
And guides the Strangers home.
Long Nights and Darkness dwell below,
With scarce a twink'ling Ray;
But the bright World to which we go
Is everlasting Day.
By glimmering Hopes and gloomy F^^^
We trace the sacred Road,
Through dismal Deeps and dangerous Snare
We make our Way to God.
Our Journey is a thorny Maze,
But we march upward still;
Forget these Troubles of the Ways
And reach at Zion's Hill.
See the kind Angels at the Gates
Inviting us to come;
There JESUS the Forerunner waits
To welcome Trav'llers home.
There on a green and flowery Mount
Our weary Souls shall sit,
And with transporting Joys recount
The Labors of our Feet.
No vain Discourse shall fill our Tongue
Nor Trifles vex our Ear,
Invite Grace shall be our Song,
And God rejoice to hear.
Eternal Glories to the King
That brought us safely through;
Our Tongues shall never cease to sing,
And endless Praise renew.
The Spiritual Warfare.
Stand up, my Soul, shake off thy Fears,
And gird the Gospel Armor on,
Such to the Gates of endless Joy,
Where thy great Captain-Saviour's gone.
Hell and thy Sins resist thy Course,
Hell and Sin are vanquished Foes,
JESUS nailed 'em to the Cross,
And sing the Triumph when he rose,
that though the Prince of Darkness rage,
And waste the F^ry of his Spite,
^ernal Chair confine him down
so fiery Deeps and endless Night.
What though thine Inward Lust rebel and I
It Is but a struggling Gasp for Life
The Weapons of victorious Grace
shall slay thy Sins, and end the Strife
(...) to let my Soul march boldly on,
^ess forward to the heavenly Gate,
There Peace and Joy eternal reign,
And glittering Robes for Conqu'rots (...)
(...) shall I wear a starry Crown,
And triumph in Almighty Grace,
While all the Arinies of the Skies
Join in my glorious Leader's Praise.
The Christian Race; Isai. 40.28, 29, 30, 31.
A Wake our Souls (away our Fears,
Let every trembling Thou^^^ gone, Ways,
Awake, and run the heavenly ^^ce,
And put a cheerful Courage on.
True, it is a strait and thorny Road.
And mortal Spirits tire and faint,
But they forget the Mighty GOD
That feeds the Strength of every Saint
The mighty GOD, whose matchless Power
Is ever new and ever young,
And firm endures while endless Years
Their everlasting Circles run.
From thee the overflowing Spring,
Our Souls shall drink a fresh Supply,
While such as trust their native Strength
Shall melt away, and drop, and die.
Swift as an Eagle cuts the Air,
We'll mount aloft to thine Abode,
On Wings of Love our Souls shall (...)
Not the amidst the Heavenly Road.
The Atheist's Mistake.
LAugh, ye Profane, and swell and burst
With bold Impiety:
Yet shall ye live for ever cursed,
And seek in vain to die.
The Ga^^ your expiring Breath
Consi^^^ your Souls to Chains,
By the last Agonies of Death
Sent down to fiercer Pains.
Ye stand upon a dreadful Steep,
And all beneath is Hell;
Your weighty Guilt will sink you deep
Where the old Serpent fell.
When Iron Slumbers bind your Flesh,
With strange Surprise you will find
Immortal Vigor spring afresh,
And Tortures wake the Mind!
Then you will confess the frightful Name
Of Plagues you scorned before,
No more shall look like idle Dreams,
Like foolish Tales no more.
Then shall ye curse that fatal Day,
(With Flames upon your Tongues)
When you exchanged your Souls (...)
For Vanity and Songs.
Behold the Saints rejoice to die,
For Heaven shines round their Heads;
And Angel-Guards prepared to fly,
Alt^ho their sainting Beds.
Their longing Spirits part, and rise
To their Celestial Seat;
Above these ruinable Skies
They make their last Retreat.
Hence, ye Profane, I hate your Ways,
I walk with pions Souls;
There Is a wide Difference in our Race,
And distant are our Goals.
ERRATA.
Page 12. l. 11. for shall read can. p. 25. l. 14. covering. p. 32. l. 18. for
to read before. P. 14. l. 9. r. does not. p. 69. l. 18. r. Gate.


