THE faithful MINISTERS of CHRIST mindful of their own Death.

A SERMON Preached at the Lecture in BOSTON; Upon the Death of the LEARNED and
VENERABLE SOLOMON STODDARD Late Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Northampton:
Who departed this Life Febr. 11. 1729. Aetat. 86.

BY Benjamin Colman.

Isa. iii. 2. The Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient.

BOSTON, New England: Printed for D. Henchman in Cornhil, John Phillips and T.
Hancock, near the Town Dock. MDCCXXIX.

To the HONORABLE Simeon Stoddard, Esquire
SIR,
I SEND You the following Sermon at your Desire, however unworthy it is to bear
the Name of your most Reverend and dear BROTHER, whom you have justly loved,
honored and reverenced from your Youth up; for that singular Gravity and
Sanctity which adorned Him in the sight of all Men; and for that great Use
which it has pleased GOD to make of Him in his Church for these last sixty
Years.

You are now Your self old and gray headed, though You have not attained to the
Days of the Years of your BROTHER; and are Luke ii. 25, 29.
waiting for the Consolation of a peaceful (...) after Him, as I ought to think
of you: And I heartily pray that you may be growing rich in Grace, and ripe for
Glory.

IT is an Honor to your Posterity that They have had an UNCLE of such Name and
high Esteem in these Churches; and your worthy Sons, I am confident, do account
Themselves honored by GOD in the Relation they have flood to Him.

THOSE things which you have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in
Him, do: and the GOD of Peace shall be with You.

AND now I join your Mourning with the bereaved Flock and Family, the Elect
Relict and her Children; Whom (I trust we may say,) we love in the Truth; Grace
be with Them, Mercy and Peace.

MAY the blessed Comforter be ever near to the Soul of his aged Handmaid, the
few Days she has to survive: And may a double Portion of the GOOD SPIRIT which
rested on the Deceased, be inherited by his honored Sons; that in the Stations
which GOD has allotted them in his Church and in the State, they may be made
great Blessings in their Generation.

WHEN I have also mourned with my Fathers and Brethren, the Ministers of the
bereaved County, and Others his Sons by Marriage; I shall add no more, but to
entreat their Prayers and yours for Me, who am,

SIR, Your very humble Servant, Benja. Colman.
BOSTON, Febr. 24. 1728, 9.
MINISTERS mindful of their own Death.
II. PETER i. 13, 14. YEA I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle,
to stir you up by putting you in Remembrance; Knowing that shortly I must put
off this my Tabernacle, even as our LORD JESUS CHRIST has showed me.


THE Death of the aged, holy, venerable, Apostolical Man of GOD, SOLOMON
STODDARD, for a long course of Years (through Grace) the faithful Pastor of the
Church of CHRIST in Northampton, has led me to the Words read for the present
Lecture.

I think it but a decent and dutiful Respect to his Name and Memory, (giving
unto Free Grace the Glory of all that He was made to us and did among us) in
this Place and Lecture, upon the first notice of his expected Decease, to mourn
the common Bereavement of all our Churches. For as he has been for some Years
the most aged Minister in the Province, so in the Course of a laborious,
burning Ministry, he has for many Years shone before us in the Gifts and Graces
of the HOLY SPIRIT; a Prophet and a Father not only to the nei'bouring Churches
and Pastors his own County, but also to those of the whole Land.

AFTER those in his own Nei'bourhood, it may be his Name and Ministry were not
more dear and honored any where than in this great Town, the Place of his
Birth; where both Ministers and People received his annual Visits with a
pecullar Reverence and Pleasure; as He made them to us (while his bodily
Strength continued for so long a Journey, and this was to near his Eightieth
Year) with all the Delight and Satisfaction that a FATHER has in visiting the
Children of his Love; bringing us the solemn Counsels and Warnings of GOD from
Year to Year, which were received by Us in crowded Assemblies, that hung on his
Lips, as a People that sought Righteousness and showed much Love.

THEN it was that this Lecture was His, and he was as a PETER here among the
Disciples and Ministers of our LORD JESUS; very much our Primate, and a Prince
among us, in an Evangelical and the truly Apostolical sense; that is to say,
among the First for Light and Integrity, for Knowledge and great Judgment, for
Faith and Love which is in CHRIST JESUS, and for Zeal and Boldness in the Cause
of Truth and Holiness: But I must add, None less affecting a Pre-eminence above
his Brethren; none more pleased with Retirement, and none more with public
Appearances for occasional Services to CHRIST and Souls; none more studious and
inquisitive after Truth; none more diligent and laborlous in his Studies; none
more lively, fervent and unwearied in the Pulpit; nor did any one love his Work
and his Master better.

No one in our Churches has run (through Grace) a longer, a brighter and a like
constant Course of Preaching, on LORD's-Days and Lectures, to the finishing the
eighty fifth Year of his Life; his LORD giving him a strength of Body equal to
that of his Soul, for such a Run of Labor and Service; and therein a happy
fruitful old Age; his Day and his Work ending together.

AND accordingly, No Minister in the Land lived more mindful of Death, his own
and his People's Death; the first and last Character of a Minister of the
New Testament, studions to save Himself and Them that hear him, and watching
for Souls as One that must give an Account. And who among Men, for many a Year
past, has enjoyed a more settled Peace, and full Assurance of his Interest in
CHRIST, than this Servant of the LORD did? whereby he lived above the Fear of
Death, in a diligent Preparation for it, and in a pleasing Expectation of it.

WHEREFORE no Minister in the Land, (I am bold to say it) for scores of Years
past, could with greater Freedom and Pleasure, Integrity and Truth, have taken
to Himself those Words of the Apostle Peter, which I have chosen for his
Funeral; and have said to his Hearers in the Name and Fear of GOD, with all
Humility and Confidence; -- " To You (...) have obtained like precious Faith
with us, through the Righteousness of GOD, and our Savior JESUS CHRIST; -- I
will not be negligent to put you always in Remembrance, though ye know and be
established in the Truth: Yea I think it meet as long as I am in this
Tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in Remembrance; knowing that shortly
I must put off this (...), as our LORD JESUS CHRIST has (...), I will
endeavor that after my (...) you may be able to have these things always in
Remembrance.

WORDS very suitable from a dying Minister to dying Hearers. Words worthy of a
dying (...). New (...) be the last Words of PETER. He speaks of his appreaching
Dissolution; He speaks of his Body, and calls it his Tabernacle; He speaks of
the putting off this his Tabernacle; he knew that he must do it and that very
shortly; He knew it by the Course of Nature, for he was now old; but he knew it
more by what JESUS his Lord had said to him concerning it: This he ever kept in
Mind; this he here calls to Mind, and speaks of it to quicken Himself, and to
excite Those to whom he wrote, to a careful and diligent Improvement of the few
remaining Days before them, in a Preparation for Death and Eternity.

Now the Truths that are here presented to us for our present Meditation; and
serious Consideration, are these, 1. THAT the Body of Man is the Souls
Tabernacle. 2. THAT we must shortly put off this our Tabernacle. 3. THAT our
LORD JESUS CHRIST has shown us that we must do so. 4. THAT the Ministers of
Christ must die as well as others. 5. THAT it is meet for Them as long as they
are in the Body to stir up themselves and their People, by putting them in
Remembrance of these things.


I. THE Body of Man is the Tabernacle of the Soul. This my Tabernacle. As our
LORD JESUS once pointed to his own sacred Body, and said, This Temple. HE was
the true Tabernacle, which the LORD pitched, and not Man. His human Nature was
(...) for therein the SON OF GOD tabernacled with us. -- Our Bodies are the
small, frail and movable Dwellings of our Souls, of mean Materials, easily
taken down, and to be taken down within a little time, and to be set up again
to dwell in. We continue in (...) but a few days, and we leave but for a few
(...), to return into them again.

(...) we consider the Body of Man in its original (...) and first State; or if
we consider our Bodies in (...) (...) and Resurrection State; they are more
than Tabernacles. They were and are in this View of them the Building of GOD, a
House not made with Hands; made for Perpetuity; for Immortality, never to be
taken down; but to be changed, made Spiritual and Incorruptible, and to be
taken up to GOD, to be a part of his own Mansion and Palace in the heavenly
Places.

YET as the Body now is, it is wonderfully made, set up and kept up. Call it a
Tabernacle; it is a sine and noble one in it self; like that of Moses, a work
of great Design, and whereon much Art and Cost and Care was bestowed. Our Souls
could neither provide this Tent for themselves; nor can they now uphold, or
preserve it from falling, no not a Day. The Soul neither may nor can leave it
at it is pleasure, though it moves and removes it at it is Will; and often injures
it by it is passions.

THE Body should be a Tabernacle for GOD to dwell in; for Him to be worshipped
and served in, both here and for ever.

IF there is any thing now mean in it, we our selves have brought that upon it:
We have made it this Corruptible falling thing, which it is now become. It was
a fair and beauteous House, as GOD framed and finished it; and will be so
again, when he shall raise it again and restore it.

LET us thank GOD for this Dwelling He made it for us, gave it to us, put us
into it. Let us give Him the Glory of it: Heb. x. 5. Psalm. xxii. 9. cxxxix. 14.
"A Body have Thou prepared me. Thou art He that did take me out of the Womb!
I will praise Thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made!"

LET us consecrate the Tent, such as it is, to GOD: He will accept the
Dedication of it and dwell in it. He made it for Himself at first, and he now
requires us to give it back to Him, to use it for Him and serve Him in it. Let
us supplicate Him to sanctify us to Himself, that we may be Holy both in Body
and Spirit; and that He may be glorified in both, for they are His, by every
Right, of Creation, Redemption and daily Preservation.

BUT while we are in these mortal Bodies, let us esteem them as no more than
our earthly House and Tabernacle; our meaner and dying Part. Let us daily think
of leaving this House of Clay, expect to remove (...) out of it. If we wait a
few days, the Grave is (...) House; and the Graves are ready for us Job xvii.
1, 13. Heb, xi. 9, 14.
. By Faith let us sojourn here as in a strange Land, dwelling (...) Tents, as
the Heirs of Promise did of old. And content in our present Lot, let us be
seeking a better Country; heavenly and everlasting Habitations.

Finally, WHO hurts or misuses his own Dwelling? Who is there but takes care of
it and repairs it? and yet who sets up a Booth and thinks of living long in it?

II. WE must shortly put off this our Tabernacle, and we should know that we
must do so. The phrase here seems not quite so proper: We speak of putting off
our Clothes, but of taking down a Tabernacle, or of going out of it. But so it
pleases the HOLY GHOST to blend the Metaphors, in my Text and in other places 2
Cor. v. 4.
.

DEATH is the Souls putting off the Body, as a Man puts off his Clothes at
Night, after the Work of the Day, and lies down to Sleep. So Aaron's putting
off his Priestly Rebes, was the Figure and Image of his following Decease.

Again, DEATH is the Souls (...) out of it is Dwelling of Flesh. The Body is no
(...) habitable; it falls and moulders into dust. As King Hezekiah prayed at
the Approach of Death, Isa. xxxviii. 12.
" My Age is removed as a Shepherds Tent.

SURELY Jonadah the Father of the Rechabites, Jer. xxxv. 2.
who commanded his Posterity not to build them Houses, but all their Days to
dwell in Tents; meant thereby to admonish them that their present Life in the
Body was no other than as in a Tent and Tabernacle; and that in the wise
Consideration hereof they should piously pass the Time of their sojourning here
in Fear. And thus the Rechabites are an Image unto the Church for ever, of Men
spiritually wise for their Souls and a better Life.

IN our Text there are three things said about our putting off our Tabernacle,
"that we must do it, that we must do it shortly, and that we know we must do so.

1. WE must do it: It is not left to our Choice, if we will, or when, or how it
shall be. Death comes with his Commission and Authority from GOD, and says to
us, You must and shall go. His Call to us is, Come away! and with a strong Hand
he hales and turns us out. He pulls down the Tabernacle over our heads, and
tears the Body in pieces, Psalm. 90.3. Thou turnest Man to Destruction. 104.29.
Thou take away their Breath, they die and return to their Dust. The Loftiness
of Man is bowed down, and the Haughtiness of Man is laid low, in the Day of
Death.

2. WE must die shortly. How soon or suddenly we know not; but we are sure it
will be shortly, " Are not my Days few? Job. x. 20. x^v. 1. Psalm. lxxxix 47.
Jam. ix. 14.
Remember how short my Time is! How long have I to live? Are not my Days as the
Day of an Hireling? For what is your Life? it is even as a Vapor, that
endures but a little while, and then vanishes away. So the Job vii. 9. Psalm.
xc. 6, Job ix 26. vii. 6.
Cloud is consumed by the Sun, or the Wind drives it away. So the Grass
flourishes in the Morning and is cut down at Even. So the Post by Land, and
the swift Ships at Sea, and the Eagle in the Air, pass away. And so the Weavers
Shuttls passes in an Instant through the Loom. Next to this is Nothing at all;
and such is our Age before GOD; Psalm. 39.5. My Age is as nothing before Thee.
Thus the Scripture teaches us to think and speak of the shortness of Human Life.

3. WE know that it is thus short. Knowing that I must shortly put off this my
Tabernacle. Who of us but know this, in one sense? and yet how few of us may
there be that know it, in another? and as we all ought to know it? Would to GOD
we every one could say like Peter, that we truly know it! that we seriously
consider and realize it every Day we live!

FEW, very few among the dying Children of Men have a real Knowledge of this
plain and common Truth. The Living know that they shall Die; but what then? how
few among the Living consider it, lay it to heart, keep it in mind, and Live as
if they knew this? This is to know and understand in the Language of Scripture
and of my Text.

THE Apostle lived and preached, and wrote and wrought according to this
Knowledge: and so shall we act if we understand this and consider our latter
End: While the careless and inconsiderate are the Ignorant in the Language of
Scripture, "Who know not, nor understand, but walk on in Darkness, Psalm. 82.5.

IT is the sanctifying Impression of this known Truth upon our Minds and
Consciences, and the ruling, Power of it over our Thoughts, Words and Actions,
that becomes dying Creatures, who are hastening to an eternal Judgment.

THIS is the true and saving Knowledge of our own Mortality; which as it is
GOD's Work in us and from his enlightening Spirit; so it is Life Eternal to us
to have this Knowledge of Death, this wise and habitual Consideration of our
dying State.

WE all lack this Wisdom, and we should ask it of GOD; Psalm. xxxix. 4.
" Lord make me to know my End and the measure of my Days; that I may know how
frail I am. We must be made to know it, we are hardly brought to know it, our
foolish earthly Hearts are very averse to the serious Consideration of Death
and Eternity; to meditate and pray over this Truth, "That we must shortly die.

HE that has learned this first Lesson, is taught of GOD. Psalm. 90.12. So teach
us to number our Days, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. We cannot
infuse this spiritual Wisdom into our selves or ours. Yet we may go to GOD for
it, who gives liberally and upbraideth not. He wishes us this understanding
Heart, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this; that they
would consider their latter End! Let us fall in with this blessed Wish of GOD
for us, and turn it into a PRAYER to Him; " O that we were wise, to consider
this! And that we may know this savingly, or be left for ever Inexcusable in
our Forgetfulness and Inconsideration, I come to the third Head,

III. THAT our LORD JESUS CHRIST has shown us this, "that we must shortly put
off our Tabernacle. Knowing that I must, even as our LORD JESUS CHRIST has
showed me.

I shall here consider, first, the very particular and extraordinary Revelation
that CHRIST had made to Peter respecting the Time and Manner of his Death. To
that the Apostle refers in my Text, namely, to the Words of the risen JESUS to
him, John 21.18, 19. Signifying to him by what Death he should glorify God:
That when he should be old he should stretch forth his Hands to be bound for
it. So that the LORD had let him know "that he should live to be old," that he
should die a violent Death, and "that he should willingly go to his Martyrdom.
And now see in my Text the accomplishment of these Things drawing on. The aged
Apostle speaks his own Readiness, Courage and Constancy in his Expectation of
this predicted Death. He was now old, and ready to reach out his Hands unto
them that should bind him for Death. Knowing (says he) that I must shortly put
off my Tabernacle: He speaks as one ready and willing to go, whenever the LORD
should please.

HERETOFORE Peter had not been the most patient at the Thot's of Sufferings,
and of an ignominous and cruel Death in particular. He of all the Disciples was
once the least likely to stretch forth his hands for another to gird him. When
CHRIST spoke first of his own Crucifixion, Peter could not bear it; "LORD (said
he) this shall not be. When he saw the rude Guards lay hold on his LORD, he
drew and wounded Malchus. When he saw himself like to be seized and arraigned,
he thrice denied CHRIST. These things did not at all look as if he hereafter
should be the Man, who when he should be old should go freely, meekly and
resignedly to a Cross for the Name of CHRIST. Yet CHRIST told him all this in
the Presence of his Brethren, to put Honor upon him after his Fall, and to
comfort him in his Sorrow for it, and to encourage him in his Self-diffidence,
Humility and Fear. And by the Words of my Text we see that. He remembers with
Pleasure what CHRIST had said to him of putting off his Tabernacle, and was
looking out for the Day.

Now it is true that none of us have any such particular Revelation made to us,
concerning the Time and Manney of our Death. Never the less it is most true and
certain, as to every one of us, "That CHRIST has many a Time, and in many Ways,
shown to us that we must shortly put off our Tabernacle.

AND as it may be very profitable to us to consider this, so it should be a
pleasant Meditation to us; For every Notice to us of this Nature from the LORD
JESUS should be taken in Love as it is surely meant. For in the Face of CHRIST
crucified, and from the Mouth of CHRIST risen and ascended, we see and hear of
Mortality and Death in such a Light and Power, as nothing else can show it in.

BUT How and Wherein has our LORD JESUS shown us that we must shortly put off
these our Tabernacles.

Briefly thus: HE has shown it to us in the first Adam. And if he had not shown
us the Origin of Death and Evil, it had been yet unknown to us. He has shown
us 1 Cor xv. 22. Romans v. 12.
, how in Adam all die, how by one Man sin entered into the World and Death by
sin, and has passed on all, because all are Sinners. He that opens the Book of
GOD and the Seals thereof, has in the first Page of it opened to us the Gates
of Death, and shown the Beginning and the End thereof Job xxxviii. 17. Rev.
(...). 2.
.

Again, THE LORD JESUS has shown us in Himself, in his own Dying, that we must
shortly put off our Tabernacle. With his dead Body all his Saints go down to
the Dust, and like His their Flesh rests in Hope Isa. xxvi. 19. Psalm. xvi. 9.
. This is that sight of Death which takes away the Sting of it, and delivers
from the Fear of Bondage. Come see the Place where the LORD lay, and prepare to
follow Him through the dark Valley, and into the Chambers of Death Mat. xxviii.
6.1 Cor. xv. 56. Heb. ii. 15.
.

Again, HE ( the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World) did from the
Beginning show his People that they must die, in the Sacrifices and Offerings
our of the Flocks and Herds; even from the Day of Abel. In the Blood of These
Adam had the first Sight of Death; and they were Notices to him that he himself
must die, as well as Figures of the Death of CHRIST the great Sacrifice. Thus
Man conversed with Death in all the Worship that he offered to GOD from the Day
of his Fall. Death star'd him in the face as often as he came to Gods Altar,
and the LORD showed him that he must shortly die, in the bleeding Figures of
his own Death. Death was the Cry at the Door of the Tabernacle and Temple, in
the Blood of the Sacrifices, through all the Days of the Old Testament: As it is
yet in the Churches of CHRIST, and at his Table, in the Memorials of his Death,
through the Days of the New Testament.

IN the Sacraments of Christianity, we remember in solemn Form the Dying of the
LORD JESUS, and are awfully minded of our own approaching change. The Table of
CHRIST, where we show forth His Death till He come, is to put us always in
Remembrance of the present Truth, (as my. Context speaks) and to stir us up to
the Consideration of it, "That within a little time He comes, as to every one
of us, and we must shortly appear before Him to give an Account, how we have
remembered his Dying, and how our own, and got ready for his Coming. "Did I not
warn you, may the LORD then say, as often as you went to my House and Table, of
your dying shortly, and of your appearing before my Judgment Seat? was it not
openly shown you in the Memorials of my own Death?

THUS again, In every Sermon preached to us on the Subject of Death, whether
the dying Creature will hear or whether he will forbear, CHRIST sends him Line
upon Line concerning his passing hence, to his (...) Judgment. From Sabbath to
Sabbath this harsh (...) is grated on, and the unwilling Mortal is made (...).
O it is CHRIST that speaks to us by his Word and Spirit, and shows us that we
must die, we know not how soon or suddenly; and what a great thing it is to set
our Souls in Order against that dreadful Hour! That the second Death may have
no power over us! That we may never be hurt of it! That this last Enemy may be
slain before us! And that to die may be our Gain, infinite and eternal Gain!

So in all the Records of the Death of Saints and Sinners, from the Death of
Adam, Noah, Abraham and Moses, to the Death of Peter and John, the LORD has
shown his People, from Generation to Generation, that they must shortly die.
Your Fathers where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for ever? And who
art Thou, O Man! whose inward Though It is, that thy House shall continue for ever?
and thy Dewlling Place to all Generations?

Moreover, IN the Deaths and Funerals of our Relations and Friends, from Week
to Week, CHRIST shows us that we also must shortly die. We may see our LORD at
every Funeral with the Keys of Hades in his Hand Rev. i*18. Deuteronomy xxxii*30. John
v. 22.
He kills and he saves alive; and none can deliver out of his Hand. The FATHER
judges no Man, but has committed this Judgment to the SON. If He will that
Peter be bound and die, and that John tarry till he come; what is it to the
rest of the Disciples? He also has determined by what Death every Believer
shall glorify GOD. The Kingdom of Providence is His, and the two great Things
in it are Life and Death.

IT is therefore our LORD JESUS who shows us we must shortly die, in all those
bodily Infirmities, Pains and Sicknesses, which we feel within ourselves daily,
and which are the Symptoms of Death upon us; and as we advance in Years the
Shadows of it lengthen upon us. It Is an instructive Fable that you have read,
"How a certain Man made an Agreement with Death, that he should kindly give him
some Notice and Warning of his Coming; and when Death afterward came upon him
suddenly, the trembling Man pleaded his Promise; "Did you not agree to give me
Notice of your Coming? Yes, answered the grim Officer, and so I did often, but
you would not mind me: Did I not at such a Time warn you by such a Faintness?
and again at such a Time by such a Pain? and yet again at other Times by these
and those Fits of Sickness? These were the kind Notices of my Coming; and now
Come away!

BUT in the last place, and in the best Sense of all, CHRIST shows unto his own
Disciples, as he did to Peter, that they must shortly put off their Tabernacle,
by the effectual Impressions of his Grace, and by the Teaching of His SPIRIT.
He savingly enlightened Peter, and so he does all his Elect, in the Truth before
us; whereby they are inclined and made to live in a serious and diligent
Preparation for Death, Judgment and Eternity. So he makes them wise for their
Souls, wise unto Salvation. He shows them their dying State in a powerful and
ruling Light. This is for CHRIST to show, and for us to know: As it is written,
All thy Children shall be taught of GOD.

LET our Souls apply to CHRIST by servent Prayer, " Lord JESUS, Be Thou my
Teacher in this great and necessary Lesson! In thy Light show me my mortal
dying State.

O let us gladly learn of Him, who is the Teacher come from GOD! learn this of
Him, which is the End of all Men! Learn it from his Word, learn it from his
Life, learn it from his Ministers, learn it in his Ordinances, learn it at his
Table, where Death is set forth evidently before our Eyes; learn it every
Sabbath and at every Sacrament, being early at the Sepulcher every LORD's Day;
and finally, learn it of the blessed enlightening and sanctifying SPIRIT OF
CHRIST, for none teaches like Him, none effectually besides Him.

YOUR Ministers labor to show you this plainest Truth in a convincing Light:
They think it meet, as Peter did, as long as you are with them in this
Tabernacle to stir you up, by putting you in Remembrance of it: They would
endeavor that after their Decouse you may have these things always in
Remembrance: To this End the Ordinances of CHRIST are graciously ordained,
wisely adapted, and to be diligently used: But O my Brethren, look off from
dying Ministers, and look above all present Means of Grace, to the crucified
risen JESUS at the right Hand of GOD! Look to Him for his HOLY SPIRIT, savingly
to show you your dying State, and help you to live in the due Apprehension of
it.

HAPPY the Ministers, and happy the People, who learn this of the FATHER and
CHRIST! Let us do it before we die! for there is no Knowledge or Work in the
Grave whither we are going.

BUT has the Lord JESUS shown us that we must shortly pus off these our
Tabernacles? So has He also shown us, That we must put them on again Acts xxiv.
15. John v*28 vi. 39.*40 41. 1 Cor xv. 20, 23, etc.
. He has told us, That there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the
Just and Unjust; That all that are in their Graves shall hear his Voice and
come forth; That of all whom the Father has given Him he will lose none, but
will raise them up at the last Day; That He himself is risen the Fruit-fruits
of them that sleep; That as in Adam all die, so in Him they shall be made
alive; That this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must put
on Immortality; and that then shall be bro't pass the saying; " Death is
swallowed up in Victory. Thus He that has told us of putting off the Body, has
not left his holy Ones in Corruption, but has bro't Life and Immortality to
light unto them.

BUT it is time I come to the Fourth Head.

IV. THE Ministers of CHRIST know, and they ought to know, it concerns Them to
know as it does their Hearers, and the Lord JESUS has shown to them in
particular, that They as well as others must shortly put off their Tabernacles.

IT was PETER, the Apostle of JESUS CHRIST, who knew that He was soon to die,
as his LORD had shown him. And every Minister of CHRIST knows the same thing
respecting himself, and should take to himself these very Words and say, " I
know that I must shortly put off this my Tabernacle; my LORD has showed me this.

DEATH knows no Distinction, Degree, Order or Character of Men; has no respect
to Persons. But of all Orders, that of the sacred Ministry should most know and
consider their Mortal state, and live according to the Knowledge of it. -- They
know no more the Day of their Death than other Men, nor the Manner of it. They
are as frail and mouldring Dust, as any of the Lords Congregation. They also
are formed out of the Clay, and returning into it, though they are in GODS stead
to corruptible Men, bringing the Lords Messages Job xxxiii*6.
.

IT is meet for dying People to have dying Teachers; very meet that they who
preach to others of Death and Eternity, be dying Persons, and do it first to
Themselves; sensible that they are going into the same Grave, and to the same
eternal World with their Hearers.

OF all the Prophets, only Enoch and Elias saw not Death. Aaron died in the
sight of all the Congregation. And we read of Elisha's Death, though he inherited
a double Portion of the Spirit of Elias, His dying too was honored with
Miracles and the Mourning of Kings and of the Schools.

MINISTERS die Young like other Men; and in the midst of Usefulness, Labors
and Fruitfulness; They live to old Age also, are gray in their Lords Work, and
worn out in the Service of Souls. Sometimes they outlive their Work, and their
Powers for Service are gone before they put off their Tabernacles. Or they die
with all their Powers, vigorous and active in them; in the midst of their
Projections for the Service of CHRIST and Souls: In that very Day their
princely Tho'ts perish. Yea they have died in the Pulpit, or been led from it
to their dying Bed.

THEY die of the same Diseases that others do: of Fevers of Dropsies, by
Languishings and Consumptions, or by Apoplexies and sudden Suffocations: They
die of Stupors, or Strangury, of dolorous Cancers (and that even in the Tongue,
as did a late excellent Minister in London): They die of noisome and ulcerous
Diseases as well as others; their Flesh broken and become loath-some before it
is put off; their body vile to an Eye of sense: They die by evil Accidents, as
we call em, by broken Bones, by Drowning, by Beasts of Prey; (as the old
Prophet.) or by the hands of Robbers and Enemies, or by Violence and Injustice
under the Name and Form of Law. They are in trouble as other Men, and plagued
like other Men; and (like Peter) have Bands in their Death. -- How many of
Christ's faithful and eminent Ministers have died Martyrs for his Name and
Truth? Since the Death of Stephen, and James and Peter. GOD has (according to
his Sovereign Will) set them forth appointed to Death, a Spectacle to the
World, to Angels and Men. But if they live and die at Home, in Ease and on
their Beds; die af Age and in Honor, with their Children and Friends about
them; beloved, desired and prayed for by their People; and mourned for when
they can continue no longer, but go from the Place of the Holy, This also is
like other worthy Worshippers.

MINISTERS know all this concerning Themselves, and so do all about them; and
it is by no means to inform but to affect my self and you, that I have said so
much about it. And to affect our selves the more, Why should I not add, "That
Ministers are Sinners like other Men, and should be Examples to their Flocks of
holy Dying, and are but herein couformed to CHRIST, like his other Members. Nay
are not their Sins greater than other Men's? And shall they not then suffer the
Pains of Death as well as others? Or if CHRIST has tasted Death for Them, among
the Church of his Elect, shall not they also drink of his Cup? and be baptized
with his Baptism? And the rather, if like the two Brethren they hope to be
nearer to Him than Others, in his Kingdom and Glory. I say again, Why should
they not go before their Flocks in holy Dying as well as Living? To hear about
the Dying of the Lord JESUS while they live 1 Cor. iv. 7.
and (by his Grace) to exhibit it when they come to die; that HE may be
magnified (and Souls edified) in their mortal Bedies; Whether it be in Life or
Death Phil. i. 20.
.

FOR these Reasons Ministers die, and should die, like other Men. They know it,
and have nothing to say against it. And they need and ought to know it
practically, lay it to their Heart and live accordingly; as much, if not more
than Others. PETER had the Primacy in this respect, among the Brethren to whom
he wrote; though not among the Apostles. In this let Ministers learn of Him, and
be Followers of him, as he was of CHRIST.

WOULD to GOD it could be truly said of all the Ministers of JESUS, that they
have a saving Knowledge of this plain Truth, which they preach to Themselves
and Others from day to day! How happy were it for Pastors and Flocks together!
if this first and small Principle in the Oracles of GOD, known to every Babe in
the Church, were but indeed fully learned by the Doctors in it? Art thou a
Master in Israel, and know not this? But O it is a great and chief and first
thing indeed! and happy is He that has learned it as he ought to know it! It is
the Power of GOD unto the Salvation both of Preacher and Hearer. We may study
the Point, preach it, and urge it on our Selves and others, and yet not have
learned it.

BUT who are so obliged, bound and advantaged to consider duly of, and live by
the Knowledge of their own Mortality, as the Ministers of the Gospel? Who are
more called to converse with Death, and to look into Eternity than they are?
How often are they at the sick and dying Beds of People, to the most solemn
Ends and Purposes; to minister to their Souls, to enquire into their Spiritual
State to assist them and pray over them in the Agonies of Death? and to follow
their Remains, among the Mourners, to the Grave!

WHO should know and understand their own Mortality, if not they who are so
often called to preach upon the dark and melancholy Subject? and to lead
others into the serious Contemplation of it, in all its Weight. Importance and
awful Consequence? To whom should the Day of Death and Judgment be more awful,
or more joyful than to the Ministers of Christ? Who have a greater Account than
they to give? How glorious a Prophets Reward, if they find Mercy to be
faithful! but how dreadful the great and terrible Day to Them, if otherwise!

HOW then ought Ministers, above all Men, to know, consider and lay to heart
their frail and dying State? the Greatness of their Work, the Shortness of
their Time, and the Account they have to give? They are the Men, who above any
should have Death and Eternity always in their Eye, ever upon their Heart, and
be able to say with the Apostle, " I die Daily! And who should urge themselves
on in their Work with his Motives 1 Cor. xv. 31. Heb xiii. 17. 1 Cor. ix. 27. 1 Timothy iv. 16.
, That I may give up my Account with Joy and not with Grief! And lest after I
have preached unto Others, I my self should prove the Castaway! And again, "
That I may both save my self and them that hear me! -- How should we feel the
Power and Force of such Words, as they pass through our Minds, and come from our
Lips?

AND it is to be charitably supposed of the Ministers of Religion, that as many
of them, and far more in Proportion of this Order than of any other, have the
saving Knowledge of the Truth before us; or else Woe unto their Souls, and to
the Churches of CHRIST for their sakes. This does in a special manner agree to
their holy and spiritual Calling, to their peculiar Bonds and Ordination Vows,
and to their high Profession. And this is the Way for them to be blessed by GOD
and made successful in their Work: As Moses prayed for, and prophesied
concerning the Tribe of Levi, and blessed them with his dying Lips; Deuteronomy. 33.8.
Let thy Urim and thy Thummim be with thy Holy One. Which was to say, "Let GOD
furnish them with those Gifts and Graces, that Light and Integrity, that
Illumination and Sanctification, which are requisite to the faithful Discharge
of the Duties of their high and sacred Office. And so Aaron was illuminated,
living in a Preparation to undress and die, at a Day or an Hours warning. And
this is a shining part in the Character of blessed Paul; as he tells the
Corinthians that by Death working in him, Life spiritual and eternal was the
more conveyed to them through his Ministry; he being the more quickened from day
to day in serving their Souls, by the daily Views he had of his own Dying:
Which I take to be the sense of those Words, 2 Cor. 4.12. "So then Death (...)
in us, but Life in you". For, the more a lively Apprehension of Death and
Eternity works in the Ministers of CHRIST, so much the more like are they to be
instrumental to the spiritual Life of their People. And who in fact are like
laborious, and it may be successful, in their Ministry, as those that live most
in the Views of Eternity? As I remember that the Venerable Mr. Baxter in his
Age, reflected with pleasure on the Goodness of GOD to Him through his life, that
by a weak and dying state of Body he had been kept studying, praying and
preaching like a dying Man for thirty Years together.

O the Comfort and Pleasure to a Minister in Age, or to any Christian, that can
thus look back on a Life spent in the Knowledge of Death, and a diligent
Preparation for it. With what Calm and Peace may such a Servant of CHRIST take
leave of his Brethren, as the Apostle Paul did of the Elders about Ephesus?
Act. 20. Yea how triumphantly may he speak of and meet his advancing Change in
the Words of the same Apostle to Timothy; 2. Epist. 4. Chap. 6, 7, 8. I am
ready to be offered, and the Time of my Departure is at hand; I have fought a
good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith; Henceforth is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the righteous Judge will give me
at that Day; and not to me only, but to all (both Ministers and People) that
love and look for his appearing.

BRETHREN, Pray for us, your unworthy Ministers, that for the honor of CHRIST,
and the sake of our own and your Souls together, We may be helped of GOD (and
you with us) to live looking into our Graves, and mindful of the things that
are unseen and eternal. This is the Way to be laboring Ministers, and fruitful
Christians.

LOOK on us, my Brethren, as poor frail dying Preachers, passing with you into
an awful Eternity: And GOD help Us to look on You with the same Eye. If there
be any Treasure put into us, for the Dispensation of the Gospel, it is at best
but in a brittle earthen Vessel, that will be broken within a few days, and the
Desks and Seats that now know us, shall know us no more.

HOW should we therefore pray and preach and hear as Persons on the Brink of
Eternity! And how much better should the most of us Worship from time to time,
if we were more under the Power of this just and awful Wiew of our selves!

LET us now every One, both Speaker and Hearer, lay his hand upon his own
Breast, and say to Himself in the Presence and Fear of the Great GOD, "I know
that shorthy I must put off this MY Tabernacle! My LORD has showed me this a
thousand times over! But O my Soul, Have thou said it to thy Self daily, as
becomes thy uncertain and dying State? -- It is a very serious and important
thing, and I leave it to every ones Conscience.

AND now I seem to have previnted my self, in what I might have designed to say
on the lair Proposition, "That it is meet for the Ministers of CHRIST, as long
as they are in the Body, to stir up Themselves and their People, by putting
them in Remembrance of these Things; and to endeavor that after their Decease
they may have them always in Remembrance.

YOU will please to accept and improve the presen Discourse, as meant by the
Will of GOD for this End.

AND I wish it were at all Worthy to bring to your Remembrance, with a deserved
Respect and Reverence, the Person and Ministry of that honored and beloved
Servant of CHRIST; to whose Memory and your Spiritual Profit it is a small
Tribute.

YOU have seen the main Design and Scope of his powerful and successful
Ministry, with the blessed Fruit and Crown of it, in the Things that I have
said; What He reaped from it himself, and with pleasure saw others reap.

THROUGH Grace He was not negligent to put all unto whom he came in Remembrance
of the great Concerns of their Souls and the eternal World. As long as he was
in this Tabernacle, (and how long was that through the Favor of GOD to us how
did he stir up Himself And all that heard him, in his pungent and awakning
Discourses, as knowing that he must shortly give an Account to GOD, and those
that heard him, together with him. And now after his Decease, We should have
these things always in Remembrance, as we can bear Witness for him he earnestly
endeavored, while he was with us and came to us in the Name of the LORD. Let
his Death bring to our Remembrance, and fix deep in our Hearts all that we have
seen and heard, of the Power of Godliness in his teaching Life and Ministry.

As the aged Apostle wrote to his Son Timothy, so the surviving Ministry of the
Land may represent the Deceased yet speaking to them; "Thou have fully known my
Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose, Faith, Long-suffering, Charity, Patience:
Continus thou in the things which thou have learned and have been assured of.

THE Crown of Life is to finish well, in a happy Death. And the way to this is
to pass our Days here under the governing Tho'ts of Death and Eternity.

WE must congratulate with the wise and faithful Servant that Lives and
finishes thus: as the Spectators in the Olympic Games shouted (...) carried off
the Prize.

THE last Character of a Gospel Minister is Sanctity and Fidelity in his LORD's
Work, in the diligent Improvement of many Talents, and the gaining of many more
thereby.

THE Gifts and Powers, natural and acquired, of an active Soul in a sound Body,
are a rich Endowment; the Student, the Disputant, the Casuist, and the powerful
Preacher, are great and good lines in the pourtraiture of a complete Divine:
But yet these are the least part in the just Character which the Public has had
to day of the Deceased: "The holy Man of GOD, and the diligent, compassionate
and faithful Pastor" are much bolder and brighter Lines in his heavenly and
angelical Face. So among the worthy Remains of his Learning and Ministry in
Print, the Mantle he has left to us, his Which is now again in the Press.
Safety of appearing in the Righteousness of CHRIST outshines all the rest. By
Faith in that glorious Righteousness, he has lived and died here below; and in
it he now appears, in Safety and Glory, before the Throne of GOD.

LET the Ministers of CHRIST, elder and younger, now present before the LORD,
learn from the holy Life and happy Death of this our Father, how to fulfill our
Ministry. Let us to this End live more than ever in the constant Remembrance of
the Mortality and Immortality of our selves and others. We need more than any
Men to do so, we are more obliged to it than others, we are more advantaged for
it and admonished of it than others; and it may turn to the Salvation of Many.
It will greatly adorn us, enrich us, and make us useful, yield us present
Comfort and a far exceeding eternal Weight of Glory.

AND not only let elder Ministers be quickened in their Work by considering
that they must die very shortly; but younger Ministers also should be as much
stirred up by the same Motive, knowing that They may die before their Elders:
And therefore while they emulate their Gifts, Labors and Usefulness, let them
not count upon attaining the Days of the Years of their Pilgrimage; but let
them begin earnestly, that they may make good Proficiency and do much Work in a
little Time, supposing their Days should be soon numbered and finished by the
Sovereign GOD.

YOU have learned of the renowned Elisha, to look up after our ascended
Fathers, and cry to their GOD for a double Portion of the same SPIRIT to rest
on You, that you may tread in their Steps: And if like Them that are gone
before you, you desire to excel in Grace, in Knowledge, in Learning, in Labors
and Usefulness; to live in Honor and Esteem among the People of GOD, and in
inward Peace and Comfort; take this short Course for it, "Live tho'tful of
Death, and in a careful Preparation for a blessed Eternity.

LET our Candidates for the Evangelical Ministry begin here, and go on with
this, in all their Preparations for it, and in their solemn Entrance on it. Lay
this good Foundation deep, and build strong for Eternity.

THIS will make you diligent in your Studies, to give your selves to Reading
and Meditation; redeeming your Time: And this will make you pray over your
Studies, and preach your Sermons first to your selves.

To have done, This wise and conscientious Tho'tfulness of Death, and these
habitual Preparations for it, will incline and excite us in our whole public
ministry, and in all our more private Applications to Souls, to act as dying
Men with dying People. And this is the Way to live above the Fear of Death now,
and to attain a Prophets Reward at the End of a few Days: When they that are
Wise shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to
Righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever Dan xii. 3.
. This is the way to attain the triumphant Knowledge and Assurance of many a
primitive SAINT; 2 Cor. v. 1.
For we know, that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a Building of GOD, a House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens.

APPENDIX. From the BOSTON Weekly News-Letter: No. 112
Northampton, Feb. 13. 1728, 9:
ON the 11th Instant died, and this Day was buried here, the very reverend and
aged, our honored and beloved Pastor, Mr. Solomon Stoddard; too eminent a
Person to be suffered to slip into his Grave in silence.

HE was born at Boston, Anno 1643. The eldest Son of Anthony Stoddard Esquire; by
his second Wife, who was the Sister of Sir George Downing. Had his School
Learning at Cambridge, under the famous Master Corlet. Took his first Degree at
Harvard College Anno 1662. And was afterward one of the Fellows of that House.
Growing out of Health by reason of too close an Application to his Studies, he
was prevailed on to take a Voyage to Barbados, with Governor Serle as his
Chaplain, where he preached to the Dissenters in that Island. But his State of
Health growing better, he returned to his Native Country in about two years.

UPON the Death of the excellent Mr. Eleazer Mather, the first Pastor of the
Church in this Place, who died when but 35 Years of Age, Mr. Stoddard was
chosen and invited to succeed him. He was ordained to the Pastoral Office over
us, Anno 1672; and we have enjoyed an uncommon Blessing in him, for 56 Years
together.

HIS natural Powers were quick and strong, and by the Blessing of GOD on his
hard Studies, he was furnished with that Learning which is requisite to make a
Divine of the first Rank. He was well skilled in the learned Languages; well
versed in the religious Controversies that relate either to Points of Doctrine
or Church Government; and was himself a ready and smart Disputant, a wise and
judicious Casuist, whose Advice and Counsel were much sought and valued by the
perplexed and scrupulous,

As a Pastor he was diligent, laborious, constant; wise, faithful,
compassionate. His Sermons were plain and powerful, experimental and spiritual,
close and searching, yet rational and argumentative. His Subjects chiefly
suited to awaken secure Sinners, direct Souls about the great Work of
Conversion, and to help Persons to judge of their spiritual State. And he was
favored with a more than ordinary Presence of GOD in his Work, and many Seals
of his Ministry; in the Course of which there were three remarkable Seasons, in
which the Spirit of GOD so moved upon the Hearts of his People, that it became
almost the general Cry of the Place, What must I do to be saved? And Converts
were so numerous, as to give a happy Occasion for that admiring Question, Who
are these that fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves to their Windows?

HE was a Man zealous against Sin, a hearty Mourner for the iniquities of the
Times, an earnest Pleader with GOD for the Land, the Nation, and His Church in
the World.

THE most in the Town have been born and bro't up under his Ministry; and
scarce any Minister was more reverenced and beloved by his People.

HIS Station was indeed in a remote Corner of the Land, but his Light and
Influence went out through the whole Country; and His being our Pastor gave a
Name and Reputation to the Town.

HE used for many Years together to make his Annual Visits to Boston at the
time of the Commencement; and the Day after to preach the Public Lecture, to a
numerous Audience, expecting and glad to hear him.

HIS Labors and Usefulness were drawn out to an uncommon length. For fifty
Years, or more, he preached twice every LORD's day; and till his 86th Year (in
which he died) he was a constant Preacher one Part of the LORD's-days, and at a
monthly-Lecture without the use of Notes at all; and, in the Opinion of some
good Judges, so well, that it could not be discerned his Powers were much
abated. And so close did he follow his Studies, even in this advanced Age, that
when he died he had a considerable Number of Sermons studied, that were never
preached.

HE enjoyed a great measure of Health, and was seldom taken off from his
beloved Work by Sickness. His Stature was something taller then the common
Size, his Countenance comely, his Presence venerable; his whole Look and
Behavior such as gave those who conversed with him, occasion to say of him, as
the Woman of the Prophet, I perceive that this is a holy Man of God.

THE whole Land has a great Loss in his Death; for such Persons are the
Chariots and Horsemen of a People, their Glory and Defense.

HE married Mrs. Mather, the prudent and pious Relict of his Predecessor, and
Daughter of the Reverend Mr. Warham of Windsor, who now survives him; by whom
he was blessed with many Children, eight of which are living, two Sons, and Six
Daughters. His Eldest Son, the Reverend Mr. Anthony Stoddard, is now the worthy
Pastor of the Church at Woodberry. His second Son, Col. John Stoddard, is one
of the present Members of His Majesty's Council. And five of his Daughters are
married to worthy Ministers. The Rev. Mr. Williams of Hatfield, (one of his
Sons in Law) preached a Funeral Sermon for him, the day of his Interment.

HE had the Satisfaction for some time before he died, to have his Grandson,
Mr. Jonathan Edwards, joined with him, to be the Colleague of his Age, and his
Successor at his Death; for whom we cannot wish any thing better, than that the
Mantle of Elijah may rest upon Elisha.

FINIS.
Page 10. l. 34 dele (.)


