THE Ministers of CHRIST should be Speedy and Earnest in speaking to YOUNG
PEOPLE.

Four SERMONS Preached to a SOCIETY OF YOUNG MEN, in Newtown On the LORD'S DAY
Evenings.

And now published at their earnest Desire.

By JOHN COTTON, Pastor of the CHURCH of CHRIST there.

I Tim. vi. 2. These Things teach and exhort.

Psalm. lxxxv. 8. I will hear what GOD the LORD will speak

BOSTON, N. E. Printed by Gamaliel Rogers near the Mi^-Bridge, for JOHN
PHILLIPS at the Stationers Arms the next Shop to Mr. Dolbear's Brasier, by the
Town-Dock. 1729.

THE PREFACE.
IT is very lamentable and awful to consider what Numbers of the rising
Generation, are walking in the Ways of their Hearts, and in the Sight of their
Eyes, fulfilling the Desires of the Flesh and of the Mind; regardless of all
the solemn Warnings, and Calls they have had, either from the Word or
Providence of GOD. However, we must continue calling on, and warning them of
their Sin and Danger, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.

IT is also comfortable and refreshing to see, and hear, of such Numbers of
YOUNG PEOPLE renewing their baptismal Covenant, and devoting themselves to the
Fear and Service of GOD; and that there are in many Towns in the Land, Meetings
of YOUNG MEN set up, and carried on, upon the Evenings of the LORD'S-Days, for
religious Exercises, which if under a good Regulation, may be doubtless greatly
serviceable to the Interests of Religion among us.

IT was the setting up such a Meeting, that occasioned the preaching of the
following Sermons, which come to you, with all possible plainness of Speech;
and O that they might in the Demonstration of the Spirit and with Power* And
they shall do so, if while we are speaking to the Ear, GOD will speak to the
Heart.

I hope such as are serious and concerned to hear what GOD has to speak to
them, may here find a Word in Season for them, and that may become, by the
Blessing of GOD, profitable to them.

AND as for such who are going on in their Disobedience and Rebellion, I don't
suppose many such will be at the Pains of reading them: If they should, it
infinitely concerns them to see to it, that they refuse not Him that speaks,
and therefore to cry for an hearing Ear, and an understanding Heart, that their
Souls may live.

AND if any may be quickened and excited by these plain, serious and solemn
Calls, and Counsels of GOD to them, to hear his Voice, and be obedient, to
engage in the Service of GOD, and seeking the Salvation of their precious
Souls: As I have directed such to give to the free and sovereign, Grace of GOD
the Praise of it, so ^ would now ask their Prayers for him, whose Hearts desire
and prayer for them, has been, and shall be, that they may be saved.

J. C.

Run, Speak to this YOUNG MAN.
ZECHARIAH II. 4. -- RUN, Speak to this Young Man.


SINCE you have been so desirous of my speaking to you this Evening, I have
chose the Words now read unto you, for an Introduction to what I have to speak.
These Words were indeed spoken by the LORD JESUS CHRIST, the LORD of Angels,
unto one of that holy Order, to Run, and Speak to Zechariah, who it seems was
but a Young Man. Here was great Condescension and Goodness manifested in such a
Dispatch of an holy Angel to carry the Messages of GOD unto this Young Man: And
what Cause should we have had to admire and adore the Condescensions of such
Grace to us, if the Lord had seen it best to send His Messages to us by Angels;
but how much more Cause have we to adore his Mercy and Compassion to us, in the
method he has taken for the Discovery of his Mind and Will to us, even by
sending Men of the same make and frame with our selves, equally concerned with
us in the important Things, they speak ^o, and treat with us about.

THE Ministers of CHRIST, are indeed Angels, GOD has put this Honor upon His
Ambassadors, and therefore they are called Angels, in the second Chapter of the
Revelation, Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus; Unto the Angel of the
Church in Smyrna, Pergamos etc. by which the HOLY GHOST means the Ministers, or
Pastors of those Churches. The Messages of the Lord are sent unto them, to be
delivered unto his People, and they are to give unto every one their Portion in
due Season. They are to feed the Lambs as well as the Sheep.

I have therefore (You are my Witnesses) been from one time to another,
bringing the Messages of GOD unto you: I have been often warning, advising and
exhorting of you, in the Lord's Name and Fear, if possible, to awaken in you an
earnest Solicitude about the One thing needful. And this is what I would in
the course of my Ministry, be pursuing with you, and yet more especially, when
I have such Opportunities for it, as I now have.

I rejoice exceedingly, that GOD has put it into the Hearts of such a number of
you, to meet together on the Evenings of his holy Sabbaths, for the carrying on
the Exercises of Religion, and that you might be encouraged and strengthened
herein, I am now come to speak unto you: And I hope you are come hither with
serious Desires to hear what GOD the Lord will now speak.

I look upon my self, as having received this Direction and Order from Him, in
whose Name I speak; Run, Speak to this Young Man.

THE Doctrine from which I will speak unto you, shall be this.

DOCTRINE.
THAT there are many Things to be spoken to Young People, which the Ministers
of CHRIST, should be speedy and earnest in the speaking of unto them.

RUN, Speak to this Young Man: It evidently hints to us, how speedy and earnest
he was to be in delivering the Messages of the Lord unto him: And so should the
Ministers of CHRIST, the Angels of the Churches be, in delivering their
Messages from their Lord and Master, unto the People, and the Young People
especially, to whom the Lord sends them, as I shall endeavor to show, before I
have done.

WHAT I propose, under this Doctrine, shall be to show,

I. WHAT Things may be proper to be spoken to Young People?

AND then,

II. THAT the Ministers of CHRIST should be speedy and earnest in speaking such
Things unto them.

I. I am to show, WHAT Things may be proper to be spoken to Young People? Run,
Speak to this Young Man. Young Men are then to be spoken to, But what are the
Things that are to be spoken to them?

1. BE Thoughtful. Use your selves to serious Consideration.

CONSIDERATION is the first step to Conversion, Psalm 119.59. I thought on my
Ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. Some translate I thought, I
considered, reasoned on; truly I considered, I pondered, I diligently weighed:
And that it signifies to reckon, cast up, to think, and think again upon a
thing; from all which its evident that this thinking, is serious pondering and
Consideration.

AND this is what I would in the first place, recommend unto you.

AS SOON as you are arrived to Years of Discretion and Understanding, you should
improve the thinking, reflecting Powers GOD has endowed you with. You should
think much on the first Answer, you learnt in your Catechism, viz. That Man's
chief End is to glorify GOD and to enjoy Him for ever. You must then seriously
consider, You have a Glorious GOD to serve, a precious Soul to save, and an
Eternity to prepare for. You must think of what infinite Concernment it is to
you, to fear and serve GOD, and secure the Salvation of your Souls, and that
the sooner you set about this great Work, the better. You must think for your
Encouragement, That if you seek the Lord early, now in your younger Years, you
have abundant reason to hope, and believe, that you shall find Him; because He
has expressly told you, Prove. 8.17. Those that seek me early shall find me. And
1 Chronicles. 28.9. If thou seek Him, He will be found of thee. You should think of
these Encouragements you have to seek and serve the Lord in the days of your
Youth.

You should think how ready and willing GOD now is to show Mercy to you, to
make you the early and happy Instances of His Grace, to pardon, renew, and
sanctify you, to take an early Possession of you for Himself; to set up His
Throne in your Hearts, and rule and reign there, and so give you new Hearts and
new Spirits, a Heart to fear Him, and keep all His Commandments, that so it may
be well with you.

YOU should think, how that GOD will for this be enquired of, by you, to do it
for you, and that it is well worth your seeking for. To excite your earnest
seeking, you should think how sad your Condition will be, if the Lord will not
be gracious to you, that if you should die Strangers to a Work of true and
saving Grace, you will rue it to all Eternity, and it would have been better for
you, that you had never had your Birth and Education in the Valley of Vision.
Oh think how distressing it must be hereafter to you, if you should die in your
Sins, to look back and consider of the many precious Helps and Advantages you
had for obtaining Eternal Life. Oh think how bitter your Reflections must be,
to consider of the many Instructions and Counsels, Admonitions and Warnings,
that were given you, by your Parents, Ministers and godly Friends; and all if
possible to save you from that Place of Torment; Oh think how grievous it will
be to consider, that when you were so instructed and warned, yea and entreated
to be reconciled to GOD, that the SPIRIT of GOD was often striving with you,
exciting you to work out your Salvation, and mind the things of your Peace,
before they should be hid from your Eyes, that you were sometimes almost
persuaded to be up and doing, and seeking the Lord while He might be found, and
to call upon Him, while He was near, that yet notwithstanding you persisted in
your evil Ways, and would not be reformed, and therefore must perish miserably
and dreadfully: Oh think on such Destruction in Reserve for the Workers of
Iniquity, and of the Aggravations thereof, until such Destruction from the Lord
is a Terror to you, until you have such fearful Apprehensions of it awakned in
you, as shall excite you with a concerned Soul to seek a Deliverance therefrom.

LET me also advise you, at the same time, to think of, and hope in the Mercy
of GOD: Think, How He has proclaimed his Name to you, to be the Lord, the Lord
GOD, gracious and merciful, slow to Anger, and of great Kindness, that unto Him
belong Mercies and Forgivenesses, though you have rebelled against Him; that He
is therefore ready to forgive the Sins of Childhood and Youth, to pass by all
your Transgressions, because He delights in Mercy, and takes Pleasure in them
that hope therein, and is willing to show Mercy to you according as you hope in
Him.

THINK on that word which he has spoken, that if the wicked will forsake his
Way, and return unto the Lord, He will have Mercy and abundantly pardon; and
that, that if the wicked will turn from all his Sins which he has committed,
and keep his Statutes, he shall live, he shall not die: Think on that
Declaration of GOD, confirmed with an Oath, that He delights not in your Death,
but had rather you would turn and live, and therefore thus expostulates with
you, Turn ye, Turn ye, Why will ye die?

AND then think how that JESUS CHRIST is exalted at the right hand of GOD, to
give Repentance and Remission of Sins, and that he came to seek and to save
that which was lost, that he came that we might have Life, that we who are dead
in Trespasses and Sins, may be quickened and made alive, that we might live a
Life of Grace and Comfort here, and a Life of Immortality and Glory hereafter

THINK on the many gracious Calls and Invitations He gave to poor miserable
Sinners while He was on Earth, and the same He now gives by his Ministers unto
you. Think on that Mat. 3.2. Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. And
that, Mat. 11.28. Come to me, all ye (...) labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. And that in John 7.37. If any Man thirst, let him come unto
me and drink of the Waters of life freely.

THINK on that gracious Assurance He has given you, in John 6.37. Him that
comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Think on that Revel. 3.20. Behold I
stand at the door and knock, if any man open the door, I will come into him,
and sup with him, and he with me.

THINK, how CHRIST has been standing for some considerable time, as young as
you are, knocking by His Word, Spirit and Ministers, at the doors of your Souls
for Entrance: By that and the other Word, as such and such a time, CHRIST
knocked at the door of your Soul, He called upon you to arise and let Him in,
that He might no longer stand without; and by such and such a Providence, by
such a Sickness, or the Deaths of others, it may be, some sudden Death of that
or the other young Person, CHRIST has knocked again at the door of your Soul
for Entrance: Oh think of these loud Calls you have had to open to CHRIST, and
no longer shut him out of your Souls, and then think of your Sloth and
Sluggishness, in refusing to awake and arise, and seek to Him for Light and
Life; how you have made him stand without, and wait on you, till His Head has
been wet with the Dew, and His Locks with the drops of the Night; how you have
sent Him away grieved to see you refuse a Compliance with His gracious Calls to
you.

THINK, how his Bowels have notwithstanding yern'd toward you, how His Heart
has been turned within Him, and his Repentings kindled together, to think of
gi^^^ you up, therefore He is yet waiting on you that He may be gracious to you.

THINK of the Mercy of GOD to you in sending Men, of the same Make and Frame
with your selves, to treat with you in the most plain and familiar way, about
the important Concerns of your Souls and Eternity; that you may have easy
Access to them, and be directed and assisted in your way to the heavenly
Kingdom.

THINK, how your dear Parents and faithful Friends are travailing in Birth for
you again, until they can see CHRIST formed in your Souls.

THINK of the early Consecration your Parents made of you to GOD, how they
solemnly devoted you to the Service of GOD the FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST, in
the sacred Baptism administered to you, and have been frequently since,
renewing the Dedication of you to GOD, in their fervent Prayers for you: Think,
how often they have carried you in the arms of their Faith and Prayer to GOD,
begging His Pity and Mercy to you, that you might live before Him, that you
might have your Hearts seasoned with His Fear, that GOD would give you a Heart
to seek and serve Him in your early Days, that He would be your GOD, and the
guide of your Youth, that you might be preserved from every Path of the
Destroyer, and never forget the Covenant of your GOD, nor forsake the Guide of
your Youth, that you might, in short, be the Children of GOD, and Heirs of an
heavenly Inheritance, that they might hereafter each one, be able to say, Here
am I Lord, and the Children which thou did graciously give unto thy Servant.

THINK of the public Instructions, Exhortations and Calls, you have had from
one time to another, how you have been entreated and urged by various
persuasive Motives and Arguments proper to work upon your Hopes and Fears, to
awaken, excite and move you to a greater Care and Solicitude about the One
thing Needful. Consider often you must give an Account to GOD, of the Means and
Advantages you have enjoyed, and that if you should finally perish, they will
all serve as heavy Items, to inflame your Reckoning in the Day of Accounts.

AND,

THINK much on that Day He has appointed in which He will judge the World in
Righteousness, by the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who shall be the Judge both of Quick
and Dead: Meditate frequently on the Awfulness of that Great and Terrible Day
of the LORD, when CHRIST shall descend from Heaven in His own Glory, and in His
FATHER'S Glory, and with great Power, being commissioned and authorized by GOD,
to be the Judge at that Day. Think how He will appear in the Clouds of Heaven,
in some visible bright Appearance, that will surround His humane Nature, and
how He will descend with the holy Angels, those bright and glorious Spirits, to
execute His royal Will and Pleasure, how that thousand thousands of them
minister unto Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stand before Him to do
His Pleasure. And think also, how He will descend with a Shout, with the Voice
of the Archangel, and with the Trump of GOD, and erect, and seat Himself on a
Throne of Glory, more glorious and magnificent, than any earthly Throne ever
was, and He appear infinitely more glorious upon it, than any earthly Monarch
ever did upon His Throne of fading Glory.

THINK, how the Dead will be raised and the Dead in CHRIST shall rise first,
arise immediately upon his Descent from Heaven by the Voice of the Angel, and
afterward the wicked also, for both must appear before the Judgment Seat of
CHRIST. Think how incorruptible, immortal and glorious the Bodies of the Saints
will be, and how frightful the Appearance of the Bodies of the Wicked, and the
ignominious State they will arise in, with all the marks of the divine Curse,
visible upon them: Think how they will tremble to appear before GOD, and dread
to be dragged away to His Bar, to their everlasting Shame and Contempt.

THINK, how that when the Judgment is set CHRIST seated upon His Throne, and
all Mankind brought into His Presence, the Books shall then be opened, the Book
of divine Omniscience, and the Book of Memory and Conscience, wherein are
recorded all the Actions of every Man, with all the Circumstances that have
attended them, whether good or evil, and the Book of Life in which the Names of
all the Elect are written. Oh think of the clear Discovery that will he made in
that Day, to Angels and Men, of the things contained in those Books, that are
now concealed from the Knowledge of both.

THINK, how all good and bad will receive their Sentence according to the
things written in those Books; that there will be a' Sentence of Absolution
passed upon the Righteous, that He will then say to such, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from before the foundation of the
World. And a Sentence of Condemnation upon the Wicked, according to their evil
Deeds, even that, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting Fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels.

THINK further, how there can be so Appeal from the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, to
an higher Tribunal, and that the Judge will never reverse the Sentence: Think
yet further, how that when the Judgment is over, CHRIST will ascend in a
glorious manner into the highest Heavens, with all the holy Angels and Saints
accompanying of Him, and leave the Wicked with the Apostate Angels to suffer
the Vengeance of eternal Fire.

AGAIN,

THINK frequently, that you don't know how soon this Great and terrible Day of
the LORD may come upon you. Think whether the late EARTHQUAKES may not have
been Forerunners of it, since (...) Tokens are to precede it.

CONSIDER how utterly uncertain you are, as to the time of the LORD'S thus
coming: Consider, how He has said, That it shall certainly come, and come upon
you as a Thief in the Night, when you are not at all aware of it, shall come
very suddenly and unexpectedly, and therefore think, it may for ought I know,
come very speedily. Oh! Think then, What Preparation you are in, and what
Provision you have made for such a Day, that so you might escape the Things
that may come to pass, and stand before the SON of Man.

CONSIDER, Whether you have been diligent, that you may be found of your Judge
in Peace; Consider, Whether you have not done many things you should wish you
had left undone, if the Judge were at the Door, and whether you have not left
undone many things you would wish you had done, if the LORD was thus at hand.

CONSIDER, Whether your Neglects of Duty and Commissions of Evil, the Sins of
your Youth, the Vanities and Follies, you have too much addicted your selves
to, have been suitably laid to heart, and bitterly bewailed by you? Whether
your Carelessness and Negligence about Soul Concerns, does now distress and
grieve you to the Heart?

CONSIDER, Whether you don't now wish, you had been more in good earnest, than
you have been about seeking first the Kingdom of GOD, and striving to enter in
at the strait Gate; that you had been more fervent in Spirit serving the LORD?

OH! Consider how comfortable it will be to you in a dying Hour to look back
upon a Life spent i^ the Service of GOD, in a Concern for advancing hi^ Glory,
and your own eternal Salvation; how comfortable to think, you early remembered
your Creator and the Bonds of Baptism lying on you, and renewed the Dedication
of your selves to GOD, and loved the House, Worship and Ordinances of GOD,
delighted in the Company and Conversation of such as were wise and godly, and
would not consent when Sinners enticed you to Evil, but said to 'em, How can I
do this great Wickedness and Sin against GOD?

HOW comfortable to think, you were watchful and prayerful, careful to sanctify
the Sabbaths of the LORD, and to improve the Evenings thereof in religious
Exercises, that you were desirous of retaining, and having revived the good
Impressions made from one Opportunity to another, under the preached Word: That
you were desirous of being directed and assisted in the way to the Kingdom,
that you might be made the Monuments of everlasting Mercy there. Think what
Refreshment you will find in such Reflections, how you will not then repent any
Labor, Care or Pains in working out your Salvation, now: Think how richly
you will be rewarded for the greatest Diligence and Pains, you can now possibly
take herein. Consider then, that you have no reason to be discouraged, whatever
Opposition you may meet with, from your wicked Hearts, the World or Satan. And
consider further, How distressing it will be to you, in the Approaches of a
dying Hour, to look back on a vain, short and merry Life, spent in a
Disobedience to GOD, a disregard of His Glory and the Welfare of your own
Souls: Oh think, how you will then wish you had not so hated Instruction and
despised Reproof, and disobeyed the Voice of your Teachers; Think how sad your
Reflections must be on your Profaness, on your trifling away GOD'S holy
Sabbaths, and the Evenings, both before, and after, without any serious and
solemn Thoughts of the End of your Creation, and Redemption: How you preferred
the vain and foolish Conversation of your evil and merry Companions, to the
things of your everlasting Peace. Oh think, how it will seem to have them then
hid from your Eyes, to have no hope of obtaining the Blessing, though you seek it
with Tears, as Esau did; For you know how that afterward, when he would have
inherited the Blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place of Repentance,
though he sought it carefully with Tears. So it will be with such, who now fell
their Souls for Trifles, as Esau did for a Mess of Pottage. Oh think, if you
possibly can how distressing such Reflections must be to a Soul upon the Brink
and Borders of an awful Eternity!

ONCE more, and I will hasten to a Close; Think upon the Motions and Strivings
of GOD'S HOLY SPIRIT with you, since you have arrived to Years of Knowledge and
Understanding, in the great Concerns of your Souls and another World. Consider
how you have been awakened and moved to your Duty at one time and another.
Convictions have come in sensibly and powerfully, that you could not withstand
them, -- yea, they have sometimes made you tremble; and cannot you (though I
hope with Grief) think how uneasy such Convictions have been to you, and how
desirous you were to get rid of them, and think of calling for them at a more
convenient Season: Oh think with Sorrow upon your resisting and opposing plain
Convictions from the SPIRIT of GOD, and think what Enemies you have hereby been
to your own Peace and Comfort!

YOU can I trust, some of you think, of the Mercy of GOD to you in enabling of
you to cherish your Convictions, that when the SPIRIT of GOD by His Word and
Providence, or both convinced you of your lost and perishing Condition, and
danger of eternal Destruction, and of your immediate necessity of flying for
Refuge to a glorious CHRIST to deliver and save you, and bring you into the
Life of GOD; that you have with the prodigal Son bewailed your Sin and Folly,
acknowledging you have sinned against Heaven and in the Sight of GOD, and have
not been worthy of the least Mercy, and have been enabled to such humble
Acknowledgements of your Unworthiness and Sinfulness, that the LORD has been
pleased with your Humiliations, and Supplications for his Pity and Mercy to
you, that you may now humbly think and hope, He then ran to you, and had
Compassion on you, so that there is hope of your being found and made alive.

WOULD to GOD, you might all of you (MY DEAR YOUNG PEOPLE) have cause to think
that the LORD has been thus merciful to you.

BUT it may be, you think, I have detained you too long on the first
Particular; I have indeed so long, that I shall have no time now to proceed to
any of the other Particulars. However I will just mention them to you, and at
the next Opportunity may enlarge upon them, if GOD spare my Life, and yours.

IF I had had time, I should have further spoke the following things to you.
Viz.

TO be Sober-minded.

TO be Prayerful and Watchful.

TO realize the Eye of GOD upon you.

TO avoid Profaness.

TO sanctify the holy Sabbaths of the LORD.

TO carry respectfully to your Parents and Superiors.

TO shun evil Company, and associate with the Wise.

TO be inquisitive about Soul Concerns.

TO attend diligently the public Worship of GOD.

TO renew your Baptismal Covenant, and be concerned to get prepared for the
LORD'S Table.

TO get and keep a good Conscience.

NEVER to grieve the HOLY SPIRIT of GOD, but cherish His holy Motions upon your
Hearts from one time to another.

AND, finally,

TO prepare for Death, and the eternal World.

ALL these things are of the last Importance to you, and should be speedily and
earnestly spoken. But I must leave speaking to you now, because I would not
make these Exercises tedious to you.

HOWEVER, before I have done speaking to you, let me entreat you to ponder upon
what has been spoken.

I have come hither to speak to you, O our YOUNG PEOPLE, and Oh! if I might but
be instrumental of bringing you to a thoughtful frame of Soul, to think upon
the things, I have directed and now advised you to employ your Thoughts upon:
If you will from this time, become thus thoughtful of the things of your
everlasting Peace, I have gained a happy step toward your Conversion, and if I
can gain no more this Evening than this, I will say, I ^a^e not run in vain,
nor labored in vain.

BUT will you now, shall any of you ^^ve me cause, alas! that you should, to
say 'ere long, I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.

MY YOUNG PEOPLE, If you will not be persuaded to be serious and thoughtful, my
labor with you, will be in vain; if it should be so with respect to many here
present, I hope it will not be so with respect to You in a particular manner,
who are the Occasion of my speaking this Evening unto others, as well as unto
You.

YOU certainly have been, and are thoughtful, and will be more so, on the
things I have advised to, and therefore I trust it is, that you desire to be
directed and assisted, in such a religious Combination as you propose, for
religious Purposes.

IF I thought you were not thoughtful, serious and sober-minded, and indeed
concerned, that you might help forward the Salvation of your precious Souls, I
would not appear with you here at this time, nor at all encourage you in such a
Meeting. But I hope you are desirous of seeking and serving the GOD of your
Fathers, and promoting the Work of Reformation and Conversion, as to your
selves first, and then by your good Examples in others.

THIS is an excellent Foundation indeed for you to set up upon, and if this be
your desire, we can cheerfully pray with and for you, and bless you in the Name
of the LORD.

SUCH SOCIETIES have been Seminaries of Piety in many Places, many have felt
the good Effects of such a meeting together, and have had reason to be thankful
to GOD therefore all their Days.

IT has been an Excitement to many to come and renew their Baptismal Covenant,
and to prepare diligently for the Table of the LORD; and a means to excite
those that have done it, to a more watchful, circumspect living and walking. Of
such Advantage, I hope through Grace, it will be to you.

IF you would not defeat the good Designs of such a meeting together, be very
cautious and careful who you admit into your Society, don't presently receive
any that have been remarkably vain and trifling in their Deportment on the
LORD'S-Days, or at other times, unless there has been observed for a
considerable time a Reformation.

OH see to it, you that are now engaging in this religious Meeting, that you
are serious and sober-minded, and let it be seen in your sober, well-ordered
Lives and Conversations.

THE Eyes of GOD, Angels and Men will be upon you, to observe your Conduct
after such an associating together for the Purposes of Religion. And you will
do incredible Damage to Religion, if you take to any vain and foolish Courses,
any of you; see to it then that you give no Occasion to any, to speak evilly of
the ways of Religion for your sakes. Let not the Doctrine of GOD our Savior be
aspersed through your means, for if after this Profession of greater Seriousness,
and more than ordinary Concern, for the Welfare of your Souls, (for that is the
Language and Meaning of your stated meeting together) People shall observe you
to be as careless, rude and vain, as other Persons, what will they not think?
what will they not say? not only to your Reproach, which may possibly be just
enough, but to the Reproach of Religion also, which is too good to be exposed
to any Censures, by your Means. But I would fain hope better things of you, and
things that accompany Salvation, though I thus speak.

YOU must know, that we shall expect much from you, since GOD has put it into
Your Hearts to meet thus together, from one Lord's Day Night to another.

YOUR Minister, your Parents, the Church, and all that fear GOD, will expect to
see you adorning the Doctrine of GOD your Savior, which you have been
instructed in, and do make Profession of.

AND to excite You, Consider, That we can have no greater Joy than to see you
walking in the ways of Virtue and Holiness, Wise for your Souls and Eternity,
and so like to prove an instructed and a godly Seed, who shall be accounted to
the LORD for a Generation.

WE hope and beg, GOD will own and bless you in your meetings, and make them a
blessed means of bringing You into, and increasing your saving Acquaintance
with GOD, and His Son JESUS CHRIST.

THAT He would teach you to pray, seriously and humbly, and fervently; and that
He would graciously hear and answer your Prayers, and so give you Cause to say,
It is good for us to draw near to GOD, and to bear the Yoke of Religion in our
Youth: The Ways of Religion we find to be Ways of Pleasantness, and her Paths
Peace. As for us We will therefore serve the LORD; whatever others do, The LORD
our GOD, will we serve, and His Voice will we obey. We will hear what GOD the
LORD has spoken to us, and seeing we look for the things of which we have been
hearing, we will by the Help of GOD be diligent, that we may be found of our
Judge in Peace, without Spot, and Blameless.

MY DEAR CHILDREN, If vou may be now, or hereafter, by the Grace of GOD,
brought into such Resolutions for a pious and holy Life, by my Ministry, you
shall be my Joy and Crown of Rejoicing in the Day of CHRIST'S appearing; for I
shall, I trust through the Mercy of GOD, rejoice in that Day, that I have not run
in vain, nor labored in vain.

Preached DECEMBER 10. 1727.
THE Second SERMON.
ZECHARIAH II. 4. -- RUN, Speak to this Young Man.


YOU may remember my having spoke to you already from these Words, upon your
entering into a solemn Combination for religious Purposes, and the Doctrine I
then observed from them, and shall now by the Help of GOD, speak to you again
from, was this,

DOCTRINE.
THAT there are many things to be spoken to Young People, which the Ministers
of CHRIST should be speedy and earnest in the speaking of unto them.

UNDER this Doctrine, I proposed to show,

I. WHAT Things may be proper to be spoken to Young People?

AND then,

II. THAT the Ministers of CHRIST should be speedy and earnest in speaking such
Things unto them.

I am yet upon the first Head proposed, viz. To show, What Things are proper to
be spoken to Young People?

I have already said,

1. BE Thoughtful. Exercise your selves to serious Consideration.

I shall now proceed to consider some of the other Heads I mentioned, I should
speak to, if the GOD of our Lives should spare us to this Opportunity, and
blessed be GOD, that though He has shaken His Rod over us, He has let us alone
three Months longer in His Vineyard, and given us this one Opportunity more of
hearing what is now again, to be spoken to us in His Name.

I now proceed to say,

2. BE Sober-minded. Indeed if we seriously regard, and diligently comply with
the Directions given us under the first Head, it will have a happy Tendency to
bring us to a compliance with this Exhortation: And I am expressly commanded to
bring this to you, Titus 2.6. Young Men likewise exhor^ to be Sober-minded. "It
is a very significant comprehensive Word, and carries in it a Check to al^ the
ill Habits, and ill Courses, that are so mischievous and ruining to Young
People".

THE Word, says one, speaks the Duty of Young Men, but it is likewise twice
used in the directory for Young Women, ver. 4. That they may teach the Young
Women to be sober; and again, ver 5. that they may teach them to be discreet.
So that it is the Duty of Young Women, as well as Young Men to be Sober-minded.
And therefore, I speak this to all the young People here present. Let me call
upon you to live soberly, as the Grace of GOD which has brought Salvation,
teaches you to do. You must not be rash and heedless in your Walk. You must
always endeavor to act discreetly and wisely, to walk circumspectly, not as
Fools, but as Wise.

YOU must resolve as holy David did, when he was setting out in the World,
Psalm. 101.2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect Way. And we read, 1 Samuel
18.14. He behaved himself wisely in all his Ways, and the Lord was with him. As
you grow to Years of Discretion and Understanding, you should put away childish
Things, as the Apostle speaks of himself, 1 Cor. 13.11. When I became a Man, I
put away childish Things. You must always endeavor to be under the Regulation
of wise and good Principles and Rules, for your Direction, that you may obtain
the Wisdom of the Prudent to understand his Way, that Wisdom that may be
profitable to direct you at all Times, and in all Cases.

BEWARE of being too bold and resolute, and calmly hearken to the Checks of
Reason and Conscience; you know how frequently the wise Man urges it, on those
of your Age; My Son be wise, Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get
Wisdom, and with all your gettings get Understanding.

YOU should beware of depending too much on your own Opinion or Judgment of
Things, you should in this Regard exercise a continual jealousy of your selves,
fearing and being sensible, of your Proness to Errors and Mistakes. And
therefore when you are at any time engaging in any Affairs of no small
Consequence, or Importance to you, be not backward to take good Advice from
your Friends, and those that wish well to you, and would rejoice in your
Prosperity, and you should have a greater Regard to their Judgment, especially
if Persons of Wisdom and Experience of the World, than to your own.

YOU may do well to observe the commendable Carriages of others, as well as
their ill Behavior, that you may imitate those that do well, and take Warning
by those that do ill, that you may receive Instruction from all such Instances
within your Observation.

AGAIN,

YOU must labor after a commendable Modesty and Humility, and beware of Pride
and Self-conceitedness. Sober-mindedness is observed to be the same with
Lowly-mindedness, and some have made it the same with that Poverty of Spirit,
on which our Savior pronounces His first Blessing, Matthew. 5.3. It is most
certainly recommended to such as are Young, that they be clothed with
Humility, 1 Pet. 5.5.

AN excellent Divine, says, It is an Observation I have made upon that little
Acquaintance, I have had with the World, that I have seen more Young People
ruined by Pride, than perhaps by any o^ Lust whatsoever. And therefore let me
press the upon You with all Earnestness, and it is a Caution introduced with
more than ordinary Solemnity, in Romans 12.3. That no one thinks of himself
above what he ought to think, but to think soberly. Some give this Text, this
Reading, Let him think unto Sobriety, let him think himself into a sober Mind,
and always keep in that good Mind.

YOU should endeavoor to have low Thoughts of your selves, of your Seize
and Improvements in every Respect, you should beware of being puffed up at any
time, when there may be many things commendable to be seen in you; You should
look more at what may be so, in others.

YOU should take a greater Pleasure and Satisfaction in saying and doing the
things that are virtuous and praiseworthy, than in being commended for it your
selves.

YOU should endeavor to maintain on your Hearts a lively Sense of your many
Failings and Infirmities, how much you come short of others in many things, and
in many more, come short of the Rule. Such humbling Reflections should be
frequent with you, to check any aspiring Thoughts of your selves. You should
humbly and frequently reflect on the continual need you stand in of the Grace
of GOD, without which you can do nothing.

YOU should never think your selves too wise, or good, or old to receive proper
Admonitions for what may be amiss in you. You should not ever think, you have
no need to be further taught and instructed: we read 1 Cor. 8.2. If any Man
think he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. And
therefore the Apostle directs such as seem to be wise, be sure to themselves,
if not to others, to become Fools that they may be wise, i. e. to be sensible
of their own Folly, that they may use diligently the Means for obtaining
Wisdom, and be thereby the better prepared to receive it.

YOU should never be so fond of your own Thought or Opinion, as to despise
those that are otherwise minded.

YOU read in the Book of Job, of an excellent Example of Humility and Modesty,
to such of your Age. It is said of Elihu, That he was swift to hear, i. e. very
desirous of further Learning and Instruction, he says, Job 32.6, 7. I am young
and you are old. Wherefore I was afraid, and durst not show you mine Opinion, I
said, Days should speak. An excellent Pattern of Modesty to be imitated by you.

I might further say,

YOUR being Sober-minded, should further appear by your Aspect and Behavior.
The Show of your Countenance should witness for you, that you have not a high
Opinion of your selves, and have a due Respect for others, especially such as
are above you.

I might further say, You should beware of Extravagancy in Dress, that so many
of your Age, do so frequently and foolishly run into. One says, "If there be
any thing in the Garb and Carriage of Young People, that they may be innocently
proud of, It is the Gravity of it; when it is an Indication of Humility and
Modesty reigning in the Heart; for those are the best Ornaments, and in the
Sight of GOD, and all wise Men, of great Price. And you will find it better to
be of a humble Spirit with the lowly, than than to divide the Spoil with the
proud, for when Men's Pride shall brin^ them low, Honor shall uphold the
humble in Spirit".

AGAIN,

YOU must be no Strangers to the Virtue of Temperance, and Self-Denial, and
must always beware of a criminal Indulgence of every sensual Appetite. The Word
Sober, is translated Temperate, You must take heed therefore, that your Hearts
be not overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness.

YOU may be assaulted by many strong and inviting Temptations to Intemperance,
which you should carefully guard against. You should consider, how it has
certainly been the Ruin of Multitudes, as to their Health, their good Names,
and Estates, while they lived, and their precious Souls for ever.

BEWARE then of all Approaches toward this Evil, Keep out of the Ways of
Temptation, and the Places of Temptation as much as you possibly can. Let your
Sober-mindedness and Moderation be known to all in this Regard.

AND, Think often what Reason there is to fear, that many, by giving way to
such Temptations, stifle their Convictions, and greatly provoke the HOLY SPIRIT
to withdraw from them, and forsake them utterly. Consider often, That though such
intemperate and forbidden Gratifications may not be very grievous, to you now,
they will certainly at the last, bite like a Serpent, and sting like an Adder.

BE always afraid of deserving that Character of those, in 2 Timothy 3.4. Who were
lovers of Pleasures, more than lovers of GOD. Think it not a hard Saying, in
many Instances to deny your selves.

YOU must ever flee youthful Lust, and be chaste in Heart, Speech and
Behavior. For it is the Will of GOD, that you be so, and possess your Vessel
in Sanctification and Honor.

YOU must be mild and gentle in your Behavior, and beware of being too soon
angry; guard against the out-breakings of Passion and rash Anger, which those
of your Age are very liable to. Always set a Watch against the door of your
Lips, that you offend not with your Tongue, remembering, if you bridle not your
Tongue, your Religion will be vain.

LET no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth, nor any of that
foolish talking and jesting which is not convenient, or not becoming the
Professors of a pure and undefiled Religion.

AGAIN,

YOU should endeavor to be steady in your Conduct, and not inconstant and
wavering, for such are not like to excel: You should not be slothful in
Business, but fervent in Spirit serving the LORD.

AGAIN,

YOU should endeavor after Contentment in every Condition, after a Mind suited
to your State and Circumstances in the World, firmly believing, they are
ordered out by an infinitely wise and sovereign GOD. And let it appear you are
Sober-minded, by being moderate in your Desires and Expectations of temporal
good Things, as those that have an Eye to things unseen and eternal.

FINALLY,

YOU should be grave and serious in your Deportment, and ever avoid that which
is frothy and vain. You should ever guard against all vain and carnal Mirth, by
which you may trespass upon the Laws of Piety, Charity or Modesty. You should
ever beware of being transported into any indecencies, in Word or Behavior.

ENDEAVOR to maintain an habitually serious frame of Spirit, and you may do
well to dwell upon such Thoughts as have a Tendency to make you Sober-minded;
and particularly the four last Things, which are so frequently recommended as
proper Subjects of Meditation, to make you Sober and serious.

I now proceed to a third Particular,

3. BE Prayerful. And were you but once become considerate and thoughtful,
serious and sober-minded you would certainly be so Let me call upon you in the
Words of the Prophet, Isai. 55.6. Seek ye the LORD, while He may be found, and
call ye upon Him while He is near. It was a sad Complaint this holy Prophet
made, Chap. 64.7. There is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs
himself up, to take hold on Thee. But yet it is prophesied in Jer. 50.4. That
in those Days, and at that Time, there shall be many going, and weeping and
seeking the LORD their GOD. Oh be concerned that this gracious Promise may be
fulfilled with respect to all of you. Be therefore no Strangers to the Duty of
secret Prayer; You read Matthew. 6.6. When thou prayest enter into thy Closet,
and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret. You
well know what Encouragement you have to be doing so, Prove. 8.17. Those that
seek me early shall find me. And 1 Chronicles. 28.9. If thou seek Him, He will be
found of thee.

LET me now then, while I am speaking to you, eanestly advise and exhort you,
to engage and persevere in the Duty of Prayer. Let there be this Token for good
found upon you, Behold you pray. Improve thankfully the Liberty of Access you
have to the Throne of Grace, make Conscience of daily Prayer to GOD, that you
may find Mercy and Grace to help you in every time of Need. Your time for
seeking the LORD is very uncertainly continued to you, for you know not how
soon your Feet may stumble on the dark Mountains, when all Entreaties for Grace
and Mercy will be too late, and the time come, when though you should seek the
LORD early, yet you shall not find Him. Wherefore, to Day, if you will hear His
Voice, set your selves to seek the LORD. Engage in this Duty with all possible
Seriousness and Solemnity of Spirit, as firmly believing that GOD is able to
supply all your Wants, according to his Ri^hes in Glory by JESUS CHRIST.

WITH an encouraged Soul then, go and carry the miserable Condition of your
Soul to GOD, deeply sensible of the miserable and wretched Circumstances the
Apostasy has brought you into, as you have lost the Image of GOD, and bring
corrupt and evil Tempers and Dispositions into the World with you, Hearts full
of Enmity to GOD, and CHRIST, and the Ways of Holiness: And bewail it with
Grief of Soul, acknowledging your Impotency and Inability to help and save your
selves. And plead with Him, that though you have destroyed your selves, yet,
that He has laid help on One that is able and willing to save you to the
uttermost, and that He would extend his compassionate Regards to you, because
He delights in Mercy, that your Misery renders you the proper Objects of His
Mercy, and that you shall be for ever undone, if He don't take Pity on you.

PLEAD with Him, how He has glorified His free Grace toward multitudes of
Sinners, as unworthy of it as you are, and that it is easy with Him, to take
away the Heart of Stone, and give you an Heart of Flesh, to make you a new
Heart, and a new Spirit, and cause you to walk in his Statutes and Ordinances:
And that it may be for the Glory of His Mercy, to do this for you, as well as
your own everlasting Peace, and Comfort. Beg of Him therefore, that whatever he
denies you, He would not deny you an Interest in His Favor, that He would not
turn away your Prayers, nor His Mercy from you.

SEEK therefore earnestly, that He would send down His HOLY SPIRIT to convince
you of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment to come. That you may see the
exceeding great Evil there is in Sin, because of its Contrariety to the Purity
and Holiness of GOD, and your continual Danger of the Wrath of GOD, the due
Desert of Sin; that you may be brought to see, what a fearful thing it is to
fall into the Hands of the living GOD, that you may have such Apprehensions of
it, arising in your Minds, as shall excite and mo^^ you to an instant Flight
from it, and that you may at the same time have such Apprehensions of, and
Hopes in the Mercy of GOD as shall encourage your Flight to the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, who alone can deliver you from the Wrath to come. That your Eyes may be
anointed with Eye Salve, that you may see, as your own Poverty, Misery and
Wretchedness, so the All Sufficiency of CHRIST to help and save you, that you
may have such gracious Discoveries made unto you of the Divine Beauty and Glory
of CHRIST, as shall draw forth your Heart to Him, as one altogether lovely and
precious, and the chief among ten thousands, that you may be freely willing to
open the everlasting Doors of your Souls, to receive and entertain this King of
Glory. Oh beg! That He would now dispossess the strong Man armed, who has so
long kept the Palace of your Soul, and kept his Goods in Peace, that He would
now come and take Possession of you, and reinstamp his holy Image on all the
Powers of your Souls, and conform you to his own holy Image and Likeness, and
dwell in your Hearts by Faith, and subdue every unruly unmortified Lust and
Passion in you, that your Souls may become the living Temples of GOD,
Habitations for the HOLY SPIRIT to reside in; that you may be prepared for His
gracious refreshing Visits to you, and so taste that He is gracious.

THUS should you seek and cry for the Manifestations of the Love of GOD, to
your Souls, and had you a due sense of the Worth and Value of it, you would not
think much of such an earnest seeking and pleading with GOD for it, nor at all
wonder at your being so earnestly called on to seek and plead therefore. There
is nothing of the like Concernment to you in the World, and therefore don't
wonder that I insist upon it, that you go and s^^ the LORD your GOD: Yea th^^
you wrestle with Him, and resolve that you will not let him go, until He bless
you, until you shall receive the Blessing from the LORD, even Righteousness
from the GOD of your Salvation.

WHILE you are thus seeking for Mercy, Acknowledge you deserve it not, that you
have indeed quenched, and grieved, and vexed the SPIRIT of GOD, by your past
Disobedience, Sin and Folly, and that your Sins have been greatly aggravated,
but since you have Reason to believe, you have been pricked to the Heart, for
Sin, and that the SPIRIT of GOD, ^ yet striving with you, and moving of you yet
to seek the Face of the LORD, that GOD therefore waits to be gracious, that you
will not therefore be discouraged, but look yet again toward his holy Temple,
and though He should seem to cover himself with a Cloud, that your Prayers
should not pass through, and that you seem sometimes to be cast out of his
Sight, yet that you will look and seek again and again, as firmly believing he
never said to any, Seek ye me in vain, that He will sooner or later give you
Cause to say, The LORD is good to them that wait for Him, to the Soul that
seeks Him.

THUS should you seek for Reconciliation with GOD, that you may be therefore
enabled by Faith to lay hold on the Righteousness of CHRIST, that you may by a
gracious Imputation of it to you, be accounted and accepted as righteous in the
Sight of GOD. And as you should pray, that the SPIRIT of GOD may convince you,
of Sin, and of Righteousness, so of ^^dgment to come; that you may be convinced
of the Certainty of it, that there is a Day coming, in which the LORD will
judge the World in Righteousness, when all Mankind shall be summoned before his
dread Tribunal, and give up an Account of the Deeds done in the Body, whether
they have been good or evil; that a lively Sense of the Terrors of that Day,
may abide upon your Heart, so as to excite you to the greatest Caution,
Watchfulness and Circumspection, that you may be accounted worthy to escape all
the things, that shall come to pass, and stand before the Son of Man.

I now proceed to say,

4 BE Watchful. You know how frequently, watching and praying are put together.
You must therefore be watchful as well as prayerful. Hence you have that
Exhortation 1 Pet. 5.8. to be not only sober, but Vigilant, because your
Adversary the Devil, goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

YOU have not only a treacherous, deceitful, and desperately wicked Heart
within you, and an ensnaring bewitching World without you, continually
endeavoring to draw away your Heart from GOD, but there is a tempting Devil
also, continually laying his Snares for you, to entice and draw you aside; he
doubtless understands your Tempers and Constitutions so well, that he can suit
his Temptations to your particular Inclinations and Dispositions, and watches
all favorable Opportunities for making his Assaults upon you, knowing how
ready you are to hearken to his flattering, alluring Insinuations, o^ Honor,
Profit or Pleasure, especially the latter, which he knows you are at this Ag^
so easily carried away by; You should therefore certainly be continually upon
your Watch and Guard, not being ignorant of his subtle Devices.

YOU should particularly keep your Hearts with all Diligence, and not cherish
any evil Temper or Disposition there. You should ever check and resist the
first Motions to Sin, arising in your Hearts, and not suffer any vain or
foolish Thoughts to lodge within them.

YOU should also guard against all corrupt and filthy Communication, or
Conversation, and endeavor continually that the Words of your Mouths, as well
as the Meditations of your Hearts, may be acceptable in the Sight of GOD.

YOU must finally, guard against all Imprudencies and Indiscretions in your
Behavior: At this Age, you are in most Danger of indulging those Levities and
Follies, that are no small Reproach to Christianity.

REMEMBER frequently the Bonds of Baptism lying on you, and so the solemn
Obligations you are under to renounce the Vanities of this evil World, that you
will therefore violate those Bonds, if you are not careful to shun the ways of
Vanity and Folly, so many of your Age, so carelessly and unconcernedly indulge
themselves in.

TO excite your Watchfulness, you may do well to consider; To indulge your
selves in light, vain, and trifling Carriages, will exceedingly unfit you for
the Service of GOD, or of your Generation; you will certainly ^^se much of that
Honor and Respect that would be ^^^tly due to you, were you Blameless and
inoffensive in your present Conduct. You would hereby gain an Interest in the
Hearts and Affections of all about you. You would be a Comfort and Joy to your
Parents, and all that wish well to you, and you might be hereby happily
instrumental of exciting others of your Age to live soberly, and circumspectly
too.

BUT I may not proceed any further now.

ONLY let me beg of you, to hearken to what I have been in the Name of the LORD
speaking unto you. I hope you came hither this Evening, with this Resolution, I
will hear what GOD the LORD will speak. But you will not be obedient to his
Voice, if you don't now become serious, and sober-minded, and more watchful and
prayerful, and if this may be the good Fruit of what you have now heard, I have
gained another happy step toward your Conversion; and if I can gain no more
this Evening than this, I shall have Cause to say, I have not run in vain,
neither labored in vain. But if you will not be persuaded to live soberly,
watchfully and prayerfully, I shall come to you now in vain. But would to GOD,
it may not be so with respect to any of the Young People who now hear me, but
more especially with respect to that SOCIETY, who are more especially the
Occasion of our present Meeting.

YOU are under very particular and peculiar Obligations, thus to live and walk,
and while you are mindful of them, by your exemplary Lives and Carriages, you
will be a Comfort to us; if we can have Reason to hope and believe the
religious Purposes, and good Designs of your meeting ^^ether, are i^ some good
Measure answered, that there are some gracious and good Effects of it, you may
expect (...) Countenance and Encouragement of you her^ (...) was with a
Prospect and Hope of this, I en^^ge^ your Meeting at first, and now do it
again, and (...) the help of GOD, I will continue to do it, so long as I can
have Reason to hope, your thus meeting has been, and may be for the better and
not for the worse. If you have Reason to hope you find it a good Means to make
you more serious, concerned and thoughtful about an early Conversion to GOD,
and that the good Impressions that are made in the public Dispensations on the
LORD'S- Days, are hereby more fixed and abiding on you. If you find the good
SPIRIT of GOD striving with you, and exciting good Motions and Resolutions in
your Hearts: If in these Regards, you hope, you find it good for you to draw
near to GOD, it cannot but encourage us, to hope your meeting together as you
do, may be for the better. But if we shall have cause to fear, it may be for
the worse, if you are as vain, frothy and trifling as others, and walk very
unworthy of your solemn Promises and Resolutions, that you have voluntarily
come into, you may expect no farther Countenance or Encouragement from us, yea,
you may expect those severe Rebukes, that such Apostacies from good Beginnings
will call for from us. But we would hope for better things from you, and things
that accompany Salvation, though I thus speak.

WE hope, that having put your Hands to the Plough, you will not look back,
because if you should, you will not be fit for the Kingdom of GOD. If any of
you draw back the Soul of the LORD will have no Pleasure in you. Wherefore
resolve by the Help of GOD, you will now set your Faces Heavenward and (...)
Way thither, that you will strive to enter in at the strait Gate, that you will
work While the Day lasts, and do with your might whatsoever your Hand finds to
do, as not knowing how soon (...) ^^king and finding time may be over, for ever
with you. And let me assure you, you shall not find your Labor in vain in the
LORD.

I shall now draw toward a Close with the Words of another, in a Discourse on
the Pleasure of being religious Mr. HENRY in a Sermon from Prove. 3.17.
.

I wish (says he, speaking to Young People) you would see and seriously
consider, the two Rivals that are making court to you for your Souls, for your
best Affections, CHRIST and Satan, and act wisely in disposing of your selves,
and make such a Choice, as you will afterward reflect upon with Comfort. You
are now at the turning time of Life, turn right now, and you are made for ever.
Come and take CHRIST'S Yoke upon you, and you will find it easy: Try the
Pleasure there is in the Knowledge of GOD and CHRIST, and in Converse with
spiritual Things; try the Pleasure of Seriousness and Self-Denial, and you will
find it far exceeds that of Vanity and Self-Indulgence; Try the Pleasure of
Meditation on the Word of GOD, of Prayer, and Praise, and Sabbath
Sanctification, and you will soon find, you have made a happy Change of the
Pleasures of vain and carnal Mirth, for these true Delights. Reckon that the
best Pleasure, which will remain with you, and stand you in stead, when you
come to die, which will help to take off the Terrors of Death, and allay its
Pains. The Remembrance of sinful Pleasures will give you killing Terrors, but
the Remembrance of religious Pleasures will give you living Comforts in dying
Moments. Thus he.

AND how soon a dying Hour may overtake you, you don't know, and when that
arrives, do you think, you shall repent any present Care and Pains, about the
Conversion and Salvation of your Souls; You may be assured, You will look back
thereon with no little Pleasure and Satisfaction, you will wish You had begun
earlier, in the Service of GOD, and Care of your Souls, than you did; and will
exceedingly rejoice You were at last persuaded to engage therein, and were
enabled by the Grace of GOD, to persevere in the Ways of well-doing. Would to
GOD, that the Consideration of this, might encourage such among us, as have
been hitherto, too thoughtless and careless about their Souls, and a
Preparation for Death and Judgment, that such may be now pricked to the Heart,
and from this Evening, go and weep, and seek to the LORD their GOD, and quickly
come and ask the way to Zion with their Faces thitherward and join themselves
to the LORD in a perpetual Covenant not to be forgotten. In this Regard, we
still hope to see further Tokens of the gracious Presence of our GOD with us,
at the beholding whereof our Hearts shall rejoice, even ours.

YOUR Parents and Friends, who are travalling in Birth for You again, are
waiting and hoping, to hear of your being born again, they hope and pray, that
CHRIST may see of the travail of his Soul, in your Conversion also. And shall
not the Consideration hereof excite and encourage more of you, to do what you
possibly can, for your eternal Safety? If you will be from hence forward
working out your own Salvation with fear and trembling, GOD has promised, He
will work in you both to will and to do, of his own good Pleasure. What greater
Encouragement can you have, to be up and doing, what can the LORD say, or do
more, to stir you up to your Duty?

CAN You think GOD will, or would You have GOD, to convert and save you, while
you sit still, and will not stir up your selves to take hold of Him? He has
said, Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened to you. And He now comes to the Doors of your Souls, and desires He may
enter in, and take Possession of you, and will you not now arise and let him
in? Must He stand now again, until His Head be wet with the Dew, and His Looks
with the drops of the Night. And will you still give Him Cause to complain, as
in John 5.40. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life. And as in Matthew.
23.17. How often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not.

OH give Him no longer Cause to say thus concerning you, and immediately seek
for shelter under the Shadow of his saving Wings; Let that be your Prayer and
Resolution, in Psalm 57.1. with which I shall now conclude, Be merciful unto
me, O GOD, be merciful unto me, for my Soul trusts in thee; yea in the shadow
of thy Wings will I make my Refuge, until these Calamities be overpast.

Preached MARCH 10. 1727, 8.
THE Third SERMON.
ZECHARIAH II. 4. -- RUN, Speak to this Young Man.


YOU may remember my having spoke to you once and again, from these Words, and
the Doctrine I have observed from them, and shall now by the Help of GOD, speak
to you further from, was this,

DOCTRINE
THAT there are many things to be spoken to Young People, which the Ministers
of CHRIST should be speedy and earnest in the speaking of unto them.

UNDER this Doctrine, I proposed to show,

I. WHAT Things may be proper to be spoken to Young People?

AND then,

II. THAT the Ministers of CHRIST should be speedy and earnest in speaking such
Things unto them.

I am yet upon the first Head proposed, viz. To ^^ew, What Things are proper to
be spoken to Young People?

UNDER this Inquiry I have already said, 1. BE Thoughtful. 2. BE Sober-minded.
3. BE Prayerful. 4. BE Watchful.


I now proceed to say,

5. REALIZE the Eye of GOD upon you. Set the LORD always before you, and at
your right hand, that you may not be moved. Consider frequently, that the LORD
is from Heaven continually looking down upon you, to see how you seek and serve
Him: To see whether you keep your Hearts with all Diligence, to observe your
inward Frames and Tempers, how your thoughts are from time to time employed,
and to observe the Words which proceed out of your Mouths, whether there be any
of that foolish talking and jesting, which is not convenient, or whether i^ be
to the Use of Edifying, and such as may minister^ Grace to the Hearers; and to
observe your whole Conduct and Behavior at all Times, and in all Places, and
in every Condition and Circumstance of Life.

REALIZE the Omniscience of GOD, that He searches the Hearts and tries the
Reins of the Children of Men, and that the most secret Thoughts and
Contrivances in your Minds, are as open and manifest to his all-seeing Eye, as
any of the Actions of your Lives, and that there is a Day coming in which He
will judge the secrets of Men by JESUS CHRIST, according to his Gospel.
Endeavor to get the Consideration and Belief of this, so impressed upon your
Minds, that you may be able, upon the most alluring Solicitations, to repel
the Tempter, as that pious Youth did, Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great
Wickedness, and sin against GOD? It will be for your Credit and Honor, if you
shall be able to say, as Nehemiah did, Chap. 5.15. But so did not I because of
the Fear of GOD.

ALWAYS stand in awe of GOD, when you are alone and no Creature sees you; and
be more concerned to please GOD, when retired from the Sight of Men, than when
the World looks upon you: Dare not commit any thing that is offensive to GOD,
or injurious to your Neighbor, because of the Eye of GOD upon you.

BEAR it upon your Minds, that no Place can escape the all-seeing Eye of GOD,
that there is no Corner so secret, but the Father of Lights shines into it.
Remember that, that GOD whose Eye is thus upon you, will call you to an Account
for secret Sins, as well as for notorious Offenses.

INDEED, not to fear GOD (says One) when we are alone, is not to fear Him at
all; and He that shuns indecencies before Men, only shows, that they are the
Gods whom he serves. Sobriety before Men only, (...) a Sign that nothing but
Credit (...) Interest keep us in Awe; and except we dread the very Appearance
of Evil, when GOD alone is with us, we are but a better sort of Atheists. What
does it signify to believe a GOD, and to walk as if there were none? And to
what Purpose is it to adore Him, when His Greatness can have no Influence upon
our Consciences? To see in secret is GOD's Prerogative, and we then deny it,
when in secret we dare break His Laws.

HE could not be GOD if He took no Notice of our Thoughts and Actions, when we
are alone, and therefore not to fear Him when we are in private, is to say with
the Fool, There is no GOD. It is a perfect Contradiction to believe GOD's
Omniscience, and not to stand in awe of it. If the whole World were present
with us, or within our View, it is not so much, as when GOD is present with us,
when alone.

YOU must realize, that the LORD searches you, and knows you, that he knows
your down-sitting, and up-rising, that he understands your Thoughts afar off,
that he compasses your Path, and your lying down, and is acquainted with all
your Ways, and will hereafter give unto you according to your Ways, and the
Fruit of your Doings. Psalm 139. init.

I proceed to say,

6. AVOID Profaness. Never take the Name of the LORD your GOD in vain, for the
LORD will not hold such Guiltless, who take his Name in vain. Never think of
GOD contrary to what He has discovered of himself, that, that Charge may not
belong unto you, Psalm 50.21. Thou thoughtest I was altogether such a one as
thy self. See that you never needlessly, and slightly mention GOD's Name, as the
manner of too many is, without any serious Thought or Consideration; of such
the Psalmist speaks, Psalm 139.20. They speak against thee wickedly, and thine
Enemies take thy Name in vain. Ever beware of needless Oaths in common
Discourse, Matthew. 5.34. And of profane Cursing and Swearing, and of false
Oaths, Levit. 24.11. Zech. 8.17.

BEWARE of Hypocrisy in your Professions of Christianity, don't in this Regard,
Lie unto GOD with your Tongues. Beware of Formality and Hypocrisy in Acts of
religious Worship, that GOD may not have Cause to say concerning, you, as in
Isai. 29.13. They draw near me with their Mouths, and with their Lips do Honor
me, but have removed their Hearts far from me. Never despise any of the
Ordinances of GOD, as they did concerning whom we read, Mal. 1.12. Ye have
profaned it, that is, GOD's Name, in that ye say, The Table of the LORD is
polluted, and the Fruit thereof, even his Meat is contemptible. Beware of all
disorderly or irreverent Carriages, in the Worship of GOD, and scoffing at, or
wresting the Word of GOD, or using Scripture Expressions in jesting, or in
common Discourse. Be not ever so profane, as not to regard the Works of the
Lord, or not consider the Operation of His Hands.

BEWARE of all these Ways, and every other Way, by which you may be Guilty of
profaning or abusing the Name of GOD. And be ever careful to manifest an holy
Awe and Reverence toward GOD's holy Name. Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may fear
this glorious and fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD. And know assuredly, That if
you will not do so, the LORD will make thy Plagues wonderful Deuteronomy. 28.59. So
that if you shall escape Punishment from Men, you shall not escape the
righteous Judgment of GOD.

I now proceed to a seventh Particular.

7. SANCTIFY the holy Sabbaths of the LORD. You know that the fourth
Commandment, does expressly require you to Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it
holy. Remember then the Approaches of holy Time, the Day before: Always think
of that Word of Moses to Israel, Exodus 16.23. To morrow is the Rest of the holy
Sabbath to the LORD.

YOU should the Day and Evening before, beg of GOD to rid your Hearts as well
2s your Hands, of whatever may unfit, or indispose you for his Service thereon,
that it may be a good Day to your Souls.

BE sollicitous that when you awake in the Morning, your Thoughts may be on
GOD, and the Things of your everlasting Peace, that pious and holy Thoughts may
take the first Possession of your Hearts, and abide there, throughout the Day.

TAKE the first convenient Time, to retire and pray to your Father who sees in
secret, adoring His Mercy to you, in giving you to see the Light of another
Sabbath, and begging that He would by His Grace enable you, to keep a Sabbath
of Rest from Sin, and of Rest in GOD, that you may be in the Fear of the LORD
all the Day long; that His Presence may go with you to the House of GOD, that
He would meet and bless you there, and grace His own Ordinances with his
Presence, and make them savingly profitable to you.

WHEN you are in the House of GOD, see that you reverence His Sanctuary,
remembering always, that this Place is dreadful, because no other than the House
of GOD, and the Gate of Heaven

COMPOSE your self with all possible Seriousness and Gravity to attend to the
Messages here delivered to you, regarding of them, as from the LORD, and not
from Man. Hear as for your Lives, and as those that must give an Account, what,
and how, you hear.

WHEN you go from the House of GOD, meditate seriously on what you have heard,
and beg of GOD you may profit by it.

SET the LORD before you in the Time of Intermission, don't divert into any
vain, and foolish talking; and beware of all trifling Carriages.

AND in the fear of GOD, return to the public Worship again, begging you may
come with meek and teachable frames or Spirit, and with earnest Desires of
hearing a Word that may be suited to the State and Condition of your Souls, and
with the like Gravity, Seriousness and Reverence, attend as before.

AND go away again, with the same earnest Desires, of a Blessing on what you
have heard, that it may become a Savor of Life unto Life unto you.

KEEP the Day holy unto the End of it. Keep up as much as possible, devout and
holy Thoughts and Meditations, to the close of it; and under a Sense of your
many Failings and short-comings in Duty, fly to the Blood of the great
Sacrifice, for Pardon, begging of GOD to accept what of Sincerity, He has seen
in your Desires and Endeavors, so to sanctify his holy Day, as that it may be
a Means of your Sanctification. Thus endeavor to keep the holy Sabbaths of the
LORD here, that you may be hereby made meet for the keeping of an everlasting
Sabbath of Rest, in the Kingdom of GOD, hereafter.

AGAIN,

8. CARRY respectfully to your Parents and Superiors. You should fear and
Reverence them, Levit. 19.3. Ye shall fear every Man his Mother, and his
Father. Beware you never despise your Parents when they are old, Prove. 23.22.
Always pay a due Deference and regard to them. And Obey them in all Things, for
this is well-pleasing unto the LORD. Col. 3.20. Beware of every disrespectful,
unsuitable Carriage or Deportment toward those whom you are under such strong
Obligations to love and honor.

OBEY and honor your Rulers, both in Church and State, and submit your selves
to every Ordinance of Man for the LORD's sake.

AGAIN,

9. SHUN evil Company. Be not Companions of Fools. Do not at any time needlessly
go into, or frequent the Society of ungodly Men. Avoid as much as may be, the
Conversation of the wicked. Let not such be your chosen Companions. Keep out of
the Way of such as much as you can. Prove. 4.14, 15. Enter not into the Path of
the Wicked, and go not in the Way of evil Men, avoid it, pass not by it, turn
from it and pass away.

FOLLOW David's Example of whom we read, Psalm 26.4, 5 I have not sat with vain
Persons, neither will I go in with Dissemblers; I have hated the Congregation
of evil Doers, and will not sit with the Wicked. And if such should at any time
come where you are, and endeavor to ensnare and wound you; hearken not to
their sinful Enticements, Prove. 1.10. My Son, if Sinners entice thee consent
thou not. Have no Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather
reprove them. Ephesians. 5.11.

AGAIN,

10. ASSOCIATE with the Wise. Prove. 13.20. He that walks with wise Men shall
be wise. Make choice of such for your Companions, concerning whom you may have
Reason to hope, they have the Fear of GOD in their Hearts, and before their
Eyes. You may then say as David does, Psalm 119.63. I am a Companion of all
them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy Precepts. Realize it, that it
will be unspeakably profitable, as well as delightful, to make the wise and
virtuous your chosen Companions. --

BUT I proceed to the next Particular, which I hope you will give me a very
serious and diligent Attention to.

11. BE inquisitive about Soul Concerns. Betimes ask the Way to Zion, with your
Face thitherward. Be desirous of knowing the right Way to Heaven, of being
taught and instructed in the Way of Life. Make it your Inquiry, What you shall
do that you may be saved? Be desirous of knowing what the Terms of Salvation
are, what the Conditions upon which eternal Life may be obtained.

BE concerned to know the Nature of a true evangelical Repentance for Sin; how
you may come to sorrow after a godly sort.

AND the Nature of a true and unfeigned Faith in the LORD JESUS CHRIST, of so
looking to Him that you may be saved.

BE concerned to know the Nature of a Sinner's Justification by Faith in the
Righteousness of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, how you may come to be accounted and
accepted as righteous in the Sight of GOD, so, that no Condemnation may belong
unto you; and how the Law of the Spirit of Life which is in JESUS CHRIST, may
make you free from the Law of Sin and Death. How you may become new Creatures,
the Workmanship of GOD in JESUS CHRIST, created unto good Works. How you may
come to be born again, born of the Spirit, and born from above; to put off the
old Man, and put on the new, to have new Hearts and, Spirits given to you, to
be made partakers of the Divine Nature, and made conformable to the Image of
CHRIST; to have your Life hid with CHRIST in GOD, and to enjoy Communion with
Him, and to keep your selves in the Love of GOD, and looking for the Mercy of
the LORD JESUS CHRIST unto eternal Life.

BE inquisitive about the Nature of these and such like Duties of Christianity,
necessary to be practiced by you, in order to your Preparation for, and
Participation of, the Blessedness of the heavenly Kingdom.

AND in Order hereunto, Seek Direction from those, who are to teach and lead
you thither. Hearken diligently to those who are appointed and authorized, to
feed you with Knowledge and Understanding. You read in Mal. 2.7. The Priest
lips should keep Knowledge, and you should seek the Law at his Mouth, for he is
the Messenger of the LORD of Hosts. You should hearken to their Messages. You
should hearken diligently to the Counsels, Warnings and Admonitions delivered
to you by them, in the Name and Fear of GOD, and regard them, as the Word of
GOD, and not of Man.

CHRIST'S Ministers are his Ambassadors, and He does by them beseech you to be
reconciled unto GOD, and what they deliver to you, agreeable to the Word of
GOD, you ought as firmly to believe and regard it, as though CHRIST himself spoke
to you in his own Person.

OUT of Pity and Compassion to you, CHRIST sends not Angels (who might rather
terrify than instruct you) but Men of the same Make and Frame with your selves,
Men of like Passions, in the same guilty miserable Circumstances, naturally, as
you are, and who must obtain and secure their own Salvation, in the same Way,
upon the same Terms and Conditions, they propose to you; Unto their
Instructions you must therefore hearken, as for your Lives, with earnest
Desires of being pric^^d to the Heart by the preached Word, that it may become
the Power of GOD to your Salvation.

BUT to come to what I principally aim at, under this Head; As we have Freedom
of Access unto CHRIST'S Ambassadors, and they are, or should be easy of Access,
so you should willingly and freely repair unto them, as authorized by the King
and Head of his Church and People, to show to you the Way of Salvation,
especially if you are at any time under Convictions, and have good Impressions
upon your Minds caused by the Word or Providence of GOD.

IF you evidently perceive the SPIRIT of GOD is striving with you, and a
serious Concern is awakened about your Soul, and Eternity, you should improve
every such happy Season to go to such, and acquaint them with your Case, and
desire their Advice and Counsel, that such Convictions may have a good Issue.

YOU should look on this to be a Way of GOD, an Ordinance of GOD appointed for
your Good, and with such a View, attend it, and not any longer cherish such a
criminal Backwardness to your Duty in this Regard.

WHEN you are really concerned about the State of your Soul, and what is like
to become of you to all Eternity, and are desirous of knowing what the LORD
would have you to do, you should at such a Time, with Freedom and Resolution,
go and open your Case, unbosom your self to some faithful godly Friend, or
Minister, and ask their Direction and Help and Thoughts upon your Case.

I am verily afraid, that many Convictions have been lost, and Impressions
defaced, and worn off, for want of taking this Method.

IF when you were under C^^^tions, and Concern of Soul about your spiritual
State, you had complied with your Duty in this Regard, it would have had a
happy Tendency to have cherished and set home your Convictions, and so have
helped forward your Conversion to GOD. May the Consideration and Hope of this
encourage you to do so, under the Convictions and Impressions, you may have
upon your Minds, for time to come.

I now proceed to another Particular.

LET me advise you while I am speaking to you, to attend diligently the public
Worship of GOD. Forsake not the House of GOD, and the assembling of your selves
together, as the manner of some is. Make Conscience of coming up to the House
of GOD, when you have Health and Ability for it. Don't let any trifling matter
divert or hinder you: Such Opportunities are most uncertainly continued to you;
improve them diligently, while you may, that you may reflect thereon with
Comfort in days to come.

LET me advise you in the next Place,

TO renew your baptismal Covenant. You are (I suppose all of you) the baptized
Disciples of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. You were early dedicated to GOD, in the
holy Ordinance of Baptism, and now, when you come to Years of Discretion, and
Understanding, you should make it your own Act and Deed.

YOU are taught by the Apostle, Gal. ^.3.^. That as many of you, as have been
baptized into CHRIST, have put on CHRIST, i. e. have put on the Name of
Disciples and Followers of CHRIST, and are therefore obliged to make such
public Profession, and explicitly own and avouch the LORD to be Your GOD, and
not be afraid or ashamed to acknowledge the Truths and Ways of CHRIST. If you
do not do so, how will you frustrate the great Design of your Baptism, by which
you became so early engaged to seek and serve the GOD of your Fathers?

AND how can you expect, or hope for the Blessings of the Covenant, if you will
not lay hold upon it, consent to the Terms of it, and walk according to the
Tenor of it? You should then most certainly not content your selves, with the
Dedication your Parents made of you to GOD, at your Baptism, but renew and take
upon you, your baptismal Vow and Covenant, solemnly promising by his Grace
helping of you, that you will fear GOD, and keep his Commandments always, that
it may be well with you for ever.

I hope, you are very thoughtful of your Duty, in this respect, such of you, as
have not yet done it, and that your religious Exercises, from one Week to
another, will have a good Tendency to prepare you for, and excite and quicken
you to it.

LET me advise you in the next Place,

TO be concerned to get prepared for the LORD's Table. The Invitation is made
unto you, as well as those that are in their elder Years, to come and show
forth CHRIST'S Death and Sufferings in Remembrance of Him. This do in
Remembrance of me, obliges you as well as others, and while you neglect to do
it, you live in the Omission of a plain commanded Duty.

YOUR SAVIOR would be glad to see you thus remembering of Him, in the Days of
your Youth. He is desirous of espousing you to Himself, that you may be married
to Him, and obtain all the Blessings of a sure and well-ordered Covenant. He is
freely willing to bestow them all upon you, and delights to see you coming
humbly to His Table, with earnest and enlarged Desires, after spiritual and
eternal Blessings.

WHEREFORE beg, that you may be brought to hunger and thirst after these
Blessings, and that you may be prepared by his Spirit and Grace, for the
obtaining of them in the Ways of His Appointment.

MY next Advice to you, shall be,

TO get and keep a good Conscience. Seek earnestly to have your Consciences
sprinkled with the Blood of CHRIST, that you may enjoy Peace of Conscience.
This will be a continual Feast to you. And always endeavor to preserve and
keep a tender Conscience. Beware of defiling and wounding your Consciences, by
contracting any new Guilt. Be always concerned that your Hearts may not
reproach you for complying with any evil Solicitations. Endeavor what in you
lies, to keep a Conscience void of Offense, both toward GOD, and toward Man.

BUT I hasten to say, in the next Place,

GRIEVE not the HOLY SPIRIT of GOD, but cherish his holy Motions upon your
Hearts, from one time to another. The SPIRIT of GOD is doubtless often striving
with you, exciting good Motions in your Minds, under the Word and Providence
of GOD; see to it that you constantly cherish them. Do not by any sinful Temper
or Carriage, provoke the HOLY SPIRIT of GOD to withdraw from you. GOD has said,
His SPIRIT shall not always strive with Man. Men may by their unwary foolish
Carriages, forfeit the gracious Influences of the SPIRIT of GOD, upon which he
may depart from them.

AND how sad will your Case be, if you should provoke the HOLY SPIRIT of GOD to
forsake you! You would then live, only to fill up the measure of your
Iniquities, and to treasure up to your selves Wrath against the Day of Wrath,
and the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of GOD.

OH then see to it, That you do not quench the SPIRIT! Carefully observe all
his inward and secret Motions, under Ordinances, and under Providence, with an
earnest Concern, your Convictions may issue in your saving and thorough
Conversion to GOD.

I come now to the last Word to be spoken to you, at this time, and that is,

TO prepare for Death, and the eternal World. Do not any of you boast of a to
morrow, for you know not what a Day may bring forth. How many of your Age are
gone down to the Grave, and gone to their long and eternal Home? And how soon
it shall be thus said of you, you don't know. Oh meditate on your Frailty and
Mortality every Day you live! And often in your Thoughts, put your selves into
the Circumstances of one a dying, and consider, What have I left undone, which
I should wish to have done at such a time, or, what have I done, that will be
grievous, and bitter to me then?

OH go away, and immediately bewail it with Grief of Heart, and resolve by the
Help of GOD, you will abandon every evil way, that you will be now working out
your Salvation with Fear and Trembling, that you will strive more to enter in
at the strait Gate, and even take the Kingdom of Heaven by a holy Violence.

BE restless until you have got into a State of Safety for Eternity: Give noe
Sleep to your Eyes, nor Slumber to your Eyelids, until you have humbly and
earnestly sought the Favor of GOD, in pardoning, renewing and sanctifying of
you, and taking Possession of you for himself, that He would rule and reign in
your hearts, that His Divine and Holy Image may be wrought into all the Powers
of your Souls.

AND know for your Encouragement, That your SAVIOR is now again, standing at
the Doors of your Souls, and knocking for Entrance, willing to come in, and sup
with you, and you with Him. And will you, can you now, make him wait again,
until His Head be wet with the Dew and his Locks with the drops of the Night,
and after all refuse to let Him in? Oh be no longer so ungrateful to CHRIST,
and unkind to your selves! Bewail it immediately, that you have so long shut
the Doors of your Souls against a compassionate SAVIOR. And now, Lift up your
Heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting Doors, that the King of
Glory may come in. Kiss the Son of GOD, with a Kiss of Homage and Subjection,
lest He be angry, and you perish from the Way. (...) Oh that you would hear his
Voice to Day, and be (...) and doing in the great Concerns of your Souls and
Eternity. Set down and count the Cost. Consider seriously, what you must part
withal, and what you must comply with, to secure the Favor of GOD, and how
miserable your Condition must be, if you should die in your Sins, and the awful
Hazards you run of so dying, while you continue alienated from the Life of GOD,
and Strangers to any renewing saving Work of GOD'S HOLY SPIRIT upon your
Hearts. Oh dread to continue one Week or Day longer, in a State in which if the
Summons of Death should be served upon you, it would be better for you, that
you had never been born.

I shall now draw to a Close, with a Repetition of the several Heads of Advice,
that have been particularly spoken to, and insisted upon, in this and the two
former Discourses, with a few close and pungent Thoughts upon them.

WHEN I first spoke to you, I called on, and advised you, to use your selves to
serious Consideration. How inexcusable must you be then, if you continue as
Thoughtless and Careless as ever, about the great Concerns of your Souls and
Eternity? I would fain hope, you are some of you, become more thoughtful and
concerned about the Worth of your Souls, and the Weight of Eternity and the
Awfulness of the everlasting State you stand upon the Brink of.

YOU have been also advised and exhorted to be s^^^ minded. To live soberly in
the World. But if (...) are still in any Instances, contradicting such a (...)
from Heaven to you, by an intemperate, soon and vain Course of living, How will
you answer (...) to GOD, and how will your Consciences 'ere long ^^^raid you,
[especially some of you] that you ^^^uld by such a religious Combination,
pretend (...) be more serious, and sober-minded than others, and yet walk on in
the Vanity of your Minds still?

YOU have been also exhorted to watch and pray more, that you enter not into
Temptation. And if you are as heedless and unguarded as ever, and are running
into the Way of Temptation still, if you are still casting off Fear, and
restraining Prayer before GOD, how inexcusable must you be? Oh that your Hearts
and Consciences might not condemn you for turning a deaf Ear to any of these
solemn Counsels!

AND will you from this Day regard those more, which have at this time been
given to you? Will you henceforward realize the Eye of GOD upon you, firmly
believe His Omniscience, and that you shall be quickly called to an account,
and receive according to what you have done?

WILL you not now beware of all kinds of Profaness, and ever manifest an holy
Awe, and Reverence toward GOD's holy Name?

AND will you always exercise a due Solicitude about sanctifying the holy
Sabbaths of the LORD? Religion will thrive and flourish, or dwindle and decay
according, as we observe or neglect our Duty, as to the Sanctification of the
LORD'S- Day.

ENDEAVOR then, that your whole Carriage and Behavior in the House of GOD,
and all the Day long, be exemplary and praiseworthy; so will GOD be glorified,
and your own Souls have Peace and Comfort.

YOU will always take Care to pay a due Deference and Regard, to your
Superiors in Church and State, and always obey your Parents in the LORD, and
never provoke or displease them by any undutiful or unbecoming Carriages; You
may well look for an untimely Death if you should. See Prove. 30.17.

YOU must ever avoid the Company of the Wicked and Profane, you will be more
inexcusable now, than ever, if you should now go into, and choose the Company of
such. You will soon find it dreadfully alienate your Hearts from GOD, and
increase and strengthen your Aversion to the Ways of serious Piety. Choose the
wise and godly for your beloved Companions, by whose Company and Conversation,
you may probably grow wiser and better.

AND now in your younger Years, Ask the Way to Zion, especially when under any
Concern of Spirit, repair to those appointed therefore to direct and lead you
under all your Difficulties and Discouragements, as firmly believing, it is a
Way appointed by GOD, for your Help, in the Way to a better World.

BE conscientious and constant in attending the public Worship of GOD, when
you have Health and Ability for it: Your Neglect of it, will be grievous to
you, one time or other.

BE concerned to renew your baptismal Covenant. You cannot but think it most
just and reasonable, you should do it, and that you are very Lame in your
Profession, until you have.

BE preparing also, for a due Approach to CHRIST at His Table. Though it is
done, as the LORD commanded, there is still room, and He sends me this Evening,
to invite you to come in, that His House may be filled. Oh be restless until
you find in you, the Qualifications requisite to your worthy Participation
thereof.

LABOR to get, and then to keep a good Conscience, that you may have Peace in
your own Minds, under all Occurrences of Divine Providence.

AND always, be afraid of grieving the good SPIRIT of GOD, that He may never be
provoked to depart from you, for Woe will be unto you, if He should!

FINALLY,

PREPARE for Death, and the Eternity before you. And do the Works of Him, that
has sent you, while it is Day, because the Night of Death is coming upon you,
in which you cannot work. How often have you had this Exhortation, and are you
slothful and like to be so, in the Business of Religion, still? How loath am I
to think, you should any of you be of this unhappy Number! For then, I must say
concerning you, I have run in vain, and labored in vain. But the LORD, in
Mercy grant, it may not be so!

AND thus, I have finished the first general Head under the Doctrine, viz. What
Things may be proper to be spoken to young People?

THAT which yet remains to be considered is this, That the Ministers of CHRIST
should be speedy and earnest in speaking such Things unto them.

BUT the Consideration of this, must be reserved to another Opportunity, if GOD
shall give it.

LET in all now, look up to GOD, for His Blessing, on what we have heard at
this time.

Preached JUNE 9. 1728.
THE Fourth SERMON.
ZECH. II. 4. -- RUN, Speak to this Young Man.


I Shall now once more, by the Help of GOD, speak to you from this

DOCTRINE.
THAT there are many things to be spoken to Young People, which the Ministers
of CHRIST should be speedy and earnest in the speaking of unto them.

UNDER this Doctrine, I have particularly shown,

I. WHAT Things may be proper to be spoken to Young People.

I am now to show,

II. THAT the Ministers of CHRIST should be speedy and earnest in speaking such
Things unto them.

FOR the Proof and Confirmation of this, we may consider several Particulars.

1. THE SPIRIT of GOD may be now striving with such, and therefore the
Ministers of CHRIST should be speedy and earnest in the speaking these things
unto them.

THE HOLY SPIRIT of GOD is frequently striving with, and moving on the Hearts
of such. Such is the Patience and Long-suffering of GOD, that He bears with
them, though they have too much despised the Riches of His Goodness. He waits
to be gracious, and is therefore by the Suggestions of His HOLY SPIRIT,
evidently intimating to such, there is Hope concerning them; that it is now an
accepted Time, and a Day of Salvation; that there is Mercy with GOD, and
Forgiveness for them, that if they will be now working out their Salvation with
Fear and Trembling, the LORD will work in them, both to will and to do, of his
own good Pleasure.

THE SPIRIT of GOD so sets home the preached Word, that they are sometimes
pricked to the Heart by it, and convinced of Sin, of Righteousness, and of
Judgment to come. They have a mighty Concern awakned in them, about what they
shall do, that they may be saved. Their great Inquiry now is, LORD, What will thou have me to do? And, What shall I do, that I may inherit eternal Life?

THEY now see themselves in continual Danger of the amazing Wrath of GOD
overtaking them, while in an unconverted Estate, and are more concerned, than
ever they were, to make their Escape from it, and are now with greater Concern,
than ever, waiting on GOD, in the use of the Means appointed for their
Conversion.

AND now, this is a special and peculiar Season, for the Ministers of CHRIST to
improve, in treating with such, and if they are now earnestly entreating,
persuading and exhorting of them, to strive NOW to enter in at the strait Gate,
to seek first the Kingdom of GOD; Now, the Gospel of the Kingdom is preached,
to press into it, to mind this one thing needful in the first Place, and before
every thing else, to make Religion and the Care of their Souls Salvation their
principal Business and Concern, and subordinate every thing else to it; and
therefore immediately seek the LORD, while He may be found, and call upon Him
white He is near, and resolve not to let Him go, until He bless them, until
they shall receive the Blessing from the LORD, and Righteousness from the GOD
of their Salvation.

IF they are now thus speaking to them, there will be great Hope, concerning
their being wrought upon, the Consideration whereof, may well excite the
Ministers of CHRIST to be speedy and earnest in speaking to such, as hoping,
that while they are so speaking, that may be the happy Season, in which the
SPIRIT of GOD may be at work upon their Hearts, and so they will be the more
likely to hear, and receive Instruction, and be made wise, even wise unto
Salvation.

AND if our speaking may be accompanied with the gracious Influences of the
SPIRIT of GOD, so that any may be thereby brought savingly Home to GOD, how
speedy and earnest should we be, upon the Prospect of such happy Fruits of our
Labors, for the Salvation of the precious Souls of such? The Prospect and Hope
of it, may well animate us to do our utmost for their Conversion.

2. YOUR speedy return to GOD will be pleasing to Him, and most for His Glory,
and for your Comfort, and the Good of others.

THE great Design of all that is spoken to you, from one time to another, in
the Name of the LORD, is to bring you to return to the LORD, from whom you have
fallen by your Iniquities.

GOD sends His Ministers to entreat and beseech you to lay down your Arms of
Rebellion, and make your Peace with Him. And if you will this Evening, hearken
to His gracious Calls and Invitations, He will take Pleasure in you. It will be
very pleasing and acceptable to Him, if you are early seeking, and serving, and
devoting your selves to Him. GOD desires the first ripe Fruits, and it is meet
He should be first acknowledged. And surely He infinitely deserves it.

AND if you hearken to the Voice of GOD now, in your Youthful Days, this will
conduce most to the Glory of GOD, and the Good of others. GOD is most glorified
by your early seeking of Him, by your early Obedience to His Voice. Such shall
be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of Water, that brings forth his Fruit in
his Season; such are like to do some good, in the World, whose Youth is
sanctified by early Piety. -- And it is certain you will do Duty more easily and
comfortably now, than hereafter, because of fewer Hindrances, than there will
be in time to come, for the longer you live, and the further you go into the
World, the more difficult you will certainly find it to repent and turn to the
LORD. And if you will now do it, if the LORD may now hear you bemoaning your
selves, and repenting in Dust and Ashes, His Bowels will yern toward you, and
He will surely have Mercy on you.

AND if you are thus in your early Days, obedient to the Voice of GOD, it will
be greatly encouraging to others, to induce and excite them to be obedient to
the Voice of GOD too: And so you may be instrumental of promoting the good of
others.

AND if you are religious betimes, It will certainly tend to your own Comfort,
to fill you with Joy and Peace, a holy Security and Serenity of Mind, that will
be inexpressibly refreshing to you. And now may not the Consideration of these
Things well excite and animate CHRIST'S Ministers, to be speedy and earnest in
delivering the Messages of the LORD, unto Young People, since a Compliance with
them, will have such a happy Tendency, in one Regard, and another.

SUCH Considerations are duly weighed by CHRIST'S Ministers, and do powerfully
excite and stir them up, faithfully to declare the Counsel of the LORD unto
such, and if possible, persuade and prevail with them, to enga^e in the Ways of
Religion: And that Motive more especially excites their Diligence, and
Earnestness in delivering the LORD'S Messages, That GOD is, and will be
glorified, by them, if they will be obedient to them; and this is what their
Hearts are exceedingly set upon, and if they may be any Ways instrumental of
promoting the Glory of their GOD and SAVIOR in the World, they have all they
can desire; -- this will be an inexpressible Satisfaction to them; and in Hopes
of being thus refreshed, they will be speedy and earnest in doing all they
possibly can, to bring such savingly Home to GOD.

AGAIN,

3. YOU or WE may speedily die, and then we can no more speak to you in the
Name of the LORD.

YOU may speedily die, your Youth and Strength: will in no wise secure you from
the Arrests of Death. Though you enjoy a confirmed Health now, and are in your
full Strength, you may speedily go to your long and eternal Home, and have your
State for Eternity unalterably determined.

YOU may in a very few Weeks or Days, be hid in the Grave, where there is no
Wisdom, Knowledge, nor Device. As Soon as ever you have given up the Ghost,
there is an End of all Means and Pains as to you. The Dead praise not the LORD,
nor can such as go down to Silence seek his Mercy; the Consideration whereof is
no little Excitement to those, who are sent to entreat Sinners to be reconciled
to GOD, to be speedy, and earnest in delivering their Messages to them.

THEY consider, they are frail and dying Men and Children, they have to deal
withal, that they are posting along into the eternal World, that they are very
quickly, and they know not how speedily, to be cited before the Tribunal of
GOD, and give an Account of the Deeds done in the Body, and receive their Doom,
according to what they have done; and how dreadful their Doom will be, if they
should be suddenly surpised into Eternity, while they are going on in an
unconverted Estate: and therefore they improve all convenient Opportunities to
advise, and counsel, to admonish and warn all such to mind the Things of their
Peace, before they shall be hid from their Eyes, and to work while the Day
lasts, before the Night comes in which they cannot work, and therefore to hear
the Voice of GOD to Day, and no longer harden their Hearts, that they would
immediately think upon their Ways, and turn their Feet to the Testimonies of
GOD, that they would make haste, and delay not to keep the Commandments of GOD;
that they would not quench, or grieve the SPIRIT of GOD, once more; that they
would immediately comply with his blessed Motions, to confess and forsake their
Sins, and give up themselves to GOD, and become serious, and sober-minded, and
wise for their Souls and Eternity, while the LORD is waiting to be gracious.

AND they may be the more speedy and earnest ^n thus dealing with them, as not
knowing, how soon they may die themselves. They realize their own Frailty and
Mortality, that they are as liable to re^^ive the Sentence of Death as any of
their Hearers, of whatever Age. And that it infinitely concerns them to declare
the whole Counsel of GOD; and knowing their time may be short, their
Opportunities but very few, they are therefore the more earnestly sollicitous
to call upon Persons of all Ages and especially those of the Rising Generation,
to know, and love and serve the GOD of their Fathers, that they may be able to
reflect with Comfort on their Endeavors for the Conversion and eternal
Salvation of such, if they should be quickly brought, as they know not, but
they may, into the Valley of the Shadow of Death; when we shall be able no more
to speak to you in the Name of the LORD.

WE who speak to you now, may have our Mouths speedily shut for ever, so as
never to give one Call, or Warning more.

AND we know not, but the next, we shall give, if done with an earnest
Solicitude for your Conviction and Conversion, may by the Blessing of GOD,
attain the desired End.

WHEREFORE we should not be negligent to put you always in Remembrance of these
Things, though ye know them; Yea, we think it meet as long as we are in this
Tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in Remembrance, knowing that shortly
we must put off this our Tabernacle. 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 14.

BUT if the GOD of our Lives, should by His gracious Visitation, preserve our
Spirits, and continue our Opportunities for speaking, you may, perhaps, be of
the Number, who are to be taken quickly out of His Vineyard, a Period shall be
speedily put to the Day of His Patience, and your Day of Grace; How can we then
do otherwise than speedily, and earnestly call upon you, to be up and doing, in
the great Concerns of your Souls, and the eternal World into which you are
hastening daily?

AGAIN,

4. YOUR Souls may perish for our neglecting to speak such Things unto you, and
the Guilt of Blood will ly' upon Us.

IF we do not plainly, and faithfully counsel and warn you; if instead hereof,
smooth things are preached to you, and you are suffered to go on in the Way^
that seem right in your own Eyes, and you meet with little or no Check or
Control: If we do not set the Terrors of the LORD, and His Wrath before you,
and let you hear but little or nothing of a Damnation that slumbers not; if we
are loath to take any Pains to rouse you out of your carnal, secure State, and
give you those Counsels and Directions, by a Compliance with which, you may
escape the Wrath to come: If we have sufficient Reason to conclude, you are
going on in any sinful Courses, to the Dishonor of GOD, and the wounding of
your Souls, and that will certainly prove fatal to you, if not reformed; if
through Fear, Favor or Affection, we spare you, and are loath to charge home
upon your Consciences, the Guilt lying upon you, and what will be the certain
and dreadful Issue of your persisting in such Ways; You may, it may b^ be well
pleased with us for it, and glad you meet with no more from us to disturb and
gall you.

BUT alas! If we should thus contrived to gratify you, your Souls would be
infinitely endangered by it; you would more readily and easily close with every
alluring Solicitation of the Devil; Habits of Sin would be strengthened, and
you would grow so accustomed to do evil, that it would become difficult, and
next to impossible, for you ever to learn to do well: Yea by our Unfaithfulness
and Negligence, as to advising and warning of you, you may be hardened in your
Security, yea, and may be suddenly and surprizingly destroyed and that without
Remedy: and we shall dreadfully hazard the Salvation of our own Souls, and your
Blood may be required at our Hands. For the Confirmation of this, let me turn
you to that awful Text of Scripture, in Ezekiel. 3.17, 18. Son of Man, I have made
thee a Watchman unto the House or Israel, therefore hear the Word at my Mouth,
and give them warning from me. When I say unto the Wicked, Thou shall surely
die, and thou give them not Warning, nor speak to warn the Wicked from his
wicked Way, to save his Life; the same wicked Man shall die in his Iniquity,
but his Blood will I require at thine Hands.

WHAT a fearful Account shall we have to give to GOD then, if we are not speedy
and earnest in delivering the Messages of the LORD unto you? If we don't as
plainly and faithfully as we can, declare the whole Counsel of GOD unto you,
you plainly see, we cannot keep our selves clear from your Blood.

AND how awfully tremendous will it be, if Occasion should be given to any of
you, hereafter to say; I am, I must acknowledge, justly condemned to that
Misery and Torment I feel, GOD and His Throne is clear and guiltless; But I
might have escaped these Torments, I now, and must for ever feel; If I had been
faithfully warned of my Danger: I had little or no Warning either from my
Parents or Minister, of the Danger of coming into such a Place of Torment; I
was never plainly and faithfully told of the Way by which I might escape this
Wrath, nor were there proper Motives and Arguments used with me to work upon my
Hopes, or upon my Fears, I was not earnestly warned to forsake the Ways of Sin,
I addicted my self to.

I seldom heard, that it would be such a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands
of the living GOD, or such Destruction from GOD would have been more of a
Terror to me. Oh that I had heard more of the exquisite Torments of the Damned!
Oh that I had been more earnestly persuaded, to fly from this Wrath! Oh that I
had had the Way to avoid It more inculcated upon me, and more Means used, and
Pains taken with me! My Soul is lost, it is lost and undone for ever, because I
was not faithfully dealt with by those, who were sent of GOD, to counsel and
warn me.

MY Damnation is very much owing to the Negligence and Unfaithfulness of those
to whom the Care of my precious Soul was committed: Oh that you had been more
earnest with me! You knew the Devil was doing all he could to ruin me, you saw
me going on in the Paths of the Destroyer, and going down to these Chambers of
Death. Oh that you had done more to have plucked me, as a Brand of the burning!
Oh that you had warned me, again and again, and not suffered me to go on so
quietly, and told me more of these Snares, Fire, and Brimstone, and this
horrible Tempest, GOD is raining upon me! Oh that I had heard more of the
direful Impressions of the Wrath of GOD, tormenting guilty Souls here! Alas!
that you would speak no more, no oftener of my Sin and Danger, and be so little
concerned, that I might not come to this dreadful Place!

AND now, may we not well dread to give any of you the sad Occasion of
exclaiming thus against us? But verily we shall do it, if we do not with the
greatest Concern and Solicitude, treat with you about the Concerns of your
precious and immortal Souls, if we do not show to you the Way of Salvation, and
beseech you to walk therein, and warn you faithfully of every Path of the
Destroyer, and set the Terrors of the LORD and his Wrath before you, and use
all the Motives and Arguments we can think of, to excite your Hopes, and awaken
your Fears.

AND, judge you now, whether we should not be speedy and earnest in speaking
such Things as we have unto you.

AGAIN,

5. WE may hereby help forward your Conversion and Salvation, and if we should
run and labor in vain, we shall keep our selves clear of your Blood.

OUR thus speaking to you in the Name of the LORD, the Things which belong to
your everlasting Peace, is the Way appointed by GOD, for your Conviction and
Awakning, to bring you to a serious Sense of the lost and miserable Condition
you are naturally in, and to an earnest Concern that you may be delivered
therefrom: It is the appointed Means for exciting your Hopes, and awakening
your Fears, and thereby animating you to fly for Refuge to CHRIST, and so lay
hold on the Hope in the Gospel set (...) you. You may be hereby brought to
realize CHRIST'S Ability and Willingness to save you, a^^ to open the
everlasting Doors of your Souls to receive and entertain this King of Glory, so
that CHRIST may come to dwell in your Hearts by Faith, and take an everlasting
Possession of you for himself, and so you shall be made an Instance of the
Grace of GOD now, and an everlasting Monument of Mercy hereafter.

AND now from the Hope of such blessed Effects, of our thus speaking to you, we
may well be speedy and earnest in treating with you about the Concerns of your
Souls and Eternity.

WE know, that many by being so spoken to, have by the gracious Influences of
the SPIRIT of GOD, accompanying such Messages, been brought out of a State of
Nature, into a State of Grace, have had new Hearts and Spirits given to them;
they are become the Sons and Children of GOD, by a gracious Adoption, and of
Children of Wrath, and Heirs of Hell, are become the Children of GOD, and Heirs
of an heavenly Inheritance; and many who have been the chief of Sinners, have
been made the remarkable Instances of Sovereign Grace, the Consideration
whereof, may well make us speedy and earnest still in our Endeavors for the
Conversion of others, yet in the Gall of Bitterness and Bonds of Iniquity, that
the like free and sovereign Grace may be glorified toward them also.

BUT if a sovereign GOD, who may dispense His Favors as He pleases, withholds
his gracious Influences, and permits Men to go on in the Ways of their Hearts,
and in the Sight of their Eyes; if Sinners though often reproved, will not hear
and receive Instruction, but continue Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of
GOD, and so hate Instruction and despise Reproof, and will not by all that can
be said or done, be persuaded and prevailed upon, to abandon their beloved Ways
of Wickedness: If any should remain thus incorrigible under all the Means and
Pains used and taken with them, for their Conversion to GOD, and after all die
in their Sins, we shall deliver our Souls, Ezekiel. 3.19. Yet if thou warn the
Wicked, and he turn not from his Wickedness, nor from his wicked Way, he shall
die in his Iniquity, but thou have delivered thy Soul.

YOUR Blood will not be required of us; You shall not be able to charge us with
Unfaithfulness to your Souls, in neglecting to counsel and warn you; yea, you
will be ready enough to acknowledge, how the Threatenings and Warnings of GOD
were often dispensed to you, and you little regarded them, and so will clear us
from being at all instrumental of your Ruin.

THIS is another Consideration from which we may conclude we should be speedy
and earnest in dealing with Sinners, about their spiritual and eternal
Concernments, we may be hereby greatly instrumental of their being brought
savingly home to GOD; but if we should after all labor in vain, and spend our
Strength for naught, we shall be unto GOD, a sweet savor of CHRIST, with
respect unto such, as well as those that shall be saved. 2 Cor. 2.15.

IF we have not shunned to declare the whole Counsel of GOD, we shall be pure
from the Blood of all Men, and so shall be able to appeal to you, as the
Apostle did to his Hearers, Acts 20.26, 27. Wherefore I take you to record this
Day, that I am pure from the Blood of all Men, for I have not shunned to
declare unto you, all the Counsel of GOD.

AGAIN,

6. IT will be an inexpressible Pleasure and Satisfaction to us, if by our
Ministry you may be brought home to GOD.

IF the gracious Influences of the almighty SPIRIT of GOD, may accompany the
Calls and Warnings, the Exhortations and Counsels, we give you; if you may be
thereby pricked to the Heart, and brought with an earnest Concern of Soul to
inquire, What shall I do to be saved? And if we may be instrumental of leading
you to CHRIST, as the Way, the Truth, and the Life; if GOD will bless our
Endeavors for opening your blind Eyes, and softning your hard Hearts, that so
of unwilling, you may be made willing to lay down your Arms of Rebellion, and
open the everlasting Doors of your Souls, to receive and entertain the King of
Glory; if you may be brought to see the lost and perishing Condition you are
in, and your Need of CHRIST; if you are brought to see your selves poor and
miserable, wretched, blind and naked, utterly destitute of any thing to
recommend you to to GOD, and are freely and heartily willing to renounce all
Righteousness of your own, to go wholly out of your selves, and by Faith to lay
hold on the Righteousness of CHRIST, to venture your eternal Salvation on the
Merits of the Obedience, Sufferings and Death of CHRIST: If you may be brought
to behold his admirable Beauty and Glory, and have such discoveries of it made
to you, as shall draw forth your Hearts to him as one altogether lovely, and
the chief among ten thousand: In short, if by the Dispensation of the Word and
Ordinances of GOD, you may be brought to a sincere Subjection to the Gospel of
CHRIST, as well as to an open Profession thereof; -- It will greatly rejoice
the Hearts of all that fear GOD, and more especially of such as have been
instrumental of gaining over the Consent of your Wills to be the LORD'S.

OH if we can but succeed in our Messages to any of the poor; sinful Children
of Men, if we can but persuade them to cherish the Motions of GOD'S HOLY SPIRIT
upon their Hearts, and come over on the LORD'S side; if we may be the
Instruments of thus reducing them from their strayings and wanderings from GOD
and their Duty, and bringing them back to JESUS CHRIST, the Shepherd and Bishop
of their Souls; What a spring of Comfort and Joy will this be to us? It cannot
be expressed the Pleasure and Satisfaction, such Reflections will yield unto us.

SHOULD we not then, from this Consideration, be speedy and earnest in speaking
to such? In this way we might hope to see of the travail of CHRIST'S Soul, and
of our own Souls, in the success of our Ministry, and be therewith exceedingly
refreshed.

AND may not the Prospect and Hope of this, well excite and animate us to the
most speedy and earnest Endeavors for the Conversion of such?

ONCE more,

7. and lastly. THE solemn Oath and Charge of GOD, may well make us speedy and
earnest in our Endeavors, for your Conversion to GOD.

YOU are committed to our Care and Charge, by the great Shepherd of the Sheep.
And we have taken the Oversight of you, and if we have any Love to CHRIST, we
must testify it by feeding the Lambs of the Flock, as well as the Sheep.

YOU are a very peculiar Part of our Watch and Charge, and we cannot answer it
to GOD, if we don't use our utmost Endeavors to bring you to remember your
Creator in the Days of your Youth, to devote your Time and Talents, all you
have and are to GOD, and not delay a Moment longer in the great Concerns of
your Souls, as to the getting into a State of Safety for Eternity.

KNOWING your continual Danger, because of your wicked Hearts, a tempting
Devil, and an ensnaring World, we cannot but faithfully warn and call upon you,
to forsake the Paths of the Destroyer, and get into the Way of Life, and use
all the proper Motives and Arguments we can think of, to excite you to your
Duty; and herein discharge our Duty to GOD, and to you, that we may not incur
the Doom of unfaithful Servants, which you know we shall, if we do not our
utmost, to save your Soul^ from Death.

BUT I may not proceed any farther in the Confirmation of the Doctrine, and I
hope what ha^ been already said, may serve abundantly to confirm it to us, viz
That there are many things to be spoken to Young People, which the Ministers of
CHRIST should be speedy and earnest in the speaking of unto them.

I must now conclude with a brief Application.

USE I.
WE should give thanks to the King and Head of His Church and People, when
favored with faithful Ambassadors.

IF we have Reason to hope and believe, that they who bring the Messages of
Peace and Reconciliation to us, have at Heart the Honor and Glory of GOD, and
are earnestly and sincerely endeavoring that we may be brought to a sincere
Repentance, and thorough Conversion to GOD; if while they are running and
speaking to us, their Messages evidently tend to promote our spiritual Benefit
and Advantage, if we would but hearken to, and comply with them; we have
certainly cause of Thankfulness to GOD, in appointing an Order of Men, of the
same Make and Frame with our selves, thus familiarly to treat with us, yea and
entreat, and beseech us to hear, that our Souls may live.

WERE our Teachers removed into Corners; or, were they unfaithful; were they
such as would daub with untemper'd Mortar, and preach smooth Things to us, and
flatter us in our evil Ways, and suffer us to go on quietly in a Course of Sin;
What a tremendous Judgment of GOD would this be?

OH let us be thankful then that our Eyes yet see our Teachers, and that we
have the Mind and Will of GOD faithfully dispensed unto us. And let us beware,
we don't provoke GOD by our Unprofitableness and Unfruitfulness under such a
merciful Dispensation, to remove our Candlesticks out of their Places, or to
put out the Lights, He has set up in them.

USE II.
HOW readily then should you hearken to the Messages they bring unto you?

IF it so highly concerns them to be speedy and earnest in bringing the
Messages of GOD to you, it certainly does as much concern you, to give a speedy
and ready Entertainment to them; for it is for your Life. The Lives of your
precious Souls depend upon your hearkening to them. You are undone for ever, if
you finally persist in your Disobedience to their Messages.

USE III.
HOW discouraging must it be to run in vain?

WHEN we obey the Command of our LORD and Master, in bringing his Messages to
you, that are of the last Concernment, and use with you all proper Motives and
Arguments to work upon your Hopes and upon your Fears; and yet your Language is
like theirs, in Jer. 44.16. As for the Word that thou have spoken unto us in
the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee: How discouraging must it
be? To give up our Account to GOD every Day, concerning you, that you are still
walking in the Ways of your Hearts, and in the Sight of your Eyes, Strangers to
any sanctifying saving Work of GOD's HOLY SPIRIT upon your Hearts; that you
will not be persuaded to repent and turn from your Transgressions, but are
lovers of Pleasures, more than lovers of GOD, and after them will go, let
Parents and Ministers say what they will, yea, though your own Consciences
check you, and the SPIRIT of GOD is striving with you, and Providence loudly
speak too: All Means and Pains used and taken with you, are lost upon you, you
continue as vain, secure and tho'tless about the Concerns of your immortal
Souls as ever.

AND thus You receive the Grace of GOD in vain, and We labor in vain, and
spend our Strength for naught and in vain; we had as good even prophesy to the
wind. Oh how discouraging and disheartning, to think, that the Word we speak to
you, is like to become a Savor of Death unto Death, and we are like to be a
Means of aggravating your Condemnation hereafter!

THIS is very grievous to think of now, grievous to Ministers and to Parents;
Why will you then so grieve and break our Hearts? Why will you thus requite us
for all our Care and Pains for the Salvation of your precious Souls? O
ungrateful and unwise that you are! You will see and own it sooner or later;
and the LORD grant you may, before it be too late!

USE IV.
LET me now beg of You, in the Name of Him who sends me this Evening to you,
that you would do your Utmost to hear and obey the Messages, I have brought
unto you, that I may not run in vain.

NOW then I am an Ambassador for CHRIST, as though GOD did beseech you by me, I
pray you in CHRIST'S stead, be ye reconciled unto GOD. I persuade my self, You
question not my Authority, as an Ambassador of the LORD JESUS CHRIST: And You
will, I hope, regard what I speak to you, as the Word of GOD, and not of Man.
Believe it, the LORD has been speaking to You from Heaven, and He takes special
Notice of your Regard to what is spoken.

I am persuaded, Your Consciences must witness for me, that what I have been
now and before speaking to you from this Text, is agreeable to the Mind and
Will of GOD, and that it is of infinite Concernment to you, to obey the Voice
of your Teacher, and incline your Ears to the Instructions that have been given
you.

AND I would fain hope, that I have not run, and spoke in vain, as to some of
the YOUNG PEOPLE of my Charge. I have some Reason to hope, what I have said,
has been awakening and quickening to some, and that they will do their utmost,
I may not labor in vain as to them; that they will continue working out their
Salvation with Fear and Trembling, and give all Diligence to make their Calling
and Election sure, that they may he found of their Judge in Peace, and be set
before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy.

I hope, through the infinite Grace of GOD, there will be found some such Seals
of my Ministry among You, concerning whom, Oh that I may have cause to say in
the Day that is approaching, Here am I LORD, and the Children which were
begotten to Thee, by my Ministry! Then will You be my Joy and Crown of
Rejoicing in the Day of the LORD!

BUT I must have done speaking to you, but how loath am I to leave speaking,
until I have persuaded and prevailed with You to become the Children of GOD;
How fain would I gain the Consent of your Souls to be the LORD'S, to hear and
obey His Voice, before I have done speaking to you?

GOD is my Witness, whom I would serve with my Spirit in the Gospel of His Son,
that my Hearts desire and Prayer for you is, that You may be saved.

I trust I can say concerning You, as the Apostle did of his Philippians; Chap.
1.7, 8. I have you in my Heart, for GOD is my Record, how greatly I long after,
you all, in the Bowels of JESUS CHRIST. And this I pray, that your Love may
abound yet more and more, in Knowledge, and in all Judgment. That ye may
approve the Things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere and without
Offense till the Day of CHRIST.

THUS are we praying, and will continue to pray for you, and the more earnestly
as to such of you, concerning whom we may have too much Cause to fear, and say
as the Apostle speaks, concerning some of his Hearers, Gal. 3.11. I am afraid
of you, left I have bestowed on you labor in vain. Will you be surpised, if I
tell you, I look for no other, but to have this heavy Trial still, with respect
to some of you, That I have run and spoken in vain!

BUT I hope you will do more than you have done, that there may be no Cause for
such a Complains; that you will now immediately resolve, that by the Grace of
GOD helping of you, you will seek and cry more for an hearing Ear and an
understanding Heart, that you may so hear what is spoken from one time to
another, as that your Souls may live. If you will not be persuaded to do this,
I have hitherto spoken in vain.

I will now put over all I have said and done, into the Hands of the Almighty
SPIRIT of Grace, the Wind that blows where it lists.

OH almighty SPIRIT of Grace, do Thou come down, and breathe upon our Children
and Young People. By thine inward efficacious Influences, make the Calls that
have been given to them effectual, and thy free and sovereign Grace shall have
the Praise of it. AMEN.

Preached SEPTEMBER 8. 1728.
FINIS.
BOOKS to be Sold by John Phillips, at the Head of the Town-Dock.
A Short Treatise of the Christian's great In^^^: Divided into two Parts; The
(...) whereof contains, The Trial (...) ^aving Interest in Christ. The Sec^^^
(...) forth plainly, The Way (...) it. By Mr. William Gut^^^ (...) the Gospel
at New-K^^ (...)

(...) indeed: Or the great Work (...) of a Christian opened and pressed, from
Prove. IV. 23. Being a seasonable and (...) Expedient for the ^^covery of the
much decayed Power of Godliness among the Professors of these Times. By John
Flavel Minister of the Gospel.

DIrections for daily Communion with GOD. In three Discourses, showing how to
Begin, how to Spend, and how to Close every Day with GOD. By Matthew Henry,
Minister of the Gospel.

A Token for Children. Being an exact Account of the Conversion, Holy and
Exemplary Lives and Joyful Deaths of several Young Children. By James Janeway
Minister of the Gospel. To which is added, A Token for the Children of
New England.

THree practical Discourses: I. Man's last End: Or the Souls farewell to the
World. Being a serious Warning for the timely Preparation for Death. By Mr. J.
Janeway. II. A Golden Chain of four Links: Or, The four last Things briefly
discoursed of. III. A Sermon on Dives and Lazarus. Published for the greater
Comfort of those that taste the Bitterness of Afflictions. The two last by
famous Authors.

A Word in Season. Or, The Duty of People to take and keep the Oath of
Allegiance to the Glorious GOD. By Samuel Phillips, M. A. Pastor to a Church in
Andover.

THE French Convert: Being a true Relation of the happy Conversion of a noble
French Lady, from the Errors and Superstitions of Popery, to the Reformed
Religion by Means of a Protestant Gardener, her Servant.

THE faithful Ministers of Christ mindful of their own Death. A Sermon preached
at the Lecture in Boston; upon the Death of the learned and venerable Solomon
Stoddard late Pastor of the Church of Christ in Northampton: Who departed this
Life Febr. 11. 1729. Aetat. 86. By the Reverend Mr. Benjamin Colman.

THE Service of God recommended to the Choice of Young People. A Sermon from
Joshua 24.15. Preached on Occasion of the Death of Mr. John Coney, a very
hopeful and pious young Man, who deceased August 20. 1726. Aetatis 25. By
William Cooper, Pastor to a Church in Boston.

AN Alarm to Unconverted Sinners, In a serious Treatise, showing, I. What
Conversion is not, and correcting some Mistakes about it. II. What Conversion
is, and wherein it consists. III. The Necessity of Conversion. IV. The Marks
of the Unconverted. V. The Miseries of the Unconverted. VI. Directions for
Conversion. VII. Motives to Conversion. Whereunto are annexed diverse practical
Cases of Conscience judiciously resolved. By Joseph Alleine, late Minister of
the Gospel at Taunton in Somersetshire.

THree Discourses, I. Sin testified against by Heaven and Earth. A Sermon
preached on the Friday after the great and terrible Earthquake. II. Piety
described and early Religion recommended. A Sermon preached to a Society of
young Men, October. 15, 1727. III. The Nature and Danger of sinful Mirth. By John
Barnard Pastor to a Church in Andover.

A Treatise concerning the Lord's Supper: With three Dialogues for the more
full Information of the Weak, in the Nature and Use of this Sacrament. By
Thomas Doolittel, M. A.

SAcramental Exercises. Or, The Christian's Employment, Before, At, and After
the Lord's Supper. By Jabez Earl.

Russel's seven Sermons.

Drelincourt's Christian's Defense against the Fears of Death.

Wigglesworth's Day of Doom.

The Testament of the twelve Patriarchs.

Fox's Time and the End of Time.

Second Spira.

Constables Pocketbook.

Secretary's Guide.

Bibles large and small, Testaments, Psalters, Psalm-Books, with Tunes or
without, Singing-Books and School-Books, with Books of Divinity, Philosophy,
History, Navigation, Physic, Mathematics, Poetry etc. Also Pressing,
Cartridge and Writing Paper, Books for Accounts or Records, Ink, Quills,
Sealing-Wax, Ink-horns, Spectacles, Letter-Cases, with other Stationary Wares,
and all sorts of Cutlery Ware at the lowest Prizes by Wholesale or Retail.

Old Books are also new Bound.


