An Impartial ACCOUNT OF A LATE DEBATE AT Lyme in the Colony of Connecticut, (
On the Three following Heads, viz. I. The Subjects of Baptism. II. The Mode of
Baptizing. And III. The Maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel)
Giving a Summary of what was there Delivered, on both Sides.

Published at the Desire of some then Present.

Together, with a Disswasive not to Depart from the wholesome TRUTHS, which
People have been Instructed in.

Also giving some Account of the Rise of the Antipedo-Baptist Persuasion.

By JOHN BVLKLEY, A. M.

To which is added, A Narrative of one lately Converted from DREADFUL ERRORS:
By Another Hand.

N. LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. GREEN. M, DCC, XXIX.

Christian Reader,
THOU have in the following Pages, a Narrative of a Debate had at Lyme, on the
7th of June 1727, with some Sectaries but 100 l much prevailing among us in the
present Day, and who in the Countenance and Favor they have with many, are
(with many other things) Evidences of the great Degeneracy of i^^^^)

By [Sectaries] I here intend certain Persons among us of a various and
uncertain Principle and Denomination, and who, perhap, agree not among
themselves in many things besides an Opposing the Truth and them that stand for
it: And are therefore ordinarilily spoken of under the different Denominations
of Seventh Day, First Day and No Day Baptists, Quakers, Seekers, etc.

As for the Occasion of this Debate, I shall no farther Account for it than to
say; That some time before, the Reverend Mr. Noyes and Mr. Mather, hearing of a
Meeting of these Sectaries intended at Lyme, and being moved with a pious Zeal
to withstand the designed propagation of their Errors, did attend the same;
where Discoursing with Mr Wight^^^ and his Colleague Gorton, on some points
which I suppose, the Discourses they then entertained their hearers with led
to, said Wightman being weary and declining much discourse th^n, Proposals were
made on both sides of a more Public Debate on the following Heads. Hereupon
desires of i^ were raised in the minds of many, who earnestly solicited, as
they had Opportunity, that Time and Place might be appointed ^alledging their
hopes it might be of Service as well for the Recovery of such, (some of them at
least) as were either wavering and but too much inclined to, or had already
^mbraced their pernicious ^rrors, as the better Satisfaction and Establishment
of others that had not. Being at New London about this time, I was informed of
these things and withal desired by some, not only to forward what was so much
desired by many, but also to be present at and take a part, at least, in the
Debate, but did decline it; and gave it as my Opinion, it were better to let it
fall, provided it might be without prejudice to the Truth, alleging I had seen
Disputes of the like Nature, but never any good that was done by them, and that
whoever undertook in it would find it difficult, if not impossible to keep to
such rules of Argumentation as might give any prospect of Benefit, either to
them with whom they Argued or any one else: And discoursing ^i^th the Reverend
Mr. Adams upon it found him of the same Opinion; nor did we come into it till
it was talked about the Town, that the Sectaries grew bold and audacious;
insulted their Neighbors, telling them their Ministers were themselves
Conscious of their Errors, and afraid to appear in the Vindication of what they
had asserted; upon which it was though it advisable to comply with the general
desire, and accordingly Time and Place were appointed, and intimation of it
together w^^^ the Questions stated, as you have them in the following pages
sent to Mr. Wightman.

On the 6th. of June being at New-L^^^^ at Mr. Adams's house, in came Mr.
Wightman, attended with one Mr. Moss of Providence (...) I mistake not, and
another person whose Name I Have not yet learned, Mr. Hitchcock I suppose was not
then come to Town. T^er^^^ had a short Conference with them relating to the
intended affair of the next day, during which, it was agreed that a Moderato^
should be chosen on each side, which according^^ was then done, On our side the
Revered Mr. Adams, On theirs Mr. Moss, whom afterward for reasons known to
themselves they dropped, and chose Mr. Hitchcock. There also it was agreed the^e
should be but one Disputant on either Side, in all the points to be Debated.
And Two things they insisted on;

The first was, That the present English Version of the Bible might be adhered
to on both sides, and no Terms or Phrases in it objected against as what were
capable of Amendment: And to induce to a^compl^ance on our part, Mr. Moss gave
us the following piece of History, viz. That the said Version was made from the
Original Languages by Seventy men, all which as they acted under a Sentence of
Death in case of Unfaithfulness, and went through the whole Work in Solitude,
being each alone in a separate Apartment; so afterward, on a comparing their
several Performances, were not found to differ in any thing Material. By which
it is manifest this famous Teacher among our Sectaries, not only supposed the
Version of the seventy and our English Version to be the same; but moreover
that the Authors of it stood well nigh upon a Level, in point of Divine
direction and assistance with the Chetubim or Hagiographi of the Scriptures in
the Originals: Which could he have Convinced us of, no doubt would have wrought
us to a compliance with his proposal. But we gave him to understand, that 'twas
what we had never heard before, and very much doubted the Truth of; and
farther, that our English Translation, though a worthy performance, yet was not
Perfect, but capable of Amendment in many places; and that though we had no
reason to Boast of our Acquaintance with the Hebrew and Greek Languages, their
various Idioms, etc. yet since the knowledge we had of them did assure us of
this, we could not see ourselves obliged to comply with what (...) Propos^d.

The Second thing they insisted upon was, That no Argument should be Propounded
Syllogistically, it being they said, a way of Reasoning they did not
understand, and would be unedifying to the Hearers; and yet, as you will see by
and by, when Mr Wightman took the part of an Opponent, he discovered himself
not such a Stranger to this way of Reasoning as was pretended. But neither was
this complied with.

Finally, They moved that after we had offered what we saw cause on the
Affirmative part of the several Questions, Mr. Wightman might offer on the
Negative: which being complied with, and mutual assurances given throughout the
whole Debate to watch against Passion and all other Undecencies, we parted for
that Day.

The next Morning accompanied with the Reverend Mr. Heart, Mr Mather, and Mr
Griswold, about T^n of the Clock, the Hour agreed upon, we met them at the
Meeting house in Lyme, where a considerable Number of People were waiting, as
might be Expected on such an occasion. Mr. Hitchcock was now with them, with
diverse more of their Brethren; and they let us know they had made a new choice
of him for Moderator on their side instead of Mr. Moss; and desired a further
Conference with us apart before we Entered the Meeting House, upon which
retiring a little distance from the People, they let us know the business in
short was what they had moved the day before, viz. That the wretched way of
Reasoning by Syllogisms might b^ laid aside and nothing offered in evidence of
what we had asserted in any other form than as we have it in Scripture. They
had nothing to alle^ge more than what we had heard the Day before, but more
pertinaciously insisted upon it: To which Mr. Adams well replied to this
effect, viz. That as Texts of Scripture are sometimes misappl^ed, and in no
case can be proof till the true sense or meaning of them is ^ound our, stated
and determined so when it is so in order to their being convincing, it is
needful that the evidence they have in them ^e^e' in a clear light, which cannot
be better done than by improving them as Mediums in Propositions
Syllogistically disposed; and withal ^ssured them that whatever was ofle^ed in
that manner should be in the plainest Terms imaginable, without the least
Ambiguity or Obscurity. But thi^ did not satisfy; nor is it at all wonderful,
since nothing was more apparent (particularly in their Moderator) throughout
the whole management, than a design to cloud and obsoure Light and truth; for
which end notwithstanding what was before Agreed upon, he would frequently
break in upon me, interrupt and break the thread and chain of the Argument;
that so the standers by might not see the Connection and Dependence of its
everal parts, and Consequently the evidence o^ it. Near an Hour was spent in
hea^ing and answering their senseless Objections against this way of Reasoning,
nor did they give over ti^l it was told them, It was in vain for them lon^er to
insi^^ upon it; that we came thither with a design to Benefit others as well as
them, and for that end with a sixth Resolution to Debate the several points
agreed upon, in such due form and order as might give us a prospect of
answering that design, and to avoid all such Rambles and Excursions from the
Argument in Hand which had tendered Debates of the like nature unprofitable
heretofore; and to be short, that if they would not agree to such a Regular
Method of Proceeding, we would go into the Meeting House, and read over to the
Assembly the several Questions to be Debated, and let them know we were there
ready to make good the affirmative part of them if any would appear to answer
us, upon which they said no more, but accompanied us into the House, where,
after a Proaemium delivered by Mr. Adams, the Debate began.

Its impossible in an affair of this nature, (wherein Excursions from the
Argument to answer their Impertinences were frequently inevitable, and which
continued from between Ten and Eleven in the Morning till about Six in the
Afternoon) to recover every Sentence and much more every Word and ^ive them
their d^e p^ace and order: Though it was desired and sought for, yet none could
be found who in Short Hand might take down things as they were Delivered, yet I
think I Have not omitted any thing Materia on either side, I Am sure I Have not
wi^ingly done so, but related every thing as far as I have been able to recover
them, and that with the utmost perspicuity and plainness I Am capable of, that
so Persons of the meannest Capacities (who may reasonably be though it most to
stand in need of something of this nature) may receive Benefit by it. Not long
before this Debate I had read Mr. Tombs his Two Treatises on Infant Baptism,
Mr. Norcott on the same Head, from whom I had extracted several Passages,
needless here to be Related, containing things either ass^rted or conceded by
them, ^^d which I knew not but might be of some use in case I were concerned in
i^; and before I proceeded to the Argument, told Mr. Wightman of it, read to
him some of them, desiring him to let me know how far we were agreed, and
whether in those things he concurred with those Gentlemen in Opinion, or not?
But he seemed Shy of making then any Confession of his Faith, and gave me to
understand by his Answer that he cared not to let me know what his Opinion in
those points was. On which I Desisted and went to the Argument. The Questions
Debated were these, Viz.

I. Whether it be the Will of GOD that some Infants, viz. The Infants of
Visible Believers, should be Baptized? II. Whether Baptism by Sprinkling of
Water on the Subject of it, be Lawful and Sufficient for the Ends of the
Institution? III. Whether the Present way of the Country in Maintaining
Ministers by a Public Rate or Tax be Lawful.
CHAP. I. QUEST. I. Whether it be the Will of GOD that some Infants, viz The
Infants of Visible Bellevers should be Baptized?
With respect to (...) which We Affirmed. They Denyed^ ^o that you already see
the first thing lying before me for Proof, was the following Position, Viz.

1 P. That it is the Will of GOD that some Infants be Baptized. By some Infants
here, was said to be intended the Infants of Visible Believers: And for proof
of this, Two Arguments only were offe^^d, the former of which you have in the
following Syllogisms, Viz.

1. Argument. If there be a Divine Command for Baptizing some Infants, viz. The
Infants of Visible Believers, then its the Will of GOD they should be Baptized.

But there is a Divine Command for Baptizing Some Infants, viz The Infants of
Visible Believers:

Therefore its the Will of GOD they should be Baptized.

The Consequence of the first Proposition you see admits not of Denial. If
there be a Divine Command for Baptizing the Infants of Visible Believers, and
Divine Commands are Evidences or Expressions of the Divine Will in any case,
then it necessarily follows its the Will of GOD they should be Baptized.
Accordingly the Minor or Second Proposition was what Mr Wightman denied, which
you see was this, Viz. That there is a Divine Command for Baptizing some
Infants, Viz. The Infants of Visible Believers.

And for proof of this I offered,

2. Arg. If there be a Divine Command for Baptizing Disciples of CHRIST, then
there is a Divine Command for Baptizing the Infants of Visible Believers.

But there is a Divine Command for Baptizing Disciples of CHRIST:

Therefore there is a Divine Command for Baptizing the Infants of Visible
Believers.

For proof of the Minor or Second Proposition, Viz.

That there is a Divine Command for Baptizing Disciples of Christ, I alleged
Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and Teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. Or as
it is in the Original, Go ye therefore and Disciple all Nations, or make them
Disciples, etc. This Mr. Wightman owned to be a full proof of that Proposition,
and accordingly denied it not; but the Consequence of the Major or First
Proposition was what he here denied; saying that though there be a Divine Command
for Baptizing Disciples of CHRIST, it does not thence follow there is such a
Command for Baptizing the Infants of Visible Believers. For proof thereof the
Consequence I said,

3. Arg That it availed or was good in case the Infants of Visible Believers
are Disciples of CHRIST.

But the Infants of Visible Believers are Disciples of CHRIST.

For proof of which I said,

That if by the Holy Spirit in the Scriptures they are called Disciples, then
they are so:

And that they are so called or ^^iled in the Scriptures, I Instanced in those
words of Peter in the Council at Jerusalem, Acts 15.10. Now therefore why Tempt
ye GOD to put a Yoke upon the Ne^k of the Disciples, which neither our Father^
nor we were able to bear? Where by the word [Disciples] I said is intended, in
part at least, the Infants of Visible Believers, as is manifest from the Yoke
there spoken of, as what those false Teachers endeavored to impose which was
the Observation of Circumcision after the manner of Moses, together with the
whole Law: This Mr. Wightman denied, and said it intended only Adult Persons,
or such Gentiles as being of Years of Discretion had came over to Christianity,
saying that such only of the Gentiles were Circumcised, to prove it quoted Joh.
7.22 -- And ye on the Sabbath Day Circumcise a Man. To which Mr. Adams replied,
that by the word (Man) in the Text is intended a Man or Male Child, and that
CHRIST in those words has reference to the custom of the Jews in observing the
Law of Circumcision, which was to Circumcise a Child on the Sabbath, when that
happened as it often did, to be the eighth day from the Child's Birth which
gave rise to that saying among them, Circumcisio pefli^ Sabbatum.

Reader, Thou see^^ ^he Debate now was about the meaning of this word
[Disciples] Acts 15.10. -- whether it intend only such Gentile Believers as
were Adult, or of Years, or their Seed together with them; and that the whole
matter in Controversy was determined by the Resolution of this. Mr Wightman
owned there was a Divine Command for Baptizing Disciples of Christ; and
consequently that if the Seed of Visible Believers are Disciples, its the will
of GOD they should be Baptized: But this he denied and said that Acts 15 10.
did not prove they are Disciples, but by that word intended only Adult Gentile
Believers. I affirmed the contrary and said it included their Seed also with
them. Here Mr Moderator Hitchcock perceiving matters were like to bear hard on
Mr Wightman, came in to his Assistance in this Exigence, and roundly asserted
with him that the word (Disciples) in the Text could intend no more than such
Adult Gentiles as had embraced Christianity, and to prove it read the preceding
Context; in doing which he particularly and with much Emphasis observed to us
the Terms [Brethren, Ye, and Them,] in ver. 15 confidently asserting that as
those Terms all signified or intended the same Persons, viz. Adult Gentile
Believers, so they were the only Persons called [Disciples] ver. 10 To which I
replied it was true that the Brethren spoken of ver. 1. were the only Persons
to whom those Judaizing Teachers then taught that Doctrine, and would have
persuaded of the necessity of observing Circumcision and other works of the Law
in order to Life, but that they were not the only Persons on whom they would
have imposed that Yoke was evident from the same ver. with ver. 5. whom they
tell us that the taught and would have persuaded them of the necessity of
observing Circumcision after the Manner or according to the Law of Moses, and
of keeping the whole Law, in order to Salvation. And to set this matter in a
clearer light told him the case was this, viz. That as in that day there were
both of Jews and Gentiles who by the Preaching of the Gospel were brought over
to an Embracement of Christianity, So of the former, viz. The Jews, there were
many who still retained (...) Zeal for Circumcision according to the ^aws or
Manner of Moses and for the whole Law, and thought them necessary to be
observed by Christians together with Faith in order to Salvation Acts 21 When
Paul had related to James and the Elders at Jerusalem the things GOD had
wrought by his Ministry among the Gentiles, it is said ver. 20 That when they
h^^^d it they Glorified the Lord, and said unto him, Thou see Brother how
many Thousand Jews there are which believe, and they are all Zealous of the
Law, i. e. of Moses. They did not so fully as they should understand that
CHRIST was the Substance of all those Shadows, and consequently that by his
Coming and Death he had put an end to them, and therefore they retained a Zeal
for them still. Some of this sort of Judaizing Christians were those spoken of
ver. 15. who came down from Judea to Antioch and taught the Gentile Converts or
Proselytes there, the necessity of observing Circumcision after the manner of
Moses, and of the whole Law, and thus they did in other Churches too. Now what
was the Circumcision of Proselytes or Gentile Converts that was after the
Manner or according to the Law of Moses? Was it not that they themselves and
all their Males, Old or Young, should be Circumcised instantly before they eat
the Passover, and that their Children afterward should be so ^o when Eight Days
Old? See Exodus, 12^ 48, 49 Nu^^^^ (...) 14. -- This was the Circumcision they
^^ught these Brethren or Gentile Conventa the necessity of, and his together
with the observation of the whole Law^ was the Yoko they endeavored to impose,
from whence it is manifest those Brethren themselves (...) not the only Persons
on whom they would have imposed this Y ke and consequently not the only Persons
intended by Disciples, ver. 10. but their Children also, whither of Adult Years
or but New Born. And for further proof of this Added.

4. All those on whose N^^^s those Judaizing Teachers would have laid this
Yoke were Disciples.

But some, you the most of those on whos^ Mecks they would have laid this Yoke
were the Children of the Brethren spoken of ver. 1.

Therefore those Brethren themselves were not the only Persons intended by
Disciples ver. 10. but their Children also.

The former Proposition is evident in-as-much as the Apostle makes no
distinction of the Persons on whose Necks those Teachers would have laid the
Yoke, calls them all Disciples without distinction: And that the Children of
the Brethren spoken of ver 1. were the most of those on whose Necks they would
the Law of Moses. To this, I remember not that any Reply was made, either by
the Moderator or Mr. Wightman, though urged to it.

Whereupon having been interrupted in delivering the Argument; and thereby the
Evidence of it being obscured, I summed it up in a few words to th^^ effect,
viz That Mat. 28.19 is a plain command for Baptizing Disciples, and therefore a
plain discovery of the Divine Will that the Infants of Visible Believers should
be Bap^ized, in case they are Disciples: Which whether they are or not, the
Word of GOD must Determine. If that Honor them with that Name or Title, calls
them Disciples, the^ doubtless they are so, and that it does so style or call
them, I alleged for an Instance, Acts 15 10. where by Disciples the Apostle
must intend all those on whose Necks the fa^se Teachers spoken of in the
C^^text, would I have Imposed the Yoke of Circumcision and keeping the Law of
M^es; the main part of which its mannest were the Children of the Brethren or
Gentile Converts there sp^ken of From whence this Conclusion must necessarily
fo^^^w, viz. That its the Will of GOD that the ^h^^dren of Visible Believers
should be Baptized: To this I annexed a short Discourse on the Term [Disciples]
showing that the Scriptures apply or use it in a greater Latitude than our
Adversaties in this matter of Infant Baptism ordinarily understand it, that as
its a Relative term, and signifies one taken into the Church or school of
CHRIST, and is there either actually under instruction and discipline, or else
there in order to it, so the Scripture uses it in such an extensive sense, as
including both, and does not limit it to Persons already In^^ructed or Taught,
various lastances of which were given. And here ends what was said on the first
Argument. The second follows,

2. A. Its the Will of GOD, that all those that belong to the Church, should be
by Baptism received to a more Visible Membership in it.

But some Infants, viz. The (...) of Visible Believer, belong to the Church.

Therefore its His shall that by Baptism they should be received to a more
Visible Membership in it. Here Mr Wightman said me the Labor of groving the
Major or First Proposition, by readly owning of it, it being what as he
supposed his own Pra^tion was agreeable to: However since there may be some who
may deny or doubt of it, I Will here insert what I had in readiness to offer for
proof of it, had he put me upon it. (...) the Church here I intend the (...)
Visible Church; by belonging to it, I intend a real though more obs^^re
Membership in it. As a Soldier is in a sense a King before the Solemnity of
Crowning, taking the Oath, etc. so are Persons really, though more obscurely,
Members of the V^sible Church before Baptism, otherwise they are not to be
Baptized. By being received to a more Visible Membership in that Visible Body,
I intend the performance of some Act or Acts whereby Persons have fixed on them
some Mark or Badge common to the rest of the Visible Members of that Body, and
are thereby Vested with a more Visible Membership with or among them than they
had before; as a Soldier by receiving the Livery of this or the other Regiment
becomes a more Visible member of it. Now this I say is Baptism, and that its
the Will of GOD that all those who belong to the Church should in this way be
received to such Visible Membership in it, is evident because we have neither
Pre^ept nor Example for any other way of Admiss^ (...) since CHRIST Ordained
Baptism. I Presume none will pre end Precept for any other way; (...) as for
example it is equally certain we have ^ore. All hose we rend o^ A^mitted to this
more V^sible Membership were Admit (...) in this way, viz. By Baptism, Thus
the three Thousand, Act. 2. The San a^^tans, Simon Magus and the Eunuch, Acts
8. Saul or Paul, Acts 9, Cornelius and his household, Act, 10 ^ydia, the Jaylour
and their households, Acts, 16 The Corinthians chapter 18. and those spoken of chapter
19 and finally the household of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1.16. All these came to this
more V^sible Membership by this way or means, Nor have we, that I know of, any
Example or Instance of any other way or mode of admission to it. All that which
with any show of reason can be objected against this Proposition is this, viz.
That although it be the Will of GOD, that all those that belong to the Church,
should be admitted to this more visible Membership in it, and that by Baptism,
yet it no where appears it should be done presently, or as soon as they thus
belong to this Body; but on the other hand, that as Baptism is our listing,
engaging Sign, its F^is Will it should be delayed t^ll Persons are ab^^ to
understand what they do in it: And if any thus object, I Answer,

(1) We are for this as much without the Warrant of any Precept or Example, as
in the but new mentioned case, Let such as pretend such delay is the Will of
GOD, prodace a Precept for it, and I have done: and as for Example, all the
Examples we have in Scripture of Persons Admission to this more visi^le
Membership, arest^ against it; as is evident in the Instances but now
mentioned. In all which we find the Persons there sp^ken of, no sooner Became
such as belonged to the visible Church, than their Admission to a more visible
Membership in it was Solemnized by Baptism As for the Three Thousand, Acts 2.
no sooner did they become Heirs of the Prem^se than they were Baptized, it was
the same day, not delayed so much as till the Morrow The Eunuch was Baptized in
his Journey, without delay one Day or Hour after he became a Disciple or Member
of this Body, Acts 8. So was Saul as soon as he rose from his Blindness, upon
the words of ^nanias, Acts 9. So was Cornelius and his Friends, Acts 10. And so
likewise Lydia and her Household without delay, and the Jaylour and his the same
Hour of the Night, Acts ^6 and so of the rest. If it be said these are all
instances of the Admission of Persons of Adult or Discreet Years, and so rather
Arguments for ^he delay of this Admission till that time,

Answer this is more than any one can ^rove, nor have we any reason to believe
it, that the Households of Lydia, the Jaylour, Stephanas were all made up of
Persons of Adult Discreet Years only, we have no reason to believe, but the
contrary. But more of this by and by.

(2) The Command for Baptizing Disciples without delay is express, Mat. 18 19,
20 Go Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them But all those that thus belong to
the Church are Disciples, they are of the S^^o^^ of CHRIST and therefore
Disciples This is what I had to offer for proof of the first Proposition, had I
been put upon it, but Mr. Wightman owning of it spared me, as I said the pains.

The Minor or Second Proposition was what he denied, viz. That some Infants,
viz. The Infants of visible Believers, belong to the visible Church, and are to
be received to a visible Membership in it. And for proof of this I added,

2. If by the Merciful gift and appointment of GOD, not yet Repealed, some
Infants, viz. The Infants of visible Believers did once be^ong to the visible
Membership in it, then they still in like manner belong to it, and as such are
to be thus Admitted.

But by the Merciful gift and appointment of GOD not yet Repealed, some
Infants, viz. The Infants of visible Believers did once belong go the visible
Church, and as such were admitted to this visible Membership i^ it,

Therefore they still belong to it; and as such are to be thus admitted to this
visible Membership in it.

You see the Minor or Second Proposition only admits of my debate or doubt, and
accordingly was what Mr. Wightman here denied;

Saving, The Merciful Gift or Grant of GOD whereby some Infants of Old were of
the Visible Church, was now Repealed; and that we are now under another
Dispensation, under which the Promise or Grant of Church Membership was not to
the believing Parent and his Seed, as under the former or legal Dispensation it
did; and by Consequence a dispensation under which the Child can claim nothing
by virtue of any Right or Privilege of its Parents: And for proof alleged
those words of John the Baptist to the Pharisees and Sadducees, that came to
his Baptism, Mat. 3.9. Think not to say within yourselves we have Abraham to
our Father; for I say unto you that GOD is able of these Stones to raise up
Children unto Abraham. I must confess I Am somewhat ashamed to relate what Reply
I made to this, and yet I find since its the same that some others, and they
Great and Good Men too, have made before me 'Twas this, viz. That neither under
the former nor present Dispensation of the Covenant, this Gift or Grant of GOD
did so settle the Right of Privilege of Church. Membership on the Children of
visible Believers as that they could not by any means afterward divest
themselves of it; they might afterward notwithstanding by their Sin cut
themselves off, and that these Pharisees and Sadducees had done so, for which
reason it was that John calls them a Generation of Vipers, and tells them 'twas
but vain for them to pr^^end to any thing on the Score of their Descent from
Abraham. This in short was my Reply to this, which every intelligent Reader
sees is not only Absurd, but what is worse Untrue, since as bad as those
Pharisees and Sadducees were, yet they had not then divested themselves of
their Church Membership, but were of the visible Church or People of GOD,
However it passed with my Antagonists well enough, and for ought I know was
received for good Divinity. But though it did so, yet I Will now be so just to Mr.
Wightman and his Brethren, as to give a better Reply, and that shall be in the
words of Learned and Pious Mr. Pool on the Text, which when they read I make no
doubt they will see its not to the Business. And think not to say within your
selves, me have Abraham to our Father, etc. On which his words are these, viz.
All Hypocrites bear up themselves with something upon which they promise good
to themselves and a freedom from the Judgments of GOD. The Jews rested much
upon their descent from Abraham, as appears also from Joh. 8.39. By which means
they Entitled themselves to the Covenant, Genesis 17. Extended to his Seed as
well as to himself; as also to the name of the Church, Abraham's Posterity by
Isaac, being all the visible Church which GOD had upon the Earth at that time.
Thus he. To which he adds, It is the great Work of Ministers to drive
Hypocrites from their vain Confidences, this John does here; as if he should
say, I know what you trust to, you think with your selves that because you are
the only Church of GOD upon the Earth, Judgment shall not come upon you, GOD
would then have no Seed of Abraham to show Mercy to and to keep his Covenant
with; but mistake not, GOD of Stones if he please can raise up Abraham a Seed
to keep Covenant wi^h. Thus Mr. Pool, And this dou^^^^ss is a good Gloss upon
the Text, and i^ so, what is here to prove the Repeal ^f the Ancient Gift or
Grant of Church Membership to the Children of visible Believers? Yea is it not
a good proof of the Contrary? Here also he bro't in the Allegorical Discourse
of the Apostle Gal. 4. concerning Sarah and Hagar, Isaac and Ishmael,
signifying the two Covenants of the Law and Gospel, or rather the same Covenant
under its former and present Administrations. To which it was thought enough to
say, that though it was an evidence we lived under a Dispensation different
from what the Jews of old did, yet there was nothing in that Discourse of the
Apostle in which the most Sagacious eye could discern any design he had to
intimate any difference between that Dispensation of the Covenant and the
present, as to the matter of Infants-Church-Membership. To the same end finally
he alleged Gal. 3.7. Know ye not therefore that they which are of Faith, the
same are the Children of Abraham. And ver. 9. if I mistake not, So then they
which be of Faith are Blessed with Faithful Abraham To which Texts I answered
to this effect, saying, That although they assure us that none are Blessed with
Faithful Abraham, i. e. Justified and Saved as he was, but such as trace the
steps of his Faith, yet have nothing in them holding forth a repeal of the Gift
of Church Membership to Children. Though they are a good Evidence that the
Internal and Saving Blessings of the Covenant are dispensed only to the
Faithful, yet in no wise that the Covenant considered in its External or
Visible Administration and Blessings, of which, Visible Church Membership is
one, belongs only to them. There is an External as well as an Internal
Covenant, a Visible as well as an Invisible Church, and though all Visible
Believers and their Seed are not Israel and the Children of Abraham in the
sense of the Apostle here, yet they are Israel and the Children of Abraham in
another sense, viz. As being Heirs of Inheriting the same External Covenant and
Blessings that he did, for unto them all does the same Promise and Covenant
belong, I Will be thy GOD and the GOD of thy Seed, Gal. 3.16 As it was of old
under the Legal Administration of Abraham's Covenant, so its now under the
present Administration of it, As then it was a Truth, that those only were
Blessed wi^h Faithful Abraham, speaking with reference to the Internal and
Saving Blessings of it, that trod in the steps of his Faith, and yet as the
same time speaking of the Covenant in the External and Visible Administration
and Blessings of it, it was true still what the Apostle tells us of Israel in
general Romans 9 4. That to them belonged the Adop^ion, and the Glory, and the
Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of GOD, and the Promises.
So it is now, though they only are Blessed with the Internal and Saving Blessings
of the Covenant, as Abraham was, that Imitate his Faith, ve^th: Ex^ernal
Covenant and Blessings of it, of which as I said, Visible Church Membership is
one, ^^e the Inheri^ance of all his Visibly Spiritual Seed, of which the
Infants of V^sible Believers are a main part. To this I rem^mber not that any
Answer was given. Whereupon I proceeded to prove that this Merciful Gift of
G^ant of Church-Membersh^p of old, made to the Children of visible Believers is
not Repealed, but st^ll remains good to them, and that therefore they are to be
received by Baptism to this more visible Membership. And here with Mr Bax^er in
the l^ke case, I took my proof from Rom ^I -- In which Chapter throughout
almost, the Apostle treats of the rej^ction of the Jews from their Visible
Covenant or Church State, because of their unbelief discovered in their
rejecting Christ and the Gospel Many of the J^wish Nation did believe,
entertain Christ and his Gospel ^cts. 2 41. and 21.20. etc. But the main Body
of them did not, and these at length for their Unbelief and Rejection of CHRIST
were Rejected from being GOD's Visible Covenant People, or which is the same,
broken off from their Visible Church Scate. This is the m^in Argument of the
Chapter, (...) in handling of it, as he shows, h^s their rejection was not
final or with a design never to recover them again to their former visible
Church State, but that a time would come when they should again be recovered
and reposs^ssed of it. ver. 25, 26. So also he shows it was not Total, or a
rejection of all of them, but that some of them still retained their former
Covenant Church State, ver. 1 -- 5 And that you may the better understand what
follows and see the evidence of it, remember that the Apostle by the term
[Root] ordinarily intends Abraham, by the [Olive Tree] he intends the V^sible
Church, by the [Root or Sap of the Root and by the Fatness of the Olive Tree]
he intends all the Promises and Privileges, the Graces, Ordinances, Spiritual
Blessings and Benefits which belong to Abraham and his Seed or the visible
Church of GOD. Vid. Pool on ver. 17

The first Argument for Proof of the continuance of the Church Membership, of
the Infants of Visible Believers, in these Gospel Times, was taken from Ver.
17. Those words of it, And if some of the Branches be broken off, etc i. e.
from the Olive or Church.

From whence I Argued thus, Viz.

If it was some only that were broken off from the Church, then ^o the rest
that remained still in it, the Merciful Gift or Grant of Church Membership to
them and their Children was not Replealed

But it was some only that were broken off from the Church.

Therefore on the rest that remained still in i^ and their Children this grant
was not repealed, but remained good.

That some only were broken off, or that this Rejection was not Total or of the
whole Jewish Nation, I but now observed was one thing the evidencing which was
one design of the Apostle in this Chapter. He begins with an evidence of this
taken from himself, ver I. I say then, ^ath GOD cast away his People, i e. All
his People? No, GOD forbid, for (...) my self am an Israelite, of the Seed of
Abraham, of the Tribe of Benjamin: And I am not cast away or broken off; and
then goes on to give further evidence of the same Truth, ver. 5. where he has
these words, Even so then at this present time also there is a Remnant
according to the Election of Grace. Now I say if some only were b^^ken off,
then to the rest that remained not broken off, the Gift or Grant of
Church Membership to them and their Children was not Repealed, and that because
this breaking off and Revoking or Repealing the Grant of Church Membership, are
things inseparable, the former being the effect of the latter. And that some
only were broken off, is the very letter of the Text. The only thing that can
be said here is that the [Some] here spoken of as broken off, we^e all the
Infants of visible Believers with others: And if any be so Absurd as to say
this, I answer with Mr. Baxter, that as the whole Chapter will Confute them, so
let them further consider thus as Infants come in with their Parents, so they
are not cast out or broken off while their Parents continue in, not even until
they are grown up and cast out themselves by their Personal Sins. Who can
imagine that GOD should cast out or break off the Infants that came in with
their Parents, while such Parents remain in the same Church? To this Argument
no answer was given though, urged to it.

I proved the same.

2. From ver 20. those words of it. Well because of Unbelief they were broken
off, etc. From whence I argued thus, viz.

If none of the Jews were broken off but for Unbelief, then believing Jews and
their Seed were not broken off, and Consequently this Gift or Grant of
Church Membership to them and their Seed was not Repealed,

But none of the Jews were broken off but for Vnhelief.

Therefore believing Jews and their Seed were not broken off; and Consequently
this Gift or Grant of Church. Membership to them and their Seed was not
Repealed.

The Antecedent of the first Proposition, and the Minor or Second Proposition
are plain in the Text; and as for the Consequence its Undeniable: For who will
say that GOD broke ^ff or Rejected all the Infants of Believing Jews for the
Sin or Unbelief of other Men? He that will not Punish the Children for the
Fathers Sins, Ezekiel. 18 will much less Pu^ish them for the Sins of other Men.
Here again I urged an Answer but none was given.

3 I proved it from ver 17, 19, 24 those Clauses of them, And if some of the
Branches be broken off, and thou being a wild. Olive Tree were Granted in among
them, and with them partakest of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree, etc
The Branches we^e broken off, that I might be Grafted in, etc. If thou were cut
out of the Olive Tree which is wild by Nature, and were Grafted contrary to
Nature into a good Olive Tree, etc. From whence I argued thus, Viz.

If the Gentiles are Grafted into the same Church from which the Jews were
broken off, then our Infants have right of Membership, as their had; and
Consequently the Gift or Grant of Church Membership to the Infants of Visible
Believers is not Repealed.

But the Gentiles are Grafted into the same Olive or Church which the Jews were
broken off from.

Therefore our Infants have the same right of Church Membership that theirs
had; and Consequently the Gift or Grant of Church Membership to the infants of
Visible Believers is not Repealed.

If their Church admitted Infant-Members and our Church be the same, then ours
admits Infant Members also. This Argument proves not only that this Merciful
Gift on Grant of Church Membership is not Repealed t^ the Seed of Believing
Jews, but also that its extended to the Seed of Belie^ing Gentiles, Hereto I
Subjoyned the following Arguments, Viz.

1. That Doctrine which necessarily infers all Infants to be Members of the
Visible Kingdom of Satan, is certainly FALSE DOCTRINE.

But that Doctrine that denies any Infants to be Members of the Visible Church,
does infer or imply that they are all Members of the Visible Kingdom of Satan.

Therefore us certainly Ealse Doctrine.

This is a natural and necessary Inference from that ^o^^rine, because these
T^o, ^iz. the Visible Church or Kingd^m of Christ, and the Visible Kingdom of
Sa^an divide the World; And all those that are not of the one, belong to the
other.

2. That Doctrins that takes away all well-grounded h^pes of the Pardon and
Salvation of any dying in their Infancy, is certain^y False Doctrine.

But that Doctrine that denies any Infants to be Members of the Visible Church,
takes away all well grounded H^pe of the Pardon and Salvation of any dying in
their Infancy

Therefore it is certainl^ False Doctrine.

To which last Argument no answer could be obtained of them, though repeatedly
u^^ed to it Whereupon, as before, or the benefit of the by-slanders, ^^sum^d up
^he Argument in a few words to this effect, viz It Is evident from the many
Scripture examples before mentioned of the Baptism of the Three Thousand, ^cts
II. The Samar^ans, Act^ VIII, ^^al, ^ornelius, Lydia, the Jailer, etc. As also
^^^m the Con^^and that all Discip^es be in^^ant^y Baptized: that it is the V^^
or God that a^ those tha^ belong to the Church, ^e rece^ved b^ Baptisin to a
more vi^^ble Membership in it; and by Consequence, that it some Infants, viz.
The Infants of Visible Believers, do so belong to the Church they are to be so
Received. Now that they so belong to the Visible Church or Kingdom of Christ,
is evident and was thus proved, viz If by the merciful Gift or Grant of God
they were once Members of it and that Grant be not Repealed, then they are so
sti^^ and that its not Repea^ed was made evident beyond all possibili^y of
denial, from Romans 11.17, 19, 20 24* Here ended what I offered as Opponent on
the first po^nt: And whoever has ^ead Mr. Baxter, his plain Scripture proof of
m^^n Church Membership and Baptism, will see ^'ve been much beholding to him
for it: which I here mention, not only on the Consideration of its being a
Justice to him, but as what I hope man recommend and obtain a better Acceptance
for it with those into whose hands it man come.

Reader, I before observed to thee, that among the Preliminaries of this Deba^e
agreed upon ^his was one, viz. That when on our ^^de what we saw cause was
offered on the Affi^ma^ive part o^ ea^h Question, Mr ^^ightman should then take
^he part of an O^^^onem and ^ffer that he ^aw cause on the Negative, ^hic^
a^cordingl^ in this place h^^id b^t offer^d not wh^t ex^e^^ed, and indeed ^ight
have been. I remember not any thing more than that Old, Threadbare, Senseless
Plea or Objection, taken from such Scriptures as require Faith, Repentance etc
in order to B^ptism, and seem to limit it to Persons so quali^ied and that we
have no example or Instance o^ any other than such that we^e Baptized. I have
forgotten whether here he gave us a ta^ of his Logic by offering what he said
Sylog^stically, however if he did not, you will find him doing so by and by
when we come to the Second Article, where I promi^e you also a taste of ^t.

And to this Pl^a^or Objection of his, taking for my Text Gal. 2.13, 14 Christ
has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law etc. That the Blessing of Abraham
might come on the Gentiles, etc. I Replied, that the Blessing of Abraham wa^
through Christ come on us Gentiles; which I less^n what it is we ha^ed cla^ed
in those word, of he, often High to Abraham. Gen 17.7. And I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee and thy Seed after thee in them Generation, for an
Everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee and to thy Seed after thee. The
Covenant and Blessing of old almost peculiar to Abraham and his natural ^eed by
Is^ac, is now by Christ who has broken down the Partition wall between Jew and
Gentile, become our Blessing and Covenant also. To prove this the Apostle
particularly insists in the following Verses. Where (1) He proves it a Minori,
by an Argument from the less to the greater, ver. 15. Brethren, I speak after
the manner of men; though it be but a man's Covenant, yet if it be Confirmed, no
man Disanalleth or Adds thereto. q. d. Covenants among men being once
Confirmed or Ratified, they are Unalterable; and no man presumes to Disanul or
Add to them: Much more must it be thus with this Covenant made with Abraham and
his Seed, which the Most High not only at the first exhibition or making of it,
declared to be an Everlasting Covenant, but has since ratified or confirmed,
not only by his Oath, Hebrews VI. 17, 18. by frequent Repetitions of it, by
such solemn Rites as Covenants used to be confirmed by, by the Seal of
Circumcision, finally by the Death of Christ. Further, the Unalterableness, and
consequently the Perpetuity of the Covenant, He proves (2) From the Promises of
it, which he tells us were made not only to Abraham but also to his Seed
whether of Jews or Gentiles in a^^ Generations, ver. 16. Now to Abraham and his
Seed were the Promises made. He says not, And to Seeds, as of many; but as of
One, And to thy Seed, which is Christ. i. e. Christ Mystical, or the Church in
any A^e or Day even to the End of Time. Thus he proves the Perpetuity, or
Unalterableness of Abraham's Covenant or Blessing; and consequently, that its
now our Covenant and Blessing also. But because notwithstanding these things,
some might object and say, That as GOD himself could Reverse or Disanul this
Covenant, so he has actually done so by exhibiting or making another Covenant
with Abraham's Seed since; He adds further, and says, That the Promise or
Covenant made to or with Abraham, neither was nor could be Disanulled by the
Exhibition of the Law at Sinai, ver. 17. And this I say, that the Covenant that
was before confirmed of GOD in Christ, i.e. To Abraham and his Seed of Jews or
Gentiles in all Generations, the Law, which was Four Hundred and Thirty Years
after, cannot Disanul, that it should render the Promise (or Covenant) of none
effect. Which words of the Apostle alone, I may observe by the way, were there
nothing else, evidently prove the Covenant of Abraham to be the Gospel or our
Covenant, for how else was is confirmed in or by Christ? Did he by his Death
confirm or ratify any other Covenant or Testament than that of the Gospel?
Thus he proves the Perpetuity of Abraham's Covenant or Blessing, and that by
Consequence that its now our Covenant or Blessing, which is the thing he had
aff^r^ed, ver. 13, 14. According to which Doctrine, I added, Its very
observable that when CHRIST and his Apostles Preached the Gospel, we find they
Preached the Promise or Covenant to and with Abraham, not only as to the matter
of it, but also as to the form or manner of Administration, i. e. Not only
making offer or promise of the same Blessings, the some Pardon, Justification
and Life to Believers that of old were promised to Abraham, but also extending
the promise of them to their Seed also together with them. For evidence and
illustration of which, I gave several instances. As,

(1) The words of Christ to Zaccheus on the occasion of his declaring his Faith
and Repentance Luk 19 9. Jesus said unto him, This day is Salvation come to
this House, for as much as he also is the Son of Abraham. Its needless to
determine here what I know Authors are not agreed in, viz. Whether this
Zaccheus was a Jew and so called a Son of Abraham, as Abraham was the Father of
the Jewish Nation, or a Gentile, and so called a Son of Abraham as he was the
Father of the Faithful, viz. Of all those who believed or should believe in
Christ; be the one or the other the Truth, this is certain that CHRIST Preached
Salvation to his House, i.e. His Family, be they older or younger, on his
profession of his Faith and Repentance; and thereby declaring him one of the
Children or Spiritual Seed of Abraham Hereupon I say he Preached Salvation to
his Family; letting them know they were visibly saved thereby. This Day is
Salvation come to this House, for as much, etc. i. e. They are now become the
visible Heirs of it, and of all means leading to it. Before I pass to my second
instance, for further illustration here I Will insert a few lines from Mr.
Sidenham on this Text, which I did not then mention. "What, says he, can be
drawn from this place more proper than these Conclusions, Viz.

1. That as soon as ever he (Zaccheus) was Converted and Believed, Christ
applies the Promise to his House; if there were not something more in it, he
would have only said, Salvation is come to thee.

2. Its clear that he opens the Covenant made with Abraham, not only to
himself, but his House, and argues from his being a Son of Abraham, that
therefore the Covenant is not only made with him, but with his House, i. e. His
Seed. It were enough for to call him the Son of Abrahim, and to say Salvation
is come to himself, but to mention his House together with himself, and to give
this as a reason, viz. Because he is the Son of Abraham, is as much as to say,
The Privileges of the Covenant are the same to you and your House as they were
to Isaac and Jacob, forasmuch as he also is a Son of Abraham as they were. He
adds, 'Now for Christ to speak in this Dialect, and to tell them of their
households, and of favor to them in the beginning of the Gospel, and yet at the
same time to exclude their Infants from all outward signs of the Promise, which
they ever had in the darkest days of Grace, is a strange Policy, unsuitable to
the Simplicity of Jesus Christ. Thus he, Page 106, 107. I went on and instanced

(2) In the case of the Three Thousand added to the Church, Acts 2. when on
their discovery of Divine impressions made by the Word on their Hearts, ver.
37. Peter exhorts to Repent and be Baptized; and to excite them to it, assures
them that the Covenant or Promise belonged not only to them, but their Children
also, and not only to them, but to such of the Gentiles also as GOD should
call, them and their Children, ver. 39. -- For the Promise is unto you, and to
your Children, and to all that are afar off, (...) as many as the Lord our God
shall call. W^^^^ I showed the Absurdity of such as would have us understand
the Promise there spoken of, as a Promise only of the Extraordinary and
Temporary gifts of the Spirit; and would limit it only to the called. And for
discovery how wide such an Understanding of it must be from Truth, I shall
rather choose to Transcribe some Passages here from Mr. Sidenham, than what I
then ^ff^red. Chap. V of his Book, Entitled, A Christian, Sober and Plain
Exercitation on the Head of Infant Baptism, he thus begins, This Text (says he)
viz. Acts 2.39 I first hold forth, as sit to hold forth, the New Testament
Application of the Covenant of Grace, and its continuation to Believers and
their Seed, as to Abraham and his in the Old Testament. It is the first
Argument used after Christ's Ascension to provoke the Jews to Repent and submit
to Gospel Ordinances, and the first open Promulgation of the Covenant, both ^o
Jew and Gentile, with the prime Privileges of it, in which is contained the
Gospel Covenant made with Believers and their Seed.

1. Here is HE EPANGELIA, i.e.) the Promise, which can be no other than the
Promise of Remission of Sins, and so of Salvation: suitable to that in Genesis 17
7. and repeated at large in Jer. 31.34 For it must either be a Promise of
Temporal things or Spiritual: of Temporal things it cannot be, for there is no
absolute Promise of these things in the New Testament, but as included in or
following upon Spiritual Mercies, as Mat 6 33. Neither is there a Syllable in
this Chapter pressing Men to look after Temporal enjoyments, or engaging them
to embrace the Gospel by any outward Emoluments.

Obj. The great and only interpretation of this Promise by those that differ is
that it has Reference to ver. 16 and is meant of the Promise of the Holy Ghost
prophesi^d of by Joel, chap. 2.28. which was to be poured forth in the latter
days, and now Visibly and Eminently begun to be fulfi^^ed at the Day of
Pentecost.

To which the answer will be clear and fair, though that be Granted, and not at
all Weaken but Strengthen the former sense. For,

1. That Promise is a Spiritual Promise and more large and comprehensive of
Spiritual Mercies, than any other; the Promise of the Spirit is as much as to
promise all at once, Graces, Gifts, yea Heaven it self; for all are but the
fruits of this Promise, Christ in the Old Testament, a^^ the Spirit in the ^ow,
contain all the Promises in an Eminency. When Jesus Christ was to leave the
World, and speak all his Heart at once, and leave his last Blessing, that
should be better than his Bodily presence among them, he expresses all in this,
THAT H^ WOULD SEND HIS SPIRIT, Joh. 14.16, 26. chap. 15.26. and 16.7. And of
this large Promise, as well according to Christ's Promise before his Ascension,
as Joels Prophesy; the Apostles and Believers received the first fruits in the
Solemn day of Christ's Triumph: So that to say its the Promise of the Spirit,
is as much as to say its the Promise of all Spiritual things. For this read in
Gal. 3 4 the Apostle speaking of the fruits of Christ's Death, says, It was
that the Blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ:
that we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith. The same Phrase
that is in this ver. 38 and in the Promise of the Spirit which is to be
received by Faith, is included Justification, Sanctification, yea all Graces,
and its here joined with the Blessing of Abraham.

2. If they take the Promise of the Spirit in a limited, restrictive sense, for
the Ex^rnal Gifts, as most do, for the Gifts of Tongu^s and Miracles and
Prophecy, they both clip the Promise, and make the Argument and Comfort from it
Invalid and of no Efficacy.

(1) Its a mi^h^y wrong to the Famous Promise of the Spirit, to Circumscribe it
to these accidental Gifts, which were especially necessary, and almost only for
that Season; when its a Promise that reaches all the latter days, and is still
accomplishing, though all these extraordinary Gifts are ceased.

(2) This straightened sense is expu^ged by the manner of the Expression of that
Prophecy, both in Joel and in the Acts, I will pour out my Spirit on all Flesh;
and on your Servants and Handmaidens will I pour out my Spirit: Which shows the
Universality and Variety of the Subjects and Blessings in this Promise, that it
sha^^ be so large and full a Mercy; as if there were to be no limitation of its
measure.

(3) If it were meant merely of these gifts, why then there is no more benefit
of that Promise after the Apostles days, but that Christ was out of Date, and
did Expire with that Age: Whereas it is a Promise made for all the time of the
New Testament; which is expressed by the latter days, and the last days, up and
down the Scripture. A Parallel Promise to this you have in Isa 44 3. I will pour
Water on him that is Thirsty, and Floods on the dry Ground, I will pour my
Spirit on thy Seed, and my Blessing on thy Off^pring. Now the Promise of the
Spirit is always appropriated to the New Testament days. And

2. This cannot be the meaning of this Phrase, if we consider to whom the
Apostle speaks, to Persons Pricked in their Hearts, wounded for their Sins in
Crucifying Christ, crying out ver 37. Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be
Saved? Now what Comfort could this be to tell them they should have
Extraordinary gifts? Their Hearts were Bleeding under Sin, their Eve was on
Salvation, they s^w no Hopes of it; nor knew the way to obtain it: The Apostle
bids them R^pent and be Baptized; they might have said, What shall we be the
better? Why (says the Apostle) You shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost;
for the Promise is unto you. What Promise? Of Gifts, of ^on^ues and Miracles;
what is this to our Souls? How will this Save us? might they well Object. It
would be a poor Comfort to a wounded Soul, for to tell him of a promise of
G^^ts, not of Spiritual Grace; and the Holy Ghost is a better Physician than to
apply such a Raw Improper Plaster to a Wounded Heart, which would hardly heal
the Skin. This Promise is bro't in as a Cordial to keep them from Fainting, and
to give them Spirits to believe and lay hold on Jesus Christ. And truly no
other Promise but that of free Grace in order to Salvation, can be imagined to
give them Comfort in that Condition. Th^^ he, from Page 35 to 39. To which
further to show the Absurdity of the forementioned Opinion, and that the
Promise here spoken of, is no Promise of Extraordinary, Temporary Gifts, but of
Saving Good things, I Will only add this one Passage further out of him, viz. Its
undeniable by the Principles of those that differ, its a Promise made not only
to these Jews, but its universally to the Gentiles and to all the called of
GOD: But all that are called have not received such gifts of the Holy Ghost,
which then were given; but every one that is effectually called does receive
the Promise of Remission of Sins and the free Favor of GOD, and therefore this
Promise must be taken mainly in that sense.

From this Instance, I passed to that of Peter his going to Cornelius, a
Gentile, to whom when he came he Preached the Covenant or Promise, with a
G^acious Entail upon his House or Family, Acts 11 14 Who shall tell thee Words
whereby thou and all thy House shall be Saved. To which I added the Instance of
the Jaylour, whom the Apostle exhorts to believe, with the Promise that
thereby, not only he but his whole House should be Saved, chap. 16.31. Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be Saved and thy House. Just as GOD of
old Propounded or Preached the Covenant or Promise to Abraham. Genesis 17.1, 2, 7.
Walk before me, and be thou Perfect; and I will be a GOD to thee and to thy
Seed, or Household. Did the Apostle intend here to Suggest that the Jaylours
Faith should Eternally Save his House, or that they should be in that sense
Saved merely on his Believing? No surely, all he could intend by it, was, that
on his Believing they should be visibly Saved, or bro't into a visible State of
Salvation, or of Right and Heirship to it, and consequently have right to all
the Visible means of it. And thus much at least he must intend: So that
granting it to be true what some would have, viz. That there were none in his
House or Family, but Adult Persons, yet this Privilege he assures the Jaylour
they should all have by his Faith; and if his Adult Children or Servants had
so, who can give a reason why his Infant Children also should not have the like
Privilege by their Father's Faith, provided he had then any such? Was there
not as much Efficacy in his Faith this way, toward the one as toward the other?
And to Conclude, In all these instances I Have now mentioned, whence was it; or
who can give a reason why the Gospel or Promise was thus Preached by Christ and
his Apostles with such an Entail on the Households, Families or Children of
those to whom they Preached it, as we have seen? Who can, I say, give a reason
for this, if it be not true what I Am now in the Proof and Illustration of, viz.
That Abraham's Covenant is our Covenant in these Days of the Gospel, and
Dispensed or Administered in this Respect to us now, as of Old it was to him,
and his Seed? This as I Am sure it well agrees with the Doctrine of the Apostle,
when he tells us in the forecited Gal. 3 13. That the Blessing of Abraham is
come on the Gentiles through Christ; So if it be not the reason why the Gospel
was thus Preached or Dispensed, for my part I know not what was.

Having laid this Foundation, I came to the more immediate Answer of Mr.
Wightman's Objection or Argument; taken as was said from such Scriptures as
require Faith and Repentance in order to Baptism, and that we have no Example
or Instance in the Word of GOD of any Baptized, but such as were so qualified:
To which I replied to this effect, That as for such Scriptures as he had a
reference to, and which, to many Persons, seemed to require Faith, Repentance,
etc. as universally necessary in order to Baptism, I could not but look upon
such a Construction of them as very wrong, and great Aboses of such Scriptures
When it is said, He that Believes and is Baptized shall be Saved, etc they
themselves would say, It were a manifest abuse of the Text for any to say, It
limited Salvation only to such as actually Believed and were Baptized, and
implied that no other than they should be Saved; and yet this Conclusion may as
fairly be gathered from the Text, as that those only that actually believe
should be Baptized. The one is as much in the Text as the other. And for this
reason with some others, I told him that when we find Faith, Repentance, etc.
required in some we read of Baptized, as necessary in order to their Baptism,
as, viz in the Three Thousand Acts 2. the Eunuch, the Jaylour, etc. All that
Consistently with reason we could think was implied or taught us by such
instances was this, viz. That of those that were Adult or grown to Years of
Discretion, they only should be Baptized in whom there is a visible Faith and
Repentance: And this I told him we all Believed, and is what our daily Practice
confirms: But it being as I have showed above, viz. That Abraham's Covenant is
our Covenant in these days of the Gospel, and Dispensed or Administered with a
Gracious E^tail upon the Seed or Children of visible Believers, as of Old it
was on his Seed; and further, it being certain that the reason why such as
Believed and Repented of old were Baptized, was because the^^ Faith and
Repentance made them the Vi^^ble Heirs of the Promise or Covenant; we could not
but think ourselves obliged, in order to a regular Administration of Baptism,
not only to enquire and resolve ourselves who were visible Believers, but also
who they were whom this Gracious Entail of the Covenant did reach or extend is
self to; being from thence assured the formal ground or reason of the
Administration of the Ordinance, is no less to be found in such than in those
who in a Judgment or Charity do actually Believe, Repent, etc.

Hereto I added, That were I or any other Person or Persons Sent into any part
of the Heathen World, to gather Churches there, Visible Faith and Repentance
being things necessary in all Adult Persons in order to their being Members of
the visible Church, and Baptism being the Door of Admission into it, what
Doctrine could we Preach to men, but this of the Apostles, viz. Believe and be
Baptized, Repent and be Baptized? We could Preach no other. But then when any
Persons did so Believe and Repent and were Baptized, and thereby became Members
of the Visible Church, the Question is, Whether Salvation does not thereupon
come to their Houses or Families, as of old it did when Parents Believed and
were Baptized; or in other words, whether they do not hereby bring in their
Children with them, and convey a Membership to them also; making them thereby
visibly Heirs of the Promise and Salvation together with themselves? This I
say, is a Question needful to be Resolved by and Persons thus Employed; and so
by You and Us, in order to our knowing what is Duty in the Administration of
Baptism. This Question I know you resolve in the Negative, and say; That the
Persons so Believing and Repenting, do not thereby bring Salvation to their
Houses, or in other words do not bring their Seed or Children into a state of
Visible Salvation; but who, I pray, must we believe, You or CHRIST and his
Apostles? Do you or They Preach True Doctrine here? If Persons so Believing and
Repenting do not thus bring in their Children with them, as you say, then most
certainly CHRIST missed it when he told Za^cheus on his Faith and Repentance.
that Salvation that very day came to his House; and the Apostle Peter, when he
told those Penitents, Act II. That the Promise was to them and their Children,
etc. And Paul, Gal. III. when he told the Galatians, That the Blessing of
Abraham is come on the Gentiles. If what you say be true, these Texts should be
Rased out of the Bible, for they are certainly False. Unless some good Reason
can be given why the Faith and Repentance of Believers in that day should bring
Salvation to their Houses, and not in the present; this for my own part I Am not
able to do.

But now if on the other hand, it be true, that CHRIST and his Apostles are in
the right in what they tell us in those Texts, the unavoidable Consequence of
it will be, that the Infants of Visible Believers are to be Baptized.

Now to apply this to the Case in hand, this was the very Case with the
Apostles and Evangelists, those first Ministers of Christianity; when they were
sent out to Preach the Gospel and gather Churches, the whole World, excepting a
few that were brought in by the Ministry of John the Baptist and CHRIST, were
either Jews or Gentiles, and both of them Unbelievers, and therefore Enemies to
CHRIST and his Gospel, out of these they were sent to gather Churches; and it
being so, as I said before, Visible Faith and ^epentance being the requisites
of Church. membership in all Adult Persons, and baptism being the ordained Door
of Admission into the Church, what other Doctrine could they Preach than this,
viz. If thou Believe thou may be Baptized, Repent and be Baptized, etc.
But from hence to Infer that they Baptized no other, and that none are to be
Baptized but such as do so Repent and Believe, is a way of Arguing which I Am
sure no man that enjoys the blessing of a Sound Mind will justify: And I think
enough has been said to show the Monstrousness of it. And whereas you say, we
have no Example or Instance of their Baptizing any other than Adult Believers;
I grant its true we have it not in Express Terms said they Baptized any
Infants, Yet we have That that to us, and we think to any not blinded by Error
and Prejudice, is Equivalent; when we are told that they Baptized Households or
Families, viz. Lydia and her Household, the Jailer and his Household, S^ep^a^as
and his Household. Every Rational man will say, its strange if in those Three
Families, there were no Children; Yea I think the Expressions or Phrases made
use of, are Equivalent to a downright Assertion, that there were; in as much
as the Terms [ House and Household,] in all Languages, and particularly in the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, are used to signify the Children of the House.
See Genesis 30.30, and 45.18, 19 Numb 3.15. Psalm. 115, 12.13, etc. Now it being
thus, that the Apostle when speaking of Baptism, should borrow an Expression or
Phrase used in all Languages and particularly in the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, to signify the Children of the House, we cannot but look upon it
Equivalent to a downright Assertion, that there were Children in those Houses;
and for any one to say that notwithstanding this, he would have us think there
were no Children in them, is a thing so extravagantly wild that I think no
Rational man in his Wits can be capable of it. The Substance of this I then
offered in answer to Mr Wightman's Objection or Argument; nor wa^ any Answer,
that I remember made to it; save only that Mr. Wightman said, That the Term
House or Household, did not always signify the Children of the House, and to
prove it Instanced in Judges 16. ults To which I though it it not needful to Return
any thing; and so Discourse ended on the First Question. The Second was,

CHAP. II. QUEST. II. Whether Baptism by Sprinkling of Water on the Subject of
it, be Law ul and Sufficient for the Ends of the Institution?
The intelligent Reader sees this Question was incautiously stated, the word
[Sprinkling] used in it not being so expressive of what we conceived to be the
right Mode of Baptism, as the phrases of Pouring on, or Washing with Water.
This was observed to them before Entrance was made on the Discussion of the
Question; and we let them know that by it we intended Baptizing by the
Application of Water to the Face of the Subject, by Pouring it on or Washing
with it. Which being premised, the Position before me to prove, was this, Viz.

2. P. That Baptism by pouring on or washing with Water, is Lawful and
Sufficient for the Ends of the In^titution. And for Proof of this, I told Mr.
Wightman and the Assembly, That I would first mention some things on which, as
grounds or reasons we held ourselves Justiciable in Administering Baptism in
this mode or manner, and which, as we supposed, being laid together, would
prove the Lawfulness of is; which having done, I would sum them up together as
a Medium in the Argument I should offer for that end. They were th^se that
follow, viz.

1. That the word Baptizo in the Greek, si^^ifi^ Promiscuously either Dipping
into, or Washing with Water, by the Application of it to the Subject.
Se^e^elius renders it by the Latin words Mergo and Lavo, i. e. to Dip or Wash;
and its rendered in other Authors by the Latin words Madefacto, Lavo, Abluo, i.
e. to Wet or Wash. Thus Budeus, Scapula, Paser and Grotius. And Critics on the
Greek Tongue tell us, that all Writers, both Heathen and Christian, thus
Promiscuously use it. Leigh in his Critica Sacra tells us, That though the word
be derived from Bapto, Tingo, i. e. to Dip, or Plunge into Water, and
signifies primarily such a kind of Washing as is used in Bucks where Linen is
Plunged or Dipped; yet its taken more largely for any kind of Washing, Rinsing,
or Cleansing, even where there is no Dipping at all. Vid. Critica Sacra on this
Word, where also he gives many instances of it from Scripture. And this ( viz.
the Scripture use of this Word) is what at present deserves our more particular
consideration and enquiry. As to which, though I have not had time so to look
into this matter as that I may be Positive in it; yet believe that upon a
search it will be found, that its no where so applied or used as necessarily to
signify Plunging or Dipping. I do not remember any Text where it necessarily so
signifies; but this I find, viz. That the Scripture when it would express such
a kind of washing or cleansing things as may be performed by pouring on or the
Application of Water to them, it then uses the word Baptizo, but when it would
express a Plunging things under Water, it then uses other Words. I Will give here
some instances, Mark 7.4. Its used for washing Hands and Cups, Pots, Brazen
Vessels and Tables. Where none can say it necessarily signifies washing or
cleansing by immersing or dipping those things in Water, since they may as well
be cleansed by pouring on, or applying Water to them. Of the Pharisees its
there said, That when they came from the Market, except they Wash they Eat not:
In the Greek, Ean me Baptizontai, i. e. Except they are Baptized, but there
rendered Except they Wash because none can rationally understand the Baptizing
there spoken of as signifying an Immersion or Dipping of their whole Bodies.
And many other things there be which they have received to hold, as Baptismous
Poterion, i. e. according to the Greek the Baptisms of Caps, but there rendered
the Washing of Cups, which may as well be done by the Application of Water to
them, as by Plunging them into it. So Luke 11 28. Its said of the Pharisee with
whom Christ at a certain time Dined, that he Marvelled at him, Oti ou proton
ebaptisthe pro tou Aristou, i. e. That he was not Baptized before Dinner; but
there rendered that he had not first Washed before Dinner: Because none can
rationally understand by it any more to be intended than the Washing his Hands,
which every one will say might as well have been done by pouring Water on them,
as by dipping them into it. So Heb. 9.10. All the Ceremonial Washings or
Sprinklings are in the Greek called Baptisms, (Diaphorois Baptismois) the words
in the Original are rendered by Beza, diverses Ablutionibus, i e Diverse
Washings, as in our Translation) many of which, says Pool in loc. were for the
Priests, in their Services, and for others in performing theirs by them; some
by Sprinkling with Blood, Exodus 29.20, 21. with Water. Numb. 8 7. and 19.9, to
19. some by washing at the Brazen Laver, as the Priests, Exodus 29.4. and 30.17,
to 22. so the Sprinkling of Healed Lepers, Lev 14.4, to 9 and the Purification
of the Unclean. All which Ceremonies were performed by Sprinkling or Pouring on
of Blood or Water, and not by an immersion of the Body into it, and are
therefore evidences that the word ( Baptisma, Baptism) is so far from being
necessarily understood to intend Dipping or Plunging, that in this place at
least, its necessarily understood to intend no more than Sprinkling or Pouring
on of Blood or Water.

But now on the other hand, when the Scripture would express a Submersion or
covering of the whole Body under Water, it uses other words; hereby intimating
that this is something different from Baptism. The words it makes use of on
this Occasion are Katapontizesthai, D^n^i and Duesthai. See Exodus 15 4, 5.
Where when it speaks of Pharaoh and his Host, their being Overwhelmed in the
Red Sea, it uses not the Original word for Baptizing, but the former of the
words but now mentioned, and expresses it thus, Katepontisen en Eruthra
Thalasse, i. e. They were Drowned or Overwhelmed in the Red Sea And Katedusan
eis buthon hosi Lithos, i. e. They Descended or Sank to the Bottom as a Stone.
Whereas speaking of the Israelites who at the same time had only the Dewings of
the Cloud, and Sprinklings of the Water of the Sea on them, uses the word for
Baptizing, expressing it thus, Baptizanto en te Nephele, kai en te Thalasse, i.
e As its rendered in our Bibles, They were Baptized in the Cloud and in the Sea.
This I mentioned as the first Ground or Reason on which we held ourselves
Justifiable in Administering Baptism by Sprinkling or Pouring on of Water: But
before I had quite finished this particular, Mr. Moderator Hitchcock, contrary
to all Order and Laws of Disputation, broke in upon me, and having bro't with
him Mr. Sympson, his Lexicon Anglo Graeco Latinum Novi Testamenti, and turning
to page 17. where on the word Baptizo you have the following words, mostly from
Leigh above mentioned, viz. To Baptize, Baptizo, Mat. 3.11. and 28.19. Mark 1
4, 8. The word though it be derived from Bapto to Dip or Plunge into the Water,
and fignifies primarily such a kind of Washing as is used in Bucks where Linen
is Plunged or Dipped, yet its taken more largely for any kind of Washing,
Rinsing, or Cleansing, even where there is no Dipping at all: As Mat. 3.11. and
20 28. Mark 7.4. and 10.38. Luke 3.16. Acts 1.5. and 11.16. 1 Cor. 10.2. Its
put generally for Washing, Luke 11.38 Heb. 9 10. Mark 7.4. And Baptizing
imports no more than Ablution or Washing, as the Baptizing of Beds and Tables.
Neither Mr. Adams, nor my self, nor I suppose any other Person present had any
Suspicion of his Unfairness or Dishonesty in reading Mr. Sympson, or that he
had not ^ead to us all he had said on the word Baptizo, accordingly did not
desire of him a sight of the Book; but since that Mr Adams having the Book in
his Library, has looked into it and found out the Dishonesty of the Man, that
he read not to us the whole his Author had said on the word Baptizo; but only
so much of it as was proper to persuade us and others, that he was against me,
or at least not so full with me in the account I had given of the import and
use of the Word, as we should have seen he was, had he read to us all he had
said. He read as far as that Clause, viz. Yet its taken more largely for any
kind of Washing, and stopped there; whereas had he read all, every one would
have seen Mr. Sympson was fully with me in what I had said. I mention not this
through any Personal Prejudice against Mr. Hitchcock; I never, that I know of,
saw his face before, but because I think I owe this Justice to my Reader, that
he may see how little these inspired Teachers, as they would be accounted, so
frequent in many parts of the Land are to be depended on for light and guidance
in our way, what little regard they have to Truth, and how unwilling they are
it should appear in cases where it will Reprove them, and Convince others of
their Errors: I make no doubt but the rest of his Brethren present knew of the
Cheat as well as he.

At the same time he read to us from The Portsmouth Dispute, (as Mr. Adams
informs me, the Title of the Book was) the Opinions of the Assembly of Divines,
Mr. Perkins, Mr. Pool, and Mr. Baxter, in doing which also he represented them
as of Opinion that dipping or plunging was the Primitive way of Baptizing. To
which he added, that if this was not the Primitive way, whence was it that the
Eunuch was Obliged to come forth of his Chariot and go down with Philip into
the Water in order to his being Baptized? What, said he, had not so great an
Officer of Queen Candace as he was, any Dish or other Vessel in his Chariot in
which a little Water, enough for Sprinkling him, might have been fetched? this
is very unlikely. He did not acquaint us with the particular Books of the
forementioned Authors from whence that Author had made those Collections, nor
have I to this day ever seen that Book; so that whether I have them by me, or
if I have, whether that Author was Faithful in making his Collections from
them, or Mr. Hitchcock read them as Honestly to us as he did Mr. Sympson, I
cannot say.

However as I then wondered to hear those two Venerable Names, viz POOL and
BAXTER among them, especially the last, considering what he says of Baptizing
by Dipping, in his Plain Scripture Proof of Infant-Church-Membership and
Baptism, so since Mr. Hitchcock's Dishonesty respecting Mr. Sympson is
detected, as I am strongly Suspicious of some such unfair-dealing as to all the
Persons abovenamed, either by that Author in making his Collections from them,
or in Mr. Hitchcock in reading those Collections to us: So I find that as for
Mr. Pool, and Mr. Baxter, they were greatly Abused or Misrepresented in this
matter. You will be convinced of this when I have cited to you some Passages
from them. As for Mr. Pool, I find it was his Opinion that Dipping in Baptism
was sometimes used in the Eastern, Warmer parts of the World; in his Notes on
Mat 3.5, 6. He has these words, viz. A great part of those, i. e. of the
dwellers in Jerusalem, etc. who went out to hear John, were Baptized, i. e.
Dipped in Jordan. But then as he adds in the same place, That it will not from
hence follow that Dipping is Essential to Baptism, So in his Notes on Joh.
3.23. he as fully expresses it to be his Opinion that this was not the constant
way or manner of Baptizing in the Primitive times, but that sometimes they
Baptized then by applying or pouring on of Water. For there we have these
words, viz. If some think it probable from this Text, that sometimes the
Apostles did Baptize by Dipping, yet it is at least as Probable that they did
not, or not constantly, from what we read of the Apostles Baptizing in Houses,
Acts 9.17, 18 and 10.47, 48. and 16.33. From whence it is evident that as to Mr.
Pool, had that Author or Mr. Hitchcock from him, given this account of his
Opinion in this matter, viz. That in the Primitive times, when Time, Place and
other Circumstances concurred, Baptism was performed by Dipping, but at other
times when those Circumstances did not invite to it, 'twas performed by pouring
on of Water. And that however it was then administered, yet Dipping is not
essential to it. This had been an Honest Representation of him in this matter;
but for them, or either of them to take from him only what I but now cited from
his Notes on Mat. 3.5, 6. with other like Passages, perhaps elsewhere in others
of his Writings, at the same time passing by others, and hereupon represent him
as of Opinion, not only that Dipping was the way of Baptizing only in use in
the Primitive times, but as needful to be observed now in order to the due
Administration of it, and hereby to bring him in as Patronizing an Error which
never entered into his Heart, as Mr. Hitchcock then did; This I say is such an
abuse of him, as can in no wise be justified, and which I think no Man of Faith
and Probity would have been Guilty of: But this is one of the usual Refuges of
Error, and what we may often see it has recourse to. In like manner that Mr.
Baxter was no less Abused either by Mr. Hitchcock or his Author, you will be put
beyond all doubt when I have cited from him some Passages which you may find
with much more of the same Strain or Tenor, in his Plain Scripture Proof of
Infants-Church-Members^ip and Baptism: Particularly from page 134 to 138, where
he is Arguing against Baptizing by Dipping. Page 134. He begins with these
words, My Sixth Argument shall be against the usual manner of their Baptizing
as it is by Dipping over Head in a River or other Cold Water; and his first
Argument against it is this, viz.

That which is a plain breach of the Sixth Command, Thou shall not Kill, is no
Ordinance of GOD, but a most Heinous Sin.

But the Ordinary Practice of Baptizing by Dipping over Head in Cold Water as
necessary, is a plain Breach of the Sixth Commandment.

Therefore its no Ordinance of GOD, but an Heinous Sin.

And as Mr. Cradack in his Book of Gospel Liberty, shows, The Magistrates ought
to restrain it; to Save the Lives of their Subjects. That this is flat Murder
and no better, being ordinarily and generally used, is undeniable to any
understanding man; for that which directly tends to overthrow Men's Lives,
being wilfully used is plain Mu^der; but the ordinary o^ general dipping of
People over Head in the cold Water, does tend directly to the Overthrow of
their Health and Lives; and therefore it is Murder. To which his Antagonist Mr.
Tombs having said, there is no necessity of its being in Cold Water; Mr. Ba^ter
replies, page 135 His warm Bath would be also dangerous to very many Persons:
And where should this Bath be prepared? If in Private, it will scarce be a
Solemn engaging Act. If the Meeting place of the Church, Then

(1) it will take no small room, and require no small stir to have a Bathing
place, and Water wherein to Dip People over Head.

(2) And if they do not run home quickly before they are well engaged, the hot
B^^h will be turned to a cold one to them, and make them Repent this B^dge of
Repentance, e^cept they will have all things ready, (...) be p^^ to Bed also in
the Church before the People. And a little after, Others, says (...), say, That
Dipping was the custom in the Scripture times: To which I reply,

[(...)] It is not yet proved by any; the Jay ^our was Baptized in the Night in
his House, therefore not likely over Head in that Country where water was so
scarce. The E^nuch might well be said to go down into the Water, for the
Country was Mountainous, and the Brooks were down in the Bottoms. Even the
River of Enon where John Baptized, because there was much Water* is found by
Travelers to be a Small Brook that a man may almost Step over. [2] The Word in
the Original signifies to Wash as well as to Dip, and so is taken when applied
to other things, as Mark 7.4 -- 8. [3] The thing signified is set forth by the
Phrase of Washing or Sprinkling, and the Sign need not exceed the thing
signified [4] CHRIST has not appointed the measure of Water, nor the manner of
Washing, no more than he has appointed in the Lord's Supper what quantity of
Bread and Wine each must eat and drink: And as it would be but Felly for any to
think that men must needs sill themselves f^ll of Bread and Wine, because it
best signifies the fullness of Christ; so it is no better to say, that we must
needs be Washed all over because it best signifies our Burial with Christ A
little may signify as well as much, as a Clod of Earth does in giving
Possession of much Lands, and a Corn of Pepper signifies our Homage for much.
His Second Argument against if follows.

My Seventh Argument is also against another Wickedness in their manner of
Baptizing, which is their Dipping Persons Naked, as is very usual with many of
them, or next to Naked, as is usual with the Modestest that I have heard of;
against which I argue thus,

If it be a Breach of the Seventh Commandment (Thou shall not Commit Adultery)
ordinarily to Baptize the Naked, then it is intolerable Wickedness, and not
GOD's Ordinance.

But it is a Breach of the Seventh Commandment ordinarily to Baptize Naked.

Therefore it is intolerable Wickedness, and not GOD's Ordinance. He goes on,

All the Question is of the Minor, which is evident thus, the Seventh
Commandment forbids all incitements to Uncleanness, and all immodest Actions,
but to Baptize Women Naked is an immodest Action and an Incitement to
Uncleanness; therefore it is there Forbidden: Which Argument also is followed
with Answers to Mr. Tombs his Objections, together with diverse other
considerations against this manner of Baptizing. Thus Mr. Baxter. And who now
can think he had any Favor for this way of Baptizing, or that he though it it the
Primitive way of Baptism? as Mr Hitchcock from that Author endeavored to
persuade the Assembly? Certainly if he did he must then think that either the
Primitive Christians in Baptizing complied not with the Institution, and so are
not to be followed, or if they did, that then GOD Instituted a way of Baptism
which is nothing less than a Violation of the Sixth and Seventh Commandments.
But enough of this. To these Authorities cited by Mr. Hitchcock, as is above
Related, it was though it enough to say, that though the Persons named were, many of
them at least, Great as well as Good Men, yet being Men and therefore Fallible,
their Opinions could be no proof in the case. On which having again liberty, I
passed on to the Second Consideration I offered as a further ground or reason
of our Baptizing by Sprinkling or Washing with Water.

Which was,

2. That none of the Scriptures alleged by our Adversaries in this point, to
prove that Dipping was the Primitive way of Baptizing do necessarily conclude
or prove it. How-much-so-ever they may seem to look that way, yet they are so
far from expres^y ass^rting any such thing, that they don't in^er it by any
necessary Consequence. And to make this evident I took the following view of
the several Texts insisted upon by them for this end.

The first of these we have in the History of the Baptism of CHRIST, Mat. 3.
where we have these words, ver. 16 And jesus when he was Baptized, went up
straight way out of the Water. In the Greek, Aneb^e Apo ^ou Hudatos, which I
observed might as well, yea better, be rendered, He went up from the Water. The
Preposition Apo, as our Grammars tell us, signifying more properly from than
out of; and as Mr. Siden^am observes i^s most suitable to Translate it so,
because Rivers for the most part lie Low and in Valleys, in going or coming to
which we are therefore properly said to descend or go down to them, and in
going or coming from which, to ascend or come up from them.

The Second we have in the Story of the Eunuchs Baptism by Philip, Acts 8 where
are th^se words, ver. 38, 39. And he, i. e. the Eunuch, Commanded the Chariot
to stand still, and they went down bath into the Water, both Philip and the
Eunuch, and he Baptized him. And when they were come up out of the Water, etc.
On which I observed several things. As,

1. That the Phrase in the Original is, Eis to Hudor, i. e. To the Water,
intimating the Text may as well be rendered, They went down both to the Water,
as into the Water. But, 2. Allowing the Preposition Eis when joined with an
Accusative case, as here it is, more properly signifies into, than to, yet it
can never from hence be proved that he, the Eunuch, was Baptized by Dipping his
whole Body in Water, since it might truly be said of them, that they both went
down into the Water, if they went no further into it than to wet the Soles of
their Fee^; nor is it possible from this place necessarily to infer any more
than this, supposing the Translation they would have be true. Especially when
its considered, 3. That the Text plainly distinguishes those two Acts, viz.
Their going down into the Water, and Philips Baptizing him. The words ver 38
are, And they went down both into the Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he
Baptized him. Manifestly making them two distinct things, and so indeed they
were, else we might as truly say of Philip that he was Baptized as the Eunuch;
for its said of them both that they went down into the Water. So that all that
can necessarily be gathered from this Text, even as here Translated, is, that
when they had some little way entered the Water, Philip took of i^ and Baptized
him. And whereas it may be ob^ected that in ver. 39. where its said that when
they were come up out of the Water, etc. in the Greek its not Apo, as in the
Story of Christ^ Baptism, but Ek tou Hudatos, thereby assuring us that they
came up not nicerly from, but out of the Water; I observed that neither will
this prove what they would, or make it evident that either of them went further
into it than to wet their Shoes, since if they did so, and no more, it might
truly be said of them, That they came up out of the Water.
But the Text our Adversaries most Glory in as what they would bear us in hand
is beyond exception in the case, is Joh. 3.23. where its said of John the
Baptist, That he was Baptizing in Enon near to Salim because there was much
Water there. To which I then more generally said, that neither did this Text
necessarily. Conclude the point, it being so far from being said in it that
John Baptized by Dipping, that his doing so could not be deduced from it, by
such Consequence as may be allowed for proof in any case. As will appear if the
Argument of the Text, be disposed into Syllogistical form: In which case it
will stand thus, Viz.

If John Baptized in Enon near Salim because there was much Water there, then
he Baptized by Dipping.

But John Baptized in Enon near Salim because there was much Water there.

Therefore he Baptized by Dipping.

But how Enormous is the Consequence here? How far from being necessary and
conclusive? Does it necessarily follow he Baptized by Dipping, because the
abounding of Water in this Place beyond what it did perhaps in most others, was
a reason of his making choice of it to attend that Duty in? Especially
considering that in that Country, many places of it at least, a Man may go many
Miles without coming at a drop of Water, unless such as is procured by Art and
Labor: And with all considering that there were Multitudes that came to be
Baptized of him

When we argue and say, That we Read in Scripture of diverse Households
Baptized, therefore Infants were Baptized; you will not allow it for good
proof, telling us the Consequence is not conclusive and necessary, and that
because its possible that in all those Households there might be no Children.
And I grant what you say is right, and that the Consequence here is but
Probably and not Necessarily true: But yet I Appeal to any Unprejudiced Person
whether there be not far greater Degrees of probability in it, than in this
Consequence, viz. That John Dipped those he Baptized, because the abounding of
Water in Enon, beyond what it did, at least, i^ places Adjacent to it, was one
reason of his Baptizing there? This is what I then off^red on this Text, and is
I think enough to show its insufficiency to Conclude what our Adversaries would
from it; more I will add by and by when we have heard Mr. Wight^an's Arguments.

There are two Texts more which I forga^ then to speak to, and which as they
are insisted on by our Adversaries in this point; so in my Opinion bid fairer
to establish this their Doctrine than any of the fore mentioned; they are Romans
6 4. and Col 2.12. In one of which we are said to be Buried with Christ [By] in
the other [In] Baptism As to which Texts I now say, that were it certain those
words (Buried with him by or in Baptism) are to be taken strictly in their
Grammatical sense, as holding forth what was in that day done in Baptism, they
would be a full proof that Dipping in the Primitive times was at least
sometimes used in Baptizing. In-as-much as a Person, so speaking, can not be
said to be Analogically, Symbolically or Sacramentally B^ried with Christ in
Baptism, that is not Dipped or Immersed in it. And thus the English Annotations
in their Notes on these Tex^s seem to understand them, when they tell us that
in them there is an Allusion to the Primitive Mode of Baptizing, which was by
Dipping, etc. But yet I think there is a great deal of reason to doubt of this,
and to take those words in a Metaphorical sense, as holding forth only the
Communion Believers have, in or by Baptism, with Christ in his Death, the
Fruits and Effects of it, etc. and that for this reason we are in Baptism not
only said to be Buried with him, but Buried with him into Death; which seems to
be expounded by the Apostle Gal. 3 ult. In other places when he telis us we are
by Baptism Baptized into Christ and into his Death, etc. And in this sense I
find Pious and Learned Mr. Pool understood these words, whose Gloss on them you
have in the following words, We are Buried with him by Baptism, etc. i. e. says
he, We have Communion with him, (i. e by Baptism) in his Burial also, which
Represents a further degree of the Destruction of Sin; by putting it as it were
out of our sight. And then adds, Some think the Apostle alludes here to the
manner of Baptizing in those Warm, Eastern Countries, which was to Plunge or
Dip the Party Baptized under Water: Others think with greater reason, that this
Phrase is used to signify that Union and Communion, Believers have with Christ
in his Death and Burial, which is signified by Pouring Water on a Person, like
Earth or Dust on a Dead Body, and not as by Dipping him under Water.

Now if this be right; and for my own part I see no necessity of the other
sense, then nothing certain relating to the Primitive Mode of Baptism can be
concluded from these Texts neither, which, unless there be others, that I know
not of, is sufficient to make good what is now before me for proof, which is
this, viz. That none of the Scriptures alleged by our Adversaries in this
point, to prove that Dipping was the Primitive way of Baptizing, do necessarily
conclude or prove it. The Third Consideration was,

3. There are sundry Scriptures which when considered render it difficult, if
not impossible to think that Dipping was, at least always, the Primitive way of
Baptizing. For evidence of which I instanced,

(1) In Mat. 3.5, 6. Where we read, Then wen out to him, (i.e to John the
Baptist) Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan, And
were Baptized of him in Jordan, Confessing their Sins. On which I said to this
effect, viz. That though it cannot be supposed that every Individual of the
several places there mentioned went out to the Baptist and were Baptized of him
in Jordan, yet as the expression implies it, so undoubtedly there was a very
great Multitude, and that of both Sexes, who did so. Now as for such as suppose
he Dipped all he Baptized, I would ask them, How could this Vast Multitude
receive the Ordinance in that way? Either they were Dipped Naked or with their
Clothes on! No man (...) presume will say the former, or that they were Dipped
Naked. Well, if not, but with their Garments on I further ask, What Garments
were they? Were they such as they came from home attired with, or such as they
bro't with them, and had prepared for that end or purpose? The last of these
looks to me most Gredible, and yet this Supposition is not without such
difficulties as are not easily removed, inasmuch as it implies an Ability in
them all to provide such Garments, and that on a sudden too; which is not very
easy to suppose, and not only so, but also that when they were come to the
place of their Baptism, where John was, they had places of Retirement, (each
Sex and Person apart by himself) for the Decent change of their Garments, and
preparation of themselves for the Decent Administration of the Ordinance: Which
how it could be where there was such a Multitude thronging together; is not
easy to conceive.

I instanced,

(2) In Acts 2.41. The Three Thousand Converted by Peter's Sermon, all which as
they were Baptized, so if it was by Dipping, seems a case attended with more
difficulty than that already mentioned, and that because we cannot suppose they
came with Garments prepared on purpose for the Reception of the Ordinance in,
since in the course of the Story we have good assurance they had no thought of
being Baptized when they came together, on the occasion mentioned toward the
beginning of the Chapter, no, nor until they were exhorted to it by the
Apostle, ver. 38. So that its Morally certain if they were Dipped, they were
either Naked, or arrayed with the same Garments with which they came, either of
which, I think must seem very unlikely to any Man. And to this, one thing
further, which is a difficulty in my way of Believing they were Dipped or
Plunged, I Will now add; and it is this, viz. It Is manifest from ver. 4.1. That
they were all Baptized in one Day: Yea, and it was in that part of it too which
succeeded the SERMON, which could not be much more than the last Half of it,
since its evident from ver. 15. that the Sermon began not till Nine in the
Morning. Now it being so, to me its difficult to conceive how so great a Number
could be Baptized in so short a time, provided they were Dipped or Plunged,
even though we suppose all the Apostles to have concurred or assisted in it. For
let us suppose they entered upon their work at Eleven of the Clock, (which I
think, all things considered, is as soon as can be supposed) there were then
not more than Eight Hours before Sunsetting. The Days its true were now pretty
near at their greatest length; this Day of Pente^ost on which this Sermon and
Baptism were, (being Fifty one Days after the Crucifixion of CHRIST,) which
according to the best accounts being on the Third of April, or (according to
the Jewish account) on the Fifteenth of Abib or Nisan, must be the Twenty
fourth or Twenty fifth of May following, at which time every one knows, the
Days in our Nothern Climates are near their longest. Yet since in no part of
Judea the Days when longest exceed Fourteen Hours and a Quarter, and Jerusalem
the place where this Baptism was, being the Southern parts of it, we cannot
suppose there was more than the Space of time mentioned, before Sunsetting,
It Is difficult I say, for me to conceive how so great a Number could be
Baptized by Twelve Men in so short a Time, if they were Plunged: And that for
Two Reasons;

[1] Because its reasonable enough to think a considerable part of this short
time must be spent in Enquiries after, or in taking knowledge or account of the
Faith and Repentance of those they Baptized. It Is certain that all that were
present at this time and heard this SERMON, were not Baptized, but only such of
them as gladly received the Word. This is plain in the Text. Now who these
were, was some way or other known to the Apostles before they Baptized them;
and probably it was by some Declaration made on their part, in answer to
Enquiry made by the Apostles. I grant the Apostles were capable of knowing this
by that Power of discerning Spirits they were endued with; yet since in other
Instances of their Baptizing, we find not they made any use of this Power for
this end, but discovery was made of the requisite qualifications of those they
Baptized by something said or done by them, its reasonable to think it was so
at this time too. And if so, be it never so concise or short, yet it must of
necessity take up a considerable part of this short time.

[2] Because there is no reason to think the needful Requisites of Administering
Baptism in this way, were ready prepared before hand. But on the other hand
there is reason to think they were not; since, as I hinted before, none of
those that were Baptized had any though it of being so when they came to the
Apostles, no nor until they were exhorted to it by Peter in the close of his
Sermon. Now if they were not ready prepared, then a considerable part of this
remaining part of the Eight Hours must of necessity be spent in this also; so
much that I cannot but think any Unprejudiced Person will say, its hard to
conceive how so much could still remain, as in which, it was possible for them
to Plunge Three Thousand Men. The only thing that can be said here, i^, that
the Apostles were now at or near some Pool, Pools, Pond, or River where there
was a sufficiency of Water, and to which they might have free access, and
therefore no need of spending time either in going far to some such
convenience, or in procuring a number of large Vessels, and filling them with
Water, (and that more than once,) for Dipping this Multitude.

But to this I answer,

(1) That though it be true there were diverse Pools in the City, yet that the
Apostles and this Multitude were now met at or nuar to any one, or more of
them, or if they were, that they had free Access to them on this occasion are
things which I Conjecture will want proof for some time, and which I think no
Rational man, will say, are very probable, (especially the last of them.) (2)
The contrary to this is what is probably true, and what a view of the Chapter
and consideration of all Circumstances, leads us to think in the case, unless
the house in or at which the Apostles and the Multitude met had one or more of
those Pools in it or Adjacent to it; and this too I Conjecture will want proof
for some time. Certain it is that as the Place where the Apostles Assembled on
this Day of Pentecost, and where those extraordinary Gifts were bestowed on
them, was an House, ver. 1, 2 And that the Multitude that heard the Sermon came
thither to them; so is it equally certain that in the whole Chapter we have no
hint of any remove from thence till the whole affair was over. For which
reason, what seems most probably to be Truth in this matter is this, viz. That
from some Loft or Window of the House the Apostle Peter Preached to this
Multitude, and that those of them that gladly received the Word, were Baptized
upon the Spot, before they removed from thence. This is what the whole Story
leads us to think in this matter; and by Consequence that considerable time
must be spent in procuring a Vessel or Vessels sufficient to receive many
Bodies at once, and so to employ all the Apostles in Baptizing; and in filling
them with Water, and that more than once or twice before all were Baptized. A
cousiderable part of this short remainder of time, I say, must be spent in
those things, in case they were Dipped, unless, as I said, this House had the
convenience of such a Body of Water in or Adjacent to it, (to use which they
had Liberty,) as was sufficient for the purpose As to which if our Adversaries
in this point will take the liberty to Conjecture it had, I cant but hope they
will give us liberty on the other hand to Conjecture it had not, since I Am well
assured they themselves cannot but be sensible we shall do it on far the more
probable grounds.
In a Word, I cannot but think our Adversaries must now see themselves in danger
of being pressed with this Dilemma on this occasion viz. That if this Multitude
were all P^ung'd or Dipped, then either they had the Convenience (...) some
Pool or Pools sufficient for the business before them, in or Adjacent ^o the
House where they were met, or they had not. If ^t be said they had, then it
must be supposed too, they had liberty of a free access to them, to Dipp this
Multitude in them, and so to defile them and render them un^i^ for other use,
at least for some time; and this I think every one must say, is very unlikely,
considering they were now in a City, and that very Populous too, where probably
their Pools and Wells contained all the Water they had for Daily use; and
considering withal, that the Apostles and this Multitude in what they now did
cannot be considered as having the Countenance and Approbation of the Body of
the People. If on the other hand, it be said, they had not such Convenience,
then besides what time was spent in taking Account or Knowledge of the Faith
and Repentance of those they Baptized, which must be considerable, besides
this, I say, the procurement of some large Vessel or Vessels sufficient for
Plunging diverse Bodies at once, and the filling them with Water, (and that
diverse times) must necessarily take up so much more time, and cause such
further delay to their work, that it seems to me Night must needs overtake them
before they could get through it; and how then will what we are told ver. 41.
remain true, viz That the same Day there were added unto them about Three
Thousand Souls? But I return to my Narrative,

In the next place the Instances of Paul and the J^ylour were considered, the
former of which was Baptized in the House of Judas, Acts 9.17, 18. The latter
probably in an outer Apartment of the Prison, and at Midnight night, chap.
16.33. compared with the preceding and following Context. I know its possible
there might be in those Houses, either some Artificial Pools or Vessers of that
Capacity as to allow of their being Dipped in them, but yet as we have nothing
in those Stories suggesting any such thing, so when all Circumstances are
considered, it can, I think, appear no otherwise than very unlikely that there
were. And for my own part, I cannot but think, that when we reason and say, Paul
was Baptized in the House of Judas, and the Jaylour in an outer Apartment of
the Prison, and at Midnight, therefore they were not Dipped or Plunged, in
Baptism, but Sprinkled or Washed, When I say we thus Infer or Argue, the
Consequence to me seems far more Conclusive, (all Circumstances considered)
than when our Adversaries say John Baptized in Jordan and in Enon, therefore he
Dipped or Plunged those he Baptized. This was the Third thing mentioned as a
ground of our Practice in Baptizing. To which Ladded.

4. That Baptism is a Visible Sign and Seal of an Invisible Grace, the Essence
of which cannot lie in or depend on the quantity of Water used in it, unless it
were Determined by some Positive Law, and so made necessary to render the
Ordinance Significative of the Grace held forth in it. It is a Sign and Seal,
and all it coes is by war of Sign and Seal. And that GOD has not by any
positive Law determined the quantity of Water hat shall be used in it, I
presume all wid a (...) and it not, its certain its Essence con^de^ed as a Sign
or Seal can have no dependence on that. And to use Mr. Baxters words, Christ
told Peter that the Washing of his Feet was enough to cleanse all. A little may
Si^ni^y (and I may add Seal) as well as much, as a Clod of farth does in giving
Possession of much Lands, and a Corn of Pepper signifies our Ho^^age for much.

5. GOD has not by any positive Law determined the Mode of Baptizing, whether
it shall be by Dipping, Sprinkling or Washing. That Ministers shall Baptize
meet Subjects is matter of positive Determination but how, or in what manner is
not This Proposition alone, it true, is enough to prove what is now before
m^tor proof, viz. That Baptism by Pouring on of Wa^^r is Lawful. Finally I
added,

6. That it appears to us unreasonable to think that Christ should appoint any
Ordinance which Persons cannot universaly and at a^ti^es attend on, not only
without such Inconveniences as would render it an Intolerable Burden, but also
without manifest Peril to the Health both of Soul and Body: But thus he has
done, if Dipping only be Baptizing. For evidence of which what I offered was of
the Tenor of what is before cited from Mr. Baxter p.

These are the Propositions I offered as accounting for the Reasons why we
Baptized by the Application of Water to the Subject, and held it lawful for us
to do so; and having done so, Summed them up into the following Arguments, viz.
Seeing it is as we have heard, that the Word of GOD our only guide in all
Administrations has left the Administration of this Ordinance of Baptism under
such a Latitude; in particular, since the word [Baptizo] signifies as well to
wash by Sprinkling or pouring on of Water, as by Dipping into it; since none of
the Scriptures alleged to prove that Dipping was the Primitive way of
Baptizing, do necessarily Infer or Prove it; since there are other Scriptures
which when considered and weighed with all attending circumstances, look quite
another way, render it difficult and next to impossible to think that Dipping
was, at least always, the Primitive way of Baptizing; since Baptism is a
Visible Sign and Seal of an Invisible Grace, the Essence of which don't depend
on the quantity of Water used in it; since GOD by any positive Law has not
determined the mode of Baptizing.

And Finally, Since its unreasonable to think that CHRIST should Ordain an
Ordinance which cannot universally and at all times be attended by Persons,
without such Incoveniences and Perils as above; these things being so, it must
needs be lawful to Baptize by applying or pouring Water on the Subject of it,
and we are Justifiable in so Administering of it. But the Antecedent is true:
Therefore so also is the Consequence. This is what I offered in proof of the
Second Article; nor do I remember any thing material said in answer to it, more
than I have already accounted for. And now again it came to Mr. Wightman's turn
to act the part of an Opponent, and offer on the Negative part of the Question,
which accordingly he did, and in doing of it, let us know he was not such (...)
Stranger to Syllogisms as before was pretended.

When I had determined to gratify the desire of some Friends by drawing up this
Narrative, I was unwilling to depend on my Memory in accounting for what Mr.
Wightman offered in this place, least in doing of it I might do him wrong by an
unfair Representation of it, and therefore Wrote to him by one of his Brethren
to send me his Arguments; in answer to which I received by the same hand the
following Letter, where you have them, but corrected or amended, as he
supposes, together with others now a ^ed by him, for further Confirmation of
the matter before him. He begins thus, Viz.

1 Arg. If all Judea and Jerusalem under Divine conduct were Bap^ized of a
Minister in a River or much Water, Confessing their Sins,

Then all Persons that are under Divine conduct, ought to be Baptized in a
River or much Water, Confessing their Sins.

But; etc Mat. 3.5.

2 Arg. If the ever Blessed JESUS was Baptized in a River or much Water, and
came up out of the Water after His Baptism

Then all followers of the LAMB ought to be Baptized in a River or much Water,
and come up out of the Water after their Baptism.

But, etc Mark 1.9.

Except you think we must not follow CHRIST's example as far as we are able:
But now you tell of CHRIST's example and follow it in the other Sacrame (...)
of the Lords Supper, and why not the S^^^ament of Baptism?

3 Arg. If the best of Saints in the Primitive Platform did go to much Water
and down into the Water in order to Baptism, then it is a Rule for us.

But the Antecedent is true.

Therefore so also is the Consequence. Mat 3.5. Joh. 3 23. Acts 8.38

4 Arg. If the best of Saints in the Primitive Platform never went into a
Private House, or Meeting House to have a little Water Sprinkled or Poured on
them in order to Baptism, then that is not the way for us.

But the Scriptures does not show that they ever did so;

Therefore that is not the way for us.

5 Arg. If Sprinkling or Pouring does not answer to some of the chief things
represented in Baptism, as a Death, Burial and a Resurrection, Romans 6.4.5. Col,
2 12 then Sprinkling or Pouring is not the right way of Baptizing.

But Sprinkling or Pouring does not answer to some of the chief things
represented in Baptism, as a Death, Burial and a Resurrection.

Therefore Sprinkling or Pouring is not the right way of Baptizing:

For what Likeness, Proportion or Analogy is there between Sprinkling or
Pouring and a Death or a Resurrection? Can any Man living imagine but in the
right way of Baptizing we go into an Element of Death, and therein is Death
represented, and being Buried in the Element of Death (as Water is,) a Burial
is represented, and rising out of the Element of Death, a Resurrection is
plainly represented: But it is not so in the Act of Sprinkling: But as to our
Practice we have plain Scripture; For,

1. We take an account of the Persons Faith to be Baptized, with a Confession
of their Sins, according to those Scriptures, Acts 8.37. Mat. 3.6.

2. We go down into the Water, Acts. 8.38. Mat. 3.6. then we Bury them in
Baptism, according to Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12: then we come up out of the Water
after the Example of our Blessed Savior, Mark 1.10. Had you but such plain
Scripture for your Practice, we should soon come over to you; but if you have
it pray show it us, and put the matter out of Debate, and when we can see it we
will submit. But it may be some will say the Apostle does not speak of the
manner of Baptizing in Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. in answer to which take this
Argument.

6 Arg. If the Assembly of Divines in their Annotations upon Romans 6.4. Col.
2.12. thus say, In this Paraphrase the Apostle seems to allude to the Ancient
manner of Baptism, which was to Dipp the Parties Baptized, and as it were to
Bury them under the Water for a while, and then to draw them out of it, and to
lift them up to represent the Burial of our Old Man, and our Resurrection to
Newness of Life. And in so saying they speak true, then the manner of Baptizing
is there intended in Rom 6.4 Col. 2.12. which in short is this, the Assembly
says, the Apostle alludeth to the manner of Baptism, and say true in so
saying, and therefore Vindicate my foregoing Argument.

7 Arg. If the Spirit of GOD does never use the Word Rantizo or Rantisma, (
Rantismos it should be) in the Original, or Sprinkling in the Translation where
the Ordinance of Baptism is mentioned,

Then Sprinkling is not the right way of Baptizing.

Now I can show in the Dutch Translation that the word ( Dipp or Gedoopt) is
expressed where the Ordinance of Baptism is mentioned; and if I remember right
you granted Baptis or Baptizo signisieth Dipping or Washing, and we can produce
a Cloud of Testimonies that says the same, and that Dipping and Washing are
the same, see 2 Kings 5.10. (...) 14. The Prophet bids Naaman the Syrian to
Wash Seven times in Jordan, and he went and Dipped Seven times; and the Spirit
of GOD has left it on Record that what he did was according to the saying of
the Man of GOD; so that Dipping and Washing is the same in Substance.

These are his Arguments, and for a Close he adds,

And thus Sir, I thought sit to give you a few Arguments on the manner of
Baptizing, and I think fit to reserve my other Arguments on the other Two
Heads, until I see yours in Print; and if they are really Conclusive of Truth
in my Judgment, I will submit, for I love to be on the strongest side, and I
account Truth the Strongest. I should have chosen to try the matter out by
plain Texts of Scripture, but since you go in this Method, I have followed you;
and I know of no fallacy in them, to be sure they are honestly designed. If
they are not so exactly formed according to rule, yet if the Conclusions be
fairly drawn from the Premises, I hope you will bear with the rest, and
sometimes my mispelling, if you put the Dispute in Print. I think you ought to
have Mr. Hitchcock's Arguments, perhaps they are better than mine, with all the
Scriptures that was then brought, and our words their due weight. The first
Four Arguments was delivered at the Dispute, only now a little altered in the
Two first; the other added now. If you say some of these Arguments are not
Negative but Affirmative, I answer, If the Affirmative be on our part, it
necessarily implies the Negative on your parts, in my Judgment.

This from him that is willing to serve you in the Truth, Valentine Wightman.

This I think is his Letter Verbatim without mistake of a word. He says the
first Four of the Arguments above were offered by him at the Dispute, I
remember but Two, and they not as here written, as he himself intimates;
however since its possible I may be mistaken, I Will not insist on that. What I
would say here, is, That as I am I hope sincerely desirous, and should heartily
rejoice if Mr. Wightman, or any others of his Way or Denomination might receive
any benefit by what is now written, so its my resolution as far as may be to
avoid every thing tending to Prejudice or Hinder it; for which reason, though
it were easy for me to make both my self and others Merry with some remarks on
the Arguments above, yet I will not do it lest I should offend those, whom I
should rejoice to Gain. For this reason I say, (as also because I think there
is not any thing in them with an Answer to which the foregoing Discourse does
not furnish the Reader) I Will wave any thing of that Nature, and instead of it
annex some further thoughts on this matter, by which Mr. Wightman and his
Brethren may see there is more reason to doubt of Dipping, its being the
Primitive way of Baptizing, than perhaps now they do, and at the same time be
convinced that whatever it was, yet that the Position laid down by us in this
matter (as we suppose proved) at the Debate, is an Undoubted Truth, and we
therefore Justifiable in Baptizing by the Application of Water to the Subject.

And for this end I Will endeavor to make good these Two Propositions. Viz.

1. That a good account may be given why John the Baptist Baptized in Jordan
and Enon, and Philip made use of the Water of a Fountain, Brook or River in
Baptizing the Eunuch, although they did not Dipp or Plunge those they Baptized.
2. That supposing the utmost that can be desired by any in this case, viz. That
John the Baptist, the Apostles, Philip, and the other Evangelists did Immerse
or Dipp those they Baptized, or that Dipping was really the Primitive Mode of
Baptizing, yet this will not prove that others are obliged to Baptize in the
same manner also, and by Consequence that our way of Baptizing by Sprinkling or
Pouring on of Water, is Sinful; yea that it will be so far from it, that
notwithstanding, it may be Sinful in others to Immerse or Dipp those they
Baptize.
If these Two Propositions can be made evident, I think, that as our
Adversaries in this matter will have reason to abate of their Confidence
respecting the Primitive way of Baptizing, viz That it was by Dipping or
Plunging; and to be more sparing in their Invectives against us, for not
complying with it; so at the same time to see how Inexcusable they are in
making this one Ground or Reason of their separating from us. I Will therefore
make an Essay here, and say,

1. That a good account may be given why John the Baptist Baptized in Jordan
and Enon, and Philip made use of the Water of a Fountain, Brook or River in
Baptizing the Eunuch, although they did not Dipp or Plunge those they Baptized.

This Opinion of our Adversaries, viz. That Dipping was the Primitive way of
Baptizing, takes rise as I conceive principally from the History we have of the
Places of the Baptisms of those Two Primitive Ministers; of the former his
Baptizing in Jordan and Enon, the latter his making use of the Water of a
Fountain, Brook or River in Baptizing the Eunuch. Not so much from the Phrase
(of going down into and coming up out of the Water) made use of in those
Histories, which have been before taken notice of, and their insufficiency to
prove what they would from them showed; this Opinion of theirs I say, does not
so much take Rise from these, as from the consideration of the Places ( Jordan
and Enon) where they Baptized, there being much Water there. And this they
think is a good evidence of the Truth of it, in-as-much as if it be supposed
the Baptist and Philip did not Dipp those they Baptized, no man, they say, can
excogitate or assign any good reason why they Baptized in such places, rather
than others where there was not such plenty of Water: To which, I say, that if
other reasons can be given of this, such as will well account for, or justify
their doing so, though it be supposed they did not Dip those they Baptized
there, the Inevitable Consequence of this will be, that this Opinion or theirs
stands upon a very Feeble Basis, such as will scarcely bear them out in their
Confidence in it. Now this is what I would here give some evidence of, and this
I will do from several Propositions of Unquestionable Truth or Certainty, and
which, although, some of them at least, may at first view, seem remote from my
present business, yet will appear otherwise when I come to apply or make my
designed use of them.

Then let it be Considered,

1 P. The Land of Canaan in which the Baptist and Philip Baptized, was and is a
Dry and Thirsty Land, not Watered with Springs or Rivers as many other
Countries are. That it is so now, the accounts of those whose Curiosity has led
them to Travel into it, assure us; and that in Ages past it was in this
respect, as it is now, Revelation assures us also. Indeed its called, Deuteronomy. 8 7
-- A Land of Brooks, of Water, of Fountains, and Depths that Spring out of
Valleys and Hills; and so it was and still is, Comparatively speaking, or
compared with some other Lands, in which sense those words are to be
understood; and yet it was and is a Dry and Thirsty Land still, compared with
many others. Nor was the extraordinary Produce of it in Old time whereby it
Subsisted, such vast numbers of Inhabitants so much the effect of the natural
Fertility of its Soil, as the peculiar Blessing attending of it, the Eyes of
the Lord being upon it from one end of the year to the other, Deuteronomy. 11.10, But
more of this under, 4 P.

2 P. The words [Much Water] Joh: 2.23. in the Original are Polla Hudata, i. e.
Many Waters; according to which the Verse ought to run thus, viz. And John also
was Baptizing in Enon near to Salim, because there were many Waters there;
alluding no doubt to the many Springs that were in it, which are intimated in
the name Enon, which signifies the Place of Springs.

3 P. We are not to consider John the Baptist as having the Countenance or
Approbation of the leading, governing part of the Nation of the Jews in his
Ministry, i. e. in his Preaching and Baptizing, no nor of the main Body of the
People, unless it was a^ his first setting out therein. Its true, at his first
appearance in that work, he had a general esteem with the People. He came in
the Spirit and Power, i. e. with a Warmth and Zeal like that of Elias, was one
who in his conduct discovered a great Mortification to and Contempt of the
World, the Manners and Fashions of it; which things occasioned in multitudes an
extraordinary Veneration of him; insomuch that they held him for a Prophet;
some Extraordinary Person commissioned and Sent from GOD, and accordingly
showed a great Regard to his Preaching and Submitted to his Baptism. But as is
usual in such cases, this raised Esteem of the Multitude was not of long
continuance, but so soon declined that (though the whole time of his Ministry was
very short; scarce exceeding a Year and half,) we find him not toward the close
of it, attended or followed with such Multitudes, as in his beginning. And to
this our Savior no doubt has reference, when in his Discourse with the Jews,
speaking of John, he says of him, Joh 5.35. He was a Burning and a Shining
Light, and ye were willing for a Season to rejoice in his Light, Q. D. How
shining a Light soever he was, and how well soever deserving of their esteem
and affection, yet their regard to him continued not long; you for a short time
made discovery of a great regard to him, and came with great Zeal to hear him,
hoping that he was (if not the MESSI AS, yet at least) Elias, or that Prophet
in him revived again: but when you saw that John did only bear Record to
CHRIST, you soon grew cold in your Affections to him, and fell of from him. And
with reference to the same, no doubt it was, that he told them of their Abusive
Speeches concerning him, Mat. 11.18 And finally, to the same thing refer those
words of John to his Disciples, on the occasion of their relating to him the
growing Reputation and Interest of CHRIST among the People, when he had entered
on his Ministry, Joh. 3.30 He must increase, but I must decrease. He must
increase in Honor, Dignity and Reputation in the world; He is the Rising Sun,
To give you notice of which I was but as the Morning Star; He must shine every
Day more and more, but as for my self, though I was once venerable in your eyes,
as he now is, yet my Glory is now in the Wane, and I must every day grow less
and less. Not that there were none that retained an Honor for him even to the
last; the History we have of him assures us of the contrary, viz That there
were many who did so; but the number was small compared with what it was in his
beginning or first entrance on his Ministry. But as for the leading, governing
part of the People, there was no time of his Ministry in which he had their
countenance or favor, as is variously evident. In the Sanhedrim that grand
Council of the Nation, as well as in their lesser Councils, there were many of
the Pharisees, who every one knows were a Set of Men most Zealous for and
Tenacious of the Jewish Rites, and would allow nothing to be added in Divine
Worship to what they had received concerning it, either from the Law of GOD, or
the Tradition of the Elders. Their eves were therefore open to Spy out and
take seasonable care of every thing tending to Introduce Innovations in
Religion, and inas-much as they could not but see this to be the Tendency of
John's Preaching and Baptism, it could not be but that they were no sooner
appriz'd of it, than they looked upon him with a Jealous eye. According to this
we find that forthwith upon this they sent Priests and Levites from Jerusalem
to Bethabara, where he was in the exercise of his Ministry, to enquire of him,
who he was, and by what Authority he Preached and Baptized? See Joh. 1.19, to
25. Hereby letting us know that they had no Favor for him, that they looked
upon him as a Dangerous Person, one who if he were suffered to proceed, as he
had begun, it might be of ill Consequence. And for further Confirmation of this
Proposition, there are Two things Obvious in the History we have of the
Baptist, which I would here take notice of, Viz.

(1) His Wilderness Life. The Story we have of him assures us not only that the
more Private part of his Life, which continued till he was about Thirty Years
of Age, was spent in the Wilderness, i. e. in places Remote and but thinly
Inhabited; but also that his Public Life, or that part of his Time which
succeeded his Entrance upon his Office was so too. I remember not that in that
part of his History that relates to us this part of his Life, we find him any
where but at Jordan, Bethabara and Enon and Parts Adjacent; all of them Places
remote and not so stored with Inhabitants as many other parts of the Land.
According to which he is said, Mat. 3 1. To come Preaching in the Wilderness of
Judea; and is styled by the Prophet Isa. Chap 40.3 The Voice of one crying in
the Wilderness, etc. Otherwise it was with CHRIST, who shunned no places of
greatest Resort; often Preached in the Temple and Synagogues of the Jews, etc.
And whereas Chemnitius thinks the Baptist chose thus to fulfill his Ministry in
the Wilderness, rather than in the Temple and other places of Resort, to make
an illustrious difference between himself and his LORD; of whom it was
Prophesied, Mal. 3.1. The Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his holy
temple. I must say, that to me it seems far more reasonable to think, it was
for the Reason hinted above, viz. because he knew how he was esteemed or looked
upon by the Leading, Governing part of the Nation, as well as the main Body of
the People (at least in the close of his Ministry) that they looked upon him
with an evil Eye, as a dangerous Person, one who it suffered to proceed, might
bring on Changes they desired not; to prevent which there was danger lest they
should Apprehend and Confine him, if not inflict greater Evils on him.

(2) It gives us no account of such Numbers resorting to him in the latter part
of the time of his Ministry, as in the beginning of it. This will be evident to
every one that considers the Order of things related by the Evangelists as done
by him in the course of his Ministry. With relation to which I say, That as in
the Story we have of him, we never find him any where, during that time but at
Jordan and Places adjacent, viz. Bethabara and Enon, (which were near to it;
the one on the East, the other on the Westside of it) So what it accounts for
as done by him, it relates as done in one or other of those Places; And
further, That he that attentively Reads it, will se that he discharged his
Ministry in those places in this order, viz. first at Jordan, then at
Bethabara, and last at Enon. I need not enlarge here to Evidence this, it being
what every one that attentively Reads that part of the Sacred History will see.
Now we have in it no account of such Multitudes resorting to him when at
Bethabara and Enon as when at Jordan. With respect to this last, the Story
says, Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the Region round
about Jordan, and were Baptized of him, etc. i. e. great Numbers of all sorts
went out. But with respect to his Baptizing at Bethabara, it only informs us of
the Conference he had with the Priests and Levites sent from Jerusalem by the
Sanhedrim to Enquire of him who he was, and by what Authority he Baptized;
Adding for a close, These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where
John was Baptizing; without a word accounting for the Number that resorted to
him there. In like manner, with respect to his Bap^izing in Enon, it only tells
us there were some that came and were Baptized of him. Now, though its not to be
doubted, there were many who came to and were Baptized of him in those Places,
since its manifest he was in great Esteem with many, even to the time of his
Death, yet in as much as the History is silent here, makes no mention of such
Numbers resorting to him when at those Places as when at Jordan, it is
reasonable to think they were Comparatively few: which if it was so, its no
doubt to be Resolved into this as the Reason, viz. The Baptists sinking,
declining Reputation among the common sort of People. That shining Light at the
time of his Ministry in these Places was in his decrease and therefore they
Resorted not to him as at first:

4 P. It Is manifest that of the Multi^des that attended John's Ministry, i. e.
his Preaching and Baptism at Jordan, there were many that came a great way to
it (and the same must be supposed to be proportionably true of those that
attended his Ministry at Bethabara and Enon) with Respect to the time of his
Ministry there, it is said Mat. 3.5, 6. Then went out to him Jerusalem and all
Judea, and all the Regions round about Jord in, and were Baptized of him in
Jordan, Confessing their fins. If the Term [Judea] here be taken in its
strictest acceptance, as distinct from Samaria and Galilee and containing only
the Tribes of Judah, Benjamin, Simeon and Dan, yet of such Extent in this sense
is it, as to make it Evident that such as came from the Remotest parts of it,
must Travel near (if not full out) an Hundred Miles before they reached Jordan.
Such as came from Jerusalem (which lies near in the middle between the Western
Borders of the land and Jordan on the East) Traveled between Forty and Fifty
Miles. Now it being so, its unreasonable to think that such of this Multitude
at least as lived thus Remote from Jordan, Traveled thither on foot; without
the help of Horses or such other Creatures as they ordinarily used in their
Journeys, and the case is the same as to such as from Remote parts Traveled to
Bethabara and Enon to attend his Ministry there, of whom its not to be doubted
there were many.

5. P. As the Southern parts of Canaan toward the Arabia's and Egypt, are more
especially dry and thirsty above the rest; so it was in this part of that Land
that Philip met the Eunuch on the Road and Baptized him. This Proposition
contains two Particulars in it, viz.

(1) That the Southern parts of Canaan are more especially Dry and Thirsty
above other parts of it. Of this we are assured not only by Humane, but Divine
Testimony. Gerar (where Abimelek was King, and to which Abraham Removed from
Mamre upon the turning the Adjacent place where the City's of Sodom and
Gomorrah stood into a stinking Lake) was in this part of the Land, yea near the
most Southern Borders of it. The Lake it self where those abominable City's
stood, and near to which Mamre was is in the Southern parts of it, and from
thence the Text tells us he removed still more South when he went to Gerar.
Genesis 20 1. And that this part of the Land was more Dry and Thirsty than other
parts of it. The Scriptures assure us in that they let us know that here
Principally it was that the Inhabitants were forced to be at such Pains and
Cost in procuring Water for their Herds and Flocks by digging Wells or Pitts.
Here it was that Abraham was at this Pains and Cost for preserving the lives of
his. Genesis 26.15.18. -- Here it was that he Contended with Abimelek about a Well
which his servants had violently seized and taken away. Here it was that the
Bondwoman and her Son, Hagar and Ishmael, being sent into the Wilderness with
a bottle of water, when it was spent she lays the Child under a shrub and
Removing some distance from him, says Let me not see the Death of the Child:
And where they were Relieved in that distress by a Well of water not far from
them, See Genesis 21.12, to 19. Here in a word it was that the Philistines envying
Isaac's growing greatness in Flocks and Herds, as an effectual Remedy to
prevent it; filled up his Wells of water, Genesis 26. forecited. And to add no
more, this is that part of Canaan wherein David hiding himself from Saul calls
it a Dry and Thirsty Land where no Water is, or without Water, as it is in the
Original. Psalm 63.1.

It was in this part of the Land that Philip met the Eunuch on the Road and
Baptized him. This is manifest in the story of it; For as Jerusalem it self is
Situate in the Southern parts of Canaan, so this Eunuch was now in his Return
from it home; which home whether it was in the Arabic or Affrican Ethiopia it
matters not as to this, since in either case he must steer South from
Jerusalem. According to which the Angel that sent Philip on that Errand, does
it in these words, Acts 8.26. Arise and go toward the South, unto the way that
goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza: Which Command he obeying meets with this man
of Ethiopia. This Gaza, the City whose Gates Sampson took away Judge. 16.2. And
whether he was carried when taken ver. 22. and where he pulled down the House
of their god Dagon on the Lords of the Philistines ver. 30. this Gaza I say
stood in the very Southern Borders of Canaan toward Egypt and Africa. In this
very Dry and Thirsty part of this Thirsty Land it was that he met and Baptized
him. Now what I Scope at in this and the foregoing Propositions, is, to make it
evident that John the Baptist and Philip had good reason to Baptize in Jordan
and Enon, or some other places a like Circumstanc'd, though it be not supposed
they Dipped those they Baptized: And if I mistake not, these Propositions
reflected on, will suggest such reasons for it, as will Convince any
unprejudiced Person, 'twas Wisdom and Necessary for them to do so, though we so
suppose concerning them.

For let it be Considered here,

1. As to John the Baptist, (1) That since there were such Multitudes came to
his Baptism at Jordan and Enon, (Thousands no doubt to the last, and to the
first many Thousands) and since many of them came from parts so Remote from
those Places, and therefore rode on Horses or other Beasts ordinarily used by
them in their Journeys, and since reason will tell every man, the Baptizing
such a Multitude (especially the Multitude that came to Jordan) must needs take
up a considerable time, some Weeks no doubt, if not Months, and did therefore
require a considerable time of stay or abode there, at least in many that came;
since, I say, these things were so, how could it be that these Multitudes and
the Beasts they rode upon, could be supplied with Water necessary to subsist
them, and satiate their Thirst, unless he had chosen some such place or places
as these were, for his Baptism, where Water was in such plenty? For certain it
is that though Comparatively speaking, a little Water would have Sufficed for
Baptizing those Multitudes, supposing they were Sp^inkl'd or Washed, yet the
supply of their necessities, and the necessities of their Beasts for so long a
time, as reason will tell any man, many of them at least, must attend or wait
for Baptism, was what required no small quantity of Water.

And here,

If it be said that as Dry and Thirsty a Land as this was, yet its not to be
doubled, but that there were in it Towns or Cities (and they Situate in the
Central parts of it too, to which a Resort had been more convenient for the
People) so stored with Pools and Wells, as to be able to furnish with Water for
the Baptism of those Multitudes, provided they were only Sprinkled or Washed,
and satiate the Thirst of them and their Beasts; and that therefore in that
case he would doubtless have chosen one or more of those Places to Baptize in.
To this I say,

(2) That supposing it to be true that there were such Places, and they so
conveniently Situate in the Land yet from what has been premised, particularly
the Third Proposition, its Evident it would have been far from Wisdom in him to
have made Choice of any of them to discharge his Ministry in, inasmuch as its
from thence manifest, that in so doing he would have had reason not only to
doubt of a free undisturbed ^^iberty in using their Water but moreover that
Violence or Injury might be done to his Person. What else could he ^a^ionally
expect or look for in this case? Did he not know that the Superior part of the
Nation, considered or look^d upon him as a dangerous Person, One, of whom there
was need some care should be taken to stop his Progress, as they did afterward
on Him, whose way he came to prepare? And that among the Inferior sort, though
there were many that had a Veneration for him, and accordingly showed regard to
his Person and Ministry, yet that there were others (and they perhaps not
Inferior in Number) who were of another strain, and had other thoughts of him,
and who making their Judgment of him by his Garb and manner of Life, though it him
to be Hypocondriacal even to a degree of Distraction, and therefore said of him
He had a Devil! Mat. 11. It Is evident therefore such a choice in him would have
been what no man in his Wits would have made, and that Wisdom did direct him to
a more Wilderness Life, during the time of his Ministry, and to the choice of
such places for the exercise of it as Jordan, Enon and Bethabara, where (also
probably) Water being ready prepared by Nature, without the cost of Labor and
Art, in great plenty; and being Communis Juris, free and open for Man and Beast
as they had occasion, he was assured of the free undisturbed use of it, and
which places being more remote, he could promise himself more safety to his
Person. This is what to me appears reasonable to think respecting the reasons
inducing John to make choice of these places to discharge his Ministry in, and
what I Am ready to think will appear to every unp^e^^^dic'd person to be the
Truth of the matter; which if it be so, it lets us know he had good reason thus
to do, even though he Baptized not by Dipping or Plunging, and by Consequence
that when our Adversaries infer or argue his doing so because he Baptized in
Jordan and Enon, such inference must appear to be what the Premises will in no
wise allow to be Conclusive.

2. As for Philip his Baptizing the Eunuch in or at a Fountain, Brook or River
the foregoing account of the Condition of the place where he met him on the
road and Baptized him, will also well account for it, though we don's suppose he
Dipped or Plunged him; inasmuch as from thence its rational enough to think
that besides that Fountain, Brook or River, there might not be a Drop of Water
within many Miles of them. This I say, by all account of the place is
reasonable to think, and if so, he must either make use of that or not Baptize
him at all, unless he had Traveled with him (perhaps) many Miles further. Had
Philip met the Eun^ch in some Town or Village where Water susficient to
Sprinkle or Wash him, might have been had from Wells or Pits they had made for
their use, and had gone with him from thence to some Fountain, Brook or River,
there had then been good reason to conclude he Plunged or Dipped him; and there
would then be some strength in the Consequence, if from their doing so his
Plunging him were inferred or argued. But we find not a Word of this in the
Story, but quite the contrary, viz That it was in the Wilderness that he met
him. The Angel says to Philip, Ner. 26. Arise and go toward the South, unto the
way that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza, which is Desert, i. e. which way is
a Desert; as Whitby renders it exactly according to the Greek. Here, in this
Dry and Thirsty Wilderness, where a man may Travel many Miles (yea, may I not
say Scores of Miles?) and not see a Drop of Water, it was that Philip Met and
Baptized him, from whence it is evident he was obliged to make use of this Water
they came to as they were Traveling on the Road, or not Baptize him at all,
unless (as I said but now) he had Traveled with him, perhaps, many Miles
further. And whereas Mr. Hitchcock at that time of the Debate, as I before
observed, said on this Instance, If Philip did not Dipp the Eunuch, why was it
that he was obliged to come forth of his Chariot and go down with Philip to the
Water? What, had not so great an Officer of Queen Candace as this Eunuch was,
any Dish or Vessel in his Chariot in which a little Water sufficient for
Sprinkling or Washing him might have been fetched? To this I say, that as ver.
36. assures us that they came in their way even to or upon this very Water (
Epi to Huder the Orignal is,) before the Eunuch moved to Philip to Baptize him,
and caused his Chariot to stand still, so every one will say the Room of his
Chariot was a place no ways convenient or proper to Administer the Ordinance of
Baptism in, unless Chariots in that Day were very different from what they are
now; and that they were better I think there is little reason to believe. It Is
not therefore strange he came forth of his Chariot, as great a man as he was,
to be Sprinkled or Washed with the Water, though he be supposed to have never so
many Attendants, and a Score of Golden Bowls with him. And now to conclude this
matter, From these things it appears to me, that John and Philip had Wise and
Good reasons for Baptizing in the Places mentioned, where there were such large
Collections of Water, even though they did but Sprinkle or Wash those they
Baptized; and it being so, how Feeble the Argument or our Adversaries must be,
when from their Baptizing in those places they infer that they Dipped those
they Baptized, is what I hope there are none but will see. And this may suffice
for the First Proposition. The Second is,

2. That supposing the utmost that can be desired by any in this matter, viz.
That John the Baptist, the Apostles, Philip, and other Primitiva Ministers, did
Immerse those they Baptized; or that Dipping was really the Primitive way of
Baptizing, yet this will not prove that all others are obliged to Baptize in
the same manner also, and by Consequence that our way of Baptizing by the
Application of Water to the Subject is Sinful, yea it will be so for from it,
that notwwithstanding it may be Sinful in others to Immerse or Dipp those they
Baptize.

This Proposition contains a Twofold Assertion, Viz.

[1] That supposing Dipping was the way in which John the Baptist, the
Apostles, Philip, etc. did Baptize, yet this will not prove that all others are
obliged to Baptize in the same manner, and Consequently that our way of
Baptizing by the Application of Water to the Subject, is Sinful. This I think
will be evident to every one that will weigh the following particulars,

(1) That the Examples even of the Holiest and Best Men in any case or
instance, are not simply or in themselves binding to others. Its true, its our
Duty and we are bound in many things to trace the steps of the Wise and Holy,
and its our Sin when we do not; But why is it so? Why not merely because they
did those things wherein we are bound to follow them, but either because there
are moral reasons in the things themselves, or because there is some express,
positive Command of GOD super-added to the example. And in these cases only it
is that an Obligation lies on us to be followers of them. If the example of any
Man, John the Baptist, Philip or any other, as such, be binding, I would gladly
know in what cases or Instances it is so, whether in some things only done by
them, or in all? I Am ready to think Mr. Wightman and his Brethren will not say
the last, or that its binding in all they did; inasmuch as this would be a
dangerous Doctrine indeed, one inevitable Consequence of is being this, viz.
That they, and I, and many others, are obliged to imitate John in his manner of
Living, taking up our abode in the Wilderness, clothing our selves with Camels
Hair, and wearing a Leathern Girdle about our Loins, and Eating Locusts and
wild Honey, as he did. But this I suspect they would not like very well, I am
sure I should not; and I believe any Man will find it a difficult Task to
persuade them they are bound by the Example of John in these points. Well, if
we are not obliged by it in these Instances, in what are we? You say in the
Instance of his Baptizing, otherwise there is no force in vour Argument, when
from his Dipping in Baptism, as you suppose, you infer an Obligation on us to
do so too. But pray give me a reason for this, viz. Why it should oblige us in
this case or Instance, and not in the forementioned. When I was at the School
A Quatenus ad Omne, valet Consequentia, (which you may English thus if you
please, viz If the Example of any Man as such, oblige in one instance, it does
in all;) was received for a Maxim or Rule of Everlasting Truth; and that it is
so, I firmly believe still. And if it be so, then our Obligation from John's
example, considered as such, to dwell in the Wilderness, array our selves with
Camels Hair, etc. is as great and strong, as to Baptize by Dipping; for as I
said, if his Example as such, bind us in any one case or instance, it must in
all. But its needless for me to enlarge here, since what I now assert is no
more than what I presume Mr. Wightman, (or at least such of his Brethren, as
pass under the Denomination of Seventh Day Baptists) will allow or grant. Their
standing practice in not observing or Sanctifying the First Day of the Week,
but the Seventh, gives me, I think, just reason so to presume; since if they
though it Examples of Holy men, as such binding, how they can hold themselves
excusable in not Sanctifying that Day, for the Sanctification of which, the
Apostles and Primitive Christians have set us an Example, is hard for me to
see. This particular at once Cashiers Four of Mr. Wightmans Arguments; and I
cannot but hope he will now see, that for him or any other Person to attempt to
prove the Unlawfulness of Sprinkling or Washing in Baptism, from the Example of
John, Philip or any other, (supposing it were evident they Dipped those they
Baptized) is Vain and Absurd; since whatever they did in this matter Simply in
it self, cannot infer any Obligation on us to do in the same manner.

2. Supposing they Dipped in Baptizing, yet as there are no moral reasons in
the Nature of the thing obliging others to do so too, so neither is there any
positive Law obliging us to follow them in it, or determining that mode of
Baptism. There are two Cases, as I Intimated above, wherein Examples are
binding, or Rather wherein we are bound to follow them, viz. When there are
Moral Reasons in the nature of the things done, and when any express, positive
Law of God is super^added determining them and Requiring in others an Imitation
of them. But now neither of these things can be pretended in this matter of
which I Am now speaking. For,

(1) There can be no Moral Reasons in that mode of Baptism obliging us to it,
but on the other hand I think its manifest from what I have cited above from
Mr. Baxter, there are Moral Reasons obliging us to Swerve or Deviate from it.
If it be true that the Sixth and Seventh Commands of the Moral Law, are Moral,
and Baptizing by Dipping be, as he says, a Breach of those Commands, then
surely there must be Moral Reasons in the Nature of the thing thus obliging us.

(2) There is no express positive Law Obliging us to follow them in it; or
Determining that mode of Baptism. If Mr. Wightman or any of his Denomination
know of any, I Will thank them if they will let me do so too, and instantly come
over to them, at least, in this point. All that I know can be said here, is,
that John's Baptism was from Heaven, as our Savior imply's in that Question he
propounded to the Chief Priests and Elders of the Jews. Mat. 21.25. -- And if
so, then so was the mode of it too: If therefore he Baptized by Dipping, this
will infer a positive Law, some may think, determining that mode of it. But I
deny the Consequence here, and say that though it be supposed he Dipped in
Baptizing, his Baptism may well enough be said to be from Heaven, and yet that
mode of it not be so, since the modes of things are not of their Essence. I
know very well Mr Wightman and his Brethren say this mode, viz. Dipping, is of
the Essence of Baptism, and that Baptism in any other way is no Baptism. But
besides that herein they seem not to me well to distinguish between Entities
and their Modes: Besides this I say, I Am at a loss how they will prove it, any
positive Law determining this mode of it I Am sure there is none, nor can it I
think be done from the import or meaning of the word in the Original: since
(whatever it is, yet) we find it often used there by the Spirit of God to signify
Sprinkling or Washing by pouring on or applying water to things, as well as
dipping them. But enough of this, and more I think I need not add to make out
this first Particular, which is That Supposing Dipping was the way in which
John the Baptist, the Apostles, Philip etc. did Baptize, yet this will not
prove that all others are Obliged to Baptize in the same manner. The Second is,

[2] That though this he Supposed. yet it will be so far from inferring such an
Obligation lying on others, that not withstanding it may be sinful in them to
Immerse or Dip those they Baptize. This will be readily allowed for a Truth by
all those that know that many cases may be supposed, wherein there may be Moral
Reasons obliging Persons to Swerve or Deviate from the Example of Holy men, in
things wherein at other times and in other Circumstances it were not only
warrantable for them, but their duty to imitate or follow them. And this all
those must know that are not so near to perfect Ideotism, as not to know that
as hic and nunc i.e. time and place are Circumstances inseparable from all
Actions, so that the Expediency or Inexpediency, and Consequently the
Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of them has a great dependence on those
Circumstances. Actions good in themselves and Expedient or Proper in one time
or place, in another are Inexpedient; and it is a known Rule, Quicquid not
Expedit, in Quantum non Expedit, non licet, i. e. Whatsoever is not Expedient,
is so far forth Unlawful as it is Inexpedient. What I now say might be
Illustrated by a Thousand Instances; but one shall suffice. And its that of the
Corinthians, their going to Law before Unbelievers; Mr. Wightman no doubt will
allow that the use of the Law for Recovery of men's just Rights is lawful, yea
many times a necessary Duty; and doubtless was so in many of the Cases referred
by the Corinthiane to the Decision of Pagan Judges: Yet it was a sin in them at
that time, for which the Apostle greatly blames them, and it was so merely on
the account of the Circumstances of time and place, which did render their
doing so Inexpedient, Prohibit it, and Require that they should rather have
debated and issued their Controversies among themselves. Now to apply this to
the matter in Hand, viz. Dipping or Plunging in Baptism, as what I have now
said especially takes place in the Positives of Religion, that have nothing
moral in the Nature of them, and more especially in the Undetermined Modes of
those Positives, so as to this particular of them of which I Am now speaking,
viz. Dipping in Baptism, if the Circumstances of time and place or either of
them are sometimes such that there are Moral Reasons Dissuading from and
Prohibiting of it, 'twill then follow that though the Baptist and others in the
Primitive Times did Dip in Baptizing, yet that will be so far from proving an
Obligation on others to do so too, that notwithstanding it may be very sinful
in them.

If any of our Adversaries say here, Supposing what I now say to be true, yet
what Advantage can it be to us; Or how does it excuse us in Baptizing by the
Application of water to the Subject, supposing Dipping was the Primitive way,
since we can Plead no such difficulty in our way from the Circumstances of time
and place? I Answer,

(1) I am not now immediately proving the Lawfulness of our Baptizing in
particullar, but that though John the Baptist and others in the Primitive Times
did Dip, yet that notwithstanding others may sin in so doing; and that because
the Circumstances of time and place may be such as to render it Inexpedient and
therefore Sinful. And this I take to be a truth so evident, that I cannot but
esteem that man better stored with Confidence then Sense that shall deny it.
And, (2) As to Ourselves in particular, I say I am of Opinion, that the
Circumstances of time and place, very often at least, do on Moral
Considerations forbid our Dipping in Baptism, and that so evidently, that for
my own part I durst not do it. To Conclude, I think I have made good the two
Propositions above, and having done so, as its manifest on the one Hand, that
Mr. Wightman's Arguments taken from the Examples of John the Baptist, Philip,
etc their Dipping as he supposes, are utterly Insufficient to prove what he
would by them, so on the other its to be hoped he and his Brethren may
henceforth more suspect the Expediency and Lawfulness of Dipping in this our
Cold Climate, than hitherto they have done: And see that we are not without
something to say for our manner of Baptizing, be more in Opinion with it, and
sparing in their Invectives against us and that, than in time past they have
been I pass to the Third and last Question, which was,
CHAP. III. QUEST. III Whether the Present way of the Country in Maintaining
Ministers by a Public Rate or Tax be Lawful?
I must Advertise the Reader here, that in the Conference we had with Mr.
Wightman and his Brethren before the Debate, he signified his dislike of the
Question as thus stated, and declared himself ^ully in Opinion with us, that
Ministers ought to be maintained, but this maintenance he though it they ought to
have from those that heard them, and not such as by Reason of Difference in
Opinion from them, hold themselves Obliged to withdraw from them. For which
Reason the Question was Stated in these Words. Viz.

Quest. Whether Lawful Authority have Right or Power to Compel such to
Contribute to the Support of the Established Ministry of the Country, who by
Reason of Difference in Opinion hold themselves Obliged to withdraw from it?
The Affirmative of this was what I though it was before me to prove, till it was
Read at the Debate in Order to Discussion: When Mr. Moderator Hitchcock rose up
and signified his dislike of the alteration, and desired the Question as at
first stated might be Debated: Which was again Complied with. So that the
Position before me to Prove was this, Viz.

That the Present way of the Country in Maintaining Ministers by a Public Rate
or Tax is Lawful. In Order to which I told Mr. Hitchcock (for he took upon him
the part of a Respondent here also) that I would first Observe to the Assembly
what Evidence we have in Scripture, that its the Will of Christ that the
Ministry he has Ordained in his Church should be maintained, which having done,
I would from thence offer an Argument more Immediately proving the Position
before me. Accordingly I Observed,

[1] That when Christ Ordained and sent forth the Twelve and the Seventy, 'twas
with this Express Command or Charge, that they should not Act in the Affair
before them, at their own Expense or Cost. Mat. 10 9.10. Luk 9.1. to 4. and
10.3, 4, 5. Where we find him Expressly Charging them not to make Provision for
themselves of Food, Raiment or Money, but into whatever House they entered and
were Received, there to stay Eating, Drinking, and Lodging. And at the same
time, in Testimony of their Detestation of such as did not Receive and freely
Entertain them, to shake off the dust of their feet against them. And further,
he gives them to understand that in thus living upon those among whom they came
and were Received, they would not live on their Mercy or Charity, but that
there was a Justice in their being so Subsisted by them Mat. 10.10. For the
workman is worthy of his meat.

[2] That the Apostle Paul insists much on this matter, and by Arguments taken
from various heads gives abundant proof of it. As, viz.

1. By an Argument taken from the Law of Nature and Common justice, Thus 1 Timothy
5.18. Thou shall not Muzzle the Mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn,
and, The Labourer is Worthy of his Meat: Where the Apostle alludes to that
Ancient Practice among the Jews and diverse other Nations of Treading out their
Corn by the Feet of Oxen, in doing which, it was the Practice of some Covetous
Persons to have the Mouths of those Beasts Muzzled, that while they were
Treading out the Corn they might not Ea^ of it; which, because it was an Act of
Cruelty, GOD forbad it to his People, Deuteronomy. 25 4 -- By this Injustice and
Cruelty of such Persons, he sets forth the Sin of not Contributing to the
Support of Ministers; hereby assuring us that the contrary Duty is no other
than what is Consonant to the Law of Nature and Common Justice.

2. By an Argument taken from the reasonable expectation of all Laborers in
other affairs, Thus 1 Cor. 9. where ver. 6. having asserted his right to
forbear working with his Hands, and to demand support from those among whom he
Labored, he goes on with a proof of it by this Medium, and instances in the
Soldier that goes not on a Warfare at his own Cost, but expects Support and
Wages from those who Employ him. In the Planter of a Vineyard, who expects
Fruit from it; and in the Shepherd, who, as he keeps and feeds the Flock, so
expects to eat of the Milk of it: ver 7. Who goes a Warfare at any time at his
own charges? Who Planteth a Vineyard and Eats not of the Fruit thereof? or,
Who Feeds a Flock and Eats not of the Milk of the Flock? And then adds,
ver. 8, 9, 10. Say I these things as a Man? or says not the Law the same also?
For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not Muzzle the Mouth of the
Ox that Treads out the Corn: Does GOD take care for Oxen? Or says he it
altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt this is Written that he that
Ploweth should Plow in Hope; and he that Thresheth should be partaker of his
Hope. q. d. Is this what the Law or light of Nature only Suggests? or is it not
what the Law of GOD does so too? Yes surely, for the reason of the Law, Deuteronomy.
25.4. more forcibly obliges with respect to Men, especially such Men as are
employed in a Ministry for your Souls, than it did with respect to the Ox that
trod out the Corn. Did GOD take such care of that Inferior Creature, as to
ordain that Men should not deal Cruelly and Unmercifully with it, while it was
Laboring for them, and does he take no care of Us? Yes surely, the reason of
that Law reaches us with a greater force, that as he that Ploweth for another
Ploweth in hope to get Bread for himself by his Labor, and he that Thresheth
for another, Thresheth in hope of the same; so We that are the LORD's Plow-men,
working together with Him in Plowing up the Fallow ground of Men's Hearts, and
Sowing the Seeds of Righteousness there; and His Threshers, (by our Labors,
Exhortations and Arguments beating the Fruits of Good-works, to the Glory of
GOD, out of these among whom we Labor) might also labor in hope of a
Livelihood for ourselves, while we are doing His work and his Peoples.

3. By an Argument taken from the disparity or inequality of the things
mutually imparted or given by Ministers and their People that Support them.
ver. 11. If we have Sown unto you Spiritual things, is it a great thing if we
should Reap your Carnal things? q d. How reasonable is it that every one should
cheerfully Contribute to the Support of their Ministers, and since there is
such a Disparity or Inequality between the things they give to and receive from
them? Ministers give them not only a Quid for a Quo, i. e. a just Compensation
for such Support, but what is of much more value, there being a vast
Disproportion in point of worth or excellence between the Spiritual things
bestowed by the Minister, and the Carnal things bestowed by the People. Finally,

4. That it is the Will of CHRIST that the Gospel Ministry should have Support
from the People, he proves from the care he took of his Ministry under the Law,
ver. 13, 14. Do ye not know that they which Minister about Holy things Live of
the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with
the Altar? Even so has the LORD Ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel
should Live of the Gospel. q d. The Will of CHRIST in these days of the New
Testament is the same that it was during the time of the Old. He had a Ministry
then, the Tribe of Levi, for which Tribe he Ordained a Live-lihood, Numb.
18.22. Deuteronomy. 1^.9. and 18.1. So that they needed not to eat Bread by the Sweat
of their Brows. The case is the same now, its His Will and He has Ordained that
those who are taken off from their Worldly employments, and spend their time in
the Study and Preaching of the Gospel should have a Live-lihood by their
Labor. Having observed these things, I told Mr. Hitchcock 'twas evident from
the Scriptures cited, and what had been said on them, that, supposing the
Established Ministry of the Country is a true Gospel Ministry, the Duty of
Maintaining them is not among the number of mere Positives in Religion, but
Moral, and supposing that to be so, for proof of the point before me I offered
this Argument, Viz.

That if Lawful Authority have Right or Power to Determine the Undetermined
Modes of Moral Duties, then the present way of the Country in Maintaining
Ministers by a Public Rate or Tax is Lawful.

But Lawful Authority have Right or Power to Determine the Undetermined Modes
of Moral Duties.

Therefore the present way of the Country in Maintaining Ministers by a Public
Rate or Tax is Lawful.

To which I added, That the Support of Ministers by a Public Rate or Tax, was
one Mode or Manner (among diverse others) of Subsisting them, and that the Word
of GOD though it had placed this among the number of Morals in Religion, yet had
not Determined the Mode of it, or in what manner it should be done, whether by
Public Rate or Tax, or Weekly Contribution, or any other, only in General,
that it should be done in some way or other: And that if in such a case where
Moral Duties are thus Ciroumstanc'd, Lawful Authority may Rightfully Interpose
and Determine the Mode of them, then the present way of the Country in
Supporting Ministers must be Lawful, because 'twas what such Authority had by
positive Law determined. And this Ended the Debate, no Reply that I remember
being made to it. Whereupon the Reverend Mr. Mather Concluded with Prayer.

CHAP. IV. The Conclusion.
I Think nothing Material said on either side is Omitted in the Narrative
above, besure I have not willingly Omitted any thing of that Nature. In
accounting for some things, for the Advantage of such as may think it worth
their while to Peruse these Sheets, and more full Illustration of the matter in
hand, I have enlarged beyond what was said at the Debate, yet not varying from
the Substance of it. Yet let not any think what is here Related as then offered
on either of the Ar^icles above, the whole that may be said in Confirmation of
them It is not so, and as to the First more especially, (which relates to the
Subject of Baptism,) much more might be said and is by many others for
Confirmation of it, and then had been, had it been needful and time and
strength allowed. However by what is contained in the foregoing Pages, its
hoped Persons will see We of the Established Ministry in the Country, have
something to say for our Opinion and Practice in those Points, and at the same
time, reason to hope we are not in our Consciences convicted of Error in them,
as some of our Adversaries Scrupled not Reproachfully to say of us before the
Debate. I have no pleasure in Recriminations, especially on such Persons, yet
cannot forbear saying on this Occasion, that when at the time of the Debate I
urged them, ^^a any of them then present, and that Repeatedly, to make answer,
if they could, to the Arguments offered, and not a word could be obtained in
way of Answer from any of them, but all remained in a Dead Silence; when I did
so I say, and none so much as made an Attempt to Reply, I could not but think,
as I now do, that some Convictions of the Truth, by the Over-bearing Light and
Evidence of it were wrought in their Consciences; and at the same time how
Engaging, Insnaring a thing ERROR is, and what need we all have to look to our
selves and stand on our Guard against it. And alas, when this once gets hold
of us, how much are we put into the Hands of our Grand Enemy, and how many
Lusts are there that instantly rise up and set in with it, and almost
Inevitably oblige us to stand by it, and this, though the Error be such as if
retained, will issue in Eternal Ruin! Every Age and Place almost affords but
too many instances sorrowfully Confirming this Remark.

But its time that I hasten to an End; and for a Close (though the Obstinacy of
the Persons but now mentioned, and Contempt of all that can be said to them,
manifested in their Pertinacious persistance in their Old Practices,
nowithstanding all discourages me from an Address to them, yet) I think my self
obliged on this occasion earnestly to call upon and exhort all others to take
heed of them, as a sort of Men that without an Abuse may in the Apostles
Language be styled Seducing Spirits; who by bringing in F^lse Doctrines, (and
some of them Doctrines that inser a denial of the LORD that bought them) as
well as by their Subtle insin^^tions, endeavor to turn Men from the Truth,
that good Old way they have been Trained up in, and which GOD has many ways
Witnessed his Approbation of. (I mean the ^^stablished Religion of the Country
Recommended and Handed down to us by our Pious Progenitors) Take heed of them I
say, come not into the way of them, lest by their Insinuations you are
prevailed upon thus to do. We find the abounding of False Teachers, Seducing
Spirits, mentioned as one of the Calamities of that Late, Concluding Day of the
World into which doubtless we are cast, 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Pet. 2.1. and no doubt
for this reason as much as any other, its sp^ken of as a Time peculiarly
Perilous, 2 Timothy 3.1. -- It were well it Persons were sensible of this, knew the
Peril attending such Persons, and the Errors they ende^our to Advance or
Propagate, at least some of them. What the Apostle Col 2. says of some
Christians in his time, viz. That they did not hold the Head, etc. (i, e. though
in words they owned CHRIST; yet at the same time retained and taught such
Opinions and Practices as inferred a denial of Him) may with equal Truth be said
of some, at least, of the Persons now spoken of; though they talk of CHRIST,
and in Words seem to Honor him, yet they hold not the Head, their Opinions and
Practices inferring a Denial of him It were easy to make good this charge upon
them were it needful. And it being so, may we not with reason look upon them,
their Opinions, etc. as none of the least things rendering the present Day
Perilous? Certainly Opinions of this Nature are no less Damning than the most
Enormous Practices. Heaven can no more Receive one who holds not the Head (at
least in the sense the Apostle there speaks,) than it can the most Prosligate
Wretch. And this consideration, no doubt, was the occasion of that mighty
concern respecting the Jews, we find the Apostle making discovery of. Romans 9.
and 10 -- It was not their Immoralities, but their bad Principles or
Fundamental Errors that wrought in him that Concern lest they should fall short
of Life, as he there lets us know. Error is as Damning as Vice; the one is an
open Road, the other but a more By-path to Hell and Destruction. Take heed
therefore, and what Paul says to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.14. I would say to you on
this occasion, Continue in the things you have learned and be not by any means
turned aside from them And that you may take heed, I Will here for a Close leave
with you a few Considerations.

1 Con. The Way now Recommended for your Walk and Continuance in, is in all the
Substantials of it that good old way our Pious Progenitors walked in, and which
as they have variously Recommended to us their Children, so God has variously
witnessed his Approbation of. Its in all the Essentials of it the same way they
walked in. Indeed of us who are of the Present Day, it may be said that our
Seize generally speaking in that way are much short of what theirs were,
at least many of them; Where are those Eminent degrees of Faith, Love, Holiness
etc. that were Conspicuous in many of them? In how few to be found? Yet the way
we walk in and desire your Adherence to and Continuance in, is the same still
as to all Essentials of it. Our Doctrines of Faith and Precepts of Life were
theirs also, they Believed and Practiced them, and handed them down to us. Our
Ministry and Worship are the same with theirs in all the Essentials of them. We
do not in any thing material differ from them in these things. What I now say
is so well known to most, that any thing in way of proof cannot I think, be
needful. And this way, I say, they have variously Recommended to us, and God
has variously Witnessed his Approbation of it, that its the way he has Chosen
and Ordained for us to walk in. Besides their great Concern and Labor to train
us up in and inure us to it, (whereby they bore witness to it) they have
Recommended it by their frequent Attestations to it and that both while living
and when dying. We have in our hands, and no doubt many of you have also, such
performances of many of them while living, as wherein though they are now dead,
yet they bespeak us their Children in such words as these, viz This is the
Right way, walk in it: In this way we walking have sound God, Received Tokens
for good from him, the Pledges and Assurances of his Favor, even those that
are the Earnests of the Eternal Inheritance And not only so, but as holy David
when Old and Dying, being filled with a Pious Concern for Solomon that he might
both do and be well after he was gone, left it in Charge with him to know the
God of his Fathers, and serve him with a Perfect Heart and willing Mind, in the
same way they had gone before him, in 1 Chronicles. 28 9. So have not many of our
Pious Progenitors done in like manner? Of how many of them may we say that
words of this Import, were their last words to us? And with them they took
their leave of us: thereby giving witness to this way and assu^ing us that our
Adherance to and Walk in it was what they looked upon to be of an Importance
for us beyond other things, and was therefore what lay on their Spirits with a
peculiar Concern. Now this Consideration methinks should be of weight with us,
and mightily arm us with Resolution to adhere to it, and withstand all attempts
or endeavors of any whatever to turn us aside from this way. I Am sure it will
be so with all those that are wise, and Consider who and what those our
Progenitors were, partioularly that they were of those of whom the Psalmist
says Psalm. 25.14. That the Secret of the Lord is with them, and that to them be
shows his Covenant.

In a word, The Most High Himself has variously signified and witnessed his
Approbation of it. I might lustance here in more things than one, but it shall
suffice to say, He has done so by that peculiar Blessing wherewith he has
attended or followed it, whereby he has made it effectual for saving good to
Multitudes. It Is but little more then one Century of Years since New England
was numbered among those Dark Places of the Earth that are filled with the
Habitations of Cruelty, where Satan Reigns, and which belong to his visible
Kingdom, as having never been visited with the Day Spring from on High. But
since the happy Day has dawned, and it has been Blessed with the present
Established Religion and way of Worship, I believe that all Impartial Persons,
being Judges, will allow it has been a Fruitful Mother, bringing forth more
Children to God, and more Serious, Pure and Practical Religion than perhaps any
other Place in the known World, Caeteris Paribus, has done. And this I take to
be a good evidence of its being what God approves of and is well pleasing to
him. And may not we of the Established Ministry in New England, on this
Occasion, with little variation say to you as Paul on the like Occasion did to
the Corinthians 1 Cor. 9 2. If we are not Ministers to others, yet doubtless we
are to you, for the Seal of Our Ministry are ye in the Lord. The Conversion of
so many Sinners to a Life of Serious, Practical Religion, and the Building up
so many Saints in Faith and Holiness, is Gods Seal to Our Ministry; and what we
may with good Reason look upon as an Evidence of its being what he approves of.
Now it being so, every one will say its not easy to believe any such Exceptions
should lie against this way as may excuse any man in deserting of it.
Especially when herewith the following are Considered, Viz.

2. Con That in this way of Religion or Worship you have a True Gospel Ministry
in all the Essentials of it i. e. A Number of men in Succession who being
competently qualified for the Ministerial work, are Lawfully called and set
apart to it. None I think will doubt of this, but such as Dis-believe the
foregoing particular; since if that be true, this is little less than a
necessary Deduction or Corollary from it. That our Ministry, generally
speaking, are so far entich'd with Furniture for their Work or Office as to be
capable of answering the main designs of it, I presume will be allowed me. And
though as to their Call and Separation to it, some may think it not according to
the order of the Gospel, yet for my own part I Am not able to see those things
by Positive Laws or otherwise so Limited or Restrained there, to any particular
Mode or Modes of them, as to doubt of the Lawfulness of them as Practiced among
us, at least under our present Circumstances. As for the right of Nominating,
Electing and Calling Ministers to their Office, certain it is that in different
Places of the World, and Ages of the Church it has been variously assumed and
used; sometimes by the Laity, sometimes the Clergy, and at other times by the
Civil Powers: and no doubt there may be cases wherein either of them may
rightfully do so. But I shall not here enter into this Controversy, nor can I
think it needful since I presume there are few, if any, who will deny the
Established Ministry in the Country to have the Essentials of a true Gospel
Ministry.

3. Con The various Objections against this Ministry with which the Mouths of
such Seducers as would turn you away from it are filled, are Absurd, of no
Validity, nor can in any wise justify you in Deserting of it. Among the several
things which depraved reason (or something worse) in Seducers of all Ages has
suggested as proper to turn Men from the Truth, one has been this, viz.
Endeavors to load with Infamy such as are the Teachers and set for the defense
of it; and thereby bring them into Dis-reputation with their hearers. According
to which, as no Age of the Church scarce has been free from them, so the
Ministers of CHRIST have ever been the Objects of their Invectives and Railery.
Thus it is in this our Day. He is a Stranger to the men of this Character among
us who knows not that they have nothing so much in view, and in which they so
much lay out themselves as in Endeavors to bring an Odium upon the Ministry in
the Land, and hurt their Reputation and Interest with their People. To which
End they are daily spending their Invectives upon it; and such Truths taught
and maintained by it, as whereby their Enormous Opinions and Practices are
Condemned. Of this Strain and Tenor, and little else but this, are the
generality of the Harangues with which they entertain their Hearers. But how
Absurd and Senseless their Objections are, and how unable to Apologize for a
deserting this Ministry you will see in the following view of them.

To Instance then,

1. From what is related in the foregoing Narrative, as offered on the Third
Article, I cannot but presume you agree with me in this, viz. That Ministers may
of right Demand something in way of Reward for their Work, and by Consequence
that its no Valid plea or exception against our Ministry that they do so. This
every one knows is a main exception against it, especially in the Mouths of
those Sectaries you are now Cautioned against giving heed to. Those of the
Established Ministry in the Country they say are Hirelings, they Teach for Hire
and Divine for Money, Mic. 3.11. -- Yea and what is worse, they are Greedy Dogs
and Ravenous Wolves than devour their Flocks: Therefore come not nigh them. And
what they think justifies them in this Opprobrious Language, is only this, viz.
That Ministers according to the allowance and grant of CHRIST their Master,
demand and receive from their People, something in way of Reward for their
work. I grant, that in cases where its evident that Gain is a Ministers last or
highest end; and that indeed the Teaches for Hire and Divines for Money, in
the sense of the Prophet there, he is justly entitled to those opprobrious
Epithets. But in order to the conviction of any one in this point, something
more is needful than merely his Preaching the Doctrine of CHRIST and Paul in
this matter, and Practicing according to it; i. e. His asserting his Right to
partake and his actual receiving of the Temporal good things of those, unto
whom he communicates them that are Spiritual; this I say alone will not do it,
since as there is a vast difference between Preaching for Money; or other
Temporal good things, and taking them for Preaching; so this last is no more
than his great LORD has vested him with a Right to do, and is of absolute
necessity to all the designs of his Office. But I need not add here,
considering what has been said above on this Head. Nor,

2. Is it a valid Plea or Exception against our Ministry, that it is not
furnished for, called to and assisted in their Work, in the same immediate and
extraordinary ma^^er the Apostles and others in the morning of Christianity
mere. This also is what we may often hear alleged in way of exception against
it, by the Persons but now mentioned. O^r Ministers, they say, are not
Conformed to those Primitive Ministers in these things; are not in that
immediate, extraordinary manner furnished for, called to, and assisted in their
Work that they were; but as they Acquire all their furniture for it by on
humane ^^ucation, so by the assistance of that only do what they do in it; they
are therefore no true Ministers of Christ, nor to be received and followed as
such. To which I say, that we own the truth of this Exception as to the ^^er of
i^, but deny its Validity as to the end for which its made. We do not nor dare
we pretend to stand upon a Level with those Primitive Ministers in these
things, who freely ^nsess we are not furnished for, c^lled to, and assisted in
our work in that same immediate, extraordinary manner they were: but do not see
that this necessarily banishes (...) from the number of the true Ministers of
CHRIST, and that (as for other reasons to be suggested by and by, so because
its certain it was never the mind of CHRIST to continue such a Ministry to the
End of the World as they were; nor was it needful to the designs of that Office
that he should do so, and that because though its certain, 'twas necessary those
Primitive Ministers in the Morning of Christianity should be furnished for,
called to, and assisted in their Work in that immediate, extraordinary manner,
yet it is equally certain there is not the like necessity or reason that their
Successors in all Ages of the Church should be so The Gospel when first
Preached by CHRIST was a new and a strange Doctrine; a Mystery that had been
kept Secret from Ages and Generations then past; Romans 16.25. the World
understood it not, nor was there then any that were able to Instill or
Communicate the knowledge of it to others, and thereby so far forth to qualify
them to be Ministers of it. 'I was necessary therefore at that time, that
Divine Wisdom and Grace should interpose, and in an immediate and extraordinary
manner enrich and furnish some with the knowledge o^ it. Again, As it was a new
and strange Doctrine, so in order to its being received in the World, '^was
necessary it should carry its credentials with it, i.e should be attended with
something in those that Published it, that might be an evidence it was no
imposture or Cheat, but come from Heaven. And for this reason, that
extraordinary Power of Miracles those (...) five Ministers were endued with was
necessary. Further, This Doctrine being then to be Preached to all Nations, the
time being come for the breaking down the Partition Wall between Jew and
Gentile, and for extending the Blessing of Abraham (which till that ^ne had
been almost wholly confined to his natural Offspring the Jews,) to Gentiles of
a^ Nations, 'twas necessary that those first Ministers of it should be endued
with the extraordinary Powers of Tongues. And Finally, They being designed by
their Lord and Master CHRIST to ga^ner Churches and lay the Foundations of
Christianity, both among Jews and Gentiles, by Preaching this Doctrine among
them, they being both Enemies to it; and it being evident the Apostles were
like to meet with great Opposition from them, in their discharge of that Work,
'twas needful they should have that Power of Discerning Spirits, and that an
extraordinary measure and presence of the Spirit should go along with them. On
these accounts it is easy for any one to see, those extraordinary measures and
gifts were necessary for and in them. But now these reasons of those
extraordinary measures or dispensations toward them, not co^inning but ^easing
after a time, there was not a like necessity of their being continued to
succeding Ministers. When those first Ministers of CHRIST had Published the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and thereby Communicated the knowledge of it to others,
there was then among those to whom they had so Communicated it, some that were
so far forth furnished to be Ministers of it too, and there was no necessity of
an extraordinary and immediate Revelation of it to them. And when by Signs,
Wonders and Miracles wrought by them, the Doctrine they Preached was witnessed
to from Heaven, and proved to be from thence, 'twas not needful that a like
Power of Miracles should be continued to their Successors. And further, When in
pursuance of their extensive Commission, they had gone into all the World, and
Preached the Gospel among all Nations, gathered Churches and Ordained Officers
in them; what occasion was there for the continuance of the gift of Tongues?
And in a word, When by these means the Foundations of Christianity were laid,
and it had obtained some Reputation and Interest among men, those who Succeeded
them had not the like occasion for that Extraordinary Presence, Guidance and
Assistance of the SPIRIT that was Vouchsafed to them.

These things are plain and sufficient to convince any that though there was a
Necessity those first Ministers should be Extraordinarily Furnished, Called and
Assisted to and in their Work as they were, yet that there is not the like
Necessity that their Success^rs in all Ages should be so: And that for ^^to
expect a Ministry to the End of the W^^ld Furnished, Called and Assisted as
they were is Senseless, Unreasonable and what carries in it matter of
Imputation on the Most ^igh, God and Nature we say, do nothing in Vain; nothing
without such Reasons and Ends as Justify the doing of it: This doubtless is as
true as any Article of Our Creed; but how it can be so, Provided what these
Enthusiastic Objectors say, be true, viz. That all True Ministers of Christ in
all Ages are Furnished, Called and Assisted as the Apostles were, I am not able
to see. On this Ground alone, were there no other, we may, I think, safely
conclude that if among the many Pretenders to the Character of the true
Ministers of Christ, any are to be found that are really so, as doubtless there
are, they are in these Respects a set of men different from what those first
Ministers were. But for further Conviction here, before I leave this
particular, I would ask these silly Objectors what they intend when they say
that all those that are the true Ministers of Christ are Furnished, Called and
Assisted in the same immediate, extraordinary manner the Apostles were? Do they
intend that in all Respects they stand upon a Level with them in these things,
or in some only? I think there are few, if any, of them now under such a Degree
of Enthusiasm or Madness as to pretend the former: As Blind as they are they
see this will be in effect to deny that Christ has now, or in any Age since
those first Ministers went off has had, any true Ministers on Earth; since
among the or^^oy that pretend to be so, there are none to be found endued with
those Powers of Miracles, Tongues, and disce^ning of Spirits which they had I
Charitably believe they themselves think that those who in any time past have,
or now may pretend to those things, were and are V le deceivers. All that they
can be understood therefore to intend, when thus they say, is this, viz. That
what Furniture the true Ministers of CHRIST have for their Work, is immediately
from the SPIRIT; that by Him they are immediately called to it; and that what
they do in it is by his immediate Suggestion and Assistance This as I take it,
is what they intend, and this some of these silly Objectors, especially such as
are Teachers among them, pretend to: And hence as they declaim against Humane
Learning, as they call it, as what is no ways necessary to accomplish any for
the Ministry, wait not for a call from Man, so in Preaching, Renoencing all
Previous Meditation or Study to prepare for it; they depend, as they say,
entirely on the Suggestions and Assistance of the Spirit. But now supposing
this to be the case with all true Ministers of Christ, that they are thus
furnished, called and assisted, yet this comes much short of what was Visible
in the Apostles; and it must remain a Truth even with these Objectors
themselves, that its no valid Objection or Plea against our Ministry, that they
are not in all points such as the Apostles were. But further, How do these Men
prove that even this is the just or true Character of the Gospel Minister? and
that they themselves, or such as are Teachers among them at least, who they
say, are the only true Ministers of CHRIST, are thus immediately furnished for,
called to, and assisted in their Work? Why we have but their Autos Ephe, their
bare word for it, nor must we expect any thing more. Whatever some of them in
times past, being under an extraordinary Infatuation, have done yet there are
none of them now, I think, make any pretenses to that evidence or proof of
this, the Apostles, etc. of old gave, or any other that might be equally
convincing and satisfying to such as doubt of the Truth of what they say. And
this to me, and I believe to all Men that are not given up to such strong
Del^sion as to believe Lies, is a convincing evidence these Miserable Creatures
are sadly deceived, and that what ever they think and would persuade others to
think concerning the Spirit by which they are, as they say, thus furnished,
called and assisted, Yet that really and in truth it is no other than that
fallen Spirit that of old said respecting Ahab's Prophets, I Will go forth and be
a Lying Spirit in their Mouths, 1 King. 22.22. For certainly were they
immediately Furnished, Called and Assisted, as they say, they would be enabled
to give such Proof of it as the Apostles did, or some other that might be
equally satisfying; and we should not be left to their Word only for
satisfaction in that matter. Princes when they send their Ambassadors on any
Errand, expect not that those to whom they are sent should depend on their
naked Word only for proof of their Mission, but together with their
Instructions, furnish them with such Credentials as may be an evidence of it:
And can we think that the Most High in this affair, which all must allow to be
of the Highest Importance, would leave us at such uncertainty whom he sends, as
in that case he must do? Is this consistent with his Wisdom and Goodness? No
furely, for how should we know who to believe, or how to distinguish such as
thus came from him, from Deceivers! Contrary to this we find all along, that
when he has thus furnished and sent any Persons on any Errand or Business, he
has at the same time furnished them with such things as might be an evidence to
all that they were so sent. He is Blind that in Reading the Scriptures cannot
see this, and its needless for me to give instances of it on Record there. From
whence I think we may, yea we must Conclude that neither is this the true
Character of a Gospel Minister, that he is not one immediately furnished for,
called and assisted to and in his Work and that as for such as say they are so
and therefore true Ministers of CHRIST, they do but Lie and deceive us. And
further, That if we would find the men that are so, we must look for them
elsewhere, and not among these Vile pretenders to the things they are
strangers to. To Conclude, Though we find in Scripture, the appointment of a
Ministry in the Church to the End of the World, yet we no where find these
things mentioned as the Character of that Ministry, but on the other hand that
it is a number of Men in succession, who being by the ordinary Blessing of GOD
on proper endeavors of their own, so furnished with Light and Grace as to be
capable of the Ends of the Ministerial Work, are by Man regularly called and
set apart to it; and by the ordinary Influences of Grace Assisted in it. And if
this be so, as I think its not difficult to prove, its to be hoped the
generality of our Ministers have a fair claim to be accounted of this Number,
and by Consequence that its no just exception against them that they stand not
upon a Level with the Apostles in the abovementioned particulars. Nor Finally.

3. Do we impose on our People, teach them to observe things unnecessary, and
Doctrines which we think False and don't ourselves Believe. The contrary to
this, how much soever of Infamy it carries with it, yet is what may frequently
be heard from the Mouths of these Men. Our Ministers, they say, are Deceivers,
walk in Craftiness, impose on their People unnecessary Burdens; and urge on
them the belief of Doctrines they themselves don't believe. To this effect, as
is before observed, some of them Scrupled not to say of us before the Debate
related above. To which Opprobrious Charge, not rendering Evil for Evil, nor
Railing for Railing, I hope we can say with the Blessed Apostle in the like
case, 1 Cor. 4.12, 13. That being Reviled, we Bless; being Defamed we entreat.
We wish them more Charity, and beg of GOD to give it them; and further, that we
can Appeal to Heaven for a Testimony of our Innocence in these points. I Am sure
I know not the Man of this Character concerning whom I dare think otherwise.
Its not difficult to guets what these Objectors refer to when they thus
Reproach us: They, or at least some of them, think the Sacraments of the New
Testament, Rituals of Religion, which like those of Moses's Law are now ceased
and of no Obligation. This is what they Teach, and perhaps some of them, from
the Ignorance that is in them, may Believe. But does it therefore follow that
they are really so, and that we in Preaching another Doctrine do teach the
Observance of unnecessary things? It Is not long since some of them taught the
same Doctrine concerning the BIBLE it self, and scrupled not to load that
Sacred BOOK with the most Opprobrious Epithets. And does it thence follow that
that is unnecessary too, and that we in Preaching otherwise teach unnecessary
things? To be short, How Trifling and Unnecessary so ever these men, (viewing
these Sacred Institutions of our LORD simply in themselves and not considering
at the same time, nor perhaps understanding, heir Relation to the Covenant,
their Symbolical Nature, nor their designed End or Use,) may think them, yet we
that know these things and consider them, cannot but look upon them as signal
discoveries of the Wisdom and Grace of CHRIST, very necessary to be retained
and observed, and of great Advantage to the ends of Christianity. And further,
as for our Doctrine Respecting the Necessity of them we are sure its among the
things left in Charge to the Ministers of the Gospel, by Christ their Master in
that Commission by which we Preach.

Nor is it difficult to Conje^ture what they intend, when they charge us with
Preaching Doctrines which we our selves think false and don't believe. To this
head no doubt belong our Doctrines respecting the subject and Manner of
Baptism. To which I shall only say, That as I have no reason to doubt that we
all Believe as we Teach in those matters, so on what Grounds we do so; I have
in part, at least, accounted for them in the foregoing Narrative. To the same
head also, doubtless, belong our Doctrines respecting the Decrees of GOD,
Original Sin, the Extent of CHRIST's Redemption, etc. In all which they are
generally Opposite to Us, and Teach in those Points what those men of Great
Renown with them ( Pelagius and Arminius) before them have taught. To which I
shall think it enough to say that as these things are deservedly to be Ranked
among the Dusnoeta of Religion i. e. Things hard to be under^ stood and
determined upon, so these Objectors, when they talk of them, I Am well assured,
talk of things they understand not; and which are utterly beyond their Sphere
or Compass. And as it would better become such Persons to be more Modest,
either wholly Silent or less Dogmatical and Positive in these matters, which
indeed are a great deep, and puzzle the most Learned and knowing Head, so as
for what we teach Concerning them, we Conceive it to be according to the Faith
which of Old was delivered to the Saints; and being as sure of this as Our best
endeavors to be rightly informed in these things can make us, if after all we
are mistaken, we have reason to hope God will not impute it to us for Sin.

4. In this way you bid as fair for ^eaven at lash, and are under as good
Advantages for it (for ought I know) as you can be in any other; Yea far
greater and better ^han you can Ration^^ly, hope to be in the way to which
these Seducers would turn you aside. In this way Our Fathers before us attained
at length that Blessed Place. Here it was that they found those Wells of
Salvation from whence they drew the water of Lise: Were nourished up in the
words of Faith, and at length made meet for the Kingdom; and so may you too if
it be not your own ^ault: Nor can you be under better Advantages for it in any
other way that I know of: Besure I think all Persons disinterested and free
from any Bias or Inclination to either way, being Judges, will say that a man
must divest himself of all Reason, and become altogether one of a Reprobate
mind or sense before he can entertain any hopes of this nature in that way to
which the Persons I am now speaking of would draw you aside. Who in his right
Wits can think those that adhere to and follow them are exalted above you in
this Respect, viz. That they are under better Advantages to attain that blessed
Place and End at last than you? Have they better means of Instruction and
growth in Grace? Are their Teachers more knowing than yours, or are they more
Painful and Faithful? What, have they either natural Capacities, or other
Advantages to search out and know the Truth, beyond what we have, or are they
more Studious, Painful and Diligent in the use of proper means for that end
than we are? Who can think so, yea who knows not the Contrary to this to be
truth? And that partly through the want of necessary helps for the obtainment of
that Knowledge that is necessary to qualify any to be Teachers of others, and
partly through an Avowed Neglect and Contempt of them, they are Generally
speaking a Set of men extremely Ignorant, especially in matters of Faith or
Doctrine, and so ill able to be Guides to the Blind and show them their way,
that indeed they know not their own. A little Conversation with them is enough
to satisfy any one of this. Nor do I Remember any one (of the many I have
Conferred with) that was able to account for even any of the more Essential
Doctrines of Christianity, with that distinct^ess that might give any Reason to
hope he might lead others to any tolerable Notions concerning them. And it
being so, as its absurd for any to pretend or hope for better helps for
improvement in Knowledge with them, than in the good old way you are Counseled
to adhere to; so is it equally so, for any to pretend or flatter themselves
with hopes of better helps for progress and improvement in Grace; since its
certain these two go together, nor can the latter be without the former. And as
for Faithfulness in our work, though I Am far from thinking there are no Instances
among us of the want of it; and instead of saying so, I will rather say, Would
to GOD there were fewer of them; Yet I look upon my self bound charitably to
think this is not the Case with the generality, no nor with many of our
Mini^^ry; nor durst I allow my self to think otherwise than that there is upon
the Spirits of the most of them, a Religious Concern to Approve themselves to
GOD: That it does not content them to walk in Craftiness and handle the Word of
God deceitfully, but that it lies with Concern upon their Spirits by a
manifestation of the Truth to Commend themselves to every man's Conscience in
the sight of God. When we pretend to be the mouth of God to our People, we
cannot think ourselves faithful in only delivering to them an old Premeditated,
and yet Incoherent, Senseless, Unintelligible heap of Jargon, which perhaps we
have gone over with scores of times before, and in endeavors to establish some
Extra-essential matters wherein we differ from others, and in spending some of
our Gall in Invective and Railery against such as dissent from us; this indeed
is all, I, or perhaps any one else, have ever heard from the mouths of those
Teachers I am now dissuading you from; and this, they, and perhaps many of
their miserable, Deluded hearers think Merits for them the Character of
Faithful: And verily when I can think so too, I Will agree with them and
acknowledge they are blessed with the most faithful Teachers. No we cannot think
these things to be that faithfulness in this Article of our work, which our
great Lord Requires, and therefore have no great Ambition or Zeal this way, but
rather with Paul to declare to our People the whole Counsel of GOD, and to be
to them like good Householders bringing forth of our Treasury things New and
Old, and so to divide the Word of Truth that every one may have their Portion
and that in Season. In a word, as we believe we are Embass^dors of Christ,
called and sent by him, and from him have Received a Solemn Charge to be
faithful in all parts of the Work he has entrusted with us, so we are not I
hope without a due sense that we ourselves have Immortal Souls to save or lose,
as well as our People, and that as their Souls are in a sense Entrusted with
us, so a Day is before us when we must Account for them. We believe and have a
sense of these things, nor are we without such frequent reflections on them as
furnish us daily with forcible motives to Faithfulness, and I charitably
believe, leave us not without endeavors after it.

5. By going after these Seducers you will be in danger of falling at length into
such Errors, and embracing such Opinions as will render your Salvation
altogether Hopeless. There are few, its probable, if any, of those among us who
do so, that have apprehensions of any such danger attending them, but certain
it is, that the Instances of this have been so many as may suffice for an
evidence in the case, and at the same time to warn and caution you against
doing so. And that you may have a just sense of it, and for the future be more
cautious of coming nigh these men, I will here give you some Passages from that
Excellent Man Mr. BAXTER, which you may find in his Book of
Infant-Church-Membership and Baptism, before mentioned, Page 147, 148 --

And as Anabaptistry, says be, has been no greater a Friend to men's Salvation
with us, so every man knows that it is the ordinary inlet to the most horrid
Opinions. Now few did you ever know that came to the most Monstrous Doctrines,
but it was by this Door? And how few did you ever know that entered this Door,
but they went on further, except they Died or Repented shortly after? I confess
of the Multitudes of Anabaptists that I have known, at the present I cannot
call to mind any one that has ^^opt there. Most that I have met with are
Separatists, Arminians, or Antinomians, or both; (for they have found out a way
to join these extremes, which a man would think impossible;) Socinians,
Libertines, Seekers or Familists. But because men may refuse to Credit my
Experience of them, I appeal to the Writings of all of them that I can remember
ever Wrote. Whither Mr. Denis arrived by this way, his Writings show, and his
late Confession, when he was to be put to Death for Rebelling with the
Levellers. What horrible things Collyer is come to, his Writings against
Ordinances witness Mr Saltmarsh his Writings estify the like too openly. Paul
Hobson (one of the Subscribers of the Churches Confession) publishes himself a
Socinian to the World, teaching that GOD was never at Enmity with men, but only
men with GOD, and that CHRIST did not Reconcile GOD to Man, but only Man to
GOD, and did not purchase Love, Life and Salvation, but was sent to manifest
them, etc. And a little below he adds, Whither Mr. Dell is arrived, let his
Sermon against Reformation, and his Treatise against Uniformity witness, How
far Mr. William in New England went by this way, that Plantation can Sadly
witness; but England far more Sadly, who giving him ki^^dsier Entertainment
than they, have received far more hurt by him, when he became the Father of the
Seekers in LONDON. And a little after, 'What should ^ tell you of all those
hideous Pamphlets against Ordinances and for the Mont^^lity of the Soul, and
that the Soul is GOD himself, and against the Truth of Scripture, and down
right Familism, Libertinism and Paganism, such as R. Wilkinsons, The Mad man's
dissection of the Divinity, etc. with a Multitude more, which all spring from
this root of Anabaptistry. I remember four year ago when Anabaptistry had not
been long in the Country, about Marshfield and Trubridge and those parts, they
maintained that CHRIST took our Sins into his Nature, as well as our Flesh, and
so had Original Corruption as well as we; and that men's Souls are but a Beam
of GOD, or GOD himself appearing in several Bodies, and when Men die the Soul
is in GOD again. And a Line or two below, I will not stand to name any more to
you, but only one, which being late is fresh in our Memory, and being not far
off us, is nearer our Knowledge, and being most ^^eadful, should be heard with
Trembling, as one of GOD's most Fearful Judgments; and that is Mr. Coppe and
his followers, called by some the Ranters, by others the High-Attainers: This
man was a Zealous Anabaptist; when I was Preacher to the Garrison of Coventry,
he was Preacher to the Garrison of Compton-House in the same Country, and I
heard of no Opinion that he vented or held but the necessity of Re-baptizing
and Independency; and was a sharp reproacher of the Ministry; (which is the
common Character of all Schismatical subverters of the Church, they smite the
Shepherds that they may scatter and devour the Sheep more easily;) this man
continued a most Zealous Re-baptizer many years, and Rebaptized more than any
one man that ever I heard of in the Country, witness Warwickshire, Oxfordshire,
and part of Worcestershire, etc. till at last GOD gave him over to a Spirit of
Delusion that he fell into a Trance, and professed himself that he continued in
it three or four Days, and that he was in HELL, and that he received those
Revelations which he has Published in his Book, in which he Blasphemously
arrogates to himself the Sacred Name and Titles of GOD, and cries down Duties
and Godly Life, by the name of [Plaguy Holiness,] and Swears most vilely, and
professes that it does him more good to run on Men, and tear them by the Hair,
and Curse like a Devil, and make them Swear by GOD than to join in Family
Duties and in Plaguey Holiness: And that he can Swear a full mouthed Oath, and
can Kiss his Neighbors Wife in Majesty and honor, which if a Precisi^n do
that knows Sin, he shall be Damned for it, ^^^e pleads for Community and a
^ainst Propriety, and says he went up and down London Streets with his Ha^
Cocked, his Teeth ^nashing his Eyes fixed, charging the great ones to obey his
Majesty within him. This and abundance more such hideous Blasphemies his o^^n
book contains. And his Practice is answerable to his Profession, for he went up
and down teaching this to the poor Professors in the Country, and Swears most
hideously in his Conference and ^re^ching; and Cursing and Lascivious Practices
not to be named, are his Religion. It may be some will say that he is a Mad
man; but it is otherwise, as may be known by those that will speak with him He
is now in Coventry Jayl, where he was once before upon his Re^bapt zing, for
which they were taken to be Persecutors by those that are now Approvers of his
Sufferings: but doubtless he is worse than Mad in his Delusion But O the
Dreadfulness of GOD's Judgments! Would any Christian ever have believed that
such a man should have any followers? and that Men and Women professing the
Zealous fear of GOD, should ever be bro't to place their Religion in Revelling
Roaring, Drinking, Whoring, open full mouthed Swearing ordinarily by the Wounds
and Blood of GOD, and the fearfullest Cursing that has been heard; as if they
were all Possessed with Devils, as for my part I think they are? Yet so it is:
Many of his People fell into Trances as well as he, and go about like Walking
Devils in this language and carriage. And a few ^ines below he adds, And is not
the Plague of Blindness upon his Understanding that will not see the hand of
GOD in this? The LORD is known by the Judgments which he execateth, Psalm. 9.16.
And is not that man a Second Pharaoh that yet will not see nor stoop to GOD? Is
not the name of the Sin Legible in the Judgment? And does not GOD testify from
Heaven against Anabaptism plainly by all these? Are they ^or even as visible
Characters of GOD's Displeasure as the Monsters in New England were? The LORD
grant that neither I, nor any friend of mine, may be ever so blinded or hardened
as to run upon the face of such visible Judgments, and to overtook the Apparent
Finger of GOD and to stop our Ears when he thus speaks from Heaven. Thus that
Great and Good Man. And is not this enough to convince any man of the danger of
what I am now dissuading you from and to let him see what Obligations lie upon
us all to take heed of these Men, which but too many are apt to make bold with
and go in the way of? I my self could give other instences of the like nature,
of a later date and nea^er home; but these may suffice, and how Blind and
Stupid are we, if by them we are not led to Apprehensions of our danger from
these men, who are so industrious to sow the Seeds of Anabaptism,
Antinomianism, Familism, as well as many other Error, among us. The LORD grant
that hereby your Eyes may be opened, and that henceforth you may not look upon
going to heas them in the places where they come; yea any unnecessary
Conversation with them, as things without Peril or Danger. Alas! Error is an
Ensuaring thing, one of those Snares with which this Sinful Calamitous World in
which we live is silled, and by which our Busy Enemy destroys Multitudes: And
when once we step aside to it and embrace it, though it be of a more Trivial
nature, yet we know not where we shall stop, and whith^r our Adversary without
us and Hearts within us, will carry us e're we have done. Let the Instances
above mentioned, with others that might have been, and of which, many of you at
least, know, be as so many Pillars of Salt serving to warn and caution you to
take heed.

6. These Seducers who thus endeavor to turn you from this good old way our
Fathers walked in, and the way they would gain you ever to an Embracement of,
are but of Yesterday. Novelty in matters of Religion has ever with reason been
lo^ked upon as a thing rendering them suspicious or doubtful, it being what
alone carries in it no small evidence of their falsehood; whereas Antiquity on
the other hand, tenders them sacred and venerable, as being what carries with
is not a little evidence of their Truth. In the Morning of Christianity when
the Gospel was first preached to the World, we find that the Novelty of it was
by the Enemies of it looked upon as a sufficient evidence of its falsehood, and
what excused them in their Conduct toward it Act. 17.19.

Certain it is that that Sect, Party, Faith and Way which is according to GOD
is very Ancient, and can deduce its descent from the Earliest times; whereas
that which is not so, is of a later Date. And this certainly is the case with
that ^ect (or those Sects) I am now speaking of, and the way they would gain
you over to. It Is Novel and but of Yesterday. When those of the Romish Communion
demand of us Protestants, saying, Where was your Religion (your Faith, Worship
and Ministry) before Luther and Calvin? We not only tell them it had a being
before those worthy Reformers lived but show them it had so, by tracing it even
to the Earliest times. But should any man thus demand of the Persons I Am now
speaking of, whatever they might reply, yet certainly they would find
themselves utterly ^nable to do the like; since its a most certain Truth their
Religion, i. e. their Faith, Worship and Ministry never had being in the World
before Luther's time. (Unless we suppose, as some do, that it lived before in
the Gnostics, Manichees, or Mont anists, and some other Heretics of a more
Ancient date.) Germany was the place where this Sect (or these Sects) first
made their appearance in the World, and it was not till the Sixteenth Century,
(about the Twenty second Year of it,) when the Glorious work of Reformation was
begun, that they did so. About this time and soon after, it was that Nicholas
Stork, Thomas Muncer, John Becold, Balthazar Hubm^ir, David George, Caspar
Swenchfield, Henry Nicolas, with many others, were inspired and raised up by
the INFERNAL SPIRIT to obstruct the work of Reformation, and what Cursed
Blasphemies and Damnable Errors they endeavored to infect the minds of men
with, and what opposition Luther and others in his day, and after him, met with
from them in carrying on that Blessed Work, the Writers of those times give us
to understand.

They styled themselves the Family of Love, but by others they were called
Anabaptists, Antin^mians, Libertines, Familists, Swenchfieldians, etc. Calvi^
wrote a Treatise against them, which in his Dedication, he says, he did for
this end, viz. To admonish all Godly men how mortal a Poison the Opinion of the
Anabaptists is, He begins it thus, If I, says he, should write against all the
Errors and false Opinions of the Anabaptists, I should undertake a Long work,
and enter into a Deep from whence I should have no p^ssage out: For this Puddle
does herein differ from all other Sects of Heretics, that they do not only err
in several things, but are as it were a vast Sea of Stupendous Dotages, so
that there can scarce be found the head of one Anabaptist which is not
possessed with some Opinion different from the rest; therefore there would be
no end of my work if I should discuss, yea, or but rehearse all the Wicked
Doctrines of this Sect, etc. He goes on, and shows they were then divided
especially into two Sects, one more Moderate and Simple, that Boasted of
Scripture, and were wont to plead it with great Confidence for their Tenets;
two of which were, that Infants are not to be Baptized, and that there should
be stricter and popular Discipline in every Church, and the Wicked more
separated from Sacraments and Communion. The other sort, he says, were called
Libertines, who pretended to be so Spiritual as to be above Scripture, and had
a Mystical, Ambiguous way of speaking proper to themselves, Confounding Good
and Bad, God and Satan, and Darkning all things. Thus that Holy man. And in
this short account of those Heretics, have we not a lively description of the
Persons (of this our Day) I am now speaking of? Are there not two sorts or
sects of them, one of which, show some regard to Scripture and Ordinances and
will plead for them; the other are so Spiritual (or at least its not long since
they were so) as not to stand in need of either of them, and accordingly were
wont to speak of them not without Reproach and Contempt!

But though these men at first were known only in Germany and parts Adjacent,
and unknown to all the World besides, yet it was not long that they were
confined to that. In the year 1575 I find they had found the way over into
England; for in that year they Published there a Confession (I suppose) of
their Faith, but so lax and general, says Mr. Rutherford, that it was hard to
know or say what it was, Vid. Rutherford's Survey of the Spiritual Antichrist,
page 168 These were those whom Henry Nicolas (that first Illuminated Elder of
the Family of Love, as he styles himself) had seduced and infected with his
Errors, it being, as far as I can learn, a little before this time that he went
over from the Lower Germany (where he had spread his ^eresies) into England.
vid Survey, etc. page 55. In the year 1604 together with the abovesaid
fraudulent Confession, they presented a supplication to King JAMES the First,
which was Printed at Cambridge, Anno 1606, in which they concealed their ^oul
Tenets, says Mr. Rutherford, Survey, etc. page 168. and 343. And what dreadful
effects followed their coming into that Land, how much the Interest of
Religion, as well as the civil Peace, suffered by them, he is a Stranger to the
History of the times following that is insensible. From thence it was that this
Sect or Sects, came over into these American parts, and Sowed the Seeds of
Familism, Antino^ianism and Libertinism here Nor were the Churches of CHRIST
scarcely settled here, before those Seeds began to spring up. The first whom
Satan employed in that work, were Mr. Wheelright with some Adherents of his,
and Mrs. Hut^hinson, the Wife of Mr. William Hutchinson of Boston, and Daughter
of one Mr. Marbury, sometime Minister in London. This Woman has been wont to be
styled by some, and that deservedly, THE AMERICAN JEZABEL; she was, says Mr.
Rutherford, Survey, page 176 Haughty, Bold, Active in Wit, Eloquent Vain and
Self-conceited, would not seruple to Lie, and brought her Errors with her from
England. She drew after her many godly People, and many that were loose and
profane, by the means of a Weekly Lecture she held in her House, under a
pretense of Repeating Sermons. She was wont to reproach Ministers as Legalists,
and said she was forewarned by GOD in Old England, that she should Separate
from all Ministers because legal men, except Mr. Cotton and Mr. Wheelright;
that she should come to New England and suffer for the Truth, and should be
delivered as Daniel was from the Lions. Among those sowers of Tares in those
early days of New England, there was also one Samuel Gortyn or Gorton, a
predecessor probably of that Stephen Gortyn or Gorton, who is now a Teacher
among our Anabaptists and Familists in the present day. What their Tenets or
Opinions in particular were, you may see at large in the abovementioned Survey
of the Spiritual Antichrist; and that they well accorded with the Abominable
Doctrines and Blasphemies of Swenchfield, Muncer, Becold, David George, Henry
Nicolas, the Theologia Germanica, and the Bright Star, with the rest of that
Cursed Gang, every one not ignorant of them will see.

Thus I have given you the true Genealogy of these men from whom you are now
counseled to turn away; they are the off spring of the Abominable Sect or
Sects abovementioned; and though some of them may be and I charitably hope and
think are in some measure reformed, and dis^laim some of, the Abominations of
their Progenitors, yet cartain it is that they still retain so many of them, as
loudly call upon every one to take heed of them. And it being as I have now
showed, viz. That they are but of Yesterday, (...) were not known in the World
till about two Mundred Years past, how can it be that the way of Truth should
be with them? Have we not in this an irrefragable Evidence of the Contrary?
What, was there no true Church, Religion, Worship, Ministry in the World all
the time down from CHRIST and his Apostles, to Luther's. Days, when as I have
showed, this Sect, or Sects, first appeared in the World? Did GOD hide the
Truth from the World all that long space of fifteen Hundred Years, and then
Reveal it to those men? Who, that is not under a worse and more grievous
possession than that Miserable man spoken of Luke 8.30 can think so? Yea, who
in his Wits durst think a though it carrying with it such matter of Imputation on
the Most High as this does? Finally,

7. The Sect, or Sect, you are now cautioned against, have never served the
In^erest of Religion, but have done much to the Dis-service of it in all Plac^s
where ever they came. This is what the Learned and Godly have observed of them
ever since they made their first Appearance i^ the world. For Evidence of this
I will give you here some further Passages from Mr. Ba^ter, whose Testimony, I
presume, none will suspect. You may find them in his Book before cited, from
Page 1^9 to 147. In the first mentioned Page he begins thus, viz.

What a hinderance the Anabaptists were to the Gospel in Germany, by resisting
the most Painful, Godly Ministers, and reproaching and vilifying them, by their
Wick^^l Lives, by their Hardening the Papists, and Scandalizing the Ignorant,
and hindering the Conversion of Multitudes that begun to have some liking to
the Gospel, is too evident in most of the Writers of those times, there being
few Divines of Note who do not bear Witness of it frequently in their Writings;
as Luthen, Melancthon, Illericus, Zuinglius, Bullinger, Leo Judah, Calvin, with
Multitudes more. How they hindered the Gospel at Limburge against Junius, you
may read in his Life. How they hindered it at Auspur^e, and what stirs and
oppositions they made against Urbanus, Regius, and Musculus afterward, and
other Ministers, is to be seen as in the History of the Lives of the said
Divines, so in many others. Sleidan's relation of their carria^^ in well known;
and how they have helped on the Gospel wherever they have since been
entertained as in the ^o^. Countri^^ or (...) where (...), is commonly known.
Those few that formerly wo^e in England we know did more against it than for
it. And page 143 ^^^^^d the close o^it, he adds, I have says h^, ^^ad too much
opportunity to know very many of th^se c^lled Anabaptists, and to ben ^an^iliar
with them; and having first examined my Heart, lest I should wrong them out of
any di^^ffection through difference of Judgment; as I clearly discover that I
hear no ill will to any one man of them, ^or ever ^^d, nor find any Passion,
but Compassion moving me to say what I do for I do impartially, and truly
affirm concerning the most of them that I have Conversed with, as follows,
viz. That I have known few of them so much as Labor a^^er, the W^^^ing of
Souls from Sin to GOD, and bringing them into Love with CHRIST and ^oliness,
and Heaven; but the main scope of their endeavors in Public and Private is to
Propagate their Opinions ^and if they do Preach any plain wholesome Doctrine, it
is usually but Subservient to their great design, that the Truth may be as
Sugar to Sweeten their Errors, that they may be the easier Swallowed. And so
strangely are they transported with a desire to bring men to their Opinion, as
if they were never in a happy condition till they are Rebaptized, or as if
there were no hope of the Salvation of the Holiest men till then, and as if
there were little more than this required to make men Happy. For this is the
Doctrine that they most eagerly press; and if they can get the Pro^anest
Persons to embrace their Opinions, and be Rebaptized, they usually make much
of them, and show more affection to them, than to the most Godly that differ
from them. Nay more, They are the greatest hinderers of the Work of GOD in the
Converting of Souls, and Reforming the Church, that I know in the Land. What
others have done, I will not say, but I know none of the most Profane or
Malignant, that are half so bitter Enemies to the Ministry, and so great
Hinderers of the Saving of Souls. Alas! How often has it Wounded my Spirit
with Grief, to see and hear men professing to be more Godly than others, to
make it the very business of their Lives to Disgrace the Ministers of the
Gospel and make them Vile and O^^ us to the People! If they come into company
of the Profane, that hate a Godly Painful Minister for seeking their Salvation,
these men will harden them in it, and say far more against the Minister than
the most Notorious Scorners were wont to do; and that not in a bare Scorn,
which is less sticking, but in serious Slanders, persuading the poor People
that their Ministers are Hypocrites and Belly-gods, and mere Self-seekers, that
study but to feed their own Guts, and to make a Prey of the People, and to
Advance themselves and be Masters of all men; and that they are Cruel,
Blood-thirsty Persecutors, Baals Priests, and Antichristian Seducers, and that
they preach Falsehood to our People, and tell Lies in the Pulpit, with the like
Accusations. O how this Confirms men in their Enmity to the Doctrine of the
Gospel and the Preachers of it! When poor People hear those despise the
Ministry, that once were constant hearers, and hear those deride Family Duties,
and Holy Walking, and the Lords Day, who once seemed Godly, they may think that
sure these men that have tried this strict way, see some Evil in it, or else
they would never speak against it so much. Nay, I never heard any of the old
Scorners that would Scorn half so bitterly and reproachfully as some of these
men. Read but the Books called Martin, Mar: Priests, and then Judge. And
usually when they run up into a Pulpit or Preach in Private, the chief scope of
their Doctrine is to persuade the People that the Ministers are Seducers and
Liars, and false Prophets, etc. as if the poor People were in the sure way to
Salvation, if they could but have base thoughts of their Ministers; and as if
the first thing that they have need to learn to make them Happy, were to Scorn
their Teachers, whom the Holy Ghost commands them to Obey, Heb. 13.7.17. and
highly to esteem them for their Works sake, and know them to be over them in
the LORD, 1 These. 5.12, 13. How could all the Devils in Hell have found out a
more effectual means to make all the People despise and disregard the Gospel,
and so to Perish certainly and speedily, than by thus bringing them to Vilify
the Messengers of the Gospel, and think it a virtue to reproach and forsake
their Guides. And page 146 you have these words, In my own experience I never
knew the Labors of any Zealous Anabaptist that ever GOD Blessed to the true
Conversion of many Souls; but many they make mere talking, censorious
Opiniatists, and usually there leave them. Nay, I desire any sober Christian
but to look impartially through all the Land, and tell me wherever any such
Teachers lived, but the place in general was much the worse for them. Where the
Gospel before Prospered, and Christians spent their Time and Conference in the
Edifying of each others Souls, and in Heavenly Duties, and Mutual Assistance,
and lived together in Unity and Love, according to the great Command of CHRIST;
they ordinarily turn all this to vain Janglings, and empty, windy, unprofitable
Disputes, which he that is most Gracious does taste the least Swee^ness in: And
they turn their Unity into Divisions and Factions, and their Amity into
Jealousies and Contentions: one is for this, and another for that; and they
seldom meet, but they have Jarrings and Contendings, and look on one another
with strangeness, if not with secret heart burnings and envyings, studying all
they can how to Undermine each other, and every man to Strengthen his own
Party. And these are the usual fruits of the Doctrine of Anabaptistry where it
comes.

Much more of the same strain or tenor I might have cited from the Pages above
mentioned, but this is enough to satisfy any man how greatly disserviceable to
Religion these men have been in other parts of the World, what dreadful effects
have attended or followed them wherever they have come, and how much it stands
every one in hand to take heed of them, and of giving the least Countenance or
Favor to them.

Nor can this seem at all incredible to any one that takes a view of the
Condition of Religion in such places of this Land, as in which this Sect (or
Sects) have obtained, and have not been favored with better helps to further
that Interest in them When Mr. Wheelright, Mrs. Hutchinson, before mentioned,
and others of their way that first sowed the Tares of Antinomianism and
Familism in New England, were for their Sedition and Blasphemies Banished the
Government of the Massachusetts, they (or at least many of them) went into the
Neighboring Government of Rhode Island; where they and some who in Succession
have imbibed their Errors, have ever since been almost the only helps (if I may
call them so) that miserable People have had to help forward among them the
great interest of Religion, till of late Years: And who viewing the Condition
of it among them, can think these men have been of any service to it? Yea who
can think otherwise than that they have been very Prejudicial to it, have been
so far from helping men forward in the Positives of Religion, that they have
even almost utterly Rased out the very Naturals of it. For certainly that
People (at least the most of those I have had opportunity to observe) had been
far better, had had much more of Religion than they have, had they been left
purely to the dim light of Nature, without any further advantage or help. They
are not such moral Pagans as the light of Nature alone ordinarily suffices to
make men, but what is much worse. And as to Principles what Calvin in the place
before cited says of the Familists and Antinomians of his day, is true of them,
viz. That they are a Sea of Dotages and Errors, there being few of the Heresies
perhaps advanced by any since Christ's Day, that are not taught by one or other
among them.

And if we look into any other Places where these men have made entrance and
gained Parties to themselves, what can we find that may give us reason to hope
they have served the Interest of Religion in any one Soul? Among those that
follow and adhere to them where shall we find a Watchful, Prayerful, Painful
Christian that makes it his Care to walk with GOD, and show forth the power of
Godliness in his life? For my own part among all those of them I now do, or
ever did know, I never knew one concerning whom there was reason thus to think.
No, this is not what they endeavor to bring Persons to: If they can but gain
them to their Senseless Opinions, furnish them with some Objections against the
Established Religion of the Country, render them Prompt and ready at Invective
and Railery against Ministers, and prevail on them to forsake our Assemblies,
neglect Family Prayer, Profane the Sabbath etc. It Is enough, and there they
leave them, they are now Good Christians. Perhaps what I have now said may be
looked upon by some as savouring too much of an Uncharitable Spirit, and the
effect of Passion and Prejudice; but GOD that knows my Heart, knows otherwise,
and that I owe none of them any, Ill will, nor have they ever given me any
special Occasion or Reason to do so that I know of. And as by these things you
to whom I now direct myself, may know what to expect in case these Men, their
Opinions, etc. obtain among us, so that you may do so, it is that I have here
mentioned them. And GOD of His Infinite Mercy grant that You may take Notice of
them, and by them be Admonished and Warned; may be led to just tho'ts of these
men, their Errors, etc. and a sense of your Danger from them; and henceforth,
as much as in you lies, keep out of the way of them, may not be Seduced or
turned aside, but continue in the Things you have Received and Heard.

To Conclude, Its much to be Lamented that, as in other Parts of the World, so
in this Land, those who profess Christ are divided into so many Parties and
Denominations, especially when its Considered what mutual Heart-burnings,
En^yings, Contentions, and endeavors to suppiant each other there are among
them. This calls upon us to weep day and night in Supplications before the Lord
for the down-pouring of the Spirit of Truth, Unity and of a sound mind upon us,
by which alone we may expect to see an end of these things. Now much is the
Interest of Religion by them hurt among us? How many are Confirmed in their
Irreligion and made to Blaspheme? How many offended, and made to stumble and
fall? O that our Heads were Rivers, and our Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that we
might weey Day and Night for this dishonor to God, hurt to Religion, and the
Souls of men! But thus it is, and for the present must be. It must needs be
that Offense Comes; but yet Woe to those men by whom it comes, it were better
for them that a Millstone were hanged about their N^cks, and they cast into
the depth of the Sea. And Happy is he that is not Offended in CHRIST.

The Relation of one, lately Converted from Dreadful ERRORS: As it was given to
a Minister of the Gospel, by the Persons own Mouth; and by him Communicated in
a Letter to the Printer hereof: Which, by reason of its Assinity to the fore
going DISPUTE, is added by way of APPENDIX thereto.
And is is as follows, Viz.

IT is some Years since I first experienced something by way of Conviction. I
should think it time to be Serious and Religious; and sometimes I should Pray
to GOD that H^ would help me to Repent and Reform; I wished I might be Changed
and Converted, but I knew not what it was to be Converted. Sometimes I should
think I was not so bad as some others, and when I read the Scriptures, I though it
I could understand what GOD would have me to do; Yes, I not only thought that I
knew Good and Evil, but I though it it in (...) Power to choose the Go^d and refuse
the Evil; and in so doing I though it I should be Accepted: And when I found any
want of Strength, I should Pray to GOD to assist me, and I though it He would be,
as it were obliged to help me, and I should be accepted and all would be well:
And when I heard or read that we must depend on CHRIST for Salvation, I though it
it easy to Believe --. But true Faith in CHRIST, that was the thing I wanted;
I was quite ignorant as to any Saving Knowledge of CHRIST, as I afterward was
made to see clearly. But I was first brought into great perplexity of Thoughts,
about the right Way of Salvation; the full of which would take up many Hours,
yea Days and Weeks to Relate, if I had retained it all in Memory. In short, The
occasion of my Solicitude at first was my halting between two Opinions; being
ignorant in the natural Darkness of my mind, and not confidering of what
eternal weight and moment the matters of Religion are to our precious Souls;
and of what sad Consequence my listening to new Opinions might be, I suffered
my self to be drawn away, insensibly, into Error: And I believe GOD was angry
with me for my too great Neglect and Coldness about the Means of Salvation,
that I was brought up under, and for my listening to new Doctrines; and
therefore lest me to strong Persuasions that the Quakers were in the only right
way to Heaven; because they were a Separate People, and seemed to be full of
Love and Charity to one another, and to contem^ the Vanities of the World, and
to be very Zealous in their way.

The first Quaker I heard was one Jonathan Tyler, who came out of England,
being moved thereto (as he professed) by the SPIRIT, that he might lead People
in this Land out of their dark State, unto the true Light! I was much taken
with the Sermons he Preached at several time^ and places: He spoke much against
Sin, and set forth an holy Life as most Excelient, I though it he was the holiest
and humbleft and most zealous man that ever I had seen or heard; and I never
before was so Affected with any Means that ever I had been undex. I concluded
the Quakers to be the best People in the world: I could not bear to hear any
body speak Uncharitably of them; A Person though never so mean, that had but the
Name of a Quaker, I could not but have an high Opinion of; and I wished for
nothing in the world more than to be like Them. I though it they were far above the
People of other Persuasions: I perceived by their own Confessions in Prayer,
that other People were full of Sin; but these, I ignorantly thought, had none
to Confess. I should earnestly Cry to GOD to give me such a Spirit as they had.
I thought I could have followed them to the farther end of the world; Yea, I
was so satisfied and confident that they were the true People of GOD
(especially after I had heard many of them Preach, and had been much Conversant
in the House of one D. Z. a Quaker in Boston) that I am well assured all the
Arguments in the world could hardly ever have shaken my good Opinion of them. I
desired never to hear any other Ministers, and should have readily Professed my
self a Quaker (for their Habit and Language I could easily have Conformed unto,
and the Shame of the world seemed nothing to me) Only I had not yet attained
(as I blindly though it) to their degree of Light and Comfort and Holiness and
freedom from Sin; so that I though it it would be Hypocrisy to own my self one of
them, till I had farther Humbled my self and gotten the Victory over Sin.

But one thing seems Remarkable! While I was Waiting and earnestly Seeking Day
and Night for the Spirit and Light, which I though it the Quakers had, GOD should
put it into my Heart, to beg earnestly (although it was not from any Jealousy of
the Truth of their Principles, yet it was in my heart to Beseech) of the LORD
that He would be pleased so all, me with his own blessed SPIRIT and the true
Light of life, that I might be indeed Converted, and have true Saving Grace;
and not be deceived in a Case of such infinite Weight. At l^ngth the SPIRIT of
GOD came upon me, first by way of Conviction of Sin^; I saw my self exceeding
Vile and run of Sin, and I began to Question whither the Quakers were not under
Delusions: Then again^ I should think they, were certainly in the Right way;
and my tho'ts were, from day to day, and from week to week, drawn out so
strongly about these ^^angs, that (...) al^^ most h^^ ^av^^d of Sense and
Reason. Wh^^ I came a little (...) my self. I though it (...) could have given ^uy^
thing in the world, to have known what was right and what was wrong: But still
I was left to farther and greater Darkness and dreadful Temptations so (...) I
began at length to Question whither thereof were any right way of Salvation
Yea. at last I was so wicked being quite over born with the Vin^^^nce of
Temptation, as to Question whither there were any GOD, or CHRIST, on Heaven or
Hell; and so, whither I had any need to be concemed about Religion. And
considering how much Pains I had taken to find the Narrow way, and how long and
often and earnestly. I Cried to Heaven for help in vain, as I though it, I did
almost wish that I might never more be concerned about my Spiritual Condition
and a Future State, so as to disquiet my self about any Religion at all. And
after a while I grew Careless and Unconcerned; but it was not long: before I
paid Dear for my wicked blasphemous Thoughts: Conviction returned again, and I
was more Terrified thou ever. Oh! I though it, there was not such another wretched
vile Sinner in the whole World: I thought of I had been left to commit Murder,
and all the most a ^^minable Acts of Wickedness that the profanest. Wretches
wallow in, it would all have been little to my Un^^l of (...) Ath^^stical
Thoughts; For then, I tho'^, I night have gone to JESUS CHRIST and asked
Pardon. And I believed there was Merit enough in CHRIST's Blood to wash the
most filthy Sinner in the World that could go to Him, not having (...) himself
off: but as for me, I had denied CHRIST and all Religion, in my Tho'ts, and I
could not for my life so much as ask for Pardon: On! I could not Have the free
to go to CHRIST for Pardon and Mercy, whose very Being I had Questioned. Then I
concluded that never any in the world was in my Condition. I though it if I were
but in the Condition of the (...) and most Abominable Sinner in the world, that
could but go to CHRIST and ask For giveness, there would be some hope; but for
Me there was none. Now I saw clearly at times, that I had hearkened too much to
Delusions; and I could not after this, endure to hear any body speak for the
Quakers; and yet should have Temptations, sometimes, to think they might be
right. But GOD was pleased to show me further, that my whole Life was filled up
with Sin; my Sins were set in Order before me, so as I never saw them before,
nor could possibly (I think) by any Power less than Almighty.

And if I though it at any time (because my Life had been Blameless before men)
that I had not Sinned and Fallen so as such and such had done; yet it was set
home upon my Heart, that I had as much Guilt on my Conscience, as if I had
broken every one of the Commandments an Hundred times over My Sins in Though It
Word and Action, from my Childhood were in great Swarms bro't into my mind; but
yet my Unbelief seemed greater than all. I could not open my mind at all, and I
though it if I could there was no body could reach my Case. I was forced to say
very often within my self, I shall never be Saved. Then I should have a little
hope and case for a new Hours, which was a great Refreshment to^m^ but while I
was a little quiet in my mind, the fea^^^ Expectation of the inexpressible
Hurries and Tossings; that must quickly seize me again, disturbed that little
Peace I had, so that I was never at Rest, Sometimes I should think if I were
driven into the most desolate howling Wilderness, and encompassed with Lions
Serpents and Dragons, all this would seem nothing to my dismal Case. I was
utterly Lost in myself: And now all my high Tho'ts of Legal Righteousness and
Exact Blameless Living, was come to nothing. I saw plainly, that if a man could
live like an Angel in all External Honesty and Sobriety; Yea, and to be filled
also with never so much Heat and Zeal ^et without the inward saving Knowledge of
CHRIST, it would nothing avail.

Oh! What would I now have given for one glimpse of the Knowledge of CHRIST: but
I feared I should never obtain it. I was much discouraged from seeking; and at
times I should be more indifferent and desire to be Unconcerned: But about the
middle of the last Winter, I was at Meeting, and GOD was pleased to come with
some power on my Heart in the Forenoon; but more abundantly in the Afternoon:
Toward the close of the Sermon, Christless Sinners were urged very much to
seek the LORD in good Earnest; and to try for one Week what fervent Cries to
Heaven might do: I went home with a Resolution to try that Week, as GOD should
Enable me; for I had quite Despaired in my self, and sometimes in GOD too. But
now I was something heartned to strive to Enter in at the strait Gate. But no
sooner was I ingag^d in this Work, but Satan was as busy with his Temptations
to Despair, as ever: Then I thought his Design was to drive me to Despair of my
Salvation, that he might hinder me from working it out: For if I gave way to
Carelessness, he would not disturb me; but if ev^ I set about this Work, I was
so hurried that I could have no Rest. However, I desired to hold on seeking,
and on any Terms to get to Heaven at last though it should be by the very gates
of Hell. My Distress increased, and I could not rest day nor night. CHRIST, I
though it would Reject me, for my numberless Sins, especially for my Unbelief and
Atheisin, and hea^ kning to Delusions, in the neglect of the Word of GOD and
Ordinances of CHRIST; more especially the Seals of the Covenant Oh! the Light
Undervaluing Tho'ts I used to have of Water Baptism, and the Supper of Bread
and Wine: I cannot express what a Trouble it was to me to think of these
things: And On! to think of being Rejected by CHRIST at last, for my slighting
Him and his precious Truths and Ordinances, was inexpressibly Dreadful to me.
That Word came into my mind, and was more terrible than a Thousand Deaths,
Depart from Me, I know you not! Because I did not know CHRIST, I feared he
would not Acknowledge me. I was in such Distress, that my very Fingers ends were
ready to drop with Sweat, through the Agony of my spirit. I think, if I had been
out in a Thousand pieces, it would have been less terrible and painful to me.
My heart was filled with dreadful Thoughts, not fit to be mentioned; and I
^eared it would never be Otherwise. I searched the Scripture, to see if I could
find any Example of any Pardoned Sinner, that had been so bad as my self; and
could find, as I though it, not so much as One I now dreaded the thoughts of
hearing any Instruction, that might cause me to E^^ from the ways of
understanding. I thought that if any should labor to make me Drink in such
Errors as I had been Poisoned withal, they would be worse Enemies to me than if
they should give me Ratsbane to Drink: My Soul Pollution seem^d worse than any
Disease; I mean, my being so deeply and long Infected with Quakerism: But I
though it, if there were any Person that could bring any Tidings o^ Peace and Rest
in Christ for such an one as I, it would be the greatest Kindness and
Friendship that could possibly be shown me. At length, not being able to
Contain any longer, I sent for Help; having some hopes of a Possibility of
Relief. And when the Minister came, and (after hearing my Case as well as I wa^
able to Express it) had Encouraged, and Counseled me and Prayed with and for
me, it Pleased God to open a Door of Hope in Christ for me; yea to loose my
Bonds and knock off my Chains, and pour out a Spirit of Prayer upon me; that I
could not but cry out aloud to the Lord Jesus (whom I saw as it were, Read, to
stretch out his Hand for my Salvation) that the waters might not overflow me,
nor the floods swallow me up. And I was now made further to understand that at
least a great part of my Wicked Blasphemous thoughts, were thrown into m^ Mind
by Satan, which I had thought before to be only from the Hearth Wickedness of
my own Heart I came to see more of the Sub^ilty of Satan, and the Wiles of the
Devil; my thirsty Soul dra^k in the Hopes of Mercy, and I Believed Christ could
overcome and Chain up the Roaring Lion. I hope I did Truly though Weakly exercise
Faith in Christ. I Thirsted, my Soul seemed to Breath, and Thirst after more of
the Knowledge of Jesus Christ. I had further Comfort from Ezekiel 16. The
beginning of the Chapter. Thou wast cast out to the loathing of thy Person --.
When I passed by thee, and saw thee Polluted in thine own Blood, I said unto
thee Live. and thy time was the time of Love. But especially from the
Conclusion of the Chapter, where the LORD says, (after he had, by many dreadful
Aggravations set forth the Heinousness of his Peoples Sins, and even Sworn by
his Life ( ver, 48) that Jerusalem and her Daughters had exceeded Sodom and
hers, in most abominable wickedness) Nevertheless I will establish my Covenant
with thee; and thou shall know that I am the Lord: that thou may remember
and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame when
I am pa^ified toward thee for all that thou have done ^aith the Lord God. From
diverse other Scriptures I was further Enlightened, Comforted and Encouraged. The
case was now strangely altered with (...) thought I would not be in my former
unbelieving, distressed, despairing Condition for the greatest Treasures in the
World; yet I had not Settled Peace: I sa^ Christ but Darkly: there seemed to be
something wanting. I was much distressed, especially at times, 'till after
serious deliberation, I resolved to seek CHRIST in his Ordinances: and desiring
the LORD to guide me, according to the Scriptures, and not having been
Baptized, I desired to search the Scriptures, Concerning that Ordinance: but I
quickly found that Satan had not left me: I had new Assaults; and I was
dreadfully afraid I should fall back again into those Errors, which I had seen
to be so dangerous: I trembled for fear they should be set before me; I hardly
dared sometimes, to open my Bible, for fear lest I should mis-understand the
Scriptures; which (the Apostle says) the Ignorant and Unlearned do wrest to
their own Destruction I cried again to God in my distress, and he heard me, and
from the Scriptures of Truth I was persuaded that CHRIST would have his
Disciples Baptized with water; Especially by such plain Scriptures as these,
Acts 8.36 37. And as they went on their way, they came to a certain water: and
the Eunuch said, See, here is water what does hinder me to be baptized? And
Philip said If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may. So Acts 10. 47.
Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized which have received
the Holy Ghost as well as we? And he Commanded them to be baptized in the Name
of the LORD. ver. 48. And now the argument that had been used with me, over and
over in vain, while I was blinded by Prejudice, deep Prejudice against this
Ordinance, which I had drunk in from the Quakers Books, I say now it seemed
quite another thing, namely, that CHRIST's Ministers must act according to
their Commission: Their Commission is (in Math. 28.19) Teach all nations,
baptizing them -- And lo I am with you to the End of the World: It was
therefore to be a Rule to all that should succeed them, in Teaching Men and
Women their Duty, in after ages. Now the only Dispute is, What baptism this is;
the Apostles doubtless understood their Commission, and without doubt would not
Practice Contrary to their knowledge: yet we find them baptizing three thousand
at one time. Acts 2.41. and, in the forementioned places, we find it was water
they baptized them with: therefore all that have Authority to teach, have
Authority to baptize with water, otherwise the Apostles must needs act Contrary
to their Commssion: How plain did this seem to me, when my Eyes were opened.
And the other Seal of the Covenant seemed as plain. Not but that I had many
doubts before I was settled: But the light prevailed over my Darkness: and I
thought how the Apostles saw but through a glass darkly: and CHRIST's words to
Thomas relieved me, when I desired to see things more clearly, Blessed are they
who have not seen and yet have believed: I thought I must venture on the plain
word of GOD, notwithstanding Temptations to the Contrary and much carnal
reasoning in my heart against my Duty. And no sooner was this purpose settled in
my mind, that I would seek CHRIST in these ways of his Appointment, but I found
peace and quietness; and was Confident I should find and enjoy more of CHRIST
in the Sacrament. Since I was Propounded, I have been more and more confirmed
in the Truth. The last Sabbaths Doctrine, concerning Election, seemed the
Sweetest Doctrine to me that ever I heard in my life. And yet I Wondered not
that it seems so dark to many, not only Quakers but others; for it is above
Natural light and (...) sanctified reason. I thought, yea, I knew assuredly, if
GOD would please to shine into the darkest hearts with Supernatural Light, it
would quickly Satisfy them, that if there be no Election, there is no free
Grace, nor certainty of Salvation. It seemed plain to me, that if this
Foundation Stone be removed, the whole building of Religion must unavoidably
fall to the ground. Since GOD has brought me ou^ of Darkness into his
Mavelous light, he has also stirred up in me a deep sense of the sad Estate
of dark souls, let them be of what Religion they will; who have nothing but the
light of Nature, and Reason, and External Revelation: And my Soul seems the
more feelingly to pity them, because I know they will take their own
apprehensions of things to be Right: And it seems as easy to persuade a man
that white is black, as to make us believe that our Legal apprehensions of the
way of acceptance with GOD, are quite wrong, 'till a new Light, from the Spirit
of GOD, shines into our hearts: For want of which the Quakers seem (to me now)
quite to invert the way of Salvation, while they seek to have a Righteousness
wrought within, that they may be accepted; whereas they should first seek
Acceptance in the Righteousness which CHRIST himself wrought for sinners,
imputed, by Faith, to us, which Faith does not only Justify us, but unite us
to CHRIST; and so we receive Sanctifying grace, and righteousness inherent,
from him, to Justify us, for that is done upon our first believing in him that
Justifies the Ungodly; according to that of the Apostle Romans 4.5.6. To him that
works not, but believes in him that Justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is
counted for Righteousness: Even as David also describes the blessedness of the
man, to whom GOD Imput to Righteousness without works.

But there was one time which I should have mentioned before, if at all; After
great d^^^kness, as I was alone in my Bed cham^^er, Sigh^^^^ and Crying to GOD,
with most A ^^^eut desires ^^r the Manifestations of his Love, which I thought
I could not Live without is pleased the LORD to fill my Soul with such Light
and Joy, and inexpressible Sweetness, that ^^^e^med to be in a new World: The
Chamber where I was seemed like Heaven, I thought. Now, thought I, GOD has
granted a ^^^m desire; yea a Thousand tim^^^ more than und my D^rk appre^^sions
a little before, I could ask (...) ^ink I thought indeed before, by some
glimpses and little Tastes that I had, that the clear M^nifestations of CHRIST
would be very Sweet and Joyful: But when I came to see GOD in CHRIST, and to
drink my fill, as it were, at the Founta^^ of infinite Free Love, as it seemed
to me; yea to be swallowed up in an Ocean of Love. Now I ^ound it to be another
manner of thing than I imagined: And I must needs say, if I speak the Truth, I
can find no words to express the Joy of the Holy Ghost: If an Angel from Heaven
had told me, as such a messenger did Dan^el, that I was beloved; or if CHRIST
himself had appeared, and said to me with his own mouth, as he did to Mary Thy
Sins which be many are forgiven thee, I could not have been more sure than at
that time I was, that CHRIST my Beloved was mine, and I his: But it made me
seem exceeding Vile in my own Eyes.

I thought not to have mentioned this flood of Joy, because ^t was followed
with as low an Ebb, which made me Question whither I had not been deluded or
mistaken; which was worse than Death to me. O to loose so rich a Treasure of
Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory! I seemed like a person quite undone: And I
thought that I could not live, unless I might recover a sense of the Love of
JESUS to my Soul, But the LORD supported me; and I was made to understand that
I must live by Faith and not by Sight.

I desire the Prayers of all GOD's People, that I may abide in the Truth; and
that I may live an humble Life of admiration at the free and astonishing Grace
of GOD, in bringing me back from the paths of the Destroyer: For, I am, Through
Grace, deeply Sensible of my Extraordinary obligations to the LORD; but I see
also my utter insufficiency to Answer them in any Measure: Eternity will be
time little enough to praise GOD for his free, free Grace to the very vilest of
Sinners I am sure there is no Person in the World has more Cause to walk humbly
with GOD and in the exercise of Charity and Com^assion toward others. Pray
^ard for me that I may do so.

ALL that shall now be added, is, That this Relation ma^^ be taken for
undoubted Truth; Desi^ing that Others who may be unhappily led into Errors
might be brought off Therefrom, and come to the Belies of the Truth.

AMEN.
Errata sic Corrigenda.
PAGE 5. Line 8 for he read they. p. 7 l. 11. for standers by, r. by standers.
p. 10 l. r. blot out each of p. 11. last line, for thereof, r. there fore p.
11. l. 5. and p. 12. l. (...) blot out A^g. p. 14. l. 5. for ver. 15. r. 1st
and 5th and l. 19. for whom r. when. p 15. l. 19 for ver. 15.1. 1st and 5th. p.
23 l. 14 for did, r was p. 36. l. 13 blot out also. p 39, l. 1, blot out that
p. 53, l. 12. for this, r. which. p 76. l. 10. r. And in other places, etc. p.
80 l. 23, read, Being in the Southem parts, etc. p. ^8. l. 12. for Arguments,
r. Argument. p. 101. lines 13 and 14. for their, r. hour p. 131 l 13. blot out
and. p, 144. l. 29 for than r. that. p 140. l. 21. for who, r. we. p. 148 l. 10
for Powers, r. Power. p. 158 l. 8. for Head, read Heads

ADVERTISEMENT.
There is now in the Press, and will speedily be Published,

THE Mother's Catechism for the Young Child: Or, a Preparatory Help for the
Young and the ignorant, in order to their easier unders^a^ding the Aslembly's
Shorter Catechism.


