A MODEST ENQUIRY INTO THE Nature and Necessity OF A PAPER-CURRENCY.

-- Quid asper Utile Nummus habet; patriae, charisque propinquis Quantum
elargiri deceat. -- Pers. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold at the New
PRINTING-OFFICE, near the Market. 1729.

A MODEST ENQUIRY, etc.
THERE is no Science, the Study of which is more useful and commendable than
the Knowledge of the true Interest of one's Country; and perhaps there is no
Kind of Learning more abstruse and intricate, more difficult to acquire in any
Degree of Perfection than This, and therefore none more generally neglected.
Hence it is, that we every Day find Men in Conversation contending warmly on
some Point in Politics, which, although it may nearly concern them both, neither
of them understand any more than they do each other.

Thus much by way of Apology for this present Enquiry into the Nature and
Necessity of a Paper Currency. And if any Thing I shall say, may be a Means of
fixing a Subject that is now the chief Concern of my Countrymen, in a clearer
Light, I shall have the Satisfaction of thinking my Time and Pains well
employed.

To proceed, then,

There is a certain proportionate Quantity of Money requisite to carry on the
Trade of a Country freely and currently; More than which would be of no
Advantage in Trade, and Less, if much less, exceedingly detrimental to it.

This leads us to the following general Considerations.

First, A great Want of Money in any Trading Country, occasions Interest to be
at at a very high Rate. And here it may be observed, that it is impossible by
any Laws to restrain Men from giving and receiving exorbitant Interest, where
Money is suitably scarce: For he that wants Money will find out Ways to give 10
per Cent. when he cannot have it for less, although the Law forbids to take more
than 6 per Cent. Now the Interest of Money being high is prejudicial to a
Country several Ways: It makes Land bear a low Price, because few Men will lay
out their Money in Land, when they can make a much greater Profit by lending it
out upon Interest: And much less will Men be inclined to venture their Money at
Sea, when they can, without Risque or Hazard, have a great and certain Profit
by keeping it at home; thus Trade is discouraged. And if in two Neigbouring
Countries the Traders of one, by Reason of a greater Plenty of Money, can
borrow it to trade with at a lower Rate than the Traders of the other, they
will infallibly have the Advantage, and get the greatest Part of that Trade
into their own Hands; For he that trades with Money he has borrowed at 8 or 10
per Cent. cannot hold Market with him that borrows his Money at 6 or 4. -- On
the contrary, A plentiful Currency will occasion Interest to be low: And this
will be an Inducement to many to lay out their Money in Lands, rather than put
it out to Use, by which means Land will begin to rise in Value and bear a
better Price: And at the same Time it will tend to enliven Trade exceedingly,
because People will find more Profit in employing their Money that Way than in
Usury; and many that understand Business very well, but have not a Stock
sufficient of their own, will be encouraged to borrow Money to trade with, when
they can have it a moderate Interest.

Secondly, Want of Money in a Country reduces the Price of that Part of its
Produce which is used in Trade: Because Trade being discouraged by it as above,
there is a much less Demand for that Produce. And this is another Reason why
Land in such a Case will be low, especially where the Staple Commodity of the
Country is the immediate Produce of the Land, because that Produce being low,
fewer People find an Advantage in Husbandry, or the Improvement of Land. -- On
the contrary, A Plentiful Currency will occasion the Trading Produce to bear a
good Price: Because Trade being encouraged and advanced by it, there will be a
much greater Demand for that Produce; which will be a great Encouragement of
Husbandry and Tillage, and consequently make Land more valuable, for that many
People would apply themselves to Husbandry, who probably might otherwise have
sought some more profitable Employment.

As we have already experienced how much the Increase of our Currency by what
Paper Money has been made, has encouraged our Trade; particularly to instance
only in one Article, Ship-Building; it may not be amiss to observe under this
Head, what a great Advantage it must be to us as a Trading Country, that has
Workmen and all the Materials proper for that Business within itself, to have
Ship-Building as much as possible advanced: For every Ship that is built here
for the English Merchants, gains the Province her clear Value in Gold and
Silver, which must otherwise have been sent Home for Returns in her Stead; and
likewise, every Ship built in and belonging to the Province, not only saves the
Province her first Cost, but all the Freight, Wages and Provisions she ever
makes or requires as long as she lasts; provided Care is taken to make This her
Pay Port, and that she always takes Provisions with her for the whole Voyage,
which may easily be done. And how considerable an Article this is yearly in our
Favor, every one, the least acquainted with mercantile Affairs, must needs be
sensible; for if we could not Build our selves, we must either purchase so many
Vessels as we want from other Countries, or else Hire them to carry our Produce
to Market, which would be more expensive than Purchasing; and on many other
Accounts exceedingly to our Loss. Now as Trade in general will decline where
there is not a plentiful Currency, so Ship-Building must certainly of
Consequence decline where Trade is declining.

Thirdly, Want of Money in a Country discourages Laboring and Handicrafts Men
(which are the chief Strength and Support of a People) from coming to settle in
it, and induces many that were settled to leave the Country, and seek
Entertainment and Employment in other Places, where they can be better paid.
For what can be more disheartning to an industrious laboring Man, than this,
that after he has earned his Bread with the Sweat of his Brows, he must spend
as much Time, and have near as much Fatigue in getting it, as he had to earn
it. And nothing makes more bad Paymasters than a general Scarcity of Money. And
here again is a Third Reason for Land's bearing a low Price in such a Country,
because Land always increases in Value in Proportion with the Increase of the
People settling on it, there being so many more Buyers; and its Value will
infallibly be diminished, if the Number of its Inhabitants diminish. -- On the
contrary, A Plentiful Currency will encourage great Numbers of Laboring and
Handicrafts Men to come and Settle in the Country, by the same Reason that a
Want of it will discourage and drive them out. Now the more Inhabitants, the
greater Demand for Land (as is said above) upon which it must necessarily rise
in Value, and bear a better Price. The same may be said of the Value of
House-Rent, which will be advanced for the same Reasons; and by the Increase of
Trade and Riches People will be enabled to pay greater Rents. Now the Value of
House-Rent rising, and Interest becoming low, many that in a Scarcity of Money
practiced Usury, will probably be more inclined to Building; which will
likewise sensibly enliven Business in any Place; it being an Advantage not only
to Brickmakers, Bricklayers, Masons, Carpenters, Joiners, Glaziers, and several
other Trades immediately employed by Building, but likewise to Farmers,
Brewers, Bakers, Tailors, Shoemakers, Shopkeepers, and in short to every one
that they lay their Money out with.

Fourthly, Want of Money in such a Country as ours, occasions a greater
Consumption of English and European Goods, in Proportion to the Number of the
People, than there would otherwise be. Because Merchants and Traders, by whom
abundance of Artificers and laboring Men are employed, finding their other
Affairs require what Money they can get into their hands, oblige those who work
for them to take one half, or perhaps two thirds Goods in Pay. By this Means a
greater Quantity of Goods are disposed of, and to a greater Value; because
Working Men and their Families ar^ thereby induced to be more profuse and
extravagant in fine Apparel and the like, than they would be if they were
obliged to pay ready Money for such Things after they had earned and received
it, or if such Goods were not imposed upon them, of which they can make no
other Use: For such People cannot send the Goods they are paid with to a
Foreign Market, without losing considerably by having them sold for less than
they stand 'em in here; neither can they easily dispose of them at Home,
because their Neighbors are generally supplied in the same Manner; But how
unreasonable would it be, if some of those very Men who have been a Means of
thus forcing People into unnecessary Expense, should be the first and most
earnest in accusing them of Pride and Prodigality. Now though this extraordinary
Consumption of Foreign Commodities may be a Profit to particular Men, yet the
Country in general grows poorer by it apace. -- On the contrary, As A plentiful
Currency will occasion a less Consumption of European Goods, in Proportion to
the Number of the People, so it will be a means of making the Balance of our
Trade more equal than it now is, if it does not give it in our Favor; because
our own Produce will be encouraged at the same Time. And it is to be observed,
that though less Foreign Commodities are consumed in Proportion to the Number of
People, yet this will be no Disadvantage to the Merchant, because the Number of
People increasing, will occasion an increasing Demand of more Foreign Goods in
the Whole.

Thus we have seen some of the many heavy Disadvantages a Country (especially
such a Country as ours) must labor under, when it has not a sufficient Stock
of running Cash to manage its Trade currently. And we have likewise seen some
of the Advantages which accrue from having Money sufficient, or a Plentiful
Currency.

The foregoing Paragraphs being well considered, we shall naturally be led to
draw the following Conclusions with Regard to what Persons will probably be for
or against Emitting a large Additional Sum of Paper Bills in this Province.

1. Since Men will always be powerfully influenced in their Opinions and
Actions by what appears to be their particular Interest: Therefore all those,
who wanting Courage to venture in Trade, now practice Lending Money on Security
for exorbitant Interest, which in a Scarcity of Money will be done
notwithstanding the Law, I say all such will probably be against a large
Addition to our present Stock of Paper-Money; because a plentiful Currency will
lower Interest, and make it common to lend on less Security.

2. All those who are Possessors of large Sums of Money, and are disposed to
purchase Land, which is attended with a great and sure Advantage in a growing
Country as this is; I say, the Interest of all such Men will incline them to
oppose a large Addition to our Money. Because their Wealth is now continually
increasing by the large Interest they receive, which will enable them (if they
can keep Land from rising) to purchase More some time hence than they can at
present; and in the mean time all Trade being discouraged, not only those who
borrow of them, but the Common People in general will be impoverished, and
consequently obliged to sell More Land for less Money than they will do at
present. And yet, after such Men are possessed of as much Land as they can
purchase, it will then be their Interest to have Money made Plentiful, because
that will immediately make Land rise in Value in their Hands. Now it ought not
to be wondered at, if People from the Knowledge of a Man's Interest do
sometimes make a true Guess at his Designs; for, Interest, they say, will not
Lie.

3. Lawyers, and others concerned in Court Business, will probably many of them
be against a plentiful Currency; because People in that Case will have less
Occasion to run in Debt, and consequently less Occasion to go to Law and Sue
one another for their Debts. Though I know some even among these Gentlemen, that
regard the Public Good before their own apparent private Interest.

4. All those who are any way Dependants on such Persons as are above
mentioned, whether as holding Offices, as Tenants, or as Debtors, must at least
appear to be against a large Addition; because if they do not, they must
sensibly feel their present Interest hurt. And besides these, there are,
doubtless, many well-meaning Gentlemen and Others, who, without any immediate
private Interest of their own in View, are against making such an Addition,
through an Opinion they may have of the Honesty and sound Judgment of some of
their Friends that oppose it, (perhaps for the Ends aforesaid) without having
given it any thorough Considerarion themselves. And thus it is no Wonder if
there is a powerful Party on that Side.

On the other Hand, Those who are Lovers of Trade, and delight to see
Manufactures encouraged, will be for having a large Addition to our Currency:
For they very well know, that People will have little Heart to advance Money in
Trade, when what they can get is scarce sufficient to purchase Necessaries, and
supply their Families with Provision. Much less will they lay it out in
advancing new Manufactures; nor is it possible new Manufactures should turn to
any Account, where there is not Money to pay the Workmen, who are discouraged
by being paid in Goods, because it is a great Disadvantage to them.

Again, Those who are truly for the Proprietor's Interest (and have no separate
Views of their own that are predominant) will be heartily for a large Addition:
Because, as I have shown above, Plenty of Money will for several Reasons make
Land rise in Value exceedingly: And I appeal to those immediately concerned for
the Proprietor in the Sale of his Lands, whether Land has not risen very much
since the first Emission of what Paper Currency we now have, and even by its
Means. Now we all know the Proprietary has great Quantities to sell.

And since a Plentiful Currency will be so great a Cause of advancing this
Province in Trade and Riches, and increasing the Number of its People; which,
though it will not sensibly lessen the Inhabitants of Great Britain, will
occasion a much greater Vent and Demand for their Commodities here; and
allowing that the Crown is the more powerful for its Subjects increasing in
Wealth and Number, I cannot think it the Interest of England to oppose us in
making as great a Sum of Paper Money here, as we, who are the best Judges of
our own Necessities, find convenient. And if I were not sensible that the
Gentlemen of Trade in England, to whom we have already parted with our Silver
and Gold, are misinformed of our Circumstances, and therefore endeavor to have
our Currency stinted to what it now is, I should think the Government at Home
had some Reasons for discouraging and impoverishing this Province, which we are
not acquainted with.

It remains now that we enquire, Whether a large Addition to our Paper Currency
will not make it sink in Value very much; And here it will be requisite that we
first form just Notions of the Nature and Value of Money in general.

As Providence has so ordered it, that not only different Countries, but even
different Parts of the same Country, have their peculiar most suitable
Productions; and likewise that different Men have Genius's adapted to Variety
of different Arts and Manufactures, Therefore Commerce, or the Exchange of one
Commodity or Manufacture for another, is highly convenient and beneficial to
Mankind. As for Instance, A may be skilful in the Art of making Cloth, and B
understand the raising of Corn; A wants Corn, and B Cloth; upon which they make
an Exchange with each other for as much as each has Occasion, to the mutual
Advantage and Satisfaction of both.

But as it would be very tedious, if there were no other Way of general
Dealing, but by an immediate Exchange of Commodities; because a Man that had
Corn to dispose of, and wanted Cloth for it, might perhaps in his Search for a
Chapman to deal with, meet with twenty People that had Cloth to dispose of, but
wanted no Corn; and with twenty others that wanted his Corn, but had no Cloth
to suit him with. To remedy such Inconveniences, and facilitate Exchange, Men
have invented MONEY, properly called a Medium of Exchange, because through or
by its Means Labor is exchanged for Labor, or one Commodity for another. And
whatever particular Thing Men have agreed to make this Medium of, whether Gold,
Silver, Copper, or Tobacco; it is, to those who possess it (if they want any
Thing) that very Thing which they want, because it will immediately procure it
for them. It is Cloth to him that wants Cloth, and Corn to those that want
Corn; and so of all other Necessaries, it is whatsoever it will procure. Thus
he who had Corn to dispose of, and wanted to purchase Cloth with it, might sell
his Corn for its Value in this general Medium, to one who wanted Corn but had
no Cloth; and with this Medium he might purchase Cloth of him that wanted no
Corn, but perhaps some other Thing, as Iron it may be, which this Medium will
immediately procure, and so he may be said to have exchanged his Cloth for
Iron; and thus the general Exchange is soon performed, to the Satisfaction of
all Parties, with abundance of Facility.

For many Ages, those Parts of the World which are engaged in Commerce, have
fixed upon Gold and Silver as the chief and most proper Materials for this
Medium; they being in themselves valuable Metals for their Fineness, Beauty,
and Scarcity. By these, particularly by Silver, it has been usual to value all
Things else: But as Silver it self is of no certain permanent Value, being
worth more or less according to its Scarcity or Plenty, therefore it seems
requisite to fix upon Something else, more proper to be made a Measure of
Values, and this I take to be Labor.

By Labor may the Value of Silver be measured as well as other Things. As,
Suppose one Man employed to raise Corn, while another is digging and refining
Silver; at the Year's End, or at any other Period of Time, the complete Produce
of Corn, and that of Silver, are the natural Price of each other; and if one be
twenty Bushels, and the other twenty Ounces, then an Ounce of that Silver is
worth the Labor of raising a Bushel of that Corn. Now if by the Discovery of
some nearer, more easy or plentiful Mines, a Man may get Forty Ounces of Silver
as easily as formerly he did Twenty, and the same Labor is still required to
raise Twenty Bushels of Corn, then Two Ounces of Silver will be worth no more
than the same Labor of raising One Bushel of Corn, and that Bushel of Corn
will be as cheap at two Ounces, as it was before at one; caeteris paribus.

Thus the Riches of a Country are to be valued by the Quantity of Labor its
Inhabitants are able to purchase, and not by the Quantity of Silver and Gold
they possess; which will purchase more or less Labor, and therefore is more or
less valuable, as is said before, according to its Scarcity or Plenty. As those
Metals have grown much more plentiful in Europe since the Discovery of America,
so they have sunk in Value exceedingly; for, to instance in England, formerly
one Penny of Silver was worth a Days Labor, but now it is hardly worth the
sixth Part of a Days Labor; because ^ot less than Sixpence will purchase the
Labor of a Man for a Day in any Part of that Kingdom; which is wholly to be
attributed to the much greater Plenty of Money now in England than formerly.
And yet perhaps England is in Effect no richer now than at that Time; because
as much Labor might be purchased, or Work got done of almost any kind, for 100
l. then, as will now require or is now worth 600 l.

In the next Place let us consider the Nature of Banks emitting Bills of
Credit, as they are at this Time used in Hamburgh, Amsterdam, London and Venice.

Those Places being Seats of vast Trade, and the Payment of great Sums being
for that Reason frequent, Bills of Credit are found very convenient in
Business; because a great Sum is more easily counted in Them, lighter in
Carriage, concealed in less Room, and therefore safer in Traveling or Laying
up, and on many other Accounts they are very much valued. The Banks are the
general Cashiers of all Gentlemen, Merchants and great Traders in and about
those Cities; there they deposite their Money, and may take out Bills to the
Value, for which they can be certain to have Money again at the Bank at any
Time: This gives the Bills a Credit; so that in England they are never less
valuable than Money, and in Venice and Amsterdam they are generally worth more.
And the Bankers always reserving Money in hand to answer more than the common
Run of Demands (and some People constantly putting in while others are taking
out) are able besides to lend large Sums, on good Security, to the Government
or others, for a reasonable Interest, by which they are paid for their Care and
Trouble; and the Money which otherwise would have lain dead in their Hands, is
made to circulate again thereby among the People: And thus the Running Cash of
the Nation is as it were doubled; for all great Payments being made in Bills,
Money in lower Trade becomes much more plentiful: And this is an exceeding
great Advantage to a Trading Country, that is not over-stock'd with Gold and
Silver.

As those who take Bills out of the Banks in Europe, put in Money for Security;
so here, and in some of the neighboring Provinces, we engage our Land. Which
of these Methods will most effectually secure the Bills from actually sinking
in Value, comes next to be considered.

Trade in general being nothing else but the Exchange of Labor for Labor, the
Value of all Things is, as I have said before, most justly measured by Labor.
Now suppose I put my Money into a Bank, and take out a Bill for the Value; if
this Bill at the Time of my receiving it, would purchase me the Labor of one
hundred Men for twenty Days; but some time after will only purchase the Labor
of the same Number of Men for fifteen Days; it is plain the Bill has sunk in
Value one fourth Part. Now Silver and Gold being of no permanent Value; and as
this Bill is founded on Money, and therefore to be esteemed as such, it may be
that the Occasion of this Fall is the increasing Plenty of Gold and Silver, by
which Money is one fourth Part less valuable than before, and therefore one
fourth more is given of it for the same Quantity of Labor; and if Land is not
become more plentiful by some proportionate Decrease of the People, one fourth
Part more of Money is given for the same Quantity of Land, whereby it appears
that it would have been more profitable to me to have laid that Money out in
Land which I put into the Bank, than to place it there and take a Bill for it.
And it is certain that the Value of Money has been continually sinking in
England for several Ages past, because it has been continually increasing in
Quantity. But if Bills could be taken out of a Bank in Europe on a Land
Security, it is probable the Value of such Bills would be more certain and
steady, because the Number of Inhabitants continue to be near the same in those
Countries from Age to Age.

For as Bills issued upon Money Security are Money, so Bills issued upon Land,
are in Effect Coined Land.

Therefore (to apply the Above to our own Circumstances) If Land in this
Province was falling, or any way likely to fall, it would behove the
Legislature most carefully to contrive how to prevent the Bills issued upon
Land from falling with it. But as our People increase exceedingly, and will be
further increased, as I have before shown, by the Help of a large Addition to
our Currency; and as Land in consequence is continually rising, So, in case no
Bills are emitted but what are upon Land Security, the Money-Acts in every Part
punctually enforced and executed, the Payments of Principal and Interest being
duly and strictly required, and the Principal bona fide sunk according to Law,
it is absolutely impossible such Bills should ever sink below their first
Value, or below the Value of the Land on which they are founded. In short,
there is so little Danger of their sinking, that they would certainly rise as
the Land rises, if they were not emitted in a proper Manner for preventing it;
That is, by providing in the Act That Payment may be made, either in those
Bills, or in any other Bills made current by any Act of the Legislature of this
Province; and that the Interest, as it is received, may be again emitted in
Discharge of Public Debts; whereby circulating it returns again into the Hands
of the Borrowers, and becomes Part of their future Payments; and thus as it is
likely there will not be any Difficulty for want of Bills to pay the Office,
they are hereby kept from rising above their first Value: For else, supposing
there should be emitted upon mortgaged Land its full present Value in Bills; as
in the Banks in Europe the full Value of the Money deposited is given out in
Bills; and supposing the Office would take nothing but the same Sum in those
Bills in Discharge of the Land; as in the Banks aforesaid, the same Sum in
their Bills must be brought in, in order to receive out the Money: In such Case
the Bills would most surely rise in Value as the Land rises; as certainly as
the Bank Bills founded on Money would fall if that Money was falling. Thus if I
were to mortgage to a Loan-Office, or Bank, a Parcel of Land now valued at 100
l. in Silver, and receive for it the like Sum in Bills, to be paid in again at
the Expiration of a certain Term of Years; before which, my Land rising in
Value, becomes worth 150 l. in Silver: It Is plain, that if I have not these
Bills in Possession, and the Office will take nothing but these Bills, or else
what it is now become worth in Silver, in Discharge of my Land; I say it
appears plain, that those Bills will now be worth 150 l. in Silver to the
Possessor; and if I can purchase them for less, in order to redeem my Land, I
shall by so much be a Gainer.

I need not say any Thing to convince the Judicious that our Bills have not yet
sunk, though there is and has been some Difference between them and Silver;
because it is evident that that Difference is occasioned by the Scarcity of the
latter, which is now become a Merchandise, rising and falling, like other
Commodities, as there is a greater or less Demand for it, or as it is more or
less Plenty.

Yet farther, in order to make a true Estimate of the Value of Money, we must
distinguish between Money as it is Bullion, which is Merchandise, and as by
being coined it is made a Currency: For its Value as a Merchandise, and its
Value as a Currency, are two distinct Things; and each may possibly rise and
fall in some Degree independent of the other. Thus if the Quantity of Bullion
increases in a Country, it will proportionably decrease in Value; but if at the
same Time the Quantity of current Coin should decrease, (supposing Payments may
not be made in Bullion) what Coin there is will rise in Value as a Currency, i.
e. People will give more Labor in Manufactures for a certain Sum of ready
Money.

In the same Manner must we consider a Paper Currency founded on Land; as it is
Land, and as it is a Currency

Money as Bullion, or as Land, is valuable by so much Labor as it costs to
procure that Bullion or Land.

Money, as a Currency, has an Additional Value by so much Time and Labor as it
saves in the Exchange of Commodities.

If, as a Currency, it saves one Fourth Part of the Time and Labor of a
Country; it has, on that Account, one Fourth added to its original Value.

When there is no Money in a Country, all Commerce must be by Exchange. Now if
it takes one fourth Part of the Time and Labor of a Country, to exchange or
get their Commodities exchanged; then, in computing their Value, that Labor of
Exchanging must be added to the Labor of manufacturing those Commodities: But
if that Time or Labor is saved by introducing Money sufficient, then the
additional Value on Account of the Labor of Exchanging may be abated, and
Things sold for only the Value of the Labor in making them; because the People
may now in the same Time make one Fourth more in Quantity of Manufactures than
they could before.

From these Considerations it may be gathered, that in all the Degrees between
having no Money in a Country, and Money sufficient for the Trade, it will rise
and fall in Value as a Currency, in Proportion to the Decrease or Increase of
its Quantity: And if there may be at some Time more than enough, the Overplus
will have no Effect toward making the Currency, as a Currency, of less Value
than when there was but enough; because such Overplus will not be used in
Trade, but be some other way disposed of.

If we enquire. How much per Cent. Interest ought to be required upon the Loan
of these Bills; we must consider what is the Natural Standard of Usury: And
this appears to be, where the Security is undoubted, at least the Rent of so
much Land as the Money lent will buy: For it cannot be expected that any Man
will lend his Money for less than it would fetch him in as Rent if he laid it
out in Land, which is the most secure Property in the World. But if the
Security is casual, then a kind of Ensurance must be interwoven with the simple
natural Interest, which may advance the Usury very conscionably to any height
below the Principal it self. Now among us, if the Value of Land is twenty Years
Purchase, Five per Cent. is the just Rate of Interest for Money lent on
undoubted Security. Yet if Money grows scarce in a Country, it becomes more
difficult for People to make punctual Payments of what they borrow, Money being
hard to be raised; likewise Trade being discouraged, and Business impeded for
want of a Currency, abundance of People must be in declining Circumstances, and
by these Means Security is more precarious than where Money is plenty. On such
Accounts it is no wonder if People ask a greater Interest for their Money than
the natural Interest; and what is above is to be looked upon as a kind of
Praemium for the Ensurance of those Uncertainties, as they are greater or less.
Thus we always see, that where Money is scarce, Interest is high, and low where
it is plenty. Now it is certainly the Advantage of a Country to make Interest
as low as possible, as I have already shown; and this can be done no other way
than by making Money plentiful. And since, in Emitting Paper Money among us,
the Office has the best of Security, the Titles to the Land being all skilfully
and strictly examined and ascertained; and as it is only permitting the People
by Law to coin their own Land, which costs the Government nothing, the Interest
being more than enough to pay the Charges of Printing, Officers Fees, etc. I
cannot see any good Reason why Four per Cent. to the Loan-Office should not be
thought fully sufficient. As a low Interest may incline more to take Money out,
it will become more plentiful in Trade; and this may bring down the common
Usury, in which Security is more dubious, to the Pitch it is determined at by
Law.

If it should be objected, That Emitting It at so low an Interest, and on such
easy Terms, will occasion more to be taken out than the Trade of the Country
really requires* It may be answered, That, as has already been shown, there can
never be so much of it emitted as to make it fall below the Land it is founded
on; because no Man in his Senses will mortgage his Estate for what is of no
more Value to him than That he has mortgaged, especially if the Possession of
what he receives is more precarious than of what he mortgages, as that of Paper
Money is when compared to Land: And if it should ever become so plenty by
indiscreet Persons continuing to take out a large Overplus, above what is
necessary in Trade, so as to make People imagine it would become by that Means
of less Value than their mortgaged Lands, they would immediately of Course
begin to pay it in again to the Office to redeem their Land, and continue to do
so till there was no more left in Trade than was absolutely necessary. And thus
the Proportion would find it self, (though there were a Million too much in the
Office to be let out) without giving any one the Trouble of Calculation.

It may perhaps be objected to what I have written concerning the Advantages of
a large Addition to our Currency, That if the People of this Province increase,
and Husbandry is more followed, we shall overstock the Markets with our Produce
of Flower, etc. To this it may be answered, that we can never have too many
People (nor too much Money) For when one Branch of Trade or Business is
overstocked with Hands, there are the more to spare to be employed in another.
So if raising Wheat proves dull, more may (if there is Money to support and
carry on new Manufactures) proceed to the raising and manufacturing of Hemp,
Silk, Iron, and many other Things the Country is very capable of, for which we
only want People to work, and Money to pay them with.

Upon the Whole it may be observed, That it is the highest Interest of a
Trading Country in general to make Money plentiful; and that it can be a
Disadvantage to none that have honest Designs. It cannot hurt even the Usurers,
though it should sink what they receive as Interest; because they will be
proportionably more secure in what they lend; or they will have an Opportunity
of employing their Money to greater Advantage, to themselves as well as to the
Country. Neither can it hurt those Merchants who have great Sums out-standing
in Debts in the Country, and seem on that Account to have the most plausible
Reason to fear it; to wit, because a large Addition being made to our Currency,
will increase the Demand of our Exporting Produce, and by that Means raise the
Price of it, so that they will not be able to purchase so much Bread or Flower
with 100 l. when they shall receive it after such an Addition, as they now can,
and may if there is no Addition: I say it cannot hurt even such, because they
will get in their Debts just in exact Proportion so much the easier and sooner
as the Money becomes plentier; and therefore, considering the Interest and
Trouble saved, they will not be Losers; because it only sinks in Value as a
Currency, proportionally as it becomes more plenty. It cannot hurt the Interest
of Great Britain, as has been shown; and it will greatly advance the Interest
of the Proprietor. It will be an Advantage to every industrious Tradesman, etc.
because his Business will be carried on more freely, and Trade be universally
enlivened by it. And as more Business in all Manufactures will be done, by so
much as the Labor and Time spent in Exchange is saved, the Country in general
will grow so much the richer.

It is nothing to the Purpose to object the wretched Fall of the Bills in
New England and South Carolina, unless it might be made evident that their
Currency was emitted with the same Prudence, and on such good Security as ours
is; and it certainly was not.

As this Essay is wrote and published in Haste, and the Subject in it self
intricate, I hope I shall be censured with Candor, if, for want of Time
carefully to revise what I have written, in some Places I should appear to have
expressed my self too obscurely, and in others am liable to Objections I did
not foresee. I sincerely desire to be acquainted with the Truth, and on that
Account shall think my self obliged to any one, who will take the Pains to show
me, or the Public, where I am mistaken in my Conclusions, And as we all know
there are among us several Gentlemen of acute Parts and profound Learning, who
are very much against any Addition to our Money, it were to be wished that they
would favor the Country with their Sentiments on this Head in Print; which,
supported with Truth and good Reasoning, may probably be very convincing. And
this is to be desired the rather, because many People knowing the Abilities of
those Gentlemen to manage a good Cause, are apt to construe their Silence in
This, as an Argument of a bad One. Had any Thing of that Kind ever yet
appeared, perhaps I should not have given the Public this Trouble: But as
those ingenious Gentlemen have not yet (and I doubt never will) think it worth
their Concern to enlighten the Minds of their erring Countrymen in this
Particular. I think it would be highly commendable in every one of us, more
fully to bend our Minds to the Study of What is the true Interest of
PENNSYLVANIA; whereby we may be enabled, not only to reason pertinently with
one another; but, if Occasion requires, to transmit Home such clear
Representations, and must inevitably convince our Superiors of the
Reasonableness and Integrity of our Designs.

B. B.
Philadelphia, Arpil 3. 1729.
FINIS.

