The Weighty Matters of the Law.

THE Worship of GOD, FOREVER To be accompanied WITH JUDGMENT, MERCY, and FAITH,
AS THE Weightier Matters OF THE LAW.

A SERMON Delivered at the Lecture in Boston, Sept. 18. 1729.

By John Barnard, V.D.M. of Marblehead.

Si quis excipiat, hoc modo praferri homines Deo quia plurit sensetur quae
illis praestatur Charitas quam Religio; facilis solutio est, hic non opponi
priori legis tabula secundam, sed potius ex secundae Observatione Probationem
sumi an vere et (...) Animo colatur Deus.

Calvin. (...) Hierocles. BOSTON: Printed for S. Gerrish, at the lower end of
Cornhill. 1729.

Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, the Weightier Matters of the Law.
MATTHEW. XXIII. 23. Woe, unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye pay
tithe of Mint, and Annise, and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters
of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to
leave the other undone.


THESE Words were spoken, by our Blessed Lord, to the Scribes, and Pharisees,
in His Day; whom He severely reproves, for several very great Errors, and
Mistakes in their Conduct, with respect to the MoralLife. The Scribes and
Pharisees were very remarkable, among the Jews, for their strict Observation of
the Externals, and Rituals of Religion; and not content with the many
Ceremonies of the Law of Moses, had advanced various Customs, and Traditions,
of their own Invention, into an Equality with those of Divine Appointment, and
made them necessary Appendages of their Religion. The Evangelist Luke
therefore, in his XI. Chap. at ver. 38. takes notice of the Occasion of our
Lord's dispencing this Rebuke in my Text to them, namely, their finding Fault
with Him, for not observing their Custom of Washing, before He sat down to
Meat, when He was invited to dine with one of the Pharisees; which our Lord
lays hold on as a good Opportunity, to show them, the vanity of their
pretentions to greater Piety and Holiness than other Men, because of their
being so very punctillious with regard to the Externals, and Rituals of their
Religion; when at the same time, they were so very negligent of the more
essential parts of true Religion.

The Jews had the Pharisees in such Veneration among them, for their Sanctity,
because they were so critical in their Observation of the outwardForm of
Religion, that they verily though it, if there were but Two Men in the World that
should get to Heaven, a Pharisee would be one of them. But our Lord, who better
understood Religion, and the Pharisee, lets them know, that notwithstanding all
their exactness, in attending upon the outward Form and Rituals of Religion,
they were so far from bidding fair for the Kingdom of Heaven, that the Woe of
Hypocrites belonged to them, while they lived in the neglect of those more
essential Parts and Duties of true Religion, Judgment, Mercy and Faith: Woe unto
you, Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites, (says he) for ye pay Tithe of Mint,
and Annise, and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy and Faith, etc.

Some Chirfos^ Hieron:
have been ready to think that the Scribes and Pharisees are here reproved for
their Covetousness, in exacting the Tithe of the people to the minutest part of
it: but this does not seem to be the intent of the words, for the Scribes and
Pharisees were not the Priests and Levites, to whom the Tithe belonged (...)
and Muse^ and besides the Word (...) sign (...) not only to receive but to pay
Tithe, as (...) pla^^ from Luke XVIII. 12.
But it plainly intimates to us, that they were a Generation of Men, who made a
great outward show of Religion, insomuch, that they seemed to make Conscience
of, and were exceeding scrupulous about the externals and modalities thereof,
even to a critical paying the least part of their Tithe, though it were but a
little Mint, Annise and Cummin.

Our Savior does not reprove them for this their exactness in the outward
duties of Religion, which he says, ought not to be left undone; but that under
this outward show, and mighty pretense of Zeal for the lesser parts and duties
of Religion, they really neglected the greater, the weightier matters of the
Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith The Jews had no strict regard to the Morality of
their Actions, and contenting themselves with some kind of outward conformity
to the bare Letter of the Ten Commandments, were almost wholly taken up with
little Ceremonies and Observances, in which they placed the main of their
Religion, almost wholly neglecting the greater (...), and weightier matters of
the Law. Dr. Till. Fol. II P. 437.
which plainly spoke them Hypocrites at the bottom, to whom the Woe and Curse of
God belonged.

In the further handling of these words, I crave your patience while I
discourse, as briefly as I can, upon these Four or Five Things, which are
plainly included in them.

I. That the Externals and Rituals of Religion ought to be observed by us.
These ought not to be lest undone.

II. The Duties of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, are specially to be observed, as
the weightier matters of the Law. These ye ought to have done.

III. No exactness in the Observation of the Externals and Rituals of Religion
will be an Excuse for our Neglect of the weightier matters of the Law.

IV. Though a Man should be ever so exact in the Externals of Religion, yet if he
neglects Judgment, Mercy and Faith, he is but an Hypocrite after all.

V. While Judgment, Mercy and Faith are neglected, the greatest Criticalness in
the Rituals of Religion will not secure a Man from the Woe.

All of these I think, are very fairly included in the words of my Text, and I
shall offer something to each of them, in their Order.

I. The Externals and Rituals of Religion ought to be observed by us. This is
what the Scribes and Pharisees were very exact in. They were noted for their
scrupulous niceness in every little Modality of Religion, and were such strict
observers of the Letter of the Law of Moses, that they were very punctillious
even in the most Minute part of their Tithe. So that their paying Tithe of
Mint, Annise, and Cummin, seems to include in it, a Critical Exactness about
the Externals and Rituals of Religion; and these, said our Blessed Savior, ye
ought not to leave undone. Which shows they are to be observed by us.

By the Externals of Religion, I mean all those various ways by which we
outwardly express our Belief of, and Reverence to the Deity, whether in Word,
or Gesture; as all our outward Acts of Religious Worship, whether more
privately, in the Family, or more publicly, in the House of God; together with
the Gravity and Seriousness of our Countenances, and Composure of our Bodies,
while we are bowing before the Lord our God. And by the Rituals of Religion, I
mean those Rites and Ceremonies of our Holy Religion, which are of Divine
Appointment; whereby we take upon us the Badge and Token of our peculiar
Relation to God, as his People, and express our Hope of the promised Mercy of
God, and bring ourselves under explicit Obligations to be his Servants,
obedient to all his Commands.

These Externals and Rituals of Religion, I say, ought not to be neglected by
us; but are carefully to be observed, even to the minute Circumstance of paying
Tithe of Mint, Annice and Cummin. For indeed the Light of Nature leads hereto,
and the Command of God enjoins it upon us.

The light of Nature leads to it; for upon Supposition of the Being of a God,
infinitely Great and Powerful, Wife, Holy, Just and Good, it is one of the next
and plain Consequences that then, this God ought to be reverenced, and
Worshipped; that therefore we should be careful not to affront him, and cast
Contempt and Indignity upon him, by Blasphemy, or any profane mentioning of his
Holy Name; that we ought to pay our public Honor to him, and so acknowledge
him the Author of all our public, as well as private and personal Mercies.
Thus far the Light of Nature goes; though it does not dictate to us, how we are
to Worship God, nor what are the Rites and Ceremonies, which are most
acceptable and pleasing to him.

But then, these Externals and Rituals of Religion are enjoined us by the
positive Command of God. As we are commanded to enter into our Closet, and pray
to our Father which sees in secret, so a more public and social Worship is
required of us. This God required of his professing people of old, in the Days
of the old Testament, as is plainly evident beyond dispute, from the whole
History of the Old Testament Exodus xxiii. 17. Levit. viii. ^ I. Chr. xxix. 20.
II. Chr. v 6.
. To this end served their Tabernacle and Temple, their Sacrifices and Feasts,
and Sabbaths, all directing to the public Worship of the Supreme Being. And no
less plain is the Obligation upon us, in the Days of the Gospel, to this part
of our Duty to our Maker, Preserver and Benefactor; and that, not only from the
Consideration, that a Law once enacted remains in Force till repealed by the
same, an equal, or Superior power; and that no Change in the Modality, and
particular Form of Worship makes any alteration either in the Substance, the
Object, or the Subjects of that Worship; but from the Practice of our Savior
and his Apostles (...).
after they were wholly drawn off from the Jewish Mode and Form of Worship, and
had set up the Christian in the Room thereof; and from that most excellent
Pattern for our Prayers (...). vi. 9.
which our Savior has given us; and the Apostolical Exhortation (...). X. 25.
not to forsake the Assembling of ourselves together: all of which plainly
speak it our Duty in the Days of the Gospel, in an external visible way and
manner, to uphold the Worship of God, Socially and together.

As to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Christian Religion, these are but few,
and more positively enjoined. For when the Change was made from the Jewish, to
the Christian Religion, the alteration chiefly consisted in the external Rites
and Ceremonies; and therefore when the old were abolished, there needed a
positive Law for the Instituting of New ones. And accordingly our Savior, the
great Head of the Christian Church, has positively instituted these; as the
Baptism of the Lord, Matthew. xxviii. 19. Go ye Disciple all nations, baptising,
etc. which evidently means a water Baptism, as appear from the practice of the
Apostles, and those Words of St. Peter, Act. x. 47. Who can forbid water, that
these should not be baptized. So also, has He possitively instituted the Holy
Supper, ( Matthew. xxvi. 26.) and commanded us to observe it in Remembrance of
Him, ( Luke xxii. 19.) and that, a literal feeding upon Bread and Wine, not
transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of Christ, but as Commemorative of
His Body broken, and His Blood shed for us, but yet remaining truly Bread and
Wine after the Consecration, (1 Cor. xi. 26.)

There is also another Rite of the Christian Church, namely, the Discipline and
Government thereof; concerning which, we have many particular directions, in
the Acts, and Epistles of the Apostles; and our Savior has given us a more
general and comprehensive Rule, in Matthew. xviii. 15. These Rites and Ceremonies
of the Christian Religion ought carefully to be observed by us, and no pretense
to greater spirituality in Worship, without these external and carnal
Ordinances, as some are pleased to call them, should exempt us therefrom.
These Ought not to be lest undone, no more than the tithing of Mint, Annise and
Cummin, under the Jewish dispensation, because our Lord has commanded them; for
it is not eno' to make us Christians, to fulfill one part of our duty, but we
must observe whatsoever Christ has commanded us, Non Sufficit Christiano,
^^unam partem Justici^e impleat, c^i u^ramque praecipitur. Audor ad Celantiam.


I proceed to say,

II. The Duties of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, are especially to be observed,
as the weightier Matters of the Law. These, says our Savior, in my Text, are
weightier Matters of the Law, and these ye ought to have done; That is, in an
especial Manner; and He blames the Scribes and Pharisees for their neglect of
them.

But that we may have a more clear and distinct view of this Head, I will
briefly show you,

1. What are the Duties of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith.

2. That, these are the weightier Matters of the Law.

3. That, therefore these ought more especially to be done by us.

I begin with the first of these, namely,

1. To show, what are the Duties, of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith.

And here,

1. By Judgment, (...), The Verb (...), is supposed to come from the Hebrew
(...) to shine clearly, and hence the Latin Cernere to discern and see
distinctly; and hence the Substantive (...) is used for Judgment and Justice.
is to be understood a clear Determination, whether in public Administrations,
or private Dealings; and so it means, both public and private Justice. That
there be public Justice, in all public Administrations, and Courts of
Judicature. The want of this seems to be one thing for which the Scribes, and
Pharisees, are faulted in my context. They sat in Moses's seat, were the
Teachers and Rulers of the People; and yet they bound heavy burdens, and
grievous to be born, and laid them upon men's shoulders, when they would not
move or touch them themselves with one of their Fingers. That is, their
Impositions and Determinations in Judgment with respect unto others, were such
as they would by no Means have submitted to themselves. This therefore shows
us, that there must be just and equal Laws, reducing all things to Number,
Weight, and Measure; and these Laws must be faithfully and impartially
administered, without respect to persons. There must be public Justice in a
certain and unalterable Levis. XIX. 35, 36. Ezekiel. XlV. 9, (...) 12.
Standard, that the Weight and the Measure may be equal and steady, and not
liable to be altered and changed by the greedy desire of worldly-minded Men.
There must be public Justice, in rendering to C^^sar, the things that are
C^sars; Romans xiii 7.
Tribute to whom Tribute, and Honor to whom Honor is due.

But then by Judgment, is meant private Justice between Man and Man, or Quod
justum et aquum ^st, in communi vita usu, Bez in Lee.
that which is just and equal in the common Affairs of Life. This the Scribes
and Pharisees are blamed for their neglect of; they devou^ed widows Houses, and
were full of Extortion and Excess. Though they put on a demure and religious
Countenance, and strained at a Gnat, in a critical Observation of the outward
Form, and the least Ritual and Modality in Religion, yet they could swallow a
Camel, and stick not to defraud, and wrong, and oppress their Neighbor, by
very grievous acts of Injustice. So that this points us to the strictest
Justice in our dealings with Mankind; that as we may not violently wrest from
them their Right by Rapine, Plunder, Extortion, Oppression, whether by Form of
Law, or without it; so neither may we underhandedly overreach, and trick, and
cheat them, by ^alming false Wares, or false Weights, or false Accounts upon
them, or by imposing upon their Ignorance and Weakness, much less their
Necessity, and the like; but we must be very careful to act in all our Dealings
by the Rules of Justice, in our Weight, and Measure, in our Bargaining, and
Acquisition, and in all Labor and Employment. This I take to be meant by
Judgment here.

2. By Mercy "(...) is supposed to come from the Chaldee (...) lame^ta^, which
is expressive of our inward Pity; and in the (...), it is expressive of our
pity by our (...)
is to be understood all the kind offices of Life: and it seems to refer very
much to the government of our Appetites and Passions, as Judgment does to the
regulating of our Actions; that we be kind, beneficent, tenderhearted,
affectionate, pitiful, full of compassion, and ready to every good work. That
we be merciful, in our compassion, pity, and sympathy, with others in their
Affliction and Sorrow, and under their Wants and Distresses, That we be
merciful, in a readiness to afford our Help and Assistance to those that need
it, to relieve the Miserable, and supply the Wants of the Indigent and Needy,
and be full of Almsdeeds; doing good unto all Men, but especially to the
Household of Faith, and not turn away our Bowels from our poor Brother, when we
see him in distress and want. That we be merciful, in the Benignity, Courtesy,
Gentleness and Sweetness of our Temper and Disposition, living in Love and
Peace, and follow after the Things that make for Peace; and put away all Anger,
Clamor, and Strife, and Contention, and the like. That we be merciful, in our
Patience, and Long-suffering, bearing with the Weaknesses, and over-looking the
Frailties and Infirmities of our Neighbors; and not make Faults where there
are none, or aggravate his little Weaknesses into great Crimes and Offenses,
and under the pretense thereof, pour Reproach and Contempt upon him, when he
really deserves none. That we be merciful, in our Forgiving those that injure
us, being ready to put up Affronts, indignities, and Abuses that are offered to
us; abstaining from all Retaliation and Revenge, seeking an Opportunity, or at
least embracing it when it is offered, to do Good for Evil, to bless those that
Curse us, and pray for those that dispitefully use and persecute us. This the
Scribes and Pharisees were faulty in their neglect of; they laid grievous
heavy Burden upon others, devot^ed the poor Widow, imtead of Helping her, and
excommunicated, and scourged, and crucified the Servants of God, who were sent
unto them; as our Savior gives us an Account of in this Chapter.

3. By Faith, and agreeably Cicero defines Fides, dictorum et conventorum
Constantia et ^eritas, qu^a, ^it quod dictum.
(...) is meant, the Constancy and Trust of our Word and Contract; and hence in
the Verb, (...), it is used to ratify, confirm, establish; and in the
Adjective, (...) for certain, indisputable, and faithful: So that by Faith,
here, is meant Truth and Fidelity. And this may be considered either as public
or private. It means, that there be Truth and Fidelity, Constancy and
steadfastness to the public Faith, in all their Leagues, Covenants, and
Contracts, with foreign Nations and States; and in all their Agreements,
Promises, and Engagements, among themselves. This Public Faith ought to be
kept inviolably Sacred, as the Foundation of foreign Alliance, and Commerce;
and the Cement of a People among themselves.

But then every Man must have regard to his own Private Faith. That is, that he
be True in his word, and put away all Lying, Falsehood, and Slander: that he be
faithful in the Depositum Committed to him, and the Trust reposed in him; and
not alienate the Pledge, or wilfully baulk the Dependence of another upon him;
that he be constant to his Promise and see to the Fulfillment of it, according
to the True Intent and Meaning of it; without vile Shifts and Evations,
needless Delays, or a perfidious violating of it, that he be punctual to his
Contract and Bargain, esteeming his word therein equal to the strongest Bond,
and never allow himself to satisfy his Faith, from the Prospect of securing
himself, or increasing his Stores; but though what he has promised, contracted,
and agreed, may prove to his Hurt, yet must he not suffer his Worldly Interest
to warp him from the Truth; for so the Good Man is characterised, Psalm. xv. 4.
if he swear to his Hurt, he changes not. This is the Faith here meant.

I know some have been ready to suppose that by Faith, here, is to be
understood, Faith in Jesus Christ; but I cannot but think, that our blessed
Lord here speaks of the common Offices of Men one among another, respecting
their Deeds, by Judgment; their Passions, by Mercy; and their Words, by Faith.
And in this last Instance, the Scribes and Pharisees were deeply guilty, in
that they made nothing of their Word, and promise, yea of their Oath, in many
Cases, under the presence of a foolish and groundless Distinction, between the
Obligation arising from their swearing by the Temple, or the Gold of the
Temple, the Altar, or the Gift that was upon the Altar. So that by Judgment,
Mercy, and Faith, are to be understood the various Duties that we owe to our
Neighbor, of Justice, Charity, and Truth, and all that is comprehended under
them.

But

2. I am now to show that Faith, Mercy, and Judgment, are the weightier Matters
of the Law. That is, they are Matters of greater weight and Moment, than all
the Externals, and Rituals of Religion. And this will sufficiently appear from
these things.

1. They are most indispensibly required of us.

2. They are of greater Weight in the Intention of the Incarnation and Death of
Christ.

3. They render us most serviceable and Beneficent to the world.

4. By these we become more like to God, reflect the greatest Honor upon Him,
and are fitted for the Enjoyment of Him.

I shall speak something to each of these.

1. The Duties of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith are most indispensably required of
us. The great Duties of Justice and Righteousness in all our Dealing and
Commerce with Mankind, of Truth and Faithfulness in all our Words, Promises and
Contracts, and the Government of our Passions, subduing them to a patient and
humble, meek and peaceable, charitable and kind Temper and Disposition, this is
the great Law, which, together with the Love of God, was at first written on
the Table of our Hearts. And when the Characters hereof were greatly
obliterated and obscured, by the Original Apostasy of Mankind, and the
contracted Habits of Sin and Vice, the Main Designs of the Divine Revelation
was, as to reveal a Savior to us, so, to recover to us the Knowledge of this
Law, and reduce us to the practice of these Virtues and Graces. As for the
Externals and Rituals of Religion, these turn purely upon a positive Command,
and result from the mere will and pleasure of our high Sovereign; but the
Duties of Judgment, Mercy and Faith, result from all the infinitely glorious
perfections of the Deity, and remain unalterably the same, and are obligatory
upon the Creature, capable of obeying them, antecedent to any positive Law and
Command: So that they are weightier with respect to their original and
stability. And when it pleased God to reveal his Mind unto the World, what has
He more positively, and peremptorily insisted upon, than that our Faith in
Christ, as the Lord our Righteousness, we should add these great Duties, and
that both under the old Testament and the New. Hence Mi^ah vi. 8. He has
showed thee, O Man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but
to do justly and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God: And Tit. ^.
11, 12. The Grace of God that ^^inget^ Salvation, has appeared to all Men;
teaching us, that denying all ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, we should live
soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in this present World. The Externals and
Rituals of Religion may be dispensed with, upon particular Times and Occasions,
(as I shall show afterward;) but these Duties are indispensibly required, and
are never at no Time, and upon no Occasion, to be neglected. Hence it is that
our Savior has told us, Matthew. V. 20. Except your Righteousness shall exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no Case, enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. That is, if you do not go beyond the Externals and
Rituals of Religion, which the Scribes and Pharisees, were so remarkable for,
but, like them, neglect Judgment, Mercy and Faith, it is impossible you should
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And so the Apostle Paul tells us, 1 Cor. Vi.
9, 10. The unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; be not deceived,
neither Fornicators, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers,
nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

There is no great Difficulty in attending upon the Externals and Rituals of
Religion, these lay no such great Restraints upon our Lusts and Passions, nor
call for any great Measure of Selfdenyal; but the Practice of these great
Virtues require all our Skill and Pains, in mortifying our Members, which are
upon the Earth, in crucifing our Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts. It is a
putting off the old Man, which is corrupt, according to deceitful Lusts, and a
putting on the new Man, which, after God, is created in Righteousness, and true
Holiness. Col. iii. 5. Gal. V. 24. Ephesians. iv. 22, 24.
The Rituals of Religion are but the means to this End, that we may be led
thereby, to such a reverend Regard to the Deity, the Purity of His Nature, and
the Holiness of His Law, as to put on, as the Elect of God, Bowels of Mercy,
Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another, and live in that Charity, which is the Bond of
Perfectness. Col. iii. 12, 13, ^.
Hence the Evangelist Luke st^es these, the Love of God, Luke xi. 42. And upon
no Terms whatever, are these great Duties to be dispensed with, but are forever
to be made the constant and unalterable Rule of our Life.

And,

2. As they are indispensibly required, so they are of greater weight in the
Intention of the Incarnation and Death of Christ. When Mankind had sunk into
the Ruins of the Apostasy, and into the lowest Dregs of Corruption, it pleased
the Son of God to assume our Nature, and appear in the World, to lead a most
Holy and Righteous Life, and at length to lay down His Life for us. And what
was the great End and Intention of all this? Surely, not to establish a few
Externals and Rituals of Religion. No, this was too mean for the Son of God to
undertake, (otherwise than as it, in part, fell in with the great End He had in
View) nor had it been worth His while to have exposed Himself to such
Indignities and Suffering, as He did only to this purpose. Though it be true that
the incarnate Son of God fulfilled all Righteousness, by a devout attendance
upon all the externals and rituals of Religion, then belonging to the Jewish
Church; and has given us His Orders and Directions concerning such Rites as He
has made the distinguishing Mark and Character of the visible Christian Church;
yet this was not the great design of His coming into the World, and dying for
us. But as one great end of his Death was, to make Expiation for Sin, that by
Faith in His Blood we might obtain eternal Redemption, even the Forgiveness of
our Sins, Vid. R^m. iii. 24, 25. Ephesians. ^^
so the main and chief design of His wondrous Incarnation, holy Life, and
bitter Death, was, to recover us from our Apostasy, to raise us from the very
Dregs of our Corruption and Depravity, and bring us home unto God; and so make
us meet for the pardoning Mercy of a gracious God. And what is the bringing us
home to God, but the bringing of us to Repentance, and a hearty, willing,
universal Obedience and Subjection to the Law of God; and so, from a principle
of Love to God, and in the Obedience of Faith to the Son of God to observe
these great Duties of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. Therefore as a Prophet sent
from God, He has taught us the way of Truth clearly and fully, and in His
Doctrine, chiefly insisted upon these, as the Weightier Matters of the Law: So
throughout his whole excellent Sermon on the Mount, wherein he explains, and
refines, and exalts the Law of Nature, and gives us the most perfect System of
real Virtue and Goodness; and begins His Sermon Matthew. v. (...)
with pronouncing the Blessing upon the Poor and humble, the Meek, and
Righteous, the Merciful, the pure, and peaceable, and such as are ready to
overlook and forgive Injuries. And as He chiefly taught us this by his
Doctrine, so also by His holy and righteous Life, wherein He has set before us
the most illustrious Pattern of Righteousness, Faith, and Mercy, that could be;
and lest it to us as an Exemplar, that we should tread in His Steps.

To this very end and purpose also is He our King, the Head of Church, and of
all Influences, that He might rule in the Hearts of His People, by His Word and
Spirit, and subdue all the workings of Self, and Love unto the World, in us,
from whence proceed Covetousness, Fraud, Oppression, Injustice, Intemperance,
Variance, Wrath, Sedition, Envying, Murders, and the like; and that we might
live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, and bring sorth the Fruit of the
Spirit, in all Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance, Gal. v. 16. 23.
and the like.

And to this End also He Died for us, not only to purchase Pardon, but that we
might be dead unto Sin, that we should live no longer therein, but be the
Servants of Righteousness unto Holiness, Romans vi. 6, 11, 19.
He gave Himself for our Sins, that He might deliver us from this present Evil
World Gal. i. 4.
; to redeem us from our Vain Conversation handed down by Custom and Example
from our Fathers; I Pet. i. 18.
; to redeem us from iniquity, and purify us to Himself a peculiar People,
zealous of Good Works. Tit. xi. 4. And what does He Interc^de for? But that we
might be kept from the Evil, might be Sanctified; might be made Perfect in one,
and so come to behold His Glory. Joh. xvii. 15, 17, 23, 24. So that the Grace
of God, in the Gift of His Son to bring Salvation, appears in teaching us to
mortify our Lust and Passions, and live soberly, and righteously, as well as
godly, in this present world.

Thus these great Duties of Righteousness, Charity, and Fidelity, are the
weightier Matters of the Law, far exceeding all the externals, rituals, and
modalities of Religion in the End and Intention, of the Incarnation, Life, and
Death of Christ.

But then,

3. These Virtues render us most Beneficent and serviceable to the World, while
we are in it; and therefore are the weightier Matters of the Law. This Argument
the Apostle urges, in his Epistle to Titus, Tit. iii. 8. This is a faithful
saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they, which
have believed in God, might be careful to maintain Good Works; these things are
Good, and Profitable unto Men.

The Divine Law is adapted, as to our rational so, to our Social Nature; and
our present state of Trial and Probation in this World, is chiefly concerned
about the Exercise of those Virtues and Graces, which more specially relate to
the Social Life. The Trial of our Obedience to our Sovereign Lord, does notly,
so much in a Compliance with the Externals and Rituals of Religion, as in the
Government of our Appetites and Passions, and the Practice of Virtues, of
Righteousness, Meekness, Humility, Patience, Temperance, Brotherly-kindness,
and Charity: And in this Way it is, that we answer to the original Intention of
our Maker, in a common Beneficence, and Usefulness to all about us. For God
made all things for His own Glory, in the subserviency and usefulness of the
Creatures; one unto another, whereby the glory of His Wisdom, and Goodness, as
well as Power, are marvelously displayed. And it is the Law of the Gospel, 1.
Cor. X. 24. Let no man seek his own, but every man another Wealth. We are not
born for our selves, but for Society, for the Benefit, and Advantage of
Mankind: and it is our great Duty, while we are in the World, so to lay out our
selves in the Improvement of all our Talents, our Capacities, and
Opportunities, that Mankind may, some way or other, fare the better for us.

But what Benefit and Advantage is it to others, that we are very critical and
exact in the observation of the Externals, and Rituals of Religion: all this
may be, and yet we may, at the some time, injure, and oppress our Neighbor,
and violate all the Laws of the social Life. Saul, the strict Pharisee, was,
notwithstanding all his c^act conformity to the Mosaic Rites, and the ancient
Traditions, a Persecuter and Injurious, I. Tim 13.


But now, to make it our constant Care to live by our Savior's established
Rule, Matt. Vii. 12. To do unto others, as we would they should do unto us; to
be as Just and Honest, as True and Faithful, as Kind and Charitable, to others,
as we would they should be to us, were our circumstances changed, this is to be
truly beneficial and serviceable in the World. We shall then, not only, do no
Hurt to any Man, by our Words, or Deeds, but, we shall really do them all the
Good that lies in our Power, in the Exercise of these Virtues; and this will be
indeed to Love our Neighbors, as our selves. And if the World would but once
learn to live up to the Laws of the Gospel, in these respects, Heaven would
come down upon Earth, (and possibly, something more of this than ever the World
has yet seen, may be intended, by the Thousand Years Reign of Christ on Earth,
and the New Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven;) where there is
nothing but the greatest Serviceableness, accompanied with the highest Delight
in each other, among the glorified Inhabitants of that blissful Region. So that
upon this Account, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, are the wightier matters of the
Law.

4. Lastly; They are the wightier matters of the Law, in that hereby, we become
more like to God, reflect the greatest Honor upon Him, and are fitted for the
Enjoyment of Him.

This renders us more like to God. For there is nothing in the Externals and
Rituals of Religion that makes us any ways like to the ever blessed and Holy
God. They are indeed appointed Means to lead us to this End, that we may in the
use of them Ass^mi^ate ourselves to the Divine Nature: Because by them we have
a Mediate Access to the Deity, whereby our Minds may be impressed with such an
Aw and Reverence of Him, as to put us upon Endeavor after a Likeness to Him.
But to be Just, and True, and Kind and Charitable, this is the great End aimed
at by them all; because this is the Moral Image of God, upon us, who is
infinitely Just, and True, and Good. So that when we live in the Exercise of
these Virtues, we are perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect, as our blessed
Savior exhorts us to be, Matthew. V. 48. Not equal to Him in Degrees, but like
Him in the Kinds of Excellency and Perfection. Whereas he I Joh. iii. 10.
that does not Righteousness, and loves not his brother, is not of God,
neither is he like Him. What is the New Man, in which we are renewed, after the
Image of Him that created him: But the mortifying our Members which are on the
Earth, formation, Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupisence and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry; that we put off Anger, Wrath, Malice, Evil
speaking, filthy Communication; that we lie not one unto another; and that we
put on Charity; that the Peace of God rule in our Hearts, to the which we are
called in one Body. Col. iii. 5 -- 15.
This makes us shine with the Rays of the divine Likeness upon us, and then are
we partakers of the divine Nature, when we have escaped the Corruption that is
in the world through Lust; and to our Faith, in God, and the word of His Grace,
add these Virtues of Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness,
Brotherly-kindness, and Charity: and this is to yield the obedience of Faith to
the Son of God; for if these things be in us and abound, they make us that we
shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. II. (...). 4 -- 8


And surely then, This reflects the highest Honor upon God. As it is the
greatest Dignity and Glory of the Creature to be like the blessed God, so it is
the highest Honor we can give to the supream-Being to endeavor after the
nearest Resemblance of Him; so to own and acknowledge and approve the divine
Excellencies and Perfections, as to make it our great Care to imitate Him
therein; this is to give to Him the Glory due unto His Name. The great End we
were made for, is to glorify God; and then do we most effectually glorify Him,
when we thus Show forth the virtue and the Praise of Him, who calieth us out of
darkness into His mavelous Light. For we cannot truly give any thing to the
al-perfect, and all-sufficient One; all our glorifying God is, but the
Acknowledgement of His glorious Excellency, and a living answerable thereto:
and in what way can this be so effectually done by us, as by our endeavoring
after the highest Conformity to Him we are capable of, and transcribing His
Excellencies into our own Life; by abstaining from fleshly Lust, which war
against the soul, having our Conversation honest among the Gentiles, that by
our good works, which they shall behold, they may glorify God. I. Pet. ii. 9 --
12.
This gives the most illustrious Example of the divine Life unto the world,
shows forth the Life of Christ, and is the most powerful Attractive, to allure
and persuade others to live the divine Life; and so reflect the highest Honor
and Glory upon the divine Majesty. Thus our blessed Lord glorified His Father,
on the Earth, manifesting His Name, Job. xvii. 4, 6.
that is, the excellencies of the Deity: and thus He has commanded us, Matt.V.
16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

And can any thing then make us more fit to enjoy God? than by doing those
things which make us most like unto Him, and by which we most glorify Him. The
most constant Attendance upon the externals of Religion does no ways of it self
fit us for the enjoyment of the blessed God, but may still leave us associated
with those fallen Spirits, who know how to transform themselves into Angels of
Light; because this neither alters our depraved Disposition, nor glorifies God
in those direct Acts of a rational Spirit, which we are capable of, and
intended for. But when we have once so got the mastery over ourselves, and our
vicious Inclinations, as, in the Faith of the Gospel, the Revelation, and the
Promises of it, to exercise our selves to have always a Conscience void of
offense both toward God, and toward Man, in the constant Practice of
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, and all those Virtues and Graces included in them,
as inseparable Companions of our religious Worship and Adoration, then, are we
most like unto the infinitely pure and holy God, (as I have showed already);
then do we in the most direct-way and manner, we are capable of, glorify Him,
and therefore are thereby best fitted for the Enjoyment of Him. For no Man
shall enjoy God, and the happy state above, but those that are like Him; those
that are Pure, as He is Pure, those that are Holy, as He is Holy; those that
have their Hearts purifyed from Covetousness and Worldly-mindedness, from Pride
and Insolence, from Falsehood and Guile, from Malice and Envy, and the like, and
live in the Exercise of that Love to their Neighbor, which is productive of
all social Virtue, and fits them for Communion together in a better World. For
the Vices above named would wholly unfit for the happy Society above, because
there can be no true Happiness in any Society where they are suffered to
prevail; the very nature of the Vice, spoils the Harmony and Delight of
Society, and rank us with infernal Spirits, who are a Torment to each other.
Whereas be that dwells in love, which comprehends all those Virtues and
Graces I am speaking of, dwells in God, and God in him I. Job.iv. 16;
and therefore shall at last come down with God, being thus made meet to
partake of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, where the delightful Society
of perfected Spirits will be as pleasant and agreeable, as uninterrupted and
endless. In these respects and upon these accounts the great duties of
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, are of more Weight than all the Externals and
Rituals of Religion. I shall not need to enlarge in speaking to the third Head,
which now 1 come to; viz.

3. That therefore these duties of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, ought especially
to be done by us. For, if by these we are made most like to the blessed God,
reflect the highest Honor upon, and are fitted for the Enjoyment of Him; if by
these we are most Serviceable and beneficial to the World about; if it was the
great Intention of the Incarnation and Death of Christ, to recover us from our
Depravity, to the Practice of these Virtues; and if these are most
indispensably required of us, (all of which we have seen,) then certainly we
need no other reason and argument to convince us, that they ought in an
especial manner to be done by us. These ought ye to have done, says our
Savior; that is, "most punctually and exactly to have observed Mr. Clark's
Note upon it.
As these are the weightier matters of the Law, so they ought by no means to
have been omitted. As for the Externals and Rituals of Religion, they are of no
weight, in Comparison with Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. God Himself has declared
He has no regard and esteem for them, that they are but mean, and low, and
unacceptable, when compared with these. What can be plainer than that in the
Prophet Isaiah, Chap. i. II. -- 17. To what purpose is the Multitude of your
Sacrifices, unto me? says the Lord. I am full of the Burnt Offerings of Rams,
and the Fat of fed Beasts; and I delight not in the Blood of Bullocks, or of
Lambs, or of He-Goats: when ye come to appear before me, who has required this
at your Hand, to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations; Incence is an
Abomination unto me; the New Moons, and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies, I
cannot away with; it is Iniquity, even the solemn Meeting your New Moons, and
your appointed Feasts, my Soul hates; they are a trouble unto me, I am weary
to bear them: -- Wash ye, make you clean, put away the Evil of your Doings,
from before mine Eyes: cease to do Evil, learn to do Well; seek Judgment,
relieve the Oppressed, Judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow. And thus the
Prophet Jeremiah Chap. vi. 19. 20. Hear, O Earth -- they have not bearkened
unto my Words, nor to my Law, but rejected it: to what purpose comes there to
me Incense from Sheba? and the sweet Cane from a far Country? Your
Burnt-Offerings are not acceptable, not your Sacrifices sweet unto me. And he
goes in the same strain, Chap. vii. 4. -- 7. Trust ye not in lying Words,
saying, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord
are these; for if ye thoroughly amend your ways, and your Doings, if you
thoroughly excute Judgment between a Man and his Neighbor; if ye oppress not
the Stranger, the Fatherless, and the Widow, and shed not innocent Blood. --
Then will I cause you to dwell in this Place, etc. So mean are all the
Externals and Rituals of Religion, in the esteem of God, though He had appointed
them, in Comparison with the greater Duties of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, that
He declares, He had no Delight in them, yea, the least of them were an
Abomination to Him, and none of all their religious Services would render them
acceptable to Him without These. And since there are no Externals of Religion
of equal Value in the Sight of God, with Justice, Charity, and Truth to our
Neighbors, therefore none of them are equally to be regarded by us in our
Practice; but though we are to observe the Rituals of Religion, yet ought we to
be much more careful to do these weightier Matters of the Law.

Though God has required us to Worship Him in the ways of His Appointment, yet
these Externals of Religion are to give Place when they interfere with the
greater Duties, of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. Hence is that, 1. Sam. XV. 22.
Has the Lord as great Delight in Burnt-Offerings, and Sacrifices, as in
obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold to obey is better than Sacrifice, and to
hearken, than the Fat of Rams. Sacrifice, though of Divine Institution, is scarce
Obedience, if compared with moral Duties. Hence also is that of our Savior,
Matt. xii. 7. If ye had known what this means, I will have Mercy, and not
Sacrifice, (...), bic non absolute, sed comparat^^egat. Pric, in Matt. ix. 13.
August^^^ speaking of the works of Mercy, says, H^^ pracipue, fire: mandat
Deus, eaque (...) vel p^^ Sacrificiis, vel pra sacrificiis (...) testatur.
ye would not have condemned the guiltless. In which he plainly shows the
Duties of Mercy and consequently of Justice, and Truth, are to be preferred to
those of Sacrifice, when they cannot, both of them be performed at the same
Time. So that the Duties of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, being the weighter
Matters of the Law, ought more especially to be done by us.

I pass now unto the Third general Head I proposed to speak to, from these
Words; and I shall be more brief in what remains.

III. No Exactness in the Observation of the Externals and Rituals of Religion,
will be an Excuse for our neglect of the weightier Matters of the Law. Ye Tithe
Mint, Annise and Cummin, and neglect the weightier Matters of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, these ought ye to have done. It is no Excuse Neque
enim Just a causatio (...) our Pra^erant^ aliqus, (...) facienda sunt omnia. Sa^
to you for your Neglect of these great Duties, that, ye are mighty exact and
critical in the Observation of the Rituals of Religion. For these Virtues when
performed from a Principle of Love to God, and our Neighbor, and not from Show
and Ostentation, are the main and essential Duties of Religion, even of the
Christian, I know, said the great and good Dr. Tillotson, that it has been the
great Design of the Devil and his Instruments, in all Ages, to undermine
Religion, by making an unhappy Separation and Divorce between Godliness and
Morality, between Faith and the Virtues of a good Life; and by this means not
only to weaken and abate, but even wholly to destroy the Force and Efficacy of
the Christian Religion, and to leave Men as much under the Power of the Devil
and their Lusts, as if there were no such thing as Christianity in the World.
But let us not deceive our selves; This was always Religion, and the condition
of our Acceptance with God, to endeavor to be like God, in Purity and
Holiness, in Justice and Righteousness, in Mercy and Goodness, to cease to do
Evil, and learn to do Well And this you will find to be the constant Doctrine
of the Holy Scriptures from the Beginning of the Bible to the End. Fol. iii. P.
345.
that which Jesus Christ designed to bring us to the Practice of by His most
holy Life, and by His Dying for us, and that which the Faith of the Son of God,
when sincere, will forever produce in us; and therefore by no means may be
excused in the neglect of them.

It is a vain thing, for a Man to think, because he is externally devout
toward God, he is exact and constant in attending upon the Public Worship of
God, and behaves himself with a great deal of apparent Devotion while he is
there, or is very nice and critical in asserting and defending, and practicing
the little Modalities of Instituted Worship, that this will be any plea or
Excuse for his allowing himself in the gratifying of his Lusts and Passions,
for his Injustice in his Dealing, his Falsness to his Word and Promise, and his
want of Charity, in his Heart and Actions, to his Neighbor. To what Purpose is
it, that thou art punctual in observing the Form and Fashion of the House of
God, and yet obeyest not the great Commands of God, the Fundamental Laws that
are taught in His House; but hate thy Brother in thy Heart, or heapest up
Slander and Reproach upon him? He that hates his Brother is a Murderer, 1 John
iii. 15. For though the Observation of a greater Duty may be a just Excuse for
the Neglect of a Lesser, at this or that particular Time, when they could not
be both attended together; yet the Observation of a Lesser Duty will by no
means be an Excuse for the Neglect of a Greater: And therefore since Judgment,
Mercy, and Faith, are the weightier Matters of the Law, the utmost Exactness
and Punctuality, in the external Mode and Form of Worship, will not in the
least palliate and excuse our neglect of them. I do not mean here, that, under
a Pretense of being Just, and True, and Charitable to our Neighbor, Men may
hope to be excused for their Total Neglect, of the Duties of Religious Worship,
which God has required. For the Divine Command with respect hereto is always
Obligatory, though not at all Times; and there is no Reason why one Command
should wholly thrust out another. But yet of so much greater Weight and
Consequence are the Duties of Justice, Charity and Truth, that they are to be
preferred to Sacrifice, in our Estimation of them; and we are to be especially
careful in the constant Practice of these, though we may sometimes be obliged
thereby to suspend any particular Duty of Sacrifice; while under no Pretense
whatsoever, to attend upon our Sacrifices and the Rituals of Religion, may we
be guilty of Injustice, Uncharitableness, or Falsehood.

IV. Though a Man should be ever so exact in the Externals and Rituals of
Religion, yet if he neglect the weightier Matters of the Law, judgment, Mercy,
and Faith, he is but an Hypocriteafter all. Thus our Savior here calls the
Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for their neglect of the weightier Matters
of the Law, notwithstanding they were Men of such apparent Sanctity, and
Critical Exactness in all the parts of the Formalities of Religion, that they
were very careful to pay their Tithe even to the most minute point, the little
insignificent Herbs of Mint, Annise, and Cummin. And so let a Man be ever so
constant in his Devotion, either private or Public, let him come up to all the
Ordinances of the Gospel, and make ever so great a Noise and Stir about the
Modalities of Worship and Discipline in the church of God; yet, if after all,
he is one that makes no Conscience of his Dealings, if he is full of Tricks,
and Fraud, and Oppression; if he be false to his Word, and unfaithful in his
business, to his promise and Engagments: if he be full of Envy, and Malice, and
Hatred, reproaching and calumniating his Neighbor, and withhold his Bowels of
Compassion from his poor Brother, when he is in want, and it is in the power of
his Hands to relieve him; let his pretentions to Religion be ever so great and
assuming, he is for all that but a very Hypocrite. Thus God articled against
His People of old as Hypocrites, Isa. Iviii. 2, 7. Ye seek me daily, and
delight to know my Ways, as a Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook net
the Ordinances of their God: They ask of me the Ordinances of Justice; they
take delight in approaching to God: Thus they seemed to be mighty devout and
Religious toward God, and yet their solemn (...) were for strife and Debate,
and to smite with the Fist of Wickedness; they made then very Religion a Clock
for their unjust and uncharitable Carriage toward their Neighbor: Though they
hung down their Heads like Bulrushes, and were very demure in their external
Devotions, yet did they not loose the Bands of wickedness, undo the heavy
Burdens, nor let the oppressed go free; they dealt not their Bread to the
Hungry, but cast the poor out of their Houses, and covered not the naked, yea,
they hid themselves from their own Flesh. So that all the show of Religion in
them, who so trespass upon the Fundamental Rights of Equity, Charity, and
Truth, is but vile Hypocrisy.

And the Reason is very obvious; such wilfully neglect Matters of the
greatest-Weight and Moment, and satisfy themselves with the Lesser: Or they
Observe but a part of their Duty, and that which is less hard and Difficult,
and would have others think of them, with respect to the whole as they observe
them exact in these Hyprocrita vero quid e Quoniam certum (...), id essebominis
Dei ^tuduosi, etiam minute divine Legis manda^^ diligenter custodire. simulat
id studii exact, ut videat^^ ^alis effc, (...) summa fit erga Mandata Dei
Observantia: gravia vero, qua cum Primis crant servanda, Prorsus negligit.
Mus.in Loc.
The Hypocrite is willing to be religious as far as the outward show of it will
make him so, but he is not willing to take any Pains with himself to keep under
his Body, to abridge his natural irregular Appetites, and Subdue his inordinate
Passions. If making a few four countenances, and saying his Prayers, and crying
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and insisting very rigidly upon
outward Rites and Ceremonies, will carry him to Heaven; this is so easy a Way,
that he is content eno' so to get thither: But if he cannot arrive at those
Mansions without doing Violence to himself, in the crucifying the Flesh with
it is Affections and Lusts, if he must pluck out his right Eye, and cut off his
right Hand, he desires to be excused from going to Heaven in such a rough and
rugged Way, and is ready to persuade himself that the Rewards of that World are
not equal to the Pains he must take to obtain them.

What is an Hypocrite? But, one that takes upon him a Character that does not
belong to him: And so does he, who would be esteemed a Religious and Good Man
for his critical Observation of a few External Rites, when he is defective in
the Main Duties of Christianity. Religion goes into the Heart and Conscience of
the Man, and means the government of him in the secret Springs of his Actions;
it means to regulate his Desires and Cravings, his Volition and Choice, and the
very Pathos of his Mind, and to correct all the Disorders the Man is prone to
run into through the Depravity of his Nature. And therefore he that cultivates
his inordinate Desires, in a series of Unrighteousness, Oppression, Fraud,
Falsehood, Unmercifulness, Backbiting, Slander, and the like; And improves the
vicious Bias of his Will, by prefering that which is Evil to that which is
Good, as he certainly does who neglects these weightier Matters of the Law; he
is verily nothing of a truly religious Man, under all the fair show and
Pretense of one. He is but like the whited Sepulcher, which indeed appears
beautiful on the outside, but within is full of all Uncleanness and Iniquity.
Matt xxiii. 27.
Hence the Apostle tells us of Charity, which comprehends all the Virtues
spoken of in my Text as the weightier Matters of the Law, for he says of it,
it suffers long and is kind, envieth not, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed
up, behaveth not it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
thinks no Evil, bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things; he says of this Charity, 1 Cor. Chap. xiii. That it is
the greatestGrace and Virtue, greater than Faith I^^que vita quidem corporis
est Anima per quam movetur at (...); Vita ver^ Fidei charitas est, quia per
^llam operatur. Bern. P. 37.
and Hope, and all pretenses to other Virtues signify and profit nothing
without it. So that if a Man should speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels,
though he should attain unto all Gifts Natural and Acquired, and have the
strongest Faith or Belief, it would be all to no purpose without this Charity;
yea, if in a sudden fit of Devotion he should give all his Goods to the Poor,
and be so tenacious of the Rites of Religion as to offer his Body to the Flames
rather than Part with them, yet without Charity, which puts him upon the
Exercise of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, it would be all in vain and to no
purpose: his Eloquence would be but empty Babbling, his Faith a vain
Presumption, and wild Enthusiasm, and all his external Devotion and exact
observance of Rites and Ceremonies, but mere Grimace and Pageantry, while he
neglected these weightier Matters of the Law.

The Last thing I proposed to speak to was, to show,

V. That while Judgment, Mercy, and Faith are neglected, the greatest Exactness
in the Rituals of Religion will not secure a Man from the Woe which God has
denounced. Woe unto you, Scribes, and Pharisees, said our Savior, for though you
tit he Mint, and Annise, and Cummin, ye neglect the Weightier Matters of the
Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. God has required Obedience of us unto the
whole of our Duty, especially unto the great and essential Articles of it, and
that upon Pain of His high Displeasure. And therefore if we wilfully omit the
more essential Parts of our Duty, though we may be careful to practice the
Lesser, we cannot rationally expect any Interest in the Divine Favor, nor
solidly hope to escape the dreadful Threatening, which God has denounced against
all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness, of Men. Every Breach of the Law of God,
wilful and allowed and unrepented of, brings down the Wrath of God upon the
guilty Head, of him that so rises up in Opposition to his Maker. We are
therefore told, the wages of Sin is Death, Romans vi. 23. and the Wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, Romans
i. 18.

Sins of omission will expose Persons to the Divine wrath as well as Sins of
Commission. Hence in the Representation of the Judgment of the Great Day, Jesus
Christ is introduced as saying to those who omitted these weightier Matters of
the Law, Ye did it not, ye did it not, therefore depart ye cursed; and these
wicked shall go away into Everlasting Punishment, Matt. xxv. 41, 45, 46.
Especially when we consider that our Sinful Omissions are attended with Sinful
Commissions as the neglect of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith are. They commit
Unrighteousness and Injustice, Inhumanity and Cruelty, Falsehood and Deceit,
ordinarily at least, in the very Instance wherein they omit Judgment, Mercy,
and Faith. And we are sure, that such cannot escape the righteous Judgments of
God, without a very deep and unfeigned Repentance. For to them that are
Contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness, God will
render Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, upon every Soul of Man
that does Evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. Romans ii. 8, 9. And
Jesus Christ shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on
them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ;
who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the
Lord, and the Glory of His power, 2 These. i. 7, 8, 9.

Nor will any Pretentions to Religion, the strictest Observation of the Rites
of the Christian Religion, and the most constant Attendance upon the Externals
of Divine Worship, secure them herefrom, while they are negligent of the great
Duties of Justice, Charity, and Truth; because no Performance of our Duty, in
one Instance, will buy off the Punishment due to us, for our neglect in
another, and a Greater. But indeed the Nice Attendance upon the Externals of
Religion will but the rather increase the Woupon us; because it is evident from
hence, that we have at least had the advantage to know our Duty, and have some
Sense of our Obligations to the Deity to perform it, and therefore the neglect
of it in any Part, especially in such great Instances, will render our
Punishment the greater, the Lashes of our own Consciences the more severe and
pungent, and consequently will be so far from securing us from the Woe,that it
will make it fit the heavier upon us. For to him that knows to do good, and
does it not, to him it is sin; Jam. iv. 17. and that Servant that knew his
Lords will, and prepared not himself neither did according to his will shall be
beaten with many Stripes, Luke xii. 47.

Thus I have, as briefly as I could, spoken to the several things I proposed,
as included in the words of my Text. What remains is to apply these things to
our selves, in one word, namely,

APPLICATION.
Let us all then be persuaded seriously to set ourselves to the Practice, as of
the Externals and Rituals of Religion so also, of those weightier Matters of
the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. Let it be our Care to Worship our God in
an Attendance upon all those outward Rites and Services which He has enjoined
us; and let us make Conscience of what we do in our Religious Worship, and be
more than External therein, acting in obedience to the Commands of God, and
having our Hearts serious and engaged in what we do, and so Worship the Lord in
Spirit and in Truth, as He requires of us. But then let us take heed to
ourselves, that we do not neglect the weightier Matters of the Law, and
satisfy our selves with the Externals of Religion only; for all our Religious
worship will be but show and outward Form if we are negligent in These.

The Generality of Mankind are exceeding apt to take up with an Outside and
Show of things, and think it eno' if they do but observe that which is less
hard and difficult to them; and therefore finding it burdensome to overcome
their vicious Inclinations, to muster and eradicate their Lusts and Passions,
to correct and reform the Disorders of their Hearts and Lives, they seem
inclinable to compound the matter and substitute in the Room thereof, a very
great Exactness and Scrupulosity in the Externals and Rituals of Religion,
which they can more easily and with less Labor and Pains come up to. But know,
O Man, that these great Duties, these weightier matters of the Law,
Righteousness and Peace, Meekness and Humility, Fidelity and Goodness, are such
essential parts of Religion, even of the Christian, that thou can be no true
Christian, nor will thou ever please God and get to Heaven without them.

It is true these Virtues are sometimes called Morality. But then they are such
Morality that if a Man do them be shall live in them; Gal. iii. 12. and without
which no Man shall see the Lord. Heb. xii. 14.
. Though no Man shall live by them, or by virtue of any real merit in them, but
only upon the account of the Merit of Jesus Christ who has loved us and died
for us; (for when we have done our best we are unprofitable Servants) yet by
whatsoever name they are called, they are essential to Christianity, and our
partaking of Eternal Life. They are Morality as they are required by the Law of
Nature; but they are Graces as they are required by the Law of the Gospel. They
are Morality as sometimes one, or another, of them may be performed by the
Strength of Nature; but they are Graces as they are unitedly performed by the
Strength and Opperation of the Divine Spirit in us. They scarce deserve the
Name of Moral Virtues when performed from fleshly carnal selfish Views; but are
real Graces when performed in Obedience to the Commands of God, and in
Conformity to the Example of Jesus Christ our Lord. Let us not then think to
have ourselves excused from the Practice of them, upon any Terms; but let us
sincerely apply ourselves hereunto, and in good earnest, that we may adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior, in all things, and walk worthy of the Vocation
wherewith we are called.

Travelers have told us of a Country, a thousand Leagues to the Westward of
Iberia, that the People are a very Religious People, but it is a thousand
pities they are not Honest. O, let not the Sarcasm ever be deservedly applied
to ourselves! But let us resolve to be a Religious People, truly so, in a
devout and hearty attendance upon all the outward Duties of Religion, and in
our Care to put in Practice all the Moral Virtues and Graces of Righteousness,
Mercy, and Truth, as the Weightier Matters of the Law Gravia dicantur bifariam;
Estimatione s^ilicet, quemadm^dum au^^m Penaere and Gravitate censetur
practantius us, (...) pandere and Gravitate deficiunt; deinde et factu gravia
(...), quod non nis^ a Justis ac piis practari possunt. Mus^. in Loc.


This will be the way for us to live up to our Profession, which otherwise we
shall greatly disgrace. For he that pretends to be very Religious, and is a
great Stickler for Modes and Ceremonies in the Worship of God, and yet at the
same Time treats his Neighbor with Injustice, or heaps Reproach and Calumny
upon him, and violates his Trust, and falsifyes his Word, and delights in
Strife and Contention, he casts the highest Indignity upon the Christian Name
and Profession, and gives occasion to the Adversary to speak Evil of the Way of
Truth. It was the sad Complaint of Austin, of old H^ nimis dole^, quia multa
qua in Divinis Libris saluber^ma pracepta sunt, minus curantur; ^t tam multis
prasumptionious plena sunt omnia, ut gravius corriptatur, (...) per Octav^s
(...) terram nudo pede teligeret, quam qui meniem ^^olentia Sepelierit. -- Si
quaratur body ubi sit fides, ubi Judicium, ub^ Mise^cordia inter Christianos,
apud quos (...) repe^^emus: In Locum Judicii introducta, est (...) Iniquitas
misericordia successit Calamitas et Inbumanitas, (...) expulit super (...) e^ga
Deum, et pers^^ta (...) preximum. Aug. ad Jan Epis. 119.
There are many wholesome Precepts in the Divine Oracles which are but little
regarded; the multitude of Ceremonies eats out the Heart of the weightier
Matters; and those who are devout eno' to walk barefoot in Procession, will yet
drown themselves in Strong-Drink. -- If it be inquired, where is Faith? where
is Judgment? where is Mercy? even among Christians, with whom these things
ought to be found; alas, you will see Tyranny and Iniquity in the place of
Judgment, Oppression and Inhumanity take place of Mercy, and Superstition
toward God, and Persidiousness toward Man has banished Faith from among them.

We make a high Profession of Religion, there is much of the Externals of it to
be found among us, and we pretend a Zeal for the Faith and Order of the Gospel:
O let not the want of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith among us slur our Profession
and stain our Glory, and rank us with Scribes and Pharisees, lest a dreadful Woe
from a provoked God fall heavy upon us: but wherein any of us have erred from
the Paths of Virtue, let us deeply humble and abase ourselves before God, and
repair the Injury we have done unto Man, and thoroughly amend our Ways and our
Doings, and thus return to the Lord our God; return to Him with a fixed
Resolution to walk in all His Ordinances and Commandments blameless; the
Ordinances of His Worship, and the Commandments which show unto us what the
Lord our God requires of us, even to do Justly and to love Mercy. This will be
the way for us to engage the special Presence of God with us, for our
Protection and Defense, for our Prosperity and Flourishing; for Righteousness
exalts a Nation. Prove xiv. 34.
and if we be willing and obedient, then shall we Eat of the good of the Land
Isa. i. 19.


This also will be the most likely method for us, every one, to enjoy the
Divine Blessing upon us, and our Interests, and then may we safely commit
ourselves and all our Concerns into the Hands of the faithful Creator in the
way of well Doing; and this will bring us at last to the Perfection of the
Mercy of God, unto Eternal Life through our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us then seek
Righteousness, seek Peace, seek Truth; and whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any virtue, if there be any Praise, think of these things Phil. iv. 8.


Remember it will not be long, before Death will come, and strip us of all our
outside show and Formality of Religion. We ever now and then see it lay its
Arrests upon one and another of our Friends and Acquaintance and sometimes
marching in State among us; as it has lately done, in the unexpected Fall of
that Great Man His Excellency William Barret who died the 7th.(...); ^ho I
think was (...) Governor that died in the Province, while filling the Chair.
into whose Urn I had this Day dropped a Tear, but that I feared to defile his
ashes. And when that grim Officer, that spares neither small nor great, high or
low, shall lay hold upon us, and hale our Ghost away to appear before the great
Judge of all, then the Mask and Visor shall be taken off sromus; and of how
little avail will it then be to us, that we were mighty exact and critical in
Modalities and Rituals, and the Externals of Religion, but were extremely
careless and negligent of the Main Duties which He has commanded us? How
dreadful will it then be to fall into the Hands of the living God, and have the
Woe of Hypocrites take place upon us. Let Sinners in Zion be afraid, and
fearfulness surprise the Hypocrite! Who among us can dwell with devouring Fire?
Who among us can dwell with everlasting Burnings? Isa. XXXiii. 14.

Let then the Love of God rule in our Hearts, whereunto we are called in one
Hope, and excite us to love one another, and to manifest our Love to our
Neighbor in all the Duties of Righteousness, Mercy, and Truth.

To this End let us set before us the bright Example of the great Redeemer, who
for our sakes humbled Himself, and became subject to the Law, and by His
perfect Obedience fulfilled all Righteousness; and be ambitious of being and
doing like Him, that we may be of a truly God-like Temper and Behavior.

And let our Faith in Christ evidence it self by our Works, without which it is
dead ^am. ii. 20.
deriving from His Fullness and Grace for Grace, that strengthened by Him, with
all might in our inner Man, we may be able to get the victory over our Lusts
and Passions, and may live soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present
World.

Let us daily address ourselves to the Throne of Grace, with our most humble
and earnest Supplications, for the plentiful Effusion of the Holy Spirit, and
the sheding abroad of His heavenly Influences in us, that we may be clearsed
from all Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, and may perfect Holiness in the
Fear of God 2 Cor. vii. 1.
that being renewed in the Spirit of our Mind, we may put away lying, and speak
the Truth every Man with his Neighbor; that we may be Angry and sin not, nor
let the Sun go down upon our Wrath; that he that ^ole may steal no more, but
may work with his Hands that which is Good, that he may have to give to him
that needs; that no corrupt communication may proceed out of our Mouth, but
that which is good, to the Use of Edifying, which may minister Grace unto the
Hearer; that all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil
speaking may be put away from us, with all Malice; and that we may be kind one
to another, tenderhearted forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake,
we hope has forgiven us, Ephesians. Iv. 23 -- 32.

Thus let us add to our Faith, Virtue; and in this way give all diligence to
make our Calling and Election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall; for so an Entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the
Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ 2 Pet. i. 10. 11.
To Whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Glory, forever and ever
Amen.

BOOKS Published by the same Author, and Sold by Samuel Gerrish in Cornhil,
Boston, viz.
SERMONS on Several Subjects. viz. A Confirmation of the Truth of the Christian
Religion; from Heb.. ii. 3. One Sermon.

Compel them to come in; from Lukexiv. 23. One Sermon.

The Christian Hero, Or the Saints Victory and Rewards; from Rev. iii. 21. in
Six Sermons.

Two Discourses addressed to Young Persons: One from 2 Chronicles. xxxiv. 3. The
other from Job. xi. 28, 29. To which is added, Another Sermon from Isa. xxix.
6. Occasioned by the EARTHQUAKE.

Two Sermons on Funeral Occasion. viz.

On the Death of the Rev. Mr. Cheever of Marblehead.

And the Rev. Mr. Curwin of Salem.

The Author's Distance from the Press has occasioned the following Errata,
besides some Accents, and Points which an understanding Reader will correct.
PAge 7. M^r. I. 2. r. ii. p. 10. M^r. ^. ^. ^. K^v. p. 12. Mar. I. 1. r (...)
p. 13 I. 19. ^ Truth I 20. (...). P. 14. I. 17. 1. falsify P. 15. 1 2. 1. (...)
P 16. I. 24. after that, add, to. p. 18. I. ult after did, add (...) minu^^ p
42. 1. II. 1 master


