THe Attorney General on reading the Votes of the 19th of June last, finds that
a Petition of the Justices of Albany, was (during his Absence then in the
Country) presented to the General Assembly; whereby the said Justices have now
a third Time, ( to wit, by this; and by their former Petition to the General
Assembly in November, 1727, and by another Petition to his Excellency the
Governor, in or about October last.) cast several scandalous and vile
Reflections upon him. In this their last Petition they insinuate, That he had
prosecuted them without just Cause, and on no other Motive than to Squeese
Money from them; and thus under color, (as they term it.) of the Insufficiency
of their County Goal; which, they intimate, they had made sufficient, upon
their paying of 45 l. Costs, in June, 1724. All which being Notoriously False
and Scandalous; The Attorney General thought it necessary to make the same as
Public as they have made their vile Aspersions; and hereby to let every Body
know, That this Prosecution was commenced by Order of the Supreme Court, in
June Term, 1723. (founded on the Presentiments, or Representations, of several
Grand Juries.) not under Color of, but for the real Insufficiency of their
County Goal; and the Court having, for these Reasons, ordered the Prosecution;
he submits it to the Judgment of every Unprejudiced Person; Whether the
Prosecution is without just Cause, or if he could have no other Motive, either
to the commencing or carrying on this Prosecution, than that of Squeesing Money
from the said Justices? Or, whether his demanding and receiving the just Fees
and Rewards of his Labor, in so necessary a Prosecution as this, can justy or
fairly be called Squeesing; especially when the said Justices well knew, that
the 45 l. they had paid him in this case, was much less than his due; and that
he received the same at the earnest Request and pressing Solicitation of those
who paid it; and on their repeated Promise and Assurance to make their Goal
sufficient forthwith; which if they neglected or delayed to do; he, at the
same time, assured them, that the Prosecution must, and certainly should go on;
which they, in such case, agreed would be reasonable; And when he has never
once taken to the utmost of what has been justly due to him for his Fees and
Labor, in any one Prosecution whatsoever. So groundless and unjust, are these,
and all such Reflections and Reproaches of him.

As to their Goal being made sufficient, upon their paying the said 45 l. Costs
in June, 1724; the same is Notoriously False; for in or about August or
September, 1726. the late Governor, and the chief Justice, being then at
Albany; they, on viewing the said Goal, complained of the Insufficiency of it,
and at the same time ordered the Attorney General (then present) to go on with
the Prosecution; and the Court often afterward ordered him to proceed therein,
and blamed him for delaying it so long; which he constantly informed the said
Justices of; and frequently advised and warned them to prevent further Costs
and Trouble, by making a sufficient Goal without delay; according to their
Promise and Agreement; or otherwise he should be obliged to Proceed. But all
these Warnings proving ineffectual, and they at last sending him word, That
they though it their Goal sufficient enough, and would do no more to it, he then
proceeded against them; And in December, 1727, received an Order from the then
Governor in Council, to proceed in all Prosecutions by Information which had
been ordered by the Supreme Court; the said Goal being then Insufficient; And
so it was even in June last, being then Protested against by the Sheriff (at
the last Court there) for the Insufficiency thereof (as the Attorney General is
very credibly informed.) and that the Court thereupon ordered the Sheriff to
get it made sufficient; and that the Costs and Charges thereof should be repaid
him by the County. From whence it is very evident, that the said Justices owned
the Insufficiency of their Goal, even in June last; though they had the assurance
to tell the General Assembly the contrary.

And as to what they say of Nineteen of the Defendents being formerly Justices,
but that they are not so at present; that four are Dead, and two never were
Justices; They betray their own Ignorance as well as Malice in it; for the
Nineteen being Justices at the Time of the Commencement of the Prosecution; and
the Goal then being, by their Neglect, Insufficient; and remaining so still;
(or at least till their last Court in June last.) surely sufficiently warrants
the Proceedings against them? And if four Dead Ones happened to be named in the
same Process, among the Living, could either the Dead or the Living be hurt by
it? Or if two others of them had not qualified themselves to act, was it not
their own faults only, to neglect it? And how should the Attorney General know
who were qualified, and who were not? When he was ordered to Prosecute the
Justices of Albany for the Insufficiency of their Goal, what should he have
done more to find out who they were, than to get a List of their Names from the
Secretary's Office, which he did, and which List of Names he was told there;
and no doubt but it was True; That it was a true Copy of the List of Names
given in there to be inserted in the Commission of the Peace for Albany; and
that the same Names were put into the Commission accordingly.

They seem likewise to have insinuated, That no good Man will continue to be,
or accept of being a Justice, if such Proceedings are not prevented, But every
indifferent and impartial Person, will no doubt, be of a contrary Opinion; for
though such necessary Prosecutions, as this appears to be, may, indeed, deter bad
Men from being Justices, ( to wit) those who Resolve either to neglect their
known Duty, or wilfully to act contrary to it, yet they can never deter good
Men from being Justices ( viz.) those who are determined neither to neglect,
nor wilfully to act contrary to their Duty; And such only (the Attorney
General is of Opinion) ought to be Justices; And that any willful Offender's
being a Justice, or in any other exalted Station, is so far from Excusing him,
that its an Aggravation of his Crime; But that no one who is not a willful
Offender need be in the least apprehensive of any Prosecution from him; having
never given the least Occasion for any such Suspicion; for he has not ever once
yet, without the Court or Government's Directions; or the regular Complaints of
the Parties injured, and taking the Examinations of the Witnesses to the
particular (...) prosecuted any Person whatsoever.

Had he been of a Mercinary Temper, which is untruly and basely suggested, he
might, in upwards of six years past, have brought Hundreds of Prosecutions,
which he has not; for it cannot be denied but he may, when he thinks fit, ex
Officio, Prosecute any Offenders whatsoever against the King's Peace, without
the Request, Order or Direction of any Body, though he never yet has done it.

And yet he never was, nor ever will be afraid to do his Duty in Prosecuting
any willful Offenders of any Degree whatsoever; whether he has any Directions
for it, or not.

On the Whole, Let every honest and unprejudiced Person judge who is in the
Fault; ( viz.) Whether the Attorney General, for proceeding in so just and
necessary a Prosecution, and after it became his indispensible Duty too, by
such repeated Orders and Directions; and after so many kind Warnings sent by
him to the Defendants, to prevent further Costs and Trouble? Or, Whether the
said Justices are not very Blameable for such false Accusations of him;
contrived for no other purpose than to Defame him, and to avoid, if they can,
paying him for his Time and Labor so necessarily employed in the Service of
the Public? And then, Whether they do not well deserve to be Prosecuted for
such a Malicious Defamation of him, unless they acknowledge their Fault and ask
his Pardon? And lastly, Whether he has been Decently, or Fairly Treated, in
Publishing, in his Absence, this Petition of the Defendants; and especially
after what appears by the Votes of the 11 th and 16 th of November, 1727, which
the Reader is desired to peruse and compare.


