He that would keep GOD's Commandments MUST Renounce the Society OF EVIL DOERS.
A SERMON preached at the public Lecture in Boston, July 18th. 1728. AFTER A
Bloody and Mortal Duel.

By Joseph Sewall, M. A. Pastor of a CHURCH of CHRIST in Boston. With a PREFACE
by the united MINISTERS of the said Town.

Prove. i. 10. My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. xiii. 20. -- A
companion of fools shall be destroyed. BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by B.
Green, for Daniel Henchman, at his Shop over against the Brick Meeting House in
Cornhill. 1728.

KIlling one another in Challenges to the Field, deserves death by the Law of
GOD and Man.

B. Usher. Duellum est damnandum, tam in acceptante quam in provocante, quamvis
major sit culpa provocantis.

D. Ames. A PREFACE BY THE United Ministers OF BOSTON.
THE ensuing Sermon was preached upon as lamentable an occasion, (of a private
nature) as has been known among us, That any of the sons of New England, who
have been born and educated in this land of light, should be so forsaken of
GOD, and given up to their lusts and passions, as to engage in a bloody and
fatal DUEL, deserves to be bewailed with tears of blood. Hitherto our children,
by the good hand of GOD upon them, have been restrained from this great
transgression. But now that an instance of it among them, has been permitted in
the holy and spotless providence of GOD, it certainly becomes the Lord's
Ministers, not only to lament it in their prayers, and to cry (as they of old
were directed to do, when a man was found slain in the field, and it was not
known who did it, Deuteronomy. 21.8.) Be merciful, O LORD, unto thy people, and lay
not innocent blood unto thy people's charge! But also loudly to testify
against it from the word of GOD, that this Sin, by the Commandment, explained
and enforced upon the minds and consciences of men, may appear to them to be
exceeding sinful, and others may fear, and do no more so wickedly: Without this
we cannot discharge the duty we owe to GOD and to our people; nor shall we be
able to say, if the like should be again committed, (which GOD prevent!) that
we are pure from the blood of all men, the blood of their bodies and of their
souls.

FROM conscience of duty in this regard (we believe) the following sermon was
preached at the public lecture in Boston, in which the case of Duelling is
solidly and judiciously (though concisely and briefly) handled, and the sins
which lead to it faithfully warned against.

AND we would all of us unite in a loud cry against a sin, the cry of which we
are sure reaches up to Heaven.

MURDER is a sin of the first magnitude; it is in its own nature the most
execrable fact that can be committed; and has been always so accounted by
those who have had even any humanity, not to say religion: The light of nature
condemns it, and the consciences of all men startle at it. How vehemently it is
forbidden, and how severely punished by the word and law of GOD, we need not
say to those who are acquainted with their BIBLES. In short, the most barbarous
people have a quick sense of the heinousness of this sin, and of the vengeance
due to it, Acts 28.4.

BUT as there is no sin, no the vilest and blackest, but through the subtilty of
the old serpent, may be varnished over with gay colors, so as to make a
specious appearance to the simple and unwary; thus it has been with that we are
now testifying against and condemning. And there are those to be met with, who
will not allow one man's killing another, in what we call a Duel, i. e. a fight
with instruments of death, upon a challenge given and accepted, to be a murder
in the nature of the fact. But surely these men understand not what they say,
nor whereof they affirm: They err, not knowing the Scriptures; not discerning
how exceeding broad the commandment and law of GOD is; even that law which the
Apostle tells us was not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and
disobedient, for the ungodly, and for sinners, for unholy and profane, FOR
MAN-SLAYERS, 1 Timothy 1.9.

How comes this not to be a Murder? It is indeed an aggravated and complicated
Murder. "Both kinds of murder are united in it; the murder of a man's self, and
the murder of his nei'bour also". The man's voluntarily exposing his own life
to this hazard, and opening his body (as it were) to the sword of him that
slays him, does not make it otherwise. This is plain and evident, because no
man has this power over his own life to lay it down of himself, at his own
pleasure, and therefore cannot give power to another to take it away. For GOD
is the absolute LORD of life, and has reserved the disposal of it entirely to
himself.

THAT this is a heinous breach of the sixth commandment, is made evident in the
following Sermon beyond sober contradiction: And it is our design not to add to
it, but to concur with it. Enough also is said in it, to show how weak and
false, how vain and absurd that plea and pretense is, with which some of the
Hectors of the world would excuse and justify the horrid practice, namely,
That it is brave and heroic, gallant and honorable in this way to revenge
affronts, and decide disputes. Were men's minds possessed with a just notion of
things, they would on the contrary pronounce it base and ignoble, scandalous
and dishonorable, to give or accept a challenge; for they who do so appear to
be destitute of those virtues and graces which adorn and ennoble the humane
soul, and which are always requisite to make a great man: And it is impossible
for an action to be truly valorous or honorable, which proceeds from such base
and vile principles as pride, hatred, covetousness, revenge, and the like, the
common incentives to Duels. No; let it never be called manly courage, but
brutal rage, or devilish fury.

THE thing should not be named among us, but with the utmost indignation and
detestation, as becomes christians And we cannot but join, all of us, in that
humble motion to our civil Rulers, that a severer Edict may be made against it,
and some farther brand of infamy put upon it by Law.

AND, Oh! that all our young people may conceive a horror at the though it of this
crime! And may be effectually warned to shun every thing that leads to, or may
be an occasion of it; to flee those lusts from whence comes wars and fightings,
duels and bloodshed; and especially EVIL COMPANIONS, which it is the business
of the ensuing discourse to dissuade from, and to whom many a hopeful and
promising a youth has fallen a sacrifice.

OUR hearts even bleed when we think of the danger the children of our people
are in at this day, of being led into all licentiousness, by the sinners which
entice and enchant them, till they are drowned in destruction and perdition. As
our beloved sons and brethren, with all compassion and earnestness, we warn
you. Such of you as are not yet entangled in the fatal snare, Take heed to your
selves, and keep your souls diligently. Such of you as are already taken, break
out of it immediately and with resolution: Do this now, my son, deliver thy
self as a roe from the hand of the hunter. Let others harms be your warnings.
As one Sir Richard Blackmore.
thus gives the reason of Job's pious care concerning his Sons,

"For he with mournsul eyes had often spied,
"Scattered on pleasures smooth but treacherous tide,
"The spoils of virtue overpowered by sense,
"And floating wreeks of ruined innocence.
BUT, O our GOD! we cry to Thee to save the children of thy people? We have, in
some measure, warned them in thy Name, and called after them, Thou know!
But, Oh! do Thou lay hold of their hearts by thy omnipotent grace, and keep
them from going astray from Thee! Such as are at this time wandering upon the
mountains of desolation, let the hand of mercy turn them back! And let us not
see the enemy of mankind, the roaring lion of hell, driving away the hopes of
our flocks before our eyes! And let the late providence, (wherein Thou art
speaking to them by terrible things in righteousness) have a restraining, and
(If it may be thy will) a converting influence upon them!

Boston, July 24. 1728. Benjamin Colman Peter Thacher Thomas Prince John Webb
William Cooper Thomas Foxcroft Samuel Checkley William Welsteed Joshua Gee
Charles Chauncy.


Such as would Keep GOD's Law must shun the Company of evil Doers.
PSALM CXIX. 115. Depart from me, ye evil doers; for I will keep the
Commandments of my God.


TO Fear GOD, and keep His Commandments is the whole duty of Man. And this
GOD's People are peculiarly obliged to, because the LORD is their GOD: He has
writto them the great things of his Law, and taken them nigh to Himself in his
Covenant, Exodus 20.2, 3. I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of
the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shall have no other gods
before me. Now, in order to this it is very needful that we separate our selves
from wicked men, who openly contemn GOD's Authority and Laws. Accordingly the
Psalmist speaks to such in the words of my text, Depart from me, ye evil doers
-- By evil doers we are to understand the workers of iniquity, who make a
business of Sinning, and seek to draw others into a fellowship with them in
their works of darkness. In the latter clause of the v. He gives the reason;
For I will keep the Commandments of my God. He had chosen the Lord JEHOVAH for
his GOD, and was resolved to live in Obedience to Him, and therefore would
avoid the Society of ungodly Men, who are Enemies to GOD and his holy Laws.

DOCTRINE.
IF we would keep the Commandments of GOD, we must Renounce the communion and
familiar Society of evil Doers. I shall not spend time to prove this plain
Truth; that it is our duty to keep the Commandments of GOD. But shall speak to
these Two Propositions only under the Doctrine.

I. Evil doers make use of many pernicious Arts and Methods whereby they seek
to prevail on Men to join with them in breaking GOD's Commandments.

II. We must therefore Renounce their familiar Society, if we would keep GOD's
Commandments.

PROP. I. EVIL doers make use of many pernicious Arts and Methods whereby they
seek to prevail on Men to join with them in breaking GOD's Commandments.
THIS is strongly implied in the reason given for shunning the Society of such
wicked Persons; For I will keep, etc. Under this First Proposition, there are
these two things,

I. We may Consider some of those Sins which evil Doers seek to draw others
into, and prevail upon them to Commit.

II. Some of the vile Arts they use to draw others into such Sins.

I. We may Consider some of those Sins which evil doers seek to draw others
into, and prevail upon them to Commit.

NOW there are no Sins so vile, but ungodly Men will tempt others to commit. I
shall rank them under two Heads agreeable to the two great and comprehensive
Commands of GOD's Law mentioned by our Savior, Mat. 22 37-40

1. EVIL doers seek to draw others into those Sins which are contrary to the
Duties we owe to GOD.

THE Sum of these is contained in those words, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy beart, -- 37. v. But these Sinners are haters of GOD: They say to
GOD, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.24.
And then they endeavor to draw others into open Rebellions against Him, as if
they would in this way strengthen themselves against the Almighty. Thus they
tempt them to sorsake the GOD of their Fathers, and the pure Worship He has
appointed in his word for lying Vanities. It is said of Solomon's Wives, That
they turned away his heart after other gods, 1 King 11.4. There are false
Opinions and evil Practices which Sinners persuade Men to embrace contrary to
GOD's Law. Some Heretics have compassed Sea and Land to make Proselytes, and
by cunning Crastiness have deceived the simple and unwary Agreably we have that
caution, Ephesians. 4.14. That we hencesorth be no more children tossed to and fro,
and carried a out with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. What pains has the
Whore of Babylon taken to make even Princes and Nations drink of the Wine of
her Fornication! How many have been corrupted from the simplicity that is in
CHRIST, by these Seducers! Again, They tempt others to set their Mouths against
Heaven, in profane Cursing and Swearing: A Horrible Crime! These abandoned
Wretches do not fear this Glorious and Fearful Name, THE LORD OUR GOD; they
make a light matter of Blaspheming it, and provoke others to take it in Vain;
though GOD assures us, that he will not hold such guiltless. Furthermore, Evil
doers Entice others many times to Profane the Day of the LORD, which GOD
requires us to Remember to keep it holy; to neglect the Assembling themselves
with GOD's People, to pay Homage to Him our Creator and Redeemer: A great
Omission indeed! And then to spend this precious time which should, the whole
of it, be sacred to the LORD, in Idleness, vain Discourses, or more heinous
Practices. The like may be said as to Family Worship. Heads of Families are
obliged to Bless their Household, (as David did 2 Samuel 6 20.
) by Praying for GOD's Blessing with and for them. But when Men follow wicked
Company they are prevailed upon to absent themselves, and grow regardless of
this Duty, although GOD threaten to pour out his fury upon the Families that call
not on his Name Jer. 10.25.
. In a word, How many hopeful Young Persons and others, have by wicked Company
been led along from one degree of Sin to another, till they have come to sit in
the seat of the scornful: To make a mock of Sin; to droll on the Scriptures,
ridicule Religion, and scoff at the serious Professors of it.

2. EVIL doers endeavor to draw others into the commission of those Sins which
are contrary to the Duties which relate to our Neighbor, and our selves.

BOTH these come under that great Command, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self, and accordingly I put them together. Here,

(1.) EVIL doers tempt Men to cost off all due Regard to the Authority GOD has
appointed among Men.

THEY are Sons of Belial which shake off the yoke, and they endeavor that
others may do so to. Thus they prevail upon unwary People sometimes to deny
their Parents that Honor which is their due, though this is the first Command
with an especial particular Promise annexed to it, Honor thy Father, etc. e.
c. they tempt them to set light by Father and Mother; yea, to resemble the
Prodigal Son, as represented in the Parable, Luk, 15. Who lest his Father's
house, and wasted his substance with riotous living. But I shall not it sist
here.

(2.) EVIL doers tempt others to Contentions; yea, sometimes to the bainous Sin
of Murder.

THE sixth Commandment is, Thou shall not kill, Exodus 20.13. which forbids rash
anger, malice, hatred, etc. and all the out-breakings of such Lusts. But now,
the wicked are like the troubled Sea which cannot rest: They will quarrel even
with their nearest friends upon light affronts, etc. And when Contentions are
risen among others, they seek rather to blow up than quench this unnatural
fire, being instigated by the Evil One, who was a murderer from the beginning,
Joh. 8.44. And here, there is a Sin which has slain it is thousands, that I
would endeavor to show the Evil of, and that is the bloody Crime of Duelling,
which Men have often been drawn into by the Solicitations or Provocations of
wicked Men, under a pretense of doing right to themselves, of vindicating their
Honor, and the like. It ought to be for a lamentation, that any among
professed Protestants should make light of this Sin; and the late tragical
Instance of it among our selves, should be deeply bewailed. O that our Eyes
were a fountain of tears, that we could weep for this, that such unjustice
should be done in this Land of Uprightness! In this Land which is under such
peculiar Obligations and Advantages to be an Habitation of Righteousness. The
LORD grant it may not again be named as Committed among us. And now, that all,
and particularly our Young People may have a just sense of this deadly evil,
and keep clear from this great Transgression, I would offer a few things to
show,

1. THAT Duelling is an heinous breach of the Sixth Commandment; And he that
destroys his Neighbor's life this way, is guilty of the crying Sin of Murder.

2 THAT it is a vile Sin, and deserves to have the greatest contempt poured
upon it.

1. Duelling is an heinous Breach of the Sixth Commandment; And he that
destroys his Neighbor's life this way, is guilty of the Crying Sin of Murder.

THIS will appear if we consider what this sin is. Now, They are guilty of this
Evil who Fight with each other upon a private Quarrel pursuant to a Challenge
voluntarily given, and accepted.

THUS Men are guilty who meet by consent, and smite each other with the Fist of
Wickedness, which is a breach of the Peace, an iniquity to be punished by the
Judge. And who can tell what such a quarrel may proceed to when Men's passions
are inflamed? But then, Duelling in the common use of the word, intends the
Meeting of two Persons Agreeable to the Notation of the word, it is a fight
between two. Bellum quod duabus partibus dimicatur. Dict. Duorum Bellum.
by agreement, and their Fighting with Mortal Weapons, in which there is an
apparent hazard of life. In this case therefore necessary Self-Defence is
excepted. If one Man violently assaults another so that he can have no other
way of escape, but by repelling force with force, he may and ought to endeavor
the preservation of his own Life, though this should be by the Death of the
Aggressor. And thus, David's Fighting with and slaying Goliath, was not a Duel
in the sense we are speaking of; because it was in an open and lawful War, with
the Approbation of the Civil Authority, and no doubt from the especial impulse
of the Spirit of GOD, stirring him up to this heroic Action. Whereas in a Duel
Men fight in a private quarrel, and to avenge themselves, without any call from
GOD, or the Authority he has appointed; yea, in opposition to Both. They
presume to hazard, if not sacrifice their Lives to gratify the vile Lust of
Pride, Wrath, Malice, etc. Now, thus to take away our brother's Life, as well
as hazard our own, is a most unjust thing, and stands condemned in the Sixth
Commandment, which forbids the taking away of our own Life, or the Life of our
Neighbor unjustly, and whatsoever tends thereunto. This is in desiance of
GOD's Law, to go about to wrest the Sword out of the Magistrate's Hand, who is
the Minister of GOD, a revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does evil, Romans
13.4. This is for Men to destroy Men as the fishes of the Sea devour one
another, having no ruler over them Hab. 1.13, 14.
. This is for a Man to be judge and executioner in his own Cause, a most
unrighteous thing. This is without any Warrant from GOD, or the Powers ordained
of Him, voluntarily to slay our Neighbor. Now such are guilty of Blood. Yea,
it is to come boldly and presumptuously upon him, in which case a Man was to be
taken from GOD's Aliar, that be might die, Exodus 21.14. And the word of GOD
declares, that he who thus Smites his Neighbor with an instrument of iron,
i. e. a mortal Weapon, is a Murderer, Numb. 35.16. Furthermore, such do in a
sense enter into Covenant to seek each other's Life, then they often times let
the Sun go down upon their wrath, and after time for Consideration come to this
foul Play, with premeditated Malice; in which respect this Sin is more
aggravated, than when one Man kills another in a sudden transport of Passion.
Such an one upon a point of honor, falsely so called, or the like, bereaveth
his brother of that which is most precious, his Life, which none can restore
when once taken away; yea destroys a Creature that was made in the Image of GOD
the Creator, and yet retains some remains of this in his Make and Coustitution,
as he is a Spirit in flesh, though he has lest his Moral Rectitude; which is the
reason given why Murder must be punished with Death, Genesis 9.6. Add to this, he
dreadfully hazards the loss of his Soul for ever, which is more worth than a
World. Now, how vile and unreasonable is this upon comparatively a small
injury, an affront, or the like, to shed our Neighbor's blood, and so bereave
him at once of all temporal good, and of the means he enjoyed of preparing for
his eternal Well-being in the life to come. O unspeakable irreparable injury!
Can he ever make him Restitution? No! His blood and life are poured out, as
water spilt upon the ground which cannot be gathered up. And then, which has
been already hinted, Duellers wickedly Endanger their own Lives, while they
strike at their Neighbor's; Though GOD gives to every Man his own life as a
sacred Depositum to be kept and improved by him for high and noble Ends, His
own glory, and the Receivers everlasting happiness. Notwithstanding this such
Persons break the great law of self preservation, hazarding their own lives,
yea, vilely casting their own away many times, that they may be avenged of
their Neighbors. How often have both fallen down slain together, or afterward
died of their wounds! They are cruel to their own flash, and tempt GOD to
destroy them Body and Soul in Hell for ever, while they lay themselves open to
temporal death, in and by the very act of Sinning. And alas! How unsit is the
miserable Wretch that falls in such an Encounter to appear before GOD His
Judge, when distempered with Rage, and in the act of Rebellion against His holy
Law! In a word, This is to go contrary to the Precepts of the great GOD our
Savior, who was manifest in flash, and took our Nature upon him that He might
reconcile us to GOD by the Blood of His Cross, having slain the Enmity; and
has set before us a perfect Pattern of Meekness and Lowliness of Mind, of a
forgiving and forbearing Spirit; And Commands us to Love our Enemies, Mat.
5.44. Yea, to suffer further wrong rather than avenge our selves, Mat. 5.39 But
I say unto you, that ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on the
right cheek, turn to him the other also. He forbids us to Avenge our selves.
Rom 12.19. -- Avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it
is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, says the Lord. To render evil for
evil, etc. And the evil dispositions of Mind which leads to this great Sin, are
also forbidden in the Gospel. Col 3.8. Put off all these anger, wrath, malice,
--. Upon the whole, we may draw this Conclusion, That Duelling is an heinous
and bloody crime. It stands condemned by the Law of GOD, the Laws of the Land,
and by the Voice of the People, expressing their just abhorrence of this deadly
evil. This Sin is very d shonourable to GOD, and baneful to humane Society.
What Peace or Safety can there be, if Men may be allowed thus to destroy one
another? And if so, it must needs be a vile thing, and most reproachful to the
Authors and Abetters of it. Which brings me to the second thing.

2. Duelling is a vile Sin, and deserves to have the greatest Contempt poured
upon it. GOD is the fountain of all true Honor. Man's Primitive glory
consisted chiefly in his bearing the Image of his Maker, and in being conformed
to his Law. When he transgressed, the crown fell from his head, and his honor
was laid in the dust. He became like the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.12. He
corrupted himself by Sin, and became vile in GOD's sight, whose judgment must
be according to truth. Sin is every where spoken against in the Oracles of GOD,
as an odious and filthy thing. Such as live in the allowed commission of it are
called fools, Prove. 14.9. Fools make a mock of sin. Psalm. 14.1. The fool has
said in his heart, There is no God: they are corrupt, they have done abominable
works, --. And it is said that Shame shall be their promotion, Prove. 3.35. Sin
is a Reproach to any People, Prove. 14.34. And provokes GOD to pour contempt on
particular Persons. 1 Samuel 2.30 -- They that despise me shall be lightly
esteemd. Such as live in it, make themselves vile, 1 Samuel 3.13. They that glory
in it glory in their shame, and such as die under the guilt of it must, as the
abhorred of the LORD, be doomed to blackness of darkness forever. And to speak
more directly to the point, This heinous Sin of Duelling deserves to be
branded with the greatest disgrace and ignominy. Indeed the Men of the World,
who are kept in bondage to Sin by false notions of honor, may imagine it the
part of a Magnanimous Spirit thus to resent and revenge an injury offered them;
but unless we would be condemned with the World, in the terrible day of the
LORD, we must not now be conformed to it in such corrupt Principles and
Practices. The word of GOD according to which we must be judged, declares the
contrary. Prove. 14.29 He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding: but
be that is hasly of spirit exalts folly. and 19.11. The discretion of a man
deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass over a gransgression. A meek
and quiet Spirit is an ornament of great price in the fight of GOD. For Men by
the Grace of GOD to overcome their Passions, and keep them under due regulation
when provoked, is the part of a truly gallant and generous Spirit. Prove. 16.32.
He that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty and be that rules his
spirit, than be that takes a city. Here Is a victory which such as obtain,
shall inherit glory. e. c How haked and exposed is that Man, how mean and vile
does he appear, whose Reason and Conscience are enslaved to his passion! He is
like a City broken down, and without walls, Prove. 25.28. The Devil and his own
lusts tyranize over him. How weak is his heart that cannot bear an injury
without running himself on the point of another's Sword, or deserving an
ignominious death by the abuse of his own! When as if he has been injured
there are ways in which he may honorably seek his Right, and have the blame
laid upon the guilty Person. But is it not a brave and courageous thing for Men
when provoked in this way to show that they are not afraid of their flesh? No!
No! True Valor is a virtue, and the Exercise of it supposes a just cause;
whereas in this Sin Men lay aside all proper regard to right Reason and
Religion, which are their glory, and with a worse than brutish fury, fly in
the face of GOD Himself. As they, Job 15.25, 26. He stretches out his hand
against God, and strengthens himself against the Almighty. He runs upon
him, even on his neck upon the thick bosses of his bucklers. And suppose such
fall in the Encounter, Do they die in the bed of honor? No surely, they die as
fools and madmen overcome of vile lusts, and are in the utmost hazard of
arising to everlasting shame and contempt, at the last day; when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taken
vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Alas! This Sin oftentimes leaves Men scarce any space for Repentance.
But suppose they come off Victors: Have they any joy or glory in such a
Victory? No! They must now say something, as wicked Lamech, I have slain a man
to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt Genesis 4.23.
While their brother's blood cries from the ground for vengeance against them.
Now they must ingloriously fly and hide, be pursued by Authority, as Murderers;
and if they are apprehended and the Fact is proved, must suffer a shameful
death, which has peculiar Marks of the Curse of GOD upon it Deuteronomy. 21.23.
. And though such should escape this punishment from Men, yet unless their
Consciences be seared, they will carry the sentence of Condemnation in their
own bosorns wherever they fly, and be a terror to themselves, fearing lest
the Vengeance of GOD should overtake them. But cannot the Sin of wilful Murder
be pardoned, and so the shame and punishment be taken away? No! not by Man.
Prove. 28.17. A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee to
the pit, let no man stay him. Such are dreadfully defiled themselves, and the
Land is so defiled by them, that it cannot be cleans'd unless due care be taken
that Justice be done. Numb. 25.33. -- Blood it defiles the land: and the land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it. The Earth seems to groan under such as a burden it cannot bear.
GOD's Name is highly dishonored, his Wrath incensed, and humane Society
greatly injured, where this Sin is tolerated. What shame and confusion then
must follow this Sin, when GOD and Man declare that the Sinner is not fit to
live? The best that can be supposed is, That even these great transgressors
upon their bitter Repentance, and upon their flying for Refuge unto JESUS
CHRIST, whose Blood cleanses from all sin 1 John 1.7.
; may find Mercy, so that their Souls shall be saved in the day of the LORD.
The Blood of CHRIST, which is the blood of GOD, Speaks better things than the
blood of Abel; It is of virtue sufficient to wash away Sins that are as scarlet
and crimson, Psalm. 51.7. Isai. 1 18. But then, such Sinners must be ashamed and
confounded under the most afflictive sense of the dishonor done to GOD by
their Sins, and of their own vileness upon the account of them; they must abhor
themselves in his sight, and condemning themselves, plead the Merits of CHRIST,
for Pardon, Relving upon Him by Faith, who is the Propitiation for the Sins of
His People. If they go on impenitently, they must be led forth with the workers
of iniquity in the Day of Judgment, be openly condemned, and punished with
everlasting Destruction from the presence of the LORD, and the glory of His
Power. But it may be some of these things will be thought a digression from the
Head last mentioned. I hope all may serve to show us, what an heinous and vile
Sin this is. However, I speak not these things as presuming to sit in judgment,
and pass sentence upon any particular Persons charged with this Crime.

MAY our honored Rulers be directed and spirited at all times, to be a Terror
to such evil works and workers, that the guilt of blood may not lie on the
Land. May they be humbly entreated to put some further and more effectual Mark
of disgrace upon the great Evil of giving or accepting a Challenge to fight a
Duel.

NOR has any word been spoken with a design to wound such as are already
greatly distressed. No! my heart's desire and prayer is, That they may be
enabled to Mourn after a godly sort, and then Experience the Presence of CHRIST
with them, giving them the oil of joy for Mourning. May the Comforter which
should relieve their Souls not be far from them. And GOD, who can make all
things work together for good, bring light to them out of this thick darkness.

THESE Truths are delivered, that on this public Occasion, some further
Testimony may be born against a deadly Evil, concurring with that which has
been already faithfully given by a superior Hand See the Rev. Mr. Colman's
Sermon from Job 10.22.
, in another Assembly. That we may all, and particularly our Young People, have
a just Abhorrence of this Crime, and avoid all approaches to it. Hear, and fear
and not do so wickedly.

IN a word, Let us with holy indignation against this Sin, say as Jacob, even
of his own Sons Murder of the Shechemites, Genesis 49 6, 7. O my soul, come not
thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine bonour, be not thou united:
for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they dug down a
wall. Gursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was
cruel.

3. EVIL doers tempt Others to the Sin of Drunkenness.

THIS is a vile Sin, and such as live and allow themselves in it cannot inherit
the Kingdom of GOD, 1 Cor 6.9, 10. There is a Woe denounced against such
Sinners. Isai. 5.22. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of
strength to mingle strong drink And 28.1, 3. Woe to the crown of pride, to the
drunkards of Ephraim. And also against them that entice others to commit this
Sin. Hab. 2 15, 16. Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink: that puts thy
bottle to him, and make him drunken also, that thou may look on their
nakedness. Thou art filled with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let thy
foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the LORDS right hand shall be turned unto
thee, and shameful spewing shall be on all thy glory. But these evil doers make
light of GOD's dreadful threatenings, and so entice others to run into
temptations to this Sin, by a needless frequenting of Taverns, by drinking
Healths, etc. And alas! how often have unwary People been prevailed upon to
drink to excess by such Companions; though GOD warns us against this Sin, whereby
the good motions of His Spirit are quenched. Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine,
wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit. And Contentions with other
evils flow from it. Prove. 23 29, 30. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has
contentions? who has babbling? who bath wounds without cause? who has
rednessof eyes? They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed
wine.

4. EVIL doers tempt Others to the Sin of Uncleanness.

THIS Sin is strictly forbidden in GOD's Law, Ephesians. 5.3. But Fornication, and
all Uncleanness, let it not be once named among you, as becomes saints. It
dreadfully defiles both the Body, and Soul. And GOD threatens that He will
Judge Whore mongers and Adulterers. Notwithstanding which, Evil doers commit
this Sin themselves, and entice others to it. Thus the Strange woman, Prove. 7,
6 -- 23. But I may not enlarge here.

5. EVIL doers tempt Others to the Sin of Gaming.

IT is a great Breach of the Eighth Commandment, for Men to use Gaming as a
trade to get Money. And yet some practice it, and tempt others to it for filthy
lucre. Games in themselves innocent become unlawful, when Men play for Sums of
Money, or spend much precious time at them, making a business of that which is
designed for Recreation. This is wickedly to pervert the end and use of them.
And then, the Games frequently used to get gain, are by worthy Divines judged
unlawful in themselves; such are Dice and Cards. Thus the judicious Dr. Ames,
"condemns such Games as depend upon a Lot wholly or principally, and that
because in Lots there is no exercise or trial of skill; because a Lot contains a
special appeal to that Providence whereby it is governed, Prove. 16.33. The Lot
is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord, Because
such Plays do from their own Nature offer a singular occasion to various Sins,
as Cursing, and Blaspheming upon the account of their bad fortune and ill luck,
as they call it, (and what is this, but to blaspheme the Providence of GOD;)
also to obstinate Contention, while they are expecting what they account a more
equal Lot." Ames Cas. Consc. p. 158, 9.
. And from the nature of these Games it may further be said, that they have a
pernicious tendency to bewitch Men. For when there is chiefly a trial of skill,
and a Man finds his Antagonist is more than his match, by being beaten several
times, he is discouraged and willing to give over: But in Games of Lottery a
Man thinks he is overcome not so much by his Neighbor's skill as by some good
luck or chance, as they speak, which he has in his favor; and so he is
tempted to try again and again, hoping to gain this on his own side, till he
has prodigally thrown away much of his Estate. And when Men are finally
disappointed, how apt are they to curse GOD and quarrel with Men! I might add,
That GOD seems in his Providence to have set an especial Mark of his
displeasure on these Games in the Evils consequent upon them; and then, they
are of ill report with the most sober, judicious Christians. Let all then avoid
such Games, and the Enticements of Sinners to them. If any have got their
Neighbor's Money in such unlawful ways, let them Repent and make Restitution,
lest the Curse of GOD enter into their Souls, and into their Houses, and
consume them. Jer. 17.11. As the partridge sits on eggs, and hatcheth them
not: so be that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst
of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. If any Young People, or others
have addicted themselves to this vile Sin, let them now take warning by the
Providence of GOD, and reform, lest it lead to others that shall Prove their
Ruin.

II. WE may consider some of the vile Methods wicked Men use to draw Others
into Sin.

I cannot pretend to unfold all the mysteries of iniquity, nor discover all the
stratagems used by them to compass their evil designs. I shall hint at some
more obvious, that we may resist these instruments of the Devil, not being
ignorant of their devices. Now sometimes they attempt this by Professing
Friendship, they infinuate themselves by pretending Esteem, they speak them
fair and seek to beguile them with enticing words. Prove. 7.21, 22. With her
much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she
forced him. He goes after her straightway, as an ox goes to the slaughter, or
as a fool to the correction of the stocks. Thus they flatter unwary Creatures
to their Ruin. As Joah said to Amasa, art thou in health my brother, and took
him by the beard to kiss him; but smote him, and shed out his bowels to the
ground, 2 Samuel 20.9, 10. At other times they tempt by their Countenance and
Gestures. Prove. 6.13. He winketh with his eyes, he speaks with his feel, be
teaches with his fingers. There Is a wanton Eye, impure Glances, etc. Sometimes
they use fair Promises. Prove. 1.11, 13. Come with us, let us lay wait for
blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause: Let us swallow them
up alive as the grave, and whole, as those that go down into the pit. We shall
sind all precious substance. Thus the Adulterous Woman promised the foolish
Young Man pleasure, that they should not be detected in their wickedness, etc.
Prove. 7.18, 20. Thus they hide the hook with a gilded bate, and cover the
snare, that they may catch unwary People, and draw them into mischief, as the
fishes of the sea are taken in an evil net, and as the birds are caught in the
snare. At other times they Threaten them, to expose them, etc. Thus if Men seem
to depend upon them for their business, etc. they will put them in fear lest
they fail them, unless they comply with them in such or such evil Practices;
they must follow them to the Tavern, it may be, or other Places of temptation;
they must keep open their Shops, and work on the Evening before the Sabbath
daylight, or these evil Men will deny them their Custom. Yea, such evil doers
have sometimes endeavored to offer violence to Men's Consciences by breathing
out threatenings and slaughter against the followers of JESUS CHRIST. Thus did
Saul before his Conversion, Act. 9.1. He compelled the professors of the Name
of CHRIST, to blaspheme the Son of GOD, Act. 26.11. Not as if Men could in a
strict sense be laid under a necessity of Sinning; they ought rather to suffer
the most grievous torments, yea, death it self. But then, such Sinners seek in
this way to testify, and as much as in them lies to force them to act contrary
to the light and convictions of their own Consciences. An impious thing indeed!
Again, sometimes they tempt to Sin under a color of zeal for Religion. As the
Scribes and Pharisees taught, That if Children devoted what they could spare to
the Treasury of the Temple, they were free from their obligation to Recompense
their poor Parents, and so sought to render the fifth Commandment of no effect,
Mat. 15.5 -- 7.

At other times they lay aside the mask, and impudently Banter Men out of their
Religion, seeking to represent this most excellent thing as unbecoming Men of
fashion and breeding. Abominable impiety!

PROP. II. WE must therefore Renounce the Communion and intimate Society of
Evil doers, if we would keep the Commandments of GOD.
WE must not stand in the way of Sinners, who use such arts of enticement; but
say to them. Depart from us. We should maintain an inward abhorrence of their
evil Deeds. Psalm. 119 158. I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved: because
they kept not thy word. And if at any time they seek to draw us into Sin, we
should give them a peremptory and resolute denial; yea, we should make them
know, we are determined to deny them by shunning their Company. As Joseph, not
only denied his unchaste Mistress; but lest his Garment, and got out, Genesis 39.10
-- 12. We must have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them Ephesians. 5.11.
, in Words and by contrary works. In our several Places we should testify
against their evil Deeds, that they may be ashamed and reformed; or, if they
persist may be punished. And while they glory in their shame, we should not be
ashamed of our glory; but hold fast the open profession and practice of
Religion, and let them know, that if this be to be vile, we will be yet more
vile in their eyes. We must be ready to own the LORD for our GOD, and declare
to them, That whatever they do, as for us we will serve the LORD. We should
show them the ground of the controversy, that while we wish well to their
Persons, we are offended with their evil Deeds, and resolved to walk contrary
to them by keeping in the way of GOD's Commandments. In such ways as these
should we separate from them, and say to them depart from us.

APPLICATION.
USE, 1. DO wicked Men tempt Others to Sin? Learn hence, What Enemies they are
to GOD, their own Souls, and the Souls of Others. These are the Achans, the
troublers of Israel; they are fighters against GOD, wound their own Souls, and
have a great hand in corrupting the Places where they dwell, Eccl. 9.18. One
sinner destroys much good. If there be any such here then, I would hope there
are none, O consider how cruel you are to your own Souls, and what a dreadful
account you have to give up? And now bitterly repent, and fly to JESUS CHRIST,
who came into the World to save Sinners, even the Chief of them. Do not go on
to fight against GOD your selves, and to tempt Others to break His Commands,
lest He tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver; but now humble your
selves before Him, lay down the weapons of your Rebellion, and cry for Mercy.

AND let us all Mourn because the times are so perilous by reason of Evil
doers; Let us stir up our selves against them, and pray as Psalm. 7.9. Oh let
the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish the just.

2. DO Evil doers tempt Others to break GOD's Commandments, and must we for
this reason renounce their Society? we should then be the Companions of such as
Fear the LORD, and Unite with them in the best Endeavors to promote Obedience
to GOD's Commandments. Psalm 116.63. I am a companion of all them that fear
thee, and of them that keep thy Precepts. We should choose to walk with them
that have spiritual Wisdom, and resolve that their People shall be our People,
and their GOD our GOD. We should prize the Communion of Saints, and join our
selves with the faithful People of GOD, in some One or other of the Churches of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to walk with them in the Commandments and Ordinances of
the LORD. And then, the People of GOD should watch over One another for their
mutual Edification, they should Provoke one another to love and good works Heb.
10.24.
, and Exhort one another daily, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of
Sin. Yea, they should according to their several Places Unite their Endeavors
to turn Sinners from the Errors of their ways, that they may, as instruments in
GOD's hand, save their Souls from death. When you see how eager wicked Men are
to draw Others into Sin, you should be excited to do your utmost to preserve
them from it, or reclaim them by your good Counsels, Warnings and Reproofs.
Thus you should counter-work Satan and wicked Men. O that the Children of GOD
were as active in this, as the Devil and his instruments are in the other! I
Pray GOD that further Methods may be used to promote Societies for the
Roformation of Manners.

3. LET us all, and particularly our Young People, be Exhorted to shun the
Company of Evil doers, that we may keep the Commandments of our GOD.

THE LORD is our GOD, and we should prepare Him an habitation; our Father's
GOD, and we should Exalt Him. We have generally been devoted to Him in Baptism,
who is the only true and living GOD, the FATHER, the SON and the HOLY GHOST.
The bonds of the Covenant are upon us, and therefore as soon as we are grown up
to Years of discretion, we should give up our selves to GOD, to love, obey and
serve Him for ever, depending on the Merits of JESUS CHRIST for pardon and
acceptance, and on His Spirit and Grace for strength to enable us to keep all
GOD's Commandments. But what Communion has light with darkness? and what
concord has Christ with Belial 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
? We cannot be conformed to this World, and at the same time prove what is that
good, and acceptable and perfect will of GOD. Agreably we have that call of
GOD, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, And will be a
Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
Almighty. Let us then renounce the Society of the wicked that our fellowship
may be with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, and that we may walk before
Him in new Obedience. Let us say, as Psalm. 26.5. I have hated the congregation
of evil doers: and will not sit with the wicked. For Vice is catching, and we
have all that corruption in us, which is apt to take the infection. Let Elder
Persons be careful to avoid this great Evil. Do you, who can speak with more
Authority, say to Evil doers, Depart from us, -- And be resolute and unwearied
in your endeavors to keep your Children and Young People from falling into
this snare. Warn them against this Evil, and Restrain them from it, lest they
make themselves vile, and GOD be provoked to judge their Houses, for the
provoking of Sons and Daughters. Rise up for GOD against such Evil doers as
would lead your Children out of the paths of GOD's Commandments, and zealously
oppose them And, O our Young People, be you in an especial manner Exhorted to
fly evil Company; for the way of Sinners leads to death and takes hold of Hell.
Obey that word then, Prove 1.10. My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou
not. Let the late most awful event of Providence, in which GOD has revealed
His Wrath against this destructive Evil, be a warning to you. And now say, as
Psalm. 119 119, 120. Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross:
therefore I love thy testimonies. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy judgments. O consider this well, look upon it and receive
instruction! lest you mourn at the last. Further, to move you to take heed and
beware of the Society of Evil doers, Consider and lay these following things to
heart. Transgressors will often be more bold in tempting you who have less
Experience, and are more easily Susceptible of impressions than Persons of
riper Age; and being sensible of your danger, watch and pray, lest you enter
into this Temptation. Consider! Evil doers wickedly depart from GOD, and if you
go with them, they will draw you from Him, and provoke Him to withdraw from
you. Now, They that are far from GOD shall perish Psalm. 73.27.
. By this Evil many well Educated and hopeful Young Persons have forfeited and
lost even the common Restraints of GOD's Spirit, and so run into all excess of
Riot. Consider, If you follow these Sinners, you will get a wound and dishonor
-- Prove. 6.33.
. How did Jacobs Daughter expose her honor and chastity when she went to see
the Daughters of the Land! Gen 34.1. It is a proverbial saying A man is known
by his Company Qui non noscitur a se, noscitur a Comite.
. So that this is the way to be looked upon as one of the fools in Israel. And
will you forfeit your good Name with the wise and good, to gratify the worst of
Men? O do it not! Again, Consider, the Sins such tempt you to have a tendency
to bring miseries upon you in this life, yea to cut short your days. The way of
transgressors is hard. Destruction and misery are in their paths, and the End
is death, Psalm. 37.6. Evil doers shall be cut off. And will you give your
Years, the flower of your days, to such cruel ones that hunt for the precious
life? Ah foolish and unwise! Turn ye, Turn ye, why will you die! O take heed!
lest you become over much wicked, and die before your time Ecel 7.17.
. How often have Malefactors when brought to the Gallows confessed that wicked
Company was their Ruin! Consider, If you go with them, you will be in great
danger of perishing with them for ever in Hell. Job 31.3. Is not destruction to
the wicked? and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? Yes surely.
GOD sometimes inflicts amazing Judgments on them in this life; but suppose, as
to outward appearance, there should now be one Event to the Righteous and the
wicked; yet the Judge of all Earth will do right. Such profligate Sinners, if
they die impenitent, Shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire
and brimstone: which is the second death, Rev. 21.8. And though they may seem to
strengthen one another in their sinful practices, yet they do but increase
their guilt, and prepare for a much sorer punishment. Prove. 11.21. Though hand
join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpanished. O be persuaded then to keep
at a distance from them lest you perish with them, and have a dreadful meeting
in the Place of Torments where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat.
8.12. Lest in the terrible Day of the LORD, you be found with them on CHRIST's
left hand, and receive that Doom, Mat. 25.41. Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. For the ungodly shall
not stand in the Judgment, nor Sinners in the Congregation of the
Righteousness, Psalm. 1.5. Come out then, be not Partakers of their Sins, that
ye receive not of their Pagues Rev. 4.18.
. Depart from the Tents of these wicked Men, lest ye be consumed in all their
Sins Numb. 16.26.
. A companion of fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13.20. O do not then associate
your selves with such, lest GOD gather your Souls with Sinners, and your lives
with bloody Men. Now, hear the Voice of Wisdom, of CHRIST, who is the Wisdom of
GOD. Prove. 9.6 Forsake the foolish, and live. -- Make haste to this precious
Savior, who has said, They that seek me early shall find me. And seek Rest
and Protection under the shadow of his Wings. The LORD draw you to Him, that
you may dwell safely, and be quiet from fear of evil. Cry to GOD for
Restraining and Saving Grace. Take with you words and say, Psalm 19.12, 13. Who
can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from (...) faults. Keep back thy
servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me: then
shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression. Psalm.
51.10, 11. Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within
me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. I
shall be not at rest till you have experienced the New Birth, and that word be
fulfilled in you, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my spirit within you, and couse you
to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. For, Great
Peace have they that love GOD's Law: and nothing shall offend them, Psalm.
119.165. And in keeping His Commandments there is a great Reward. Psalm. 1.1 --
3. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, not
stands in the way of sinners, nor suteth in the seat of the scornful. But his
delight is in the law of the LORD, and in his law does be meditate day and
night. And be shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that
brings forth his fruit in due seoson; his leaf also shall not wither, and
whatsoever be does shall prosper.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7 line 27. for Lust read Lusts. p. 9. l. 21. f. their own r. them. p. 13.
l. 1. f. taken ^^taking. p. 20. l. 22. f. testify r. terrify.


