Mr. Sewall's SERMON On a Day of Prayer For the Rising Generation.

The Holy Spirit THE Gift of GOD Our Heavenly Father, To them that Ask Him.

A SERMON Preached on a Day of PRAYER with FASTING, kept by the South Church in
Boston, to Ask of GOD the Effusion of His SPIRIT on the Rising Generation,
November. 13th. 1722.

By Joseph Sewall, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

Isai. 44 3 -- I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine
Offspring. Mar. 7.11 -- How much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give
good things to them that ask him. BOSTON: Printed for D. Henchman, at the
Corner Shop over against the Brick Meeting House in Cornhill, 1728.

GOD will give His Holy SPIRIT to them that ask Him.
LUKE XI. 13. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
Children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them
that ask Him.
IN the beginning of this Chapter, one of Christ's Disciples asked our Lord to
teach them to Pray; in answer to which request, this great Prophet and Teacher
of His Church, gives His Disciples an excellent Form or Pattern as a Rule for
their Direction in Prayer; which is recorded in this and the Evangelist
Matthew, with some considerable difference. And He encourages them to continue
instant in Prayer, with persevering Importunity, by declaring that if they Ask
it shall be given them; that if they seek, they shall find, and that if they
Knock it shall be opened to them. And our Lord illustrates and confirms this
Truth by a double similitude or comparison. The first is that of a Friend, who
is moved by importunity to grant his friend's request, being urged to that
which his kindness as a friend was not sufficient to incline him to. The second
is taken from an earthly Father, whose parental love to his Child will not by
any means, suffer him to give that which he knows to be hu^tful, when his Child
asks what is needful and proper to be given, ver. 11, 12. And then follows my
text, in which we have the similitude formed into an Argument by way of
Comparison, from the less to the greater, If ye then being evil, know how to
give good gifts to your children: how much more shall your heavenly father give
his holy Spirit to them that ask him? If ye who are evil, who have, even the
natural Affection God has given you toward your Children impaired and
vitiated by Sir; and compard with God, have no goodness in you; for there is
none good but God; if ye have both knowledge and will to give good things to
your Children; and who is there that has not, who is not a monster, without
natural affection; How much more shall your heavenly. Father: God who is your
Father not only by Creation, but also by Adoption in Christ; and has his
Throne in Heaven above, whence comes down every good and perfect giving? How
much more shall He give his Holy Spirit, (in Mat. it is, good things, Mat. 7.
i^.
the Gift of the Holy Ghost comprehends in it formally, or virtually and
causually all good things) to them that ask him: And therein express a silial
disposition and frame of spirit. The Dutch tender the text, those that pray to
Him The word signifies, says Mr. Leigh, humbly to beg any thing, and earnestly
to desire it.

DOCT. GOD our Heavenly Father will most certainly give His Holy Spirit to
them; that Ask Him.

1. WHO is intended by the Holy Spirit? 2. What is implied in His being given?
3. What is intended in Asking the Holy Spirit? 4. Why should we Ask the Holy
Spirit? 5. Prove the Doctrine, That God our Heavenly Father will most certainly
give the Holy Spirit to them that Ask Him.

I. WHO is intended by the Holy Spirit?

Ans THE Third person in the Godhead. The word here used for Spirit signifies
Breath or Wind: And it is observed by a learned Man, that the Word for Spirit
in the Hebrew, Greek and Latin, signifies Breath. Now by this Word the Divine
Essence which is pure and spiritual, immaterial and invisible, is sometimes
signified, in which the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are One. But then, as this
Name is in a peculiar manner given to the Holy Ghost, so it declares His
especial manner and order of subsistence in relation to the Father and the Son,
as He proceeds from them. Now it is very obvious that the Third Person in the
Trinity is often called by this Name in the New Testament, and by a Name of the
like signification in the Old. Thus in the old Testament, Genesis 1.2. The Spirit
of God moved on the face of the waters, Psalm. 336. Genesis 6.3. In the New
Testament this word is frequently used to signify this Divine Person, Joh. 3.5,
-- 8. etc. And the Epithet Holy, is frequently given Him, Psalm. 51.11. in our
text and in many places in the New Testament, which may be, not only to denote
the holiness of His Nature as He is God, but especially in that it is His
peculiar Work to sanctify, and make us holy. He proceeds from the Father and
the Son, Joh. 15.26. But when the Comserter is come, whom I will send from the
Father, even the Spirit of truth, which procce^eth from the Father. He is
called the Spirit of the Son, Gal 4.6. Now, that the Holy Ghost is an
intelligent Subsistend or Person is evident from the things ascribed to Him in
Scripture, if vou take them together, as Understanding, Will etc. He is said to
divide to every Man as He will, 1 Cor. 12. 11. And there are those Works
attributed to Him, which declare the same thing, Job 33.4. The Spirit of the
Lord has made me. He is said to teach us, 1 John 2.^ To make Overseers or
Bishops over the Flock at Ephesus, Act. 20.28. As also to be the Object of
those Actings of Men which declare the same thing. He is said to be vexed, and
we read of the Sin against the Holy Ghost. Again, the Holy Spirit is a Divine
Person. He is God, One with the Father and the Son in all the Essential
Properties and Glories of the Divine Nature, I Joh. 5.7. There are Three that
bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these
Three are One. He is called God, Act. 5.3. Why has Satan filled thy heart to
lie unto the Holy Ghost? ver. 4. Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. He
inspired those holy Men who spoke and wrote the holy Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.20,
1. Now it is said, All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16.
The Incommunicable Attributes of God are ascribed to Him. He is Omni-present,
Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, Omniscient, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11.
But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searches all
things, yea, the deep things of God. For what man knows the things of a man,
save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knows no
man, but the Spirit of God. We are Baptized in his Name, Mat. 28.19. And
therefore devoted to His Faith and Service, as our Covenant God. And we are
also solemnly Blessed in His Name, 2 Cor. 13.14. Not to mention His Agency in
the Supernatural Works of Creation, and of Grace, the latter of which may be
Considered under the following Head.

II. IN what respects is God said to give, the Holy Spirit? Or thus, What is
intended in God's giving the Holy Spirit? The Holy Spirit is in Scripture
called the Gift of God, Joh. 4. 10. God is said to give Him; Joh. 14.16, 17. I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, even the Spirit
of truth. And agreeable to this, such as are made Partakers of this rich Gift,
are said to receive the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 2.12. We have received the Spirit
which is of God. Our Heavenly Father gives His Spirit to His Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, as He is the Head of His Church, Joh. 3.34. -- God gives not the
Spirit by measure unto him. He is the first Receiver, and through Him God bestows
this great Gift upon His People Act. 2.33. Therefore being by the right Hand of
God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost,
be has shed forth that which ye now see and hear.

Here I may say,

1. GOD's giving the Holy Spirit denotes His Authority and free Grace. This is
a free Favor, and is of mere Grace, not of Debt. When we Pray for the Holy
Ghost, we must come to the Throne of Grace without Money, and without Price.
God has Power to bellow Him, and He acts herein with Authority and the
greatest Freedom. We can do nothing to Purchase this Gift, or to oblige God to
bestow it upon us as a reward of Debt. No, we are unworthy of the least of
God's Mercies, much less can we in any measure deserve this Comprehensive Gift.
Ability to Ask aright, and the thing bestowed in answer to our humble Petition,
are both of the free Mercy of God through Jesus Christ.

2. THE Spirit is said to be given respecting His Office, as He is the
Dispenser of all Good to God's People. The Spirit is Essentially One, with the
Father and with the Son, and as God acts with Sovereign Liberty. But then
respecting His Office He is said to be sent and given "In the Communication of
the Spirit, respect i^ had unto his Effects, or the Ends for which he is given.
The Authority of this Giving respects principally his Gifts and Graces. Dr.
Owen of the Holy Spirit, p. 81.
. The Application of the Redemption purchased by Christ is peculiarly
attributed to Him, Tit. 3.5, 6. -- According to his mercy he saved us, by the
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost; which was shed on us
abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. He is the Good Spirit of God, and
all good is from Him. And accordingly He is said to be given with an especial
Regard to those excellent Gifts, Graces and Comforts which are Communicated by
Him. The Holy Spirit is in His Divine Nature one and the same, without
variableness: But in His Gifts and Operations He is various, 1 Cor. 12.11. But
all these (gifts) works that one and self same Spirit --. Agreably we read of
the seven Spirits of God, Rev. 4.5. i. e. the Holy Spirit in His manifold
Dispensations of Gifts and Graces. "Variety of Gifts, Dr. Thomas Goodwin,
And in this respect the Spirit of God may be said to be given more sparingly,
or poured out more plentifully, according to the degree and measure in, which
He is Communicated. It is said, that the Holy Ghost was not yet given --, or as
in the Original, was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified, Joh. 7.39.
The Holy Ghost existed from Eternity; but He was not respecting that peculiar
Dispensation and manifestation of Him, which the Church was favored with,
after Christ's Ascension.

III. WHAT is implied in Asking the Holy Spirit? How must we attend this Duty?
Now as we have already observed, the Word signifies earnestly to desire any
thing, and humbly to beg it. It intends humble and earnest Prayer. And thus the
Word is used, Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God -- And
then, we must Ask in a right manner, from a right principle, and for a right
end.

1. IN Asking of God His Holy Spirit, we must offer up our hearty Desires to
Him. When we come before God to Ask His Holy Spirit, we must be duly sensible
how needful and excellent a Blessing this is, and accordingly express to God
the inward desires and breathings of our Souls after it. We must obey that
Word, Psalm. 62, 8 --. Pour out your hearts before him --. We must desire and
value this great Blessing, otherwise our Asking it will be but an empty
Compliment, yea a mocking of God. We must thirst for this living Water, the
plentiful Effusions of the Holy Spirit. As David longed, and said, Oh that one
would give me drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem 2 Samuel 23.15.
So must we long for these holy Waters, and from our Hearts say, O that God
would Pour out His Spirit upon us! And then express our hearty Desires to God
in Prayer. The thirsty are invited to Come and drink, Job. 7.37. There may be
true Prayer without the Voice, but not without the Heart; there must be the
Voice of the inward man.

2. WE must Ask of God His Holy Spirit in a due sense of our own Sinfulness and
Unworthiness. God gives Grace to the Humble, but knows the Proud afar off: And
therefore when we come before Him with our Requests and Petitions, we must come
under an abasing sense of our own emptiness and unworthiness. We must be
sensible that we are empty of all spiritual Good, till the Holy Spirit is
Communicated to us, and that we are less than the least of God's Mercies, and
therefore most unworthy of so great a Blessing. We must ask as Beggars ask an
Alms. Thus the Word is used, Act. 3.2. As we are spiritually poor, so we must
have a gracious Poverty of Spirit while attending this Duty.

3. WE must Ask in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the exercise of
Faith upon God as our Father in Him, Joh. 16.23. -- Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. ver.
24. -- Ask, and ye shall receive --. Our Savior here requires His Disciples to
make an explicit and express mention of His Name in Prayer. When we come before
God, we must not come in our own name; but make mention of the Name of Christ,
who is worthy, and has purchased the Gift of the Holy Ghost to be Communicated
to His People. Now asking in the Name of Christ does not intend merely our
making mention of the Name of Christ in our Prayers, but also our believing and
entire Dependence on Him, His Merit and Mediation, for audience and acceptance
with God. He is our great High Priest, and our Advocate with the Father. He
appears in the Presence of God for us, as a Lamb that had been slain; His Blood
was offered once for all, and it has a Voice to plead for us; it speaks better
things than the blood of Abel. He sits in Heaven as a Priest on a Throne, and
is that Angel who offers much incense with the Prayers of the Saints upon the
golden Altar which is before the Throne. And when the smoke of the Incense with
the Prayers of the Saints, ascends up before God out of the Angel's Hand, God
smells a sweet savor in these spiritual Sacrifices, and has a gracious regard
unto them for His Son's sake. See Rev. 8.3, 4. We then who are Sinners, and
have our best Duties defiled with this accursed thing, must take our
Encouragement from the Merits of Christ, who has a just Claim by Purchase, to
this Comprehensive Blessing; and ask in His Name who is the Mediator between
God and Man. And then, having such an High Priest, Jesus the Son of God, we
should come boldly to the Throne of Grace, thot we may obtain mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16. We must through Christ have our Faith
in God, and come in humble Confidence as Children to a Father, believing that
God is able and ready to bestow a Fathers Blessing upon us. He that comes to
God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him, Heb. 11.6. We must believe that God is such an One as He reveals
Himself in His Word, and in the face of Jesus Christ. Particularly, that He is
rich in Mercy to all that Call upon Him. Without Faith we cannot please God in
this Duty of Prayer, Jam. 1.6. Let him ask in Faith nothing wavering --.
Believe, and you shall receive what you ask agreeable to God's Will, either in
specie, or in true value.

4. WE must he servent, and continue instant in this Duty. This we are taught
in our Context, ver. 9, 10. We must ask, seek and knock. We must be
importunate, as ver. 8. Jam. 5.16. -- The effectual servent prayer of a
righteous man avails much. The inwrought Prayer. He that asks coldly, asks a
dental Qui srigide rogat, docet negare.
We must be servent in Spirit if we would obtain the gracious Answer of our
Prayers. We must strive and wrestle in holy earnestness, as Jacob did, whose
wrestling was accompanied with weeping and supplication, Hos. 12.4. And thus he
had power over the Angel, over the Son of God, who is Jehovah, and prevailed.
If we would not seek in vain, we must approve ourselves the genuine Sons of
Jacob, and refuse to let the Lord go till He bless us. I may say with great
reverence that God delights to be thus overcome by His People, i, e. He who is
Almighty, is most willing to yield to their importunate Prayers, Again, we must
continue instant in this Duty: As we are commanded. Rom, 12.12. We must pray
always, watching thereunto with perseverance. Ephesians, 6.18. If God seem to shut
out our Prayers, we must Pray the more earnestly, and never cease till we
obtain the Answer of Prayer. Such Petitions never return empty, but always
obtain of God either the very thing we ask for, or that which is better for us.

FROM what has been said of the nature of the Duty, and of the right manner of
attending it, it is plain that the Asking here spoken of is a Duty which none
but the Children of God, who have the Spirit of Adoption, can discharge aright;
and they are obliged to ask that they may receive the Holy Ghost in more
plentiful measures, which seems nextly intended in our Text, However,
unregenerate Persons are also indispensibly obliged to attend this moral Duty
of Prayer, and to ask of God the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, that they
may do it in a light manner. That moral impotency which is natural to us since
the Fall, and consists very much in the rebellion of our Wills against God and
His Law does not abridge God's Power to Command. And then there are those
general Promises, If I may so call them, made to the Children and People of
God, of the plentiful Effusions of the Spirit, as are a gracious encouragement
even to such as are now destitute of saving Grace, to ask of God His Holy
Spirit. Who knows, but you may be the happy Subjects of this great Benefit? It
is not only possible, but probable, if you are now under the Convictions of
God's Holy Spirit, O seek then, God is not wont utterly to forsake such, unless
they resist His holy Spirit st^iving with them. I may further say, it is a much
less evil to fail in the manner of our attending this Duty of Prayer, than
wholly to neglect it.

IV. WHY should we Ask of God His Holy Spirit?

Ans. 1. BECAUSE this is God's Will and Command. God's Will revealed in His
Word is to be made our Rule and Directory in Prayer, and in every part of
Religious Worship. If we ask any thing of God it must be agreeable to his Will,
I Job. 5 14. This is the Confidence that we have in Him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will, be he^reth us Now that this is the Will of God,
our next and context snew us. And in those Eva gel^cal Promises which we have,
Ezekiel 36. among which is that good Word, ver. 27. I will put my spirit within
you. It is added ver. 37. Thus faith the Lord God, I will for this he inquired
of by the house of Israel to do it for them. -- God would do it; but in such a
manner that He would be acknowledged as the hearer of Prayer. The Blessing
promised must be sought of God, that it might be given in answer to Prayer. The
Spirit of God is promised as a Spirit of Supplications, Zech. 12. 10. And then
it is promised in the beginning of the 13th. Chap. In that day there shall be a
fountain opened --.

2. THE Advancement of the Glory of God and the Kingdom of Christ in the World,
very much depends on this; and therefore we should ask of God this great
Blessing. Our Savior has directed us to Pray for the Advancement of God's
Honor and Glory in the first place --. Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come,
etc. Now when we ask of God His Holy Spirit to be poured out upon us, upon our
Children, and upon all Flesh, we do in effect ask that God's Name may be
hallowed, for we are utterly unable and indisposed, yea averse to this since
the Fall, and must be formed by the Spirit of God to show forth his Praise, if
ever we give glory to Him in a right manner. We shall never sanctify the Lord,
unless He renew and sanctify us by His Spirit. And then in order to the
increasing and flourishing of Christ's Kingdom, the Spirit of God must be
poured out to qualify Ministers to Preach the Gospel of the Kingdom, and to
make the Ordinances effectual to Salvation. Agreably our Savior directed His
Disciples to wait for the promise of the Father; assu^ing them they should
receive Power after that the Holy Ghost was come upon them, Act. 1.4, -- 8. And
promised to send His holy Spirit, to reprove the World of Sin, of
Righteousness, and of Judgment, Joh, 16. 7, -- 11. If Sinners are convinced of
the deadly evil of Sin, particularly of the Sin of Unbelief, and of the
suitableness and sufficiency of Christ's Righteousness for their Justification
in the sight of God, it is the Holy-Spirit of God that wrought the Conviction.
The Apostles themselves were in this respect, but Ministers by whom God's
People believed, even as the Lord gave to every man, 1 Cor. 3.5. The quickening
Influences of the Spirit are necessary to make the Ordinances a favor of life
unto life. Men will not fear God, and give Glory to Him unless the Spirit of
Grace come mightily upon them. When the, Word of God is accompanied by the
Spirit, then the Son of God rides prosperously, and such as were His Enemies
fall downunder Him, being subdued to the Obedience of Faith. Act. 2.41. Then
they that gladly received his word, were baptized; and the some day there were
added unto them about three thousand souls. Surely then, we are obliged to ask
of God His Holy Spirit, as we are obliged to seek the Glory of God, and the
Advancement of His Kingdom among Men, God's Honor should be nearer to us than
any temporal Interest of our own.

3. THIS is the most needed and excellent Blessing. When God gives His Spirit,
He blesses His People with all spiritual Blessings in Heavenlies in Christ
Jesus, It is of the Spirit that God's People are born again, Joh. 3. 5. By the
Spirit they are united to Christ, and so obtain an interest in all the saving
Benefits He has purchased. When God gives His Spirit, He gives Grace and
Glory, and every good thing. All good things are either formally or virtually
included in this Gift. And therefore we should ask it of God, otherwise we
shall he greatly wanting to our selves, and not consult our best good and
advantage.

4. THIS is the way to obtain Outward good things with God's Blessing. If we do
thus seek first the Kingdom of God, other things shall be added, "as far as
shall be for God's Glory and our own good", and we shall have God's fatherly
Blessing with them. Thus when God had promised of old to put His Spirit within
His People, it follows, ye shall dwell in the land I gave to your fathers --
Ezekiel. 36.27, 28, 29. I will call for the Corn, and increase it. But now
temporal Prosperity without this Blessing will prove that of fools which
destroys them. It God give a People fullness of Bread and take His Spirit from
them, they will declare their Sin like Sodom, abusing God's good Creatures to
His dishonor, and their own destruction, Psalm. 106.15.78, 29, 31. Thus God
threatened them, Mal. 2.2. I will ^urse your Blessings --. But when God gives
His Spirit He blesses His People indeed; for then the Creatures of God are
good to them, being sanctified by the word and prayer, I Tim. 4.4, 5,

V. WE come now to prove the Doctrine; That our Heavenly Father will give His
Holy Spirit to them that Ask Him. Now this is evident in that Christ the
faithful Witness ^stifies it. He is the only bego-ten Son of God, and was sent
to declare His Fathers Will Joh. 1.18
; and seeing the Father and He are One, He cannot be deceived, nor deceive us. I
shall here just hint at a few things.

I. GOD is our Heavenly Father, and therefore He will give His Holy Spirit to
them that ask Him. -- How much more shall your heavenly Father -- Has God put
such a strong and invincible Affection in Parents toward their Children, that
they think nothing too good or too much for them, nothing that they judge is
convenient and proper for them; and shall not God our Heavenly Father much
father give His Holy Spirit, and in and with Him all good things to His
Children? Most certainly He will He has not spared his own son, but delivered
him up for us all, how shall be not with him also freely give us all things?
Romans 8 32, Is God our Father in this peculiar sense; why then; God has sent
forth His Son made of a Woman -- that we might receive the Adoption of Sons,
Gal. 4.4, 5. And because ye are Sons, God has sent ^orth the sprit of his son
into your hearts, crying Abba Father, ver. 6. And will not God hear the Cries
of His Children, when the Holy Spirit himself helps their Infirmities, and make
Intercession in them, Romans 8.26, 27. most certainly He will; they shall have
the Holy Spirit more abundantly. God's coming into this Relation of a Father in
Christ, is the most wonderful testimony of His Love, I Joh. 3.1. Behold what
manner of love the father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
sons of God. God is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ in an appropriate
sense, as He is His only begotten by eternal and ineffable Generation He is
such a Son as was begotten of the substance of His Father, even as he that is
said to be a Man's own natural Son, uses to be Dr. Goodwin.
And then, He is our Father by the Grace of Adoption in Him: We being united to
Christ, and spiritually one with Him according to the tenor of the New
Covenant; He being our Lord and Husband, we may call His Father our Father, Joh
20.17. I ascend to my Father, and your Father, etc. And surely when such
Children ask the Holy Spirit that they, may more and more resemble their
Heavenly Father, and do His Will more perfectly, He will not deny them. No!
they are ^eirs of God, and in giving His Spirit God gives a Fathers Blessing, a
Child's Portion.

2. I might further Confirm this Truth by considering the great and precious
Promises made to the (...) of God. I shall give one text instead of many, Isai
44.3. I will pour Water upon him that is thirsty, -- I will pour my sprit upon
thy seed, and my blessing upon thine s^sp^ing. This is the great New Testament
Promise, that God having sent His Servant Christ, and upheld Him, would send
His Spirit to uphold us. Mr. Henry.
The words may denote a plentiful ^ffusion of the Sprit in his purifying
refreshing and fructisying influences, even as when the Heavens pour down
abundance of Rain, and the thirsty Earth is enriched with the River of God
which is full of Water, Psalm 65. Isai. 32.15. God that cannot lie has pr^mised
this great Blessing to His People. Surely then, God will not deny His Spirit to
such as express the longing Desires of their thirsty Souls in Prayer to God for
Him, Mat. 5.6 blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness:
for they shall be filled.

Again, 3. GOD is a God hearing Prayer. This is one of the Titles given Him in
Scripture, Psalm 65.2. O thou that hear Prayer --. God is rich in Mercy to
them that call upon Him -- I said not to the Seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain,
Isai 25.19. ver. 11. Thus says the Lord, the holy One of Israel, and his
Maker, Ask me of things to com^, concerning my sons, and concerning the work of
my hands command ye me. The gracious Answer which God is giving, is we may
hope, to the Prayers of his People, in the good (...) made and revived on many,
particularly of our Young People, (...) Earthquake, has been an Encouragem^nt
to me to publish t^is small (...) at this time. (...) God, and be Excited to
pray more earnestly for his Spirit, to work a gene^al and (...) Reformation. O
that such as are un^er (...) might not draw back to P^r^ition, but believe to
the saving of their Souls! Prove. 1.23 Turn you at my r^proof, behold, I will
pour (...) my (...) unto you.


APPLICATION
USE. I. LET us believe the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and Worship Him as God.
The Holy Ghost is God. This the Scriptures testify, as we have heard, and this
his Works declare. He that is the Sanctifier of God's People; the Author and
Dispenser of all divine Grace and Consolation, must be a Divine Person. Let us
then ascribe Divine Honors, Blessing, Glory and Power to the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Spirit. Three Persons; but One God. And let it not discourage us
that this great Mystery of our holy Religion is to us incomprehensible; for the
God whom we Adore is Infinite, and therefore incomprehensible to our finite
minds; And He who is the Truth, plainly reveals this to us in His Word, and the
Children of God that receive this Revelation of God concerning Himself, they
live by it, and their enlightened minds do Acquiesce in it, which could not be
if it offered Violence to any Faculty, or Contradicted right Reason.

2. LET us give the Holy Spirit the Glory of His Works. We have heard that in
giving the Spirit, God Communicates all saving Good to His People, and
therefore we must in a Religious manner Ascribe the effectual Application of
the Redemption Purchased by Christ to the Holy Spirit. We must give Him the
Glory of all His Gifts and Spiritual Operations on the Souls of Men, and take
heed we do not ascribe them to another either in whole, or in part. (...) we
savingly Converted? This is the work of the Spirit, and we must say. Not unto
us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be ^he Glory.

3. LET us bless our Heavenly Father for the Gese of the holy Ghost. As we
ought to bless God for that unspeakable Gist, His only Son, so we must bless
Him or this Comprehensive Gist of the Holy Ghost, without which we could never
obtain the Benefits purchased by Christ, being dead in Sins, and altogether
without strength. Let us then Adore the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, for this New Testament Blessing beltow'd on His Church and People in an
eminent manner after Christ's Ascension. The Disciples of Christ were directed
by our Lord to wait for the promise of the Father, Even the Baptism of the Holy
Ghost, Act. 1.4, 5. And we find they did not wait in vain; for when the Day of
Pentecost was fully come -- they were all filled with the holy Ghost, Act. 2.
which Peter declares was spoken of by the Prophet foel. And it shall come to
pass in the last days (says God) I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh:
and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall see
visions --, Act. 2. 16, -- 18. And when we bless God for what He has done in
this regard, let us encourage our selves to Pray and Wait for the further and
more full Accomplishment of His Promises toward the close of the Gospel-Day.

4. LET us be Exhorted and Encouraged to Ask of God His Holy Spirit. We are met
together this Day to seek to God, that He would pour out His Spirit upon us, in
particular upon the Rising Generation. And surely if we duly consider the Awful
withdrawments of the Spiritual Presence of God, the lamentable decay of the
Power of Godliness, and the great abounding of Iniquity among us, we shall find
gr^^t reason to say, as Hos. 10.12. -- It is time to seek the Lord, till he
come and rain righteousness upon us. Our Heartsmay well tremble for the Arkof
God, and we had need cry to Him that He would not utterly forsake us. We have
in a dreadful manner vexed the Holy Spirit that has been striving with us by
Ordinances and Providence. And now it seems as if the Holy Spirit did in a
great measure cease striving with Men. Few comparatively have any remarkable
Convictions under the Preaching of the Word. Conversions are rare, and dubious.
God spoke the last Year to us, especially to our Young People, by His Word, and
by His Rod The Smallpox: (...) which, the Minister that carried on the
Thursday Lecture in Boston were (...) to (...) a Course of Sermons on Early
Piety: I hope to the saving advantage of not a few who d^^d by that (...).
. The Visitation was very general, and the Slain of the Lord were many; but
alas! it is not followed with a General Reformation. Indeed I hope there has
been some good fruit of this grievous Chastisement visible on the Survivours,
for which we owe our humble Thanks to the God of all Grace; but alas! there is
but little compared with what God may justly expect. We find by sad experience.
that outward means are in themselves insufficient to reform us: Notwithstanding
them we shall grow worse and worse, unless God send His Holy Spirit to work
with and by them. O then let us seek of God His Holy Spirit to revive His Work
among us and that importunately and incessently, being sensible of our great
need of His saving Influences.

AND here I would direct the Exhortation, 1. To Parents and Elder Persons. 2.
To Children and Young People.

1. TO Parents, and Elder Persons, Be you Exherted to Cry to God for the
plentiful ^^ssusions of the Holy Spirit. Seek to God to pour out His Spirit
upon you, and then upon your Children. In the first place, Ask of God His Holy
Spirit for your selves, and take heed you do not continue secure in a graceless
state, destitute of this great Blessing. If you are not concerned about this
your selves, how shall you seek it for your Children? If you have not the Holy
Spirit your selves, how shall you Pray aright for them, or instruct them, or
set them a good Example? If you are sensual not having the Spirit; Worldly,
Proud, Passionate; this will be a sore Temptation to them, and may be a means
to harden them in Sin. If you reglect to seek after Baptism, or to renew your
Baptismal Covenant, this may dreadfully hinder their entering into Covenant with
God. If you live in the neglect of the Ordinance of the Supper, this may lay a
dreadful stumbling block in their way, and embolden them to neglect that great
Command which our Lord has given to His Disciples, Luke 22.19. Do this
inremembrance of me. O be you then Exhorted to Cry to God for the Holy Spirit
your s^lves, that you may be in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless. If you obtain the Spirit of Grace, then you will be enabled to seek
to God for your Childien. And then, Ask of God His Spirit for your Children,
your own Bowels. Travail in ^irth again with them till Christ be formed in them
Pray without ceasing, and with holy importunity! Bring them to God, and cry to
Him to Convert and heal their Souls. Imitate the Woman of Canaan who cried to
our Lord to heal her Daughter that was vexed with a Devil. At first Christ
answered not a word; but still she cried after Him. Then He seemed to upbraid
her, -- It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it to Dogs.
Instead of being discouraged, she makes a Plea of this; Truth Lord, yet the
Dogs eat of the Crumbs that fall from their masters table Upon which our
Savior answered, O woman great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou will, Mar. 15.22, -- 28. A bold Faith truly, but not so bold as welcome. You
can remember how much you were concerned for their outward man when endangered
by the late Sickness: And will you not be as much concerned for their Souls,
which are under a more dangerous Distemper by the Fall, and that an hereditary
one which you have been instrumental of conveying to them? most certainly you
should. As Children of the first Adam they are under the Curse of God's broken
Covenant, and in danger of the second Death which is eternal. O be earnest with
God then to give them His Holy Spirit, that being united to Christ the second
Adam, they may obtain the Blessings of the New Covenant. (...) this way yen
should carry your little Ones to the Great God our Savior for His Blessing,
who has said, ^uffer little Children and forbid them not, to come unto we, for
of such is ibe kingdom of heaven, Mat, 19.14, And thus you should bring your
Children that are grown up, and ask of God His Holy Spirit to renew and change
their Hearts. As David prayed for Solomon, I Chron. 29. 19, Give unto Solemn my
son a perfect heart.

2. LET this Exhortation be directed to our Children and Young People. O be you
Exhorted and Encouraged to Ask of God His Holy Spirit. It is with an especial
regard to you that we are Assembled this Day: Your Parents and Pastors are
concerned for you, and earnestly desirous that you may be the Offspring which
the Lord has blessed; and therefore they unite in seeking to God for His
Spirit to be given to you. And will not you join with them in asking this most
needed Blessing? Certainly you should with great importunity; for you will be
accursed for ever unless you obtain it. You were by Nature dead in Trespasses
and Sins, and Children of Wrath even as others, and stand in absolute need of
the Holy Spirit to renew a right Spirit in you. Unless you are born from above,
born of the Spirit, it had been better for you that you had not been born.
However, you are generally the Children of the Covenant, and to you pertains
the Adaption, Romans 9.4. You have been Baptized -- O seek to God then that He
would Baptize you with the Holy Ghost. You have heard how ready our Heavenly
Father is to give His Spirit to them that ask him. Ask then, and you shall
receive. O dear Children! Go to your Heavenly Father in the Name of Christ,
say, My Father! be thou the Guide of my Youth. O give me thy Spirit to unite me
to thy Son, and to form thine Image on my depraved Soul. I am blind, Open the
eyes of my Understanding by the anointing of the Holy Spirit; my carnal mind is
enmity against God, it is not subject to thy Law, neither can be, O subdue it:
my Affections are vile, O purify them! Thus Call upon God and Cry to Him. And
do not cease 'till a saving Change be wro't on your Souls. You mult turn from
all Sin unto God, and receive the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, or perish
forever. Do not then depend on this, that you have Abraham to your Father, and
are the Children of the Covenant, as if your Parents Faith would save you. But
remember that awful word, Mar. 8.11, 12. Many shall come from the east and west
and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, But
the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there shall
be weeping and. g^ashing of teeth. Seek to God then to save you by the washing
of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. You must bear good fruit,
or be cut down and cast into the fire, Mat. 8.9, 10. Don't satisfy your selves
with the blaze of an outward Profession, but bring your empty Vessels that they
may be filled with the Oil of saving Grace. Open your Mouths wide, enlarge your
Desires, and God will fill them. You are not straightened in God; O be not
straightened in your own bowels! Now seek, and you shall find. The time of Youth
is probably the Accepted time with the most that are Converted, and who enjoy
Gospel-Priviledges from their Child hood, And it may be your only time for
working out your Salvation. Many of your Age hare lately been removed by Death;
Do you then Remember now your Creator in the Days of Youth, and seek Christ
early.

I might offer many M^tives to Excite and Quicken you to this Duty; but shall
further only say:

Consider, You cannot serve your Generation according to the Will of God, unless
He give you His Holy Spirit. Our Fathers are (...) the Stage; you are rising up
and coming upon the S^^r of Action. In a little time the Aftairs of Chist's
Visible Kingdom mutt he dev^^ved upon you. And let me tell you, an awful Trust
this is, and woe ^o you if you betray it. Our Forefathers came into this Land
when it was an how^i^g Wilderness, that they might Own Christ as the only Lord
and Lawgiver of His Church, and enjoy Communion with Him and His People in the
Purity of His Ordinances, without the Corrupt mixture of humane I^ventions in
Religious Worship. And no doubt they had an especial regard to their Posterity
herein; for they themslves were not in so much danger of being defi^d. God was
eminently with them. God owned the Ministry of this Country by many Seals of
it, in the great Numbers that were born to God here. Many were declared to be
the Epistle of Christ written not with ink, but with the Spirit of die living
God, 2 Cor. 33. However, in this degenerate Day, it is probable you will be
tempted to break the Second Commandment; for the purity and power of Godliness
commonly decay together. Yea, in this Evil Day, there are dreadful Temptations
utterly to forsake the God of your Fathers. Now there is nothing can preserve
you from this Apostasy but the Spiritual Presence of God with you by His
Spirit. Unless He enlighten your Minds, you will not know the God of your
Fathers; Unless He renew and sanctify you, you will not feel the power, nor
taste the Sweetness of Religion. You will account the great Things of God's Law
a strange thing: you will preser the World and your Lusts before Christ and His
Unsearchable Ric^es, and will fall an easy Prey to them who lie in wa^^ to
deceive. O seek to God then to give you His Holy Spirit. And now (...)-Him as
your Sanctifier Guide, and Comforter. T^er God will be with you ^s He was (...)
our Fathers, He will never leave you, nor forsake you. I (...) Rev 22 17 The
Spirit and the Bride say come and (...) him that (...), say Come and let him
that is (...), Come: And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.
Ep^ 3 20, 21. Now unto him that is able to d^ exceeding abundantly above all
that we ^work^ think, according to the power that works in us, Unto him be
glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end.
Amen.

FINIS.

