REMARKS UPON A DISCOURSE ENTITLED An OVERTURE.

Presented to the REVEREND SYNOD of Dissenting MINISTERS sitting in
Philadelphia, in the Month of September, 1728.

In a LETTER to the AVTHOR.

By a Member of the said SYNOD.

Printed by I. Peter Zenger, in Smith-Street, in New York. 1729.

REMARKS Upon a DISCOURSE Entitled An OVERTURE, etc. In a LETTER to the Author.
Reverend and Dear Brother,
THE Glory of God, and Interest of Religion, having been the Motives of your
publishing your Reasons for a Subscription to the Westminster Confession, etc.
You cannot be displeased with me, if from the same Motives, I offer some
Objections against the proposed Subscription, and your Arguments to persuade it.

I have nothing to object against your appearing publicly in this Case: For,
if Subscription be a Duty, and the Cause you espouse be the Cause of God, (as
you seem very confident that it is) it must be a commendable Zeal, that prompts
you to be extensively useful and serviceable, in such an important Affair. I
shall therefore make no Remarks upon your Apology, for the Publication of the
Overture and Preface: But immediately enter upon the Merits of the Cause, and
consider,

Whether it is the Duty of our Synod, publicly and Authoritatively to adopt
the Westminster Confession of Faith and Catechisms, etc. and to oblige their
Members, and every Candidate for the Ministry within their Bounds, to subscribe
them? This you hold in the Affirmative, and have endeavored to prove. But
either you have wanted Success in that Attempt, or I am so unhappy as not to
see the Force of your Arguments.

I shall therefore, with all that Candor and Respect that is due to you, as a
Christian and a Minister of the Gospel, offer you the Reasons of my Dissent
from your Proposal, by first taking some Notice of the Arguments for
establishing your Opinion, both in the Overture and Preface, then, by stating
my own Objections, and occasionally considering what occurs in your Discourse,
to obviate them.

The Argument that claims my first Notice, is in the first and second Pages of
the Overture, which may be thus summed up.

That it is the unquestionable Duty of every Christian, according to his
Station, especialy of every Gospel Minister, and not of them only; but of every
Gospel Church as an Organized Body politic, to maintain and defend the Truths
of the Gospel against all Opposition; and also to endeavor to perpetuate and
propagate them unto Posterity, pure and incorrupt.

But what Consequence would you draw from hence? Is the debated Subscription
therefore necessary; because it is the only, or the most probable Means to
answer these Ends? This I think must be your Meaning, or else your Argument is
inconclusive. But then,

1. It Is the unquestionable Duty of every Christian according to his Station,
to subscribe the Westminster Confession, etc. For it is their unquestionable
Duty (as you observe) to maintain and defend the Truths of the Gospel against
all Opposition. And consequently their unquestionable Duty, to submit to, and
comply with, the necessary Means to that End. You should therefore move for on
Act of Synod, that all the Ministers within our Bounds, enjoin a Subscription
upon every Member of their respective Congregations; and that too upon Pain of
Exclusion from their sacred Fellowship. A just Penalty for an open Defyance to
unquestionable Duty. For, (to use your own Words, p. 21.) it is utterly
impracticable for those of subscribing Principles, to take the Measures which
these Principles oblige them unto, in order to their Defense against the
Dangers of encroaching Errors; and at the same Time to drop this Overture; by
way of Compliance with those (Members of their Congregation) of non-subscribing
Princeples. It Is true this Method would put our Congregations into utmost
Confusion, it would (to use your own Words) procure Rents and Divisions in our
small In^ant Church; and be of most pernicious and dangerous Consequence,
contrary to Christian Charity; and most obstructive to spiritual Edification.
This indeed at first view, seems a formidable Objection. But you have taught me
how to answer it. You apprehend (you tell us p. 12.) that this is in it self a
proper Preventive and Antidote against Division, being a suitable Mean to bring
a Church to be of one Mind, and one Judgment; and if it should in the Event
have other Effects, it is only by Accident, etc. And again. If it be a Churches
Duty as a Church (in which Sense surely it includes the Congregations as well
as the Ministers) to declare unto the World, and unto one another, the
Principles of their Faith, etc. it is not the Fear or Danger of Division, that
should deter from it. Thus Sir, if your Conclusion will follow from these
Premises, the Consequence is unavoidable, that it is our Duty to maintain and
defend the Truths of the Gospel, by Schisms, Contentions and Confusions; and
even the total Subversion of our Congregations.

2. If this Argument prove any thing to the Purpose, it must also be a
necessary Consequence, that those Churches that want this Defense, and enjoin
no Subscription upon their Ministers, have no good and proper Means to maintain
and defend the Truths of the Gospel, and propagate them to Posterity: But
Nothing can be more contrary to Truth and Experience, than this Suppositi^^.

I believe it will prove a difficult Task, to find so much as a Proposal, much
less an Injunction of Subscription, to any Formula whatsoever in the primitive
Church, before Constantine the Great. They then found other Means to detect
Heresies, to resist Gainsayers, to propagate the Truth; and to keep the Church
not only a Garden enclosed, but a Garden of Peace. The Synod of Nice did indeed
impose Subscriptions; but what was the Consequence, but horrible Schisms,
Convulsions and Confusions, until the Church was crumbled into Parts and
Parties, each uncharitably anathematizing one another. Never was the Church
infested with such a Swarm of Heretics and Heresies, as sprung from that
corrupt Fountain of Imposition and Subscription. The Arrians were not only
strengthened in their Heresy, and increased in their Numbers by their
Persecution; but there was quickly added to 'em, the black Catalogue of
Eustathians, Macedonians, Anomoioi, Eunomians, Photinians, Luciferians,
Anthropomorphites, Donatists, Appollonarians, Dimeritae, Massiliani,
Antidicomorianitae, Collyridiani, Metangismonitae, Psathyrians, Euti^hians,
Seluciani, Patriciani, with a long and almost endless Et caetera. All which
Heresies rose out of the bottomless Pit, in about Seventy Years space, in the
same Church. Whence one Council was conveen'd after another, to draw up new
Creeds, and impose new Subscriptions, until almost every Article of
Christianity was both condemned and established. This was the Mark set by
Providence upon the first Subscription of this kind, that was ever imposed in
the World; and this the Defense and Propagation of Truth that followed from it.

I might exemplify this Case, by Instances of the same kind, in all the
succeeding Ages of the Church, unto the present Time. I might particularly show
you, how this imposing and subscribing of Creeds, was both an Inlet to the
Papacy, and a continued Engine of Papal Tyranny, after the Pope was mounted
upon the Seven-headed Beast. I might also observe, on the contrary, how the
Waldenses, Wickliffians, Lollards etc. flourished in Purity of Doctrine and
Discipline, defended and propagated the Truth pure and incorrupt against the
utmost Opposition of Hell and Earth, without any Imposition or Subscription.
But we need not look so far back, nor go farther from Home, than the Countries
where you and I were born, to find brightest Examples of this kind. The
Presbyterian Church in Ireland, subsisted some Ages in Peace and Purity, to the
Honor of their Profession, and Envy of their malignant Enemies; and thus might
they probably have continued, had not the Fire of Subscription consumed their
Glory; and this Engine of Division broke them to pieces, disunited them in
Interest, in Comunion, and in Charity; and rendered them the Grief of their
Friends, and the Scorn of their Enemies. And on the other Hand, the Churches of
New England have all continued from their first Foundation Non-subscribers; and
yet retain their first Faith and Love. From all this I think it naturally
follows, that Subscription is not Necessary for the Being, or Well-being of the
Church; unless Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions and
Heresies, are necessary to that End,

3. I Am sure this Argument is very little to the Purpose if Subscriptions have
no direct Tendency to mantain and defend the Truths of the Gospel; and
propagate them incorrupt to Posterity. It seems you were not aware of this
Objection; but have taken for granted, as a first Principle not to be debated,
that Subscription is not only a means, but the best means to this End. You have
built all your Superstructure upon this Postulatum; and therefore, if upon
Examination it proves a Sandy Foundation, you know the Fate of your whole
Fabric. Let us then consider the Case a little. Let us view this Fortification
you are for erecting about a poor defenseless Laish; and see whether it don't
agree to that Description Neh. iv.3. If a Fox go up, he shall even break down
this Stone Wall.

You Will readily grant that there is no Need of Subscriptions, for confirming and
establishing the sincere Christian and orthodox Professor in the true Faith. He
is influenced with higher Motives, he is established upon a more stable
Foundation; and kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. There
wants no Laws nor Subscription to secure them, whom all the Malice of Men and
Devils can neithe^ draw nor drive into Apostasy. These will b^ ready enough to
profess their Faith They Will no^ be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. And they'l^
be sincere in their Profession, being so far re^mov'd from Hypocrisy; and from
loving an^ making a Lie.

You Will also grant, that Subscription cannot b^ of any Service to open professed
and declared He^reticks, either with Respect to themselves, or t^ the
Jurisdiction they belong to. 'Twill be o^ no Use with Respect to themselves. It
won'^ let new Light into their Minds, to dispel the Mists of Ingnorance and
Error; nor will it con^quer the Perverseness of their Wills, and bring 'em to
bow their Necks unto Christ's Yoke* Neither can it be of any Use with respect
to us as we are an Ecclesiastical Judicatory, to direct our Conduct toward
them. Known Heritick^ are not to be put upon subscribing Formulas o^
Confessions, but after the first and second Admo^nition to be rejected.

It therefore remains that there can be no Prospect of Advantage from
Subscriptions, save only as a Means to keep Hypocrites out of the Church, to
detect covered and concealed Heretics; or (as you express it) to search out,
discover, and set a Mark upon secret Bosom Enemies to the Truth. Let us
therefore next consider, whether the Imposition of Subscription is like to
attain this End.

Who can be imagined more ready to subscribe blindfold, whatever is imposed,
than such Men as are last described. If they are under no Restrain of
Conscience, what should hinder their Compliance with any Injunctions, that may
prove a Means of Profit or Advantage to'em? Or if their Consciences are not
wholly laid waste, how easily do they quiet 'em, by the famous Distinction of
subscribing in a Scripture Sense. -- This Practice may be examplified in all
the Churches, in all Ages, where Subscriptions have been imposed. Look into the
Primitive Church, and you will find Arrians, Macedonians Eutichians etc.
Subscribing the Orthodox Faith when required; and when they could find their
account in doing it Socrat. Ecclesiast. Hist. Lib. I. Cap. X. and XIX. Lib. II.
Cap. XIX. et alibi.
. Look into the Reformed Churches of France, and you will find almost every
Synod, a black Roll of apostate Heretics, who had not only Subscribed but
sworn to their Confession; And so did the Sieurs Amirand and Testard again and
again, notwithstanding the dangerous Errors they held; and at length published,
to the just Alarm both of the Gallican and other Reformed Churches Vid. Quicks
Synodicon on the Synod of Alanson.
. Look into the early Times of the Church of Scotland, and you will find how
ready her bitterest Enemies were to subscribe her Formulas, when secretly
gnawing out her Bowels; and Malingantly conspiring her utter Ruin Calderwood
Hist. p. 30, 96, 121: et alibi.
. And han't w^ flagrant Instances of the like kind in our ow^ Times? Don't
every Body know, that the Ar^minian and even Arrian Ministers in the Church of
England, do all of 'em subscribe all the For^mulas of that Church; though
purposely directly and in the strongest Terms possible calculated and levelled
against those Errors? Nay, don'^ these openly in Print, justify their Conduct
in this Matter, from the forementioned Distinction of Subscribing in a
Scripture Sense? To all which I might add a late Instance in the Church of
Scotland, of twelve Subscribers to the Westminster Confession, condemned by
that Church for Antinomians. Upon the whole then it appears, that though
Subscription may shut the Door of Church Communion, against many serious and
excellent Servants of Christ who conscientiously scruple it; yet it is never
like to detect Hypocrites, nor keep concealed Heretics out of the Church. I
know not how this matter can be better summed up than in that Satyr of Iuvenal,

Dat veniam Corvis vexat Censura Columbas,

But after all, we'll suppose (as it may justly be supposed) that these
Heretics under Consideration, do not only willingly, but sincerely without any
mental Reservation, subscribe the Westminster Confession, etc. What Defense
will Subscription in that Case prove to the Truth? How will the Purity of
Gospel Truth by this ^eans be perpetuated, and propagated unto Po^terity? What
a vast Veriety of Sects and Par^^s are there in the Christian Church, who all
^gree in the sacred Scriptures as the Foundation of their Faith and Hope; and
are notwithstanding at the greatest Distance imaginable in their Religious
Sentiments, and their Interpretation of Scripture. And why may not this be the
Case, with Respect to any Formula whatsoever of human Composure? Can we express
our Sentiments more clearly and intelligibly, than the Holy Ghost has done in
that blessed Book? Can we fence our Confessions, etc. against false Glosses,
with any Art that is there wanting? Are not all things necessary either for our
Faith or Practice, clearly revealed, that he that runs may ^ead? And yet what a
Babel Confusion of Sectaries is the Church infested with. And thus if
Subscription should universally obtain among us, every one would subscribe in
his own Sense, and all severally put their various, and it may be contrary
Constructions upon the same Article of our Confession. It were as easy to hedge
in the Cuckoo, as to prevent this. We'll suppose for Instance an Antinomian, an
Arminian, and a Calvinist all subscribing to the Article of Justification, in
our shorter Catechism. Each ^f'em acknowledge, that Justification is an Act of
Gods free Grace, wherein he pardons all our Sins, and accepts us as
Righteous in his Sight, only for the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and
received by Faith alone. But (...) they all mean the same Thing, when they
sub^scribe the very same Words? Nothing les^* The Antinomian understands it,
that the Righ^teousness of Christ is imputed to us from Ete^^nity, and that by
our eternal Justification w^ are acquitted from the Guilt of all Sins, pas^
present, and future. And our receiving thi^ by Faith, is (according to him) a
Believing that Christ dyed for us in particular, and thenc^ taking the Comfort
of our happy State. The Arminian on the contrary understands this Ar^ticle,
that the Righteousness of Christ impute^ to us, is His purchasing for us new
Terms o^ Justification, and substituting sincere in the Place of perfect
Obedience: And our receiving this by Faith, is our Assent to, and Comply^ance
with these Terms, by a sincere Obedience I need not tell you how the Calvinists
under^stand the Article.

I think you your self must grant, that Sub^scription will not prove of very
glorious Servic^ to the Church, if this be the Effect of it. An^ you must be
very much a Stranger to the Con^troversies formerly managed in England, and
more lately in Scotland upon these mentioned Points, if you don't know, that
each Party pressed this very Article into their Service. (...) might also add,
that you cannot be such a stranger to the present Circumstances of the Church of
England, as to be ignorant, that not only the Arminians; but even the Arrians,
themselves have found out away, to bring in all the ^^cellent Articles of that
Church, as Vouchers ^or their erroneous Opinions: And that Doctor ^lark, the
Head of the modern Arrians, has ^ndertaken in Print, to reconcile all the
Church ^ormulas; and even the Athanasian Creed it ^elf, to his new Schemes.

I will conclude this Head with Observing, ^^at Nothing can have a direct
tendency to ad^ance the Interest, of the Church; but what Christ himself has
instituted to that End. God. ^ill own and bless his own Institutions; but He
^rdinarily puts a Mark of His Displeasure upon the most artful Contrivance of
Men, in ^he Affairs of His House and Kingdom, as I Have ^lready shown that He has
done in the Affair under Debate. Whatever Show of Wisdom and Policy may appear
in such human Inventions, ^hey nevertheless impeach the Wisdom, or Faithfulness
of our Lord Jesus Christ; for not giving ^s sufficient Instructions in these
important Concerns. Heb. iii.2. they assume His Throne, who is sole King of the
Church, Col. i.18. and ^roclaim the Contrivers of these politic ^chemes, to be
Darkness it Self. Isai. viii.20.

If you pretend that Subscription is required in ^he Scripture, you would do
well to point out ^he Text that requires it, that we may learn our Duty. And I
must tell you, that it should be a Text full and clear to the Purpose. It is
not enough to say as you do (p. 9.) that it is possible ^here might be
Confessions of Faith or Creeds, (in the Apostolic Times) besides the
Scriptures; b^ you must make it evidently certain, that the^^ were such in
those Times. It is not enough (...) think as you do, (ibid.) that we have a
plai^ hint in Scripture of something like a Creed and^ but you must prove that
Subscripton is possitivel^ enjoined before you can justly expect a Comply^ance
with your Proposals, For certainly ou^ Lord never imposed a Duty of this
importanc^ upon His Church; and yet left us at a Lo^^ where to find the
Institution. Since therefore I am certain that there is no such Precept in my
Bible, you must pardon me, if I must wait f^^ better Instruction and
Conviction, before I (...) subscribe.

And now I think I have performed what I pre^tended under this Head; and have
plainly shew'^ that Subscription has no direct tendency to mai^^tain and defend
the Truths of the Gospel; an^ that it is therefore at best, but Useless and
i^^significant.

4. If there be other Means besides this Su^^pected and contested Method,
sufficient to main^tain and defend the Truths of the Gospel, and^ then this is
not necessary to that End. Let (...) therefore consider whether there be no
suc^ Means, that will every way answer the En^ proposed. And I shall here only
take Notice (...) the Duties belonging to us, as we are Ministe^ of the Gospel,
and an Ecclesiastical Judicatory*

I would first propose to this Purpose, a stri^^ Examination of all Candidates
of the Ministry before they are admitted to the Exercise of that sacred
Function. It is impossible to imagine, what Advantage can accrue from
Subscription, that cannot be attained by this Means only. This will as well
discover the Seriousness, the natural or acquired Abilities, and other
Ministerial Qualifications in the Candidate, as his Soundness in the Faith;
which Subscription can never do, the most carnal Wretch and unlettered Dunce,
being as capable, and as ready to subscribe as any. This is a method we have
hitherto been in the Practice of from the Beginning, with Un^nimity and
Success; and which the Word of God requires us yet to continue in. We are to
la^ Hands suddenly upon no Man, 1 Timothy v.22. What can be intended by this, but
that by personal Acquaintance and previous Examination, (not by subscription,
which can be very suddenly done) we have good Proof of the Candidate's Fitness
for the Work, before we separate him to the Sacred Employment? We are required
^o commit the Dispensation of the Gospel, to faithful Men, who shall be able to
teach others. 2 Timothy ^i.2. How shall we discover these Qualifications? Will
their Subscribing ^ Confession ac^uaint us with their Fidelity or Ability? Or
must we not know the former, by examining the Inducements to their putting
their Hand to this Plow; and the latter, by strictly enquiring into their
Capacity for this Work; and their Orthodoxy in the Faith.

I would again propose a strict Discipline in the Church, especially with
respect to Scandalous Ministers, and all such as can be proved guilty of
dangerous Errors. By a seasonable rejecting of whom, we may prevent the
Progress of Immorality, or Heresy among us. In this Case we have also express
Commands and Directions, in the Divine Oracles, 2 Timothy iii.5. 1 Timothy vi.5. 2
These. iii.6. Tit. iii.10.

I would lastly propose, that the Ministers of the Gospel be most diligent,
faithful, and painful, in the discharge of their awful Trust. That by their
sedulous Application to their Work, they may instruct the ignorant, establish
the wavering, and convince the erroneous. Or to sum up all in a Word, that they
may be instrumental to convert poor perishing Sinners to Christ, and thereby to
have them built upon the Foundation of God that stands sure. Such painful
Address to our Business, joined with fervent Prayer for Success, is the proper
Engine to subvert the Kingdom of Satan in all it is Branches; and to confirm and
establish the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ among us. See 1 Timothy iii.13 and
Fin. 2. Tim. iv.1, 2.3.

Thus Sir, I have something particularly considered this first Argument; and I
think fully answered whatever occurs in the Overture. For allowing that a
Principal of spiritual Wisdom would direct the Church of Christ, to fortify
itself against all assaults that secret Bosom Enemies to the Truth, are as
dangerous as any whatsoever. Admit, that we are so a particular Church, as not
to be a Part of any particular Church in the World; that we are in no small
Danger of being corrupted in Doctrinals; that we are too much like the People
of Laish, in a careless defenseless Condition; that we are surrounded with many
pernicious Corruptions in Doctrine; that our Poverty renders us incapable to
plant a Seminary of Learning among us; and that the Edge of our Zeal against
prevailing Errors is blunted. If we allow all these Reasons for our being upon
our Defense, and for our endeavoring to propagate the Truths of the Gospel to
Posterity: Yet it all makes nothing for the Subscription under Consideration,
if that ben't the proper Means to answer these Ends, which I think I have fully
proved.

Your second and last Argument, I find (in page 7.) thus proposed. As it is
observed in the Overture, we are an entire Church of our selves, so as not to
be a Part of any particular Church in the World, with which we are joined as a
Part. Now every Collection of People, which are united together under a politic
Body, whether ecclesiastical or civil, must have some Bond of Union, by which
the several Parts are joined together, to make or constitute them one entire
whole* etc. Now, until we fulfill the Intent of the following Overture, I am at
a loss where to find a sufficient external Bond of Union, by which we are
united, etc. In answer to which, I shall offer these three Things to your
Consideration. (1.) That there may be a sufficient Bond of Union without
Subscription. (2.) That we have already all the external Bond of Union, that
the Scriptures require of us. (3.) That what has a natural Tendency to Disunion
and Division, cannot (agreeable to the Laws of Charity) be prop^s'd as a Bond of
Union.

I. There may be a sufficient Bond of Union without Subscription. A joint
Acknowledgement of our Lord Jesus Christ for our common Head, of the sacred
Scriptures for our Common Standard both in Faith and Practice; with a joint
Agreement in the same essential and necessary Articles of Christianity, and the
same Methods of Worship and Discipline, are a sufficient external Bond of
Union, either for the Being or Well-being of any Church under Heaven. To this
you object. How is it possible for us to know concerning one another, or for
others to know concerning us, in what Sense we take or understand the
Scriptures, etc.? To which I answer.

1. By retorting the Objection upon you. How is it possible for us to know
concerning one another, or for others to know concerning us, in what Sense we
take or understand the Assembl^'s Confession, suppose we all subscribe it.

2. It Is possible for us to continue in strict Examination of Candidates for
the Ministry, that by that Means we may discover whether they be orthodox or
erroneous; and in what Sense they understand the Scriptu^e^.

3. It Is possible for us to reject Heretics when we find any such among us.
For though we have no just claim to impose our Faith, and our Interpretation of
Scripture upon any Man; yet we have an undoubted Right to reject their
Opinions, when we think them erroneous; and to refuse Communion with them in
sacred Ordinances, and even in the exercise of Church Government, when we
suppose their Heresy renders them unqualified for it. This (as I Have shown
above) is what the Scriptures enjoin upon us. And if these Scriptural Methods
be duly attended, what further external Bond of Union can be wanting?
Professed Deists, Socinians, Armi^ians and Free-thinkers, cannot be united to us
in the same Church Government, as you suppose p. 10. if these Rules of Christ
be duly observed.

You object again, that an Erastian, who supposes that Christ has left us at
Liberty, to choose what Form of Government we think most agreeable, may freely
join with us in the actual Exercise of Presbyterian Government. To which I
answer. Why not? I hope your Charity is hardly so restricted to those of our
own Sentiments in this Matter, as to suppose this a damning Heresy; or an Error
that incapacitates for Communion in all Ordinances. And I cannot see what
Prejudice these can be to our Constitution, so long as they heartily join in
our Methods of Discipline; and thereby declare 'em best for us, whether they
believe 'em of Divine Right or not. Cannot we live peaceably with those who live
peaceably with us, and join with us in consulting and concerning the Interest
of Christ's Kingdom among us, without breaking in upon their Consciences; and
destroying their Right of judging for themselves?

I might here subjoin, that a view of this Affair from the very Infancy of
Christianity will convince us, that the Churches of Christ have been always
better united, and every way more flourishing, when no other external Bond of
Union but what is now proposed, have been imposed upon 'em, than when they have
been fettered with Subscriptions, and other Impositions and Institutions of
human Invention; as I have something exemplified above.

II. We have already all the external Bond of Union, that the Scriptures
require of us. We all of us for ought I know, have one Faith, one Lord, one
Baptism, and one Discipline. And what more is needful? You indeed require, that
we should all subscribe to one Confession: But does our Lord Jesus Christ
require this? Have you cited, or can you cite, any thing like a Precept or
Direction to this Purpose, from that one Lawgiver who is able to save or
destroy? Who art thou then that judge another? Jam. iv.12. You indeed p. 9.
infer from Heb. v.12. compared with Chap. vi.1. that there were both rudimental
Principles, for the use of young and more ignorant Professors; and more
difficult and m^sterious Doctrines of the Christian Faith, that were to come
after the former, collected for the Use of the Church, in the Apostolic Times.
N^w were this granted, what does it argue for Subscriptions? Can you your self
pretend that these were the Dictates of fallible (...), imposed and subscribed
in those Times? Or can you pretend, that there is no Difference between
Catechizing our Children, and Subscribing Confessions? To what Purpose then do
you quote this Scripture?

III. What has a natural Tendency to Disunion and Division, cannot (agreeable to
the Laws of Charity) be proposed as a Bond of Union. What you have offered in
answer to this, does Nothing affect the present Case; because you apprehend
Subscription a proper Antidote against Division; and if it should in the Event
have other Effects, it is only by Accident (p. 12.) If it does therefore appear,
that this has a natural and direct Tendency to Division, you have said Nothing
to the Purpose. Let us then consider this Case.

I must first observe to you, that the requiring and enjoining any unscriptural
Terms of Union or Communion, is a direct and natural Means to procure Rents and
Divisions, in the Church. For there will be such thinking and serious Persons,
whose Consciences will startle at these Innovations; and who will sooner dye,
than submit to these Injunctions against their Consciences. A Schism will
follow. And who are the criminal Causes of this Schism, they who refuse to sin
against their Consciences; or they that lay this Unnecessary Burden upon'em*
If the former, we are brought into the midst of Rome, must believe ^s the
Church believes, and expect Sal^ation by that public Faith. If the latter, it
necessarily foll^ws that these Unscriptural Institutions (and such is the
debated Subscription) are directly and formally, the troublers of Gods Israel.
This Argument has been constantly used by our Dissenters from the Church of
England. It has hitherto triumphed over all Impositions, and remained
unanswerable, and will ever do so.

I cannot but further observe to you under this Head, that we all of us know,
that that Subscription under Debate, has been scrupled and opposed by many
godly, learned, and faithful Ministers of Christ; that it has made horrible
Divisions and Confusions in other Churches, and that it is like to have the same
sad Effects among our selves. And I must therefore take the Freedom to tell
you, that I would not for all the World, be the Author of that Dishonor to God
and our holy Profession, and of that Schism and Confusion that is like to
follow, if this be enjoined by the Syond. No Sir! It Is better to dye in the
Cause, than to merit that Character in Romans xvi.17.18. For if it be better for
a Man to have a Millstone hung about his Neck, and ^e cast into the midst of the
Sea, than to ^ffend ONE of Christ's little ones, as Mat. xviii.6. How will such
be able to account at Christ's Tribunal, who ^end His Church in pieces, and
offend so MANY of His Ministers and other serious Christians among us, that
cannot in Conscience come into the proposed Subscription?

Having thus finished my Remarks upon your Arguments. I shall now pr^ceed
briefly to offer you some few more Objections against your Overture.

1. I think a Subscription to any human Composure as the Test of our Orthodoxy,
is to make it the Standard of our Faith; and thereby to give it the Honor only
due to the Word of God. I take a Subscription to imply a s^lemn Declaration to
the World, that we believe the Articles subscribed to be the Mind and Will of
God, free of all Error and Mistake. A Subscription in any laxer Sense, is to
open a Door to all the Unsincerity in the World. Every one of whatever
Sentiments, may subscribe with his own Reserves; and so the Subscription
instead of a Test of Orthodoxy becomes a Door to Hypocrisy, as I have hinted
above. If we subscribe in this Sense, we give to fallible Men, all the Honor
due to the Inspired Penmen of the Sacred Pages; and ascribe that Perfection to
human Composures, which no Book but the Bible, ever had a just Claim to.

You offe^ s^veral Things to ^bviate this Objection* which I shall briefly
consider.

1 You tell us (p. 14.) that the Matter is of Divine Authority, being con^ain'd
in the Word of God; and the Words though composed by fallible Men, being
agre^able to the Divine Master, though falling short of that Perfection that the
Scripture justly claims, must of Necessity have the Divine Approbation. But how
do you kn^w that the Assemblies Confession etc. is contained in the Word of
God? You indeed, and we that agree with you in the same Creed do thus interpret
the word of God. But I challenge you to bring one Word to evince your
Certainty, that our Interpretations are agreeable to the Meaning of the Holy
Ghost; and have the Divine Approbation* that any Sect under Heaven may n't
bring in the same Case Suppose I was now debating with a Roman-Catholic,
against Subscription to the Decrees of the Council of Trent. He answers my
Objection in the very Words that you do; and tells me that the Matter is of
Divine Authority etc. what shall I say to him? Shall I tell him that they
subvert the Scriptures, and that there are no such Doctrines contained in them?
Will Not he retort the Answer and tell me, that the Argument is the quite contrary
Way, that it is we who wrest the Scriptures to our own Damnation, and they are
sure that they are in the Right, they being infallible, which we don't pretend
to be. Or if you please instead of a Roman-Catholic suppose a Quaker thus
disputing; and in the strongest Terms assu^ing me, that he has the Witness in
himself from the Illuminations of Gods Holy Spirit, that Barclays Apology is
contained in the Word of God. Now I demand of you* whether we must subscribe
these mentioned Books upon this Evidence. If not, what Assurance can you give
me, that you are in the Right and they not; You are sure of it, so are they of
the contrary. You compare Scripture with Scripture, and find your System
agreeable to the whole Scope of the Gospel. They Will not be behind hand with you
in the same Pretense. You suppose yours the most rational System* most worthy
of God, and most agreeable to the Circumstances of fallen Man. They apply the
same Lofty Attributes to their Creed, be it in it self never so inconsistent.
If you reply to all this, that Truth has certainly from the Nature of Things,
the Advantage of Error. This is true; but then this also may be urged with as
good Advantage, by any other Persuasion. You have therefore no Refuge left, but
a recou^se to Infallibilty, which is what I Am now objecting against.

As for your long Discourse* about the Necessity of our subscribing our own
Words; and not the Words of Scripture, I have but this short and general Answer
to make. Though I cant possibly see into your Methods of Reasoning; nor draw your
Conclusion from your Premises, yet if it be granted, that our Confessions must
be in our own Words, and not in the Words of Scripture* I don't see how it will
follow, that we must therefore subscribe them. Cannot we have Confessions in our
own Words, without the Imposition of Subscription, Can there be no other Use
made of Confessions, but as an exclusive T^st of O^^hodoxy? Certainly there
may. May not Confe^sions be useful for Instruction to the ignorant, for
Quickening to the careless and secure, for a Help to our Devotions; and even for
a public Declaration of our Religious Sentiments. And therefore until you have
proved a necessary Connection between Composing, and Imposing or Subscribing a
Confession, you say Nothing to the Purpose.

2 I cannot see how we can impose Subscriptions upon others, without Invading
His Ro^alty, who is sole King and Lawgiver unto His Church; and practicing our
selves, what we so l^uely complain of in others. To this you answer (p. 14.)
For a Church to oblige their Members to rece^ve, embrace, acknowledge*
subscribe or practice* any thing that is not ^ounded upon the Word of God, is
indeed Tyranny and Persecution andc. If you mean by this, that it is Tyranny and
Persecution for a Church to impose what they acknowledge is not founded on the
Word of God. I believe it will be difficult to find any Church upon Earth
guilty of such Impositions. And if every Church may impose what they Suppose to
be founded on the Word of God, even the Church of Rome must be acquitted from
all unwarrantable Impositions. For they as resolutely claim a Scripture
Foundation for all their Articles of Faith, as we can do. And why ha^'t they as
good Authority to impose their Interpretation of Gods Word, as we have to
impose ours? Is not the Imposition of such Interpretations as properly a
Legislatvie Faculty in us, as it is in them? Are we sure we are in the Right?
Don't they profess the same Certainty? Do we impose our Creeds in Honor to God
and His Truth? They have the same Pretense. Do we appoint Subscription to keep
out Error and Heresy? They are acted by the same Views. Do we impose them by
ministerial Authority committed to us by Christ. And have not every other
Society the same Claim? But the Difficulty is, I find Nothing in the Divine
Oracles by which either they, or we can support this Claim; but the direct
contrary. Iam. iv.12. Col. ii.22.23. Romans xiv.4.9. Mat. xxviii.18. etc. And to
deal freely with you, I have no worse Opinion of the Assemblies Confession, for
the 2 Art. in the xx. Chap. God alone is Lord of the Conscience; and has left
it free from the Doctrines and Commandments of Men which are in any thing
contrary to His Word, or BESIDE it, in Matters of Faith or Worship. So that to
believe such Doctrines, or obey such Commands out of Conscience, is to betray
true Liberty of Conscience; and the requiring a implicit Faith, and an
absolute and blind Obedience, is to destroy Liberty of Conscience and Reason
also. And I must tell you that to subscribe this Article, and impose the rest,
appears to me the most gloring Contradiction.

If you reply to this, that there is no Imposition designed. I answer, what is
then designed? Is not Subscription proposed as the Test of Orthodoxy, as the
Terms of Membership with the Synod; and of Admission to the Ministry? And if
this ben't Imposition with a Witness, with all the Penalties annexed that we
are capable of, I don't know what Imposition means.

You indeed argue, that according to our recorded and common Way of Speaking,
it is hard to say, whether Subscribers or Non-subscribers would be obliged to
separate. But pray Sir, what Occasion that either should be obliged to
separate? What Law or what Reason is there for these Injunctions, that must of
course produce a Separation? Why may not every one enjoy his own Opinion, and
act according to his Conscience in this Matter, without a Separation? Or why
may not some middle Way be thought on, that will every Way answer the End
proposed; and give Satisfaction to both Parties? For my own Part, I can
cheerfully come into any Method for securing our Faith, that I can apprehend
consistent with Liberty of Conscience, and Christian Freedom.

You subjoin, if one Party think it an Imposition to be required to subscribe,
as a Term or Condition of our continuing united as formerly. The other Part^
upon as good grounds, may esteem it an Imposition, to be obliged to continue in
the Neglect of what in Conscience they conceive to be (as the Case now stands)
a necessary Duty incumbent upon them. I answer. Whoever think it their Duty,
shall have my free Vote, to subscribe with both Hands if they please: But I
hope none of you will imagine your selves ^ound in Conscience, to Lord it over
your Brethren.

3 If I subscribe, or concur in imposing Subscription ^n others, I must either
do it as a necessary Duty; or as a Thing in it self indifferent. Not the
former, until you can find some Scripture that requires Subscription to human
Composures; and even to this under Debate in particular, in Contradistinction
to all others elsewhere imposed, which I am sure you can never do. If it be in
it self indifferent who gave the Synod Authority to take away the Liberty, with
which Christ has made as free? We ought to leave Things as Christ has left 'em;
And on the one Hand, not to bring our selves under the Power of any 1 Cor.
vi.12. Nor on the other Hand, to destroy them with our Meat, for whom Christ
dyed Romans xiv.15.

4 I know not how to concur, in making this Subscription the Terms of our
admitting Candidates to the Ministry, least I keep them out of Christ's
Vi^eyard, whom He has sent to labor there; and qualified for glorious Service
in His Church. Such as these may (as I do) Scruple Subscription to any human
Composure; Or they may be doubtful as to some Particulars in the imposed
^orm^^a, and yet be ^ound in the Faith. Or they may not satisfactorily
understand some of the credenda thus enjoined; and yet have very promising
Capacity for the Sacred Service. If all qualified Candidates can well
understand the whole of that large Confession, it is just Matter of sh^me to me,
who have be'n a Minister between twenty and thirty Years; and yet don't
understand several Things in it, as I shall be ready to give a Particular
Account when desired. I Am afraid therefore, that most of our Candidates must
subscribe blindfold, or be kept out of the Ministry from invincible Necesity.
And is this to receive one another, as Christ also received us to the Glory of
God Romans xv.7? ^s this charitably to bear with M^ns differing Sentiments in
Matters not essential, as the Apostle requires, Phil. iii.15 16.?

5. Suppose me if you please a weak Brother, in my Conscie^tious Opposition to
Subscription. Will my Weakness and Mistake in this Matter, justify the Synod in
excluding me their ^ellowship in exposing me as (...) Her^tic to the Jealousies
and Censures of my Congregation; and in doing what they can, to render my
Ministry useless for the future? Is this agreeable to the Apostles Rule, Romans
xiv.1. If h^s must be the Case, a weak Brother is in a sad Dilemma. Either he
must subscribe against his Conscience, contrary to Romans xiv. (...) or else be
persecuted for his Weakness. If you answer to this, th^^ wea^ (...) are no
ways qualified for the Ministry. I reply. Though I could wish that there were
fewer in this awful Tru^t* who deserve that general Character: ^et he ^ust be a
stron^ Man indeed, that has no particular Weakn^^s. The greatest Men have
discovered th^ms^lves (...) weak in some particular Opinions* and this may be
either your Case, or mine, in this (...) Affair under D^b^te, for ou^ht either
of us know to the contrary. Others (and not we our selves) mu^^ be Jud^es of
that Matter.

I think what I have (...) offered a^u^dantly sufficient to disposs^s ^ou of
our unjust Claim to imposing upon other Men's (...) I therefore omit many other
Arguments, that mi^ht have been brought to the same Purpose.

Upon the whole the (...) I have a higher Opinion of the Assemblies (...) of
(...) Book of that kind extant in the Wo^d yet I don't think (...) perfect. I
know it to be the (...) Men and I know of no Law either of Religion or Reason,
that obliges me to subscrib^^.

Thus Sir you (...) upon th^^ Matter, if you (...) I shall not (...) upon your
Subscribing him. I (...) of (...) the same Charity (...) for me, that I have
for you, which is but (...)

Your Brother and Servant JONATHAN DICKINSON.
Elizabeth-Town, April 10. 1729.

