Mr. Prince's SERMON In the Audience of The General Court. 25 July 1728

CIVIL RULERS Raised up by GOD to Feed His People.

A SERMON At the Public Lecture in BOSTON, July 25. 1728.

In the Audience of His Excellency the GOVERNOR, His Honor the Lieut.
GOVERNOR, and the Honorable the Council and Representatives of the Province:
Being the Thursday after His Excellency's Arrival here.

By Thomas Prince, M.A. And one of the Pastors of the South Church.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed for SAMUEL GERRISH, at the lower end of
Cornhill. MDCCXXVIII.

CIVIL RULERS Raised up by GOD To Feed His People.
PSALM LXXVIII.71, 72. -- He brought him to Feed JACOB his People, and ISRAEL
his Inheritance; so he Fed them according to the Integrity of his Heart, and
Guided them by the Skilfulness of his Hands.


THE meaning of the Text is plainly this -- that the most high GOD, who rules
among the sons of Men and bestows the Government on whom He pleases, having an
Eye to the advantage of his People Israel, and having chosen and qualified his
Servant David; He by a special Providence conducted Him to the chief Seat of
Power among them: To this He bro't Him for this great End, that He might Feed
and Guide them; and being thus advanced, He took care to answer it in his
succeeding Government; He fed them according to the Integrity of his Heart, and
guided them by the Skilfulness of his Hands.

But in treating of the Words I shall not enter into an Historical Detail,
either of the signal steps of Providence in conducting Him to so great a
Charge, or of the various Instances of his wise and faithful Execution of it. I
shall only take a transient view of the things most obvious in the Passages now
read, and then propose those Heads to a more particular consideration which
they naturally suggest, and that will easily direct us to apply them to our
selves.

AND here are these 4 Things -- 1. THE Singular Relation between the Blessed
GOD and that ancient People. 2. HIS special Providence acknowledged in raising
up and bringing such a one as David to the chief Seat of Power among them. 3.
THE principal and gracious End observed of this Providential Dispensation. 4.
and lastly, David's wise and upright answering this great End in his succeeding
Government.


I. THE Singular Relation between the Blessed GOD and that ancient People. And
this is somewhat more emphatically represented by doubling the Expression, though
with some Variety -- Jacob his People, and Israel his Inheritance.

By Jacob and Israel we know is meant the same; and by these Names are here
meant the People issuing from that ancient Patriarch that bare them. In the
Hebrew it is -- in Jacob and in Israel -- possibly to signify his administering
among them rather as a Friend and elder Brother, then his ruling over them as a
foreign and imperious Lord. And it is not simply said, in Jacob or Israel --
but in Jacob his People, and Israel his Inheritance. How often does the Blessed
GOD delight to style Himself in Scripture the God of Jacob, and the God of
Israel? And here their singular Relation to Him as his People and Inheritance
is very carefully observed, both as an Illustration of his special Favor to
them in placing such a one as David over them, and of the Honor done to Him in
setting Him at the Head of such a People.

2. WE have his special Providence acknowledged in raising up and bringing so
qualified a Person as David to the chief Seat of Power among them.

IN the 70 verse, it is said, He chose and took Him, i. e. at first from his more
private Station; and through various Providential Changes, now He brings Him to
take the Chair of Government. Whatever means were used by David or his Friends;
yet the principal Agency and Conduct of this Affair is here religiously
ascribed to GOD. And the Expression strongly intimates, that in all this matter
He had a special view to the Good of his People.

3. WE have then the principal and gracious End observed in this Providential
Dispensation.

IT was to Feed and Guide his People Israel. I add the word to Guide, because
it is added in the following Passage. It was for this great End that GOD at
first had chosen Him, as the Tribes of Israel themselves observed to Him, when
they first assembled to receive his Government. I Chron. XI.I, ^. Then all
Israel gathered themselves to David, unto Hebron saying; Behold -- the Lord thy
God said unto Thee, Thou shall FEED my People Israel, and Thou shall be Ruler
over my People Israel. So in that Parallel Place to this, 2 Samuel V.I, 2. where
we have the same word in Hebrew, as well as in our Translation. It is true
indeed, our English Margin to the former Place, for Feed, says, or Rule: But
this is but a mere Comment quite besides the known meaning of the word in the
Original: And the Design of the Translators must be rather only to give the
Reader a general Idea, that to Feed a People is to Rule them, without
explaining the singular Intention of the Metaphor.

AND what can this imply, but that Civil Rulers have the weighty care of the
People devolved on them: And their Superior Office is to seek their Welfare,
to lead them, and to be careful of them, as a faithful. SHEPARD of his tender
Flock.

4 and lastly, Then we have David's wise and upright Answering this Great End
in his Succeeding Government. So He fed them according to the Integrity of his
Heart, and guided them by the Skilfulness of his Hands.

FOR Integrity some translate it, Innocence, some Simplicity, some Tranquillity,
and some Perfection: Bib Polyglor, and Pol Synops.
i. e. with a sincere, upright and honest mind: Castal.
Regarding more the Public Good then his own advantage: Gel in P. Synops.
and governing with great Calmness and Moderation. By this excellent Example
says a learned Expositor, Civil Governors may see that they are the Public
Shepards of their People; who are committed to them for Protection, and not for
Servitude: nor is the Commonwealth to be accounted as their Property, but
rather they are to be devoted to the Public Interest Muis in P. Synops.


SKILFULNESS, in the Original is of the Plural Number; and signifies both
Understanding, Judgment, Prudence and Dexterity. Bib Polyglor, and Pol Synops.
It is as if He had said, He guided them with the utmost Circumspection, that
He might neither hurt nor neglect his People, Gel in P. Synops.
nor let others hurt them, and with the greatest Wisdom. Jun, Trem and Ainsw
And it is said, with Skilfulness of Hands, to signify, that there was not only
great Prudence in his Councils, but also in the Prosecution of them. i. e. He
took care to act as wisely as He thought: and in short He managed all things in
his Administration, as became a Wise and Skilful Governor. A. Jackson.


AND all this is doubtless mentioned as a Public and Lasting Testimony, both
of his own Fidelity and Honor, and of his People's Happiness, as well as of
GOD's particular Regard and Favor for that distinguished Nation, and for a
fair Example to Succeeding Rulers in all others.

AND thus much for the Words themselves -- We now proceed to those general
Heads which they readily suggest, and that equally Concern every other People
of a religious Character. And agreeable to the preceding Articles, I propose to
show you these four things, 1. ON what accounts may any be said to be the
People and Inheritance of GOD 2. THAT his special Providence is to be
acknowledged in bringing Persons to the chief Place of Power among them. 3.
THAT it is to Feed and Guide them as a Shepherd that He thus advances them. 4.
and lastly, THAT it is their own great and lasting Honor, as well as their
People's Happiness, to answer the great Ends of their Exaltation, and to Feed
and Guide them with Integrity and Skilfulness.


I. ON what accounts may any be said to be the People and Inheritance of GOD.

Now this was for many Ages limited to the House of Jacob. The People flowing
from that illustrious Patriarch are in multitudes of places of Holy Scripture
challenged by GOD Himself for his own Peculiar, in distinction from all others.

THE Ground of this no doubt was that special Covenant which GOD had firstly
made with Abraham, confining it so his Posterity by Isaac; and then with Him,
restraining it to his by Jacob; and then with Him, diffusing it to all his
Offspring without Exception. Upon which account He often calls them by this
distinguishing Denomination of His People, even while they were in Egypt, both
in his Discourse to Moses and in his Messages to Pharaoh; as in Exodus III.6, --
10. I am the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the
God of Jacob -- I have surely seen the Affliction of my People which are in
Egypt -- and I will send thee to Pharaoh, that thou may bring forth my People
the Children of Israel out of Egypt. And Chap. V.1. Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, Let my People go, etc. And as if this were not enough, He further tells
them, in Chap. VI.6, 7. I will redeem and take you to me for a People, and I
will be to you a God, etc.

UPON their coming out of the Red Sea, and their wonderful Deliverance from
their mighty and pursuing Enemies, the peculiar Character increased upon them.
And in the Prospect of it Moses sings thus triumphantly to GOD, Exodus XV.13,
16. Thou in thy mercy have led forth the People, which Thou have redeemed: Thou
have guided them by thy strength to thy Holy Habitation -- THY PEOPLE -- O LORD
-- The People which Thou have redeemed So Exodus XVIII.1. and Deuteronomy. XXI.8.
. And the same divine Historian tells them in Deuteronomy. IV.20. The LORD has
brought you forth out of Egypt, to be to Him a People of INHERITANCE, etc.

BUT that which finished this distinguishing Relation, was the most public,
mutual Transaction between the GOD of their Fathers and the whole Body of that
People, about Two Months after, in their Incampment in the Wilderness, and
about Mount Sinai. Then the LORD came to Deuteronomy XXXIII 2. For so the Hebrew Min
which commonly signifies From is sometimes put for To by the Interpretation of
the Holy Ghost Himself, 2 Samuel VI.2. 1 Chr XIII.6. [So Isa. LIX.20. Romans
XI.26.] So, 1 King. VIII.30. 2 Chr. VI.21, etc. See Ainsw.
Sinai, He rose up from S^ir unto them, He shined forth from mount Paran, He
came with Ten Thousands of his Saints: And then He told them as in Exodus XIX.5,
-- 8. Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians; and how I bare you on Eagles
Wings, and brought you to my self: Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice
indeed, and keep my Covenant; then ye shall be a PECULIAR PEOPLE TO ME above
all People; and ye shall be to me a Kingdom of Priests and an Holy Nation --
And all the People answered together and said, all that the Lord has spoken we
will do. And now came forth the fiery Law, in the midst of Thunders,
Lightnings, the Mountain burning, the Smoke ascending like the Smoke of a
Furnace, and the Voice of GOD exceeding loud -- I am the Lord thy God, which
have bro't thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage; Thou
shall have no other gods but me, etc. Exodus XIX and XX.


How august and solemn is this Divine Confederacy! And it is to this no doubt
that Moses afterward alludes in Deuteronomy. XXVI.I^, I8. Thou have avouched the Lord
this Day to be thy GOD; and the Lord ha^r avouched Thee this Day to be his
peculiar People.

ON these Accounts that ancient People were then distinguished from others. And
that they might so continue, they were forbidden of GOD to mingle with other
Nations; and not only to learn their gross Idolatries, but also their
superstitious and uninstituted Rites and Customs. And the Reason alleged is
this, in Deuteronomy. VII.6. and XIV.2. For Thou are an Holy People to the Lord thy
God: and the Lord thy God has chosen Thee to be a peculiar People to Himself,
above all the Nations that are on the Earth.

FROM this time forward they are perpetually called His People Israel, and
Israel his Inheritance, and sometimes both together: And thus says Moses, Deuteronomy.
XXXII.9. For the Lord's Portion is his People, and Jacob is the Lot of his
Inheritance. So Deuteronomy. IV.26, 29. 1 King. VIII.51.


AND they are called His People -- Because He separated them from the rest of
Men to serve Him; To them He revealed Himself by special Inspirations, to them
He gave his lively Oracles, and by mutual and public Consent he received them
into a special Covenant: And -- His Inheritance, Because they were to be
entirely his, to acknowledge none but Him; and to intimate the dear Account He
made of them, that he delighted in them, dwelt among them, would possess and
keep and plead for them as Men their own Inheritance, and that not only they
but their Children after them were also to be his successively, A. Jackson on
Deuteronomy. XXXII.9.
and Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord, and the People He has chosen
for his own Inheritance, Psalm. XXXIII.12.

BUT wherefore was it that the Blessed GOD confined his People to this single
Nation?

To this I only answer -- That the Reason of his singling out this numerical
People for his own peculiar, is perfectly his Sovereign Pleasure. But the
Reasons of his setting apart some particular Nation for Himself, may be such as
these -- There was a special Revelation to be made for the use of the World,
and the Messiah was to be Born and known according to the ancient Promises, and
after a long and earnest Expectation. In order to these great Events of
universal moment to the World it was very requisite that He should have a
distinguished People of public Worshippers and Prophets to receive his
Inspirations and authentickly transmit them to the rest of Men. It was also
fitting that the great Messiah should be born among them with such certain
Characters as were publicly known and looked for, that the rest of Men might
be more fully satisfied of his appearance. The Evidence of all which things
could not have been so easily made out, had the religious and inspired People
been dispersed here and there through the idolatrous Nations over all the Earth,
and not collected into one Community.

AND the particular Reasons why the Sovereign GOD was pleased to separate One
Nation only for his People, and not inlighten the rest for so many Ages, seem
to be such as these -- That He might testify his high Displeasure at the first
Apostasy and after Sins of Men; That he might show the Insufficiency of
Nature's Light to keep us from the grossest Errors, and the absolute necessity
of special Revelations; that he might prepare the World for the glad Reception
of them; and lastly, That his Blessed SON incarnate might have the Glory of
extending his saving Light and Kingdom unto every Nation.

AND now his People are no more confined to the Sons of Israel: But the People
of every Kingdom, Country and Community that know and own Him in these special
Revelations are accounted by Him as his People, and more emmently those that
are devoted to Him in a Public Covenant and obey his Laws. For to such
dispersed abroad, the Apostle says, 1 Pet. II.9, 10. But ye are a chosen
Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People; that ye
should show forth the Praises of Him that has called you out of Darkness into
his mavelous Light: which in time past were not a People, but are now the
People of God.

AND the happy time is doubtless hastening of which we read the Prophecy in
Isa. XIX.24, 25. In that Day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with
Assyria, even a Blessing in the midst of the Land; whom the Lord of Hosts shall
Bless saying, Blessed be Egypt my People, and Assyria the work of my Hands, and
Israel mine Inheritance. Then all the Sons of Men shall know and own the
Blessed GOD: His People shall be one great Company over all the Earth; and as
the Psalmist speaks, He shall inherit all Nations, Psalm. LXXXII.8. But whether
this shall be, till the present Frame of these inclement Heavens and of this
vitiated Earth shall be dissolved and refined by Fire, and the new Earth appear
wherein dwells Righteousness, -- I leave to be considered.

IN the mean while, as I have already hinted, GOD's peculiar People are neither
now confined to Lands nor Kingdoms, nor yet to any Sects or Parties among
Professing Christians: But all that own and serve him according to the
Scripture Revelations, are accepted of him.

AND since the Terms of our being His People and his being our GOD are mutual
and reciprocal; let me take the Liberty of reciting a few Passages of the late
excellent Bishop ^urnet, in a Sermon Preached before the House of Commons on
the first Public Thanksgiving after the REVOLUTION, and reprinted in this
Town Thirty-nine Years ago. They are from these Words, Y^^ happy is that People
whose GOD is the LORD, And are as follow,

THAT the Lord is our GOD signifies that we adore and worship Him in Spirit and
in Truth -- that we adore Him in those Instances that become this Relation of
his being our God. And this we do, when we seriously call upon Him and Pray to
Him: when we do entirely depend on Him, and resign up our selves wholly to his
Conduct, when we do sincerely acknowledge, that all the Blessings we receive
come from Him; and when in a word, we perform all those Duties to Him which we
owe to the Author of our Being and the Giver of all the Good that we enjoy. But
if we laugh at all that is sacred, or set about the Performances of it in so
slight a manner as show how little we Believe that which we profess; if it is
plain that Prayers and Thanksgivings, Worship and Sacraments are only Words or
Rites of Form: and if the whole Frame of our Lives, and the Disposition of our
Hearts, shows that these things are only Marks and Disguises put on to deceive
those that have some regard to them: then it is plain that the LORD is not our
GOD. And if He is not our GOD in this first sense, we have no Reason to expect
that He should be our GOD long in the second sense of these Words, that is,
that He will Protect and Defend us. He is a Son and a Shield, and will give
both Grace and Glory; but this Blessedness comes only on those that trust in
Him. It is certain, that according to the Phrase in the Psalms, the sheilds of
the Earth, i. e. the Defense of the Land, belong to GOD. And how unworthy
soever those that have made Him their GOD, may have been of that Relation; yet
till their Sins grow up to that Hight that He will throw them off, He will
continue to watch over them with so distinguishing a Providence, that all the
World shall see that His Eyes are upon those that fear Him and that hope in his
Mercy.

BUT we must now pass on to show,

II. THAT His special Providence is to be acknowledged in Bringing Persons to
the chief Place of Power among them.

So the People did in the Text before us, and herein have given a fair Example
and pointed out the commendable Practice to be observed by others. So it as
well becomes all other People in the like Events of Providence, and the wise
and pious will be inclined to follow them. They will see a special Providence
at work in these great affairs, and pay their suitable acknowledgments and
adorations to it.

BY Special Providence I mean the Blessed GOD Himself, by his secret Influence
on Second Causes, conducting Men to Seats of Dignity and Power, which He would
have them both to fill and beautify.

AND that there is a Providence in General over the whole Maternal and Moral
World, is evident both from Scripture and Reason.

THE Passages in the Sacred Oracles are numberless to testify -- That as He
made, so He constantly upholds and governs all things by his almighty Power and
Wisdom: That He does whatever pleases Him both in Heaven and Earth: That all
the inanimate Creation are under his Direction and fulfill his Word: and that
He rules according to his will both among Angels and Men: That not a little
Sparrow, nor yet a single Hair falls to the Ground without Him: That we live
and move and have our Being in Him: And that He pulls down the Mighty from
their Seats and advances others according to his Sovereign Pleasure.

AND if we apply to Reason, we may clearly learn a Providence, both from the
very Being and Perfections of GOD, from the very nature of created Substances,
and from the State and Order of things in these lower Parts of the Creation.

FOR as HE must have brought all things besides Himself, from nothing into
Being, He must in this have acted as a wise and designing Agent: He must have
given them all, their various Constitutions Powers and Qualities, and placed
them in such Scituations, as through all their Successive Train of Changes,
most exactly to answer his wise Designs. And the same Designs, accompanied with
his almighty Power and Wisdom, must needs oblige Him to see them answered; and
in order unto this, to take effectual Care of all his Works both to Preserve
and Govern them, till his Ends of making them are perfectly accomplished.

OR if we look into the Nature of Created Substances, we shall very easily
discover, that both in their continued as well as first Existence and
Operations, they depend on the active Power or perpetual Influx of Him that
made them. For they could not possibly be any other then what his Power
effected: and therefore when that Power shall cease its Influence, they must
needs be where they were before. The Force of that active cause determining, to
whose Influence alone they owe their Power and Being, they must needs return to
Inactivity and Nothing.

AND if we strictly search into the Natural State and Course of things in these
lower Worlds, we may clearly see the careful, constant, wise and mighty Action
of the invisible GOD in every part of the perceptible Creation, to preserve it
in it is proper State and Order. For all these curious and well adjusted Systems
do entirely hold together and perform their Operations by virtue of certain new
and prodigious Forces inspired every where in the same proportion into every
Particle of Matter, when once removed out of it is proper Place, to reduce and
keep it there again. Let but the minutest Atom throughout this mighty Frame of
Beings, be either placed too near to others, provided it don't unite, or too
far off; it will immediately receive a new and amazing Force to turn it back
into it is due Point of Distance; and even there will be a constant Power
exerted, in such a certain measure, to preserve it from wandering of being
easily driven away. By such Means as these the Regulation of this lower World
is kept from Age to Age, and without them all things would quickly run into the
last Confusion.

BUT I must restrain my self from launching out into this surprising Argument.
In short, All Nature bares her lively witness both to the Being, Attributes and
Providence of GOD: and the farther we enter into her intimate Recesses, the
more she shows us of his Presence, Care and active Influence and Government,
like the universal Soul and animating Principle of all her Powers and Actions.

AND now shall we see these things, and not acknowledge and adore a Providence
in all those Changes that affect the Sons of Men the noblest Parts of this
lower Creation, and especially great Companies and Collections of them? Does
the glorious GOD take care of mere Inanimates that cannot know and praise him,
and not of us, and especially of those that are his devoted People? Are there
none of the Sons of Men that own, adore and serve Him; or can He possibly be
unconcerned for them? And is there any Temporal Thing, wherein He can so much
express his Care, as in raising up Men of singular Integrity and Skill, and
bringing them to the chief Place of Power among them?

I readily allow it, that in his righteous and holy Providence, He may also
raise up either weak, or able Men, that shall yet be wicked and even skilful
both to vex and ruin: And these He may set over a People He loves, for their
Correction; or a provoking People, for their dreadful Scourge and Punishment.
And even in such Events as these, his holy Providence is still to be adored
with deep Abasement and Repentance; but in the other, with the highest
Gratitude and Praise.

AND for the Manner of his overruling Providence in the moral World; It is
enough to say, that He has milions of Angels both Good and Bad at his
Direction, the one to order and the other to permit, that have a near Access to
the Minds of Men, and a vast but imperceptible Influence on them. Or if these
mighty Intelligences cannot suffice; the Hearts of Kings and all others are in
the Hands of GOD, and He can turn their Inclinations which way He pleases, and
suggest the Thoughts that move and govern them, though they perceive it not.

BUT it is high time that we now show

III. THAT it is to Feed and Guide his People as a SHEPARD, that He thus
advances Rulers over them.

WE have already hinted that these are Pastoral Allusions: and they cannot be
limited to the Particular Branches here specified, but carry in them all the
Offices of a faithful SHEPARD toward his Flock. And how beautifully are they
represented to us, even by David himself, in the following Passages Psalm. XXIII.
He will not let them want: He makes them to lie down in Green Pastures: He
leads them beside the still Waters: He restores their Souls: He leads them
in the Paths of Righteousness: and in their darkest and most dangerous Hours He
will be with them, with his Rod and Staff to defend and comfort them.

WHAT an entertaining Comment might easily be made on this Description: But I
may only now observe in General, what Images of Tender Care and Gentleness are
these! and when applied to Rulers, as our Text directs us; what great concern
for their Peoples universal Safety, Welfare and Tranquillity, and what Fatigues
and Labors to promote them, are here shadowed out by these Poetical
Expressions.

How inconsistent with the very first and principal Idea carried in this
Allusion, are both Severity and Rigor on the one hand, as also Indolence and
Negligence on the other, in Civil Rulers, to whom the Care and Welfare of a
numerous People are committed. How blame worthy would Shepards be to treat
their Flocks with Cruelty, which they are appointed to protect from every
Injury? And how absurd to give up themselves to Rest or Pleasures, when their
very Business is to watch both Day and Night for their Security and Quiet.

BY these Expressions then, both the Offices, Design and Spirit of Civil Rulers
are very strongly represented. And to answer these grateful Characters and the
chief End of their Advancement, they are carefully to attend the Public
Welfare: they are to look round about their People on every Side to see if any
Danger threatens, and to defend them against all their Enemies: And in short
they are to take such care of their People's Interest and Safety; as that we
may entirely confide in their Integrity and Vigilance, and as the Apostle
speaks, may lead a peaceable and quiet Life in all Godliness and Honesty, while
they are caring for us. 1 Timothy II 2.

AND as for Gentleness of Government, Endeavors to oblige their People, and
even Patience under High Affronts and Injuries; to imitate the admirable
Example of DAVID, who appears to be one of the mildest Men in Government that
ever was. I shall only give a single Instance of the last mentioned Virtue. He
forgave his open Enemies and Rebels, and even those that sought his Life and
cursed him to his Face and in the very sight of his own Army, upon their
Returning to him in humble confidence of Mercy and professing their Repentance:
and after a great and dangerous Rebellion, he severely chid the Sons of
Zerviah, for exciting his Revenge, and would not suffer a Man to be put to
Death that Day in Israel, 2 Samuel XIX.22.

IN fine we must remember, they are RULERS of a RELIGIOUS PEOPLE that we are
now considering. And it would be the plainest Contradiction therefore to the
great Design of their being advanced by GOD to the Government of such a People
which He calls his own, to neglect the most precious Interest of all others, of
the greatest Moment both to the People and to the Rulers also, and which GOD
Himself who raises them has the highest value for. By this I can mean no other,
than the Interest of his Revealed Religion in the Purity and Practice of it.
Not the narrow and confined Prosperity of this or that particular Church or
Churches, too grovelling and limited an Object for the Soul of any Generous
Christian; But the Prosperity of every religious Company that professes their
Subjection to the Laws of GOD, or rather the very Practice of these Laws
themselves in the Lives of Men. And if Righteousness exalts a Nation, as the
wisest of mere Men assures us, Prove. 11.34.
It must needs be both the People's highest Interest and the Rulers greatest
Business to promote it: and the Advancement of it will in the course of things
redound to their mutual Satisfaction, Benefit and Honor.

AND here I need not say, of what great Importance it is, to promote Religion,
that RULERS be themselves the Shining Patterns of it among their People, and
distinguishing Incouragers of the Pious and Virtuous of all Persuasions; and
especially of those that are of Charitable and Benign Principles to all about
them.

THIS it is in part to Feed and Guide them as a Shepard: and this is the great
design of GOD in bringing Men to Places of Power and Dignity among his People,
as the Text implies. Nor is our Text a single Instance of this great End of
their Office, in the sacred Writings. For of the ancient Judges of the Tribes
of Israel, it is expressly said, That the Lord raised them up, in Judges II.16.
And having raised them up, HE says Himself, that He commanded them to Feed his
People, 2 Samuel VII.7. and 1 Chr. XVII.6. And agreeable to this are Rulers often
called Shepards in the sacred Prophesies; their Office being in GOD's account
like theirs, to order his People with Care and Tenderness for their best
advantage, and not to rule with Rigor, or gratify their Pleasure to the Injury
of any.

AND how agreeable is this to the notion we have of the Goodness of GOD? who
must needs require that the great Men of the World, whom He raises to act as
chief Officers under Him, should be as like Him as possible in their
administration of Government. For ever awake and attentive to the State of his
People especially: slow to Anger and plenteous in Mercy, ready to Pardon, and
abundant in Goodness, even to the unthankful and evil.

BUT we must hasten on to show in the

IV. and last place, THAT it is their own great and lasting Honor as well as
his People's Happiness, to answer these chief Ends of their Exaltation, and to
Feed and Guide them with Integrity and Skilfulness.

To Feed them with Integrity of Heart -- is to manage all things among them
with an honest and upright Intention; and this both with respect to GOD who
raises them, as also to his People that are governed by them Moller.
It is to adore the Providence that conducts and carries them to their exalted
Stations, to keep the great End of GOD in their constant View, and sincerely
aim and labor the Fulfillment of it; so that they may throwout their whole
Administration approve themselves to Him whose Eye is always on them, and who
will surely call them to an account of the Execution of their Charge. It is
also to level their Designs at the Public Good: To preserve their Word as
Sacred; and their Administration free from Partiality, Oppression, Wrong, or
whatever is grievous to intelligent and sober People. And as their People
should in Duty and Gratitude afford them such an Honorable Maintenance as may
secure them from Temptations; so every Species of Bribery or disposing of
Offices more for gain then merit, will be an abhorrence to them.

AND how well is Skilfulness joined with Integrity? without which the former
could not deserve the sublime name of Wisdom, but the mean character of Deceit
and Craft for their own Interest. For Wisdom in a Ruler is a Public Virtue,
that deliberates according to Conscience, Reason, Justice and the Nature of
things, and then determins on those Actions that are honest, honorable and for
the Good of the Public. And to Guide with Skilfulness of Hands -- is to get a
true and thorough Intelligence of the State of their People, to penetrate as
far as possible into all the multiplying Tendencies of present Appearances, to
compare as many Circumstances as possible together; and then to apply their
utmost Skill and Labor to prevent all threatening Evils, and to Guide the
Public Affairs to the best Advantage, and this not only for the Present but
also Future Generations.

AND here I might mention several excellent Heads of Public Wisdom recommended
both by Gentile and Christian Moralists -- Such as to secure the Character of
Moderation, Justice, Honesty and a Concern for the Good of the People; and
thereby acquire their Love and Confidence, without which there can never be an
Administration happy. To prefer the more momentous things to those that are
indifferent, and that which is honest to that which is profitable. To pry into
the Councils of Enemies. To be cautious of great and needless Innovations. To
guard against Misinformers, Flatterers, and all those Persons who easily speak
evil of others, or seek to raise a Prejudice and promote Divisions; especially
of a Public Nature. To be Terrors to those who are of no Reputation for
Virtue, who are the general offense and contempt of the People; and to smile
upon Persons of Wisdom and Credit. And in fine, To encourage Religion, Justice
and Temperance, the natural and fruitful Source of all Prosperity.

IN such things as these no doubt did DAVID excel as the Text implies, and
agreeable to those excellent Rules He proposed to Himself at his Entrance into
his Government, as we find recorded in the CI. Psalm. I will behave my self
wisely in a perfect way: I will walk in my House with a perfect Heart: I will
set no wicked thing before mine Eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside,
it shall not cleave to me. A froward Heart shall depart from me: I will not
know a wicked Person: whosoever privily slanders his Neighbor, Him will I cut off:
Him that has a high look and a proud Heart will not I suffer. Mine Eyes shall
be upon the Faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me: He that walks
in a perfect way, He shall serve me: He that works Deceit shall not dwell in my
House: He that tells Lies shall not tarry in my sight. I will early destroy
all the wicked of the Land; that I may cut off all wicked Doers from the City
of the Lord.

AND now -- How Happy were the People, think you, under his wise and upright
Administration! while He was seeking the Wealth and Defense of his People,
speaking Friendship and Peace to them, and ruling with Faithfulness and Equity;
Judgment rolled down among them as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty
Stream^ Peace was within their Walls and Prosperity among their Palaces: And
they have here reported his auspicious Government to his Renown and Honor in
all Ages.

ON the other hand, look into the Books of the Kings and Chronicles; and how
offensive and contemptible do the Wicked Governors of the Tribes of Israel
appear? They that were given up to Atheism and Licenciousness on the one hand,
or biggotted to Idolatry, Superstition and uninstituted Rites of Worship on the
other. Religion languished, and therewith all manner of enormous and
destructive Vices grew bold and rampant, till every thing was thrown into
Confusion, and the People bro't to the Brink of Ruin. But when an ASA, an
HEZEKIA, a JOSIAH rises -- How lovely do the Men appear! Religion now revives,
and therewith Justice, Honesty and every Public and Private Virtue, the Civil
State is restored and settled, and the People with their Rulers flourish in
Success and Riches. And what Superior Honors are thereby reflected on those
wise and upright Governors? They were the Joy of their People while they
lived, were greatly lamented when they came to die: their Memories are precious
for ever, and their very Names are mentioned with pleasure in every Nation.

AND thus have we in some measure illustrated these observable Passages.

AND now what remains, but that we IMPROVE them by considering seriously our
own high and holy RELATION to the Glorious GOD, as the GOD of our Fathers, and
our as well as their Covenant GOD and Redeemer; with the multiplied and solemn
Engagements we are under to love and honor him, and to observe all his Laws
and Institutions for ever.

THAT we also adore his destinguishing Favor in providing for us so many
excellent GOVERNORS, that have faithfully served this People in those noble
Interests which they always accounted their greatest from the very Beginning,
viz. the Interest of Scripture and sincere Religion and Liberty both Civil and
Sacred; which will render their Names most dear and honored to all Posterity.

AND with our hearty Thanks to our LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR and late Commander in
chief, for all that tender affection He has born to this People, His example
and countenancing Virtue and Piety, His Impartiality and Moderation of
Government, and the Care; Zeal, Fatigue, Circumspection and Diligence,
wherewith He has attended the Public Affairs, and sought our Safety and
Welfare; that we follow Him now with our most grateful Blessings and Honors
as long as He lives.

THAT we most heartily welcome our PRESENT COMMANDER IN CHIEF into our
Province, and to the Principal Chair of Government in it: that we adore the
hand of GOD in bringing a Person of such eminent Talents to watch over and
guide this People, and take care of our Interests: that we treat Him with
Honor as becomes his Birth, his Person, his Commission and Dignity: that in
our several places we study to render his Government easy to Him, and happy to
us and our Country: that his Councillors give Him their true Informations and
faithful Advices: that our Commons in asserting our Liberties, may do it with
Decency: that the People be Quiet as the Apostle exhorts them I These IV, II.
and that we be all submissive to his legal Authority. In fine, that we
continually Pray for the Spirit of Grace and Wisdom to be poured out upon Him
in the most plentiful measures; that He may Feed and Guide this People with an
upright Heart and with a skilful Hand.

AND for YOUR EXCELLENCY --

WE sincerely Congratulate Your safe Arrival. We receive You as a Governor
sent both from GOD and the KING, to Feed and Guide us. We behold and value you
as the Son of a FATHER -- illustrious for his open and steady Zeal for Liberty
both Civil and Religious, and the Protestant Succession on which it depends;
for the great part He bare in the glorious Revolution; for his Generous and
Catholic Charity; for his earnest Breathings after a farther Reformation; for
the Indignities He suffered for all these things; and for his great Expressions
of Kindness to this Country in the Day of our Distress. In particular, when He
told our Agent, Dr. Increase Mather; as I have heard Him often say.
That He would openly stand up for us, and notwithstanding all the obloquy that
would be cast upon Him for it, He would plead our Cause; and when our CHARTER
should come to be considered in the HOUSE OF LORDS, He would there publicly
declare, That there was a greater Sacredness in the CHARTER of NEW ENGLAND,
then in those of the Corporations in ENGLAND; For those were only Acts of
Grace, whereas the CHARTER of NEW ENGLAND was a Contract between the KING and
the First Patentees; wherein they had promised to enlarge the King's Dominions
on their own Charges, provided that they and their Posterity might enjoy such
and such Privileges: and now they had performed their Part, for the King to
deprive their Posterity of the Privileges therein granted to them, would carry
a Face of Injustice in it.

AND as we cannot doubt, but that YOUR EXCELLENCY is in the same noble
Sentiments; so we trust our present Privileges will be precious to you, as well
as the Royal Prerogative, and safe in Your Hands. and this more especially
still, since we are a People known for our universal and most hearty Attachment
to the present happy SUCCESSION IN THE PROTESTANT LINE.

THAT Your Excellency will protect THESE CHURCHES, which differ chiefly from
the CHURCHES OF ENGLAND in these two things, that our Clergy do nothing in our
Administrations without the Consent of our People, and that we take the
inspired Scriptures for our only Canon of Ecclesiastical Institutions: whereas
in their 20th Article, in which alone of all the 39 we differ, they assume the
Power of adding other Institutions not prescribed in the Sacred Writings; and
their Clergy don't allow their own People those Liberties which we humbly think
that by the Laws of CHRIST and Nature they have a Right to Claim. And we rather
confide in YOUR EXCELLENCY's Smiles upon us for our extensive Charity: that
while many of their high-flying Members confine the Validity of Ministerial
Orders to their own Community and deny it to ours; we make no other Return then
this, though we were Here above threescore Years before them, and are as I
suppose in this Country above a hundred Freeholders to one of them, that we
readily own the Validity of theirs as well as of all other Protestant Orders
whatever, and desire to live in Peace and Charity with them.

THAT YOUR EXCELLENCY will also favor our COLLEGE, which our Fathers began to
provide for on the very Year of their Arrival in this part of the Country, and
for this Ninety Years has Flourished in Learning, Virtue and Liberty; and
preserve it from every Incroachment that may be attempted against it, contrary
to the known Intentions of its Original Founders and Successive Indowers.

BUT above all, and so to Conclude -- It is our greatest concern that YOUR
EXCELLENCY, will countenance VIRTUE and PIETY not only with us, but also in
Persons of every other Denomination among us. That so this which we account our
Glory may continue to dwell in our Land, that Mercy and Truth may meet
together, that Truth may spring out of the Earth, and Righteousness may look
down from Heaven, and the Lord our GOD may give that which is Good, and our
Land may yield her Increase.

AND for these great Ends -- as the People and Priests of Israel, in their
Salutations of DAVID in the Courts of the Tabernacle, when He first appeared as
their Ruler among them; so we earnestly pray, -- Save now we beseech Thee O
LORD! O LORD we beseech Thee send now Prosperity: Blessed is He that comes to
Feed this People in the name of the LORD, and we wish you a Blessing out of the
House of the LORD, Psalm. CXVIII.25, 26.

AND with the Prayer of DAVID to GOD for his People, let us all now cheerfully
unite and close -- Psalm. XXVIII.9. Save THY PEOPLE, and Bless THINE
INHERITANCE: Feed them also and lift them up for ever.

FINIS.

