DEATH The Advantage of the Godly.

A SERMON Delivered at Guilford, On the 9 th. of June, Ann^ (...) 1728. BEING
The LORD's DAY, next (...) the FUNERAL OF THE REVEREND Mr. Thomas Ruggles,
Pastor of the Church of CHRIST there, WHO Departed this Life on the First
Instant In the Fifty-Eighth Year of his Age.

By Elisha Williams, A. M. And Rector of YALE COLLEGE.

Printed at the Desire and Charge of that Society.

N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Green, 1728.

Death THE Advantage OF THE GODLY.
PHILIPPIANS I. 21. FOR to me to Live is CHRIST, and to Die is Gain.


THE Apostle having in the Beginning of this Chapter Saluted the Philippians,
and assured them of his great Love to them, and Ardent Prayers to God for them
that they might grow abundantly in knowledge and love, be enabled to understand
and discern the Truth, and to choose what is most Excellent, in Sincerity and
without Offense, Persevere in the Faith, and be filled with all the Fruits of
Righteousness, which flow from Faith in CHRIST, and are to the Glory and Praise
of GOD by him, -- ver. 11. He then proceeds to remove any offense his
Sufferings and Imprisonment at Rome might have occasioned, by assuring them
that they had been so far from being any Impediment to the progress of the
Gospel, that on the Contrary they had rather tended to the Advancement thereof.
For the Gospel, by the means of his Sufferings for it, came to (...) more
abundantly taken Notice of and Known, both in Caesar's Court and other Places.
And withal by his Example of Suffering and Patience, many of the Brethren were
Animated to Profess CHRIST and Preach the Gospel, with more Zeal and Courage.
Some indeed says he, did it out of Envy, and by way of Emulation, not designing
to Advance the Glory of CHRIST, but to add to his present Afflictions. But
others out of Love to him and the Gospel, knowing that what had befallen him
was in Defense of the Gospel.

YET nevertheless, every way the Gospel came to be more known, which was and
would be matter of Rejoicing to him, from the 12 th. to the 18 th. ver. The
Advancing the Kingdom of CHRIST was what he chiefly aimed at, and was entirely
Devoted to; and in the verse preceding the Text he declares his free
Resignation of himself to the Honor of CHRIST, in what way soever he should
see fit to make use of him, and his assured hope that he would make him
Instrumental to Advance his Kingdom, both by Preaching the Gospel as Constantly
and Boldly as ever he had done, if he should Live, and by Sealing the Truth of
it by! is Blood if called thereto. For says he in the Text, To me to Live is
CHRIST, and to Die is Gain. q. d. As I have hitherto made is my business to
serve CHRIST in the Gospel, so if my Life be continued it shall be spent in his
Service, by Preaching the Gospel, and by Patience in suffering for him as he
requires, He shall be Glorified. And if I Die in bearing Testimony to CHRIST,
his Glory shall be Advanced, and may own Unspeakable Advantage and Joy
Promoted, in that I shall be with CHRIST which is (...) better.

THE Words then Contain this

DOCTRINE. THAT to whomsoever to Live is CHRIST, to such Death will be Gain.
WHAT the Apostle is here assured of concerning himself, is true of others also
in a like State and Condition. Such as Derive a Spiritual Life from CHRIST, and
make it their great care to Live to the Glory of CHRIST, will find to their
abundant Comfort, that Death will be their Unspeakable Advantage. In
Prosecuting this Doctrine

WE shall

I. EXPLAIN the Import of this Expression, To me to Live is CHRIST.

AND

II. SHOW in what respests Death is Gain to such.

I. WHAT is Implied in this Expression, To me to Live is CHRIST?

1. IT Implies a Participation in his Life, being quickened and made alive unto
GOD, by Virtue of His Powerful Grace, Efficaciously working in us.

MAN in his Lapsed State is naturally Destitute of Spiritual Life. Sin has
Deprived him of it, That has separated between us and our GOD, Isa. LIX. 2. It
has broken that special Union there was between GOD and Man; (who so long as
that lasted, was Blessed with the Participation of a Spiritual and Divine Life,
all those Graces Spiritual, necessary for his Holiness and Happiness) And at
the same time has United and Subjected him to another Head, the Prince that
Rules in the Children of Disobedience. But by CHRIST we have a Reunion, to
GOD, in whom he accepts us, and gives us his Image. All we receive from GOD is
conveyed to us by and through CHRIST, for His sake, and on His account. He
being Constituted by Divine Appointment, as the Head of his Body the CHURCH And
therefore this Benefit of a Spiritual Life is conveyed through and by Him. He
is the Author of it,

(1) AS He has Purchased it for us. He has purchased a Life for us at the
Expense of HIS OWN. By the Sacrifice of his Death, he has Redeemed us from
Death, and Purchased a Spiritual and Eternal Life for us He has Redeemed us
from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, Gal. III. 13. We are
bought with a Price, 1 Cor. VI. 20. And by Virtue of that Price, We are
quickened together with him, Ephesians. II. 5.

(2) HE is so as he Conveyeth this Life to us by the SPIRIT. He by the Spirit,
quickens us with a Divine Life. It is the special work of the Spirit to apply
CHRIST, to carry on the Work* he has begun in Redemption. Though he be of equal
Glory with the FATHER, and SON, yet he Acts as from CHRIST, conveying Life in,
and through, and by Him. For CHRIST who has Life in Himself does Derive it to
whom he will, John V. 21, 26. and John VI. 57. He acquired by his Merits on the
Cross a right to send, and promised to send the Spirit for this End. John XVI.
7, 13, 14, 15. CHRIST then is the Author of Spiritual Life; and this is the
first thing here intended, A Spiritual Union to Christ, whereby we receive Life
from Him, and are made to live unto Him and to GOD by Him.

1. IT intends the Dedicating our selves Unreservedly and Sincerely to Him. The
owning Him as our LORD, to whom all the Honor and Fruit of our Lives is
Firstly and Peculiarly due. He is to be Practically acknowledged by us, as our
rightful Owner and Lord. This was one End CHRIST aimed at, in what he has Done
and Suffered for us that he might acquire a new right to us, and lay us under
the most engaging Obligations to him. Romans XIV. 7, 8, 9. For none of us lives
to himself, and no Man dies to himself. For whether we Live, we Live unto the
LORD, and whether we Die, we Die unto the LORD. For to this End CHRIST both
Died, and Rose, and Revived, that he might be LORD both of the Dead and the
Living. Our Duty is to Devote our selves, our all to GOD, whatever may be
useful to the Manifestation of his Glory. This seems to be what the Apostle had
principally in his Eye, That if his Life were still continued in the World, it
should be employed in Serving and Glorifying CHRIST, He had chosen Him for his
LORD and Devoted himself to be his Constant and Faithful Servant; and he would
not Recede from his Resolution, but Persevere in a constant attendance to his
Duty. When therefore Persons are either Glorifying GOD, in a Faithful
attendance to the Duties of their General Calling, doing the work of
Christians, exercising and growing in Grace, working out their Salvation with
Fear and Trembling, or doing the Duties of their particular Calling in
Obedience to CHRIST, filling up the Duties of their Places and Relations, in a
Subserviency to the will of CHRIST, This is to Live to CHRIST. This the same
Apostle shows us by his own Example, when he tells us, he valued not his Life
for it Self, but for the Service which during the continuance of it he might do
unto CHRIST. Acts XX. 24. Neither count I my Life Dear, so that I may Finish my
Course with Joy, etc. And then as our All, is without Reserve to be Devoted to
him, so all is to be done Heartily and Sincerly: Not in pretense and
appearance, but with a Real and Gracious bent of Heart. There are many make
shows of Honoring GOD, while they are only Serving of themselves; Hence GOD
says to them, Zech. VII. 5. When ye Fasted, Did ye do it at all to Me? So is it
in any other Services, wherein Men make a fair Profession as if they had a Zeal
for the Honor of CHRIST, and a desire to Promote it; when really their aim is
no higher than Self. To Serve it way be a Spirit of Pride and Ostentation, or
to bring about some Carnal Design and Interest. These serve not CHRIST but
themselves in all they do. But GOD requires and expects an Upright Heart in all
we do; Not only doing the things he requires of us, but the doing of them with
Gracious Aims and Intentions, Eyeing His Glory in all we do, and doing all as
in His sight. Where there are suitable Apprehensions of the Glorious
Excellencies of CHRIST, a Sense how worthy He is to be served with our Best,
and the greatest Affection and Engagedness of Heart, it will teach us to Banish
all Sinester respects, and make us upright before GOD, to do what He requires
in a right manner, and to do every thing unto His Glory, As Vessels fitted for
our Masters Use, and prepared unto every Good Work. 2 Timothy II. 21*

BUT Secondly, We are

II. TO show How Death is Gain to such. This may appear Strange to such as are
Strangers to this Life of CHRIST, who judge of their Felicity by what is
present and sensible, and think That only makes to their Happiness which serves
to their Use, Comfort and Delight in this present State; and therefore they
count that which separates them from these things are Evil; yea the worst of
Evils. To whom no wonder is it, if Death proves the King of Terrors. But this
is a Truth every Believer will assent to, though perhaps under the prevailings of
Indwelling Sin, too much Carnality of Heart and Inordinacy of Affection to
Carnal things, they are ready to shrink from Death as an Enemy. But the
certainty hereof will appear if we Consider in what respects Death is Gain to a
Believer.

1. THIS appears if we consider the Evils and Miseries, that such are hereby
delivered from. This World is to Believers (as well as to others) a Vale of
Tears; and upon many accounts more so to them than to others. GOD never
intended their Felicity and Portion here. They have here their Evil things, and
hereafter they will have their Good things. In this Tabernacle they Groan,
being Burdened, as the Apostle speaks; 2 Cor. V. 4. But hereafter their
Burdens shall be Removed. They have Burdens here in common with others; a
Burden of Care, Labor, Weariness, Bodily Pains, Weakness, and many
Infirmities. These are Fruits of Sin, which GOD sees necessary for His own
Children to be Exercised with as well as others. But at their Death they find
an End of all these. The Grave is a place of Rest to the Body, and HEAVEN a
place of Rest to the Soul. Job III. 17. Rev. XIV. 13. And they have also their
share in the common Calamities and Miseries, that GOD brings upon the World.
They are a part of the Body and therefore suffer with it. But at Death they are
taken from this Community, and are delivered from the Burdens and Exercises
thereof, and Secured from the Evils to Come, Isa. LVII. 1, 2. Besides these
there are Evils more peculiar to them; Others are under some of them indeed,
but they don't feel them as such, and complain of them as their Misery as they
ought to do. The Activity and Power of Indwelling Sin, which still remains in
them is a great Exercise to them. By reason of it they are so Clogged,
Indisposed, and out of Frame and Unfit for any Holy and Spiritual Actions and
Employments, that when they should do Good, Evil is Present with them. They are
led into Captivity to the Law of Sin remaining in their Members. They are often
Groaning under this, as their Burden. Yea as a Burden too heavy for them.
Psalm. XXXVIII. 3, 4, 6, 8. There is no Rest in my Bones because of my Sin. Mine
Iniquities are gone over mine Head, as an Heavy Burden they are too Heavy for
me. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly; I go Mourning all the Day long. I
am Feeble and Sore broken: I have Rored by reason of the Disquietness of my
Heart. Romans VII. 24 Oh Wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
Body of this Death? And by reason of this they often fail in their Duty to GOD
and Man, and the best they do is but imperfectly done. But now they are through
CHRIST made Victorious over this, it shall never Trouble them any more. This
Body of Sin being destroyed they are made Perfect. Here also they are Burdened
with many Temptations and Trials, from Satan and the World. The World is a
Place full of Snares; There are Temptations, and Exercises, in every Condition,
in every Relation and Employment. And Satan is a constant and restless
Adversary, who is full of Malice, and watches all Opportunities seeking whom he
may Devour, and though he cannot Destroy yet he may and does greatly Afflict the
People of GOD. He is often Assaulting and Buffeting them, sometimes by Amazing
Terrors, sometimes by Hellish Insinuations, and Horrid Suggestions, that are
enough to fill the Soul with Trembling Agonies and Dreadful Perplexities. But
now his Opportunities are over; he is shut out of that place where the Souls of
Believers are carried. Now they Rejoice as having Conquered, yea they Triumph
in CHRIST, being made Partakers of his Conquest and Victory over Satan, and the
World. Besides such are more especially exposed to the Reproaches and Injuries
of the Wicked. The ungodly World hates them because of their Love to CHRIST and
their Faithfulness to Him. But Death sets them free from this also. I shall
only add, They are here sometimes exercised with sad Desertions, and Heart
oppressing Fears, about their Interest in the Covenant of GOD and the Happiness
of Heaven. Many Dark Days pass over them in this State, wherein such Complaints
are over heard from them as in Psalm. XIII. at the beginning, How long will thou
forget me, O LORD, for Ever? How long will thou hide thy Face from me? How long
shall I take Counsel in my Soul, having Sorrow in my Heart daily? But now they
are wholly delivered from these Exercises, they are no longer at a State of
distance from, but present with the LORD. Now their Souls Rejoice in His
Salvation, now they Sing unto the LORD because He has dealt bountifully with
them. This is the Exchange, Death makes for, and in a Believer, then surely he
is no Loser by it.

2. DEATH is Gain to Believers, in that they then enter upon the Enjoyment of
all Good. All Tears are then Wiped away from their Eyes, and they Drink of the
Fullness of Joy. They Hunger no more, nor Thirst any more, nor shall the Sun
light on them, nor any Heat. For the LAMB which is in the midst of the Throne
shall Feed them, and shall Lead them unto Living Fountains of Waters. Rev. VII.
16.17.

[1] THEY then have the Fruition of GOD. In this lies their true Happiness and
a higher than this the Creature is not Capable of. For this they will be
Completely framed and fitted, by the clear Manifestations of the Glorious
Perfections of the Divine Nature unto them, whereby they shall be Completely
and Perfectly Transformed into the Divine Likeness. They had some Knowledge of
the Divine Glories before, but yet small Comparitively to what then they shall
have. It Is but a very small Portion the best know of GOD in this World: Now much
Darkness is in them, how Dull and Slow of Heart to Believe? What little
understanding of the Glory that shall be hereafter Revealed? They Sigh and
Mourn under their Ignorance in this bodily State, and earnestly Groan for
farther Discoveries of the Divine Glory to them. But as soon as the Believers
Soul is Released from the Body, the Blessed Morning of that long Desired Day is
risen upon it, it comes forth from all its Darkness, and the Glory of GOD is
risen upon it. He will then enable it to behold his Glory in such a measure, as
in its Conjunct State with the Body could not be Born, without a Dissolution of
the Vital Bonds. It will then be made to See HIM that is Invisible, and to
approach the Inaccessible Light It Is not Compatible to the Nature of the
Creature, to have a Comprehensive knowledge of GOD, as that means the Infinite
Extent (if I may so speak) of his Perfections; yet a Perfect one it may be said
to have, as that means just and agreeable to the Object, and the Capacity of the
Subject The understanding will then take in a discovery of the Divine Glory
equally. It will be much more enabled to discern the Divine Excellencies
together, to have a fuller Understanding, and more Adequate Conceptions of GOD.
For says the Apostle We shall see him as he is. And then, the sight of this
Glory shall Completely Transform it, make the Soul perfectly Holy. It Is the
beholding the Divine Glory, that impresses the likeness of GOD upon the Soul.
It Is a sight of the Glory of GOD that first changed it in its Conversion, and
made it Conformable to Him. 2 Cor. III. 18. Now this work of Holiness is but
begun in this Life, and carried on according to the discoveries GOD gives of
Himself to the Soul. But this is not Perfected here. When we see and know
better, then we shall become better. When He appears we shall be like him, the
Apostle says, because we shall then see him as he is. We shall then be Holy as
He is Holy. There will be no more any Law of the Members warring against the
Law of the Mind, no remaining Blindness of Mind, no Error of Judgment, no
Irregularity of Affections; all Clouds, Darkness and Disorder are Chased out of
the Soul for Ever by the Beaming forth of the Divine Glory upon it. Then is the
New Creature Arrived to the Measure of the Stature of a Perfect Man in CHRIST
JESUS. And then is the Soul arrived to the Perfection of its Happiness. It is
then filled with GOD, the pourings out of His Love and Goodness, and is carried
out to Him in the highest delight and satisfaction, as its Complete and
Adequate Rest. It has then Obtained that State of Existence that is proper for
the Nature of such a Being, higher than which it is not Capable of and beyond
which it cannot Desire. Psalm. XVII. 15. As for me, I will behold thy Face in
Righteousness: I shall be Satisfied, when I awake with thy Likeness. GOD is
enough to fill the Soul with Ineffable Delight, and He will be the Everlasting
Fountain thereof unto it. In His Presence it will Eternally find, fullness of
Joy, Psalm. XVI. 11. It shall then behold the Face of the FATHER, Mat. XVIII. 10
And have a full View and Fruition of His Love. With delightful Wonder shall
Believers then View the Love of the Father in giving His SON to be their
SAVIOR, to Suffer and Dye that they might Live; And that Eternal Love that
singled them out of the corrupt Mass of the World, and chose them to be the
Subjects of his Everlasting Favor and Love. And Love and Praise, will be the
ceaseless returns they make for that wonderful Love of the Father in making
them His Sons 1 John III. 1. Then also they shall see the SON the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, who is Man as well as GOD, and have immediate Communion with Him. He is
gone before them to prepare a Place for them, and this is His good Pleasure
that they shall be with Him where He is, to behold His Glory, Joh. XVII. 24.
Here they have Fellowship with him in his Death and the Power of his
Resurrection, but then they shall see him as he is, 1 John III. 2. It was a
great Privilege the Apostles had to Live with CHRIST on Earth; though he was
Humbled and his Glory Veiled, in a great Measure: But how much more delightful
to be with Him in a Glorified State in Heaven? When the Apostles had but a
Glympse of this in His Transfiguration, Peter cries out it is good for us to be
here, Mat. XVII. 4. But how much better is it to be with Him for Ever in
Heaven, where He shall always appear in the Brightness of His Glory; and
satisfy them with His Love, whom He Redeemed by His Death? So also they shall
have Fellowship with the Holy Spirit. They have Communion here with the Spirit
in His Sanctifying, Quickening and Comforting Presence, but then in a more full
and satisfying Manner; They shall be filled with all the fullness thereof, with
the Perfection of every Grace, with Knowledge, and Wisdom, and every Gift
suitable for the Converses and Employments of the Heavenly World; with that
Comfort and Consolation, that Peace and Joy that passes all Understanding.

[2] THEN they have Fellowship with the Saints and Angels, in Heaven. The
Favor of GOD is Essential Happiness. But the Society of the Heavenly
Inhabitants, Saints and Angels, will be Additional thereto. As soon as their
Souls are Dislodged of their Bodies, they will doubtless find themselves in the
Embraces of Angels, (appointed by their Redeemer, as an Honorary Guard to
Conduct them to Him,) who with Joy* and Rejoicing*. will convey them to the
Palace of the GREAT KING and present them before HIM. Luke XVI. 22. Where they
shall have the Pleasure of being joined with the Congregation of the Righteous,
the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect, and the Holy Angels, being themselves as
the Angels of GOD in Heaven, Mat. XXII. 30. And Singing Praises to Him who sits
on the Throne in delightful Consort; and of the sweetest Fellowship and
Converse about the great things of GOD, and what may Promote Mutual Knowledge,
Love and Joy among those Heavenly Inhabitants. The manner of their Converse and
Communicating their Ideas to one another, we know not, nor perhaps are we
capable in this present State to conceive of, yet the thing it self is
undoubted. And it is certainly no small Happiness to be Associated to such a
World of Glorified Spirits, all Animated by the same Spirit of Love to GOD, and
to one another, fitted for the highest Services and Joys, all joined in one
Triumphant Society in Praising GOD for all his wonderful Works, and
Everlastingly Bathing themselves in those Rivers of Pleasure that flow at His
Right Hand. Unspeakably Gainful therefore does DEATH prove to such, since as
has been shown, it delivers them from every thing Afflictive, and is an Inlet
to Consummate Felicity, all the Joys of the Heavenly World.

I Proceed now to the APPLICATION of This, in a few Particulars;
1. THIS may show us the great difference there is between Christless Persons
and others. Death is Gain to those, to whom to Live is CHRIST, in several
respects as we have seen, but to Christless Persons Death proves the Reverse,
even the greatest loss Imaginable, and brings with it the greatest Misery. Here
they have their Good things, but hereafter their Evil things; and Hence, while
others are Comforted they are Tormented. To awaken such, and to excite their
endeavors to get out of that miserable Condition wherein they are, Let them
Consider,

(1) THAT at Death they loose all their Worldly Comforts, and whatever was
Serviceable to them while they Lived. They have here many Mercies in common
with others; many times as to the Gifts of Providence, they have as great a
Share as any in the World, yea oftentimes a Greater. The Psalmist observes,
Psalm. LXXIII. 7. That they have the Waters of a full Cup wrung out to them,
that they have as much as Heart can wish. But whatever their Possessions and
Comforts are while they Live, Death brings a Writ of Ejection against them,
their Houses and Lands pass to other Owners, they are (...) Naked and can carry
nothing away with them. If they had Honors they are laid in the Dust. Whatever
great designs they had, to raise their Names or Families, they are all Dashed;
In that Day all their thoughts Perish. They loose all their Friends and
Acquaintance; all the Comfort they had in them, and delight they took in
Conversing with them is at an End. As to his outward Man there is nothing but
loss, yea loss of all things.

(2) THE Christless Sinner at Death looses all his Hopes. While he Lived, he
oftentimes Blessed his Soul, and Flattered himself with Hopes of going to
Heaven when he left the World. There are many Carnal Confidences they are apt
to Cherish, because of their Privileges, Profession, Visible Relation to the
People of GOD, Religious Duties they carried on, and some Reformation and
Strictness in their Lives, and Usefulness to the Public But when Death Seises
upon them all their Hopes are Dashed and at an End. Job VIII. 13, 14. The
Hypocrites Hope shall Perish, whose Hope shall be cut off, and whose Trust
shall be a Spiders Web. Their Hopes will leave them ashamed, and they will find
to their Everlasting Confusion, that they had only been Flattering and putting
a Cheat upon their Souls. Now they will see they have not those Gracious
Dispositions in their Souls, that would qualify them for a State of
Blessedness; and then they will find those things they built their Confidences
upon, will be Rejected. All they did in Religion will come to nothing, being
done from a Carnal Principle, and to a Carnal End; every thing will be looked
upon as so many Provocations to GOD, as Prove. XV. 8. Isa LXVI. 3. CHRIST will
say to them as in Mat. VII. 23. With a Dreadful Note of Abhorrency, I NEVER
KNEW YOU, I never Approved of you, nor of any of your Services which ever you
Performed from First to Last, but my Soul Abhorred them.

(3) A Christless Sinner at Death looses all his Opportunities to get a Change
in his Condition. It is a Terrible time with a Sinner in this World when his
Eyes are opened, and his Sins are set in order before him, and he sees the
Wrath of GOD Impending him, and all his False Confidences struck out of his
Hand He is as it were upon the Borders of Hell, and Terrors take hold on him.
But though it be Sad, yet this is some Mitigation of it that there is hope his
Condition may be altered. He yet enjoys a Day of Patience and Probation. GOD is
waiting to be Gracious, there is a Possibility of a Change though it be Hazardous
and Uncertain. But now in the case before us, this is the Aggravation of it
that the Day of Patience is at an End. Such are gone away from all
Opportunities of Repenting and Returning to GOD. The Master of the House has
risen and shut to the Door. They have no more offers of Mercy, no more calls to
Repentance. Time was when GOD did Invite, yea by His Ministers did Entreat
Sinners to be Reconciled to Him; who have used all Persuasions and Arguments
they could, but they turned a Deaf Ear to all their Entreaties, and now
Repentance is hid from the Eyes of their Judge, as before it was from then. The
things of their Peace are Everlastingly hid from their Eyes, because they knew
them not in the Day of their Visitation. Now no Cries or Entreaties will be
regarded; CHRIST has shut his Heart against them, and will be Favorable to
them no more. As in Prove. I. 24. -- How much soever the Seasons of Grace are
undervalued now, the loss of them at that Day will be esteemed an Insupportable
Misery.

(4) THEN their Souls are for Ever Lost* You Read Mat. XVI. 26. of the Loss of
the Soul, that it is the Sum of all other Losses, and Miseries that can be
thought of. For this consists not in the Death or Annihilation of it; for GOD
has made it Immortal, it shall never Die. But it consists in an Eternal
separation from GOD, and Banishment from His Gracious Presence, (in the
Enjoyment of which the Blessedness of the Soul does consist) and in the Eternal
Sense and Impression of GOD's Fearful, and Fiery Wrath and Indignation: They
are Sentenced as Accursed Creatures, to Depart into Everlasting Fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. Where the Worm never Dies, and the Fire is never
Quenched, Mat. XXV. 41. Mark IX. 44. They loose at this Hour all that was
necessary to their Souls Felicity. All Hopes of ever seeing and enjoying GOD
and CHRIST and Heaven for Ever. Who can conceive the Misery of such a Loss, or
apprehend the Dreadfulness of it! This is the dreadful Catastrophe of a
Christless Sinner! Now he slights the best Good, and sets his Heart and
Affections upon Perishing Delights, and hereafter, he will loose all Good, yea
his very Soul, and all the Happiness it is capable of, and instead of any
Delight and Comfort, be confined to Everlasting Horrors and Lamentations. How
Infinitely does it concern them to Awake out of their Sleep, and never be at
Rest till they shall have obtained a Spiritual Life from CHRIST, that so all
these Evils may be Prevented?

2. THIS may Instruct us Not to pass a wrong Judgment upon the Death of the
Godly, nor to count them Unhappy in their Departure, and the charge that is
made, in their Condition at Death. The Death of such is a great loss to the
Living, but of unspeakable Advantage to them. The Mention of which leads our
Thoughts to, and makes our Tears spring a fresh at our Loss, in the Death of
Your late very EXCELLENT PASTOR, of whom most true was it, That to him to Live
was CHRIST, and to him therefore Death has been Gain He is now Reaping, and
Eternally will do so, the Advantage of Living to CHRIST. To whose Memory we
cannot but be bound to pay a Tribute, by Publicly Bewailing the Loss Sustained
in his Death, and Exhibiting a just account of his Eminent Example, to Incite
the Living to an Imitation, and for the Honor of CHRIST his Grace, and His
Servant too. This is doubtless acceptable to CHRIST, to give Him the Honor of
his Graces in his Deceased Servant, and for us also to Remember Him with
Honor, who has made is his Business to put Honor upon CHRIST. Since GOD has
Graciously Promised to Honor such 1 Samuel II. 30. And CHRIST has told us That
such as serve Him will His Father Honor, Joh. XII. 26. But suitably to Exhibit
the Excellencies of this Eminent Servant of CHRIST, I am very sensible of my
Unskilfulness, and might any Arguments have been admitted for my Excuse, I had
been among the Silent, as I am among the deepest Mourners, where my Affection,
and Sense of his Excelling worth carry me, and make me Earnestly wish for a
better Hand to Embalm his Precious Memory.

THE Subject is High and Large, and which way soever we take a View of him, we
shall find uncommon Excellencies, and not a little for our Admiration and
Imitation.

WHAT of him first took our Thoughts, was his Comely, Serene and Majestic
Aspect, his Pleasant, yet Grave and Solemn Deportment, every way becoming the
great Excellencies of his Mind, always Commanding our Reverence, and Attracting
our Love. Most Happy was he in a Meek, Composed, Peaceable and Pleasant
Disposition. He Excelled in a peculiar Sweetness and Goodness of Temper, and in
a Beneficent Love to Mankind. This his Love most Diffusive, though especially
directed to such where the Christian appeared, yet led him to do Good to all,
and to the greatest distance from speaking Evil of any. He was Hearty and Real
in his Affection to his Friend, Faithful to his Interest, Obliging and Sincere
in the Expressions of his Friendship, and wholly Unpractised in the Arts of
Dissimulation.

AND as he was by Nature of a Placid, Patient and Meek Spirit, so he was by
Grace much more so. His Mind was possessed of a constant Serenity, and his
Breast with a Steady and Uninterrupted Calm, which seemed wholly a Stranger to
the Disorders of Passion. The Heavenly Dew which falls not in a Storm, ever
falling upon his Soul, always Calm and Serene with the Meekest Patience. That
Wisdom was Eminently discovered in him, which is from above, which is first
Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle and Easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good
Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy, James III. 17.

SUCH an Humility was always his Clothing, as discovered his Relation as a
Disciple to the Lowly JESUS. His Conversation, his Behavior, whatever he did,
was most Remote from Pride, and spoke pure Humility. Whoever saw any thing in
him Savouring of Ostentation, or ever Discovered the least Envy to have had a
Room in his Heart? He had learned of CHRIST to be Meek and Lowly, and to make
himself of no Reputation, nor seek the Honor that is of Man. He was truly a
Man of Prayer, being much with GOD in that Duty, and the successes upon Special
concerns, of his quiet Waitings, and mighty Wrestlings with GOD were sometimes
too Remarkable not to be observed, and improved as Encouragements to keep alive
that Spirit of Faith and Prayer that was so Eminent in him.

AND if we follow him into his House we find a Generous, Kind and Obliging
Hospitality, we there see the Tender and Dear Husband, the Careful and Loving
Father, the Wise Governor of his Household, where nothing Indecent or
Extravagant could find a Room, making his House a Bethel by the constant and
exact maintaining the Worship of GOD in it, and a School of Piety, in the
Religious Education of all under his care. Therein approving himself a true
Child of Abraham, Commanding his Children and Household after him to Serve the
LORD.

IF we Consider him in his Public Capacity, we there see the true Evangelical
Pastor. His Abilities and Learning were beyond what were imagined by the most,
(his great Humility being a Veil to those Excellencies) which being attended
with the Fire of Goodness in an Eminent Degree, he approved himself a Burning
and Shining Light in this Golden Candlestick. And in whose Light GOD has
Vouchsafed you many Years to Rejoice.

HE Lived always as under the Eye and Awe of the Great GOD, to whom he was to
give account of the Great Charge committed to him; and Labored therein as one
Absolutely Devoted to the Service and Interest of CHRIST. He understood his
Work and had a Lively sense of the Worth of Souls; and the bringing Glory to
GOD, in being an Instrument to Promote the Salvation of Sinners by CHRIST, was
his chief his only Ambition, and this Swallowed up all his Thoughts and
Talents. The Conversion of Sinners was the Great thing he aimed at, he was
moved with Compassion for them in their Misery, and Labored their Awakening,
to Shoot his Arrows into their Hearts and Effect a Trembling Sense of their
being in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bonds of Iniquity, having no part in the
Pardon of their Sins, or the Hopes of Glory, and a thorough Humiliation of Soul
before GOD; that they might be prepared for the Entertainment of the Truth, if
GOD Peradventure would open their Eyes to see his Glory in the Face of His SON,
and give them Repentance to the acknowledging of it, that they might escape out
of the Snares of the Devil, who are taken Captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy
II. 25

HOW Tender and Affectionate was his concern for the Children of the Covenant,
the Lambs of his Flock, (which he always Eyed as a great part of his Charge.)
How warm and constant his Endeavors that they might not be Lost, both his
Public and Private Instructions and Applications to them are Witnesses.
Careful and Diligent was he as a good Shepherd, to know the State of his Flock,
and look well to all the parts of it, to give to every one his Meat in due
Season. Diligent to Observe, and Prudent in Accommodating himself to the
Temptations, Distresses, Afflictions and Duties of all under his Charge. In
directing the Enquirers of the way to Zion, Encouraging the Faint Hearted,
Comforting the Disconsolate, and Settling the Peace of the Souls of his People
on Sure grounds, Helping under Temptations, Strengthening the Weak, Encouraging
the Humble, Endeavoring all he might to Perfect the Saints, that they might be
Strong in the LORD, and fitted for their Master's use. HE Managed his Ministry
with Faithfulness and Wisdom, purely for GOD, and the Salvation of the Souls of
his People. His Preaching was Plain, and suited to the design he had always in
view, the Convincing, Humbling, and Converting Sinners, Promoting Faith, Love
and Holiness in his Hearers. And agreably to this great design in his view, to
Save himself and others, to Demolish the Kingdom of Satan, and set up the
Kingdom of CHRIST, attain himself the Kingdom of Glory, and help others to it,
he Labored with all his might, as having to Encounter Principalities and
Powers, the Strength of Hell, and the Lusts of the Hearts of Men, which Baffle
all means but what are in the Hand of the Spirit; and therefore under a sense
that means were Powerful and Effectual through GOD; He maintained a believing
Dependence upon CHRIST, and had ever Recourse to the LORD that sent him; and
the Success which GOD has Graciously given to the Labors of this His Faithful,
Humble and Diligent Servant, has been beyond what many Ministers do ever
Experiences Many and Happy are the Fruits GOD has Graciously given to the
Travail of his Soul. And this may be reckoned among not the least Successes of
his Conduct in the Ministry, That Peace has by GOD's Blessing upon his Wisdom
and Meekness, been preserved among his People, notwithstanding many Temptations
unto Difference that have been amongst them. And as he was ever Studious of the
Unity and Peace of the Church, over which the HOLY GHOST had made him an
Overseer, so he was ever Studious of Union and Communion, with those that were
Fellow Laborers with him in the like Work, for the Prosperity of the whole,
and the Enlargment of the Kingdom of CHRIST; and without Partiality it may be
said, he has been unto them a Pattern of Humility, and Prudence, Meekness, Love
and Ardent Zeal for the Glory of CHRIST. Nor may be forgotten his Faithful and
Eminent Services, for the School of the Prophets, (having for many Years been
Improved as one of the Trustees of YALE COLLEGE) which accounted it no small
part of their Glory and Safety that he stood in the Relation of a Father to it,
and employed his Wisdom, Care and Love for the Flourishing of it.

HE Adorned every Station wherein he was set, and in every Capacity Reflected
such an Honor upon Christianity, that without Flattery it may be said, he was
one of the Brightest Examples of it, that this Age has Produced.

AND thus in Serving GOD with Entire Devotedness and Resignation, in Simplicity
and Godly Sincerity, not with Fleshly Wisdom, did his last Sickness find him,
(not without having had a strong Impression upon his Spirit sometime before,
that his Work was almost Finished) which he endured with Patience and the
greatest Resignation; during all which (while he was Favored with the Regular
exercise of his Rational Powers) a Divine Calm, and Peaceful Serenity filled
his Soul. Expecting it would prove as it has done, the End of his Labors, and
an Inlet into his Master's Joy. By Faith he looked over the Dark Valley, and
saw the Crown of Righteousness, which GOD the Righteous Judge does give to them
that Fight a good Fight, and Finish their Course with Faith. And as the
Apostle, so he has Unquestionably found, that as to him to Live was CHRIST, so
Death has proved Infinitely Gainful.

3. WE here see there is a Consolation belongs to those that are looking after
Godly Friends with Tears and Sorrows. To take Notice of the Hand of GOD in
their Removal, and to Mourn our own, and the Publick's Loss, is our Duty. But
here a Comfortable Reflection is Administered to us, that the Change they have
made is Unspeakably to their Advantage. As it was matter of Thankfulness that
we enjoyed such Friends, where GOD by his Spirit had drawn his Image and
prepared for an Inheritance among the Saints in Light. A Favor which it must
be Confessed, rendered them more desirable, and much greater Blessings; yet it
yields no small Consolation to think how happily for them, GOD has ordered
their State. That the place they live in is more Desirable, their Enjoyments
and Comforts more Satisfying than ever before. Death brings them to the Place
and Happiness they Prayed Believed and Hoped to enjoy. It puts an End to all
their Burdens, Fears and Temptations, it turns their Sorrow into Joy. They
were here so long as it pleased GOD they should be, and no longer is it fit
they should be with us; which ought to quiet us with Relation to their Removal
from us. But it ought to be matter of no small Consolation to us, that GOD has
taken them from all Sorrows and satisfies them immediately with Himself. Their
Death has not parted them from their Happiness, though it has parted them from
their Nearest and Dearest Friends, yea has cut asunder the Union between Body
and Soul, but it has not Dissolved the Union between them and CHRIST; hence in
Romans VIII. 38 Death is put into the Apostle's Triumph, -- Neither Death, nor
Life, etc can separate us from the Love of GOD which is in CHRIST JESUS our
LORD: Here then is matter of Consolation to the Relatives of this Deceased
Servant of the LORD, whose Death we Deplore. His Death is your Loss, an
unspeakable Loss to us all, and Stupid must we be if such an Afflictive
Providence cost us not Tears of Grief. But not the Least Groan is due on
account of any Disadvantage he has Sustained. But you may Comfort your minds
with the thoughts that a Dear Husband, a Loving Father is gone before you from
a World of Sin and Sorrow, to Inherit a Crown prepared for him before the
Foundation of the World. All Murmurs under so Sorrowful a Stroke of the Divine
Hand, should be utterly forbid, Excessive Tears Dried, and by Moderation of
Sorrow Testify your assured Hope of his having entered into his Master's Joy.

AND suffer me here only to observe what is but a just Inference from what has
been said. That your Obligations are Special to acknowledge Divine Goodness in
those Graces that were so Eminent in your Deceased Husband and Parent, and
making him so Great a Blessing to you, and to Imitate that Excellent Example he
has set you. Follow him as he has followed CHRIST, considering the end of his
Conversation; and then, though you are parted for a while, yet ere long you will
surely meet again in endless Bliss. In the mean time you will be the Charge of
the same Good Providence that carried him through to the end of his Labors,
and the Gracious Presence of CHRIST will be with you, whom you are to Trust for
the fulfillment of those Precious Promises made to the Widow and the Fatherless;
which may GOD grant you the Happy Experience of.

BUT then I may not finish my Discourse without making a particular Application
of this Text and Providence, to you that have been Blessed with the Ministry of
this Eminent Servant of CHRIST.

[1] TAKE up a Lamentation, and Observe GOD's Threatening in the Removal of your
EXCELLENT PASTOR, who has Taught you from the Divine Word, and by a most
Shining. Example, what it is to Live to CHRIST.

HIS Death is a very Public Frown as well as upon you, and those he stood in
any special Relation of Trust and Usefulness to. All Share in the Loss; and
should accordingly take Notice of the Hand of GOD in it. The Public looses by
the Death of such Eminently Holy and Useful Men. They are the Pillars of the
State wherein they dwell, They stand in the Gap to turn away the Wrath of GOD.
In the Removal of these, GOD many times makes way for His Anger. Hence is that
Plea of the Psalmist, Psalm. XII. 1. Help LORD for the Godly man cease; for
the Faithful fail from among the Children of Men. And not to Lament it is a
very bad Omen. Isa. LVII. 1. And certainly the late Frequent Removals that have
been in several parts of the Country, of such as were our Defense and Glory,
and whom we very much want as Intercessors for us, in this Day of Common
Calamity, and Doubtful Expectation, may well cause us to Fear, what GOD may be
about to do with us. And this is Especially a Loss to You, who have been
peculiarly Benefited by his Public Ministry, Example and Conversation. It
becomes You therefore to be Affected with and Humbled under this Bereavement.
Mourn the Loss of such a Painful, Faithful, Edifying Ministry; such a Teaching
and Angelick Life. Such will Mourn that they may enjoy his Ministry no more (as
well as Bless GOD that they have enjoyed it) to whom GOD has made him
Instrumental in their Conversion, and Spiritual Edification, to Pluck them as
Brands out of the Burning, and to Polish them for their Master's use. And such
as have remained Unconverted under it, have special Reason to Mourn; to reflect
upon their Loss of the Blessing and Fruit of so Holy a Ministry, and at length
of him, who has Longed, Prayed, Studied, and Labored for their Salvation. What
reason have you to Bewail the loss of the most likely means for your Salvation?
Do you expect better than you have lost, or can you think less Likely and
smaller Remedies will prove Healing to you, when the more Hopeful and Greater
have Effected Nothing? Is it not Awful to you to think that all his Sermons,
Prayers, Tears, and Heavenly Life, will Rise up in Judgment against you? And
that he who has been Entreating for your Souls, and Importunately beseeching
you to be Reconciled to GOD, will be a Witness against you, to your GREAT
JUDGE, to whom he is gone to give an account of his Charge? And how know you
but your Unperswadobleness, is the great Provocation to GOD to Remove him from
us? As doubtless it is no small part of the procuring cause of this His Anger.

[2] IMITATE this Holy Example of the Apostle, of this Eminent Servant of
CHRIST, who has Lived an Excellent Comment upon this Text; and having so
Finished his Course, is now Reaping the Happy and Glorious Advantages thereof.
What he, with the Apostle, made his whole Business, and with him Accounted all
things but Loss, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of CHRIST, and be found in
him not having on his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of CHRIST, the Righteousness which is of GOD by Faith, that
he might know Him and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his
Sufferings being made Conformable to his Death, if by any means he might attain
to the Resurrection of the Dead, Phil. III. 8, 9, 10, 11. So this is your Work
and Business also to be found in CHRIST, to obtain Spiritual Life from Him,
that you may be enabled to Dedicate your selves Sincerely and Unreservedly to
Him; It Is receiving Life from CHRIST, that enables us to Live to the Glory of
GOD by Him. CHRIST must be in us by his SPIRIT, and we must be in CHRIST by
Faith; which unites us to CHRIST. Ephesians. III. 17. or else our Persons and Hopes
are Reprobate, and will be Rejected in the Day of CHRIST. 2 Cor. XIII 5.
Consider and Realize this such as are Christless, and Tremble; such as have
never been Prevailed upon by this Ambassador of CHRIST, to give themselves up
to a Glorious CHRIST, who has been the Great Subject and Sole End of his
Ministry, but have Stopped their Ears upon the Voice of the Charmer, though he
Charmed never so Wisely. Remember what and how you have heard and seen, and let
not those things rise up in Judgment against you another Day, for your
Condemnation. And let such as have reason to be Humbled that they have Profited
no better, learned no more of CHRIST by him, from the Pulpit, and Life, make
just Reflections upon themselves. And let all Remember both the Instructions
and Counsels and Warnings, which you have had from him in Public and Private
Dispensations, and that bright Example of Christianity, he has set you.
Remember his Faith and Patience, his Humility and Meekness, his Self Denial and
Heavenly Mindedness, his Devotedness to the Interests of CHRIST, and
Undissembled Love; Remember them for your Imitation, as well as for the Glory
of GOD, and the Honor of this his Servant whom GOD has Honored; and Copy
after him. Which if you do, you will Reflect an Honor upon a Glorious CHRIST,
and find the Comfort of a true Christian Life. Nor then will you, or can you
forget all his Labors of Love among you, to Testify a Grateful sense thereof
to his Glorious MASTER who Furnished and sent Him, and Continued Him thus long
among you; and to Him also, by showing Kindness to the Dead, his Sorrowful
Family, the Widow, and the Fatherless; and this ye will do as unto CHRIST, and
it cannot go without a Reward. And you will Testify your Love to him (as well as
to your selves) in Choosing a Wise, Humble, Pious and Faithful Man to Succeed
him in that Great Work which he with the greatest Diligence, Zeal and
Faithfulness Prosecuted. Your eyes will be to the Great Shepherd and Bishop of
your Souls, By Faith and Prayer you will wait upon him for Direction therein,
and for his giving you another PASTOR after His own Heart, that shall again
Feed you with Knowledge and Understanding. And in all Endeavors about the same
will be Concerned to maintain a Unity of Spirit in the Bond of Peace, and this
will be the way also to have the GOD of Peace dwelling with you.

IN a Word,

IF you draw this Example into Imitation, with a Peaceful Serenity, and Holy
Joy, will you meet the Sentence of Death as he did: And find it a Discharge
from your Tabernacles of Clay, and all the Exercises of Time, and an Inlet into
the Joys of your LORD, where He is, with whom, together with an Innumerable
Company, the General Assembly and CHURCH of the first Born, the Spirits of Just
Men made Perfect, you will drink of those Rivers of Pleasures that Eternally
flow at the Right Hand of GOD. Which GOD Graciously Grant may be the Portion of
us all, through the Grace and Mediation of our Ascended and Exalted REDEEMER.

FINIS.

