Mr. Gay's SERMON Upon Occasion of Governor BELCHER's Arrival.

The Duty of People to pray for and praise their Rulers. A SERMON At the
Lecture in Hingham, August 12. 1730. On Occasion of the Arrival of His
EXCELLENCY Jonathan Belcher, Esquire To His Government.

By Ebenezer Gay.

Published at the Desire of the Hearers.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed by Thomas Fleet in Pudding-Lane, near the Townhouse,
1730.

A SERMON At the Lecture in Hingham, etc.
PSALM. LXXII. 15. the latter part of the Verse. Prayer also shall be made for
him continually, and daily shall he be praised.


KING David, having appointed Solomon his Son to succeed him in the Throne of
Israel, expressed his Concern that he might be a wise and just Ruler, by
praying for him, as in the first Verse of this Psalm, Give the King thy
Judgments, O God, and thy Righteousness unto the King's Son. The King's Son is
styled the King, because he was anointed, and did sit on the Throne of the
Kingdom, his aged Father yet living. This Prayer of David for his Successor was
acceptable to God, who immediately gave him assurance that it should be
granted, by enabling him to foresee and foretell the Glories of Solomon's Reign;
though it must be observed and acknowledged, that the Prophecy thereof recorded,
does ultimately refer to the Kingdom of a greater than Solomon, the blessed
Messiah, of whom Solomon in all his Glory was an illustrious Type.

In this remarkable Prediction (which amply and elegantly describes a happy
Government, such as we are this Day rejoicing in) we may take Notice, 1. Of the
Equity of Solomon's Government: He shall judge thy People with Righteousness,
and thy Poor with Judgment. This his good Father prayed that he might do, and
this the Spirit of Prophecy. said that he would do; and that he accordingly did
so, appears from the sacred History of his Reign. He soon gave proof of the
Wisdom of God that was in him to do Judgment. The Queen of Sheba discerned and
pronounced, that it was because the Lord loved Israel, that he made him King,
to do Judgment and Justice. The Throne is established by Righteousness, and the
King adorned therewith. Job 29.14. I put on Righteousness, and it clothed me:
my Judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem. 2. The Peaceableness of his Government;
The Mountains shall bring peace to the People, and the little Hills by
Righteousness -- In his days shall be abundance of peace. It is said, that the
Mountains and Hills shall bring Peace, either only because Judea was a
mountainous and hilly Country; or because Peace should so abound, as that even
those places should be safe and quiet, where wild Beasts and Robbers were wont
to lurk, that they might do Mischief. Happy is the Government, under which Men
lead a quiet and peaceable Life. 3. The Mercifulness of his Government toward
the poor and oppressed, and the severity of it toward the insolent Oppressors.
He shall judge the poor of the People, he shall save the Children of the needy,
and shall break in pieces the Oppressor. -- He shall deliver the needy when he
cries: the poor also, and him that has no helper -- he shall redeem their
Soul from deceit and violence: and precious shall their Blood be in his sight.
-- Whereas many Princes did not value the Lives of their poor Subjects, he
would make a precious Account of the Blood of the meanest and most despised
among his People, and defend them against those who thirsted for it, or revenge
it on any that should shed it. As good Magistrates are Fathers to their Country
in general, so particularly to the poor, that are most helpless and exposed. 4.
The Piety of his Government: that Religion should flourish under it: They shall
fear thee (i. e. God) as long as the Sun and Moon endure, throughout all
Generations. The building of the Temple, and establishing God's Worship
therein, did promote Religion in Solomon's time, which was continued, though not
without Interruption, in the time of his Successors, the Kings of Judah, and
afterward until Christ, in and by whom this Prediction and Promise was most
fully accomplished Pool.
The advancement of pure and undefiled Religion is the great End and highest
Honor of Civil Government. 5. The refreshing Influence of his Government,
metaphorically set forth; He shall come down like Rain upon the mown Grass: as
Showers that water the Earth. Whereas cruel Tyrants are like Storms of Wind and
Hail, that destroy the Fruits of the Earth, Solomon's just and wise, kind and
gentle Administration, would be like the Rain that distills on the Grass, and
causes it to spring again after it has been mowed; like the sweet Showers that
water the Earth, and make all the Fruits of it to revive and look pleasant. In
his days shall the righteous flourish. So when Job sat Chief, and dwelt as a
King in the Army, and chose out the way of the People, they waited for him as
for the Rain, and they opened their Mouths wide as for the latter Rain. Job
29.23. Good Government is like the Rain, comfortable and beneficial; the Fruits
produced thereby are alike grateful and pleasant. 6. The large Extent and vast
Riches of his Kingdom; He shall have dominion also from Sea to Sea, (from the
red to the mediterranean Sea) and from the River (Euphrates) unto the ends of
the Earth. The utmost bounds of the Land toward Egypt. Solomon reigned over
all Kingdoms, from the River unto the Land of the Philistines, and unto the
border of Egypt. 1 Kin. 4.21. They that dwell in the Wilderness shall bow
before him: and his Enemies shall lick the dust, in token of humble subjection
to him. The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring Presents: the Kings
of Sheba and Seba shall offer Gifts: Tea, all Kings shall fall down before him:
all Nations shall serve him. This was hyperbolically spoken of Solomon, that
all Kings shall fall down before him, and all Nations serve him: but it may be
strictly applied to Christ, and shall be literally verified in him, the Prince
of the Kings of the Earth, at whose Name every Knee under Heaven shall bow. --
He shall live, i. e. long and prosperously, as Solomon did, and to him shall be
given of the Gold of Sheba. This was done first to Solomon by the Queen of
Sheba, 1 Kin. 10. and afterward to Christ by the wise Men that came from the
East to worship him as soon as he was born, Matt. 2.11. 7. The pious and
dutiful Behavior of the King's Subjects with respect to him, is spoken of in
my Text, Prayer also shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he be
praised. His People should constantly pray for him, which would make him and
his Reign so great a Blessing to them; and every Day should they have occasion
to praise him, to commend the Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness of his Government.


The Text consists of two parts, and so my Discourse upon it fitly may of
these two Propositions, viz. I. That Prayer should continually be made for the
Ruler of a People. II. That daily should he be praised.


Prop I. That Prayer should continually be made for the Ruler of a People.
To pray continually, is, according as the Phrase is used in Scripture, to give
one's self to Prayer, to pray very frequently, in all fit Seasons, and with
unsainting perseverance. And thus is the Ruler of a People to be prayed for by
them. King Solomon's People did no more than was their Duty, when Prayer was
made by them for him continually.

Our strict Obligation to, the great Importance, Reasonableness and Advantage
of this religious and loyal Practice, may easily be demonstrated.

1. The Will of the universal Sovereign, almighty Lawgiver and Judge, revealed
in the Scriptures, has made it the indispensable and unquestionable Duty of a
People to pray continually for their Ruler, or Rulers under him. The declared
Will of God is the Measure and Ground of our Duty, and should be the Reason and
Motive of our Obedience. His Commandment is exceeding broad: It extends to all
the Relations, civil, sacred, and domestic, which Men sustain, and enjoins and
urges every Duty belonging thereunto. Among the Duties required in his Word,
of a People toward a Magistrate, this is undeniably one, that they pray
continually for him. We are commanded to pray for all Men, and consequently for
those that rule over us. By what is said in our Text, the People of Israel were
admonished of, and obliged to this their Duty toward Solomon, to make continual
Prayer for him. The Words of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. plainly show what
the Will of God is concerning this Practice: I exhort therefore, says he, that
first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be
made for all Men: For Kings, and for all that are in Authority. -- For this is
good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. It is good, being
agreeable to the Will and Commandment of God; and acceptable in his sight,
because enjoined by his Law. The Service which pleases him is prescribed by
him. In vain do we worship him otherwise than according to his Appointment. It
is therefore the good and acceptable Will of God, that we should pray, as for
all Men, so particularly for those in Authority.

2. In regard to the public Good, Prayer should continually be made for the
Ruler of a People. The State of a People is commonly prosperous or adverse,
according as their Rulers are good or bad. The safety of the Commonwealth very
much depends on the Skill and Faithfulness of those who sit at Helm, and steer
its Affairs. As Rulers were ordained for this End, so they are in the highest
Capacity to advance the public Weal; and they have also the greatest Power and
Opportunities to obstruct the same. The Peace and Prosperity, the Glory and
Happiness, which a just and religious Government brings to a People, the Spirit
of the Lord declares by the Mouth of David, 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4. The God of Israel
said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me. He that rules over Men must be just,
ruling in the fear of God: And he shall be as the light of the Morning, when
the Sun rises, even a Morning without Clouds; as the tender Grass springing
out of the Earth by clear shining after Rain.

Rulers are the light of a People, and as when the Sun shines brightly, there
is a pleasant Day over the face of the Earth, so when they shine with Wisdom,
Justice, Meekness and the like, and shed abroad the reviving Rays and benign
Influences of good Government, there is a cheerful Day of Prosperity enjoyed;
truly their Light is sweet. But if they are over clouded with Ignorance and
Vice, there is commonly much Darkness upon a People, and a melancholy state of
things to be seen. If they know not, neither will understand, but walk on in
Darkness, unrighteous and mischievous Courses, all the Foundations of the Earth
are out of Course: And if the Foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous
do? -- Religion flourishes or decays in a Kingdom or Country, according as
Rulers show themselves affected thereto in their Conversations. Their Examples
are usually more influential on the Morals of People, than their Laws. And
therefore, since Righteousness exalts a Nation, and Sin is the Reproach and
Ruin of a People, it is of unspeakable Consequence to them, that their Rulers
be Men fearing God, walking before them as their Guides in all paths of Virtue.
The Piety of Rulers deriveth many Blessings on a People, and their Wickedness
involves them in Misery, and pulls down the sorest Judgments on a Land, as the
History of the Kings of Israel and Judah shows, and the Experience of all
Ages may attest. God often deals with a People as their Rulers do good or evil
in his sight. David was an eminent Saint, a. Man after God's own Heart, and
remarkable Prosperity did attend his Reign: Yea, the Land of Judah fared the
better for that good King after he was dead. "How often did God profess for his
Servant David's sake to preserve Judah from Destruction?"

When the King of Assyria, in Hezekiah's time, was coming with a mighty Host
against Jerusalem, God said, I will defend this City to save it, for mine own
sake, and far my Servant David's sake, Isa. 37.35. On the other hand, the
Instances of God's Vengance on a People for the Sins of their Rulers are many.
Because Manasseh King of Judah did wickedly above all that the Amorites did,
therefore the Lord stretched over Jerusalem the Line of Samaria, and the
Plunament of the House of Ahab. Among all the Iniquities which drew down such
heavy Judgments upon the Land of Judah, the Sins of Manasseh are reckoned the
chief, the most provoking Cause. His Country felt the ill Effects of his
Wickedness after his Death, notwithstanding his Humiliation and Repentance.
When Josiah wrought such a notable Reformation, it is said, Notwithstanding the
Lord turned not from the fierceness of his Wrath, wherewith his anger was
kindled against Judah, because of all the Provocations that Manasseh had
provoked him withal. 2 Kin. 23.26 God avenged Readiness perfidious Cruelty toward
the Gibeonites with a triennial Famine after his decease, 2 Samuel 21.1. There
was a Famine in the Days of David three Years, Year after Year: And David
enquired of the Lord, and the Lord answered, it is for Saul, and for his bloody
House, because he slew the Gibeonites. Not only the gross Iniquities of vicious
Rulers, but also the Faults and Miscarriages of those that are pious, are the
Cause, or at least the Occasion of God's inflicting Judgments on their People.
When good King David, in fit of Pride, numbered his People, it is expressly said,
1 Chr. 21.7. God was displeased with this thing, therefore he smote Israel. So
God visited the Pride and Ingratitude of Hezekiah upon his Subjects, 2 Chr.
32.25. Hezekiah rendered not again according to the Benefit done unto him, for
his Heart was lifted up: therefore there was Wrath upon him, and upon Judah and
Jerusalem. God's Way is equal in this proceeding, though Men are apt to be
stumbled at it: Yea, David himself seems to speak as if He thought, it
otherwise, 1 Chr. 21.17. David said unto God, Is it not I that commanded the
People to be numbered? even I it is that have finned and done evil indeed; but
as for these Sheep, what have they done? let thine Hand, I pray thee, O Lord my
God, be on me, and on my Father's House, but not on thy People, that they
should be plagued. Rulers are political Fathers of their People, and God
righteously visits the Iniquities of Fathers upon Children, unto the third and
fourth Generation. Ex. 20.5. Not that God arbitrarily inflicts undeserved
Punishment on any: He never punishes a People more than their own Iniquities
deserve: But he might exercise more Patience toward them; His Anger would not
break out so soon, nor burn so fiercely, were it not for the Provocations of
these their Fathers. The holy God, that he might engage People to do all that
in them lies, to prevent the Corruption of Rulers, and the more deter Rulers
from Sin, does in the Course of his Providence visit the Iniquities of Rulers
upon People.

From all which it is evident, that the public Good calls for Prayer to be
made continually for the Rulers of a People; that they may be wise as Angels of
God, impartially just, and truly religous, inclined to all Virtue, and
restrained from all Sin. In praying for those in Authority, we pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, the prosperity of the Church and State: We exercise and
express Love to our Country, and a due Concern for the public Welfare. If by
Prayer we obtain God's Blessing upon Rulers, we procure his Favor to the Land,
and take the shortest and most effectual Way of furthering the public Good. We
are exhorted to pray for Kings and all in Authority, on this Account, for this
End, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty.
Would a People live, and enjoy Quietness and Prosperity? Would they have any
Honesty or Godliness found amongst them? then let them pray for all in
Authority. They show themselves true Friends to the public Interest, who pray
continually for the Rulers of a People: and thus it may be advanced by those
who cannot in any other way be Serviceable thereunto. As without praying for
our selves, we can have no ground to expect personal Favors; so without
praying for Rulers we cannot reasonably hope for public Blessings. We ought to
pray for all Men; and we do so, and for all kind of Blessings in their behalf,
when we pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority.

3. The Law of Gratitude obliges People continually to pray for their Rulers.
They that exercise Authority upon Men are called Benefactors, Luke 22.25. and
if Magistrates duly exercise the Power they have over others, they highly merit
this Title from them, for they do a great deal of Good. They are styled Gods,
not only in respect of their Dignity, but because they resemble him in their
extensive Beneficence. They are the Pillars of the Commonwealth, the main
Supporters of it, without which the Fabric would unavoidably sink. -- They are
the Shields of the Earth, defending a People from their Enemies. They are the
Shepherds of Israel, that with tenderness and Compassion feed the People
according to the Integrity of their Hearts, and guide them according to the
Skilfulness of their Hands. To them under God People are indebted for the
Protection of their Lives and Liberties, Names and Estates, for the
Preservation of good Order and happy Peace, for the Security and Comfort they
have in all their Enjoyments. Rulers are God's Ministers for good to a People,
attending continually on this very thing. Romans 12. -- They are vigilant and
solicitous for the temporal Interest and spirititual Benefit of their People:
studious in contriving, and industrious in prosecuting Measures for the
advantage of the Public. They take much Care and Pains to dispense Judgment,
to encourage Virtue, and suppress Vice. Such Rulers are called Lam. 4.20. the
Breath of a People's Nostrils, and under their Shadow they enjoy Safety, eat
the Fruits of their Labor, "possess the Comforts and Conveniences of Life,
with security from Rapine, from Contention, from Solicitude, from continual
fears of Wrong and Outrage."

People are greatly obliged to such Benefactors, and are in Gratitude bound to
pray for them, that God would reward them with the choicest Blessings: think
upon them for good, accoding to all the good which they do to his People. It is
true, that unjust and oppressive Rulers do a great deal of Mischief. Prove:
28.15. As a roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the
poor People. Instead of feeding them as a Shepherd, he terrifies and devours
them, like a roaring Lion and hungry Bear. Yet if Rulers are bad, People
receive some Good from their Government, at least in comparison of the
Mischiefs they would suffer from Anarchy, or a total want of Government. And so
far as any Rulers are beneficial to a People, they should acknowledge the same,
and desire and pray for their Good and Happiness, which they best do by praying
heartily for their Reformation. Let the King live, or God save the King, was an
ancient Form of Prayer, which good Men have used even for bad Princes.

4. The Need which the Ruler of a People stands in of continual Prayer to be
made for him, enforces the Duty under Consideration. It is a weighty and
difficult Business which Magistrates are employed in: There is a heavy burden
lying on them, who have the Government on their Shoulders: And though they are
called Gods, yet are they by Nature Men of like Passions with others. And
therefore they depend on God for Wisdom, and all necessary Qualifications for
Government, and disireable Success in the management of it. They receive from
him, not only Their Authority, but also their Ability to rule. Prove. 8.15. By
me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me Princes rule, and Nobles,
even all the Judges of the Earth. And they need the Prayers of all for them,
that the Spirit of the Lord may rest upon them, the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and
the fear of the Lord; that they may be assisted and prospered in their
Administrations. They have the Infirmities which are common to Men, and they
are surrounded with peculiar Temptations. Principalities and Powers, wicked
Spirits in high Places, the Rulers of the Darkness of this World bend their
Malice and Force especially against them. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Satan stood up against
Israel, and provoked David to Number Israel. The Devil is restless in his
Endeavors to seduce the Leaders of a People, that these may cause the People
to err. They are exposed more than others to the Snares of this World, the
Pleasures, Honors and Riches of it, which are very dangerous Temptations unto
them to Luxury, Pride, Avarice and Oppression: So that they need extraordinary
measures of Grace, restraining and sanctifying, and special Assistances from
God, to be obtained by their own and People's Prayers. Such Rulers as have any
sense of their dependence on God, their need of his Counsel to direct them, his
Power to help them, and Mercy to pardon them, desire the Prayers of their
People for them: And People violate the Law of Charity, if they do not
conscientiously perform this good Office for them. Darius, the Persian Monarch,
was willing to have an Interest in the Prayers of God's People in the Temple at
Jerusalem, therefore he commanded his Officers to furnish the Jewish Elders
with whatsoever they had need of, that (said he) they may offer Sacrifice unto
the God of Heaven, and pray for the Life of the King, and of his Sons. Ezr.
6.10.

5. GOD is glorified in a special manner by continual Prayer made for the Ruler
of a People. -- We glorify God whenever, and for whom, and whatsoever we pray
as we ought. But by praying for those in Authority, we give Glory to God in a
way somewhat peculiar: We do special Honor to his great Name. For hereby we
emphatically confess him to be the God of Gods, the Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings; that he is higher than the highest on Earth; that Rulers are dependent
on him, and stand in absolute need of his Counsel, Succor, and Blessing: that
without him they can do nothing: that it is he that gives Salvation to Kings,
and to People by them: that the King's Heart is in the Hand of the Lord, as the
Rivers of Water he turns it whithersoever he will. We own and avow Him to be
our supreme Benefactor, from whom we receive all that Good which comes to us
through the Hands of the chief visible Ministers of his Providence. We declare
that we put not our trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in whom is no
help: that we don't repose our Confidence in them, nor raise our Expectations
from them, any otherwise than as they are his Agents and Instruments, which he
is pleased to make use of for our Comfort and Happiness. That we don't look
that they can be any farther a Blessing to us, than he shall see good to render
them so. Psalm. 20.9. Save, Lord, let the King hear us when we call. As if the
People should say, Save the King, Lord, preserve and bless him, that when we
are distressed and cry to him for help, he may be inclined and enabled to help
us. Or, Save us, Lord, and that by making our King instrumental for our
Preservation, when we seek to him for help. -- Hence then as we regard the
Honor of God, and would bring a singular Glory to his Name, we should pray,
continually for the Government over us.

6. Continual Prayer made for the Ruler of a People tends to engage and
influence them to discharge their whole Duty to him. Men having revolted from
God, they are naturally averse from honoring of, and submitting to his
Authority which Rulers are vested with, and are prone to carry irreverently,
frowardly and stubbornly toward their lawful Magistrates: Having practically
renounced Allegiance to the glorious King of all, they are unwilling to yield
due Respect unto his Officers and Vicegerents. Not being in subjection to the
original Power of the Creator, they do not readily obey the derivative Power of
earthly Governors.

Now what better and more effectual Means can People use to mortify that
Corruption in them, which prompts them to undutiful Behavior toward their
Rulers, than to pray continually for them? The sincere practice of this Duty
would have a mighty Influence into all the rest which they owe to such as are
in Authority, and make them subject to the Powers that be ordained of God, and
move them to render Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear
to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. If we sincerely pray that Rulers may be
faithful in the discharge of their Duty, we shall be seriously concerned that
we may be so in the performance of ours. If we earnestly pray for the success
of their Administrations, we shall be forward to contribute what we are able
thereunto. This would keep the Hearts of People well disposed toward their
Rulers, and prevent or cure all Tho'ts and Desires of invading their
Prerogatives, infringing their Rights, and impeding their Government. Prayer is
the exercise of holy Love; and Exercise increases and confirms Habits; and
Love is the fulfilling of the Law. If People are ill affected to their Rulers,
Conscience will accuse them of Hypocrisy in praying for them: and so either
their Prayers will be hindered by their evil Dispositions, or else these will
be extinguished by their Prayers.

Thus it is a plain and important Duty, a reasonable Service, an excellent,
commendable and useful Practice, which is spoken of in our Text, as that which
should be observed with respect to a Civil Ruler, Prayer shall be made for him
continually.

Prop. II. That daily should the Ruler of a People be praised.
Men are bound to honor in their Hearts, and with their Lips, those whom God
has vested with his Authority, and advanced by his Providence to rule over
them. 1 Pet. 2.17. Fear God; Honor the King: If we obey the first, we shall
not despise the second of these divine Precepts. Magistrates are God's
Representatives upon Earth, they bear his Character, and shine with some Rays
of his Majesty; and ought therefore to be highly respected according to the
dignity of their Station. Much Honor is put upon them by God, and much should
be paid unto them by Men. They are the Heads of the Tribes, and more honorable
than their Brethren. They are the Protectors of the civil and religious
Liberties of a People, the Conservators of the public Peace, and Revengers to
execute Wrath upon those that disturb it; and should be esteemed greatly, and
had in Reputation for their Work sake. They are the Fathers of their Country,
and the fifth Commandment obliges us to honor them "The fisth Commandment is
as the Hinge of the two Tables: many of the Ancients thought it was the last
Commandment of the first Table, and the Moderns think it is the first
Commandment of the last Table; for it commands our Duty to the noblest sort
of Men, but not merely as Men, but as the Officers of God."
When Joseph was made Ruler over all the Land of Egypt, they cried before him,
Abrech, tender Father, (which our Translators render, Bow the Knee, Genesis
41.43.) It is the Duty of People to express their Satisfaction in, and
Thankfulness for, the wise, just and beneficial Administrations of their
Rulers: and commend the Skill and Faithfulness which they discover in the
management of arduous and important Affairs.

People should not easily conceive Prejudices, nor utter Complaints against
those in Authority. It is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of
thy People, Act. 23.5. It was the Sin of the licentious Heretics in the
primitive Days of Christianity, to revile the Gods; to speak evil of Rulers. We
should be far from imitating of them; for this Sin is represented as very
heinous, and the Punishment thereof as very heavy. 2 Pet. 2.10, 11, 12. -- They
despise Government, presumptuous are they, self willed: they are not afraid to
speak evil of Dignities: whereas Angels, that are greater in Power and Might,
bring not a railing Accusation against them before the Lord. But these as
natural brute Beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things
that they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their own Corruption. See
also Jude, ver. 8-10. It may be as commonly from Ignorance, as Ill Will, that
Men speak evil of Dignities: They are wont to accuse, arraign and censure those
Proceedings, which they are incompetent Judges of, not having Capacity or
Opportunity to know the Reasons thereof. There are Arcana Imperii, the
Mysteries of State, which every one cannot penetrate into. People should be
willing to believe, that ordinarily their Rulers are able to discern more and
farther than they, having greater Advantages therefore. They should be cautious
lest they speak evil of those things which they understand not; and not presume
that they know the way better than their Leaders. How often has the public
Good been furthered by those Determinations and Actions of Rulers, which many
have clamoured against, as tending directly to the hurt and ruin of the
Commonwealth? People should be afraid to speak evil of good Rulers, Number.
12.10. Wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my Servant Moses?
Neither should they be forward to speak evil even of wicked and oppressive
Rulers; but should first penitently reflect on their own Sins, which provoked
God to let such have dominion over them. Sometimes the vilest Men are exalted,
Psalm. 12.8. so Dan. 4.17. The most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and
gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of Men. He
is provoked by the Sins of a wicked People to do so. We have this Account of
Zedekiah's evil and unhappy Government, 2 King. 24.19, 20. He did that which
was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that Jehoiakim had done;
for through the Anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, until
he had cast them out from his Presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the King
of Babylon. "The People's 020 Sins were the true Cause why God gave them wicked
Kings, whom he suffered to do wickedly, that they might bring the long-deserved
and threatened Punishments upon themselves and their People" It is storied of a
certain holy Man; that he expostulated on a time with God, why he had permitted
Phocas, being so cruel a Man, to be Emperor? To whom a Voice answered, that if
a worse Man could have been found, he should have been set over them, the
Wickedness of the World requiring it.


People should take to themselves their share of the blame of the Mis-Conduct
and Mal-Administration of the Government over them, and not impute it all to
their Rulers. Much of the Fault is their own. Their Sins incense God's
righteous Displeasure, so that he withholds or withdraws his Spirit and
Presence from their Rulers, and then through the prevalence of Temptations, the
Influence of bad Counsel, and the power of their own Lusts and Passions, they
are misled into those Courses, which are destructive to the Weal and
Tranquillity of a People. It is said, 2 Samuel 24.1. The Anger of the Lord was
kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them, to say, go number
Israel and Judah. People should be more ready to judge themselves, than to
inveigh against their Rulers, when it goes ill with them: should look upon
themselves to be, in part, if not principally, the faulty Cause of the ill
management of public Affairs, and not lay all the blame thereof on their
Rulers.

Indeed Magistrates are not to be flattered in their Vices, nor praised for
what they do amiss: They who are to reprove in the Gate, should not fear their
Faces, nor spare their Sins: But People should not aggravate their Faults, nor
rashly censure their Decrees and Acts, which they apprehend to be Errors in
Government. They should more readily observe, and with more pleasure relate,
what those in Authority do that is tending to the public Welfare. They should
be very thankful to them for all the Care and Pains they take in consulting and
promoting their Good, in zealously defending their Rights, impartially
dispensing of Judgment, encouraging of good Works, and correcting the evil.
People should rejoice in them as their Light, and speak of them as their great
Benefactors: Should praise them in the Gate; rise up and call them blessed; and
so encourage and comfort the Hearts, and strengthen the Hands of their Rulers,
by showing themselves easy under their Government.

Wise and pious Rulers, it is true, do not love the praise of Men, more than
the praise of God: Nor seek honor of Men in comparison of the honor that
comes from God only. They are not pleased and puffed up with the extravagant
Commendations that any bestow upon them; as Herod was, when the People gave a
shout at his fine Oration, and said, It is the Voice of a God, and not of a
Man, Act. 12.32. They have a greater Reward in view than that of popular
Applause: They are solicitous to improve the Talents committed to them, so as
that they may receive the life-breathing Euge from the Mouth of their great
Master and Judge, Well done, good and faithful Servants, ye have been faithful
over a few things: enter ye into the Joy of your Lord, Matt. 25.

But though good Rulers don't make the praise of Men their great Aim, or seek it
as their Reward, yet they value an Interest in the Esteem and Affections of
their People, which their praising of them declares; and it is an Encouragement
and Comfort to them in all their Cares and Labors for the Public, to fee
People fatisfied with, and thankful for their Administrations. Prove. 27.21. As
the fining Pot for Silver, and the Furnace for Gold; so is a Man to his Praise.
If a Man be wise and good, he is by his praise made better, more thankful to
God, more respectful to Men, more watchful against every thing that may blemish
his Reputation, more diligent to improve himself, and do good to others, that
he may answer the just Expectations of his Friends from him. Rulers are
encouraged to lay out, themselves for the public Good, when they are accepted
of the multitude of their Brethren. Esth. 10.3. Mordecai the Jew was next unto
King Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his
Brethren, seeking the Wealth of his People, and speaking Peace to all his Seed.

And certainly much Praise is due unto good Rulers from an obliged People: It
is a just Debt they owe to their Protectors and Benefactors. The prudent and
tender Fathers of a Country should be acknowledged and blessed, as Job was when
he sat Chief: Job 29.11, 12, 13. When the Ear heard me, then it blessed me; and
when the Eye saw me, it gave witness to me. Because I delivered the Poor when
he cried, and the Fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The blessing
of him that was ready to perish came upon me. Daily should the good Ruler of a
People be praised, they saying of him, or to him, as Tertullus unto Felix, Act.
24.2, 3. By thee we enjoy great quietness, and that worthy Deeds are done unto
this Nation by thy Providence, we accept it always, and in all places with
great thankfulness.

To conclude, Let us now be exhorted to the sincere Practice of the Duties
recommended from this Text.

Among the Directions which the Apostle Paul gave to Timothy, and so to every
Minister of Christ, for the regular and faithful discharge of his Office in the
House of God, this was a principal one, That he should take care that
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all
Men; especially for Kings, and for all that are in Authority. 1. Tim. 4.

I thought it proper for me to attend this part of my Duty, as a Minister of
the Gospel, at this time, when a universal Joy runs through this Province, at the
safe and happy Arrival of His Excellency Governor BELCHER: hoping that a
Discourse of this Nature would make the deeper Impression on your Hearts, now
you are expressing so much of Duty and Affection toward him our welcome Ruler.
It was once a Lamentation made over Jerusalem, Eze. 19.14. She has no strong
Rod to be a Scepter to rule! But blessed be God, this is not yet our Case: He
has raised up from among the Sons of New England, and by the good hand of his
Providence led into the highest Seat of Government here, One, who (we trust)
will naturally care for our State, and industriously seek the Welfare of his
People, rule us with Clemency and Justice, and be unto us with Clemency and
Justice, and be unto us as the light of the Morning, when the Sun rises after
a darksome Night; as the tender Grass springing out of the Earth by clear
shining after Rain.

Let Prayer be made for him continually, and daily let him be praised.

There is great Cause of Thankfulness and Praise to Almighty God, whatever a
murmuring Spirit in any may suggest to the contrary, for the Blessing we enjoy
in our Civil Rulers. -- That our KING is a nursing Father, and our QUEEN a
nursing Mother, who have expressed their tender Care of, and Concern for us,
their poor but dutiful Children, in these distant parts of their Dominion. --
That we have such in immediate Authority over us, as are Men of Wisdom,
Integrity, and Piety: Judges, in so good a measure, as at the first, and
Counselors as at the beginning: Officers who are Peace, and Exactors
Righteousness. Solomon observes, Prove. 29.2. When the Righteous are in
Authority, the People rejoice: but when the wicked bears rule, the People
mourn.

O let us for Conscience sake study and perform our Duty to our Rulers! -- Let
us pray heartily and continually for them. This is not thought of and practiced
by many, as the importance of the Duty requires. Too many spend more of their
Time and Breath in talking against them, censuring their Conduct, and venting
Complaints against them, than they do in imploring God's Direction for them,
and Blessing on them. Continual Prayer would be found the best Method People
can use for the prevention or redress of Grievances, that arise from the
Maladministration of Government. This is indisputably a lawful Weapon with
which they may defend themselves against tyrannical Powers. "I must observe
(said a holy Minister of Christ, who lived in some of the unhappy Reigns in
England Mr. Baxter.
) that most Christians are so cold and formal in their Prayers for the Rulers
of the World, and of the Church, that we have great Reason to impute the
Unhappiness of Governors, very much to their neglect: Almost all Men (says he)
are taken up so much with their own Concernments, that they put off the public
Concernments of the World, and of the Church and State, with a few customary
heartless Words; and understand not the meaning of the three first Petitions of
the Lord's Prayer, and the Reason of their precedence, or put them not up with
that feeling, as they do the other three. If we could once observe, that the
generality of Christians were more earnest and importunate with God, for the
hallowing of his Name through all the World, and the coming of his Kingdom, and
the obeying of his Will in Earth, as it is in Heaven, and the Conversion of the
Kings and Kingdoms of the World, than for any of their personal Concernments, I
should take it for a better Prognostic of the Happiness of Kings and Kingdoms,
than any that has yet appeared in our Days".

O that this Duty might be better considered and observed by us than hitherto
it has been!

Let our Rulers have our sincere Praises, as well as fervent Prayers. They are
sent by God, for the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2. 14. and we are
ungrateful indeed to such Benefactors, if we don't make the small Returns of
our Praise to them, and accept of their very worthy Deeds for the public Weal,
with great Thankfulness. And if we pray, as we ought, continually for those in
Authority, we shall have more Occasion and Incentive daily to praise them, and
to bless God for them.

I conclude the present Discourse with the Words that David the Son of Jesse
did his Prophecy concerning Solomon's Government, which was a Type of Christ's,
and also his Prayers, in the close of this Psalm [And you all join in the
Doxology, Intercession, and double Amen] Blessed be the Lord God, the God of
Israel, who only does wondrous things. And blessed be his glorious Name for
ever, and let the whole Earth be filled with his Glory. Amen, and Amen.


