A Serious Word TO THE POSTERITY OF Holy MEN; Calling upon them TO Exalt their
Fathers GOD.

Being the Abstract of a Number of SERMONS Preached, By John Williams, M. A.
Pastor of the Church of Christ in Deerfield.

BOSTON, New England: Printed by B. Green, MDCCXXIX.

The Privilege and Duty OF THE Children of godly Parents.
EXODUS XV. 2. The Lord is -- my Fathers God; and I will exalt Him.


THE preceding Chapter gives an historical Account of the wonderful Providence
of GOD, in completing Israel's Deliverance from their Egyptian Enemies, by
drowning Pharaoh and his Host in (...) Red Sea. And this Chapter, wherein the
Text is, contains a Song of Praise to GOD, in which Moses and the Israelites
expressed their thankful Acknowledgements upon that occasion. It Is the most
ancient Song we know of; a Divine Song. The Composure is elegant, and in a very
(...) strain: and doubtless holy Moses was directed (...) inspired from above
in the drawing of it up. The Contents of it were very acceptable and well
^^easing to GOD. As He by his Spirit indicted the Song, so by his Providence He
ordered the Delivery of it to his People, and putting it upon Record, for the
benefit of his Church to the end of the World.

It appears from the Song, that Moses terminated his Joy in the LORD, Israel's
mighty Redeemer: and that his highest Design was the Glory of GOD. His holy
Soul makes its Boast in and of GOD, and acknowledges the Power of the most High
manifested in the sight of all Israel. He thankfully makes mention of the Works
of Wonder and Mercy GOD had wro't for him and his People; and as a proper
Return, resolves upon a Life of Praise and Obedience.

Omitting other affecting Passages, I shall only take notice of what he says in
our Text. He is my Fathers God, and I will exalt Him. Here Is a pious
Acknowledgment of GOD in his Covenant Relation to his People; My Fathers God.
Which he (...) upon as Matter of Joy and Praise; it being an excellent
Privilege, to be the Posterity of such (...) early related to GOD and
interested in (...) And further in this he might have a View to the Engagement
or Motive, arising from that Consideration, to fear and honor GOD. Hence the
Resolution, which follows; -- And I will exalt Him.

The Observation I design to speak to, from the (...) Words, is this:

(...). THAT it is a high Privilege to be descended from godly Ancestors; and
it is the important Duty of such as are so privileged, to exalt the GOD of their
Fathers.

In the Prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall en^eavour to show, (1) That it is
a great Privilege to be the Descendant^ of godly Ancestors. (2) That such are
under special Obligations to exalt the GOD of their Fathers.

PROP. I. It is a great Favor to be descended from religious Ancestors; or a
very valuable Privilege to be born of godly Parents.

This is a point, which the holy Scriptures do abundantly confirm; and many
Considerations might be offered for the Clearing of it.

1. It is no little Honor put upon them, to be descended of Ancestors so
worthy and excellent.

It is accounted a great Privilege to be the Posterity of rich and honorable
Parents; of Parents that are great Favorites in the Courts of Earthly Princes.
But surely they are more highly favored and exalted, that are born of
Religious Parents; descended from Godly Ancestors. For the Righteous are the
Excellent in the Earth; the wisest and best, the only great and truly
honorable: of high Account with the blessed GOD, with the Lord JESUS CHRIST,
and with holy Angels. They are called a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood
unto God, his peculiar Treasure and Inheritanc^^ They are said to be Kings and
Priests unto God (...) Heirs of God, and Joynt-Heirs with Jesus Christ^ Such,
of whom the World is not worthy.

O what an Honor is it to be related to such! David thought it a great Thing
to be the King's Son in Law, (1 Samuel 18. 23.) And shall it seem a light thing
to us, to be the Children of such as are Kings and Priests unto GOD, who as
Princes have Power with GOD! Who, while in this World are his Favorites; and
when taken hence, are exalted to great Dignity and Happiness in the Kingdom of
Heaven!

The Jews counted it no small Honor to them, that they were the Offspring of
the holy Patriarchs^ It was what they gloried in (though not with a right
Spirit;) We have Abraham to our Father: We be Abraham's Seed, and were never in
bondage to any man. (...) Hence, they said in a way of Insult, to our blessed
Lord, Art thou greater than our Father Abraham? Whom make thou thy self? --
Our Lord reproved them indeed for sinfully resting in their Relation to
Abraham, as if this would secure them from GOD's Wrath, while yet they were
without the faith and holiness of Abraham. However their Abuse is no argument
that it was not a very valuable Privilege and Honor to be so de^cended. And it
is observable, in the Enumeration which the Apostle ( Romans 9.) makes of the
Advantages that the Jews had above all other Nations, he begins with that, Who
are Israelites, and adds afterward, Whose are the Fathers, viz. Abraham, Isaac
and Israel, and other Elders who by faith obtained a good Report. This (says
one) was the Jews first Title of Honor, that they descended from Him who was
by GOD himself Surnamed Israel, because as a Prince he had power with GOD and
prevailed.

2. The Children of godly Parents are further dignified and distinguished, by
the Covenant Relation, that is between GOD and Them.

They are the Children of Parents in Covenant with GOD: and in Consequence of
this, They are themselves also in a Covenant Relation to GOD, as other Children
are not. So the Song of Moses runs, He is my God, and I will prepare Him a
Habitation; my Fathers God, and I will exalt Him. This was the Covenant that
the LORD made with Abraham, That He would be a GOD unto Him, and to his Seed
after him. ( G^n. 17. 7.) Which Covenant was renewed with Isaac and Jacob, ^and
confirmed to their Posterity. Hence that of the Apostle, Romans 9. 4. Who are
Israelites; to whom pertain^th the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenant,
etc. They were by a National Adoption nearly related to GOD: Israel is called
his Son, (...) firstborn, Exodus 4. 22. GOD often mentions the
Covenant Relation between Him and the Jews, as their high Honor and Privilege.
Moses often takes notice to them; How GOD had chosen them to be a peculiar
People unto Himself, above all the Nations upon Earth. GOD directed, Moses to
let Pharaoh know the Relation that Israel stood in to Him; not of a Servant
merely, but of a Son and First Born; whose Liberty and Honor therefore He was
very jealous for. When GOD heard the Groaning of the Israelites under their
Egyptian Bondage; it is said, He remembered his Covena^ with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; and looked upon them with Compassion. They were (...) for their Fathers
sake: because of the Covenant made with their Fathers, which took in the
Children with the Parents. -- GOD spoke of himself to Moses and the Israelites,
as the GOD of their Fathers; to encourage their Faith in Him. (...) indeed
GOD's Covenant Relation is a very great Encouragement to Faith in the wors^ of
Time (See, Psalm. 22. 10, 11. and Isai. 63, 17, etc. ^ King 18. 26. and 2 Chronicles.
20. 6.) This may be improved for Encouragement of Hope, when surrounded with
Dangers, (see Genesis 46. 2, 3.) or when ready to be cast down with a sense of our
own Unworthiness. (See Genesis 32. 9, 10.) This may serve to excite and encourage
backsliding Professors to return. (See Jer. 3. 4, 14.) GOD calls them Children
still, though they are backsliding Children.

When GOD sent Moses unto the Children of Israel, He put those Words into his
Mouth, -- The Lord God of your Fathers, the GOD of Abraham, the GOD of Isaac,
and the GOD of Jacob, has sent me unto you: This is my Name for ever, and this
is my Memorial unto all Generations. (Exodus 5. 15.) Therefore he has given the
Seals of his Covenant from Generation to Generation; signifying that it is an
everlasting Covenant: not a personal Covenant with Abraham only, but an Entail
extending to all the Seed: and not to that (...) which is of the Law and
according to the Flesh, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, that
walk in his Steps, who is the Father of us all. He is the Father of the
Faithful under the New Testament-Dispensation, as well as under the Old. And
the Blessing of Abraham is come upon the Gentiles through Jesus Christ. The
Promise is still to you and to your Children; -- I will be a God to Thee and to
thy Seed after Thee. -- Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

And is it not then an exceeding great Favor and Privilege, to be born of
godly Parents, which brings us into this Covenant Relation to GOD! Upon this
account the initiating Seal of the Covenant is applied to the Infants of
Believers; which was Circumcision under the Law, but is Baptism now under the
Gospel. -- By this solemn Rite they are dedicated to GOD, declared Members of
the visible Church, and enrolled in the Family of CHRIST. His Mark is put upon
them, as being born in his house: his special Right in them asserted, and his
Providential Care engaged to them, as his Sons and Daughters, cast upon him
from the Womb. And hereby is furnished out a very acceptable Plea to be used in
Prayer by or for them, Psalm. 86. 16. Give thy strength to thy Servant, and save
the Son of thy Handmaid.

In a word, Unto them pertain the Promises: many great and precious Promises
are made to Believers concerning their Posterity. As that, Isai. 61. 9. Their
Seed shall be known, -- all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are
the Seed which the Lord has blessed. So Chap. 44. 3. I will pour out my Spirit
upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine Offspring. [See also, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
Psalm. 102. 28. -- 11 ^2. and innumerable other places.] Now these Promises
afford the Children of holy Parents abundant Encouragement to seek GOD, and put
into their Mouths such Pleas to urge in Prayer for Mercy and Grace, as the
Children of others cannot make use of.

All which speaks the Advantage of a Covenant Relation to GOD; and so the
Privilege they enjoy, who are descended of godly Ancestors.

I pass to say in the next place,

3. The Children of pious Parents have the Advantage of many Prayers put up for
them.

They have a peculiar Remembrance in the Prayers of the whole Church of GOD at
all times: who though they make Supplications and Intercessions for all Men, yet
do so in a particular manner for GOD'S People, and their Seed. Psalm. 90. 16.
Let thy work appear unto thy Servants, and thy Glory unto their Children.

But more especially do the praying Parents bear them upon their Hearts, in all
their Addresses to the Throne of Grace. How did Abraham pray even for Ishmael!
Genesis 17. 18. And Abraham said unto GOD, O that Ishmael might live before Thee!
-- Holy Job day by day, carried all his Children in fervent prayers of faith to
GOD for his Blessing. (See Job. 1. 5.) So David prayed, Give to Solomon my Son
a perfect Heart, 1 Chronicles. 29. 19.

The Children of godly Parents are the Subjects of many Prayers: And these very
fervent and importunate. We may well think that believing Parents lay out their
strongest Faith and Fervor in wrestling with GOD for the Graces and Blessings
of a well ordered Covenant to be dispensed to their dear Children.

Now is it not a great Privilege to have so many Prayers going up for them
continually; even effectual fervent Prayers of the Righteous, which avail much!
And must it not therefore be a great Privilege to be born of godly Parents!

4. They have the Advantage of early Instruction, (...) a Pious Education.

GOD said concerning Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. I know him, that he will command his
Children and his Household after him; and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
to do Justice and Judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he
has spoken of him. So David taught and charged his Son, Know thou the GOD of
thy Father, etc. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. -- Which we find Solomon afterward making
mention of, and copying out some of the Lessons he had learnt, to his own
Children. See Prove. 4 th. and 31 st. Chapters.

Pious Parents will not only pray for the Blessings of the Covenant to come
upon their Children; but will also put them in mind of the Bonds of the
Covenant, and instruct them in the Duties incumbent on them, as the devoted
Servants of GOD. GOD has made it the Duty of Parents to bring up their Children
in the Nurture and Admonition of the LORD. And this is more or less the Care of
all pious Parents. They make it their Care to teach their Children the good
Knowledge of the LORD, and to train them up in the ways of Religion. They bring
them to the House of GOD, to fit under the Means of Grace, and teach them to
Sanctify the Sabbath, and reverence the Word preached; while the Children of
many others learn from their ungodly Parents to despise and scoff as the
Ministry and Ordinances of GOD. They also Catechize and teach them at home;
affording them the Benefit of Family Prayer, and Family-Instruction; and often
counselling, warning, and exhorting them, as they fit in the house, or walk by
the way. They labor to keep up a good Government over them; to restrain them
from Sin; to keep them out of the way of Temptation; and in particular to save
them from the Snares of evil Company, and bring them to associate with such as
fear GOD. And surely such an Education must be accounted a great Privilege. It
is the most likely means to bring Persons to remember their Creator in the days
of their Youth: the age, wherein their Minds are apter to receive good
Impressions, and such as are usually the most durable and effectual.

5. They have the benefit of pious Examples set before them.

Examples of Parents and Predecessors have a very great Influence. Both
Scripture and History show the Truth of this observation. The Example of
Parents is usually present, and constantly near; and their Relation dear and
venerable. For which reasons their Example has the greater force, to draw their
Children to imitate them.

It is therefore a great Privilege to be descended of pious Parents. The Report
of the Godliness of our distant Ancestors, that are dead, tends to make us
ambitious of being godly also. Hence, we read of Hezekiah, 2 King. 18. 3. And
he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, according to all that
David his father did. And the View of our living Parents holy Conversation,
while they walk in their House with a perfect heart, this carries yet greater
Influence, to awe and allure us into an Imitation of them. Timothy doubtless
got Good by the Patterns, as well as Precepts and Instructions of his holy
Parents. Hence we read, 2 Timothy 1. 5. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned
Faith that is in Thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy
Mother Eunice.

6. They have their Parents Experiences of the gracious Presence of GOD, to
encourage them to seek Him.

Believers should be ready always to give an Answer to every Man that asks
them a Reason of the Hope that is in them. Wisdom is justified of her Children.
Pious Parents are usually careful to give their Testimony for GOD, That He is a
good and faithful GOD, and a Rewarder of them that diligently seek Him; that
the ways of Wisdom are ways of Pleasantness, and that in keeping of them there
is great Reward. That is the Language of a godly Parent to his Children, Psalm.
34. O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together. I sought
the Lord, and He heard me. O (...) and see that the Lord is good. Come, ye
Children, hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord, etc. --

Now this representation of the Experiences of godly Parents tends to affect
Children very much, and incline them to walk in the Steps of their Faith.
Hence, Psalm. 78. Showing to the Generation to come the Praises of the Lord, --
that they might set their Hope in God, and not forget the Works of God, but
keep his Commandments. Hence that Prayer of Solomon, 1 King. 8. 56, 57, 58. The
Lord our God be with us, as He was with our Fathers, etc. And that of David,
Psalm. 22. 3, 4. Thou art holy, O Thou that inhabitest the Praises of thine
Israel. Our Fathers trusted in Thee, and Thou did deliver them, etc. This
Reflection he applies for the encouraging his Hope, and strengthening his Faith
in GOD: and it tends to quicken Children to seek and serve the GOD of their
Fathers.

I proceed to say,

7. They have the Advantage of more early, and powerful strivings of the holy
Spirit with them, than the Children of ungodly Parents generally Experience

They early enjoy the means of Grace, which are ordinarily accompanied with
such Influences of the holy Spirit, as tend to convince and humble, to convert
and renew them. Doubtless the Generality of the Children of pious Parents have
some Convictions, and good Impressions begun upon them, while they are young.
The Spirit often begins with them betimes. He is wont to work more powerfully
upon their Hearts, in a way of Conviction, than on others. And He uses much
Patience in following them with his gracious Calls and Offers, as loath to
forsake them, even when they forsake Him. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim! --
And many times when they seem to be entirely lost and cast off, yet ^e returns,
and works savingly upon them by his irresistible Grace. Is Ephraim my dear Son?
Is he a pleasant Child? For since I spoke again^ him, I do earnestly remember
him still: There (...) my Bowels are troubled for him: I will surely have mercy
upon him, faith the LORD. They are most frequently the Instances of saving
Conversion; and the Church of CHRIST is mostly supplied with Ministers and
Members out of the Families of godly Parents.

I might add now, in the last Place,

8. They oftentimes at least have external Blessings bestowed on them for their
Fathers sakes.

They bid the fairest of any for the Spiritual Blessing; being so early and
continually in the way (...). But yet many (through their own fault) miss of
that. However, even these often obtain the Temporal blessing, and fare the
better for their godly Parents and holy Ancestors. This was the Case of
Ishmael, Genesis 21. 13. and of Esau, Genesis 27. 39. and Rehoboam, 1 King. 11. 34. A
degenerate Seed is often beloved (visibly in Providence) for their Fathers
sak^. They are established, and prosper in the World; increase in Riches, or
come to Honor: and it may be, by means of considerable Gifts and Powers of
Mind, in conjunction with moral Honesty, and a blameless Life, they are very
useful in their Places, and prove no small Blessings to their Generation,
either in the Church or State.

Thus we have seen something of the Advantage and Happiness of being born of
religious Parents, descended from godly Ancestors.

Now to say a word or two by way of IMPROVEMENT

USE I. What a^^^mentation then should it be, that so few in the World are
partakers of this Privilege, compared with those that are destitute of it!
Multitudes of Parents even in Christianized Places, are wicked and ungodly;
neither obey the Gospel themselves, nor take any pains to train up their
Children in the Ways of GOD. Miserable Parents! And unhappy Children! This is
for a Lamentation.

USE II. But then may it not be said, to the Honor of New England, that the
first Generations in it were mostly such as feared GOD; So that many among us
are the Descendents of pious Progenitors! And may not it be said of not a few,
in regard of their immediate Parents, they are highly privileged; being born of
such as are religious, who betimes dedicated them to GOD, and prayed for them,
and instructed them, and set a good Example before them! This is a greater
Honor than to be born of rich Parents, o^ descended from Royal Ancestors. And
where there are many Families that fear GOD, and in which the Covenant descends
from Parents to Children; this reflects a Glory on such a Land. Happy the
People that are in such a Case!

USE III. Let such as have been thus favored, often reflect with Thankfulness
to GOD, upon his Goodness in casting their Lot so happily. Bless GOD for your
distinguishing Privilege in being born of good Parents: and be not wanting in a
right use and improvement of it. Take heed that you don't make light of it, nor
yet sinfully ^^ust in it, as the manner of some is. Endeavor to walk worthy of
your Privileges, and have your Fruit unto Holiness: so live the Praises of GOD.

USE IV. Let such highly value and honor their godly Parents, and study to
make grateful Returns to them for all their Kindness to, and pious Care of you,
(see 1 Timothy 5. ^.) (...) for the Continuance of their useful Lives: and even
when they are old and almost useless, still honor them, (see Prove. 23. 22.)
Reverence their Memory, when they are dead. Bewail your Bereavement of them;
especially if they have been taken from you while in your Youth. This is a very
afflictive loss. But still you^ Fathers GOD lives. Cast your selves on his
^ender Providence, and get under the special Keeping and Conduct of his Grace.
So it shall be well with you; though Father and Mother forsake you.

USE V. Let me now call upon Parents^ that are ungodly, to repent of their
Sins, to take (...) of the Covenant, and give up themselves to me LORD. I
beseech you, in the Name of CHRIST, and by all the Love you bear to your Selves
and your Children; Labor to secure the good Part, an Interest in CHRIST, and
the Covenant of Grace (...) shall you not only save your own Souls, but take an
happy Method to save the Souls of your Children too. For hereby you will bring
your Seed into a peculiar Relation to GOD, and put them in the way of his
Blessing. Hereby you your selves will become more earnestly and sincerely
concerned for their Souls, and will have some singular Arguments to make use
of, both in pleading with them, to engage them in the Service of GOD, and in
pleading with GOD, to engage his Favor toward them. -- You will have an
Interest in Heaven, to improve for your Children; that will put them in a more
hopeful Condition, than the Children of unbelieving Parents. You will be
capable of deriving many spiritual Advantages to your Children, and will give
them abundant ground to bless GOD for their Descent from you: Especially will
it be thus, if you faithfully take pains to fill up your Relation, with the
Duties of Parents.

USE VI. I shall only add, in the last place, Let not the Children of
irreligious Parents unreasonably pervert (...) been said, to their
Discouragement. Tho^ you are denied many Advantages, that the Children of pious
Parents enjoy; yet your Case is not desperate. Though the Line of Election is
though it to run generally in the Families of Believers; (...) the Promise is made
to the Believer, and to his ^^ed after him in their Generations; yet, as
Covenant-Blessings are not in such a manner entailed upon the Posterity of
Believers, but that not a few of them miscarry and perish at last; so neither
are their consigned to the Children of good Parents: but we sometimes see
Converts taken out of ungodly Families. Wicked Jeroboam had a Son Abijah, in
(...) was found some good thing toward the LORD his GOD. Hence then as the
Spirit of boasting is to be rebuked in the Children of good Men; Mat. 3. 9.
Think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father: For I say
(...) you, That God is able of these Stones to raise up Children unto Abraham.
-- So this Consideration should give Check to a Spirit of Despondency in the
Children of ungodly Parents; and they must be addressed in the Words of the
Prophet, Isai. 58. 3. Neither let the Son of the Stranger, that has joined
himself to the Lord [or that thinks of doing so] speak, saying, The Lord has
utterly separated me from his People. -- No, but the Calls and Offers of the
Gospel are made to you as well as others: and whosoever believes in CHRIST,
shall not perish. He has said it, whose Grace is exceeding abundant, and who
suffers not his faithfulness to fail, Him that comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast out. That Is the Gospel-Invitation, Ho, every one that thirsleth, come
ye to the Waters: -- Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden; and
I will give you Rest. Take my yoke upon you; and ye shall find Rest unto your
Souls.

I pass now to the other Proposition, viz.

PROP. II. That (...) godly P^rents are under great and (...) Oblig^^^ (...)
exalt GOD, the GOD of their Fathers.

The Resolution in our Text was a (...) ^^^sonable one, and proceeded from a
sense of (...); -- He is my Fathers God, (...) him.

Here two Things may be spoken to. (1.) What is implied in this exalting of
GOD? (2.) (...) Respects are the Children of holy Parents (...) obliged to
exalt the GOD of their Fathers?

Q. 1. What is it to exalt GOD?

A. Neg. It does not imply, that it is in the power of Man to make GOD really
greater and higher than He is, in regard of his essential Perfections or
Dominion. For He is the most high GOD, (...) than the Kings of the Earth; yea
the LORD (...) Angels; and infinitely excels the noblest Creatures. They all
receive their Beings and Excellencies from GOD: and He distributes to them all
their Exaltations, in his Providential Government of the World. Promotion comes
from Him. He exalts whom He will, and can pull down at his pleasure. He can
promote from the Dunghill, to the Throne. But Creatures cannot exalt GOD, by
adding any thing to his real Happiness, or essential Glory and Authority. See
Psalm. p6. 2. and Job 35. 6, 7.

No, but it may be said now Affirmatively, This exalting the GOD of our Fathers
implies an Acknowledgment of his glorious Perfections and Relations, by free
Choice, and in an active way, agreeable to the Powers of reasonable Creatures,
and the Advantages and Obligations of the Children of the Covenant.

It implies,

1. A Belief of the Being and Perfections of GOD, and maintaining high and
honorable Tho'ts of his Nature and Government.

This lies in (...), and is the (...) Principle of (...) Homage and Obedience
(...) GOD. Hence the Apostle observes, Heb. 11. 6. (...) that ^^^eth to God
must believe that He is, and that (...) Rewarder of them that diligently (...).
(...) are those that with the Fool say (...) ^here is no God: or with Pharaoh,
(...) Lord, that I should obey his Voice! I know (...) the Lord. -- There are
many against (...) GOD advances that Charge, (Psalm. 50. 21.) (...) (...) that
I was altogether such an one (...). -- Yea, many do with the Athenians, (...)
that the Godhead is like unto Gold or Silver, (...) graven by Art. With the
heathen Romans, they become vain in their Imaginations, and change the glory of
the incorruptible God; into an Image made like to corruptible Man, and to
Birds, (...). They deny his Being, or level Him (...) Beings; have mean and low
Apprehensions of his Nature, and wrong Notions of his Providence; saying, He
will neither do Good nor Evil. The Lord sees us not, neither will He regard:
The Lord has forsaken the Earth. -- ^ Such debase GOD, and deny Him the Glory
of his Name.

But they exalt GOD, who acknowledge Him in his Being, in his Perfections and
Relations: who adore Him as GOD blessed for evermore, the first Cause and last
End of all Things, the supreme Governor of the World, and chief Good of the
reasonable Creature. We exalt GOD, when we realize his infinite Excellencies,
and admire his unparallal'd Works. This internal Honor is due to Him, whose
Inspiration has given us Understanding, That we entertain reverent Tho'ts of
Him, right Notions and worthy Opinions. Certainly without these we shall
neither be able nor disposed to exalt and honor GOD in an active Way, and
acceptable Manner.

2. It implies a Choosing GOD to be our Portion, and devoting our selves to his
Glory as our last End.

The Will, as well as (...), (...) concur in this exalting of GOD^ There must
(...) those Actings of our Wills toward GOD, which are suited to a worthy
Opinion and right Conceptions of Him. Do we conceive of Him as the supreme
Good? We must then make choice of Him to the Portion of our Souls: Renouncing
the World as empty and unsatisfying, and taking up our Contentment in GOD
alone. (As the Psalmist, Psalm. 4. 6^ 7. and 73. 25.) We must prefer Communion
with GOD, above all other Delights; and deliberately choose that for our
Consolation here, and Happiness hereafter. And because his loving Kindness is
better than Life, we must resolve with the Psalmist, (Psalm. 63. 3.) My Lips
shall praise Him. We must make Choice of his Glory, as our chief End, and
subject our selves to his Law as our supreme Rule, in the observance of which
our great End is to be attained. We must consent to all those Means, which have
a Tendency to advance this End. We must therefore take GOD'S Testimonies for
our Counselors, hide his Word in our Hearts, and lay his Judgments before us.
We must choose GOD for our LORD. and Lawgiver. As they, Isai. 26. 13. O Lord our
God, other lords besides Thee have had Dominion over us ^ but henceforth by
Thee only will we ^ake mention of thy Name.

3. It implies an exercising those Affections and Graces, that are suited to
the Divine Perfections, and the Relations GOD stands in to us.

It is required that we sanctify the LORD GOD in our hearts, 1 Ret. 3. 15. We
must exalt GOD by all proper Affections, correspondent to our high Tho'ts of
Him, and Dedication of our selves to Him.

The Graces of the Divine Life are the Soul's true Riches, and most beautifying
Ornaments. They that have them, are said to be Partakers of the Divine Nature,
and renewed after the Image of GOD; which is (...) and Happiness. Hence the
Saints are (...) ^he excellent in the Earth; Hence it is said, The King's
Daughter is all glorious within. True Godliness makes Men truly honorable.

And, as it gives Men a real intrinsic Worth, so it likewise reflects Honor
upon GOD, as it is declarative of a high Regard to Him, and a just sense of his
infinite Excellency and supreme Authority.

We must exalt GOD, by conforming our Wills to his Will, and our Affections to
His. Our Hatred, Love, Delight, etc. must be placed on the same objects with
his; and we must copy after Him in the manner of exercising them, as far as we
are capable. So shall we exalt GOD, by exhibiting some kind of Image or
Resemblance of his holy and perfect Nature.

And then in duly exercising our Affections toward Him, we exalt GOD, by
paying a proper Respect to his glorious Attributes.

I might say here particularly,

(1.) This exalting of GOD includes Repentance for Sin.

Repentance is one of the Graces of the Christian Life. It implies those
Acknowledgments of GOD, whereby his declarative Glory is advanced, and engages
the Soul in unseigned Resolutions to endeavor the Advancement of this blessed
End in an active way and manner. True Repentance does honor to the Law of GOD,
as holy, just, and good; and is a Vindication of the rectoral Holiness and
Wisdom of GOD; It enlarges the Heart in Thankfulness to GOD for his Mercy in
the Pardon of Sin, and tends by a natural efficacy to dispose us to forsake
Sin, and follow Holiness; to humble our selves in the sight of GOD, and seek
his face. Repentance therefore has an Aspect on the Glory of GOD. Hence Joshua
called on Achan to repent, in such terms as those, Josh. 7. 19. My son, give
Glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make Confession unto Him. Hence also it is
complained of some, Rev. 16. 9. They repented not, to give Him Glory. -- It is
called Repentance toward GOD because He is the object of Confession, and his
Glory the End.

(2.) This exalting of GOD implies Faith i^ CHRIST. The Sum of the
Gospel-Demand is Repentance toward GOD, and Faith toward the Lord JESUS
CHRIST. See Act. 20. 21. And Faith, as well as Repentance, tends to exalt GOD.
-- It is a Self-humbling Grace, and debases Man; subdues every self exalting
Though It, and excludes all vainglorious Boasting in our own Works. Romans 3. 27.

Moreover, It is a Christ-exalting Grace; It gives CHRIST the entire Glory of
our Redemption, puts honor upon him in all the Offices, he executes as our
Redeemer, acknowleges his Ability and willingness to save^ disposes us to part
with all for CHRIST, as the only Soul-enriching Pearl; to renounce our own
Righteousness, and seek to be justified by CHRIST, by his Righteousness
imputed: and constrains the Soul to study due Returns of Love and Gratitude to
this our great Benefactor. And he that thus honors, the Son, honors also
the Father which sent Him. In a word, Faith gives GOD the Glory of all his
Perfections shining forth in the Salvation of fallen Man by JESUS CHRIST, and
engages us to a Care to walk worthy of so great a kindness. Faith purifieth the
Heart, and overcomes the World, and quenches the fiery Darts of the Evil one.
It acknowleges the Mercy of GOD in CHRIST, and confesses his Truth and
Faithfulness, in accomplishing the great Promise that was so early published to
fallen Man. It establishes the Law, as it relies on CHRIST, who is the End of
the Law for Righteousness; and as it is a Principle of Obedience, without which
it is Impossible to please GOD in any acts of Duty: So that if this be wanting,
all is wanting, to an exalting of GOD, that is gracious. Faith teaches us to do
all in the Name of CHRIST; and so we become Priests unto GOD and the Father,
and find acceptance in our spiritual Sacrifices. We must come to the Father by
the Son, and improve his Mediation in every address to GOD; depending on him
for Righteousness and Strength. Else GOD don't look upon (...) as exalting him
in any thing we do. He that forgets to exalt GOD by Faith in CHRIST, leaves out
what is fundamentally necessary to an exalting of GOD. So that whatever
melodious Airs he may form; how many good words soever he may express; how
externally reverent soever he may be in his Deportment; yea, whatever seeming
Affections he may have in Duty: yet being destitute of Faith in CHRIST, he
wants what is essential to the exalting of GOD. If you are under the reigning
power of Unbelief, you are far from exalting GOD.

(3.) It implies Love to GOD, and Delight in CHRIST.

Faith works by Love. The true Believer loves the LORD. And by love he exalts
GOD. Love carries forth the Heart in Desires toward GOD, and Delight in CHRIST,
as the chief Good. And thus it gives him the Glory of his infinite Goodness,
Beauty, and Perfection. -- Love also engages Believers in a Care of Obeying the
Commandments of GOD, and of serving our Generation according to his Will. For
which reason, Love is called the Fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 10. -- Love
engages the Believer to seek the Glory of GOD; and to seek Communion with him
in Ordinances and Providence; to glory in his Name, and delight in his
Presence; saying, This is my Beloved, and this is my Friend. The Soul triumphs
in CHRIST, saying, In the Lord have I Righteousness and Strength: -- And thus
doing, we exalt GOD.

(4.) It implies a godly Fear, and Reverence of the Divine Majesty.

Holy Fear gives him the glory of his Greatness and Majesty; and honors his
Law and Sovereignty, as it is a Principle of Holiness and Obedience. Thus It
exalts GOD. Hence that Command, Isai. 8. 13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts
himself; and let Him be your Fear; and let Him be your Dread. So Rev. 14. 7.
Fear God, and give Glory to Him.

(5.) It implies Hope and Trust in GOD, in (...) Providence, and Promises.

Fear and Hope must be kept on a due balance in the Soul. The LORD takes
pleasure (it is said) in them that fear Him, in them that hope in his Mercy. We
must choose the Things that please Him, and take Hold of his Covenant; embrace
the Promises, and set our Hope in God: make Him our Confidence, and trust in
Him at all times. We must wait on his Name, for it is good before his Saints.
Wait on him and trust in him, for Advice and Guidance in all our Difficulties;
for support under all our Afflictions; for the supply of all our Wants, and the
Continuance of all our comfortable Enjoyments.

Thus to do, is to give GOD the glory of his Providential Government and Power,
his Alsufficiency, Goodness, and Truth; and so exalts Him. Hence it is said of
Abraham, Romans 4. 20. He staggered not at the Promise of God through Unbelief:
but was strong in Faith, giving Glory to God. And hence that Reproof to Moses
and Aaron, Numb. 20. 12. Because ye believe me not, to sanctify me in the eyes
of the Children of Israel; therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into
the Land, which I have given them.

(6.) It implies a due exercise of Patience, and Resignation to GOD.

That we commit our selves and our ways to the LORD; leave all our Cases with
GOD, submit our Wills to his Will, and resign all our Interests and Concerns to
his sovereign Dispose. -- That we humble our selves under his correcting Hand;
accept the punishment of our Iniquity, and welcome all Events, in the Language
of David, Eli, and Hezekiah: It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.
-- Good is the word of the LORD. Here, am I, etc. Yea, with holy Job, we should
bless GOD under Correction: The LORD gave, and the LORD has taken away:
Blessed be the Name of the LORD.

If Patience has thus its perfect work in us, we very much exalt GOD. Hence
the Apostle calls it a giving Reverence, and being in Subjection to the Father
of Spirits. -- This shows a reverent Opinion of his Providence, and glorifies
his Justice, his Faithfulness, Goodness, Wisdom and Power.

(7.) It implies a Zeal and earnest Care for the Name of GOD and Interest of
CHRIST in the World.

There must be a Zeal to honor GOD our selves; and an earnest Care for others,
that they may do likewise: -- A sincere Desire for our selves and them, that we
may be Instruments of GOD'S Glory, and Blessings to our Generation: -- A
sincere Desire that the Interest of CHRIST may gain ground among Men; that his
Gospel-kingdom may flourish in all Places where it is erected, and may be set
up every where upon the Ruin of Satan's Kingdom. -- There must be a hearty
Grie^ for the suffering Honor of CHRIST; a hearty mourning the Sins of the
Times, and the withdraw of GOD'S Spirit and Presence.

This holy Zeal exalts GOD. It is a kind of universal Grace, that animates and
puts in exercise every other Grace, whereby GOD is exalted. And it discovers a
deep sense of His infinite Worthiness; that He is worthy to be praised, and to
be feared above all gods.

Thus we see how GOD is exalted by suitable Exercises of our Passions and
Affections.

I proceed to say, in the last place,

4. This exalting of GOD implies the attending all those Duties, and doing all
those Works in the course of our lives, which are suited to express our
honorable Sentiments of and Regards to Him.

Here,

1. The Duty of religious Meditation is one thing, by the diligent practice
whereof GOD is to be exalted by us.

We must be much in contemplating on the Being and Perfections of GOD, on his
Works of Creation, Providence, and Redemption: We must love to be thinking of
GOD and CHRIST; Meditating in his Law and Gospel day and night. As for many, it
may be said, GOD is not in all their Thoughts: Their Heads are full of the
World, and their Thoughts are very Vanity: They seldom think of GOD, and if
ever, it is with great Coldness and Unconcern. Whereas they that fear GOD, and
who exalt Him, do think on his Name, and Meditation of Him is Sweet unto them.
Their Hearts indite good Matter concerning the King, and rejoice in the LORD,
while they remember Him upon their beds, and meditate on him in the
night-watches. -- Now this frequent devout Meditation upon GOD exalts Him, as
it discovers a deep, lively, and governing Sense of his Being, and Perfections;
and as it tends to promote a holy Acquaintance and delightful Communion with,
and Conformity to Him.

2. We are to exalt GOD, by Speaking honorably of Him.

How does the Spouse, in the Canticles, set forth the Glory of CHRIST; glorying
in her Beloved, and triumphing in his Praise! So the Psalmist, while he spoke
of the Things which he had made, touching the King, the King of Glory, His
Tongue was as the Pen of a ready Writer. We find him often dwelling in his
Discourse on the Glory of GOD; Celebrating the Wonders of Creation, Providence,
and Redeeming Grace: Admiring the Wisdom, the Power, the Justice and Holiness,
the Mercy and Faithfulness of GOD; his unfearchable Glory, and inexhaustible
Fullness. -- And how often, not only in the Psalms, but in the Prophets, and the
Apostles, do we find the Name of GOD magnified, and the Glory of CHRIST set
forth, by the most magnificent Descriptions!

Even thus should we exalt GOD, by our Words. We should praise him with our
Lips; often employ our Tongues in speaking of his Glory, not only in our
religious Addresses to Him, but in our Conversation with Men. We read, Mal. 3.
16. They that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another; Spoke of GOD
doubtless: For they thought upon his Name; and out of the abundance of the
Heart, the Mouth speaks. And whenever we speak of GOD, let it be in a manner
exhibiting our inward Awe and Veneration of Him. We must speak with the deepest
Humility, and a sensible Reverence of his glorious Being, Attributes, and
Works, of his sacred Day, Word, and Ordinances. Holy and Reverend is his Name.

3. We must exalt GOD by paying religious Worship to Him, and attending on his
Institutions, constantly and devoutly.

Religious Worship belongs only to GOD: and by rendering this to Him, we declare
He is worthy to receive Blessing, and Glory, and Honor; and that He is high
above all gods. -- We acknowledge his Supremacy, his Omniscience, his
Omnipotence, his Goodness, and other Perfections, when we worship Him: when we
make Confession of our Sins, Supplication for the Supply of our own and others
Wants, Thanksgiving for Mercies received, -- We give unto the LORD Glory and
Strength; we give unto the LORD the Glory due to his great Name.

We exalt GOD, when we pray to him in our Closets. It Is (in special) an
Acknowledgment of his omniscient Eye, and his particular Conduct and Government
of Persons, as well as Societies. Hence, Matthew. 6. 6. But thou, when thou
prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy (...), (...) to thy
Father which (...) insecret, and thy Father which (...) in secret, shall reward
thee ^p^nly.

Again, We exalt GOD, when we pray to Him with our Households. It Is an
Acknowledgment of Him as the Founder and Governor of Families; upon whom we
depend, and to whom we are indebted for all Family-Mercies. And hereby we take
a method to make our Houses little Nurseries of Piety, to GOD's Honor. We
should therefore with David, every one bless his Household, and that daily
Morning and Evening, listing up holy hands, without wrath and doubting, that
our Prayers be not hindered.

So we exalt GOD, when we attend the Public Worship. This is the most open and
visible Homage to Him, as the true GOD, and the LORD of all. We exalt GOD, when
we show a Love to his House, and devoutly wait upon Him in the ways of his
Appointment. -- When we call upon Him in the House of Prayer; uniting our
solemn Requests, and Penitent Confessions: when we Sing to the LORD, filling
our Mouths with his high Praises, and pouring out our thankful Adorations: When
we hear his Word, and take heed how we hear; receiving the Truth in Faith and
Love; -- When we attend on the holy Sacraments, and make our Vows to GOD;
joining our selves to the LORD in an everlasting Covenant; rejoicing in CHRIST
JESUS, and having no Confidence in the Flesh; -- when we do these Things, we
magnify the LORD; we exalt his Name together. -- We may especially be said to
exalt GOD, when we walk in all his Ordinances. So far as we neglect any of his
Institutions, we forsake GOD, and dishonor GOD, by practically disputing his
Wisdom in appointing them, despising his Goodness, as if it were no Privilege,
and flighting his Authority, as if it were no Duty to attend upon them. If
therefore we would exalt GOD, we must observe all his Ordinances without
partiality. Let all Worship, secret, private, and public be diligently
attended.

Moreover, We must keep the Ordinances, as they have been delivered to us, in
the holy Scriptures. GOD has given us many Laws relating to his Worship: showed
us what the Matter of Worship is, and in what Manner, and to what End, it is to
be performed. He is very jealous for his own Honor in this Affair; and
requires that we be exact in observing the Rule of his Word. We must see to it,
that our Worship be such Worship, both as to matter and manner, as GOD has
prescribed. See to it that it be a Scriptural Worship. Not Will Worship; not
Worship taught by the Precepts of Men; nor Worship devised out of Men's own
Hearts; which may have perhaps a show of Wisdom, of Decency and Order; but
indeed carries in it Folly, Indecency, and Irregularity. GOD is infinite in
Wisdom, and knows how to order his own Worship. And it is a practical Contempt
cast on his Wisdom, as well as Sovereignty, as if he had not a Right, or had not
skill, to prescribe proper Mediums or Modes of Worship. As it is Idolatry, when
a wrong object is worshipped: So it is Superstition, when the true GOD is
worshipped in such ways and modes, as he has not appointed or allowed. Worldly
Pomp and external Pageantry in the Service of GOD, does not exalt Him, nor is
acceptable to Him. He reproved his People of old for performing a Worship,
which (says He) I commanded them not, nor spoke of it, neither came it into my
mind. And our Savior reproved the Pharisees, for mingling their own Inventions
in Divine Worship, and conforming to human Traditions, as of equal authority
with Divine Precepts: Mat. 15. 9. In vain do they worship me; teaching for
Doctrines, the Commandments of Men. We must take heed then to avoid all
Superstition: beware of this Leaven of the Pharisees. See that our Worship be
pure, according to the Scriptures; making these our governing Rule. It Is only
the Authority of GOD that can bind the Con^^^ence, in the Matters of his
Worship. Here we may safely renounce the Traditions and Impositions of Men: Yea
and must do it, if we would exalt GOD, and serve him acceptably. To set up the
Inventions of Men, as of equal Authority with the Commands of GOD, and to
practice them in his Worship, under the notion of Decency and Edification,
shows too great want of that Reverence and godly Fear, which is necessary if we
would Sanctify the Lord of Hosts in our Approches to Him. But then let our
Worship, as to Externals, be ever so pure and scriptural; yet, if inward Purity
is wanting, it is all vain and unacceptable. We must look then to our Hearts;
that we sanctify GOD in our Hearts, and worship Him in spirit and in truth.

I shall only add here, We must always remember the Sabbath, to keep it holy;
if we would be of Those that exalt GOD. Call the Sabbath a Delight, the holy of
the LORD, honorable; not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure,
nor speaking thine own words; and thou do honor Him, Isai. 58. 13. -- We
should love the LORD'S DAY, and not count it a Weariness; but esteem it a high
Privilege: one Day in GOD'S Courts should be better to us than a thousand
elsewhere. The whole day should be spent, as much as possible, in public and
private Exercises of Religion. We must take heed we don't rob GOD of any part
of holy Time, by wasting it in Idleness, in worldly Recreations, or unnecessary
worldly Business. We must be conscientiously careful to sanctify GOD'S
Sabbaths: So shall we sanctify and exalt GOD and CHRIST. Hereby we acknowledge
Him in one of his dearest and most sacred Titles, The LORD of the Sabbath: and
by an holy Rest, give Him the glory that is due to his Name.

4. We must exalt GOD, by a suitable Carriage in the several Relations we
sustain, and by exemplary Holiness in all manner of Conversation among Men.

We must endeavor to be sober, just, grave, temperate in all things. The fruit
of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Fidelity, Meekness, Temperance: Against such things there is no Law. He that in
these things serves CHRIST, is acceptable to GOD, and approved of Men. -- Let
us be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly Love; in honor
preferring one another; distributing to the necessity of the Saints; given to
Hospitality. Bless them, which persecute you; bless, and curse not. Rejoice
with them that do rejoice; weep with them that weep. Mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low Estate. Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide
things honest in the sight of all Men. Let us every one please his Neighbor
for his Good to Edification. Study to be quiet, and to do your own Business.
Render to all their Dues; Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom to whom Custom
is due; Fear to whom Fear; Honor to whom Honor. Honor all Men. Love the
Brotherhood. Fear GOD. Honor the King. Let every Soul be subject unto the
higher Powers for there is no Power but of GOD. And let Magistrates approve
themselves. Terrors not to good Works, but the evil. Let Ministers study to
show themselves approved unto GOD, wise and faithful ^^ewards: and ^et the
Brethren know such as labor among them, and are over them in the LORD;
esteeming them very highly in Love for their Work's sake: and be at ^eace among
your selves, walking together in Love; Warn them that are unruly Comfort the
feeble-minded; support the Weak, and ever follow that which is good, both among
your selves, and toward all Men. -- And in all Family-Relations, we must set
our selves to know and do the Duty which GOD requires of us. Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Brothers and Sisters, should
study the se^^ral (...) they ^^and in one to another, and be faithful in the
discharge of all relative duties; That they may adorn the Doctrine of God their
Savior in all things, Tit. 2. 10. He can never exalt GOD, that is not
relatively good. GOD is dishonored, whatever Profession Men make, if they
carry not aright in their respective places and relations. But did Professors
do so, GOD would be exalted, Religion would be praised, themselves honored,
and the Times become happy.

5. We must exalt GOD, by a right Entertainment of all Events of Providence,
and carrying ourselves properly under the various Circumstances of Life.

Whether prosperous or afflicted, whether rich or poor, high or low; we must
endeavor to accommodate and suit our selves to our Condition; and that both as
to our inward frame, and outward deportment. We must by our suitable Carriages
testify our Gratitude for the Mercies of GOD to us; Rejoice in every good thing
which he bestows upon us, and yet by his Goodness be led to Repentance, and
engaged to Obedience. So under affliction, we must manifest in our whole
Deportment all Humility, Patience, Resignation to GOD, and Meekness toward Men;
and endeavor that the Fruit of all may be to purge away Sin; that we may
profit by GOD'S Chastnings, and be made partakers of his Holiness. This is to
hear the Rod, and who has appointed it. Hereby we pay a just Respect to Divine
Providence; and GOD that is holy, is sanctified in Righteousness.

6. We must exalt GOD, by a due Application and Improvement of our various
Talents, Gifts and Abilities.

Unto every one are given Talents, according to the Measure (...) Gift of
(...); which are capable of being applied to the great End of exalting GOD.
Some have Gifts of Mind others Abilities of Body^ Some have the Advantages of
Repute and Name; some of Authority and Power; others of Estate and Riches, or
the like. And whatever our Talents are, whether more or fewer, greater or less;
we must diligently employ them in serving our Generation, according to the Will
of GOD, for the honor of GOD. We must labor to approve our selves good
Stewards of the manifold Grace of GOD: be ready to every good Work, and make a
business of doing Good, that we may be Blessings to the World. -- We must
faithfully and zealously in our several Places endeavor, that CHRIST'S Kingdom
may be advanced; that Religion may flourish and spread; that Sinners may be
bro't to Repentance, and Saints edified: and so the Name of CHRIST exalted.

Further, In all these things we must persevere; running the Race set before us
with Patience; never weary of well-doing, but laboring always ^ervently in
serving the LORD; and resisting the Devil, steadfast in the Faith.

Finally, when we have done all, we must count our selves unprofitable
Servants; that we have done but our Duty, and not brought GOD in Debt to us;
yea, that we have fallen very much short of Duty; and therefore must depend on
the Mercy of GOD, and Merits of CHRIST for the Acceptance of our best Tributes
of Praise. Though (in the Scripture-sense) we may walk worthy of the LORD: yet we
must renounce all Pretenses of Merit in our best Services, and look on our own
Righteousness as filthy Rags. We must depend on the white Robe of CHRIST'S
Righteousness to clothe us, and hide the Shame of our Nakedness. We must ever
be looking unto JESUS, as our Sacrifice and Intercessor; and be looking for the
Mercy of CHRIST, as our glorious Head and Prince, unto eternal Life. Thus we
shall honor the rectoral Holiness of GOD, and redeeming Grace of CHRIST
together.

This it is to exalt GOD. And so much for the Nature of the Duty. The next
thing proposed was to show the Obligations hereunto. But I shall apply what has
been said, in several Reflections, before I pass to that.

USE I. What has been said may afford Conviction and Reproof to Multitudes
among us, even of the Children of godly Parents, who do not in such a way and
manner exalt GOD.

O how many are there that forsake their Fathers GOD; being quite of a
different Spirit and Behavior from their pious Parents and holy Ancestors!

1. Are there not many that are openly Vicious and Wicked, loose and vain: like
Eli's Sons, who made themselves vile; and like Samuel's Sons, who walked not in
his Ways! Are not many given to Profaneness, Sabbath-breaking, Cursing and
Swearing, evil Speaking, Lying, and Slandering, Gaming and Rioting,
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Stealing and Defrauding, or other Immoralities!

2. Are there not many that cast off their first Faith; who have drank in very
loose and hurtful Notions in Religion, if not damnable Heresies: and have
learnt to speak Evil of the Way of Truth! These be they who separate
themselves. -- Of whom it may be said, They went out from us, because they were
not of us. -- How little are the first Principles of New England understood by
many, and how much rejected^

3. Are there not many, who forsake the pure Scriptural Worship, that their
Fathers came over unto this Land to enjoy! How easily are many led away by one
Temptation or another from the Simplicity of Gospel Worship! How easily
prevailed upon, to desert that good Cause, which their pious Ancestors were
Sufferers for, and to turn aside unto Superstition, following after those Pomps
and Vanities, in the Service of GOD, which are of humane Device, and offensive
to the pure Eyes of his Glory.

4. Are there not many, that are only externally religious; who deal
deceitfully with their Fathers GOD: are perhaps frequent in Duties, but all the
while flattering GOD with their Lips, and regarding Iniquity in their Hearts.
All their Devotions are but mere Hypocrisy.

5. Are there not Multitudes, who at best are but partially obedient! Their
Religion lies all in Externals; and even here they are partial in the Law. They
don't subject themselves to all the Laws of CHRIST'S Kingdom. It may be they
are zealous in some points, but negligent in others; as the Pharisees, who paid
Tithe of Mint, Annise, and Cummin, while they omitted the weightier Matters of
the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith.

Oh! what great Numbers are there in the Land, the Posterity of religious
Ancestors, to whom the foregoing Characters may be justly applied! And can such
be said to exalt the GOD of their Fathers? No, so far as they are guilty in any
of these respects, they dishonor GOD, their Fathers GOD.

I might say here, They cast base Reflections on their Fathers themselves. Upon
the Choice they made of GOD for their Ruler and Portion, as if they had acted
unwisely herein, and were overseen in parting with the World and Sin, for
Heaven and Holiness. And they reflect too upon their Parents solemn Counsels
and Charges given to them, as if they were of no Authority, and not worth the
minding. Thus they are disobedient to their Parents, and incur the Curse
denounced against him that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his
Mother, Prove. 30. 17.

They do also cast the most unworthy Reflections on the GOD of their Fathers.
They practically say, His Favor is not worth desiring; that his Law it not
worth the keeping; and that his Promises and Threatenings are not worth
regarding. That Is the Language of their Practice, Who is the Lord, that we
should obey him? Or, What profit is it, if we keep his Ordinances? They say to
the Almighty, Depart from us; for we desire not the Knowledge o^ thy Ways. They
say of the Sabbath, What a Weariness is it^! They say, The Table of the Lord is
contemptible. They treat the blessed Institutions of CHRIST, as weak and
beggarly Elements: And call his Worship an unreasonable Service.

They show a faithless Spirit toward GOD; and in breaking their own Promises,
and disbelieving his, they deal worse with GOD than with their fellowcreatures.

They show a very disobedient, stubborn, and ungrateful Spirit. They break
through innumerable Obligations; the Bonds of the Covenant, and the Ties of
Gratitude they are under. GOD was their Fathers Friend: and yet they cast him
off. He offers to be theirs also, but they reject him. He has nourished and
brought them up as Children: and yet they rebel against him. Do ye thus requite
the LORD? O foolish People, and unwise! Wherefore do the Wicked contemn GOD!
Shall he not visit for these things! O that Sinners would receive Conviction,
and no longer harden their Hearts!

USE II. What has been said may serve to direct us in examining our selves,
whether we do exalt the GOD of our Fathers.

Let it be inquired here,

1. Have we obtained a gracious Knowledge of GOD, and been bro't to make Choice
of Him for our Portion? -- Have we an affectionate, practical, and experimental
Knowledge of GOD? Do we so know his Name, as to put our Trust in Him; to choose
him for our GOD; and seek his Face with our whole heart?

2. Are we much in Meditating on GOD, and admiring his Excellencies? Do we
maintain high Thoughts of his infinite Perfections, and a reverent Opinion of
his governing Providence? Do we frequently muse on his Works with Admiration,
and speak of them with Praise? Do we delight to be discoursing on the great
work of Redemption in particular? Do we often think and speak of CHRIST, and
the things pertaining to his Kingdom?

3. Are we careful and exact in Matters of Divine Worship? Do we walk in all
the Ordinances of CHRIST? Are we concerned to enjoy CHRIST in his Institutions
and to Worship GOD in Spirit and in Truth?

4. Do we follow Holiness in all manner of Conversation? Are our Lives, in the
general ^^nour of them, a practical Acknowledgment of the Sovereignty of GOD,
and Equity of his Laws? Do we herein exercise our selves always to keep a
Conscience void of offense, both toward GOD and toward Man? Do we study to
carry it aright in all Relations and in all Conditions of Life? Do we endeavor
faithfully to use all our Talents, as those that must give an account?

5. Are we concerned for the flourishing of Religion, and Prosperity of the
Kingdom of CHRIST? Does it grieve us to see the Name of GOD dishonored, his
Son slighted, his Spirit quenched, his Worship neglected, his Sabbath polluted,
his Laws trampled upon? Are we much in Prayer for the Revival of GOD's Work?
And do we, to our Prayers, add the diligent use of all proper Means within our
power; dispensing our Counsels and Instructions, Reproofs, Warnings, etc. as we
see occasion therefore?

6. Do we labor to govern our Aims well in all we do, and to subordinate every
other End to the Glory of GOD? Is this the main Scope of our Lives, and ruling
desire and design of our Souls, That GOD in all things may be glorified?

Finally, Do we do all in the Name of CHRIST! The Life we now live, is it by
the Faith of the Son of GOD? Do we by Him offer the Sacrifices of Praise
continually? In a word, Will nothing content us without being clothed with his
Righteousness, filled with his Spirit, and dwelling in his Presence.

O let us solemnly put these Inquiries to our own Souls; and by these things
try our selves, whether we are such as do really exalt GOD. It is a very
important Case: and Multitudes deceive themselves to their everlasting Ruin;
Thinking themselves to be something, while they are nothing; and imagining they
are Exalters of GOD, when indeed they are but Mockers of Him, and Enemies to
his Glory. O let us beware of a fatal Error here. Be not deceived: God will not
be mocked. Let us all be humbled, that we have (...) GOD'S glory so little at
heart; that GOD is no more in our Thoughts, and so little honored in our
Lives; and let us fly to the Blood of sprinkling for a Pardon. But wherein we
have been enabled to exalt GOD, let us give him the glory of his Grace in and
with us: and let us resolve for the future, to give greater diligence in
serving GOD; that we may bring much Glory to his great Name. So shall we truly
honor our selves; shall please GOD; and may hope that the GOD of our Fathers
will be our GOD; will own us for his Sons and Daughters, by the Dispensations
of his Grace here, and exalt us to eternal Glory and Happiness in the World to
come.

I proceed now to the other Inquiry,

viz.

Quest. 2. What are the Obligations lying upon the Children of godly Parents,
to exalt the GOD of their Fathers?

And here I might say,

Answ. 1. They are under all common Obligations together with others, to exalt
GOD.

There are many general Reasons, and Obligations, that extend to all Mankind;
which are of equal Force upon them, as others.

Is not GOD most worthy of all that Homage and Respect, which we are capable of
yielding to Him: both in regard of what He is in Himself, and of what He has
been and is unto us! Has he not all possible Excellencies in his Nature, which
bespeak our highest Love, and Delight, Admiration and Praise, Reverence,
Worship, and Obedience!

And is He not our Creator, our (...), our daily Benefactor, our sovereign
Ruler, and our supreme Good! Hence then are we not under the various Ties of
Duty, Interest, Justice, and Gratitude? Do not our own Consciences tell us,
that to exalt GOD is our reasonable Service: and that we shall be sordidly
ungrateful, undutiful, and unjust, if we refuse or neglect to do it! And what
can we expect from GOD, if we do not study to exalt Him? Will He not justly be
provoked to pour Contempt on us, and load us with Shame and Misery here and for
ever! But on the Contrary, if we really exalt Him, may we not hope for his
Favor, and all the blessed Fruits of it! That he will accept and bless us
here, and crown us with glorious Rewards hereafter, for CHRIST'S sake!

Now these Considerations are so many powerful Arguments for our exalting GOD,
and demand our diligent Endeavors to do it.

But then,

Answ. 2. The Children of godly Parents are under many peculiar Obligations to
serve and exalt GOD, their Fathers GOD. As,

1. They are under special Covenant-Bonds. GOD has a special Propriety in such,
as they have been devoted to Him. Their Baptism obliges them indispensably. The
Vows of GOD are upon them. They are the visible Children of GOD: and as such
should exalt Him. Mal. 1. 6. A son honors his Father. If I then be a Father,
faith the Lord, Where is mine Honor? -- They are born in his House, and are
his Servants; have had his Mark put upon them, and been separated to his
Service. Now a Servant honors his Master: If I then be a Master, faith God,
Where is my Fear? -- They deny GOD his just Rights, and deal falsely in his
Covenant, if they do not exalt Him.

2. They are bound in honor to their Parents, to exalt the GOD of their
Fathers.

If they forsake GOD, it will be a Reflection on the Wisdom of their Parents in
the Choice they made of GOD to be their GOD. It will be disobedience to their
Commands, and solemn Counsels; and a breaking all those Divine Laws, which
require Children to obey their Parents in the LORD, as what is right. And then
it will be a Transgression of that equitable Law, Prove. 27. 10. Thine own
Friend, and thy Fathers Friend, forsake not. -- To exalt GOD is the best way to
please their pious Parents, if living, and to honor their Memory, if dead.

3. They are bound by very special Ties of Gratitude to GOD.

It was an Honor done to their Fathers, for GOD to choose them for his
Children: and a Dignity put upon the Children to take them (with their Parents)
into a Covenant Relation to GOD. -- It was a high Privilege to be early devoted
to GOD, to have Prayers going up for them continually, to have a good Example
set them, to have a pious Education bestowed upon them, and to have the Spirit
early striving with them, etc.

Now all these Advantages, being the fruits of GOD'S distinguishing Goodness,
do lay them under very special Bonds of Gratitude to Him. And there is no other
way wherein they can express their Gratitude to GOD, but by exalting and
honoring GOD, by loving him, and living to Him.

4. They are under special Bonds of Interest and Self-love. -- To exalt GOD is
their only safety, and truest Glory and Happiness: and as they love themselves,
they are obliged to do it. If they do not exalt GOD, they forfeit the Blessings
promised in the Covenant, and expose themselves to the terrible Curses therein
denounced. They have the Experiences of their pious Parents, to encourage them
to seek GOD; and have GOD expressing himself as most graciously ready to
embrace them, and to be found of them: But if they forsake him, he has said he
will also forsake them. Hence David enforces his dying Charge to his Son, with
those Considerations, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the
God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind:
for the LORD searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of
the thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake
him, he will cast thee off for ever.

The Children of pious Parents have the greatest Encouragement to hope that GOD
will be their GOD, and will be found of them, if they seek him aright. And they
have peculiar Opportunities, Advantages, and Helps; which if they faithfully
improve, giving Diligence to serve and exalt GOD, they will lay up for
themselves Treasures, glorious Treasures in Heaven.

But if they do not exalt GOD, they run a dreadful Hazard of being cast off,
because they sin against the LORD, the Hope of their Fathers, and are not
steadfast in his Covenant, which he will surely avenge the Quarrel of. Yea, such
expose themselves to an aggravated Condemnation. For GOD expects more from
them, than from others, not so favored as they. He looks for more and better
Service from them: And if they do more than others to honor him, he will
distinguish them by very ample Rewards. But if they deny him his just Honor,
and rebel against him, He will distinguish them by as severe Punishments. If
they will not exalt GOD by an active obedience here, He will exalt himself by
an extraordinary Vengeance upon them hereafter, even a Wrath to the uttermost.
If they don't keep the Covenant of their Fathers, GOD is certainly at Liberty
to cast them off: And his Honor requires that he should proportion their
Punishment to their Guilt. The Honor of his rectoral Holiness, Justice, and
Wisdom demand it. And hence if he cast them off, it will be with the utmost
Indignation. They shall be to him as the Children of Ethiopians, the very Filth
of the World, the most despicable of Mankind. He will treat them as very
Children of the Devil. Hence CHRIST said to the unbelieving Jews, who boasted
that Abraham was their Father, (Joh. 8. 39, 44.) If ye were Abraham's Children,
ye would do the works of Abraham: But ye are of your Father the Devil, and the
Lusts of your Father ye will do. -- Men will plead, in the great day, their
pious Parentage, their religious Profession, and many other things: but the
righteous Judge will say to them (as we are told, Math. 7. 23.) I never knew
you; Depart from me, ye workers of Iniquity. -- And they shall receive a
greater Damnation, who have been more highly privileged.

The Children of the Kingdom, that don't exalt GOD, shall not only be cast out
of his Presence; but shall be cast into a hotter Hell. Such sin at a more
heinous Rate than others. The very same Sins carry greater Guilt and
Provocation, as committed by them, than by others. And then such, when they
prove Apostates, do commonly run to greater Lengths in Wickedness and
Profaneness; and are often some of the most monstrous Sinners. In a word, the
ungodly Lives of such do carry the greatest Scandal; and are most prejudicial
to Religion; partly by tempting some to slight Infant Baptism, and to imagine
it is no privilege to be in the visible Church State of the Gospel; partly by
discouraging Parents from the baptismal dedication of their Infants to GOD, or
from taking Pains in their religious Education, and in the good Government of
their Families^ partly also by hardening the profane Children of wicked ^^rents
in all their evil Courses, by the power of an ill Example. Hence then the
glorious GOD must needs account Himself moredespised and dishonored by the
degenerate Offspring of good Men, than by other: and if so, then he is
certainly more provoked at them, and will pour out his heaviest Curses upon
them. So that it shall be more tolerable even for the Children of Sodomand
Gomorrah,in the day of Judgment, than for them. Hence then they are in a
special manner bound, in Love and Compassion to their own Souls, to yield
themselves unto GOD, to seek and serve him.

These brief Hints may suffice to show what great and extraordinary Obligations
are upon the Children of religious Parents, to exalt their Fathers GOD.

I proceed now to the APPLICATION.

USE I. This affords abundant Motive to religious Parents, to take all the
Pains they can to bring their Children to exalt GOD.

You see what great Obligations your Children are under to exalt GOD, in point
of Duty, Gratitude, and Interest: how happy they must be, if they do; and how
miserable, if they do not exalt Him. Oh how should your Bowels yearn toward
them! How should you pity, and pray for them! And labor with them day and
night, in a way of serious Instruction, Counsel and Reproof, that you may bring
them to a sense of their Duty, and that none of them may be hardened through the
Deceitfulness of Sin! Have they not many Enemies, that are in an accursed
Conspiracy to destroy their Souls! O Parents, do what you can to resist the
Devil, in his Devices and Attempts against the Souls of your poor Children:
strive to guard them from the Temptations of this day of Apostasy. Commit them
to GOD, and strive to keep them in his way. O what Glory will you bring to GOD,
if you are the Means of bringing your Children to seek and serve him! And what
joy will you treasure up for yourselves! Next to one's own Salvation, a pious
Parent has no greater joy than to see his Children walking in the Truth. But
how dreadful will it be, if they forsake GOD, and die in their Sins! And can
any serious Parent quietly bear the Thought of any of his Children's
miscarrying and perishing at last!

O let these Reflections awaken Parents to a due Solicitude and Care for the
Souls of their Children. Let there be a Striving and agonizing in your Prayers
to GOD for them: and a laboring to bring them up in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord. So you are charged to do, Ephesians. 6. 4. -- Begin betimes with them:
take Pains, and be unwearied. Solomon observes, Prove. 13. 24. He that loves
his son, chastneth him betimes. And it is added, Chap. 19. 18. Chasten thy son,
while there is Hope. -- Let Parents suitably reprove and frown upon all that is
bad in their Children: but encourage every good Disposition in them. Put them
upon minding secret Duties betimes: And see that they constantly and reverently
attend Family Duties. Teach them to reverence the House of GOD, and to sanctify
the Sabbath. Labor to prepare them for renewing their Covenant, and coming to
the Table of the LORD. Deal very solemnly and frequently with them about it:
and when you see them hopefully fitted and prepared, put them upon coming into
full Communion, and so completing their religious Possession. Relate to them
your own Experiences for their Encouragement and Quickening: and bear witness
for GOD, that He is merciful and gracious; and true and faithful and that all
his Paths are Mercy and Truth, unto such as keep his Covenant and his
Testimonies.

USE II. What has been said, should excite in Ministers a particular Zeal and
Care for the rising Generation among GOD'S People.

The Children of the Covenant are peculiarly committed to their Watch and Care.
That was one Charge our LORD gave to Peter, Joh. 21. 15. Feed my Lambs. The
Children of religious Parents are very much the Hopes of the Flock: from among
these is the Church of CHRIST usually filled up, and by them Religion supported
and kept up in any place from Generation to Generation. With these, Ministers
generally have greater Opportunities for personal Converse; some peculiar
Arguments to urge upon them; and many other Advantages in dealing with them. In
this Case Ministers have the Parents (while living) to back their Counsels;
Here also the Spirit of Grace is most ready to assist and succeed their
Endeavors. And though Satan and his Instruments do usually ^here make the
greatest Opposition; yet this should only whet their courage, and inflame their
Zeal, and stir them up to more fervent Prayer and unwearied Pains-taking; if by
any means they may save some from the snare of the evil one, and engage them to
exalt GOD, their Father's GOD. Success here will afford peculiar Comfort,
Satisfaction, and Pleasure to faithful Ministers. Hence the Apostle so rejoiced
in Timothy, his own Son in the faith. 2 Timothy 1. 4, 5. -- Filled with Joy; when
I call to Remembrance the unfeigned Faith that is in Thee: which dwelt first in
thy Grandmother Lois, and thy Mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in Thee
also.

USE III. May be an earnest Call and Exhortation, to the Children and Posterity
of GOD'S People, to exalt the GOD of their Fathers.

This is the Charge, that your Parents bring you: This is the solemn Charge,
that your Pastors bring you (...) the Name of the LORD. O hearken to the Calls
of GOD^ and be not a faithless and froward Generation. But incline your Ears,
and hearken diligently: Obey his Voice, and your Souls shall live.

Here I shall say something distinctly, (1) To such as are already brought to
exalt GOD. (2) To such as are under some Convictions, and beginning to seek
GOD. (3) To others that are secure and careless. And, finally, To such as have
apostatized from good Beginnings.

(1.) I shall speak to such as are in a converted state, and already brought in
some measure to exalt the GOD of their Fathers.

O be thankful to GOD, who has brought you to this. (...) Admire his
distinguishing Mercy toward you. And endeavor to live, as well as speak, the
Praises of Him, who has washed you from your Sins in his own Blood, and made
you Kings and Priests unto God. Labor to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge
of CHRIST, Maintain a daily close Walk with GOD: and study to be fruitful and
thriving Christians. Rest not contented with any measures of Grace and Holiness
already attained. Let it be your Care to bring forth Fruit in due season; Fruit
to Perfection; much Fruit, even all your days: Fruit unto Holiness; Fruit meet
for Repentance.

Thus, you will have the most comfortable Evidence of your real saving
Conversion. You will herein manifest the true Spirit of Children, obedient
Children: for (as it is said, Mal. 1. 6.) A son honors his Father. You will
show that your Hearts are right with God, if you are stedfa^t in his Covenant:
You will come to know the Truth of Grace in you, by your Growth in it.

You will please GOD, by manifesting your Gratitude and Love to, and Delight
and Trust in Him. -- And herein is your heavenly Father glorified, that you
bear much Fruit, ( Joh. 15. 8.) If your Light shine before others, they (seeing
your good Works) may be induced to glorify GOD for you, and by imitating your
pious Example.

And if you thus exalt GOD, he will also exalt you. For He has said, (1 Samuel
2. 30.) Them that honor me, I will honor. Verily GOD will spare you, as a Man
spares his own Son that serves him: He will rejoice over you, to do you Good;
He will crown you with his loving kindness, which is better than life; will
hear your Prayers, and accept your Services; will make all things work together
for your best and final Advantage; will never leave nor forsake you. You will
be the continual Charge of his good Providence: and his holy and blessed Spirit
shall be with you, to guide, sanctify, and comfort you. And though Afflictions
may abide you; yet in all these things you shall be more than Conquerors though
CHRIST, which has loved you; and nothing shall be able to separate you from
his Love. Behold! All is yours, whether Life or Death, things present or Things
to come; and ye are CHRIST'S. And because CHRIST lives, ye shall live also! and
when He, who is your Life, shall appear, you shall appear with Him in Glory.
The Name of the LORD JESUS CHRIST shall be glorified in you, and you in him. He
will honor you in this Life, at Death, and in the Resurrection-day, yea
throughout all Eternity. -- Wherefore comfort one another with these Words: and
be hereby stirred up to all diligence in exalting GOD, as knowing that your
labor shall not be in vain in the LORD.

Surely nothing deserves to be prosecuted with so much Care and Zeal and Pains,
as this great End, the Glory of GOD. This is the End of our Creation, the End
of our Preservation, and of our Redemption. Hear what the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
6. 19, 20. Ye are not your own; for ye are bought with a Price: Therefore
glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit, which are God's. -- So 1 Pet. 2.
9, etc. Ye are a chosen Generation, -- THAT ye should show forth the Praises of
Him, who has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. Dearly
Beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts,
which war against the Soul: Having your Conversation honest among the Gentiles,
that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works
which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of Visitation.

O let the several Considerations that have been mentioned, prevail with you to
maintain a continual Care of exalting GOD; and therefore beware of every thing
that is contrary to it; that tends to hinder your glorifying GOD, or blemish
your holy Profession.

Hate every evil and false way. Flee youthful Lusts. Avoid the Sins of the
Times. Don't follow a Multitude to do Evil. Oh how many are the Land-defiling
Iniquities, and growing Evils of this degenerate Day! How much Looseness in
Principles, Luke-warmness in Religion, Profaneness, and Licentiousness in
Manners, Pride, Idleness, Intemperance, Uncleanness, Injustice, Oppression,
Murmuring, and the like! But ye that would exalt GOD, take Care that you shun
these things: and have no Fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; but
rather reprove them.

Watch particularly against a Worldly Spirit; which so leads to a defrauding
GOD of his Dues, as well as Men of theirs; and tends to eat out the Life and
Power of Godliness. There is a withholding more than is meet, which tends
unto Poverty: and there is that scatters, and yet increases. O beware of
Covetousness; and keep your selves unspotted from the World, as those that are
set apart for GOD: Remembering the Words of the LORD JESUS, how he said, Ye
cannot serve God and Mammon.

See that you account GOD'S Sabbath a Delight. Beware you don't at any time
sacrilegiously rob GOD of any part of his Day. Beware of a slighty and careless
Spirit, in preparing for the Sabbath, or in attending the Duties of it. Let not
the day be spent in Idleness; but in a faithful discharge of all holy Exercises
required, in Secret, in Private, and in Public. And beware lest a Pretense of
not beginning the Sabbath on the Evening before, end in robbing GOD of both the
Evenings. So far as the LORD'S day is neglected, his Glory is neglected. O that
you would keep GOD'S Sabbath from polluting it! Blessed is the Man that does
this, Isai. 56. 2.

Love GOD'S House; and let one day or hour in his Courts, be better to you than
a thousand elsewhere. Blessed is the Man that hears Wisdom, watching daily at
her Gates, waiting at the Posts of her Doors. Be exemplary for your
affectionate and reverence of GOD's Sanctuary.

Be exemplary also for your Love and Subjection to them that are over you in
the Lord; and be not of them who strive with the Priest that stands to
minister before the LORD thy GOD. But obey them that rule over you: for they
watch for your Souls.

Come into a complete Profession, and entire Church Fellowship. Don't think it
enough to attend some parts of divine Worship, while you pass by others: but
let your Worship be without Partiality. Worship GOD in all the ways He
commands. In particular, let such as have hitherto neglected the Lord's Supper,
be persuaded to come to this Ordinance. Too many among us take a License to
neglect this, as if it were no Ordinance of CHRIST, or as if they stood in no
need of it. In so doing, they dishonor GOD, and wrong their own Souls. As then
you would exalt GOD and benefit your Souls, come humbly and preparedly to the
Table of the LORD. 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself; and so let him eat
of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. You are solemnly invited. O consider how
the Master of the Feast will resent it, if you refuse. Sins of Omission are
displeasing to GOD, as well as Sins of Commission.

Moreover, Take heed of all Errors in Doctrine, and Corruptions in Worship and
Church Order. Don't give into the loose and large Principles, contrary to sound
doctrine, which many are so fond of; lest you be turned away from the
simplicity of the Gospel. Beware of drinking in prejudices against the holy
Discipline of CHRIST'S Churches. Ask for the old paths; where is the good way:
and walk therein. O be found walking in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, with
all purity and constancy. Be followers of them, who through faith and patience do
inherit the Promises. The Elders that have obtained a good Report, let their
Memories live, and be honored by yo^^

Give GOD the glory of the great Works He wro't in their days: For our Ears
have heard, and our Fathers have told us what good and great Things GOD has
done for New England; how He drove out the Heathen, and planted here a noble
Vine, and caused it to spread and grow and flourish.

Often reflect upon the worthy Example, which our Forefathers have left us, of
a zeal to the house of GOD, and for the Purity of his Worship; as well as for
Truth of Doctrine, and Holiness of Life: And let us follow them wherein they
followed CHRIST, our grand Exemplar. -- Don't desert the Cause they so
faithfully asserted; Being the Cause of GOD, you are bound, by the Covenant of
your Fathers, as well as by your own professed Devotedness to GOD, to adhere
unto it. -- Indeed (as one well observes) we are to call no Men Fathers upon
Earth, in such a sense, as to believe or practice any thing in Religion, merely
upon the Credit of their Opinion, or Authority of their Example. For the best
of Men may mistake, and mislead others, in some particular points, whether of
doctrine or practice: so that to be for a thing only because our Fathers were
for it, is to be governed by a blind implicit Faith, and to act upon a Reason,
which if weighed in the balances of the Sanctuary, will be found wanting.
However, since the Errand of our Forefathers into this Land was so approved of
GOD, by many Signs of his gracious Presence with them, and the general Cause is
so manifestly agreeable to holy Scripture, our Rule; hence to flight and forsake
it, or be unmindful of it, will be very faulty in us. 'Twill be nothing less
than Treachery to one of the Best of Causes, and an affront to the LORD JESUS
CHRIST; whose Sovereignty; as Head of the Church, and the sacred Authority of
his Word, as the Rule of Faith and Worship, are two of the main Principles
these Churches were originally erected and established upon. -- We exhort you
then to continue in the Things which ye have learned, knowing of whom ye have
learned them. Remember how you have received, and heard, and hold fast that
which you have, that no Men take away your Crown. Hold fast the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, and cleave to the Ministry which CHRIST has so
signally owned and blessed, in this Land, from one Generation to another. Don't
forsake the Communion of these Churches, upon frivolous Pretenses, or for
by-ends, as the manner of some is. Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith CHRIST
has made you free, and be not of them who are for returning to the Bondage of
human Impositions. Meddle not with them that are given to Change. Now after ye
have known GOD, or rather been known of GOD; how turn ye again to weak and
beggarly Elements! Beware le^t any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain
Deceit, after the Tradition of men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not
after Christ. Let no Man beguile you of your Reward, in a voluntary Humility,
and Will Worship, after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men: which things
indeed have a show of Wisdom; but it is only a show: and in these things many
prosessing themselves to be wise, do become Fools. From such turn away.

Finally, Have Regard to the Interest of CHRIST, and be concerned for the
Flourishing of Religion in the Land. Not only be your selves Examples of the
Life and Power of Godliness; but be zealous to promote it in others. If you
have Families, train up your Children for GOD, and govern your Households to
his glory. Labor to promote Religion in the Place where you live; by
dispensing suitable Counsels, Warnings, and Reproofs, to one and another, as
you ^ave opportunity; looking diligently le^t any Man fail of the grace of GOD.
-- O sigh and mourn for the Sins of the Times. Lay to heart the low state of
Religion in the Land, and pray for and labor after a Reformation. Be watchful,
and strengthen the Things which remain, that are ready to die, Rev. 3. 2. How
will GOD exalt you, if in this day of backsliding, you set your selves to exalt
New-England's GOD, and study to bring others to exalt Him! Who can tell what
vessels of Honor GOD will make you, if you will but in good earnest endeavor
the exalting of his Name! Who can tell what Blessings you may be to the Land,
the Town, the Church, the Family, you belong to! Some of you are Heads of
Families, and may do a great deal to exalt GOD, in your Houses. Some of you are
employed in Offices of a public Nature, in the Church or Commonwealth. Such
as are Ministers or Deacons; such as are Magistrates, Counselors, Judges,
Justices, and others of a Civil Character, Sheriffs, Representatives,
Select-men, Tything-men, Constables, Jurors, etc. have particular Opportunities
in their hands to serve their Generation. And if they set themselves to do it
in their several Places according to the Will of GOD, They may be not a little
instrumental of serving the Kingdom of CHRIST, and promoting the Prosperity of
Religion and Virtue. Who then is willing to consecrate his Service this day
unto the LORD?

Indeed every one has his Talents and Advantages (more or less) which are
improvable to this end. The most private and obscure Christians may do not a
little Good; as by being Examples of Devotion and Morality, so by their holy
Instructions and Counsels to those about them; by their serious Discourse with
Neighbors; etc. And they that can do little in any other way, may do a great
deal of Good by the Prayer of Faith. O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: They
shall prosper that love Zion.

Let Magistrates, and Ministers, in particular be exhorted to arise; for this
matter belongs especially unto them. And let the People say, We also will be
with you; be of good Courage, and do it. Do with might what your hands find to
do, in your respective Stations: and be as the ^e-goats before the flocks, ^ho
are said to be comely in going, because they head the Company, and go
fore-most. It is a graceful thing to be forward in a good work, and to set
others a good Example.

What an Honor will it be to GOD's Servants, and People, of this Generation,
if it may be said of them, That in a day of very great degeneracy they were as
Noah, just Men and Perfect, and walked with GOD; and as Hez^kiah and Josiah,
zealous Reformers, who sat themselves in good earnest to exalt the GOD of their
Fathers! That Religion was dying; the Interest of CHRIST sinking; Sin and
Vanity were overspreading the Land: But such and such stood up for GOD against
the workers of Iniquity, and lifted up a Standard against the growing Evils of
the day. They were as Watchmen on the Walls, which never held their Peace day
or night: but made mention of the LORD, and gave Him no rest, till He made
Jerusalem a Praise. They spoke often one to another, strengthening each others
hands: and they called upon others, saying, Come, let us return to the Lord.
And their zeal provoked many, to an holy Emulation; and by this means an happy
general Reformation was effected.

What an honor will it be to have it said thus of you! None will so deserve to
be esteemed highly in Love, and had in Remembrance, as they who in days of
provocation stir up themselves, to take hold of a departing GOD, and save a
self-ruining People, by leading in a necessary Reformation of Sin, which is a
Reproach to them, and promoting that Righteousness which exalts a Nation.

Well then, whilst others say, Come, cast in your lot among us, for good
fellowship, for flesh-pleasing delights, or worldly profits; Do you be found
among them that call on others, as in Zech. 8. 21. saying, Let us go speedily
to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts; I will go also. O that
that Scripture might this day be fulfilled, Jer. 50. 4, 5. The Children of
Israel shall come; They and the Children of Judah together, going and weeping:
They shall go, and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Zion,
with their faces thither-wards, saying, Come, and let us join ourselves to the
Lord, in a perpetual Covenant, that shall not be forgotten.

(2.) I would offer a Word to such as are under Convictions; beginning to seek
the LORD, and taking up Resolutions to exalt their Fathers GOD.

Be not discouraged. Satan, the grand Adversary of Souls, and Enemy of GOD's
Glory, may cast many Stumbling Blocks in your way, and by a variety of subtle
Methods, labor to hinder you in, or divert you from seeking and exalting of
GOD. Sometimes he may essay to do it by Flatteries; at other times by Frowns
and Affrightments. But listen not to his deceitful Flatteries, nor be afraid of
his Terrors: But resist the Devil, and he shall flee from you.

O take great Care that you don't return to a secure Frame. Now the Spirit of
Grace is striving with you, fall in with his holy Motions. Bless GOD that he
has not utterly forsaken you, as he justly might have done. And receive that
Divine Caution, 1 These. 5. 19. Quench not the Spirit. O cherish your
Convictions, and labor to improve them to a through and sincere Repentance.
Beware of all that tends to hinder you in seeking GOD, and to divert you from
minding the everlasting Concerns of your precious immortal Souls. And in
particular, avoid the Company of carnally minded persons; Forsake the Foolish,
and live; My son, if sinners (...) thee, consent thou not.

Attend diligently the Means of Grace. Be much in Prayer, crying to GOD for his
holy Spirit to be given to you. Seek the Lord while he may be found: Call upon
Him, while he is near. Be much in reading and hearing the Word of GOD. Be much
in religious Conference, and let them that fear GOD be your Companions at all
times. Be likewise much (...) the Duties of Meditation and Self-Examination.
Labor after a right Knowledge of your selves, as you are in your natural
State, guilty, polluted, miserable; Realise your absolute Need of a Savior;
and meditate much on the sufficiency of CHRIST, on his dying Love, on his
glorious Offices and Benefits.

And when you are thus musing, try with a dependence on Divine Grace to act
Faith toward the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and Repentance toward GOD. Try to confess
your Sins with a broken Heart: Try to renounce your own Righteousness, to
receive the Atonement^ to fly for Refuge, and lay Hold on the Hope set before
you. Yield your selves to the LORD, to be taught and ruled by his Word and
Spirit, and to be justified and sanctified by Him in his own way. Take hold of
his Covenant, choosing the Things that please Him: and look to your Resolutions,
that they be sincere, and made with the greatest Integrity, with a becoming
Self-diffidence, and entire Reliance on CHRIST for strength to perform them;
sensible that without Him you can do nothing.

Embrace the Promises of GOD, made in his Covenant, sealed in your Baptism:
Realise the Truth of the Promises; humbly plead them with GOD in Prayer (so
Solem^n did, 2 Chronicles. 6. 16, 17.) and plead them with your own Souls for their
Encouragement and Quickening.

Though you may have been Sinners exceedingly before the LORD; yet sink not into
Despair; but rather turn it into a Plea for Mercy, That the greater your
Iniquities are, the more abundantly will sovereign Grace be magnified and shine
forth in your Pardon and Salvation. This is the import of Psalm. ^5 11. For thy
Name's sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity; for it is GREAT. -- A wonderful Plea
this is, and a wonderful Remedy against Despair.

As another Remedy, consider the remarkable Examples of Mercy, on sacred
Record: such as Manasseh, in particular^ who after many years of notorious
Wickedness and bloody Crimes, was at last brought in a time of Affliction to
humble himself in the Sight of GOD, and to seek the LORD GOD of his Fathers,
and so doing, obtained Mercy. See 2 Chronicles. 33. 12, 13. --

Let me add, Though GOD should not presently be found of you, yet don't give over
seeking him; but rather seek him the more earnestly; follow hard after GOD;
seek his face evermore. Remember how Jacob wrestling with the Angel, vowed unto
the LORD, I will not let Thee go, except Thou bless me. O give him no Rest,
till he come and bless you, by turning you from all your Iniquities. And give
no Rest to your Souls, until you find that GOD has by his Grace restored you to
the Divine Image, and brought you to exalt the GOD of your Fathers; brought you
to live to his Glory on Earth, and so to a Hope of living with Him and seeing
his Glory in Heaven hereafter.

(3.) I come now to offer a Word of Exhortation to the carnally Secure; who
though they may not altogether neglect the Externals of Religion, are yet very
careless in their inward Frame, and wretchedly thoughtless of the Honor of GOD.

Many there be that are at Ease in Zion, and trust in the Mountain of Samaria;
and rest in the law, making their Boast of GOD: yet through breaking of the law,
dishonor they God; or if they seem to honor him, by external Duties, and
moral Virtues, yet inwardly and really they do not exalt Him. The love of GOD
dwells not in them. They are full of Hypocrisy: and keep the Feast with the
old Leven. Nevertheless, they cry Peace, to their Souls, and flatter themselves
in their own Eyes, as if they were the Children of Abraham, and the Friends of
GOD: or at least they put far from them the evil day.

O that such would bethink themselves before it be too late! What a dreadful
thing will it be for you to perish with a lie in your right hand! Let no man
deceive you with vain words: if any man have not the Spirit of CHRIST, he is
none of his. You may do many things, may hear the Word with some Affection, and
keep up a Course of Prayer, and be not far from the Kingdom: and yet may come
short of it! Our LORD has given you warning, Matthew. 7. 21. Not every one that
^aith unto me, LORD, LORD, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: but he that
does the will of my Father. -- Many will say unto Him in that day, LORD, LORD,
have we not prophesied in thy Name? Have we not eaten and drank in thy
Presence? And in thy Name done many wonderful Works? -- Yet the Judge says,
Then will I profess unto you, I never knew you. Depart from me, ye that work
iniquity. O that carnal Professors would hear and fear; and strive to enter in
at the strait Gate, as our Savior exhorts, Matthew. 7. 13. O strive to enter in;
for wide is the Gate, and broad is the way that leads to Destruction, and
many there be that go therein: but strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way
which leads unto Life, and few there be that find it. -- Beware of false
Prophets, which may come to you in Sheeps-clothing, but inwardly are ravening
Wolves: They zealously affect you, but not well: as many as desire to make a
fair show in the flesh, constrain you to be circumcised, (to allude to that of
the Apostle, Gal. 6. 12.) yet neither do they themselves keep the Law, but
imagine an easy and ceremonial Religion will carry them to Heaven. But be not
deceived: GOD is not mocked. Beware of evil Workers, and follow not their
pernicious ways. Beware of the Concision. For we are the Circumcision, which
worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no Confidence
in the Flesh. -- Awake, thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead; and CHRIST
shall give thee Light. Work out your Salvation, with fear and trembling: for it
is GOD that works in us to will and to do according to his good pleasure. Be
in earnest, as they that know their season is short, and may suddenly come to
an end. Do with might what your Hand finds to do: for there is no Work nor
Device in the Grave whither you are going. The Grave cannot praise GOD; Death
cannot celebrate Him: they that go down to the Pit (impenitent) cannot Hope for
his Truth. The Living, the Living, they shall praise Him. The Father to the
Children should make known his Truth; and the Children should rise and take
hold of his Testimony which He has established in Jacob, choose his Statutes,
and not forget the Works of GOD, but set their Hope in Him, and keep his
Commandments.

O consider the awful Hazard you run by Security and Delays. Is it not
threatened, Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his Neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy! And have you not resisted many
Calls, rejected many Reproofs? Surely then it is now high time to awake out of
Sleep. O awake, ye secure Sinners; and do it speedily, lest the Master coming
suddenly, find you sleeping. Boast not thy self of to Morrow; for thou know
not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27. 1.

There is nothing of greater Consequence and Concern for us to set about early
and speedily, than the exalting of GOD. It is the greatest Imprudence to put it
off to futurity. Nothing is worthier of Care in your Youthful days, than this.
If you neglect this, you spend your days in Vanity, and in what will be the
Reproach of your Youth. This will be your only safety. You cannot be safe, so
long as you forget GOD. You are every day, in hazard of Death; yea in danger of
Hellfire. Rejoice, O Young Man, and walk in the ways of thine Heart, and in
the sight of thine Eyes: But know thou that for all these things, God will
bring thee into Judgment. Therefore Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
Youth. Eccl. 11. 9. and 12. 1.

(4.) And lastly, Let me apply my self in some solemn words, to such among the
Children of godly Parents as are degenerated from the good Principles and
Practices, in which they were trained up, and wherein their Fathers walked.

O consider from whence you are fallen, and repent. Consider, and turn again.
Whether you be younger or elder, let me expostulate with you in the Name of
CHRIST, and beseech you to return unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls,
that you may live.

Behold, you have not obeyed his Voice, but despised the Oath in breaking the
Commandment, and therein despised your own Souls; yea, and despised the
glorious GOD. Why have ye done this? What iniquity did your Fathers find in
GOD, that ye have forsaken him! Or what have you to charge him with! Gal. 5. 6.
Ye did run well perhaps: who has hindered you, that ye should not obey the
Truth! -- Verily you are without Excuse, and have no Cloak for your Sin.

O consider how unaccountable your Conduct is. Read the second Chapter of
Jeremiah, where GOD is pleading with his People, upon the Unreasonableness of
their Apostasy from Him: and take shame to your selves as utterly inexcusable.
Consider how disingenuous and ungrateful a part you have acted. For, does not
GOD infinitely deserve to be exalted by you in all possible ways! Does he
require any thing of you, to this end, but what is altogether reasonable, and
what will be infinitely for your Profit and Advantage, for your highest Honor,
and greatest Pleasure and Satisfaction! And are you not under the bonds of a
solemn Covenant to seek and serve GOD! Yet ye make Him to serve with your
Iniquities, and shamefully cast Contempt upon Him. Is not that fulfilled in
you, Prove. 14. 2. He that is perverse in his ways, despises the Lord! Do you
not slight his blessed Son, grieve his good Spirit, pollute his Sabbaths,
corrupt his Worship, trample on his Word, and profane his holy Name! O the vile
Ingratitude you are guilty of in thus treating the glorious GOD, in whom you
live, move, and have your Being! It is an awful Charge lying against you, Dan.
5. 23. The God, in whose hand thy Breath is, and whose are all thy ways, thou
have not glorified. O think what a base Spirit you are of: think how basely you
carry it toward your best B^nefactor, and your Fathers Friend; while you are
so careless of his Honor and Favor, and are taking so much pains to please
the Devil, to conform unto the World, and gratify the Lusts of the Flesh, your
own and GOD's implacable Enemies!

And consider how great your Danger; how you expose your selves to the
vengeance of a dishonored and provoked GOD. You have provoked Him to take his
holy Spirit from you, and to strive with you no more, but give you up to walk
in the Counsel of your own Hearts. You are in hazard of that Curse, Prove. 14.
14. The Backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways. And of that,
Hos. 4. 17 Ephraim is joined to Idols; let him alone.

Indeed, we trust, your Case is not yet desperate. For GOD our merciful Father
invites even backsliding Children to return. Jer. 3. 1. Thou have played the
harlot with many Lovers; yet return again to me, faith the Lord. O how should
this Grace of GOD melt and dissolve the Heart of every rebellious Child! Will thou not from this time cry unto GOD, My Father, I choose thee for my Guide and
Portion!

Or despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance; and treasurest
up to thy self Wrath against the day of Wrath!. O consider, if you go on still
in your Trespasses, after your Hardness and impenitent Heart; verily your
Damnation slumbreth not: for if GOD spared not the Angels that sinned, but
quickly cast them down to Hell, will he let you go unpunished, who have sinned
against those Mercies, which they never sinned against; and despised those
Offers of Grace that were never made to them! Verily the latter end will be
worse than the beginning; for it had been better for you never to have known
the way of Righteousness, than after you have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment. If we sin wilfully and with final Impenitence, after we have
received the knowledge of the Truth; there remains no more Sacrifice for sin:
but a fearful Judgment, and fiery Indignation, to devour the Adversaries. He
that despised Moses's law, died without Mercy: Of how much sorer Punishment,
shall he be though it worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of GOD, and
counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing,
and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace! For we know him that has said,
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, faith the LORD. And it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living GOD. Better never to have
been born, than to fall into his revenging hands. Consider this, ye that forget
GOD, lest he tear you in pieces, and there he none to deliver.

All the Means of Grace will be lost upon you, if you don't consider and
repent: and will be so many dreadful Items in your future Account.

Your godly Parents will be loud witnesses against you in the day of reckoning;
their Examples, Prayers, Counsels, and Warnings, will rise up in Judgment
against you. And they will give their approving Voices, in your Condemnation. O
awful Thought! Don't it strike you to the heart!

And then, You will be eternally sep^rated from your holy Parents, and all
Saints, from the blessed Angels, from JESUS the Mediator, and from GOD the
fountain of all Good. The LORD will disown you at last. You may read your Doom,
in Heb. 10. 38. 2 Timothy 2. 12, 13. -- Luke 9. 26. and other places. O hearken,
and be not high-minded, but fear. Realize it, Death and Hell are before you,
and the Pit opens its Mouth for you. You are going in the broad road to
Perdition. GOD will not bear always. His Anger will kindle and bu^^ against you,
except you repent. He will pour out the full Vials of His Wrath upon
Gospel-Impenitents; a wrath to the uttermost upon Hypocrites and Apostates.
Your Misery will be in proportion to your Guilt, exceeding great. Rev. 18. 7.
How much she glorified her self, and lived deliciously, So MUCH Torment and
Sorrow give her. Verily your Cup will be a most bitter Cup; GOD will fill to
you double. And shall not Destruction, an everlasting Destruction from GOD, be
a Terror to you!

But to conclude,

While you go back from the LORD, you are taking an unhappy Method to bring
down the Judgments of Heaven, not only on your selves, but on your Families
too^ (if you have any) which will fare the worse for the miserable Heads of
them; yea, upon the Land. And how doleful and terrible a thing will it be, if
you are found in the number of them that help on the Ruin and Destruction of
New England, by provoking GOD to depart from us! If GOD forsake the Land, all
good goes away with Him: Our Glory departs; we lose our Crown, our Strength,
our Safety and Defense. Hence those awakening Scriptures, Jer. 6. 8. Be
instructed, O Jerusalem, left my Soul depart from thee. And Hos. 9. 12. WOE to
them when I depart from them. It will be a dreadful thing for GOD to depart
from New England! And will you be of those that say to Him, Depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways! O what a sorrowful thing will it be to
have a hand in the ruin of so many Churches of CHRIST, as He has planted here;
and to be among them that pull down the Judgments of GOD, to the making of the
Land desolate! -- We have gone very far in provoking GOD, to visit us with
desolating Calamities: to bring us under the Contempt of the Heathen, to cut us
short in our Comforts and Blessings, and distress us, both by Sea and Land; to
send the Sword to devour, and Sickness to waste and consume, and other
Judgments to impoverish and destroy us. We are already brought low for our
Iniquities. And shall we by continued Impenitency, and by multiplying
Provocations, hasten on the Completion of all heavy Woes, GOD's Departure from
us! If this Generation sin away the gracious Presence of GOD, they take a
Course to have Sword and Famine and Pestilence employed, to the emptying
Families and Towns, and laying waste a pleasant Land. If we are unthankful for
and unfruitful under such Covenant-Privileges, and especial Liberties, and
Means of Grace, as we enjoy; we take an unhappy Method to provoke GOD to cast
us off^ and to write upon New England, Lo-rubamah, Loammi^ for they are not my
People, and I will not be their GOD; nor will I any more have Mercy upon the
house of Israel, but I will utterly take them away, faith the LORD.

I conclude with those Words of CHRIST to the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen; and repent, and do the first
works: or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent. -- He that has an Ear, let him hear what
the Spirit faith unto the Churches.

FINIS.

