SOME Plain and Necessary DIRECTIONS To obtain Eternal Salvation. IN Six
SERMONS From ACTS XVI. 30.

By John Webb, M.A. Pastor to a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

Luke x. 42. But one Thing is needful.

BOSTON: Printed for BENJ. GRAY, at the Head of the Town-Dock. 1729,

TO THE READER.
THE following SERMONS, as you will find by some Passages in them, were
Preached not long after the Terrible Earthquake October 29, 30. 1727.
, whereby, the People in NEW ENGLAND, were generally very much Awakened; and
Multitudes, almost in every Town and Parish, came to their Ministers, as the
Jailer, in my Text, did to Paul and Silas, with this important Inquiry, Sirs,
What must we do to be Saved? And 'twas a Joyful Sight to us, to behold such a
gracious Effect of so awful a Dispensation. For though, by this means, our Work
was greatly increased on our Hands; yet I believe, your Pastors never went more
cheerfully through their abundant Labors, nor took more Pains to suit their
Discourses to the state of their Hearers: And it was with this View, these
Sermons were first Composed and Delivered from the Pulpit. But alas! it is no
less grievous now, to find, how soon and easily these solemn Impressions are
worn off the Minds of a great many, both Old and Young. Who, notwithstanding
their late Convictions and Vows for Reformation, are returned to their former
Evil Courses, as the Dog to his Vomit: and so are fallen under the weight of
that heavy Charge against Ephraim and Judah, Hos. 6.4. O Ephraim, what shall I
do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your Goodness is as the
Morning Cloud, and as the early Dew it goes away. And it is enough to make
one's Heart and Flesh to tremble, to think of the fearful Doom that awaits
these Backsliders in Heart and Life. For, we have it from the mouth of GOD
Himself, in Heb. 10.38. Now the just shall live by Faith: but if any man draw
back my soul shall have no pleasure in him. And if any such Persons should cast
an eye upon these Pages, I beseech you, for GOD's sake, and for the sake of
your poor Souls, to look back, before it be too late, and Consider, How many
strong Convictions you have stifled, how many solemn Vows and Promises you have
broken, and what hopeful Beginnings you are fallen from; and then look forward,
and behold the amazing Gulf of Endless Miseries you are plunging deep into.
And, Oh, That GOD, of His infinite Mercy, would Revive your Convictions, and
bring you in earnest to Inquire, what you must do to be Saved; and so pluck you
as brands out of the Burning!

BUT notwithstanding the Melancholy Prospect we have from these Revolters from
GOD and Duty, There are (Blessed be GOD for it) some Thousands in the Land upon
whom these Impressions do yet remain; and I hope will do so to their dying Day.
And it is no small Comfort to me to find so many of this Character, in the
Congregation I belong to, and very particularly among our Dear YOUNG PEOPLE,
who are still, Inquiring the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward.

AND as an Help to them herein, a Number of them have earnestly desired (and I
have accordingly complied with their Desires, in) the Publication of these
Discourses. And how defective soever they may be as to the manner of them, I am
sure the Subject of them is of infinite Importance. And therefore, though at some
times they may be more peculiarly a Word in Season, as they were intended in
the Preaching of them; yet, Discourses of this kind, can never be out of
Season, while there are any Men in the World under the Condemning Sentence of
GOD's righteous Law, and so stand in absolute need of Eternal Salvation.

AND if these Sermons, mean as they are, should fall into the Hands of any,
that are in deep Concern about the state of their Souls and another World, for
whom they are chiefly designed; I hope, by the Blessing of GOD, they will meet
with such Directions in them, as may be of Service to them, in working out
their Salvation with fear and trembling.

AND if such poor distressed Souls, or any else, should reap the least
Spiritual Benefit by them, my End is answered: And let GOD the CREATOR,
REDEEMER, and SANCTIFIER have the whole Glory of it.

John Webb.
March 10th. 1728, 9.
Some Plain and Necessary DIRECTIONS To obtain Eternal Salvation. SERMON I.
ACTS XVI. 30. Sirs, What must I do to be Saved?


ETERNAL Salvation is a matter of the greatest Concern to every Sinner. And
accordingly this Inquiry in the Text is usually the first and great Inquiry of
every one, that is thoroughly convinced of the miserable and wretched state he
is in by Nature. The apprehensions he has of his own Sin and Guilt, fill him
with the deepest Concern about the state of his poor Soul and another World:
And he desires nothing so much as to know, what means he must use, or what
course to take, to escape the Damnation of Hell, and come to enjoy the
Happiness of Heaven. This is a Subject that employs his tho'ts day and night.
And he frequently thinks with himself, What a miserable Condition am I in? What
shall I do in this sad state? How shall I get out of it? What Course shall I
take for this end? And he is ready to ask these Questions of every one whom he
thinks able to give him any Light and Direction in a matter of so great
Importance.

AND in hopes this is the Case with many of my Hearers at this day (having
lately had the same loud call from GOD in His Providence, to awaken and rouse
you as the Jailer had in our Context,) I shall consider the Inquiry before us:
And in the Prosecution of it, give the most full and satisfactory answer I can,
to those who make it in earnest.

BUT before I come to the Point in hand, I shall briefly consider the Context;
and so lead you to the Occasion of the Words themselves. And here if we look
back to the ninth verse of this Chapter, we shall find the Apostle Paul had
been called by God in a vision to go over into Macedonia: which call he
immediately obeyed; and soon came to Philippi, the chief City of Macedonia, and
a Colony, (ver. 10.12.) And being arrived thither, he improved the first
opportunity he had to preach the Gospel of CHRIST, (ver. 13.) Whereupon follows
an account of the success of his Ministry in the Conversion of Lydia, and his
casting out an evil spirit that had possessed a Damsel in those parts, ( ver. 14,
-- 19.) But her Masters had made their Advantage of her heretofore by her
Divination, ( ver 16.) they were enraged at the Apostle for the loss they
sustained in her Conversion to Christianity; and so raised a grievous
Persecution against the Apostle and Silas, his Companion and Fellow Laborer.
Upon which they were both cruelly scourged, and cast into Prison, by order of
Government ( ver. 22, 23.) This being done; the Jailer to make good his Trust,
thrust them into the inner Prison, or Dungeon, where none were usually put but
condemned Malefactors: but as if this were not enough, he made their feet fast
in the Stocks; resolving to load them with all the indignity and misery he
could do. Under this cruel treatment those Servants of CHRIST took Courage, and
comforted themselves in GOD; rejoicing, no doubt, that they were counted worthy
to suffer such shame for the sake of their dear LORD. And therefore we read in
ver. 25. At midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang praises unto God; and with
so loud and cheerful a Voice that the Prisoners heard them. Whereupon GOD
immediately appeared in a very awful and surprising manner, both to vindicate
the Innocence of his suffering Servants, and to testify his great Displeasure
at their malicious Persecutors. For we read in ver. 26. And suddenly there was
a great Earthquake; so that the foundations of the Prison were shaken. How far
there might be the ministry of second Causes in this amazing Dispensation, we
know not: but yet this we are sure of, there was the Hand of Heaven remarkably
in it; and something very extraordinary, if not miraculous, as appears by the
Effects, or rather the Attendants of it: For it is said in this same verse, And
immediately all the doors were opened, and every ones bonds were loosed. It is
probable this opening the Doors of the Prison, and loosing the bands of the
Prisoners were not by the violence of the Earthquake, but by the ministry of an
Angel; as in Peter's case, Act. 5.19. But yet they were effected at the same
Instant when the Walls of the Prison, and no doubt all the Houses in the Town
were tottering and ready to tumble into Ruins, by the dreadful Quaking of the
Earth under them: And by this means the Dispensation appeared more awful and
amazing. And now as to the Effects of this surprising Providence upon the Minds
of Men: There is no Question to be made, but all the People in the City were
thrown into an amazing Fright by it; as we were the other Night by the like
Dispensation. But my Text leads me to consider only the Case of the Jailer; and
the Impressions it made upon him. And accordingly we read in ver. 27th. That
the Keeper of the Prison awaked out of sleep; it is likely by the great Shock of
the Earthquake; and seeing the Prison Doors open, he supposed at first, as well
he might, that all the Prisoners were fied. And this filled him with new
Terrors; for though the Earth had not opened her mouth and swallowed him alive,
as a minute or two before he though it it would have done, yet now he apprehended
himself in fresh hazard of losing his Life, and in a most ignominious manner,
by the hands of the Magistrates; for the Roman Law was very severe in this
case, and made it a Capital Crime for a Prison-keeper to let any of his
Prisoners escape. And accordingly the Severity of it had, not long before, been
executed upon the Keepers, out of whose hands the Apostle Peter had escaped,
Act. 12.19. And therefore to avoid that kind of Death, the Jailer at first
attempted in a most unnatural manner to lay violent hands on himself: for he
drew out his sword, and would have killed himself: See ver. 27. But Paul
perceiving the intended Tragedy cried out with a loud voice, and said to the
poor distressed Wretch, Do thy self no harm: for we are all here, ver. 28. This
voice of the Prisoner was Life from the Dead to the Keeper of the Prison;
whereupon he immediately laid aside his vile Purpose of murdering himself; and
being at once convinced of the Innocence of Paul and Silas; of the truth of
their Religion, and of the Almighty Power of that GOD who had so signally
appeared for them, He immediately called for a Light, and sprang in, and came
trembling, and fell down before these Servants of the most HIGH GOD, in token
of Reverence and Respect to them, And being at the same time also convinced in
a very wonderful manner of his own sinful and wretched state, and the hazard he
was in of losing his Soul forever; He puts this most serious and important
Question to them in the words of my Text, -- Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
He was now in as great Concern for the Life of his precious Soul, as just
before he had been in, for the Life of his Body: And he knew of none so fit, as
Paul and Silas, to apply to for Counsel and Direction in this most important
Affair. And therefore applied to them, in the most respectful manner, for their
speedy Help and Direction in this Case, Sirs, What must I do etc? He was
willing now to take any Advice, and to do any thing; yea, every thing in his
power for the Salvation of his Soul: and therefore how to obtain this, was
become his first and chief Enquiry. Thus the Providence of GOD, that had just
before like to have cost him and many more their Lives, proved a merciful
Dispensation to him: GOD made it a means to awaken him to purpose; and brought
him hereby to Inquire in earnest after Eternal Life. And since (as I hope) this
is the very Case with a considerable Number both here and elsewhere, at this
Time; I shall speak to this DOCTRINE from the Text, as a Word in Season to you,
--

Namely,

DOCT. WHENEVER a Sinner is thoroughly Convinced of his Sin and Danger, he is
will not to make this his first and great Inquiry, What must I do to be Saved?

So did the Jailer in our Text; being brought into deep Convictions by the
surprising Providence of GOD, as you have heard. And so did the three thousand
that were Convinced, at one time, by an awakning Sermon of the Apostle Peter.
The story of which we find in the second Chapter of the Acts: Where we have a
brief account of the Sermon he preached to them, from the 14 th. to the 16 th.
verse inclusively. And then we have an account of the impression it made upon
them in ver. 27 th. Now when they heard this they were pricked in their heart,
i.e. They were deeply convinced, by the Word, of their Sin and Guilt. And upon
this it follows, They said unto Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and
brethren, What shall we do? That is, What shall we do to be saved? The Question
is of the same import with that in the Text. They were now made sensible, they
were sinful, guilty, undone Creatures in themselves, and stood in infinite need
of eternal Salvation: and upon this Conviction, the very first thing they
inquire after, is, What they shall do to obtain the Pardon of their Sins, and
the Salvation of their Souls. And we may observe the like Concern in the
Apostle Paul, at his Conversion, in the ninth Chapter of the Acts. He was
convinced of his sin and danger, by a voice immediately from Heaven, saying
unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? ver. 4. And he was no sooner
made sensible from whence the voice came, and what the design of it was, but
with trembling and astonishment, at the prospect of his Sin and Guilt, he cries
out, Lord, what will thou have me to do? As if he had said, Lord, my way has
been perverse before thee; I have greatly dishonored and offended thee by my
Sins; and exposed my self to thy dreadful wrath and vengeance; Oh, what shall I
do? Lord, teach me what Course to take, to get my Sins pardoned and my Peace
made with thee. Teach me how to live and walk that so I may glorify thee in
this World, and enjoy thy Salvation in the World to come. And thus if you meet
with any Sinner that has been once thoroughly convinced of his Sin and Danger,
either by the Word or Providence of GOD, you will soon find, that this is the
great Inquiry he is in pursuit of; and what he desires above every thing to be
resolved in; namely, What shall I do be saved? What Course shall I steer? What
Steps shall I take? What Means shall I make use of, that may prove effectual
for this End? This is enough to prove the Truth of the Point.

HERE then in the Prosecution of this Subject, I shall observe the following
Method.

I. I Shall show, when a Sinner may be said to be thoroughly Convinced of his
Sin and Danger.

II. WHAT is implied in that Salvation, which such a Sinner so earnestly
inquires after.

III. SHOW the Necessity and Importance of the Sinners making this his first
and great Inquiry. And then,

IV. SHOW what Steps a poor Convinced Sinner must take to obtain Eternal Life,
in answer to that Inquiry in the Text, What must I do to be saved?

I. I Shall show when a poor Sinner may be said to be thoroughly Convinced of
his Sin and Danger: or what this CONVICTION implies in it.

AND here there are these Four things principally included in it.

1. A deep sense of the evil and accursed Nature of Sin. Sin in it self is the
very worst of Evils. There is nothing so odious in the nature of it, as Sin is.
It Is far worse than any Evil of Punishment can be: for though penal Evil be
destructive of the Creatures Happiness; yet, as it is a Correction for Sin, and
never inflicted by GOD but when Sins calls for it, there is both Reason and
Justice in it. But Sin can in no sense be said to be good: For, in the very
Nature of it, it is directly opposite to all that is holy, just and good. It is
contrary to the most pure and blessed Nature of GOD; contrary to His just and
righteous Law; and is followed with the whole train of penal Evils, as the
proper Demerit of it. And therefore he that has a due Conviction of Sin, has
been awakened by the Spirit of GOD to see something of the odious and accursed
Nature of Sin, as it is in it self. GOD has given him to see Sin in its horrid
Contrariety to His most holy Nature and Law; and that it deserves to be hated
and ought to be abandoned on the account thereof. And accordingly, He is
wounded to the Heart to think how injurious Sin is to GOD; How it opposes His
holy Will; affronts His supreme Authority; Dishonours His sacred Name; and so
how hateful it is to GOD on the account hereof. And from hence he cannot but see
and own the unreasonable and odious Nature of Sin: and is ready at the Prospect
of it to cry out, Oh, the accursed Thing! I hate the Name, I abhor the Nature
of it: I now loath the Garments spotted with it; and if it were possible, I
would not have my Heart, nor my Hands defiled with it for ten thousand Worlds.
Nay, in the Mind I am now in, I would suffer any Affliction and Pain rather
than touch the accursed Thing. And so under this Conviction the Sinner is put
upon flying from Sin as far as he can, and upon escaping as many of the
Temptations to it as he can do: And makes that Prayer to GOD, which CHRIST has
taught us in this Case, Math. 6.13. Lord, Lead me not into Temptation, but
deliver me from Evil: from the Evil of Sin, which is so hateful in thy sight.
Again,

2. IN this Conviction there is a just sense of the dreadful Demerit and
Tendency of Sin. For as Sin is a Transgression of the Law of GOD, and casts all
manner of Reproach upon His Sacred Name and Ways: there is no Punishment too
severe to be inflicted on the Guilty. For the Nature of Sin is such, "that it
deserves the Wrath and Curse of GOD both in this Life, and in that which is to
come". And accordingly, they that are guilty of it, are cursed by the Law of
GOD, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the book of the Law to do them. And they are doomed to die on the
account of it, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
die. And Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is Death. This Death includes in it all
outward Evils and Miseries in this World, from the least Pain of a Finger to
the Death of the Body. Again, it includes in it all spiritual Plagues and
Judgments in this Life; such as the Anger of GOD; the Frowns of His Face; the
Stings and Lashes of the Sinners own Conscience; and GOD's delivering him up
into the Hands of His spiritual Enemies, to be tyranized over, and hurried by
them to Eternal Ruin. And therefore it also includes in it, the Everlasting
Destruction of Soul and Body in Hell; which is eternal Death, and the thing
principally intended in the Threatening and Curse that is due for Sin. All this
the convinced Sinner has an affecting Apprehension of; and cannot but own the
Justice and Righteousness of GOD in ordatning such a severe Punishment for the
workers of Iniquity. And therefore,

3. IN this Conviction the Sinner has a deep Sense of his own Guilt and
Pollution by Sin. For Sin is not only the most hateful Thing in itself, and so
deserves the Curse of GOD: but we are all of us horribly infected with the
Plague of Sin, and deserve the Vengeance of Heaven our selves. For as the
Prophet observes, We are all of us as an unclean thing, Isai. 64.6. From the
Crown of the Head even to the sole of the Feet, there is no spiritual soundness
in us; nothing but wounds and bruises and putrefying sores, Isai. 1.6. And our
Lives are naturally among the unclean. And being thus polluted with Sin, we
deserve nothing but Wrath and Death on the account of it. And so are said to be
by Nature, the Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Now in true Conviction, the Sinner
has a deep sense of this his Pollution and Guilt by reason of Sin. GOD has set
his Iniquities in order before him; and bro't him to see what a vile
Transgressor he has been. And accordingly the Convinced Sinner is sensible of
the Sins both of his Heart and Life* He sees in some good measure what an evil
Heart He has in him; an Heart full of mity to GOD, of Indisposition to that
which is Good, and inclined to all that is Evil. And as such an Heart can bring
forth no good Fruit; so he sees that out of the evil Treasure of his Heart, he
has brought forth nothing but Evil in his past Life and Conversation: He sees
that his Days have been filled up with acts of Rebellion against GOD; that his
Sins have been many and exceedingly aggravated; that he has sinned against the
Light of his own Conscience; sinned against the Calls and Warnings of GOD,
against His Mercies and Judgments, and the like. And so he stands ready to
confess with the returning Prodigal, in Luke 15.21. Father I have sinned
against Heaven, and in thy sight. And as he sees himself so great a Sinner, so
he apprehends his own Pollution by Sin. He justly concludes himself a most vile
and abominable Creature: and knows that GOD has infinite reason to abhor him
forever And this sense of his own vileness makes him to loath himself for his
own Iniquities; and to confess with Job, Behold, I am vile -- I abhor my self,
and repent in Dust and Ashes, Chap. 40.4.42.6. And with this sense of Pollution
he conceives his own dreadful Guilt by reason of Sin. He knows that he justly
deserves Wrath and Hell on the account of his Transgressions: and sees all the
Curses and Threatenings that are written in the Book of Gods Law standing in
full force against him: and so apprehends himself a Miserable Condemned Wretch:
one that has run a swift Race in Sin, and been ripening apace for the Damnation
of Hell. And so with the Jailer in the Context, he trembles at the prospect of
that Wrath that is due to him for his Sins; and can truly say with David, in
Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy
judgments. Thus in true Conviction the Sinner has a deep sense of his own
Pollution and Guilt by Sin.

And then,

4. Lastly. IN this Conviction the Sinner is deeply sensible of his own utter
Inability to Help and Save himself. For a true Conviction of the evil Nature
and Desert of Sin will soon bring a Sinner to see, that it is not in his own
Power nor in the Power of any mere Creature to atone the Wrath of GOD for his
Sins, and obtain his release from the Condemning Sentence of the Law. And
therefore when the Convinced Sinner makes that Inquiry of himself, as we find
in Mich. 5.6, 7. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before
the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings; with calves of a
year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousand of rams, or with ten thousand
rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul? He presently makes answer to himself, Oh, no! all
this can never be a proper Atonement for Sin. Lebanon is not sufficient to
burn, nor the beasts thereof for a burnt offering. Nay, such is the Nature of
my Sins, and the Nature of that GOD against whom I have sinned; that a
Sacrifice of the whole Creation, if I had it to offer, could not satisfy Divine
Justice for the least of my Offenses. And then besides, would GOD accept the
least good at our hands as an Atonement for Sin; He that is thoroughly
Convinced, sees that he has nothing of his own, that has the least value in it;
and that he can do nothing of himself, that is any ways worthy of GOD's
Acceptance. And therefore, he looks upon his own Righteousness but as filthy
Rags, and can see no Hope, no Help for him in the compass of the Creation.

THUS I have given you something of the Nature of true Conviction of Sin,
whether it be wrought more immediately by the Word, or by any remarkable
Providence of GOD. And whenever a poor Sinner is brought into this state of
Conviction, his first and great Inquiry is that in the Text, Sirs, What must I
do to be saved? And this would naturally lead me now, to show, what is implied
in that Salvation which such a Sinner so earnestly inquires after: which is the
second Thing I proposed under the Doctrine. But I shall not enter into the
Consideration of this Point at present. But conclude with a brief Reflection or
two upon the first general Head, which I have spoken to.

Infer. 1. DOES Conviction of Sin imply in it such things as we have heard?
Hence learn that this Conviction is the Work of the SPIRIT of GOD. Some are
ready to impute their own Convictions of Sin and Danger, and the Convictions of
others, to the power of Melancholy within them, or to the Malice of Satan
without them, and so are for shaking off, and discouraging such Convictions in
the beginnings of them, as much as they can. But, Sinner, Art thou Convinced in
any measure, of the evil and accursed Nature of Sin, -- of the fatal Tendency
of it, and of thy own Pollution and Guilt by reason of it: This can never be
the Work of Corrupt Nature; for that is always in love with Sin: nor the Work
of the Devil, for his main Business is to hide your Sin and Danger from you;
that he may make the easier and surer Prey of you to your everlasting undoing.
Well then, it must be the Work of the Spirit of GOD. And whatever were the
Means of thy Convictions, the Holy Spirit is the Author and Efficient of them;
and they are appropriated to Him in the Gospel of Christ. Joh. 16.8. And when
the Spirit is come he will reprove or convince the world of sin etc. And we
should accordingly ascribe all our Convictions to the Holy Spirit, and make
proper Acknowledgments to Him on the account of them.

Hence,

Infer. 2. IS every one that is thoroughly Convinced of his Sin and Danger
will not to make this his first and great Inquiry, What must I do to be saved?
Convinced Sinners should then bless GOD for their Convictions, and pursue the
Inquiry after Eternal Salvation, 'till they see where there Help is to be
found, and are enabled to put their trust in CHRIST for Eternal Life. Has GOD
brought any of you to a deep sense of your sinful and miserable state by
Nature? Has He awakened this sense in you by His Word or Providence, or by
both? Oh! Bless GOD herefor as the most merciful Dispensation of your whole
Lives hitherto. And are you now brought to make that Inquiry, What shall I do
to be saved? Oh, keep on in the Inquiry, 'till you come to a comfortable Issue
in the matter. Pursue the Inquiry by searching into the Word of GOD, which
shows poor Sinners the Way to Eternal Salvation. And ask of your Ministers and
Christian Friends that have found the Way, and are walking in the way to
Eternal Life, What you must do to be saved? And if you are but in earnest and
constant in this Inquiry, GOD will in His own Time enlighten and lead you in
the Way Everlasting.

SERMON II.
II. I Proceed to the Second general Head under the Doctrine, and this is to
show what is implied in that SALVATION which the Convinced Sinner so earnestly
enquires after. Every Sinner, as I said, that is timely Convinced, is bro't
into deep Concern for Eternal Salvation. This is what he longs for, Enquires
and Seeks after, while his Convictions abide by Him. It is worth while
therefore to Enquire a little into the Nature of this Salvation, to see whether
such a Sinner be Rational in his Desires and Pursuits. And accordingly, if we
consider the Point a while, we shall find He has infinite Reason for the utmost
Concern about it. For there are these two things in general implied in it.

1. A Deliverance from the Curse of the Law, to which every Sinner is
obnoxious, by the breach of the first Covenant.

2. A sure Right and Title to the glorious and invaluable Privileges and
Benefits of the New Covenant.

(1.) This Salvation comprehends in it, a Deliverance from the Curse of the
Law, to which every Sinner is obnoxious by the Breach of the first Covenant.
That God entered into Covenant with our first Parents before the Fall, is plain
from the History of our Creation. For therein we find that as soon as God made
man in his own Image, which consisted in Righteousness and true Holiness, He
gave him a Law to walk by; a Law suited to the Dignity of the Great Lawgiver
and the State of the Subject. This Law was confirmed at the same time with the
most forcible Sanctions: with the Promise of Life on Condition of perfect and
persevering Obedience, and with the Threatening of Death and Misery in Case of
Disobedience. And these Terms, without Doubt were cheerfully submitted to by
Man in a State of Innocence: and from hence resulted the Nature of a Covenant
between God and Man. And this we call the first Covenant, or Covenant of Works.
Now this Covenant was no sooner made between God and Man, but it was broken on
our part. The way and manner in which it was thus violated, is expressly
declared to us in the Story of our shameful Apostasy from God: which you may
read at large in the Third Chapter of Genesis. This Breach of Covenant exposed
poor Man at once to the whole Curse of the Law: For it is written Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things written in the book of the Law to
do them, Gal. 3.10. The substance of this Curse, as I said before, is Death of
every kind. And therefore the Evils contained in it are inconceivably great and
dreadful. It implies in it a forfeiture of all the Good, the Sinner has in
Possession, or ever had a Right and Title to; and a subjection to all Positive
Evil. For he that is under the Curse of the Law, has forfeited and lost the
Favor of GOD, and lies open to all the amazing strokes of revenging Justice.
And therefore the Sinner deserves, and so the least he has any Reason to expect
from the Hands of an holy Sin-revenging GOD, is eternal Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish: and he has no other rational Prospect before him, but
a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall
devour the Adversary. See Heb. 10.27. This is the lamentable Condition of every
one that is under the Curse; and so the doleful state of every one of us by
Nature. And it is upon this deplorable account alone, that we stand in need of
Salvation. For had we never violated the holy Law of GOD, we had for ever been
secure in the Favor and Enjoyment of GOD, which is Life Eternal. But by the
most perfidious Breach of GOD's Covenant, we have brought our selves into the
depth of that Misery, I have now described. And it is not possible we should
ever be happy without a complete Redemption from it. And therefore the
Salvation we are speaking of necessarily implies this Redemption in it.

Here then I shall say,

1. THIS Salvation implies in it, a Deliverance from Sin and Lust. As Man's
Apostasy from GOD, and the miserable state he is fallen into, began with his
Sin and Rebellion against GOD; so from that time Sin took a full Possession of
our Nature, and set up an absolute Empire, in every unregenerate Sinner. And
therefore all such Sinners are said to be the servants of Sin, Romans 6.17. Now,
though carnal Sinners themselves are not sensible of it; this subjection to Sin
and Lust is the greatest part of the Misery we are plunged into by the Fall.
For as Sin at first brought down the Curse of GOD upon us; so this subjection
to Sin keeps us still under the Curse; and there is no getting free from the
Chains of it, but by getting loose from the Power and Dominion of Sin. And
therefore a Deliverance in this respect is essential to the Sinners Salvation.
And accordingly the Heirs of Salvation are said to be made free from Sin, Romans
6.18. i.e. They are delivered from the reigning Power and Dominion of Sin, and
in part from the Pollution of it, in their Regeneration and Sanctification by
the Spirit of GOD, while they are in this World, and they shall be wholly freed
from the Rage and Tyranny of Sin, from the Pollution and Defilement of it, and
from the very in-being of it, in the World to come. And this is so glorious a
part of our Salvation, that the Saint longs for nothing more than to be thus
entirely and everlastingly set at Liberty from Sin, and therefore he daily
groans out his Desires in that pathetical Language, Romans 6.24. Oh, wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

Again,

2. IT implies in it a Deliverance from the Power of our spiritual Enemies.
While Sinners are under the Curse of GOD's Law they are in slavery to the
Powers of Darkness. And therefore are called the Children of the Devil, and
said to do his Lusts, Joh. 8.44. And the Devil himself is called, the Prince of
the power of the Air, the spirit that now works in the children of
Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. Now this is a doleful part of that Misery which the
Apostasy has thrown us into. For while Sinners are in this slavery to the
Powers of Darkness, they are Enemies to GOD, and are hurried on by the Devil in
their Rebellion against Heaven, and so are ripening apace for the vengeance of
Eternal Fire; where, without timely Repentance, the wicked Spirits that now
rule in them, will be their Tormentors for ever and ever. And therefore a
Deliverance from the Power of these our spiritual Enemies, is a necessary part
of the Sinners Eternal Salvation. And accordingly the Saints of the most High,
are said to be saved from the hands of their spiritual Enemies, and from the
hand of all that hate them. And again, to be delivered out of their hands, Luke
1.71, 74. This Deliverance is begun in this World; and every true Believer is
translated, by the Grace of GOD, out of the Kingdom of Satan into the Kingdom
of his dear Son, Col. 1.13. And therefore though Satan may assault and buffet
him, by his Temptations, and sometimes foil him in his Combat with him, yet, he
shall never more have Dominion over the Saint. For GOD will finally crown all
His Children with everlasting Victory and Triumph in His eternal Kingdom, Rev.
3.21. Now this part of our Salvation is what every true Believer longs and
prays for. For he meets with so great Opposition at present from the Powers of
Darkness, and so much Difficulty and Distress from them in his Christian Race,
that he would give ten thousand Worlds to be conducted safely beyond the reach
of them.

And then,

3. THIS Salvation implies a deliverance from the Guilt of Sin and the
Condemning Sentence of Gods Righteous Law. Now the Guilt of Sin is nothing less
than the Sinners Obligation to suffer the dreadful Penalty that is due for Sin.
And accordingly while the Sinner is under the Power of Guilt, he is under the
Condemning Sentence of God's holy Law, and doomed to suffer all the Plagues and
Curses that are written in it. And therefore all unbelievers are said to be
condemned already, Joh. 3.18. Now in the Sinners Salvation, this Guilt is
removed by a Pardon, and the Condemning Sentence of the Law is taken off in his
Justification by the Righteousness of Christ. And agreeably, we read in Romans
8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. And this is so great and
necessary a part of our Salvation that a poor convinced Sinner, who has a true
sight and sense of his own Sins; and sees what a guilty Condemned Wretch he is,
would freely give all he has in the World, to have any Assurance that his Sins
were Pardoned, and that he shall not be Condemned for them at the awful
Tribunal of Christ at the great Day.

And accordingly,

4. Lastly, THIS Salvation implies in it everlasting security from the amazing
wrath and vengeance of GOD in the World to come. As every unregenerate Sinner
is under the Guilt of Sin and the Condemning Sentence of Gods Law; so he is
every Moment in infinite Hazard of falling under the dreadful weight of His
Eternal Indignation. And therefore such Sinners are expressly called the
children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. And what a fearful thing is it, thus to fall into
the hands of the living GOD! And what would not a poor Condemned Sinner give,
to obtain full security from this tremendous Wrath to come? Now in that
glorious Salvation which is offered to us in the Gospel, this Security is
contained, and every Saint shall eternally be delivered from the Wrath of GOD,
and the Torments of Hell in the World to come. This is certain from the words
of our Savior Himself, Joh. 5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that
hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death to life. And thus
you see in these Particulars, what the Sinners Deliverance from the Curse of
the Law implies in it; and how great and necessary a part it is of our Eternal
Salvation. Nay, this Deliverance from the Curse is the first and most proper
notion we have of Salvation. But then as this Salvation is applied to the Case
of Apostate Man's Recovery by JESUS CHRIST; it comprehends in it all the
Happiness Believers shall ever attain to in and through Him.

And therefore,

(2.) THE other great and Comprehensive Article in our Salvation, is, a Right
and Title to all the Privileges contained in the New Covenant. It is no more
certain, That GOD entered into a Covenant of Works with Man at his Creation; the
Privileges of which we forfeited and lost by the Apostasy; than it is evident,
He has graciously condescended to enter into a New Covenant with us, in and
through a Mediator: which we usually call the Covenant of Grace. Now in this
Covenant we have not only the offer of everlasting Security from all the
Miseries of the Fall (which we spoke to under the former Head:) but there are
many other glorious and inestimable Privileges contained in it: which we call
the Positive Blessings of the New Covenant; and are essential to eternal
Salvation.

And agreably I shall say,

1. OUR Eternal Salvation implies in it the Renovation and Sanctification of
our Natures. For every Sinner that is bro't into a state of Salvation, is made
a new Creature. All old things are done away, and behold all things are become
new in him. Hence he is said to put off concerning the former Conversation, the
old man, which is corrupt according to deceitful lusts: and to be renewed in
the spirit of his mind; and to put on the new man, which after God is created
in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. And this is the Work of
Almighty Power and Grace: and therefore they that are thus renewed are said to
be born of the Spirit, Joh. 3.5. And that Work which is so happily begun in
Regeneration, is daily carried on to greater Degrees of Perfection in the
renewed Sinners Sanctification; and this also being wrought by the Spirit of
the LORD JESUS CHRIST, Believers are said to be sanctified in him, 1 Cor. 1.2.
Now this Renovation and Sanctification of a Sinner is the beginning of Eternal
Salvation. For the Application of Redemption by CHRIST begins in it. And when a
Sinner is thus Created a new in Christ Jesus, he is brought immediately to
enjoy many of the Privileges of Redemption, and obtains a sure Title to all
the rest of them.

Hence,

2. THIS Salvation implies in it Peace with GOD, in and through JESUS CHRIST. For
as the Fall set Man at an infinite Distance from God, and bred an Enmity
between them; which proves fatal to every Sinner, that dies in his Natural
Condition: so whenever a poor Sinner is brought into a state of Salvation, this
Enmity between GOD and the Sinner is removed, and they are brought into a state
of Reconciliation one to another. For the renewed Man, having the Image of GOD
stamped upon him, has no longer any reigning Enmity in his Heart against GOD,
but loves and delights in Him from that Day forward; and accordingly, GOD
pardons and justifies, and so is at Peace with the Sinner, from the moment he
is enabled to close in with Christ by Faith. Hence that in Romans 5.1. Therefore
being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
And therefore this Peace is another glorious Article in the Saint's Salvation,
and fills him with Joy unspeakable whenever he has a sense of it. And then,

3. THIS Salvation includes the Saint Adoption in it. For every one that is
renewed by the Spirit of GOD, and bro't into a state of Peace with Him, through
Jesus Christ, is also taken into the Number of his Children. Joh. 1.12. But as
many as received him to them gave he power to become the sons of God: even to
them that believe on his name. And this is a very comprehensive Article in the
Saints Salvation: For as soon as ever the Believer is bro't into the Relation
of a Child to GOD, he has the Nature and Spirit of a Child given to him: He has
the Holy Fear and Love, the Reverence and Delight of a Child in him; and
receives the Spirit of Adoption, whereby he is enabled to go to GOD as his
Heavenly Father, and open all the Wants, and Fears, and Burdens of his poor
distressed Soul before him. And on the other hand, GOD has the tender
Compassions and Bowels of a Father toward those whom he graciously Adopts. And
accordingly, His Ear is always open to hear their Cries to Him for Mercy. He
pities them under all their Distresses; Comforts them under all their Sorrows;
Supports them under all their Weaknesses; and supplies all their Necessities
for them: and has moreover provided a Glorious Inheritance for them in His
Eternal Kingdom. This with much more of the like Nature is included in the
Saints Adoption. And therefore this Article of Adoption is one of the most
Glorious Privileges of the New Covenant. And then,

4. THIS Salvation implies all that Grace and Strength that is necessary to
help and assist the Saint to the end of his Christian Race. For as the Saint
has a great deal to do in the way to GOD's Kingdom: many Difficulties to
encounter; many Temptations to resist; many Enemies to conquer; many great and
difficult Duties to engage in, and go through with; and no strength of his own
equal to the least of them: He needs the special Presence of the Holy Spirit,
to direct, assist and carry Him through all, to the Honor and Acceptance of GOD*
And accordingly, this is secured to the Believer in the New Covenant. As we
find in Isai. 41.10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed for I
am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness. And in 2 Cor. 12.9. My Grace is
sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. And therefore
though the blessed Apostle Paul expressed the greatest sense of his utter
Insufficiency to perform any Duty aright in his own strength, as we find in 2
Cor. 3.5. yet elsewhere he is confident in this, Phil. 4.13. I can do all
things through Christ which strengthens me.

And therefore,

5. THIS Salvation implies in it the full and eternal Enjoyment of all the
Glory and Blessedness of HEAVEN in the World to come. This is the last and
principal Thing contained in Eternal Salvation, and the Perfection of it. And
the Happiness of those that enjoy it, is so great that it is not possible for
any one to describe it: Nay, it is so glorious, that Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of man, in this mortal state, to
conceive of the Things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor.
2.9. I will therefore only say, That the substance of it consists in the
immediate, full, and eternal ENJOYMENT of GOD and CHRIST, in the Kingdom of
Heaven. And therefore the Happiness flowing from thence must needs be an
infinite Happiness. And accordingly David expresses it, by fullness of Joy, and
Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. And assures himself in the last verse of
the next Psalm; As for me, I shall behold thy face in Righteousness: I shall be
satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.

AND thus, upon the whole, I have given you a short and imperfect Account of
that Salvation, which is the subject matter of the Inquiry in our Text. And
this was the second Thing I proposed to speak to under the Doctrine.

And therefore,

III. I proceed now to the next General Head: And this is to show the Necessity
and Importance of the Sinners making this Inquiry after Salvation his first and
great Inquiry. And here I shall apply my self chiefly to such Sinners as are
yet in a state of Carnal Security; and endeavor, by some proper
Considerations, to awaken in them that Conviction, which was spoken to under
the first Head: and hereby bring them to inquire in earnest after that
Salvation, which I gave you some Account of in the next place; and so make way
for their close and serious Attention to that Solemn Advice which is the
principal Subject of these Discourses. And there are these two or three
Considerations, which I shall briefly mention; and which, by the Grace of GOD,
may very much serve my present Design.

1. THE Nature of Eternal Salvation is such, that it is richly worth a while for
every Sinner to be chiefly concerned about it. For do but consider the short
and imperfect Account I have given of this matter, under the last general Head;
and then judge Whether there is any thing in the World to compare with this
Salvation: Whether there are any Evils in this Life to compare with those which
this Salvation delivers us from: Or whether any of the good things here below
may stand in Competition with those which the Saint shall enjoy in the
Possession of Eternal Life. I am sure there is no reasonable or considerate
Person will own there is any Comparison between them. For whereas the greatest
outward Evils we are liable to in this World, are said to be but light and
moment any; the spiritual Plagues and Judgments the Sinner is subject to, are
intolerable and eternal. And whereas, on the other hand, the best things of
time and sense, are fading and transitory in their Nature, and unsatisfactory
in the Possession and Enjoyment of them; the Spiritual Privileges and
Blessings of our Redemption by CHRIST are Eternal in their Nature and Duration,
and afford infinite Satisfaction to the Possessors of them. And now since Men,
from the sensible Experience they have both of outward Prosperity and
Adversity, are agreed in this, as an established Law of Nature, that it is both
their Duty and Interest to escape as many of the Evils of Life, and enjoy as
many of the Comforts of it as they can, while they live; and scarce think any
Pains too much, to accomplish their desire in these respects: it must needs be
a matter of vastly greater Importance to them to seek after Eternal
Blessedness. And when they have once secured an Interest in it, this will
beyond all Comparison more richly Recompense their utmost Labor and Cost in
the Pursuit of it. Nay, the very least of all the peculiar Privileges and
Blessings of the New Covenant, will be of infinitely greater Advantage to the
Sinner, than if he had all the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures of this Life at
his Command. Where then shall we find the Tongue that has Eloquence enough to
describe, or the Understanding that has Largeness enough to conceive, what the
Believers Gains are, when he has once past from Death to Life? and so comes to
enjoy all the precious Privileges of a state of Grace in this World? and has
the Covenant Truth and Faithfulness of GOD to rely upon, for the immediate
Possession and Enjoyment of all the Glories of Heaven, in the World to come? Oh
then, as you would be wise for your selves, and lay out your Time and Strength
to your infinite Advantage, let this Salvation be the great Subject of your
best Inquiry and Endeavors: and keep that Direction of the wise man always in
your eye, Prove. 4.7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom: and
with all thy getting, get understanding. Again,

2. THE Absolute need we stand in of Eternal Salvation may serve to convince
you of the great Necessity and Importance of making this Inquiry after
Salvation your first and great Inquiry. For Eternal Life is a matter of so
great moment to every Sinner, that unless he obtains an Interest in it, he is
undone for ever. For, as you heard before, by the Apostasy of our first
Parents, we all of us fell under the dreadful Curse of the Law, and immediately
became slaves to Sin, and subjects to the Powers of Darkness, in this World;
and obnoxious to the Eternal Vengeance of GOD, in the World to come. And there
is no getting loose from the Chains of Guilt and Wrath, but by an Interest in
that Salvation we are speaking of. For as long as any Sinner continues in his
natural state, his Heart is full of reigning Enmity against GOD and Holiness:
He lives in Sin, and delights in nothing but Rebellion against GOD: and so
daily treasures up to himself Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and revelation of
the righteous Judgment of GOD. And if he should die in this state of Nature,
he will die under the full weight of the Curse, and sink under the intolerable
Load, into endless, easeless and remedilous Torments, beyond all possibility or
hope of Recovery. And therefore, if you can think it any ways necessary for you
to escape the insupportable Miseries and Torments of the bottomless Pit, you
must think it equally necessary to inquire and seek after Eternal Salvation.
For it is this alone that can set you at Liberty from the amazing Curse of the
Law, and secure you from that Wrath of GOD which is infinitely more bitter than
Death. This we are sure of, from what I said was contained in our Redemption by
Christ. And now, Sinner, what do you think of the matter? Is Salvation
necessary for you, or no? Or, are you still indifferent, whether you are ever
delivered or not, from the eternal Wrath and Curse of an Almighty Sin-revenging
GOD? I am sure if you are not fast asleep in Sin, you must have such a sense of
the dreadful Wrath of GOD, that hangs over your Head, as to make you concerned,
above all things, to get out of the reach of it. And if your Conscience is but
awake, as it should be, you cannot but cry out in agony of Soul, Oh, what shall
I do to be saved? How shall I escape the amazing Vengeance that is ready to
fall upon me? and sink me down into Eternal Perdition? And the rather for what
I shall observe to you in the last place, Namely,

3. THERE is no obtaining an Interest in Eternal Salvation without making the
Inquiry after it our first and great Inquiry. And this shows us the vast
Importance, yea, the absolute Necessity of this sort of Inquiry. For as Eternal
Salvation is a matter of the most weighty Concern in itself; GOD will never
bestow the Blessing upon any Sinners, unless they see the inestimable Worth of
it, and have a due sense of the absolute need they stand in of it; and so are
put upon Inquiring and seeking after it with the greatest Care and Diligence.
For if GOD should bestow the Mercy upon any else, they would but despise,
abuse, and even trample upon His Grace and Goodness therein; and so, in effect,
He would but throw away the richest Gift he has to bestow, and not get the
least Glory to Himself, in so doing. We must not therefore imagine that any
Sinner, while he continues in a senseless, unconcerned frame of spirit, can
ever obtain an interest in GOD's Salvation. No; the poor Sinner must first be
deeply sensible of his own miserable state by Nature, and see the absolute need
he stands in of Eternal Life; and so with fear and trembling inquire and seek
in earnest after this Salvation. And when the Sinner is once come to this, we
have all the reason in the World, to hope, it will not be long, before GOD will
discover to the miserable Creature, where his Help is to be found. Now this may
serve to convince us all of the great Necessity and Importance of being chiefly
concerned about Eternal Salvation; and so of inquiring after it, as the One
Thing needful. For I suppose there is scarce any Sinner under the Gospel to
blind and stupid in his sins, but, in his cooler Thoughts, thinks, Eternal Life
to be really necessary for him; and hopes to come to the Enjoyment of it at
last. But herein lies the misery and deceit of the generality of carnal
Sinners. They think their Salvation may be obtained at an easy rate, at any
time: and that they have no need to make it the main Inquiry and Business of
their Lives; and so go on securely in their Sins, till the Day of Grace and
Season of Salvation is over with them for ever. But, believe it Sinner, you
must be made deeply sensible of the present need you stand in of Salvation, and
inquire and seek after it, with as great Concern of Soul, as ever you sought
after any one thing in the World. And by this means, you will soon come into a
fair way to have the most important Inquiry answered to the satisfaction and
comfort of your Soul.

AND thus you see, in these Particulars, of how great Necessity and Importance
it is, that every Sinner should make the Inquiry after Salvation his first and
great Inquiry. And this was the Third general Head, I proposed to speak to,
under the Doctrine. I shall therefore close this Discourse with a Reflection or
two on what has been said.

USE. I. DOES the Salvation of a Sinner imply such Things as we have heard in
it? Oh, How stupid and blind then are such poor Sinners who have little or no
concern about this Salvation! Poor Souls! you see not the miserable Condition
you are in by Nature. You are upon the very brink of Eternal Ruin: There is
but one short step between you and eternal Destruction; and yet you can eat,
and drink, and sleep, and enjoy your selves, with as much ease and satisfaction
as if you were out of all Danger. And though you stand in as much need of this
Salvation, as ever any poor Souls did, or can do: yet, you slight and despise
it, and mind the merest Trifles in the World, more than you do the great
Concerns of your precious Souls and Eternity. Oh! the amazing stupidity, the
blindness, and the hardness of your Hearts! You have no pity or concern for
your selves. But alas! your Ministers and Christian Neighbors, they pity and
pray for you: their Hearts tremble for fear of what is coming upon you. And Oh!
that the infinite GOD would have pity upon you, for the sake of the great
Redeemer, and pluck you as brands out of the Burning!

USE. II. HENCE learn that Convinced Sinners, in being so earnest in their
Inquiry after this Salvation, have all the Reason in the World on their side;
and do that which is well-pleasing in the sight of GOD. And therefore poor
distressed Souls! though you may possibly meet with a great deal of Scorn and
Contempt, of Reproach and Banter, and be accounted mere fools by the Men of the
World, for this great Concern you express for eternal Salvation: yet be not
discouraged. For they are certainly the greatest Fools, in the World, who treat
you, and Eternal Salvation, at this rate. And, believe it, you never began to
be really wise till you began in earnest to make the Inquiry you are now upon.
For the greatest wisdom, doubtless, consists in a due Concern for the one Thing
needful. And then besides, the Inquiry you are upon is most pleasing in the
sight of GOD. For it is in effect to Inquire, how you shall glorify GOD, and
answer the great End of your Being. And therefore if you do but pursue this
Inquiry with Earnestness and Diligence, never fear; GOD will, in due time give
you an answer of Peace: He Will show you, by His Word and Spirit, what you must do
to be saved, and make you wise to Eternal Salvation.

SERMON III.
IN the former Discourses I have shown you, First, When a Sinner may be said to
be thoroughly Convinced of his Sin and Danger. Secondly, What is implied in
that Salvation, which such a Sinner earnestly inquires after. And Thirdly, I
have considered the Necessity and Importance of every Sinner's making this his
first and great Inquiry.

And now,

IV. I proceed to show what Steps a poor Convinced Sinner, who is chiefly
concerned about Eternal Salvation, must take to obtain this Salvation: And this
is the principal Thing I have to Discourse upon: And I shall be the more
particular in it. And here I shall not confine my self only to that answer to
the Question in the Text, which we find in the next verse, viz. Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. For though Faith in Christ will
certainly interest a poor Sinner in that great and glorious Salvation purchased
by Christ; and is, at least, the principal Thing that is absolutely necessary
to that purpose; yet, there are other things, besides an immediate and direct
believing in Christ, which a poor convinced Sinner must give his Attendance to,
if he means to be saved: and which indeed are necessary to his closing in
aright with Christ for Salvation. And therefore, I shall give my Answer to the
grand Inquiry in the Text, under these three more general Heads: which I beg
your most diligent attention to. And say,

1. YOU must carefully guard against all the Hindrances of a Sinners Salvation.

2. YOU must diligently attend to, and improve all the Means and Helps of
Salvation. And then,

3. YOU must immediately and directly close in with Christ by Faith, that so
you may be saved by Him alone.

I begin with the first of these important Heads at this time. And therefore,
Sinner, if this be the great Inquiry you are now upon, and would gladly receive
an Answer to, namely, What must I do to be saved? Then hearken to what I am to
say to you, in the Name and Fear of GOD.

First. IF you would be saved, you must carefully guard against all the
Hindrances of your Souls Salvation. And here, poor Soul, you have a great deal
of Work to do; as much as ever you can turn your hand unto. Nay, more than ever
you can do to purpose, unless you have the special presence and assistance of
the HOLY SPIRIT of GOD with you in this Affair: For ever since the Apostasy,
Earth and Hell are engaged in a War against us; and unite in their endeavors
to ruin and destroy us for ever. Nay all within and all round about us, in the
World, are in this dreadful Combination against us: so that you have
innumerable Enemies to conflict with on every side. And if I should attempt to
speak particularly concerning every one of them, I could not tell how to begin,
or where to end. However I shall instance in four of the principal Hindrances
of our Souls Salvation. And if you can but overcome these, in the Name of
Christ, and by the Help of his Spirit, which you must humbly and earnestly ask
of Him in the first place; never fear, the Salvation of your poor Soul will be
accomplished in due time. And these Hindrances are Sin, Self, Satan, and this
World.

1. YOU must carefully watch and guard against Sin, if ever you intend to be
saved. Sin is the worst and most dangerous Enemy we have to conflict withal,
and stands more immediately, than any other, in the way of our Salvation. It
was this that at first brought us into so wretched and miserable a Condition as
to need Salvation. 'Twas this that violated the holy Law of GOD, and exposed us
to the dreadful Wrath and Curse of GOD, which we now lie open to by Nature. And
it is this that at present stands between the Sinner, and the Salvation of his
Soul. And therefore, were it not for this, the other Enemies of our Salvation,
could do little or no hurt to us, in the great Concern we have in hand. But,
Sinner, this being an Enemy within thy self, it is in league with all the other
Adversaries without, and opens the passage for their more easy and successful
Assault upon thee. And therefore your main Concern, upon this head, should be,
How to watch and guard, and secure your self effectually against Sin. And to
this end, you must get as well acquainted as you can with your own Heart; and
here you will soon discover the bitter Root and Spring of all Sin. For as the
Prophet observes, Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked. Yea, it is full of the most unnatural Enmity against GOD and
his holy Law. Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God; it is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. And therefore the corrupt
Heart is the Fountain of all those actual Sins which pollute our Thoughts,
Lips, and Lives, Math. 15.19. Out of the heart proceed evil tho'ts, murders,
adulteries etc. which defile the man. You must therefore endeavor to see and
lay to heart the strength and treachery of Sin, that dwells in you; and cry out
under the burden of it, as he did, Romans 7.24. Oh, wretched man, that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? And with this sense of indwelling
Sin, you must earnestly apply to the Blood of Jesus to cleanse you from the
Guilt and Pollution of this, and all your actual Transgressions; and you must
carry the Body of Sin to the Cross of Christ, and plead importunately that it
may be Crucified and Slain there and that by the help of GOD's HOLY SPIRIT you
may from this time forward be delivered from the Reign and Tyranny of it. And
when you have taken this method to mortify and subdue the Root and Fountain of
Sin in you, then carefully watch against all the workings of Sin in your Heart,
and the out-breakings of it, in your Life and Conversation. Keep thy heart with
all diligence, and endeavor to suppress the very first motions to Sin in it.
And whatever particular Lusts you have been more peculiarly inclined to, and
that have been as a Right Hand, or a Right Eye, set your self in a special
manner against such Lusts; and Pray and Watch, and strive hard for the
Mortification and Destruction of them. And in a word, see that you constantly
Watch and Pray against all Sin, and all Temptations to Sin. So we are directed
to do, in Mat. 26.41. Watch and Pray that ye enter not into Temptation. Thus
you must carefully guard and strive against all Sin, if you really intend and
desire to be saved. And I pray, you would observe all that I have said here
concerning Sin, and comply with the whole Direction. For many an Awakened
Sinner, for want of due Conformity to this Rule, has at last fallen short of
Eternal Salvation. For some Sinners when they have been under the Convictions
of the HOLY SPIRIT, and in great Concern about the state of their Souls, and
another World, have been full of terror on the account of some Heinous and
Scandalous Transgressions they have been guilty of; and have taken a great deal
of pains to reform themselves in such Particulars. And when they though it they had
done this, they concluded now they had done all that was necessary with respect
to Sin; without ever coming to see the Monstrous Vileness and Wickedness of
their own Hearts: and so have lived all their Days, and Dyed at last under the
Reigning Power and Guilt of Indwelling Sin. This seems to have been a fatal
mistake in the Scribes and Pharisees of Old. And then again, many others, when
they have been in the like concern for Salvation, have confessed before God,
the Guilt, both of Original and Actual Sins, and begged of him the Pardon of
both; and with their Confessions have reformed a great deal that has been amiss
in them: but then, they have had some secret Reserves, some beloved Lusts, that
they could never be prevailed upon to part withal: and so they have finally
fallen short of Eternal Life. A sad Instance of this kind we have in that Young
Man, who came to Christ, with that important Question, Math. 19.16. Master,
what good thing shall I do, that I may inherit eternal life? He appears, by
this Inquiry, to have been in some considerable Concern about his Salvation;
and was willing to do, and had done, a great many things for the sake of it;
but he could not part with his Coveteousness for the sake of Heaven; and so
fell short of Eternal Life at last; as appears from that Context. And
therefore, as I said before, if ever you intend to be saved, you must set your
self against all and every Sin: against Original and Actual Sins; against the
Sins of Heart, Lip, and Life etc. And if you can but get the victory over Sin,
you will remove the main obstacle in the way to your Eternal Salvation. Again,

2. As you must carefully watch and guard against Sin; so you must, with the
like care, watch and guard against Self, if ever you intend to be saved. This
is another inbred Enemy, and inveterately set against the Salvation of our
Souls, in the way and method which the Gospel prescribes. I confess, indeed,
every Sinner has a principle of self-love, whereby he truly desires his own
Happiness, both in this World, and in that which is to come. But then, he has
an accursed principle of Pride in him, whereby he cannot bear to think of going
entirely out of himself to another, for that Salvation he stands in need of.
And therefore many a poor Sinner, when he has been greatly Awakened by the
Spirit of GOD, and bro't into deep Concern about the state of his precious
Soul, has been willing to do a great many things in Religion; yea, every thing
which he though it was required of him in the Law of God: and hence he has set
himself, with a great deal of Care and Diligence, to reform all known Evils,
and to Discharge every known Duty. And, indeed, it is a great length which many
an Awakened Sinner has gone in this way. And it would grieve any one to the
Heart to think, that after so much Labor and Cost in Religion; so much
striving against Sin, and unto Duty; after so many Prayers and Tears and
Struggles, against many of the Enemies of our Salvation; and after an
incredible deal of pains taken to obtain Eternal Life, the poor Sinner should
in the End fall short of Heaven and Happiness. But so it has been with a
multitude in the Christian World; and, I doubt, will be so with a great many
more. For though they are willing to go all this length in Religion; yet, they
cannot be persuaded to go one step further, i.e. to go out of themselves to
CHRIST, and rest upon Him alone for Salvation, which would effectually secure
their Eternal Well-being. But their own Obedience must be the price of their
Future Happiness. They are righteous in their own eyes: and think there is
something worthy of God's acceptance in their own Persons and Performances; and
will not be persuaded that GOD can, with any Justice, cast them off at last,
when they have done and suffered so much in his Cause and Service. This seems
to have been the fundamental error of the Scribes and Pharisees in the days of
our Savior: and therefore they are frequently condemned by him for their
self-righteousness, and threatened with eternal Damnation, after all their fair
show in Religion. And indeed the generality of the more religious Jews split
upon this Rock, in the days of our Savior and his Apostles. See Romans 10.3. --
For they being ignorant of God's righteousness (says the Apostle) and going
about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto
the Righteousness of God. And so fell short of the righteousness of faith, i.
e. of Eternal Salvation; as we find in the close of the preceding Chapter. And
therefore, if ever you intend to be saved, you must diligently watch and guard
against this Self-righteous Principle: and be not only willing to do all you
can in Obedience to the Law of GOD; but when you have done all, you must be
willing to confess you are but an unprofitable Servant; and cast your self upon
the free Grace and Mercy of GOD, and trust alone to the Righteousness of the
LORD JESUS CHRIST, for Justification to Eternal Life. This (as I said before)
is what every Sinner is very hardly brought to, through the reigning Pride of his
own heart: and therefore there is so much the greater hazard, from this
Quarter, of your falling short of the Grace of GOD at last. Well then, let me
advise, and prevail with every Awakened Sinner, that is now inquiring in
earnest, What he must do to be saved, to take special heed of Self: That is, of
trusting in your own Duties and Righteousness, for the Salvation you are
seeking after. And to this purpose, Let me farther advise and entreat you, to
think seriously with your self, That you have a GOD of infinite Justice and
Righteousness, as well as a GOD of infinite Mercy, to deal withal: And that the
strict Justice of GOD requires perfect Obedience to every Tittle and Iota of
the Law, before any Person can be justified by the Deeds of it; and by
consequence, that full Satisfaction must be made for the Sinner's breach of the
Law, before he can be acquitted from the condemning Sentence of it. Again,
Consider, what a vile Transgressor you have been: what Sin and Guilt you
brought into the World with you; and how many thousands of actual
Transgressions may be justly charged to your own Account. Think also, how far
short you fall of the strict Demands of the holy Law of GOD; even when you have
done your best in Obedience to it: Think how many Duties you have totally
neglected; and how defective you have been in the manner of those Duties you
have best attended: what wrong Ends you have many times had in them, and what
sinful wanderings and distractions; what coldness, deadness, and formality in
the Performance of them. And then think, whether a Righteousness made up of
such lame and imperfect Services can have any thing of real worth or merit in
it: whether GOD can be beholden to the Sinner on the account of them; or,
whether he may not justly condemn him, after all he has done, or can do, of
this Nature: nay, whether He is not in Justice bound to do so, if the Sinner
have no other Righteousness than this maimed Righteousness of his own, to trust
unto. If you do but closely pursue such Meditations as these, it will, by the
Grace of GOD, quickly bring you to confess with those, in Isa. 64.6. We are all
as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. And so
make you afraid to trust to any Righteousness of your own; yea, wholly to
renounce it in the great Affair of your Souls Salvation. And if you can but
once come truly and thoroughly to conquer and renounce Self in this great
Affair, you will then get over one of the main Hindrances to the Salvation of your
Soul. And now I proceed to say,

3. YOU must carefully watch and guard against Satan, if you intend to be
saved. Indeed Sin and Self are the two most hazardous Enemies of our Eternal
Salvation; because they have their Seat and Residence in us, and have wrought
themselves, as it were, even into the very Constitution of Man, in his fallen
state; and so are present with us at all times, and in all places; and oppose
every thing that tends to the Honor of GOD, and the Salvation of our Souls.
But then Satan and this Evil World are as inveterate Enemies to us as Sin and
Self. And because they are in strict League with the Enemies within, they have
all the Advantage, they can wish for to make the most successful assaults upon
us; and we are daily in infinite hazard of being ruined Eternally by them. And
therefore if you mean to be saved in the World to come, you must be careful and
diligent in your Watch and Guard against them. But it is the first of these I am
to speak to under this Head. And here I shall observe, That Satan is a most
Inveterate and Dangerous Enemy. He is full of the most Implacable Hatred, Rage,
and Malice against the Blessed God: and has been so ever since his Apostasy,
and Banishment out of Heaven. And in consequence of this, he has all along been
carrying on a War against GOD, and doing all he can to Rob Him of the Glory
that is due to His Name. And as he hates the Infinite GOD; so he hates every
One that is in Favor with GOD, and envies the Happiness of their state. This
moved him to assault our first Parents in their primitive state of Innocence;
which proved so fatal to them, and to all their Posterity, as we find in the
Third Chapter of Genesis. And when GOD, to show forth the Infinite Riches of
His Sovereign Grace, had contrived and revealed the astonishing Method of our
Redemption, by the promised Seed, as we find in the 15th verse of that Chapter,
this filled him still with greater Rage and Hatred against GOD, and Mankind,
whom, by his Subtilty, he had drawn into the grand Rebellion against GOD. And
he has ever since employed his utmost Strength and Policy, to overthrow the
method of our Redemption, and to keep poor Souls from enjoying that Salvation,
which Christ has purchased for them. And therefore we read, in 1 Pet. 5.8. --
Your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may
devour. And accordingly, we are in the utmost Hazard of being ruined forever by
this most malicious Adversary. For he is implacably set against us, and bent
upon our Eternal Destruction. And then besides, being of the Angelic Order, he
is furnished with Powers vastly Superior to Man, at his first Creation; and
greatly exceeds us in Natural Strength, and in his Policy, which has been much
improved by long experience, in contriving and making use of such snares and
stratagems, as have the greatest tendency to deceive and ruin poor Souls
forever And more than all this, he has usurpt at Empire over Mankind in their
Natural Condition; and Sinners are by Nature willing to submit to his accursed
Rule and Tyranny. And therefore he is called, in Ephesians. 2.2. The prince of the
power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience.
And many Millions of poor Souls daily run after him in the broad way to Eternal
Destruction: All which may serve to convince us of the infinite Hazard we are
in of being undone to Eternity by the malicious Powers of Darkness. And
therefore every poor Sinner that desires and expects to be saved, must stand
upon his watch and guard against the Devil, and his accursed Legions. And let
him appear in ever so beauteous a form, (as sometimes he transforms himself
into an Angel of Light, and puts the fairest Colors on the foulest Deeds, yet)
you must renounce him, and all his works, and have nothing to do with the
unfruitful works of darkness: for if you allow your self in any of them, they will
be the bane of your Soul forever. Yea, you must watch against his Snares and
Temptations of all kind. You must enquire into the Nature and Tendency of them,
and not be ignorant of his Devices, lest he get an advantage of you. See 2 Cor.
2.11. And here I shall take liberty to warn you against two of his most Subtle
and Comprehensive Devices, whereby he has ruined many Millions of poor Souls.
And these are carnal Security on the one hand, and our horrid Despair of the
Mercy of GOD on the other hand.

(1.) YOU must watch and guard against carnal Security: against a tho'tless
unconcerned frame of Spirit, about the state of your Soul, and another World.
This is one of the most fatal Devices of Satan, whereby he has ruined the
greatest part of Mankind already. He has led them on blindfold in the way to
Eternal Destruction; without any sight of their Sin and Misery; without any
sense of their Danger; and without any remarkable Concern about the World to
come, till they have suddenly and unexpectedly been thrust headlong into
Eternal Perdition. And when any poor Souls are awakened by the Spirit of GOD
and bro't into concern about their Spiritual state, (as the Sinners I am now
speaking to, are supposed to be in) the Devil does all he can to stifle the
Convictions they are under, and to bring them back again into their former
state of security. And thus if the convinced Sinner be Young and in Health,
he will tell him, It Is time eno' yet to prepare for Eternity; and so tempt him to
lay aside this concern for the present. If he be still tho'tful about his
Eternal state, he will feed him up with tho'ts of the Mercy of GOD, and tempt him
to think it is an easy thing to be saved; and so lead him, if he can, unto a
vain presumption of the Mercy of GOD, without doing any thing considerable in
Religion. And when this will not do, but the Sinner sees still he must labor
and strive in Religion, if he intends to be saved, and so sets about the Duties
of it with seeming earnestness and diligence. Then the Devil tempts him to
place his Duties in the room of Christ, and to patch up a Righteousness of his
own, and trust to this for his Justification to Eternal Life. And by these
means he has deceived many an awakened Sinner, and lulled him into his former
carnal security, or into a vain confidence which has proved his Eternal ruin.
And therefore you that are now Awakened and Convinced by the Spirit of GOD,
must expect to meet with such Temptations as these: and you must carefully
watch, and pray, and guard against them, or the Devil will certainly be too
hard for you, and deceive and undo you forever.

And then again,

(2.) YOU must watch and guard against horrid Despair of the Mercy of GOD in
CHRIST. This is another accursed Device and Snare of the Devil, whereby many an
awakened Sinner has been ruined forever. For when the Adversary sees, that, by
all his Strength and Subtilty, he cannot reduce the poor Soul to its former
state of Carnal Security, then he shifts the Scene, and strives with all his
might to drive the Sinner into utter Despair of the Mercy of GOD. He shoots his
fiery Darts into the Soul, and fills the mind with blasphemous and unreasonable
tho'ts of GOD: as though GOD was an hard Master; and as if the terms of
Salvation, as they are laid down in the Gospel, were such, that 'twas
impossible for him ever to come up to them; yea, the Devil represents GOD to
the poor Sinner, as an irreconcilable Enemy and Judge, as one resolved upon
his Eternal ruin: as one that will have no Mercy upon him, let him take ever
so much pains, in any way, to make his Peace with GOD. And by the force of such
Temptations many an awakened Sinner has, with Cain and Judas, fallen into the
most Black and Outrageous Despair of Mercy, and in the height of this Despair,
has with an Heart full of Enmity against GOD and CHRIST, and his Mouth full of
Blasphemy against them, rushed headlong into Eternal Perdition. And therefore
let every Convinced Sinner, when he finds his Convictions grow and press hard
upon him, watch and pray against this accursed Device of Satan; this horrid
Despair of the Mercy of GOD. And labor to see that as great Sinners as you,
have been saved (as doubtless, a multitude of such have been) and that the Door
of Mercy now stands open to the greatest Sinner in the World, and stands open
to you in particular, (supposing you are the greatest Sinner that has ever yet
been) if you are but willing now to cast your self upon the free Grace and
Mercy of GOD in JESUS CHRIST. For Christ dyed for the very chief of Sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. And is able and willing to save to the uttermost, all that come unto
God, in and through him. See Heb. 7.25. Joh. 6.37.

BUT this for the 3 d. Particular; you must carefully watch and guard against
Satan if you intend to be saved. And now I proceed to consider the last great
Hindrance of the Sinners Salvation, which I named unto you. And this is,

4. IF you intend or desire to be saved, you must carefully watch and guard
against this Evil World, that we live in. Indeed, this World and the things of
it, as they came out of the hands of GOD were very good. See Genesis 1.31. And GOD
particularly created them for the use and comfort of Mankind. And therefore, if
we had never sinned against GOD, we had never been in the least hazard of any
injury from our enjoyment of this World. But by our Apostasy from GOD, and as a
punishment to Man for the same, the Curse of GOD has fallen upon this whole
lower World; whereby it is full of Snares and Temptations on every side: And has
been a sad means to ruin many Millions of poor Souls forever and ever. And
therefore it it expressly called this present evil world. ( Gal. 1.4.) And Satan
is called the God of it (2 Cor. 4.4.) and his Evil Angels are called, the
rulers of the darkness of this world, (Ephesians. 6.12.) And accordingly, this World
is now one of the greatest Hindrances to the Salvation of our precious Souls.
And Satan has, probably, ruined more by the Snares and Enchantments of it, than
by all his other Devices put together. And therefore we have many solemn
Warnings in the Word of GOD against the Snares and Temptations of this Evil
World. We are warned against all inordinate Love to the World and the things of
it, and are told that a prevailing Love to them is utterly inconsistent with
the Love of God, and so will certainly prove the Destruction of our Souls
forever. 1 John 2.15. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
world: If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. Again,
we are as solemnly warned against all Conformity to the sinful Manners and
customs of this World, as having a most fatal tendency in them. Romans 12 22. And
be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind, etc. And then besides, Christ is said to have given himself for our Sins,
that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of
God and our Father. See the forecited Gal. 1.4. By these, and many other places
of the same importance, it evidently appears this World is one of the greatest
Hindrances that can be to the Salvation of our immortal Souls. And therefore if
you have any true desires after Eternal Life, and are willing to do all that is
needful to be done, that so you may be saved forever, you must and will look
upon this Evil World as an Enemy in the way to Heaven: and you must diligently
watch and pray against all the Evils, Snares, Temptations, and Hazards of it.
And in particular, you must thus watch and pray against the Men and Things of
this Evil World.

(1.) YOU must watch and pray, that you be not ruined by the Men of this Evil
and Sinful World. It is sad, indeed, to think that any of our own Flesh and
Blood; that any of the same Frame and make we are of, and who stand in need of
the same Salvation that we do, should be so vain and foolish, as to neglect
their own Spiritual good, and be an hindrance to all about them in the way to
Eternal Life. But so it has always been, from the beginning of the World, to
this day; and ever will be so 'till the Wickedness of the Wicked shall come to
an end; which we may not expect 'till the Conclusion of time. And therefore, as
you desire to be saved in the day of Christ Jesus, you must arm your selves
against the Men of this World, and have as little to do with them as you can.
Indeed, it is utterly impossible for us in the present state of things, to keep
entirely at a distance from the Company and Conversation of the Men of this
World; for we have often times something or other necessarily to do with them, in
the way of our lawful Calling. And he that would avoid this, as the Apostle
observes, in 1 Cor. 5.10. must needs go out of the world. And therefore that
which I intend here, is this, if you truly desire the Salvation of your
precious Souls, you must not choose such as are known to be Wicked Persons, for
your intimate Companions: you must not take delight in their Evil Conversation:
you must not hearken to their Wicked Counsels; nor follow the bad Examples they
set before the World. For these things are strictly forbidden to you in the
Word of GOD. Prove. 1.10, 15. My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not.
Walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from their path. And
again, Chap. 4.14, 15. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the
way of evil men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. And if
you will not hearken to these solemn Admonitions, you are threatened with
eternal Destruction, Prove. 13.20. A companion of fools shall be destroyed. And
we find this awful threatening fulfilled in many sad instances in the Word of
GOD. And how many have we known or heard of in our day, who when they came to
lie upon a Sickbed, and a Deathbed, and saw themselves just going into
Eternity, then to cry out in the agony of their Souls, Oh! I am undone to
Eternity! my evil Company which I have kept, and delighted in, has been the
ruin of my poor Soul for ever! my wicked Companions have drawn away my Heart
from GOD and Duty: They have been a means to stifle the Convictions of GOD's
SPIRIT in me: and a means to draw me into all manner of Iniquity. And behold,
now I must be separated from them for a little while, and be thrust down into
Hell, into the doleful Company of Devils and Damned Spirits, there to endure
the dreadful Wrath of GOD to all Eternity. Oh, Cursed be their Persons; Cursed
be their Advice to me; and Cursed the Day that ever I saw the Face of any one
of them. This has been the Heart-piercing Language of many a vain
Company-keeper, as he has past out of this World into an amazing Eternity: And
therefore, as you would escape the dreadful Doom of these Sinners, and be
prepared for the Comforts of a dying Hour, and the Happiness of the future
State; avoid the evil Company and Conversation of the Men of the World; and see
that you be able to say with David, in Psalm. 26.4, 5. I have not sat with vain
persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers. I have hated the congregation
of evil doers: and will not sit with the wicked. And this will have a good
tendency to prepare you for the Mercy of GOD. For such are pronounced blessed,
in Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the
scornful.

And then,

(2.) YOU must with the like Diligence watch, and pray, and guard against the
Things of this Evil World, if you intend to be saved. By these things, I mean
the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures of this Life. For though they are not simply
sinful in themselves; yet, when Men set their Hearts and Affections
inordinately upon them, they prove a dreadful Snare and Temptation to them; and
many thousands and millions have been eternally undone by them. And therefore
you must mortify all inordinate affection to these things, or they will be the
Ruin of you forever. Particularly, (1.) You must guard against all inordinate
affection to the Riches of this Life, and get this corrupt Affection mortified
in you. For, this is that Lust of the Eyes which we are warned against, in 1 John 2.16. And which has been the eternal undoing of many a precious Soul. For
as the Apostle observes, in 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. They that will be rich, fall into
temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of all
evil, which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the truth, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. The sum of which is, inordinate
Desires after the Riches of this World, have, tempted and prevailed upon many a
poor Sinner to neglect the true Riches, for the sake of them; and pushed him on
to many unwarrantable Practices for the gaining of them; such as Lying,
Cheating, Stealing, and the like, which have involved him in a great deal of
Guilt here, and crushed him down into Eternal Perdition, in the other World.
And thus they have proved a Snare to him, and his Ruin for ever. And
therefore, if you would be saved in the World to come, you must carefully guard
against this snare of Destruction. You must pray to GOD to show you the vanity
of Earthly Riches; and often think how uncertain they are. For as the wise man
observes, in Prove. 23.5. -- Riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly
away as an eagle toward heaven. And therefore, when Men dote upon them, they
set their eyes upon that which is not. As you may see in this same verse; and
the poor Miser enjoys little else in them, saving the beholding of them with
his eyes, Eccl. 5.11. Oh then, see that you don't neglect your poor Souls, and
the Riches and Treasures of Grace and Glory, for such Trifles, as the Riches of
this World are at the best. Again, (2.) You must guard against the empty
Honors of this World, and learn to despise them. For, these are what the
Apostle John calls the Pride of Life, in the forecited 1 Epist. 2.16. Because
the generality of those who arrive to them, are proud and vainglorious: They
entertain too high an opinion of themselves, and too mean a conceit of the rest
of mankind. And they prove a most dreadful Snare and Temptation to Men, when
they set their Hearts and Affections inornately upon them: For then they
neglect the Honor of GOD, and the Honors of Religion, for the sake of a
little Worldly Glory: and if this cannot be come at any other way, they are
tempted to take the most indirect and sinful Courses, by false Flatteries, by
Bribery, and sometimes by Bloodshed, to obtain them. And thus while they are
clambering after the Honors of the World, their Souls are sinking, by this
means into the very depths of Hell. And therefore, as you wish and long for the
Salvation of your poor Souls, Oh! guard against this Snare of Destruction. Pray
to GOD to show you how empty the Honors of the World are, and think how vain
they be: That they depend only on the Breath of thy Fellow Creatures, and are
more in Name than in Reality; and that a few days, at farthest, will put an end
to the outward Glory of the greatest Men on Earth. For we read, in Psalm. 49.12.
-- Man being in honor abides not. And in ver. 17. When he dies he shall
carry nothing away: his glory shall not descend after him. And then (3.)
lastly, You must carefully guard against the sinful Pleasures of this Life, and
learn to contemn them. For, these are called, the Lust of the Flesh, in 1 John
2.16. which I have named once and again already. And this (says one) is,
subjectively, "the Humor and Appetite of indulging Fleshly Pleasure: and
objectively, all those things that excite and influence the Pleasures of the
Flesh". This Lust (says he) is usually called Luxury". And as these Pleasures,
when they are inordinately desired and pursued, are all of them sinful
Pleasures. (See Heb. 11.25.) So they have an immediate tendency to the Ruin of
our Souls for ever. For while Sinners hunt after the Pleasures of Sense, and
immerse themselves in them, they can have no true Desire after the Enjoyment of
GOD, and the Pleasures of Heaven; nor find any time to take care of their
precious Souls, and provide for the World to come. And agreably the Apostle
James speaking to these Sensuailists, says in Chap. 5. ver. 5. Ye have lived in
pleasure on earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your heart as in a day of
slaughter. And thereby they treasure up to themselves Wrath against the Day of
Wrath. See ver. 3. And therefore, poor Sinner, if you have any true desire
after Eternal Salvation, and are willing to do all that is necessary for this
purpose, you must mortify your inordinate Desires after the Pleasures of Sense,
and get your Heart weaned from them. And to this end, Think how momentany these
Pleasures are: they being but for a season, and a short season too. Think also
how unsatisfactory they are; how unable to fill the enlarged and boundless
Desires of your immortal Soul. And then beg of GOD, that He would reveal to you
the true and substantial Pleasures of Religion, and give you to taste of the
Comforts of His Holy Spirit, which will make sensual Pleasures the most insipid
and unsavory things in the World to you.

AND thus I have finished the first general Head in answer to that grand
Inquiry, What must I do to be saved? namely, If you would be saved you must
guard against all the Hindrances of your Souls Salvation: and more especially,
against Sin, Self, Satan, and the World, in both the Men and the Things of it.

AND now to conclude at this time, Let me entreat every poor Sinner that is in
deep Concern for the Salvation of his own Soul, to hearken to what I have said,
and carefully Watch and Pray against these Hindrances of Eternal Salvation. For
they are the main Obstacles you are like to meet with in the way to Eternal
Life. And if you can but surmount these, you will be more able and ready to
attend the Directions that follow: and you will find the Ways of Wisdom, that
now appear so rough and difficult to you, to be Ways of Pleasantness, and all
her Paths, the Paths of Peace.

SERMON IV.
I Am still upon the Answer to that grand Inquiry in the Text, What must I do
to be Saved? This Answer I proposed to give you under these Three more general
Heads. viz. (1.) If you intend to be saved, you must carefully watch and guard
against all the Hindrances of a Sinners Salvation. (2.) You must carefully and
diligently attend all the Means and Helps of Salvation. And (3.) You must
particularly and directly close in with Christ by Faith, that so you may be
saved by Him alone. I have spoken largely already to the first of these Heads.
And proceed now to the next in order:

And this is,

Secondly. IF you intend or desire to be saved, you must carefully attend to,
and improve, all the Means and Helps of Salvation. It is not sufficient that
you only steer clear of the Rocks; avoid the Dangers; and surmount such
Difficulties as lie in the way to Heaven, and have proved fatal to infinite
numbers already: but you must set your Faces toward Heaven, and steer your
Course, as directly as you can, in the way that leads to it. And this you must
do, by attending and improving aright all the Means and Helps of Eternal Life.
And these I shall consider either as Instituted, or Occasional. By the
Instituted means of Salvation, I intend such, as GOD has appointed in his Word,
and therein required us constantly to attend them in the working out our
Salvation. And these are the stated Ordinances of the Gospel. By the Occasional
Means and Helps of Salvation, I design such Providence of GOD, which, in the
Sovereignty of his Grace, He has frequently Blessed for saving good to the
careful Observers of them.

Here then,

1. IF you would be saved, you must carefully and constantly attend all the
Instituted and Appointed Means of Salvation. Which, as I said before, are the
ORDINANCES of the Gospel; and more especially the Word, Prayer, and the
Sacraments of the New Testament. Some of these are the Outward and Ordinary
Means, of Divine Appointment, to beget Grace in the Hearts of Sinners; and all
of them are such means for the growth and increase of Grace in the Children of
GOD. And every one that desires to be saved, must make a right Improvement of
them according as his State and Condition may be.

And therefore,

1. IF you desire to get into a state of Grace, you must give the most Careful
and Diligent Attendance to the Word of GOD. The Word of GOD is a special Means
of Divine Appointment for the Conversion and Salvation of perishing Sinners.
And agreably we read, in Psalm. 19.7, 8, The Law of the Lord is perfect
converting the soul: the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple
-- the Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. Indeed, the
written Word of GOD is not sufficient, of it self, to give Life unto a dead
Soul. But however it has a moral tendency to Salvation; as it discovers to poor
Sinners the miserable Condition they are in by Nature; the need they stand in
of Salvation; and points out to them the SAVIOR of perishing Souls: together
with the Means and Method to obtain an Interest in Him. And then besides, the
Word of GOD is the ordinary Means which the Holy Spirit makes use of and
blesses for the opening a Sinners eyes, and turning him from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan unto GOD. And therefore, the Word of GOD is a Means
you must carefully attend to, or you can never reasonably hope to be saved. And
here, that you may improve the Word to your saving Advantage,

YOU must look upon the written Word which we have in our Bibles, to be indeed
the Word of GOD; or that Revelation of his Mind and Will to us, which contains
in it, all that he would have us to Believe, and Practice to Salvation.

AND accordingly, you must use all the Helps we have to come to a right
understanding of the Mind and Will of GOD contained in his Sacred Word. To this
end, you must beg of GOD, as David did, in Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine eyes
that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law. Pray to him that he would
enable you to understand not only the Letter, but the true Spirit and Intent of
his Holy Word. And with this Preparation, you must Daily Read and Meditate in
the Sacred Scriptures of Truth. You must set apart some time every Day to look
into your Bible, and read a Portion in it. And whenever you do so, you must not
content your self with a bare Cursory reading of a Chapter or two, but spend a
little time to examine into the meaning of the Holy Ghost, and meditate on the
Mind and Will of GOD revealed in it, 'till you find your Hearts warmed and
affected with it. And besides this stated Reading the Scriptures; you must make
them the Man of your Counsel at all times; and search into them particularly,
that you may obtain that Light and Direction, which they afford in the great
Concern of Eternal Salvation. Look into them, and see what they say, concerning
the Miserable, undone State the Sinner is in by Nature; how Obnoxious he is to
the dreadful Wrath of GOD; how many Tremendous Curses stand in their full Force
against him, and must certainly be Executed upon him, if he lives and dies in a
state of Impenitency; and how unable the Sinner is said to be, to afford any
Relief to himself under the Ruins of the Apostasy. Look again into the
Scriptures, and see what Discoveries they make of a Glorious Savior for lost
Sinners; what method they prescribe, that we may obtain an Interest in him; and
what gracious encouragements are set before us in the Invitations and Promises
of the Gospel, to fly unto the Lord Jesus Christ, and put our Trust in him for
Eternal Life. This searching into the Scriptures is expressly required of us, in
Joh. 5.39. And the Blessed tendency of it is manifest from Psalm. 1.1, 2.
Blessed is the man -- whose delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law
does he meditate day and night.

AND as you must thus carefully Read and Meditate on the Word in private; so
you must diligently attend to the Public Dispensation of it. For, the
Preaching of the Word is an Ordinance of GOD. CHRIST, the Head of the Church,
has instituted an Order of Men to explain and inculcate upon others the great
Doctrines and Duties that are contained in the Sacred Writings. See Mat. 28.19,
20. And he has commanded us to give the most careful Attendance to the Word
dispensed, Luke 8.18. Take heed how ye hear. And this is one Appointed Means to
beget that Faith, and so the other Graces, which are necessary to Salvation.
Romans 10.17. -- Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. You
must therefore, improve your Opportunities to hear the Word Preached. You must
watch at Wisdoms Gates, and wait at the Posts of her Doors, Prove. 8.34. And
whenever you go to the House of GOD, you must go with an humble heart, ready to
receive Instruction. And there you must give the most reverent, devout, and
diligent attention to what is spoken to you, in the Name of GOD, and according
to his Will. You must be willing to have your Sins detected and reproved, and
your Duty explained and inculcated upon you, in the Ministry of the Gospel; and
receive with meekness the ingrafted word of God, Jam. 1.21. To such Hearers, as
these, GOD has many times blessed the Ministry of his Word, and made it the power
of God to the salvation of their souls; as in Romans 1.16.

AND here, I shall take leave to add, as one special means to understand the
Will of GOD, and to receive farther light, in the great Affair of Eternal
Salvation: It Is your Duty to go to the Ministers of CHRIST, whose great Work
and Business it is, to direct and assist your Souls, from the Word of GOD, in
the way to Heaven and Happiness. And therefore, when you are in Darkness and
Distress about your Spiritual state, and don't receive that Light and
Encouragement from the Preached Word, which you are waiting and praying for; go
to your Ministers; acquaint them with the state and circumstances of your poor
Souls. Don't be ashamed or afraid to do so, as many have sinfully been, lest
you betray your own Ignorance: but go, and give them to understand, as well as
you can, what your sad State and Fears are; and ask their Counsels and Prayers
for you. So did the poor Jailer in our Context. He sprang in, and came
trembling, with an Heart full of Conviction and Distress, to Paul and Silas,
two eminent MINISTERS of JESUS CHRIST; and inquired particularly of them, what
he must do to be saved? And GOD blessed this method as a means for saving good to
him. And many poor Souls besides have received unspeakable benefit in this way.
And for your Encouragement herein, I can assure you in the Name of every
faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST, that he will receive you with all Tenderness
and Compassion, and give you the best Counsel and Encouragement he can, from
the Word of GOD. And now by these means; that is, by this Prayer to GOD to give
you understanding in His Word; -- by this Reading and Meditation in private; by
this public attendance to the Word Preached: and by asking Counsel and
Instruction of the Ministers of CHRIST, under your dark and distressing
Circumstances, it is to be hoped you will come to understand the mind and will of
God, as it is made known to us in the holy Scriptures.

AND when you have gained this Light and Instruction from the Word of GOD, you
must resolve to make this WORD the RULE of your Faith, Worship, and Manners, in
the World. You must submit your Reason and Understanding to the revelation of
GOD, and receive the great Doctrines and Articles of Christianity, as true and
faithful sayings, upon the authority of GOD, who has revealed them to us: You
must serve and worship GOD according to the directions of his holy Word: And
you must strive with all you might to order your Conversation in all respects
agreeable to the Gospel of Christ, and herein keep a Conscience void of offense
both toward GOD and toward man. By such a careful and diligent improvement of
the Word of GOD, it will, by the mighty influence of the Holy Spirit, become
the Power of GOD to the Salvation of your precious Soul.

But then again,

2. IF you desire to get into a state of Grace, you must be abundant in Prayer
to GOD for this end. Prayer is a duty indispensably required of all Persons,
both by the Light of Nature and Divine Revelation. And it is an instituted
Means for the Conversion and Salvation of miserable Sinners: And therefore the
Apostle Peter, after he had plainly discovered the hypocrisy of Simon Magus,
and so perceived that he was still in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond
of iniquity, gives him this direction, in order to his Conversion, Act. 8.22.
Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine
heart may be forgiven thee. For though, it is very evident, there can be no real
virtue in the Prayers of an unregenerate Sinner; yet GOD delights to honor his
own Institution, and has many a time bestowed saving Grace upon a poor Sinner,
when he has, in agony of Soul, from an apprehension of his miserable state by
Nature, cried to him for his Mercy. And it is one of the most hopeful Symtoms
that GOD intends to give Grace to a poor Sinner, when, by the Convictions of
his Holy Spirit, he has brought the Sinner to Pray earnestly to him. And
therefore, as you who are now making that Inquiry in the Text, What must I do
to be saved? are in deep Concern about the state of your poor Souls, and wan't
to be directed in the way to Heaven, I can scarce give you a more proper
Direction thin this, Pray humbly to GOD, for the Salvation of your poor Souls.
And that you may improve this Ordinance so as to reap saving Benefit by it:

SEE that you do in the first place, heartily bless and praise GOD for what he
has done for you already. That is, you must bless GOD, that he has preserved
your Soul in Life, and not sent you down into Hell, as he might justly have
done, long before now. Adore his sovereign Grace and Patience toward you, in
this respect, and give him the glory of them. Again, Bless GOD for the
Possibility there is of your Eternal Salvation, by his providing such a
glorious and almighty SAVIOR, for poor Sinners, as CHRIST is. And then again,
Bless GOD for his distinguishing Mercy in ordering your Birth and Being, not in
a Land of Heathenish Darkness; but in a place where CHRIST is revealed, and the
Means of Grace and Salvation are, or may be enjoyed, in great Plenty, by all
sorts of Sinners. And then, in a particular manner, Bless GOD for the strivings
of His Holy Spirit; and the gracious Effects of them: For the Convictions and
Awakenings you are under; and the deep Concern you are in at present, about the
state of your Soul and another World. Indeed, these Convictions when they arise
to any considerable Degree, are very oppressive and burdensome to Nature; and
many an awakened Sinner has looked upon them only as the expressions of GOD's
Anger; and so has been for shaking them off, as soon as he could: But believe
it, poor Soul, There is a great deal of Mercy in them. They come with a
gracious design to show you the need you stand in of a Christ, and put you upon
flying to him in time, as your only sure Refuge for Eternity. And therefore
they are a sufficient Ground for Praise. And you should in the most solemn and
affectionate manner, bless and praise GOD, that he has not left you, as he has
done thousands and millions of others, to perish in a dead sleep of carnal
security; but has in a great measure, shown you your misery by nature; and
discovered the wants of your poor Soul; and put you upon seeking after a
remedy, if one may be found. And having thus blessed GOD for what he has done for
you already,

PRAY humbly and importunately to Him for what you stand in need of. Oh, Beg of
him, that, as he has begun to show Mercy to you, in the Convictions of his
Spirit; so that He would carry on this good Work, and cause his Convictions to
take such deep root in your Heart, that they may never wear off; but abide in
the most lively Impressions, till the gracious end of them is answered in a
thorough Conversion to GOD. Plead with Him to wash away the Guilt and Pollution
of your poor Soul in the Blood of Christ. Entreat Him to renew and sanctify
you, by his Grace and Spirit, throughout, in Soul, Spirit, and in Body. Beg of
Him to create a clean Heart, and to form a right Spirit in you. Pray, that He
would enlighten your dark Mind; renew your stubborn Will; purge your defiled
Conscience; and sanctify your disordered Affections. And for this purpose; Beg
his Blessing upon all the means of Grace you enjoy. Pray that his Spirit may
breathe in them; and in and through them, breathe Life into your dead Soul. And
Oh, be in agony of Soul while you are in your Supplications to Him for Eternal
Life; and use all the Arguments you can, in Prayer, to move his most tender
Compassions toward you. Lay open the Wants and Distresses of your poor Soul in
the Duty. Lament the Miseries of your doleful state by Nature; and urge the
Necessity of Eternal Salvation: Tell him what an undone Wretch you shall be
forever; and how greatly you shall dishonor Him to Eternity, unless he have
Mercy on you. Declare to Him, what a Desire you have after Eternal Life; and
that you cannot bear the thought of perishing under the dreadful weight of his
Eternal Wrath. Put Him also in mind of the great and glorious Provision He has
made by CHRIST, for the Salvation of such miserable Sinners as you are; and how
great his Glory will be forever in your Salvation through Jesus Christ. Again,
Put Him in mind of the many gracious Invitations He has made to poor Sinners to
come to Him in and through the Redeemer, for Pardon and Salvation: Yea, urge
this, that He has solemnly Commanded you to do so; and that it is in Obedience
to his revealed Will, that you thus seek to Him, for the Mercy you need. And in
a Word, Humbly declare to Him, that it is the steadfast Resolution of your Soul,
to cast your self upon Him for his Grace in and through Christ; and that if you
must perish at last, you will perish at the feet of his Mercy. And while you
are thus begging for the Mercy of GOD in Prayer: Oh, Give up, and devote your
self to Him in the same Duty. Say, Lord, I am thine; for thou have made me, and
do daily preserve me; and have paid down a price sufficient for my Eternal
Redemption: And accordingly I desire to be thine for ever; and do here upon my
bended knees, present my self, Soul and Body to thee, a living Sacrifice: and
devote all I have, to be employed in thy Service and for thy Glory: 'This, I
acknowledge to be but my reasonable Service: Oh, therefore, accept of me in the
Son of thy Love; and save me for ever, according to the multitude of thy tender
mercies in Him. Prayer thus improved cannot but be very helpful to poor Sinners,
in the great Concern of their Souls Salvation.

AND when you have thus improved the Word and Prayer; and GOD has Sanctified
them so, that you begin to feel a mighty Change in you; and do now hate your
Sins, and loath your self for them; and find the Desires of your Soul drawn
forth after Jesus Christ: and are heartily willing to receive and embrace Him
in all his Offices, and take your greatest Delight in the Service of GOD and
CHRIST. Then,

3. As you desire to grow and improve in Grace, and ripen for Eternal
Salvation, you must carefully observe the Sacraments of the New Testament.
These are two, viz. BAPTISM and the LORD's SUPPER. And they are "holy
Ordinances instituted by CHRIST, wherein by sensible signs, CHRIST and the
Benefits of the New Covenant, are represented, sealed and applied to
Believers". And they are most admirable Means for growth and increase in Grace.
And therefore when GOD has blessed the Word and Prayer, or any special
Providence, so as to bring you to the happy Frame and Temper but now hinted,
it is high time for you also to improve Baptism and the Lord's Supper, as
special Means for your furtherance in the way to Salvation. And agreably, if
you are come to adult Age, and have never yet been Baptized, you must speedily
give up your Name Publicly to GOD in that Ordinance; or if you were Baptized
in Infancy, it is equally necessary that now you should in the most solemn
manner Renew your Baptismal Covenant, and at the same time come up to the TABLE
of the LORD: For if you can do one, you may do the other also, acceptably unto
GOD. And therefore I put both together; and am grieved that so many weak
Christians make such a groundless distinction between them, as they do. I mean,
as to their Qualifications for them. But to go on, you must, as I said before,
come up to, and improve the visible Seals of the New Covenant, one or both of
them, as your case may require. They are both Commanded Duty. Baptism is so;
and is of great Importance to Salvation: As we find in Act. 2.38. where says
Peter to the convinced Jews, in answer to that great Inquiry of their's, in the
preceding verse, What must we do? You must, says he, Repent, and be Baptized
every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins. And
the Lord's Supper is as strictly required as Baptism. Luke 22.19. -- Do this,
i. e. Take and eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, in remembrance of me. And
therefore for any to live in a careless neglect of them under this pretense,
that they are not necessary to Salvation, is a bold and daring affront to the
Authority of GOD and CHRIST, and a certain evidence of their unregenerate
state. You must therefore say and do otherwise if you intend to be saved. That
is, you must own the necessity of these Ordinances, and carefully observe them.
And they are (as I said before) most admirable Means for a Christian's Growth
and Improvement in Grace. for in these Ordinances the Believer does, as it
were, set his Hand and Seal to the Covenant of Grace; and confirm the
Dedication of himself unto GOD; and GOD at the same time makes over His CHRIST
and all the Blessings of the New Covenant to the Believing Soul in them. And
then besides, the Lord's Supper is a precious means of intimate Communion with
CHRIST; and the Believer fetches new Life, Strength, and Nourishment from his
Redeemer, every time he eats and drinks in Faith at the Table of the Lord. And
this prepares him more and more the full Enjoyment of GOD and CHRIST in Eternal
Glory. Thus I have considered the Instituted Means of Salvation; and shown how
you must improve them, if you mean to be saved.

But besides these,

2. THERE are the Occasional Means and Helps of Salvation; which you must
carefully observe and improve, if you desire to be saved. And these are the
REMARKABLE PROVIDENCE of GOD toward us in the World. And I call them
Occasional Means: For, though GOD has not instituted them in His Word, as
ordinary and necessary Means of Salvation; yet, He frequently makes use of them
for the Conviction and Conversion of Sinners. And when we meet with such
Providence, GOD commands us to observe them, and improve them to our Spiritual
Advantage: as I could easily make appear, if need were. And therefore, whenever
you meet with any remarkable Dispensations of Heaven, whether by way of Mercy
or Judgment, you ought to improve them so as to get Spiritual Good by them.
Thus when you meet with any signal Mercies or Deliverances from the Hand of
GOD, you should improve them so, that by His Goodness you may be led to
Repentance; for this is the special End why GOD bestows His Mercies upon
Sinners. Romans 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance? And so when GOD sends his Judgments upon you, and awakens
you by them; or, threatens you by any terrible Dispensation; as lately he
threatened to destroy us all in a moment, when the Earth quaked under us, our
Houses shook over us, and our Hearts were ready to fail within us: Such
Providence you ought to set a special Remark upon. And as GOD does convince
you of your Sins and awaken his Terrors in you by these Means: so you must
hearken to the Call of GOD in them. You must Repent of, and turn from, those
Sins, for which He is angry at you, and threatens you with such severity: and
beg of Him that the good Impressions which such awful Dispensations are apt to
make upon our Hearts, for the present, may not prove as the morning cloud and
the early dew, which soon passes away: but may prove abiding and saving
Impressions: That the fruit of them may be to purge out Iniquity, and take away
Sin: and be instrumental to bring you nearer to GOD and CHRIST. And then, you will
have reason for ever to bless GOD for them.

AND thus I have finished the Second general Head in answer to the most
important Inquiry in our Text. And now I go on to the last general Head in
answer to the same Question. And this is,

Thirdly. IF you would be saved you must particularly close in with the LORD
JESUS CHRIST by FAITH, as He is offered to us in the Gospel. And now I come to
the main Article I have to consider. For Faith in Christ is the very Hinge upon
which the Eternal Salvation of a Sinner turns. And therefore, let a Sinner do
ever so much in Religion: Let him be ever so diligent and constant in attending
and improving all the other Means and Helps of Salvation; yet, if he neglects
Faith in Christ, it is utterly impossible he should be saved, according to the
tenor of the New Covenant: For our Savior himself is very positive in this,
Joh. 3.18. -- He that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. And again in ver. 36 th.
-- He that believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God
abides on him. But on the other hand; If a Sinner is once brought to close in
with Christ by Faith, upon Gospel Terms, this will effectually and infallibly
secure his Eternal Salvation. This is evident from what our Savior himself
asserts in the places but now mentioned. Joh. 3.18, and 36. He that believes
on him is not condemned. And again, He that believes on the Son has
everlasting Life. And therefore, when the convinced Jailer came to the Apostle
Paul and Silas his Companion, with that most serious and important Question in
his mouth, -- Sirs, what must I do to be saved? as in the Text: They were at no
loss at all what Answer to give him, but immediately made that reply in the
next verse, -- Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. As if
they had said to him, Let your former Transgressions have been ever so many and
great; your Guilt contracted by them, of ever so crimson and bloody a Dye, and
your Fears and Prospects on the account of them ever so dark and distressing;
yet, if you will but go to Jesus Christ, whom GOD has given to die and rise
again for the Salvation of Sinners, and do but Believe in Him alone for
Righteousness and Salvation, you need not fear; your Sins, which are many shall
be forgiven, and the Guilt and Pollution of them washed away in His precious
Blood: you shall be justified by His Righteousness; and saved with an
everlasting Salvation, by His infinite Merit. And thus you see that Faith in
Christ is absolutely necessary to Salvation, and that every one that does
Believe aright in Him, shall certainly be saved. But now, since many Convinced
and Awakened Sinners are very much in the dark about the Nature of saving
Faith, and the Manner of a Sinners closing in with Christ by Faith for
Salvation, I shall spend some Time in opening and confirming this great Point,
for the Direction and Encouragement of all such as are in earnest seeking and
inquiring after Eternal Salvation. And here, First, I shall give you a short
Account of the Nature of Saving Faith. And then, Secondly, Show what course a
poor Convinced Sinner must take, that so he may close in effectually with
Christ by Faith for Salvation.

First; I shall give you a short Account of the Nature of Saving Faith, as a
proper Foundation to what follows.

AND here I shall lay down this as a general Description of it, viz.

SAVING Faith is that Grace of the Holy Spirit, whereby a Convinced Sinner,
having had a true Discovery of CHRIST, as He is Revealed to us in the Gospel,
highly Approves of the method of Salvation by Him, and so, Receives and Rests
upon Him alone for Salvation, as He is made known, and offered, to us in the
Gospel.

THIS general Description I shall briefly open to you in the several parts of
it. And say,

1. SAVING Faith is a Grace of the HOLY SPIRIT. That is, Saving Faith is one of
the free and distinguishing Favors of GOD toward those that are endowed with
it: And it is wrought in the Heart, not by the Power and Virtue of any Means, in
themselves, but by the immediate Influence and Agency of the HOLY SPIRIT of
GOD. And therefore, Saving Faith is said expressly not to be of our selves: but
the Gift of God, in Ephesians. 2.8. Again,

2. THIS Faith is wrought in the Heart of a Convinced Sinner. Not that every
Convinced Sinner has saving Faith wrought in him: For many a one that has been
Convinced and Awakened, for a time, has found means to shake off his
Convictions; and so at length died in a state of Impenitency and Unbelief: But
however, the Sinner must be Convinced, and brought to a deep sense of his Sin
and Misery by Nature, and the absolute need he stands in of Salvation, before
he can be willing to receive and embrace a Savior by Faith. For before this
Conviction the Sinner sees no need he stands in of Salvation; and so, is ready
to slight and contemn the offer of a Savior; as they did, whom our Lord
upbraids, in Joh. 4.40. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. And
therefore, this Conviction is necessary to prepare the way for Faith in Christ.
And agreably, such Sinners only are called upon immediately to close in with
Christ by Faith; as you may see in Matthew. 11.28. Joh. 7.37, 38, etc.

But however,

3. BEFORE the Convinced Sinner actually closes in with Christ by Faith, he has
a Discovery of Christ, as He is revealed and offered to us in the Gospel. For,
the Holy Spirit, who first convinces the Sinner of his Guilt and Pollution by
Nature, and of the need he stands in of Salvation, goes on to Reveal to him
where his Help is to be found, and makes Christ known to his Soul. He shows the
Sinner the glorious Contrivance of GOD for our Salvation by a Redeemer, and
reveals the only SAVIOR to him in the Glory and Fullness of his Person, Offices
and Benefits. This is plain from what our Savior said to Peter upon his
declaring Him to be the Christ, the Son of the living God, in Mat. 16.16. For
upon this says Christ in the next verse, -- Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona:
for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee: but my father which is in
heaven. And when the Sinner has once gained a true Discovery of Christ, Then,

4. HE highly Approves of the Method of our Redemption and Salvation by Him.
For the Convinced and Enlightened Sinner, beholding the infinite Wisdom and
Grace of GOD in this Contrivance of Salvation by JESUS CHRIST; and seeing that
it is wonderfully adapted beyond any other way whatever, to advance the great
Ends proposed in the Salvation of a Sinner; which are the Glory of GOD, and the
Happiness of the poor Sinner; he is bro't immediately to Receive this
Revelation concerning Christ, as a faithful saying, and worthy of all
Acceptance; as we find in 1 Timothy 1.15.

And upon this,

5. THE Sinner that has Faith wrought in his Heart, willingly Receives and
Embraces CHRIST, as He is revealed in the Gospel. That is, he freely accepts
Him as His Lord and Savior: He closes in with Him in all his Offices, as the
Prophet, Priest and King of his Salvation; and embraces Him thus upon His own
Terms; being ready and willing to be and do, all that Christ requires, that he
may be saved by Him. And upon his thus receiving Christ,

6. THE Believing Sinner Rests and Relies upon Him alone for Salvation. That
is, He wholly and forever Renounces all other Methods and Proposals of
Salvation, and has no Dependence upon any thing but Christ for the Salvation he
needs. And he sees such a suitableness in Christ, such an infinite Fullness and
Sufficiency in Him, that he finds he may safely depend upon Him; and so casts
the whole Burden, and leans all the Weight of his Eternal Salvation upon Him;
hoping that Christ will be made unto him, of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, as in 1 Cor. 1.30. "And whatsoever fears he
has, yet he resolves here he will lie, and go no whither else, for what he
wants: saying, as Joh. 6.68. -- Lord, to whom should we go? Thou have the words
of eternal Life."

THUS I have given you a short Account of true and saving Faith, only as a
Foundation to what I am to consider more largely under the next general Head.
But I shall go no further at this time; but conclude this Discourse, with a
short Reflection or two, on what has been said concerning the general Nature of
Gospel Faith, and the Necessity of it for Salvation.

And,

1. Infer. WE hence learn that true and saving Faith, is quite another thing,
than most Men take it to be. For the generality, even of those who are favored
with Gospel Revelation, are ready to imagine, That Divine Faith consists only
in a bare Belief, or Assent of their Understandings to the Truth of this
Revelation. And therefore, if you Discourse with them about the Nature of
saving Faith; and inquire, whether they have any grounds to conclude they have
this Faith in them? They Will readily reply; That they are no Infidels: For, they
believe that the Scriptures are the Word of GOD, and that the Doctrines
revealed in them are the Truths of GOD: And, in particular, That they believe
that Christ, who is so much spoken of in the Gospel, died for the Salvation of
Sinners; and upon this, they express a Confidence, that God, who is a merciful
GOD, will save them for His sake. And if you go on to Inquire, How they came by
this Faith? They Will say, This is the Faith they were born and brought up in. And
this is the best Account they can give of the matter: And therefore, this is
all the Foundation they have to build their Hopes for Heaven and Happiness
upon. But, believe it Sinner, if you have no other notion of true and saving
Faith than this, your Faith is no better, than the Faith of Devils; for,
doubtless, they have as clear an understanding of the Scripture-revelation
concerning Christ, and as firmly assent to the truth of it, as you can do. (See
Jam. 2.19.) And by consequence, all the Hopes you ground upon this Faith are
vain and presumptuous. And it is very lamentable to think, how many poor Sinners
go on, all their days, in this groundless presumption; and will not suffer any one
to rectify this fatal mistake for them, nor be at any pains to do it
themselves, 'till they come to be convinced of their Error, in the Agonies of
Death: And then their false Hopes vanish in a moment, and endless Despair
seizes upon them: Agreeable to that, in Prove. 11.7. When a wicked man dies, his
expectation shall perish: and the hope of unjust men perishes. O then! if you
have any desire at all to be Saved, beware of this presumptuous Faith and Hope:
And while you have Time and Means for it, search narrowly into the Nature and
Grounds of true and saving Faith. Study the Holy Scriptures with care and
diligence, to see what account they give of this Faith, and Pray to GOD to
enlighten you in the knowledge of this Mystery: And then, I am persuaded you will
soon be convinced, that the Faith of God's Elect, contains much more in it,
than the naked assent of their Understandings to the faith of the
Scripture-revelation concerning Christ: And in particular, that it also
comprehends in it, the Souls delightful Approbation of the Method of our
Redemption by Him: and the hearty Consent of the Will, to Receive and Embrace
Him, in all His Offices, and upon His own Terms etc. as I hinted before, and
shall more fully make out in the following Discourses.

And then,

2. Infer. SINCE this Faith is absolutely necessary to Salvation, you ought to
be greatly concerned how to obtain it. And must take the same pains to become a
sincere Believer in Christ, that you would to secure your Title to Heaven and
Glory. For there is an inseparable Connection between them. That is, Faith
unites the Soul to Christ; and this Union entitles the Believer to all the
Benefits of Redemption by Him. And therefore, our Savior assures us, in Mar.
16.16. He that believes -- shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be
damned. Well then, since Faith is so essential to Salvation, let this be your
next Inquiry, How shall I obtain this Faith? What Course must I take? What
Means must I use for this End? And this will prepare the way, for a cheerful
Compliance with those weighty Directions, which are the Subject of the
following Discourses.

SERMON V.
IN the last Discourse I gave you a short Account of the Nature and Importance
of Gospel Faith, as a Means to Salvation.

And now,

Secondly, I proceed to show what Course a poor Convinced Sinner must take, to
obtain this Faith in CHRIST, and be saved by Him.

AND here I shall say, I. You must endeavor to See and Know, what a Savior
CHRIST is. Upon which, II. You must consent to Receive and Embrace Him, in all
His Offices, and upon His own Terms. And when you have done this, III. You must
have your whole Dependence upon Him alone for Salvation. These are the three
Principal DIRECTIONS, that are to be attended in this Case: And every Sinner
that is enabled, by the Grace of GOD, to comply with them, is a Believer in
Christ, and has a sure and unalienable Title to Eternal Life. I shall therefore
speak something distinctly to each of these Heads. And say,

I. IF you desire to obtain a true and saving Faith in JESUS CHRIST, you must
endeavor to see and know what a SAVIOR He is. For, without an agreeable
Knowledge of Him, there can be no saving Faith in Him. This is evident from
that of the Apostle, in Romans 10.14. -- How shall they believe in him of whom
they have not heard? The Apostle speaks here by way of Interrogation: "which is
the more convincing; because it carries in it, a sort of appeal to the persons
spoken to". And this kind of Interrogation is equivalent to a negative
Proposition: so that the sense of the words is plainly this, viz. Men must hear
of Christ, and so come to the Knowledge of Him, or they can never Believe in
Him, so as to be saved by Him. And the Reason is evidently this, That Faith,
which is not grounded upon some proper Knowledge of the Object of it, is Faith
without a Foundation; and so is but a mere Fancy, or vain Credulity, rather
than true Faith. But, on the other hand, if the Sinner is once thoroughly
acquainted with the Doctrine of Christ, and comes to know, in a spiritual
sense, what a Savior is provided for us, he will soon be brought to Believe and
Trust in Him for Eternal Life. For David assures us, in Psalm. 9.10. They that
know the name of the Lord will put their Trust in him. And agreably, this
Knowledge is called Eternal Life, Joh. 17.3. And this is Life Eternal, that
they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
i. e. there is an inseparable Connection between the true Knowledge of Christ,
and Salvation by Him. And that you may not be at a loss to know what I intend
by this Knowledge of Christ, which is essential to true Faith, and lays the
Foundation for a Sinners closing in immediately with Him for Salvation, I shall
give you this short Description of it, namely, This Knowledge of Christ is that
inward and spiritual Acquaintance with the Doctrine of Christ, as revealed to
us in the Gospel, which gains the Assent of the Understanding to the Truth of
this Revelation, and the Approbation of his Judgment to the Reasonableness and
Necessity of our Salvation by Him. In this Description there are two principal
Articles contained; which (though you have had some Hints upon them, in the
general Account of true and saving Faith) I shall more particularly open and
explain in this place. And say,

1. THIS Knowledge supposes a through Acquaintance with the DOCTRINE of CHRIST,
as Revealed to us in the Gospel. And therefore, every one that has this
Knowledge, is so well acquainted with the Gospel Revelation, that he is able to
give a good account of what the Scriptures say concerning the Person, the
Nature, the Offices, the Benefits of Christ, and other Articles of this kind;
which the Scriptures reveal, and have made necessary to be known to Salvation.
And this is what we usually call, the Doctrinal Knowledge of CHRIST. And since
these Lines may, probably, fall into the Hands of some awakened Ones, who are
very ignorant of the Redeemer; and who, by reason of their unskilfulness in
searching the Scriptures, and comparing one Text with another, must needs spend
a great deal of Time and Pains, without some more compendious Help, to gain a
competent Knowledge of Christ; I shall for the Information of these, give a
summary Account of this Doctrine, as it is revealed and made known to us in the
Gospel. And accordingly, you must know, That the Savior, whom you are bound to
believe in, "is both GOD and MAN in two distinct Natures and one Person
forever". And therefore, He is sometimes called GOD. See Joh. 1.1. In the
beginning was the WORD, and the WORD was with GOD, and the WORD was GOD. And
Romans 9.5. CHRIST, who is over all, GOD BLESSED FOR EVER. And sometimes He is
called MAN, as in 1 Timothy 2.5. -- The MAN CHRIST JESUS. And by the UNION of
these two Natures, in one Person, He is called EMMANUEL, which, being
interpreted, is God with us, or, God in our Nature, Math. 1.23. And as Christ
is both God and Man in one Person; you must know, that according to His DIVINE
NATURE, He is the Son of God, and the only begotten of the Father. See Joh.
1.34. Chap. 3.18. with many more places: and that this SONSHIP is by eternal
and ineffable Generation: For the Prophet Isaiah speaking of Him says, in Chap.
53.8. -- Who shall declare his Generation? And being thus the SON of GOD, you
must understand, that He is the Second Person in the adorable Trinity; the same
in Substance, and equal in Power and Glory, with the FATHER and the HOLY GHOST:
For we read in Joh. 5.7. There are three that bear record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are One. And concerning
this WORD, we are taught in Phil. 3.6 That being in the form of God, he though it
it not robbery to be equal with God: being the brightness of the Father's
Glory, and the express image of his Person: as we find in Heb. 1.3. And then,
as for the HUMANITY of Christ, you must know, that this Glorious SON of GOD
assumed, or took our Nature into, that which we call, a Personal Union with his
Divine Nature: And the manner of it, was, by His being conceived by the power
of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the virgin Mary, Math. 1.20. And by this
means, He wholly escaped the Guilt and Pollution we bro't into the World with
us, in the way of natural Generation. This we learn from Luke 1.35. And the
Angel said unto her, i.e. unto Mary, the Mother of our Lord, The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest shall over shadow thee:
therefore that HOLY THING that shall be born of thee, shall be called, the SON
OF GOD. And agreably, He is said, in Heb. 7.26. -- to be holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners. These are the things you must learn
concerning the Nature and Constitution of Christ's Person. And by this means,
you will soon understand how admirably He is fitted to accomplish the great
Work of our Redemption. And accordingly, you must know, that this blessed
Immanuel is the only Person, whom the Father has constituted to be the MEDIATOR
of the New Covenant: As we find in 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God, and one
Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus. And by consequence, that He
is the very Savior that was promised to our first Parents, as soon as they
stood in need of such an one, Genesis 3.15. And the Person, whom, when the fullness
of time came, the FATHER sent into the world, made of a woman, made under the
law to redeem them that were under the law; as we read in Gal. 4.4, 5. And that
He might more effectually discharge this high Trust, you you must know further,
that He is, more particularly, vested with a threefold Office of Prophet,
Priest and King, "which He executes as our Redeemer, both in His state of
Humiliation and Exaltation". (1.) With the Office of a PROPHET; as Moses
foretold of Him in Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a
Prophet from the midst of thy brethren like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken.
Which words are interpreted of Christ, in Act. 3.22. And this Office He
discharges "in his revealing to his People, by his Word and Spirit, the will of
GOD for their Salvation". Again (2.) He is vested with the Office of a PRIEST.
Heb. 5.5, 10. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high Priest:
but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. --
Called of God an high Priest. And in the Execution of this Office, you must
know, that when He was here, in our Nature, He did, in his Obedience unto
Death, offer up Himself a Sacrifice, to atone the Justice of GOD for our
Offenses; a Sacrifice that had infinite Merit in it, and so was infinitely
pleasing to the FATHER, Ephesians. 2.5. And that after He had made this Expiation for
us, by His Sufferings and Death, He arose out of the Grave for our
Justification, (Romans 4.25.) ascended into Heaven, leading Captivity Captive,
(Ephesians. 4.8.) And is there seated at the Right Hand of GOD, where He ever lives
to make Intercession for us, (Heb. 7.25.) And then (3.) JESUS CHRIST is vested
the Office of a KING. For He is the King whom the Father has set upon his holy
hill of Zion, (Psalm. 2.6.) And being exalted to that Dignity, you must know
that He has a name given him above every name: that at the name of JESUS every
knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the
Earth; and that every Tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
glory of God the Father, (Phil. 3.9, 10, 11.) And that, in the Execution of
this Office, He now Overrules and Governs all things in the Kingdom of Grace
and Providence, for the good of His Redeemed, ( Heb. 2.8.) And will finally
come to Judge the World in Righteousness, (Act. 17.31.) And so render to every
man according to his deeds: to them who by patient continuance in well-doing,
seek for glory, and honor, and Immortality; Eternal Life: But unto them that
are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness;
Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish -- (Romans 2, 7, 8, 9.) And as
necessary Inferences from all that has been said concerning the Person and
Offices of Christ, you must farther know, that this JESUS is an ALMIGHTY
SAVIOR; able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by Him, (Heb.
7.25.) Again, That He is a most WILLING and COMPASSIONATE SAVIOR; and will
never reject any that go to GOD in and through Him, ( Joh. 7.27.) And finally,
That He is the ONLY SAVIOR of Sinners: For we read in Act. 4.12. Neither is
there Salvation in any other: for there is none other Name under Heaven, given
among men, whereby we must be saved.

THUS I have given you a brief Account of the Principal Things, which are
revealed to us in the Scriptures concerning Christ: And they are, every one of
them, of very great Importance, if not of absolute Necessity, to be known, that
so you may obtain true and saving Faith in Him. But then, as this saving
Knowledge according to the Description I have given, implies something more
than a Doctrinal Acquaintance with the Scripture Revelation concerning Christ,
I add,

2. THIS Knowledge must be inward and Spiritual, so as to gain the Assent of
the UNDERSTANDING to the Truth of this Revelation, and the Approbation of the
JUDGMENT to the Reasonableness and Necessity of our being Saved by Christ. And
herein consists the very Essence of true and saving Knowledge: or, that,
whereby the Knowledge of the Believer, is distinguished from the Knowledge of
all other Men whatever. For many Unconverted Persons, under the Light of the
Gospel, are as well acquainted with the Scripture-revelation of Christ, as any
of the Children of God; and can give a more distinct account of the Doctrine of
Christ, as it is taught us in the Gospel, than many true Believers can do. But
then, They, either look upon all that is said concerning Christ, in the Gospel,
to be but a mere Fable, and so believe not one word that is said concerning
Him; as the Jews and Deists, and such like Infidels do: or else, they are
deeply prejudiced against this way of Salvation by Christ; and cannot bear to
think that HE should have all the Glory, and Men so little of the Credit of a
Sinners Salvation: And this is the Condition of all such who are building their
Hopes for Heaven upon a Righteousness of their own. And therefore, this true
and saving Knowledge is something more than Speculative, which floats only in
the Head and Imagination: it sinks deeper into the Heart, and takes fast hold
of the superior and leading Powers of the Soul. And for this reason, I call it
an inward acquaintance with the Doctrine of Christ. And I add Spiritual, to
distinguish it from that carnal Knowledge, which only puffs Men up with Pride,
and because the Spirit of GOD is the Author of it; as you will presently here.
And every one that has this Knowledge, gives in the real and unfeigned Assent
of his Understanding, to all the great and fundamental Truths, which the Gospel
has revealed to us concerning Christ, and is fully persuaded, not only of the
certainty of their Revelation; but also that the Salvation of a Sinner is to be
obtained only by Christ, as the Gospel asserts. And to this firm assent of the
Understanding, he joins the hearty Approbation of his Judgment; and is really
Convinced, upon the most impartial Consideration, that the whole Contrivance of
our Redemption by Christ, as it is made known to us in the Gospel, is the most
Wise and Reasonable, the most Just and Gracious, the most Honorable to GOD,
and the safest for the Sinner, that could possibly be thought on: And so
receives it as a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15.
And with the Apostle in Phil. 3.8. He accounts all other things but loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord.

AND thus I have given you the most clear and distinct Account I can, of that
Knowledge of Christ, which is necessary to Faith and Salvation.

AND now, that you may gain this saving Acquaintance with Christ, You must be
careful to improve the Appointed Means, which GOD has been will not to bless for
the Communication of it, to Convinced and Awakened Sinners. And they are
principally, the WORD and PRAYER. These, indeed, I considered before, as
special Means, of Divine Appointment, to bring a Sinner out of a state of
Nature into a state of Grace: but here I shall consider them only in their
Aptitude or Fitness, to bring a poor Sinner to the saving Knowledge of Jesus
Christ: or, to that spiritual Acquaintance with Him, which will bring the
Sinner to Receive and Rely upon Him alone for Salvation, as He is offered to us
in the Gospel. And therefore, I say,

1. IF you would know Christ so as to believe in Him, you must carefully Attend
to the WORD of GOD, both in the Reading and Hearing of it. Now it appears very
plainly, from what I said before, upon the Doctrinal Knowledge of Christ, That
the SACRED SCRIPTURES contain the whole External Revelation of Christ, as a
Savior; and that there is no one Article, that is necessary to be known
concerning Him, but what is therein clearly Revealed to us: And therefore, in
themselves considered, they are the most proper and natural Means, we can make
use of, to come to an exact Knowledge of the Doctrine of Christ. But then, as
we can never justly expect to be the Masters of this Knowledge, unless we take
Pains for it, in the way of Divine Appointment; that is, by Searching the
Scriptures, to see what they Reveal and Testify concerning Christ: as God
commands us to do, in Joh. 5.39. And by giving a due Attendance to the Public
Dispensation of the Word, as He also directs us, for this End. See Romans 10.14.
and onwards. I say here, if you would lay the very Foundation of this true and
saving Knowledge aright, you must diligently apply your selves to the study of
the Holy Scriptures, and carefully attend upon the Public Dispensation of the
Word, in the manner you were directed to do under a former Head: And by this
means, you can scarce fail of gaining that Doctrinal Knowledge of CHRIST, which
is necessary to Faith and Salvation. But since, as I said before, the highest
Degrees of this Knowledge alone, will never bring a Sinner to close in with
Christ by a true and saving Faith, I add,

2. YOU must humbly and earnestly Pray to GOD, that He would Reveal CHRIST to
your Souls, and give you the inward and spiritual Understanding of that Way and
Method of Salvation by Him, which is Revealed to us outwardly in the Gospel.
For observe it, whatever Convictions and Terrors of Conscience you may be
under, from that sight, which the Law may help you to, of your miserable
Condition by Nature; you can never be brought to Receive and Rest upon Christ
alone for Salvation, 'till your Understandings are enlightened, and Christ be
Revealed in you, by His Holy Spirit For we read in 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man
receives not the things of the spirit of God: for they are foolishness to him:
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. And
therefore, that you may gain that Knowledge of Christ which is Life Eternal,
you must, particularly, Pray to GOD, That He would, by a powerful act of His
Almighty Spirit, First, open the eyes of your Understanding, that you may be
able to discern spiritual things after a spiritual manner; and work such a
mighty Change in your Heart, as to turn the corrupt byas of it from Sin to
Holiness; and thereby enable you to Discern and Approve the things that are
most excellent. And when you have Prayed thus for the Illumination and
Sanctification of the Faculties of the Inner Man: Then, Plead with GOD, That He
would unveil the GLORY of CHRIST, and show you that sweet HARMONY there is in
the way of our Redemption by Him: that so your Hearts may be filled with
Admiration and Praise, at the Wisdom and Grace of GOD appearing in them. For,
to this effect the blessed Apostle Paul prayed, on behalf of the Christian
Ephesians; as we find in Chap. 1. ver. 15. and onwards. Wherefore (says he) I
cease not -- to make mention of you in my Prayers; That the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the Knowledge of Him; the eyes of your Understanding being
enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his Calling, and what the
Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding
greatness of his Power to usward, who believe according to his mighty Power
etc. And now, to close this Head, if, by such Means as these, you once come to
know Christ, and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his
Sufferings, you can no longer withold the Consent of your Souls from Him; but
you will run to Him as your only Refuge, to shelter you from the Storm of Divine
Vengeance which pursues you; and, with open Arms, you will Receive Him in all His
Offices; and, by an Act of Recumbency, cast all the Cares of your Souls, and
lay the whole stress of your Salvation upon Him.

AND this leads me now to the next thing I proposed in Directing, what Course
you must take, that so you may effectually close in with Christ for Salvation.
And this is,

II. IF you would believe in Christ to the saving of your Soul, you must
heartily CONSENT to Receive and Embrace Him in all His OFFICES, and upon His
own TERMS, as He is offered to us in the Gospel. For, the Faith of a Christian
is not, like the Faith of the Philosopher, confined to the Head, but it extends
to the Heart also: It takes possession both of the Understanding and Will; yea,
it is eminently seated in the Heart. For though there can be no saving Faith in
Christ without a Doctrinal Knowledge of Him; yet (as I said before) the largest
Degrees of this Knowledge alone, will not secure a saving Interest in Christ.
Whereas on the other hand, if any poor Soul, who has but a competent Knowledge
in the Doctrine or Christ, does but heartily Consent to take Him for his
Savior, as He is offered in the Gospel, he has that Faith in the Redeemer,
which will immediately entitle him to Eternal Life. And therefore, this Consent
of the Will, to receive and embrace Christ, is an Essential Act of SAVING
FAITH; and of infinite Importance in the Salvation of a Sinner. And
accordingly, we frequently read of it in the Gospel of God our Savior. It Is
expressed to us in one place under the notion of Receiving Christ, Joh. 1.12.
To as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God;
even to them that believe on his Name. This Receiving is a relative Term, and
necessarily supposes a previous Offer of Christ to us. For, (as One Mr.
Taylor's Discourse on Faith in Jesus Christ.
well observes) "what is not sent, or offered me, I may snatch at, or seize by
violence; but I cannot properly he said to Receive it". Now this offer of Christ
is made to us in the Gospel, and the true Believer Receives Him, not physically
but in a moral sense, i. e. He gives in the full Consent of his Will, that
Christ should be his upon Gospel Terms. Again, This Consenting Act of Faith is
expressed by Believing in Christ with all the Heart. Thus it is expressed by
Philip in his Answer to the Eunuch, when he requested Baptism of him, Act.
8.38. If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may be baptized. And so
it is expressed again, in Romans 10.10. With the heart man believes unto
righteousness. And in many other places to the same purpose. And therefore, if
you truly desire to be saved, you must and will give in the free and full
Consent of your Soul to take Christ for your Savior, just as He is made known
and offered to us in the Gospel. And agreably, you must be heartily willing to
Receive Him, (1.) In all His Offices. And (2.) Upon His own Terms: For so the
Gospel reveals and offers Him to us.

(1.) YOU must be heartily willing to receive and embrace Him in all his
OFFICES. I observed to you, under the first Head, when I Discoursed of that
Knowledge which is necessary to Faith and Salvation; that Christ is Revealed
and Offered to us in the Gospel in a threefold Office, which He has taken upon
Himself, by the special Appointment of GOD the Father, and executes as our
Redeemer. And these (I said) are the Offices of a Prophet, Priest and King. And
therefore you must heartily Consent to take Christ in all, and in each of these
Offices.

1. YOU must heartily Receive and Embrace HIM in His PROPHETICAL OFFICE. Jesus
Christ is the Great Prophet that was foretold and promised in the forecited,
Deuteronomy. 18.5. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst
of thee etc. This Promise GOD has long since fulfilled, as we find in Act.
3.22. Where the Apostle cites this Prediction of Moses, and applies it
particularly to the Lord Jesus Christ. And He is One every qualified to give
the Knowledge of Salvation to his People. He is perfectly acquainted with all
the Secrets of GOD, and so knows His whole Will concerning our Salvation: For
He came forth from the Father, as He testifies of Himself, in Joh. 16.28. Yea,
He is the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father; and so has
seen Him, and makes One with Him in all His Counsels concerning us. Joh. 1.18.
And being thus perfectly acquainted with the Mind of GOD, He is able to reveal
to us, by His Word and Spirit, the whole will of GOD for our Salvation. And
does by these Means enlighten every one of the Heirs of Salvation. Hence He is
called, The Sun of Righteousness, in Mal. 4.2. And, The dayspring from on
high, -- to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, to guide our feet into the way of peace, Luke 1.78, 79. And therefore,
as you are by Nature full of Darkness and Ignorance, and need such an
Instructor as Christ, you must be heartily Willing to Receive and Submit to
Him, as a Teacher sent from GOD, to give you the Knowledge of Eternal
Salvation. And you must give in the Consent of your Soul to take Him in His
Prophetical Office after this manner,

O LORD, I am a poor miserable Creature by Nature. And that which renders my
Case the more so, is, I am naturally full of Blindness and Ignorance. I was
born into the World in a state of Darkness; and so have by Nature no Power to
behold any spiritual Object after a spiritual manner. Indeed, I have read in
thy Holy Word, and been many times told by thy Ministers, that I am in a
sinful, miserable, undone state by Nature: That there is no Hope nor Help for
me in any but thy self: And that thou art a most Glorious Savior, and every
way able and willing to save poor Sinners to the uttermost: But such is the
dreadful darkness and ignorance of my mind, that I cannot, of my self, see the
evil of Sin, nor the miserable Condition I am in, on the account of my
Transgressions: nor can I see the Glory, Beauty and Fullness, I have been told
there is in Thy self: no, nor the need I stand in of an Interest in the Merits
of thy Obedience unto Death, that so I may be saved: But on the other hand, I
am exceeding apt from this Ignorance of mine, to entertain high thoughts of my
self, and but low thoughts of the Grace of the Gospel. But after all, I am
convinced, I need to have other and righter Apprehenons of these things, than I
have ever yet had: And I know not whether else to go, but unto Thee, O LORD,
for that spiritual Illumination and Instruction I want. For I have often heard
that Thou art a great Teacher sent from GOD, and sent on purpose, to enlighten
poor Sinners, that are willing to be taught by Thee, in the way to Salvation. I
desire therefore now to come to Thee, and to put my self under the Teachings of
thy Word and Spirit. I choose Thee for my Prophet, Oh! Reveal to me the whole
will of GOD for the Salvation of my poor Soul. Open my blind Eyes, and turn me
from Darkness to Light. Renew and sanctify the Powers of my Soul, that I may be
able to discern spiritual things after a spiritual manner. Give me a true sight
of my own sinfulness and vileness: and help me to see, How wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked I am; and how unable to redeem and
save my self. LORD, I desire to see and know the worst of my self. Oh! That all
my Sin, and Guilt, and Misery, may be laid open before me! Give me also to see
the Vanity and Emptiness of this World, the false Glory of which has dazzled my
Eyes and captivated my Heart. But above all, Discover thine own Glory and
Fullness to me. Give me to see what an Almighty and Compassionate Savior Thou
art: and help me to see the absolute need I stand in of an Interest in thy
self. Give me such a sight hereof that I may go no whither else but to Thee
alone, for Eternal Life. LORD, open to me the New Covenant way to Salvation.
Thou have plainly laid down the Doctrine of it in thy Holy Word: but I
earnestly desire, and apply to thee, to give me an inward, Spiritual
understanding of the Reasonableness, Necessity, and Excellency of that way of
Salvation. And whereas, I am bound to Love, and Fear GOD, and keep all his
Commandments, give me such a sensible discovery of the Infinite Being and
Perfection of GOD, that I may Love and Fear Him above all. And give me such a
Spiritual understanding of the Mind and Will of GOD contained in His holy Word,
that I may truly account his Precepts concerning all things to be right, and to
desire nothing in the World so much, as to lead a Life of New-Obedience to His
sacred Commandments. And, LORD, I choose Thee for my Instructor; Oh! Give me a
spiritual Understanding in all these Things, and in every thing else that Thou
see needful for me to know; and mine Ear shall be open to all thy sacred
Instructions. There are no Teachings like the Teachings of thy Word and Spirit;
I am resolved therefore, by thy Grace, always to hear what my God and Savior
has to say to me.

AND now, if you do but thus heartily Consent to take Christ for the Prophet of
your Salvation: If you do but humbly and earnestly apply to Him, after this
manner, for spiritual Illumination and Instruction; and Resolve thus, by the
Grace of GOD, to Hear and Receive all that He has to say to you, by His Word
and Providence, by His Spirit and Ministers: then have you received Him aright
in His Prophetical Office. And He Will teach you the whole Will of GOD, as far as
it is needful for you to know it: and make you wise to Eternal Salvation. Again,

2. YOU must heartily Receive and Embrace JESUS CHRIST in His PRIESTLY OFFICE.
Jesus Christ is the Great High Priest of our Salvation. See Heb. 4.14. And as
such, He appeared once, in the end of the world, to put away sin, by the
sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26. And when He had thus paid down the Price of
our Redemption, by His Obedience unto Death, He arose again from the Dead for
our Justification; and is ascended into Heaven, where He ever lives to make
Intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. Now this Office of Christ is of the greatest
account, both with GOD and the Believer. For herein is laid the very Foundation
of our Eternal Redemption; and the other two Offices of Prophet and King, are
built upon it: For hereby that Salvation is procured for us, which Christ as a
Prophet makes known to us, and as a King brings us to the Enjoyment of. And
therefore it is of the greatest Necessity to Salvation, that the Sinner
heartily Consent to take Christ in His Priestly Office. Without this there can
be no Atonement for Sin, no Peace with GOD to be obtained; and consequently, no
Salvation to be hoped for. And therefore, as you desire to be saved, you must
cheerfully Receive and Embrace Christ, as the High Priest of your Salvation.
And you must give in the Consent of your Soul to take Him in this Office, after
this manner,

O LORD, I am a poor Guilty, Condemned Creature. I came into the World under
the Guilt of the first Transgression, and derived a corrupt Nature from my
first Parents, whereby my Heart is naturally full of Enmity against Thee, and
thy holy Law. On these Accounts, I am by Nature a Child of Wrath; and lay open
to the dreadful Wrath and Vengeance of GOD, from the first moment I had a
Being. And as I was born in Sin, so I have lived all my Days in Sin and
Rebellion against GOD: And been guilty of many Millions of Sins, of Heart, Lip
and Life; of Omission and Commission; of Knowledge and Ignorance; and these
against both the first and second Tables of GOD's holy Law; and also against
the very Gospel of our Salvation. And these Sins do all and every one of them
deserve the Damnation of Hell: and I am every moment exposed to that Damnation
in the most amazing Aggravations of it. And I tremble at the thoughts of that
Wrath that is ready to fall upon me. O LORD, How shall I make my Escape? I am
no ways able to Atone Divine Justice for my manifold Offenses. For, wherewithal
shall I come before the LORD for this end? Lebanon it self is not sufficient to
burn, nor the Beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt-offering. And therefore, if
I could offer thousands of Rams or ten thousands of rivers of Oil, if the fruit
of my Body for the sin of my Soul, there would not be merit enough in all to
procure the Pardon of the least Sin. No, nor could a Sacrifice of the whole
Creation yield a suitable Satisfaction for anyone of my manifold
Transgressions. But, Oh Dear LORD JESUS, I have heard of thee, that Thou have
loved poor Sinners, and given thy Self an Offering and a Sacrifice to GOD, of a
sweet smelling savor. Thou have laid down thy precious Life for our
Redemption; a Life that is worth infinitely more than the Lives of all the
Angels in Heaven and Men on Earth. And therefore, that Sacrifice had infinite
Merit in it; and accordingly, Thou do ever live to plead the Virtue of it on
the account of all that believe in Thee: and if ever I obtain Pardon and
Salvation, it must be on the account of that Sacrifice alone. I fly to Thee
therefore, O LORD, for an Interest in thy precious Sacrifice. I wholly renounce
the Merit of my own Person and Services, and account my own Righteousness as
filthy rags, and heartily submit to Thee as the Lord my Righteousness. Oh! that
my Sins may be washed away in thy precious Blood! That the Merit of thy
Sacrifice may be my Atonement! and thy Righteousness alone be the Covering and
Ornament of my naked Soul! My great desire is to obtain Pardon of Sin, Peace
with GOD, Acceptance with Him here, and Eternal Salvation in the World to come,
only on the Account of what Thou have done and suffered, for the sake of such
miserable Sinners as I am.

AND now, if you thus Consent to take Christ in His Priestly-Office, and can
uprightly say with the Apostle, in Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. Yea, doubtless, and I
count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord: and do count them but dung that I may win Christ; and be found in him
not having my own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. That I may
know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable unto his death etc. I say, if you do but
thus Consent to take Christ, you have truly received Him in His
Priestly-Office: and you need not fear: you shall certainly obtain Pardon,
Peace, and Eternal Life through Him. And having thus accepted Christ for the
Prophet and Priest of your Salvation; I proceed to say,

3. YOU must heartily Receive and Embrace HIM in His KINGLY OFFICE. For, JESUS
CHRIST is not only the Prophet and Priest; but He is also the KING of our
Salvation. Hence He is called a King; and a King by GOD's own Appointment,
Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion. And as such, He
has the Kingdoms of Grace and Providence put into His Hands: And in the
Administrations of them, He gains Subjects over to Himself, and overrules all
things for the Glory of GOD, and the best Good of those that put their Trust
under the shadow of His Wings. Now this is an Office you must own and submit
to, if you expect to be saved by Christ. This is expressly required of you, in
Psalm. 2.11, 12. Serve the Lord, i. e. the Lord Christ with fear, and rejoice
with trembling. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when
his wrath is kindled but a little: Blessed are all they that put their trust in
him. And here, you must give in the free and full Consent of your Soul to take
Christ in His Kingly Office after this manner,

O LORD, Thou art King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Thou have the right of
Dominion over all. The Angels in Heaven Worship Thee, the Saints on Earth
Praise and Adore Thee: and all thy reasonable Creatures ought to serve and obey
Thee. But alas! I am a poor sinful and rebellious Creature. I was born an Enemy
to thee, and have played the Rebel against thee all my Days. I naturally belong
to the Kingdom of Darkness, and have been a vile Slave to Sin and Satan: and
was never better pleased than while I was serving them, and dishonouring thy
Name. But now I plainly see I must shift sides, and change my Masters, or I am
undone to Eternity: For the Service of Sin and Satan, if persevered in, will
certainly end in Death and Destruction. But Oh, What shall I do! The Powers of
Darkness have fast hold on me: They have for a long time had the Dominion over
me: and I am bound Hand and Foot with the Cords of Sin and Lust, and have no
power of my own, nor indeed, any Inclination by Nature, to shake them off. But,
LORD, Thou art stronger than the strong man armed: and art able to break the
Yoke of Those, I would now account my spiritual Adversaries. Oh, Destroy the
Power of Sin in me, and make me a Captive of thy Grace. And accordingly, I now
renounce all other Lords, and choose Thee this Day for the King of my Salvation.
Oh! Conquer that Enmity there is in this vile Heart against Thee, and set up
thy Throne and thy Kingdom in me. Thou have said in thy holy Word, That thy
People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power Psalm. 110.3.
. Oh! That such a Day of Almighty Power may now pass over me! I Pray and long
for it. Oh, when shall it once be! LORD, make me one of thy willing and
obedient Subjects. Give me the Heart of a true Disciple, the Heart of a sincere
Follower of thine; and make thy Yoke easy, and thy Burden light to me: so shall
I delight to do thy Will at all times. And LORD, take me under thy special Care
and Government. I desire to put my Trust under the shadow of thy Wings. Oh!
Deliver me from the power and rage, and malice of my spiritual Enemies.
Strengthen me against all my Temptations; Support me under all my Weakness;
Comfort me under all my Sorrows. Assist me in a Course of Obedience to thy holy
Commandments; and lead me under thy Banner in the way to Eternal Life. O LORD,
make bare thine Arm, and do all this, and much more, for me: for all my Desire
is before thee, and all my Expectation from thee. And in Token hereof, I do
this Day and at this Time, take my Oath of Allegiance to Thee, and Promise, by
thy Grace, to be true and faithful to Thee all my Days.

AND now, if you can but thus acknowledge CHRIST, and give in the free and full
Consent of your Soul to Him, after this manner, in His Kingly Office, you then
close in with Him aright by Faith: and shall certainly be saved for ever under
the Conduct of that Great Captain of our Salvation. For He is the Author of
Eternal Salvation to all them that obey Him, Heb. 5.9. And thus I have shown,
how you are to close in with Christ in all His Offices, if you would Believe in
Him so as to be saved by Him.

AND now the next thing I am to observe is, That this Reception of Christ in
all His Offices must be also upon His own Terms. But this, with something more
of the like importance, must be reserved for a concluding Discourse upon this
Subject.

SERMON VI.
IN the last Discourse I propounded three general Directions for the obtaining
that Faith in CHRIST, which will entitle a Sinner to Eternal Life. And they
were, I. You must See and Know what a Savior Christ is. II. You must Consent
to Receive and Embrace Him in all His Offices, and upon His own Terms. And III.
You must Rely upon Him alone for Salvation. The first of these Directions has
been fully spoken to: and I have in part, considered the second of them; which
I divided into these two Branches. And said, (1.) You must Receive Christ in
all His Offices. And (2.) Upon His own Terms. And I have told you already, how
you are to Receive Him in the first Respect. And therefore, the next thing I am
to observe is this, viz.

2. You must be heartily willing to Receive and Embrace CHRIST, upon His own
TERMS. There are indeed, many Sinners who would willingly accept of Christ and
His Salvation, if they could but have them on their own Terms: But this can
never be: because Christ has stated and fixed His Terms in the Gospel, and will
not be the Savior of any Sinner, unless he approves of, and Consents to them.
And agreably, it is in the Nature of Saving Faith to close in with Christ upon
the Terms of His own proposing. For Faith sees these Terms to be absolutely
best in themselves. And therefore if you would close in with Christ by Faith
for Salvation, you must freely Consent to take Him for your Savior upon His
own Terms. And they are such as these,

1. YOU must Consent to take Him for your ONLY SAVIOR. We read in Act. 4.12.
Neither is there Salvation in any other: for there is no other name under
heaven given among men whereby we can be saved. That is, There is no One else
that has undertaken the Work of our Redemption for us; nor any one else that
GOD will accept in this Affair. And therefore, Christ proposes Himself to us as
the only Savior of miserable Sinners. Isai. 45.21, 22. -- There is no God else
besides me, a just God and a Savior -- Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the
ends of the Earth: for I am God and there is none else. And accordingly, if you
would be saved by Christ, you must not share the Honor of your Salvation
between Christ and another. No, not between Christ and your self; as the proud
Sinner is exceeding apt to do. But you must say as the Psalmist did, in Psalm.
62.5, 6. My soul, wait thou only upon God: for my expectation is from him. He
is my rock and my salvation; He is my defense: I shall not be moved. Again,

2. YOU must be content to part with every thing in the World, that is dear to
you, and patiently submit to any Hardships and Sufferings, when the HONOR and
INTEREST of CHRIST call for them. This is what the Gospel calls Self-denial and
taking up the Cross, and our Savior has made them a distinguishing Mark of his
true Disciples, and so a necessary Condition of Eternal Life, in Mar. 8.34. --
Whosoever will come after me, says Christ, i. e. Whosoever would become one of
my real Disciples, and expects to be saved by me, Let him deny himself, and
take up his Cross, and follow me. (1.) He must deny himself. "By which (as a
noted Expositer Burket in loc.
observes upon the place) we are not to understand the denying and renouncing
our Senses in matters of Faith, not yet the renouncing our Reason in matters of
Religion; but by Self-denial is meant, that we should be willing to part with
all our Earthly comforts, and quit all our Temporal enjoyments, for the sake of
Christ and his Holy Religion." i. e. when the Honor of Christ and the credit
of Christianity plainly calls us to do so. And then, (2.) He must take up his
Cross. Which Expression (as the forecited Expositor observes) is, "an Allusion
to a Roman custom that the Malefactor, who was to be Crucified, took his Cross
upon his shoulder, and carried it to the place of Execution." And we find this
exemplified in our Savior Himself, when He was unjustly Condemned to dye on
the Cross. (See Joh. 19.17.) And therefore, the sense of the Phrase is
evidently this, viz. That the Disciple of Christ, though he may not, by an
intemperate Zeal, run himself into any needless Trouble, and so make a Cross
for himself; yet, he must be disposed and firmly resolved, patiently to bear
any Affliction, which GOD in his Providence shall see meet to lay upon him: and
in particular, if GOD sees it most for His own Glory, he must cheerfully submit
to the loss of all that is dear to him in the World; to the loss of his Earthly
Estate, Friends, and Reputation among Men: and be ready to endure any kind of
Sufferings in the Body, even to the laying down of his Life, for Righteousness
sake. And we have many very noble and Heroic examples of this Self-denial and
bearing the Cross, Recorded in the Sacred Scriptures; and particularly, of the
Primitive Christians, who took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and
suffered the loss of all things, for the sake of Christ, Heb. 10.34. But of all
the examples of this kind, those of the Blessed Apostles were the most noted,
and so the most worthy our Imitation; as we find by the account which one of
them has given of the matter, in 1 Cor. 4.11, 12, 13. Even unto this present
hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no
certain dwelling place, and labor working with our own hands: being reviled,
we bless: being persecuted, we suffer it: being defamed, we entreat: we are
made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto
this day. And their Sufferings in these respects, were so many and great, that
the Apostle draws this Conclusion from them in the 9 th v. of this Chapter. For
I think that GOD has set forth us the Apostles last, as it were appointed to
death. For we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men.
And though it does not fall to the share of every true Christian to endure such a
Variety, and such Extremity of Sufferings, for the sake of Christ; yet, every
one must endeavor to bring his Spirit to submit to them, if GOD should call
him thereunto. For Christ has made it necessary that we should do so: and has
plainly told us, that unless we have something of this holy Temper in us, we
cannot be His Disciples, Luke 14.26, 27. If any man come to me, and hate not
his father and mother, and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea,
and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever does not bear
his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple. Which Hatred is not to be
understood in an absolute but comparative sense. And accordingly, our Savior
explains this severe passage after this manner, Math. 10.37, 38. He that loves
father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: and he that loves son or
daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. And he that takes not his cross,
and follows After me, is not worthy of me. So that the meaning of both
together is this, viz. We must love Christ and His Interest so much more than
we do the dearest of our Enjoyments in the World, that we must be willing to
part with them all, if He should call us to do so.

3. ANOTHER Term upon which you must Receive Christ is this, namely, You must
cheerfully submit your self to the Yoke of GOSPEL OBEDIENCE, and Follow the
EXAMPLE of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. This is a Term of Christ's own proposing; as
you may see, in Math. 11.29. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me. By the
Yoke of Christ here, we are to understand Gospel Obedience to His holy
Commandments: and to learn of Him, is to learn by his Example, to tread in his
Steps, and be Imitators of him as dear Children. And this he propounds as a
necessary Condition of Eternal Life, Math. 12.17. -- If thou will enter into
life, keep the Commandments. And again, Heb. 5.9. He is the author of eternal
salvation unto all them that obey him. And, indeed, to none else: for we read
in the Twelfth Chapter of this Epistle, ver. 14. Without holiness no man shall
see the Lord. So that, you see, this Gospel Obedience is necessary to
Salvation: Not as the meritorious Cause of it; for so Christ alone has
purchased Eternal Redemption for us: but as it is the fruit and evidence of our
Faith in Him. For, as I observed before, in Receiving Christ by Faith, you
accept of Him in His Kingly Office; and therein take the Oath of Allegiance to
Him, and swear to keep all his righteous Commandments, Psalm. 119.106. And if
you are sincere in what you do, that Faith, whereby you so receive Christ, will
produce this holy Obedience in your Life and Conversation. And that you may not
be at a loss to know what is meant by this Obedience, I shall say in a Word,

BY this Obedience, we are not to understand a sinless and perfect Obedience to
the whole Law of GOD: but a sincere Purpose and Endeavor, by the help of the
Spirit, to reach as near to that perfect Obedience as it is possible for one in
this state of Imperfection to do. So that in yielding this Obedience, the Heart
is first fully Resolved upon the Duty; and this Resolution becomes a fixed and
governing Temper in the Mind. And agreably, in the next place, this Resolution
is brought forth into Act, and is expressed in the Christians uniform, steady
and diligent Endeavors to walk in all the Ordinances and Commandments of the
LORD blameless to his Heavenly Kingdom: And in all, he has dependence upon the
SPIRIT of CHRIST, for the Pardon of his many defects in Duty, and for the
Acceptance of his Person and Services with the FATHER. And that you may not be
at a loss to know what RULE to go by, in yiedling this Christian Obedience, you
must be sure to make the Gospel of Christ the only Rule and Measure of it; and
see that in all things your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel. And in
particular, since Christ has left us a most perfect Example of holy Obedience
to GOD, and Commanded His Disciples to be Followers of Him, (Math. 16.24.) you
must be sure to have His spotless Example as much as possible in your Eye, and
strive to imitate Him in all his imitable Perfections. And more especially, in
His Meekness and Humility; in his Patience under Sufferings; in his Love and
Compassion to Mankind, which expressed it self in his readiness to do Good to
them upon all Occasions: In his Zeal against Sin, and for the Glory of GOD; in
his fervent Devotion to the FATHER; in his entire Submission to His Will under
all his Trials and Temptations; in his unshaken Faith and Dependence upon Him;
and finally, in his unwearied Diligence to work the Works of Him that sent him
while the Day of Life lasted.

AND thus I have finished the Second general Direction, I proposed to speak to,
for the obtaining true and saving Faith in Jesus Christ; viz. You must heartily
Consent to, Receive and Embrace Christ in all his Offices, and upon his own
Terms. And here I have particularly shown you, How you are to Receive and Walk
in Him, in both these Respects. And now there remains but one Important
Direction more of this kind: And this is,

III. IF you would believe in Christ to the Saving of the Soul, you must put
your whole TRUST in, and RELY upon HIM ALONE, for Salvation. I am sensible
indeed, this Act of Reliance is treated most unworthily by many in the World:
And by those in particular, of the Pelagian and Arminian Principles, who make a
Banter of it, both in the Pulpit, and from the Press; as they do of the whole
Doctrine of a Sinner's Justification and Salvation by Faith in Christ without
the Deeds of the Law: though therein, I think, they expressly contradict the
inspired Apostle, in Romans 3.28. And therefore, whatever any Men may say to the
contrary, This Reliance upon Christ is a most noble and necessary Act of true
and saving Faith. It is a most noble Act of Faith, and greatly glorifies the
Lord Jesus Christ. "For in thus doing (as One says well) we practically
declare, in despite of all Discouragements, that we are firmly persuaded of
Christ's Love and Grace, Faithfulness and Power, -- of the merits of His Blood,
the value of His Intercession, and the truth of His Promises* and set our Seal
to the Record given of Him in the Word, that He is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come to God through Him; and will not cast out any, that
seriously apply themselves to Him for Salvation". And as it is a most noble, so
it is a most necessary Act of true and saving Faith. That is, Let Men think and
say what they please of it, there is no obtaining Eternal Life, but by having
our whole Dependence upon Christ for it, as we are directed to have in the
Gospel. And therefore this Act of Faith is frequently spoken of, and great
stress laid upon it, in the Holy Scriptures. And I shall endeavor to give you
some understanding of the Nature of it, by considering a few of the Expressions
whereby it is made known to us* Particularly,

IT IS expressed by Trusting in CHRIST for Salvation. Psalm. 2.12. -- Blessed are
all they that Trust in him. And so again in Psalm. 9.10. and in many other
places. Now this supposes, that the Believing Sinner, who has received Christ
in all His Offices, sees enough in Him to answer all his Wants and Necessities:
that is, He sees all that Pardon, Peace, Grace and Salvation in Christ, which,
when once obtained, will make the most miserable Sinner in the World, happy
forever; and so depends upon Him alone, as an All-sufficient Savior, for all
that he stands in need of. Again,

IT IS expressed in Heb. 6.18. by fleeing for refuge, to lay hold on the Hope
set before us. And this supposes, That the poor Sinner has, first, a deep sense
of the imminent hazard he is in of being seized by the Justice of GOD, and
Condemned to Eternal Death, which his Soul trembles at the prospect of: and
then, that he has had a discovery of Christ as the only Savior from the Wrath
to come; and so hastens away to Him, as the Manslayer of old fled to the City
of Refuge, to save his Life, from the Avenger of Blood that pursued him. And so
lays hold on Christ and Trusts in Him* as his only Hope and Refuge. Once more,

IT IS expressed by committing our Souls into the Hands of CHRIST. 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know (says the Apostle Paul) that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him against that day. And agreably, Every poor Sinner has a
precious and immortal Soul to take care of, and to provide for, against the
Time when it enters into the Eternal World: and it needs to be put into safer
Hands than his own. And therefore, the Believer, having seen what a merciful
and faithful Redeemer Christ is, he commits his Soul by Faith, and all the
Concerns of it, that respect Eternity, into His Almighty Hands, and hopes that
by His infinite Power and Grace He will preserve it, and bring it forth richly
adorned with the Robes of Glory at the Great Day. And then,

Finally, THIS Act of Faith is expressed by Leaning upon Christ. Cant. 6.5. Who
is this coming out of the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved. These words
have doubtless a respect to Jesus Christ, and true Believers on Him. Christ is
the Beloved One here spoken of, and true Believers are they that come out of
the wilderness leaning upon him. And here we have (1.) The natural Condition of
a Sinner described to us: It Is a wilderness state. i. e. a lost, indigent and
disconsolate state. And (2.) The Believers Reliance upon Christ to bring him
out of this sad Condition: expressed by leaning upon Him. And accordingly,
every true Believer, that is sensible of his lost estate by Nature, has also
seen that there is no one can direct and lead him out of it but Jesus Christ.
And being ready to faint and die under the Apprehensions of his sad Condition,
He lays hold on Christ by Faith, as one that is faint lays hold on the first
Support he can meet with: and here he depends, both for Wisdom to direct, and
for Strength to help him along through the Darkness and Difficulties that lie
before him. And this proves a Cordial to his fainting Soul.

AND now from these, and such like Expressions, whereby the Act of Reliance
upon Christ is described to us, we may easily gather, that the Nature of it
consists in the Soul's Adventuring it self by Faith upon Christ alone, for all
that Salvation it needs. And so, on the one Hand, it shuts out all Confidence
in others, either in whole or in part. And says to Christ at they did, Isai.
26.23. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee, have had dominion over us: but
by thee only will we make mention of thy name. And as they, in Psalm. 20.7. Some
trusts in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember the name of the
Lord our God. And on the other hand, it shuts out that black and raging
Despair, which some Reprobates have gone out of the World under the Anguish of;
as Cain and Judas did.

INDEED this Act of Reliance is not always so Strong and full of Comfort as the
Saint could wish for; and as some Believers have had experience of. For in some
it has grown up to full Assurance; as it did in the Apostle Paul, as we find,
in the forecited 2 Timothy 1.12. I know (says he) whom I have believed, and am
persuaded, or assured, that he is able, and willing too, to keep that which I
have committed to him against that day. And the like we read concerning many
more of the Saints in Scripture. But in many others this Act of Faith runs at a
very low ebb indeed. It does so in most on their first Believing in Christ;
"and sometimes a great while after, in an Hour of spiritual Darkness and
Distress". But then, when the true Believer is reduced to the greatest Straits
in his own Mind, and questions whether he has the least degree of saving Faith
in him, he is wont to express his Humble Reliance upon CHRIST by Faith after
this manner,

O LORD, I am in a most miserable lost Condition by Nature. My Sins are many
and greatly Aggravated. I deserve thy dreadful Wrath and Vengeance on the
account of them: and I am afraid I shall perish forever under the intolerable
weight of my Sin and Guilt. But I find, in thy Holy Word, with Thee there is
Mercy, and with Thee there is plenteous Redemption, that thou may be feared.
And thou have shown forth the Riches of thy Grace, in providing an Almighty
Savior for perishing Sinners; yea, even for the chief of Sinners; such as I
have just reason to account my self. But whether I have yet an Interest in Him,
or am ever like to obtain one, I am sadly at a loss. I meet with all manner of
discouragements in the way, both from within and from without. Within I have a
wicked and deceitful Heart, that opposes all that is good, and I am surrounded
with Spiritual Enemies, who are much too hard for me in my own strength; and I
fear I shall one day fall and perish by the hands of them. But, LORD, Thou
can help me if thou please; and I see eno' in thy CHRIST for my Relief and
Salvation. Oh, that I could once obtain a saving Interest in Him! Well, I will
make what haste I can toward him, though I fear I shall perish in the way: I am
resolved, for this once, to try what Almighty, Sovereign Grace can and will do.
And what though I am the vilest Sinner that ever was, and deserve the very
Hottest Place in Hell; yet, will not thy Mercy be so much the more magnified in
my Salvation? Yea, LORD, it will: and Heaven will ring for ever with the
Praises of it. I will therefore venture into thy Presence: I have no whither
else to go; and I will humbly cast my self down at the Feet of thy Merry, and
wait upon thee for thy Mercy in Him. If I don't do this, I know I must Perish
forever: for I am sure there is no other Savior but CHRIST; nor any other way
to Salvation but by Him. And if I do this; who knows but there may be Mercy in
store for me. But if not, I can but Perish after all. And if I do Perish, it
shall be at the Foot of Mercy. Yea, I will trust in the LORD though he slay me.

THIS is the Language of a poor Soul relying upon Christ by Faith, when it is
filled with the greatest Darkness and Distress about its everlasting State and
Condition. And by this means the Believer is kept, at such times, from falling
into utter Despair. And now, though this be a very uncomfortable state, for any
one to be in; yet, every one that thus relies upon Christ in his Distress, is
in a safe Condition. For these are the Breathings of true Faith. And if he does
but "continue thus looking toward Christ, waiting upon him, and resigning to
him, he shall be dealt with as a true Believer." And though he may seem to
himself to have no Faith, and others may think he has but little of it; yet,
since his Faith bears some proportion to his Discouragements, which are
evidently great, his Faith also must be great, when it can thus prevail over
them.

AND thus I have shown you how or after what manner a poor Convinced Sinner
must close in with Christ, and rely upon him by Faith, that so he may be saved
by him. And now that you may obtain this Faith from GOD; (For as I told you
before, Faith is a Grace of the Holy Spirit, and the gift of GOD to those that
have it) and be able to exercise it to the saving of the Soul, you must wait
upon GOD for the Bestowment of it, in the use of Appointed Means. That is, you
must give your Careful and Diligent Attendance to the Word, for this End. You
must improve all the Opportunities you well can to read the Word in Private,
and to hear the Word Publicly dispensed to you. For says the Apostle in Romans
10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And then
besides, you must Pray humbly and earnestly to GOD to bestow this Grace upon
you. For since it is the Gift of GOD, He justly expects to be sought unto for
it: And since it is so eminent and useful a Grace, as we are all of us ready to
own, we can never be too importunate in our Supplications to GOD for it.

AND if by these Means you can but obtain Faith, as no doubt you may; and can
but exercise it in Receiving and Relying upon Christ, as you have heard; you
will certainly obtain Eternal Salvation in this way. For this Faith in the very
Condition of the New Covenant on Man's part, and gives the Sinner an Interest
in Christ, and a Title to that Salvation which He has purchased and wrought out
for poor Sinners. And therefore, by the Grace of GOD, we are said to be saved
by Faith, Ephesians. 2.8. And then besides, this Faith has, many times over, the
Promise and Assurance of Eternal Salvation made unto it. But this one place may
serve instead of all at this time, Joh. 6.40. And this is the will of him that
sent me (says our Savior) that every one that sees the Son, and believes on
him, may have everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the last day. And
therefore, if you have but true Faith, though it be but small, like the grain of
mustard seed, and but weak, like the bruised reed; yet never Fear: You are
passed from Death to Life, and shall never come into Condemnation; but be saved
in the Day of Christ Jesus.

AND thus, I have gone through the several general Heads I proposed to speak to,
in Answer to that most important Enquiry in the Text, viz. What must I do to be
saved? And have given such particular Directions under each of them, which if
any Sinner in the World, can but find an Heart fully to comply with, Let his
past Sins and Hazards be what they will, he shall certainly be saved with an
Everlasting Salvation.

AND now I shall Conclude this Practical Subject, with a few brief Reflections
upon it. And,

1. Infer. MUST we do so many things, as I have said, to obtain Eternal
Salvation? Then it is not so easy a thing to be saved, as Multitudes in the
World are ready to imagine. Indeed, it is sad to think what vain and delusive
thoughts carnally secure Sinners do forever entertain on this Head. But so it
is; They don't see the worth of Eternal Salvation in it self, nor see the
absolute need they stand in of it: but prefer the Service of Sin, and the
forbid Pleasures of it, to the Service of GOD here, and the Enjoyment of Him
forever. And when, at any time they are put in mind of Death and Eternity, and
are called upon to prepare for the Happiness of the World to come, They think
it is the easiest thing they have to do, to provide for it. They think that a
few broken Prayers, and a little lifeless Devotion, in Old Age, or upon a
Deathbed, when they can no longer enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, will effectually
answer the end: And so wholly lay aside all their Care and Concern for the
present. But, O vain and presumptuous Sinner, whose Case this is, Eternal
Salvation is quite another Thing than you have ever yet taken it to be. For, it
is of infinite worth in it self, as you have oft-times heard. And then besides,
It Is the One Thing needful for us; and that without which you are like to be
undone to Eternity. And as it is so excellent in itself, and so needful for us,
it is richly worth all the Labor and Pains* you can take in securing an
Interest in it. And accordingly, it is not to be obtained at so Cheap a rate as
you vainly dream it is. But GOD expects and requires of every one that would be
saved, that he make a Business of working out his Salvation; and the main
Business too of his whole Life. Read and consider the following Places, Math.
6.33. Seek first the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof. Luke 13.24.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many I say unto you will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. Phil. 2.12. Work out your own salvation with
fear and trembling. Romans 12.11. Be not slothful in business; but fervent in
spirit; serving the Lord. And in 2 Pet 1.5. And besides all this, giving all
diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge etc. And in ver.
10. Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make your calling and
election sure. And so in many more places: whereby you may plainly see that GOD
calls for the Improvement of all your Time and Strength and Talents in this
Important Affair. And therefore, all such Sinners as entertain these light
thoughts of Salvation, and think it is so easy a matter to be saved, are
certainly great strangers to this Salvation: They have no Right or Title at all
to it; and are every moment in hazard of falling into the Pit of endless
Perdition. For so long as you continue perversely in the state you are in,
despising and neglecting Christ and his Salvation, those awful words may be
applied to you. Math. 23.33. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye
escape the damnation of hell?

2. Infer. MAY Salvation be obtained upon such Terms as we have heard? How
glorious and wonderful does the Grace of GOD appear herein? Eternal Salvation
contains so many great and excellent Things in it, as you heard in a former
Discouse, that there appears to be an infinite worth and value in it. And by
Consequence, there can be no proportion between the Gift of this Salvation, and
what GOD requires we should do for the obtainment of it; and so there is a most
glorious Display of Divine Grace, in the offer and Grant of Salvation upon
these Terms. Indeed, if we consider all that has been done for the purchase of
this Salvation, there has been a sufficient Price paid down for it. For Jesus
Christ who has undertaken for our Redemption, has shed His most precious Blood,
and laid down His most precious Life, for this End: And this is a Price of
infinite value; and so worth all the Happiness the Believer can possibly come
to the Enjoyment of: For Christ was an infinite Person. And, indeed, the
Justice of GOD Required such a Satisfaction of our Surety, before He could,
with Honor to Himself, release any one Sinner from the Chains of Guilt, and
advance Him to the Dignity and Privileges of His Children. But then, as the
Matter concerns us immediately, There is no manner of Proportion, between the
weight and worth of Eternal Salvation, and all that GOD Requires and Expects
from us, for the obtaining of it. For what are the best Services we can perform
in this sinful State, but mean and imperfect in themselves? And then besides,
the Things which GOD requires of us for this End; such as parting with our Sins
and Lusts, which have brought all our Ruin and Misery upon us; -- Our turning
our feet into the Paths of His Commandments, which carries its own Reward with
it; and our closing in with Christ by Faith, whereby we are brought into a Life
of Communion with Him: These Things, I say, in themselves, tend as much to our
own Happiness, as they do to the Honor and Glory of GOD. And yet, These are
all that GOD requires of us that so we may come to enjoy Eternal Life in Jesus
Christ. Here then is a most mavelous Discovery of infinite Grace. And well
might the Apostle say, as in Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace ye are saved. And this Grace
will be the Subject of the Saints Admiration and Praise to Eternity.

But then,

3. Infer. HERE is Ground of great Encouragement to every Convinced Sinner that
is ready to Despair of Salvation. For if Salvation is to be had upon such Terms
as you have heard, then you may have it upon those Terms as well as any else.
And to make you sensible of it, I shall offer two Things briefly to your
Consideration.

1. IT IS a very Remarkable Day of Salvation with you, and the Offer of
Salvation is immediately made you. This your present Hears and Jealousies make
you to call in question: And you are ready to think your Day of Grace is over,
and that the Door of Mercy is shut against you for ever. But, poor Soul, why
such hard thoughts of GOD and His Grace! I am sure thou art infinitely mistaken
in them: For GOD has said the direct contrary in His Holy Word. He has told us
all plainly, in 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold, now is the accepted Time; now is the day of
Salvation. And therefore, there is not one Sinner in this Assembly; no, nor one
Sinner in the whole World, that has any Knowledge of Christ, and breathes after
an Interest in Him, as you now do, but GOD is now waiting upon him in a way of
Grace; and stands with the Arms of His Mercy open, ready to embrace Him, as
soon as ever He gives in the Consent of his Soul to take Christ in all His
Offices, and upon the Terms of the Gospel. And then besides, The Offer of
Christ and Salvation by Him, is more immediately directed to you than to any
other Sinners in the whole World, that have not yet actually embraced Him. For
are you not weary and heavy laden with a sense of your Sins? Then that gracious
Invitation and Promise, is directed to you, as though by Name, Mat. 11.28. Come
unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
Again, Don't you thirst and long for an Interest in Christ, and the Grace of
the New Covenant. If so, that gracious Invitation is directed to you in
particular, Joh. 7.37. -- If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. And
that in Rev. 22.17. And the spirit and bride say, come. And let him that
hears say, come. And let him that is a-thirst come: And whosoever will, let
him take the water of life freely. So that you never before had such a
remarkable Season of Grace as the present Day is.

And then,

2. GOD offers His HOLY SPIRIT to you, to assist you in all that He Requires of
you to Salvation. This your present Distress makes you to doubt: and you are
ready to think you have so long resisted and grieved the Blessed Spirit that He
has taken His farewell of you. But there is nothing more evident to all that
have a right Understanding of your Case, than that the Holy Spirit is now
powerfully at Work upon your Heart; and by the Fears and Terrors you are in, He
is every Day more and more humbling and emptying you out of your self. And if
you do but cherish these strivings of the Spirit; and are thankful to GOD for
them; and earnestly cry for the more plentiful Effusions of it, GOD stands
ready to hear and answer your Request. See Luke 11.13. If ye then being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your children: How much more shall your
heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him? So that upon the
whole, every Convinced and Awakened Sinner, whose Sins are a Burden and Grief
to Him, has all the Reason he can desire, to lay aside all Despairing tho'ts of
the Mercy of GOD, and to follow the Directions that have been set before him;
and in this way to Hope for Eternal Life.

And now,

4. Infer. WHAT we have heard should Awaken all Careless and Secure Sinners,
and stir them up to Inquire and Seek in earnest after Eternal Salvation. You
have heard what this Salvation implies in it, and how necessary it is for you.
And can any thing more be said to awaken and rouse, and fill you with Concern
about it? You have also heard what Course you must take if you intend ever to
obtain it. And cannot you be prevailed upon yet to fall in with these gracious
Directions? which are all plainly laid before you in the Word of GOD. Well
then, I have but two Things more to offer to your Consideration; and so must
leave you to the Mercy or Judgment of GOD.

1. WHILE you continue in your present careless and wilful neglect of
Salvation, you every Day run further from it, and ripen more and more for the
Damnation of Hell. For while you keep out of the narrow Way which leads to
Life, you are in the Broad Way that leads to Destruction: and Satan and your
own Lusts hurry you down Hill toward the Pit of endless and irremediless
Misery. And therefore, those awful Words are spoken to you, and such as you
are, Romans 2.4, 5. Thou despisest the riches of his goodness, and forbearance,
and long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment
of God.

And then,

2. Consider, YOUR Day of Grace passes swiftly away, and will quickly come to
an end with you. Your Days are like a shadow that quickly passes away; and you
can have but a little while, at the longest, to live in the World; and you may
Die before the Light of another Morning advances upon us. And whenever you Die,
whether sooner or later, this will put an everlasting Period to your Day of
Grace. And if your Salvation is not then provided for, you will be undone to
Eternity, and the Damnation of Hell must be your Everlasting Portion. Oh, Then,
awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, arise quickly, that Christ
may give thee life. And hearken to that compassionate Call that is now renewed
unto you, Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. Cast away from you all your Transgressions,
wherewith ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for
why will ye die, O miserable Sinner? For I have no pleasure in the death of him
that dies, says the LORD GOD: wherefore turn your selves, and live ye. And to
all that are willing to do so, I will leave that word of Encouragement, with
which I conclude these Discourses, Isai. 55.6, 7. Seek ye the Lord while he may
be found, call ye upon him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way,
and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him turn to the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. line 17. read But as. p. 11. l. 13. r. Sin. p. 14. l. 2. r. ordaining.
p. 15. l. 2. r. Enmity. p. 21. l. 7. for timely, r. thoroughly. p. 61. l. 30.
dele our. p. 121. l. 16. r. So I say.


