Mr. Foxcroft's Sermon ON THE Beginning of New England etc.

OBSERVATIONS Historical and Practical ON THE Rise and Primitive State OF
NEW ENGLAND, With a special Reference TO The OLD or first gathered Church in
Boston. A SERMON preached to the said Congregation Aug. 23. 1730. Being the
last Sabbath of the first CENTURY since its Settlement.

By THOMAS FOXCROFT, M. A.

Psalm. 80. -- Thou have brought a Vine -- and planted it. -- Return, we beseech
Thee, O God of Hosts: Look down from Heaven, and behold, and visit this Vine.
BOSTON, N. E. Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, for S. GERRISH in Cornhil, M
DCC XXX.

To the Old or first gathered CHURCH in BOSTON.
Dear Christian Friends,
A S I have often reviewed with Wonder, so I take Leave on the present Occasion
thus publicly to mention with Gratitude, the signal Conduct of Divine
Providence in bringing me at first among you, while I was in a manner an utter
Stranger to you all, and when by reason of my young Years, and apprehended
Unfitness for so important a Station, I could not entertain the least
Expectation of such a Preferment. And the uncommon Unanimity that (as you may
remember) attended your Invitation and Call, was what I have thought a very
happy Circumstance of my Settlement, and do often look back upon with equal
Pleasure and Surprise. This indeed was one peculiar Encouragement I had to give
up my own Inclinations, which were not to fix in the Ministry so very early.

I have Reason to admire your Candor toward me, while I have been with many
Infirmities serving in the Gospel among you: And I desire to take a thankful
Notice of the Favor of God in continuing us together thus long in so much of
mutual peace and Satisfaction; now the 14 th Year Feb. 1716, 17. By Vote of the
Church I entered on stated Preaching.


I have sometimes very anxious Thoughts of Heart upon that of the Apostle, 2
Cor. 12. 2. I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago. -- Happy the
Minister, happy the Professor, that has such Assurance of his saving Union to
Christ! And happy the People, who have those to testify the Gospel of the Grace
of God among them, who are vitally united to Christ, and have the Witness in
themselves!

IT has always been very affecting to me to consider what Men of God they were,
in whose place I succeed. This Church of Christ has been distinguished with a
Succession of burning and shining Lights; Pastors and Teachers eminent for
their Gifts, and no less eminent for their Graces and Experience in all the
Mysteries of the Divine Life; Wilson, Cotton, Norton, Davenport, etc. These
Venerable Fathers were in their Day very much New England' s Strength and
Glory; and in each of them this Church enjoyed a peculiar Treasure. I have
often blushed and been full of Confusion within my self, from a Consciousness
of my own comparative Nothingness: Yet I hope the Reflection has sometimes been
a Help to me in my Work, to direct and animate my Ministrations among you.

I have taken a singular Delight in reading the Lives of my excellent
Predecessors; so many of which we see in Print: have often thought I could
desire no better Patterns to copy after; and made it my Heart's Desire and
Prayer to God, That I might by the Grace of Christ be principl'd and spirited,
as they were; that I might have the like Presence of Christ with me, as they
had; that the Work they so happily began, might not miscarry in my hands.

ALAS! there is among us a visible Decline of Religion in the power and
practice of it, and not the ancient Success of Gospel Ordinances. Sure I am, It
becomes us all, both Ministers and People, humbly to inquire into the Grounds
and Causes hereof.

I readily take to my self my part of the Blame, as being sadly sensible of
many Defects in me, with regard both to those Abilities and Graces, which form
the Character, and direct the wise and holy Management, that is necessary in
those that would by their Example, as well as Preaching, win Souls to Christ,
and lead the Way in seeking the Kingdom of Heaven. Verily the best of us all
need merciful Allowances, before we can claim the Character and Reward of good
and faithful Servants of Jesus Christ. O for the Application of the Blood of
Sprinkling, that I may be made accepted in the BELOVED! And for the Supply of
the Spirit of Jesus Christ, that I may watch in all things and make full Proof
of my Ministry! I earnestly ask the Help of your fervent Prayers for me (as
also for my worthy Brother and Colleague) that the Sins of my Ministry may be
done away by the Blood of Christ, and that the Success of it may be secured by
his powerful Blessing: that Christ our Master may be with us continually, in
the Study and in the Pulpit, and in all our Conversation, Visits, and private
Labors among you.

AND we beseech you (Brethren) in the fear of God to consider what Defects
there are on your part, that may be a further Obstruction to the Success of the
Gospel in this once flourishing Church. "Let your Ministers have their just
Share of Censure: Nevertheless we are persuaded, you do not think the whole
Blame lies at our Doors. Even the SON of GOD himself, of whom it was witnessed,
That never man spoke or lived like him; yet meets with little Success, and
finds himself constrained to throw back Men's just Condemnation on their own
Heads, Ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life".

BE much in serious Self-Examination, to know what on your part hinders the
Gospel; and be much in Prayer, and in the Use of all proper Methods, that the
Power of Godliness may be revived among us. Let Gospel Truths, Gospel Order,
and Gospel Worship be precious in your Eyes. Stand fast in the Liberty,
wherewith Christ has made you free: and keep the Ordinances as they have been
delivered to you, in their primitive Purity, without suffering any Alloy of
human Inventions. If some from an Antichristian Spirit would impose upon you in
Matters of Religion, remember these are sacred to God and Conscience; and be
not the Servants of Men. As we are a spiritual Corporation, let us take Care to
exercise and reverence the holy Discipline that Christ has instituted;
Charitable to receive all visible Saints, cautious to admit only such, and
faithful to expel scandalous Sinners from our Communion. Purge out the old
Leaven, that ye may be a new Lump. O let the Duty of Brotherly Admonition, so
much neglected in this Day of Degeneracy, be restored to a serious and
universal Practice; and yet let none, under a specious pretense of lamenting
others Sins, act the Busy-Body, as the manner of some is, whispering Things
which they ought not, to the prejudice of their Neighbors Reputation, the
great Hurt of Religion, and the manifest Forfeiture of all Pretensions to a
Spirit of Charity and Brotherly Kindness. Watch over one another, for good, and
not Evil. Provoke one another to Love and good Works. Exhort one another daily,
left any of you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin. Be not Partakers
of other Men's Sins: but by bearing due Testimony against them, deliver your
own Souls. Such as are Heads of Families, O take a religious Care of the Youth
committed to your Charge: And Children, see that you obey your Parents in the
Lord.

IT' s a day abounding with Temptations, to our young People in special, to
desert the Interest of pure Religion, and betray the Cause of God, in which our
Forefathers were engaged. O let us do all we can to fortify and fix them, and
to recover such as are fallen from their Stedfastness. What greater Joy than to
see our Children walking in the Truth! Let us labor their early Conversion to
God, and use all possible Means to form them to Virtue, to furnish and dispose
them to be active Blessings to their Generation. And thou Solomon, my Son, know
thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect Heart and with a
willing Mind: for the Lord searches all Hearts. If thou seek him, he will be
found of thee; but if thou forsake him, tremble lest be cast thee off for ever.

IN a word, let us glorify God for his signal Appearances in the days of our
Forefathers; and consider them as Obligations on us, who reap the happy fruits
thereof, to adhere with Steadiness and Zeal to the spiritual and exalted Ends
of that great Undertaking, which brought them over to America. Let us always
maintain a peculiar Esteem for the Memory of our pious Progenitors, and train
up our Children in the same Veneration: be often telling them of the excellent
Character and Spirit of our Forefathers, their Errand into this Wilderness, the
Covenant wherein they have bound their Posterity to the Lord, and their many
ardent Prayers for succeeding Generations. As we are building on the
Foundations they have laid for us, and rejoicing in many desirable Results of
their Pains and Prayers, surely it becomes us never to mention their Names but
with Distinctions of Respect, as the Fathers of New England. And let us see to
it that we act and behave worthily of our noble Descent: Else this will turn
for a Testimony against us.

STAND ye in the Ways, and see, and ask for the old 'Paths, the good Way, and
walk therein: and ye shall find Rest for your Souls Remember them that have had
the Rule over you, who have spoken to you the good Word of God. And be ye
Followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises.

To promote these excellent Purposes, is my Aim in the following Discourse:
which I now put into your Hand for your serious Perusal, and commend to the
Blessing of GOD for the desired Success. Unto WHOM be Glory from you, and in
all the Churches of the Saints, by Christ Jesus, World without end! It Is the
affectionate Wish of,

Dearly Beloved, Your sincere Friend, And Servant in the Gospel, T. FOXCROFT.

A DISCOURSE Historical and Practical ON THE Beginning of New England etc.
MATTHEW. XIII. 31, 32. Another Parable put he forth unto them, saying, The
Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Grain of Mustard Seed, which a man took and
sowed in his field.

Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is the
greatest among herbs, and becomes a Tree: so that the Birds of the air come
and lodge in the branches thereof.


WE may very fitly entitle the Chapter before us a Collection of Parables. No
less than eight are here recorded; where, in Language borrowed from Things
earthly, our Savior discourses of Matters spiritual and heavenly. This way of
teaching by Similitudes was what the Jews had always been accustomed to: and
our Lord in the use of this Method condescended to the Capacity and Genius of
the People of that day. His Parables are all the most wisely chosen, to serve
their respective purposes. It Is both pleasant and profitable to meditate upon
them.

THE scope of this Parable of the Grain of Mustard Seed is to show how the
Gospel Church (to which the Style of the Kingdom of Heaven is here and often
elsewhere given) should from very low and small Beginnings, gradually increase
and grow, and at length rise up to an admirable Degree of Strength, Extent and
Glory.

THE Text would naturally lead me to discourse of the State of Christianity in
the Apostolic Age; which appeared at first as a little inconsiderable Seed,
but did soon sho^^ up, and grow into a stately Tree; did like the Tree of Life
in the midst of the Garden of God, spread its salutary Branches far and wide,
and has taken so deep and firm a Root, that all the Powers of Hell, with all
their Storms and Underminings, shall never be able to prevail against it. --
But though such a Discourse might be of excellent Service, it is out of the way of
my present Design; which is to bring your Reflections nearer home, and employ
them in a brief Recognition of the Primitive State, Beginning and Progress of
the Kingdom of Christ in this place.

WHAT determined my Thoughts to such a Subject, was a View to that observable
Circumstance of the Week now opening to us, That it is the Period of One
HUNDRED Years since the first Gathering of this ancient, Church, and laying the
Foundations of Gospel Order here, by a solemn Covenant; which sacred Affair was
transacted on a day of Fasting and Prayer, Aug. 27. 1630. It may gratify the
Curiosity of some, to see a Copy of that COVENANT, and (...) may be useful as a
standing Monitor to those who are of the Church, to have it in their Hands.
It Is a brief and comprehensive Form, in the following Words. --

In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in Obedience to his holy Will and
Divine Ordinance,

We whose Names are here under written, being by his most wise and good
Providence brought together into this part of America in the Bay of
Massachusetts, and desirous to unite ourselves into one Congregation or Church
under the Lord Jesus Christ our Head, in such fort as becomes all those whom
he has redeemed, and sanctified to himself, DO hereby solemnly and religiously
(as in his most holy Presence) promise and bind ourselves, to walk in all our
ways according to the Rule of the Gospel, and in all sincere Conformity to his
holy Ordinances, and in mutual Love and Respect each to other, so near as God
shall give us Grace.

John Winthrop Thomas Dudley Isaac Johnson John Wilson etc etc.





Now as it has fallen out in the Course of our public reading the Scriptures,
that so suitable a Text should occur for the present Occasion, I have been ready
to interpret this as an Intimation of Providence to me, to take some special
Notice of the remarkable Period before us, and lead you into some Meditations
adapted thereto. The Language of Heaven to us at this day seems to be as in
Isa. 51. 1, 2. Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek
the Lord: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit
whence ye are dug. Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare
you; for I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him. And when I
reflect seriously on the Wonder-working Providence of God, which planted our
Zion and has established it hitherto, I have thought She might very fitly take
up the Language of Psalm. 40th. -- He brought me up out of an horrible Pit, and
set my Feet upon a Rock: and he has put a new Song in my Mouth. -- Many, O
Lord my God, are thy wonderful Works which thou have done, and thy Thoughts to
usward, they cannot be reckoned up in Order unto thee; if I would declare and
speak of them, they are more than can be numbered. A Train of mavelous
Operations of Divine Power and Grace prepared the Way to the Plantation of the
Kingdom of GOD in this place; and a Succession of illustrious Events attended
the Progress thereof. O sing unto the Lord a new Song: He has made known his
salvation; his Righteousness has he openly showed in the sight of the Heathen:
all the Ends of the Earth have seen the Salvation of our GOD. One Generation
shall praise thy Works to another: I will speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom,
and declare thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple. Thy Saints
shall bless thee; they shall abundantly utter the Memory of thy great Goodness,
and sing aloud of thy Righteousness. My Mouth shall speak the Praise of the
Lord: and let all Flesh bless his holy Name for ever.

I will not pretend to critically trace the Beginning and Improvement of this
Work of GOD in all its several steps; for that were to write a Volume of
History: But shall only give you the more general Hints, proper to have place
in a Sermon, to the End I may excite your Gratitude and encourage your
Confidence toward GOD, the Hope of our Fathers.

OUR Text points out the Method I propose to my self in treating this Subject,
which is --

1. To call your Thoughts back to the Original of this religious Settlement,
and show the Smallness of our Beginning.

2. To consider the Means of its Progress and Establishment.

3. MENTION the extraordinary Degree of its Growth, Strength, and Usefulness.

LIKE a Grain of Mustard Seed, it made but a contemptible and unpromising
Figure at first: but afterward it strangely came on, improved and flourished,
until at length it became as a Tree, in whose extended Branches the Fowl of the
Air seek for Shade and Repose.

1. I shall say something as to the Rise and Occasion of this religious
Settlement, and make some remarks on the smallness of our Beginning.

IT rose from little and improbable Beginnings. Though afterward it grew up to a
considerable Tallness, it was in its first Principle but fitly resembled by a
Grain of Mustard Seed, one of the smallest sort of Seeds.

IN order to search out the first Springs, and Root of this Plant of the Lord,
it may be of Use to premise the following historical Observations.

ABOUT two hundred Years since, began the Protestant Reformation; when after a
long Night of Popish Darkness GOD caused the Light of the glorious Gospel to
break forth in many parts of the Christian World, overspread with thick Clouds
of Ignorance, Heresy, and false Worship. Several Countries, moved by the Spirit
of GOD, nobly attempted to throw off the yoke of Antichrist, and deliver
themselves from the Superstitions and Tyrannies of the Romish Hierarchy.

BY the grace of GOD such Prosperity attended those glorious Attempts, that in
a few years the Reformation made its progress through a great part of Europe.
About the year 1526 several States in Germany, that were zealous for the
reforming Interest, united in a Protestation against the Decrees of a Popish
Diet; and upon that account the Reformers have ever since gone under the Name
of Protestants.

"GERMANY took Fire from Luther and Melancton: Switzerland and Geneva from
Zuinglius and Calvin. And after them followed England in the Reign of King
Henry the eighth, under the Direction of Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley. -- The
writings, that defended the Necessity of a Reformation in the Church of Rome,
were greedily embraced; the Corruption in Doctrine and Worship became
intelligible; and the Corruption of Manners, crept into all the spiritual
Orders, becoming scandalous, not one of them had Interest to stop the
Reformation" Bennet's Historical account of the several Attempts for a further
Reformation.
.

NEVERTHELESS the Reformation was not in all places carried on with equal Zeal,
nor to the same degree of Perfection. Things were prosecuted to a greater
length in some places than others, according to the variety of Motives, that
influenced Men in their opposition to Popery.

THE case of the English Church had something very peculiar in it. For our
first Reformers were acted by Principles vastly different.

ONE Set of Men were governed by Political Views and sinister Considerations.
Many were Papists in Disguise, "who (as one expresses it Pref. to Abridgment of
Bp. Burnet's 3d. Vol. Mist. Reformation
) when they could no longer resist the prevailing force of the Reformation,
conformed to it in Appearance, still retaining the Old Leaven: and these, if
they could not retain the substance of Popery, yet endeavored to preserve as
much as possible of the outward Face and Appearance of it; that so a Return
might be the more easy, and seem the more natural" -- Others there were, who
though it was a Joy to them for reasons of a political Nature, to behold the
Power of the Sea of Rome broken, and the Pope discarded; yet, having, by the
Impressions of an Education in the midst of Popish Superstitions, a strong Gust
for Ceremonies, and Love of Pomp in Worship, were strenuous Advocates for the
continuance of many of those ancient Rites and Customs, they were bred up in
the Observation of: they hoped by this to recommend themselves to the esteem of
Papists, and thought it a most probable Method to make an easy Conquest of
them, to remove their Prejudices, and bring over Multitudes of them to a
Compliance with the Reformation.

MOREOVER, (as an Episcopal writer observes Burnet, ubi supra
) "Many at that day were for complying with the Laws, and bearing with several
things which they did not approve of, in hopes of getting them afterward
amended. -- Influenced by false Notions of Policy, this Circumstance of Affairs
(he adds) kept them from reforming many things which they disliked, and also
(no doubt) from examining more thro'ly into several other things" --

IT IS a very good Paragraph that follows, which I beg leave to digress so far
as to repeat to you, from the same Hand, -- "Certainly (says he) our
Reformation, as happy as we are in what we enjoy of it, was never yet
perfected; nor ever can be till we all come openly to acknowledge, and to act
consistently with, that Principle, which was the only Ground upon which the
Reformation did, or could, stand; viz. That the Scriptures are the only Rule of
Faith to Christians; and that every Christian, as he is to answer to GOD for
his own Actions, and not others for him, so is he to judge for himself, how he
is to act in matters of Religion, and not others to judge for him. Where this
Principle does not prevail, there (says he) Papery still remains, though it pass
under the name of Protestantism: And till this Principle does prevail, we can
expect no Completion of that Reformation, which as yet can only be said to have
been happily begun amongst US".

I come now to observe, There was in the very Infancy of the Reformation "In an
ancient Book called The Register of memorable Matters touching Reformation
(mentioned by Mr. Cotton in his Way of Congregational Churches cleared) there
is a Story of an hundred Persons, who refused the common Liturgy, and the
Congregations attending thereunto, and used Prayers and Preachings and.
Sacraments among themselves; whereof 14 or 15 were sent to Prison. And these
pleaded their Separation before the LordMayor, Bishop Sands, and other
Commissioners on June 20, in the year 1567.
another Set of Men, who were engaged in the Cause sincerely upon that great
Principle, and considered things not in a Political View, but a Scriptural.
They appealed to the Law and to the Testimony: making that their sollicitous
Inquiry, What says the Scripture? They pleaded for the inspired Writings as
^^e alone Standard of Truth in Divine things, and professed to bring every
Opinion and Custom to the Test of the HOLY BIBLE. They renounced all implicit
Credit to human Teachers, and all human Impositions in matters of Religion and
Divine Worship. They asserted the Sovereignty of the Lord Jesus Christ, as the
sole Lord of Conscience; and took his written Word for the only Canon of their
Faith and Practice.

THEY were Enemies to Magnificence and Ostentation in Worship, and to coercive
Power and Tyranny in Discipline; as things the Scriptures were absolute
strangers to. "They remembered how these things had minister'd to the
Corruptions, the Superstitions, and Enormities of Popery: and they though it it
best, in conformity to the laudable Example of Hezekiah, who brake in pieces
the brazen Serpent (though of divine Appointment) when the People abused it to
Idolatry, to lay aside human Inventions which had been so abused". They thought
it the Wisdom of Protestants, their Duty and Safety, to reduce every
Circumstance of Discipline and Worship as nigh as possible to their professed
Rule; to avoid all Resemblances of Popery as much as might be, and so settle
the widest Distance between Protestant and Papal Churches; which would be a
happy Method to clog any future attempts of a Return to Romish Fopperies and
Usurpations.

BESIDES, in the beginning of the Reign of the Popish Queen Mary (so
irrecoverably devoted to that cruel Church, which has been often drunk with the
Blood of the Saints) when they foresaw a furious storm of Persecution coming
on, many of the Reformers fled abroad for Safety, and having Opportunity to
observe the Worship and Discipline of the foreign Protestant Churches, they
were (not a few of them) pleased with their Practice; who, they thought, had
gone the furthest in reviving of primitive Christianity, and restoring the
Order of the Gospel. And hence, after their Return home, at the happy Accession
of the Protestant Queen ELISABETH, which made another Revolution in Religion,
and gave new Life to the Protestant Cause, those Men retaining a delightful
Remembrance of what they had seen in the reformed Churches abroad, and judging
it more subservient to the Interest of true Christianity, to study a Harmony
with the foreign Protestants, in Worship and Discipline, as well as in
Doctrine, than to Symbolize with their avowed Adversaries, the idolatrous
Papists; they became zealous Contenders for a more perfect Reformation in the
Church of England: advancing and urging those three great Principles, The
Limitation of Church Power to Matters of Divine Commandment, the Limitation of
Bishops to a particular Congregation, and the Limitation of Church Fellowship
to visible Saints. They were for having the Rule of Christianity to be the Rule
of Conformity. This is the Party, who were at first distinguished by the Name
of Puritans; afterward by that of Nonconformists or Disciplinarians, and now
usually of Presbyterians or Dissenters; the Glory of the English Reformation.

THESE good Men, though dissatisfied at the imperfect Constitution of things, yet
considering the Necessity of the Times, in the beginning, labored to suppress
their Resentments and Complaints as much as possible for the present, and
tarried in the Communion of the established Church many of them; waiting for
better Days, and encouraging a Hope that the Reformation might proceed in due
time unto greater Purity. But (as One observes Dr. Cotton Mather in his
Eleutheria, or History of the Reformation and of Nonconformity.
) they that found their secular Interests accommodated in that Constitution,
employed the Power which they had in their hands, not only to retard the
progress of the Reformation, but even with innumerable Vexations to harass such
as were the most zealous Friends unto it; to censure, fine, silence, deprive,
and imprison those that were dissatisfied and could not conform, being (as is
most remarkable) Men for the most part of the same Spirit and Principle with
those Protestants, who suffered under the Prelates in Queen Mary's Day. For a
considerable time these persecuted Puritans remained very much in Privacy under
their Sufferings, waiting still for more of Reformation, or for more of Liberty
and Indulgence to conscientious Dissenters. But after some years of fruitless
Expectation, Severities being multiplied upon them, and the increasing Tyranny
of the Ecclesiastical Courts destroying all Hope of a religious Pacification,
it drove many to a more open Separation from the Things that were by Law
established.

A noble Army of Confessors (martyred with scandal and oppression, and not able
to live in Quiet at home) being conducted by that Wisdom, which is first pure,
then peaceable, left their native Country, and sought Rest to their Souls
abroad. Some retired into various parts of Europe, and found Comfort in the
Bosom of foreign Churches.

OTHERS sought a Refuge and Covert from the Storm in some quiet Recess of the
NEW WORLD. Here they hoped still to enjoy the Freedoms and Privileges of
English Government, and to enlarge the British Dominions: Here they hoped to be
the blessed Instruments of spreading the Gospel of Christ among the heathen
Natives: Here they hoped to prosecute the Design of a Scriptural Reformation,
according to the Example of the best reformed parts of the Protestant World, to
form Churches truly evangelical, and to enjoy the spiritual Liberties and
Blessings of the purest Church State under a faithful Ministry. In a word, here
they hoped they should be out of the Reach of Persecution, or that their angry
Brethren would be ashamed to pursue them in their distant Retreats; and that
they should entail pure Religion, with Liberty of Conscience, as the goodliest
Heritage, unto their Children in succeeding Generations.

UPON such excellent Views, our pious Ancestors transplanted themselves,
Families, and Estates into these remote Regions of NEW ENGLAND This Land had
beeen for some years known by the Name of the Northern Plantation, until King
Charles the first (then Prince of Wales) gave it the Name of NEW ENGLAND. Dr.
I. Mather' s Relation of the first Indian Troubles in N. E.
, a Land that God had espied for them; as it was said in the Case of Israel,
when brought up out of Egypt into Canaan.

LATE in the year 1620, arrived the first Body of American Reformers, who laid
the Foundation of the most ancient Church and Colony of Plymouth Morton's
New-England's Memorial.
.

EARLY in the year 1629, arrived at Salem, the original Settlers of that part
of the Country; who soon prosecuted their great Intention, in the Voyage, by
entering into the Church State of the Gospel, and planting a reformed
Congregation in that most ancient Town of the Massachusetts.

IN the Summer of 1630. came over diverse honorable Persons The Governor and
Company of the Massachusets-Bay, which had hitherto resided in London, now
removed to New England, bringing with them the Patent or Charter of the
Plantation.
, Ministers, and worthy Christians: among whom were those Servants of Christ,
that founded the Church-Society, of which we are the present Members, the most
ancient Congregation in this Place.

THEY first embodied into Church Order at Charlstown, under the pastoral Care
of the famous old Mr. Wilson: But not liking their Situation so well, the
greatest part (with their excellent Pastor) very quickly agreed to remove over
on this side the River, and planted the Town of Boston: Those of the Church,
who stayed behind, still retaining their Relation to it, until October. 1632;
when, those Members desiring a Dismission from the Congregation to enter into a
New Church-Body at Charlstown, and having first solemnly sought unto God, with
the Rest of the Church, for Direction herein, they were accordingly dismissed
upon the 14th day of the said Month. Old Church Records.
And now upon this Separation, I find the Number of Males in the Church of
Boston (after nigh two years continuance here, in which time doubtless
Additions were made to it) amounted but to about 70 or 80: the Body of the
Inhabitants.

YOU see, from how minute an Origin has risen this great and populous Town;
which has (...) many worshipping Assemblies now belonging to it. It was truly
at first a Day of small things with this People of the Lord, with the Country
in general, and with this Town in particular.

As to Number, their Beginning was small, and so in general as to external
Figure: which exposed them to many Fears, and to the Insults of their Enemies;
who were ready to mock these contemptible New-Englanders, as Sanballat and
Tobiah d^d the Jews in old time, when attempting to rebui^d Jerusalem: The one
said, What do these feeble Jews? Will they fortify themselves? will they
sacrifice? will they make an End in a day? And the other said, Even that which
they build, if a Fox go up, he shall even break down the Stone-wall. -- Yea,
Judah herself said, The Strength of the Bearers of Burdens is decayed, and we
are not able to build the wall. Neh. 4. 2, 3, 10.

IN like manner our Forefathers were a despised Handful of Men; looked upon
with Contempt by proud and haughty Scorners; and at the same time when the
Adversary said, Let us cause the Work to cease, the Builders themselves almost
sinking under the weight of many Discouragements, were ready to say, Even let
it fall, we are not able to go through with it. They were in a
Wilderness-Condition; seeing nothing round them but uncultivated Wilds and
savage Creatures; distant a thousand Leagues from their native Country, capable
of being but little served by foreign Amities, and for a while without any
Vicinity of christian habitation among themselves; enduring various Hardships,
Wants and Straights; meeting with sore Losses, grievous Sicknesses, many
Deaths, and lamentable Bereavements of some that seemed to be Pillars in the
Church and Commonwealth.

INNUMERABLE Evils compassed them about: They were in perils on every side, in
perils of Robbers, in perils by their own Countrymen, in perils of the Heathen,
in perils by false Brethren, in perils in the Sea, and in perils in the
Wilderness: in Weariness and Painfulness, in Watchings often, in Hunger and
Thirst, in Fastings often, in Cold and Nakedness.

THEY dearly purchased (with many Tears, Prayers, Mortifications and
Self-denials) those happy Gospel-Privileges and religious Liberties, which too
many among us at this day are so ready to make light of, and the Royal Charter
for which was the grand Inducement to our Forefathers, to come over into this
Wilderness and plant the same at their own Charge. They did not aim at a
worldly, but spiritual Interest: Nor had they any temporal Attractives to bring
them hither. They could not come (as Israel of old into Canaan) with hopes to
enter into other Men's Labors and build on Foundations already laid. No! They
came expecting, neither Cities and Houses prepared for their Reception, nor
Gardens, Fields, and Orchards for their Entertainment: but a great and terrible
Wilderness, a Land of Deserts, and of Pits, and of the shadow of Death. Here
they expected they must (like the Builders of Jerusalem) work with one hand,
and hold a Weapon in the other; and looked to get their Bread not only with the
Sweat of their Brows, but even with the Peril of their Lives. And it was not
without indefatigable Application, much Labor, and great Expense, that they
subdued this desert Land, for a Dwelling place and Inheritance.

BUT I proceed now

II. To make some Reflections on the Growth and Progress of this religious
Settlement, and the Means thereof.

THE little inconsiderable Seed, sown in this Place, quickly took Root, sprung
up, and grew, increased and flourished, in an admirable and almost unexampl'd
manner.

THE Country flourished, under the Protection of the Royal Charter, a mild and
equal Administration of civil Government, and the Smiles of Heaven, very
remarkably; that scarce any History affords a Parallel.

THIS Town filled very fast with People, and waxed rich, and made an eminent
Figure among the Tribes of our Israel. A waste howling Wilderness became a
pleasant Habitation, like the Garden of God, satisfied with Favor, and full
with the Blessing of the Lord.

ALSO the Church here had added to it daily such as should be saved;
Multitudes, both Men and Women. As it is said, Act. 6. 7. The Word of God
increased, and the Number of the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly. And
as it is said of the Church at Rome in its first days, Romans 1. 8. Their Faith
was spoken of throughout the whole World. In this Respect our Land might once
be called the Glory of all Lands; this Town, the golden City, and this Church a
fruitful Field, which the Lord has blessed. Glorious Things have been spoken
of thee, O City of GOD, Beautiful for Situation, the Joy of the whole Earth,
and Heaven's Delight, as Jerusalem of old.

AND now if the REASONS of their Prosperity and Growth be inquired into, it may
be said,

1. WE must resolve all into the gracious Presence of CHRIST with them, as the
principal Cause, the fundamental Ground.

THE Presence of Christ with our Forefathers was the Fountain of all their
temporal Prosperity, Safety and Increase. It is remarkable, that several
repeated Attempts for the Settlement of an English Plantation in the Bay of
Massachusetts, upon worldly Views, proved abortive* though undertaken by Gentlemen
of considerable Powers and Estates; attended with a multitude of Servants: The
Difficulties of a Wilderness were too hard for them; they met with such cross
Providence, as did quickly discourage; and at last dissipate them. Dr. I.
Mather's Relation of Indian Troubles.
But it pleased GOD to put a visible Distinction upon the Undertakers of this
religious Settlement, and crown their nobler Enterprise with glorious Success.
This he did for his own Name's sake. They had been eminent Confessors, and
suffered not a little in the Cause of Christ; ventured their Lives and Estates
over the dangerous Seas, and exposed their Persons in the Thickets of a hideous
Indian Desert, that they might pursue the Designs of Christianity in rightly
constituted Churches; serve GOD in the Gospel of his Son, with Liberty of
Conscience, according to their best Light, and set up the Kingdom of Christ,
where Satan's Seat was. The Honor of Christ therefore was concerned in the
Success of their Undertaking, and engaged his favorable Presence to
distinguish them. As it was said in the Case of Israel, Ezekiel. 23. 14. But I
wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be polluted before the heathen,
in whose sight I brought them out.

IT was a precious Word, our pious Ancestors by Faith lived upon, See a Sermon
of the famous old Mr. Cotton's upon this Text, entitled, God's Promise to his
plantations, -- Printed in England, Anno 1634.
2 Samuel 7. 10. I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant
them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more: neither
shall the children of wickedness afflict them any more, as beforetime. It was
the GOD of Israel, who conducted his People over the wide and hazardous Ocean,
and prepared a Sanctuary for them in a strange Land, here in this obscure
Corner of the World. We have heard with our Ears; our Fathers have told us, how
GOD did drive out the Heathen, and plant his People. They got not the Land in
possession by their own Sword, nor did their own Arm save them: but his right
Hand, His holy Arm, and the Light of his Countenance, because He had a Favor
unto them. GOD drove out the wild Tribes of Indian Natives, by mortal
Sicknesses The Plague amongst them in Plymouth-Colony, and the Small Pox among
the Massachusetts, which swept away whole Plantations of them together, not one
Soul escaping the common Destruction. Dr. I. Mather's Relation of Indian
Troubles.
and wasting Wars one with another; that He might make Room for his Israel,
and prepare a City for Habitation. Here he made the hungry to dwell; he blessed
them also, that they multiplied greatly, and made them Families like a Flock.
They found here a sure Refuge and a Resting place: and had a Table prepared
before them in the presence of their Enemies. They experienced the Fulfilling
of that Word, Job 8. 6, 7. If thou would seek unto God betimes, and make thy
supplication to the Almighty; If thou were pure and upright; surely now he
would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.
The Errand of our Forefathers into a waste Wilderness was not to seek this
World's Good, but to seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness:
Nevertheless they by the Bounty of Providence received an Increase of earthly
Comforts, as additional Blessings.

GOD had Compassion on them for his Covenant's sake, and permitted not the
Sword of the Wilderness to devour, or Cold and Hunger to destroy them, or fatal
Sickness to make the Land desolate. Though sometimes thick and dark Clouds,
charged with Thunder, and shooting out their fiery Arrows, rolled over them; yet
GOD prevented Destruction coming upon them, and soon dissipated the threatening
Appearance 'Twas a wonderful Providence of GOD particularly that restrained the
Fury of the Heathen in our first Times. "It is to be wondered at, (says one of
our Historians) that the Church in Plymouth should be preserved, when other
English Plantations could not subsist in this Country, but either the Indians
or the Lord's own Hand brought them to a sudden End from time to time. But GOD,
who saw that they designed something better than the World, in their planting
here, watched over them. -- "Some of the ancient Planters have told us, that
the Indians being possessed with fears lest the English should in time take
their Country from them, did early conspire to destroy them: And the small
handful of Christians then in Salem (lately arrived) were alarmed with the
Report of no less than a thousand barbarous Natives, coming to cut them off,
and that upon a Lord's Day; whereupon they discharged several great Guns,
laden with small Shot, which made such a terrible Rattling among the Trees
afar off, that the amazed Indians returned, without putting their bloody Design
in Execution. -- Dr. I. Mather, ubi supra.
. In all their Affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved
them: in his Love and in his Pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and
carried them all the days of old. The Righteous saw it and rejoiced: and all
Iniquity stopped her Mouth, or every Curse was turned into a Blessing: the
Wrath of Man praised him; and the Remainder thereof he did restrain.

THE Beauty of the Lord our GOD was upon his People, and he established the
Work of their Hands. He instructed the Husbandman to Discretion, and satisfied
the Earth with the fruit of his Works: Causing the Grass to grow for the
Cattle, and Herb for the Service of Man, furnishing Seed to the Sower and Bread
to the Eater.

HE blessed them also in the City, as well as Field. Boston, though originally a
Plantation for Religion, not Trade, yet has been a prosperous Town. GOD has
been pleased to smile on our Merchandise and Navigation, Trade and Business, in
years past; so that Zabulon rejoiced in his goings forth, as well as Issachar
in his Tents.

WHOSOEVER is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
Lovingkindness of the Lord in a very remarkable Instance. The Presence of GOD
with our Fathers was their Strength and Defense, and the Source of all their
Victories, Successes, and external Tranquillity and Happiness.

WE may sing very properly on this Occasion in the Language of Psalm. 107. O
give Thanks unto the Lord: for he is good. Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so,
whom he has redeemed, and gathered out of the Lands, from the East and West,
from the North and South. They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way,
they found no city to dwell in. Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.
Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of
their distresses. And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to
a city of habitation. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and
for his wonderful works to the children of men! And so in the Language of Psalm.
105. -- Glory in his holy Name, O ye Seed of Abraham his Servant, ye Children
of Jacob his Chosen When they were but a few men in number, yea a very few and
Strangers; when they went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom to
another People, He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea, he reproved Kings for
their sakes. He increased his People greatly, and made them stronger than their
Enemies. He sent Moses his Servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen, to lead them
forth by a right way: and gave them the Lands of the Heathen, that they might
observe his Statutes and keep his Laws, pure and entire, without the
Depravation of human Mixtures, Praise ye the Lord. I am bold to express my self
on this Occasion very much in Language borrowed from the Sacred Story of the
ancient Israelites: for I freely confess my Opinion, "if there has been any
People in the World, whose general History runs Parallel with that, it is the
People of New England.


BUT to proceed, --

AGAIN, The Presence of Christ with our Fathers in this Land was the Fountain
of all their spiritual and moral Happiness and Excellence. It was a plentiful
Effusion of the HOLY SPIRIT, that turned this Wilderness into a fruitful Field,
and gave it a Glory above that of Lebanon, and above the Excellency of Carmel
and Sharon. He appointed it for a Fold of Flocks; and here as the Lord their
Shepherd, he caused them to lie down in green Pastures, restored their Souls,
and led them in the Paths of Righteousness for his Name's sake. 'Twas the
Presence of the Spirit of Christ with them, in their Families, Courts, Schools,
and Churches, that so gloriously succeeded the Means for increasing of
Knowledge, and promoting of Order, Peace, Justice, Sobriety, and Religion. Then
that word was fulfilled, Psalm. 72. 6, 7. He shall come down like Rain upon the
mowen Grass, as Showers that water the Ground -- There shall be a handful of
Corn in the Earth upon the top of the Mountains, the fruit thereof shall shake
like Lebanon, and they of the City shall flourish like Grass of the Field. The
influxive Presence of Christ gave an admirable Energy to the Seed of the Gospel
here sown; that an handful of it produced a mighty Harvest to the Glory of
Christ. 'Twas the Fruit of the Spirit; entirely owing to his concurrent
Influences: without whose powerful Blessing all human Instruments and second
Causes have no Significance.

BUT though all their Prosperity is to be resolved ultimately into the Power of
the Lord present with them: Yet it may be observed,

2. THERE were subordinate Causes, secondary Grounds and Reasons, which in
their place and order challenge some Regard with us.

IT might be premised here, The Flourishing of Religion among our Fathers had a
powerful Efficacy as the best natural Means, to promote their universal
Prosperity, Peace, and external Glory. For as the Wise Man observes, Prove. 14.
The Fear of the Lord is a Fountain of Life: -- Righteousness exalts a Nation.
-- And let me speak freely, without offense to any, The first Beginners of this
Plantation, as to the Body of them, were an excellent Set of real and living
Christians, who felt the power of vital Religion in their Hearts; and not such
as desired only to make a fair show in the flesh.

DOUBTLESS indeed they had a Mixture of false Professors among them: but these
being awed by the prevailing Example of serious Godliness and the common Zeal
against Sin, were generally careful to preserve an Appearance of Religion in
their Lives; so that in the first days of Boston and New England, all Iniquity
was forced to hide its head: it fled the open Light, it sought for Shelter in
Darkness, and lurked privily in secret places: while Virtue was triumphant, and
Religion reigned every where, in the Conversation, Language and Actions of the
Generality. -- It must further be observed, as to the worthiest of our Fathers,
they were but Men; in a State of Imperfection; and therefore subject to
Temptations and sinful Infirmities: And some in our best times might be of too
rigid and severe a Temper, have less Candor and more Heat with relation to
certain Modalities and minute points of Church Order, than became them; and as
one might be of too levelling Principles, so another of too close and narrow a
Spirit, and not liberally enough disposed toward the Servants of the Public.
Some I say, among the first and best Generation of this People, I readily
concede, might be deficient and reprovable on such heads as these: Yet even
they were in general Men of an excellent Spirit, and in other regards appeared
with shining Characters of the Divine Image upon them. But many others there
were, who possessed their Graces and Virtues, without those their Distempered
Frames.

THERE were among them many Plants of Renown, Trees of Righteousness, some of
the choicest in the whole Garden of Christ: and their Transplantation from
Britain to New England did but add to their Beauty, Verdure and Refinement.
They flourished in this Soil, and multiplied and brought forth abundantly the
Fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to the Praise of GOD. Here
the glorious Jesus (and GOD in him) had the sincerest Honors, the purest Love
and most faithful Obedience paid to him: -- which engaged his
Covenant-Presence, and drew down his Blessing on this People.

AND then the excellent Virtues, which in a flourishing State of Religion, were
continually and almost universally in Practice, contributed by a necessary and
powerful Influence ( in their own Nature) to the good Regulation of all kinds
of Societies, to the Happiness of Conversation, to the Security and Success of
Commerce, and an universally prosperous State of Externals. By their Industry,
Sobriety, Temperance, Mortification and Self-denial, Justice, Integrity, and
the like, they took a most effectual Method to secure the Happiness of the
social Life, and prevented abundance of such Mischiefs and Disorders, as are
the natural Results of those Vices, which have been the Ruin of many a People.

BUT it will be inquired,

WHAT were the peculiar instrumental Causes, and more immediate Reasons and
Occasions of such an extraordinary Flourishing of Religion in that day? What
the Means under GOD, the special Means?

As to the Gospel, the great Instrument of Religion, that is in it self the same
at all times, and the Power and Grace of Christ in themselves the same. We have
just Ground then to think there was something in the Men and the Circumstances
of that Age or Generation, which might have some Instrumentality, and conduce
as a Means, to the uncommon Success of the Gospel, and Flourishing of
Christianity among them.

I will give you my Thoughts under a few distinct heads. Let it be considered,

1. THE initial Generation of New England was very much a Select and a
Puritanical People, in the proper sense of the Word. They were not (as to the
Body of them) a promiscuous and heterogeneous Assemblage: but in general of an
uniform Character, agreeing in the most excellent Qualities, Principles and
Tempers; Christians very much of the primitive Stamp. As one of our Worthies of
the second Generation Mr. Stoughton in his Election-Sermon.
has aptly expressed it, "GOD sifted a whole Nation that he might send a choice
Grain over into this Wilderness": -- Seeking a godly Seed to serve him, which
should be counted before him for a Generation, even a Generation of his Praise.

IT was as little of a mixed Generation, in regard of their moral Character and
religious Profession, that came over first to New England, as perhaps was ever
known in the Earth. We read, when Israel went up out of Egypt in such Pomp and
Glory, there went a mixed Multitude with them, who were a Snare and Disgrace to
the Israelites, and by a profane and vicious Example spread Infection among
them. But now the first Generation of this People were very much a chosen
Generation: collected from a Variety of Places, and by a strange Conduct of
Divine Providence agreeing in the same Enterprise, to form a Plantation for
Religion in this distant Part of the World, where they might worship GOD
according to the Light of their own Consciences, without the depraving
Intermixture of human Inventions, and without Hazard of Persecution from the
Bigots for papistical Ceremonies.

THE Genius or Spirit of the Age was such as indisposed the Generality to this
sort of Men, I mean the Puritans, who were despised as hypocritical or ignorant
Precisians; like the primitive Christians, a Sect every where spoken against,
and suffering like things of their own Countrymen, even as they did of the
Jews. And then the Remoteness of these American Shores, the Dangers of the
Voyage, the Difficulties of a Settlement in an hideous Waste, and the former
Defeat of several Essays for a Plantation here; these were Considerations that
tended to strike Terror upon the Worldly minded; insomuch that few Men of that
Complexion had Spirit enough to join in so arduous and expenceful an Adventure.
Few had the Heart and the Courage to leave their native Land, and pleasant
Habitations, Friends and Relatives, and exchange them for the Society of
Strangers, and for Hardships, Straights and Distresses in a foreign rude and
wild Country; but those who felt the power of that Faith, which works by
Love, which over comes the World, and is the Evidence of Things not seen, the
Substance of Things hoped for.

THERE being a Royal Patent for the Massachusetts Government, many out of
England flocked into this Country almost every year, chiefly on the Account of
Religion. Dr. I. Mather ibid
But scarce any of a profane Character mingled themselves with the first
Comers; and of those that came hither upon secular Views, some were
disheartened by the Toils and Difficulties they met with, and soon returned,
and others finding this reformed Climate disagreeable to their vitiated
Inclinations, took their speedy Flight away. "Some that came hither upon sudden
undigested Grounds, did soon return upon as flight Reasons, carried by an
unstayed Spirit. Others that must have Elbow-room and could not abide to be so
pinioned with the strict Government in the Commonwealth and Discipline in the
Church, also removed hence Vid. New England's First Fruits.


Now being such a select and unmixed Generation, this was one Reason of the
extraordinary Flourishing and bright Appearance of Religion in that day. It was
in the general a shining Collection of sincere Professors; who enlivened and
animated one another, in following after Holiness, by the reciprocal Influences
of an alluring Example.

LET it further be observed,

2. THEY were, for the Generality, such as had been trained up in the School of
Patience.

THE Body of the first Comers were Men in their middle age or declining days;
who had been inured to Sufferings for Righteousness-sake: being among those
Puritan Reformers, who had for many years been witnessing against the Relicts
of Popish Superstitions in Protestant Worship, and had been persecuted for
their Zeal in the Cause of a further Reformation. Many a time have they
afflicted me from my Youth, might Israel say.

Now their Afflictions being sanctified to 'em, they served to their
Establishment and Growth in Grace: which made them the more meet and prepared
to conflict with the Difficulties of this new Settlement, to encounter
Oppositions, and triumph over Discouragements. They learnt Obedience by the
things which they had suffered; were purified in the Furnace of Affliction, and
came forth as Gold out of the Fire refined. They were not like him in the
Parable of the Sower, that received Seed into stony places; who hears the
Word and entertains it with Joy, yet has he not Root in himself, and therefore
continues but a while; for when Tribulation or Persecution arises because of
the Word, by and by he is offended, discouraged and falls away. No, but they
were like him, that received Seed into good Ground, which brought forth Fruit
to Perfection. They were something in the Apostle's Case, who had long been
serving the Lord, with many Tears, and Temptations, which befell him by the
laying in wait of the Jews, and the Trial of their Faith (like his) wrought
Patience: so that although Afflictions awaited them continually, yet none of
these things moved them, neither counted they their Life dear unto them, if so
be they might finish their Course with Joy, and the Work which GOD had
committed to them. They staggered not at the Promise through Unbelief, but in
some sort like Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, were strong in Faith,
giving Glory to GOD. Though in some days of Temptation, they might seem almost
shaken in Mind, and ready to give up their Undertaking as desperate: yet they
were enabled to overcome at the last, and their Faith failed not. They
confessed they were Pilgrims and Strangers upon Earth; had a Spirit in some
singular measure weaned from this vain World by the Afflictions and Trials they
had met with; and looked for a City to come, that has Foundations, whose Maker
and Builder is GOD. Hence laying aside every Weight, they could run with
Patience the Race set before them.

HAVING received the Word in much Affliction all their days from their Youth
up, it was the less a Discouragement to them now, that they must through much
Tribulation (though of another nature) enter into the Kingdom of God. Nay, the
prospect of Difficulties might several ways be of Service to the Work in hand;
particularly by keeping them humble, by putting an Edge on their Zeal, by
exciting them to Diligence and Dispatch, by disposing them to study Union, and
(like the Builders of Jerusalem) to strengthen one another Hands for this good
Work.

3. THEY had newly experienced the Goodness of God in eminent Works done for
their Salvation: which had its sanctifying Effects upon them.

THE Goodness of GOD served to lead them to Repentance, and engage them to
Obedience. The Impression of their Deliverances, and of the Enlargements given
them by a gracious Providence, was now fresh upon their Minds, and had
doubtless a holy Influence into their Lives. So it was with the first
Generation of the Israelites that settled in Canaan, Judge. 2. 7. And the People
served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the Elders that
outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the Lord, that he did for
Israel. "They that saw those Wonders, which GOD wrought for his People, had so
much Sense as to believe their own Eyes, and so much Reason as to serve that
GOD, who had appeared so gloriously on their behalf." The succeeding Generation
indeed forgot the Works of the Lord, the great things he did for their Fathers
in bringing them out of Egypt, and planting them in a good Land; and so had
very little Value for the Religion of their Fathers, but corrupted their ways,
and forsook the Lord. Whereas the first Generation, who had the great Actions
of Providence done for them fresh in Remembrance, these were by a Principle of
in genuous Gratitude excited to a zealous serving the holy One of Israel. So in
the first times of New England.

THEIR religious Liberties and Privileges being new to them, increased their
Value with them, inflamed their Zeal, and made them more diligent in employing
aright the happy Opportunities and Seasons of Grace they enjoyed; and which
were esteemed by them a plentiful Reward of all the Hazards they had exposed
themselves to, and Difficulties they were struggling with.

4. THE Business and Occasion of that Day were extraordinary, and such as might
conduce to the Flourishing of Religion among the first Generation of this
People.

ONE observes Stoughton ub supra.
"When GOD does in a more than ordinary way of Providence, form a People to
himself, there is ever that which is eminent in the primitive frame of things
amongst them. Thus GOD speaks of his Vineyard, Isa. 5. 2. It was planted with
the choicest Vine. Thus also GOD speaks of Judges as at the first, and
Counselors at the beginning, Isa. 1. 26. -- David had his first ways, 2 Chronicles.
17. 3. And so Churches have their first ways, when they newly come out of the
forming Hand of GOD". Ephesus had her first Love and her first Works. And thus
it has been with New England. Surely GOD has often spoke concerning his
Churches here, as in Jer. 2. 2, 3. I remember the Kindness of thy Youth, the
Love of thine Espousals, when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a
Land that was not sown. Israel was Holiness unto the Lord. O how much of
Holiness to the Lord was written upon all their Affairs and Transactions!

Now there was something in the Nature of Things and in the peculiar
Circumstances of that Day, which might contribute not a little to the
prosperous state of Religion among the first Generation of New England.

RELIGION was the one grand Design upon which they came hither; the securing of
it among themselves, propagating it to their Posterity, and planting it among
the Heathen: and this Design took up the Chief of their Thoughts, Cares and
Prayers.

THE Success of their Undertaking depended very much on the exemplary Piety,
Reputation and good Conduct of the first Engagers.

THEY were (as they hoped) laying the Foundation of many Generations; the
Foundation for a glorious Superstructure: and in this Work they were to be made
a Spectacle to the World, Angels, and Men. Therefore as they needed GOD to be
with them now in a peculiar manner, they were very careful not to forfeit the
Divine Presence by any provoking Evils: but did all they could to secure that
Blessing of Heaven, which was necessary to give Prosperity to the Work in Hand.
"It was needful that the first Advances of such a Work should be great and
considerable, and that some very notable Progress should be made in the
Beginning, as the Church and Interest of Christ here lay now more exposed, and
liable to be insulted and crushed in its infant-state". -- Upon this account,
as they needed they therefore sollicitously sought, to have the Hand of GOD
more remarkably with them at that critical Juncture.

THEY made it their Care to avoid every thing, that might open the Mouths of
envious Enemies, to speak Evil of the way of Truth on their account, and it was
their Concern that their Light might so shine before others, as that they might
glorify GOD in them, and acknowledge the Work they were engaged in was of the
Lord. In a word, the Threatenings of Zion's Adversaries, did but quicken them in
their Work, so that they took the greater Pains and made the more Haste in
building the Walls of Jerusalem.

THUS, in such Regards as these, the extraordinary Nature and Season and
peculiar Circumstances of their pious Undertaking, had a natural Influence to
the eminent Prosperity it met with.

AGAIN, let it be considered,

5. THEY were Men of an extraordinary Character, for the best Accomplishments,
that were the Leaders of the first Generation in this great Work.

A faithful Magistracy and Ministry are two distinguishing Articles of the
public Happiness, and contribute as much as any at all to the Prosperity of
Virtue and Religion in a place. This was one of the brightest Glories of our
primitive Times. God led his People like a Flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

THEIR civil Leaders were in general Men of the best Character, for governing
Abilities and Virtues. The Righteous were in Authority: which made the People
rejoice, and gave Reputation to Religion. There was much of the Kingdom of
Christ in the civil Constitution and Laws of the Country, and in the Spirit and
Conduct of our primitive Rulers. They were, like David, Men according to GOD's
own heart; feeding Jacob his People with Integrity and Skill. They were as the
Heads of Issachar, understanding of the Times to know what Israel ought to do.
They had the Temper of Moses, who chose rather to suffer Affliction with the
People of GOD, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a Season,
and esteemed the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt.
They considered themselves as Rulers under and for CHRIST; as Ministers of GOD,
appointed for a Terror to evil Doers, and for a Praise to them that do well.
Accordingly they were warm and active Enemies to Vice, Blasphemy, and
Profaneness: but diligent Promoters of universal Morality, and zealous Patrons
of pure Religion. They were bright Examples of all Godliness and Honesty;
Patterns of Justice, Benignity, Gravity, Temperance and Self-denial: and
applied their Authority for the promoting Piety and Virtue in others. The
Interest of Religion lay much on their Hearts, and entered more or less into
all their public Actions, Cares, and Designs. Far were they from the Spirit of
the Nobles of Tek^a, who (when Jerusalem was in repairing) put not their Necks
to the Work of the Lord. But as those that preferred Jerusalem above their chief
Joy, they employed a Variety of the wisest Methods for the Advancement of the
Kingdom of Christ, and for the Security and Prosperity of his Churches in this
Wilderness. Like godly Hezekiah they spoke comfortable words to such as taught
the good Knowledge of the Lord, animating and encouraging them in the Service
of God. And as Joash did not disdain to take Counsel of Jehojada the Priest,
nor Josiah of Hulda the Prophetess; So neither did the ancient Leaders in our
civil Government disdain to consult with the ecclesiastical Leaders in matters
of Weight and general Concernment to the Churches and Commonwealth: but you
might often see Moses and Aaron meet and kiss one another in the Mount of God.
They were tender of the Credit and Honor of the sacred Ministry; taught the
People by their own Example to reverence faithful Messengers of the Lord, and
were ready to screen such from the Injuries of the Malevolent. They were
Members of the Churches themselves, and by setting a beautiful Pattern of
Order, Peaceableness, and Submission to the Elders, to their Power and Rule in
the Lord, they much contributed to a regular and quiet State of things therein.
They were ardent Lovers of the Word and Ordinances of Christ, and Assembly of
the Saints; and gave their constant Attendence both in Season and out of
Season. Like Nehemiah they contended for the Honor of the holy Sabbath, and
did many good Deeds for the House of their GOD and the Offices thereof. They
were as Eyes to his People in the Wilderness. They were as nursing Fathers:
they delivered the Poor that cried, and the Fatherless, and him that had none
to help him. The Blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon them: and
they caused the Widows heart to sing. They put on Righteousness, and it clothed
them: their Judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem. In a word, They sought the
Welfair of their People: were very tender of the young Plant committed to their
Care, nursed and cherished it with their benign Influences.

AND then the ecclesiastical Leaders, they were also in general Men of the like
approved Character; eminent in all ministerial Gifts and Graces, which formed
them visibly for great and extraordinary Services. There were reforming Rulers:
And there were with them the Prophets of God helping them. The Ministers of
that day very much breathed the Spirit of the old Prophets and of the Apostles;
in all things studying to approve themselves as the Ministers of GOD, in much
Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses, in Labors, in
Watchings, in Fastings, by Pureness, by Knowledge, by Longsuffering, by
Kindness, by Love unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the Power of GOD, by the
Armor of Righteousness on the right hand, and on the left; in Honor and
Dishonor; as Deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet wellknown; as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having
nothing, yet possessing all things. They were conspicuous Examples of
Mortification to the World, and of fervent Devotion; Men of GOD; Watchmen upon
the Wall; giving themselves continually to the Ministry of the Word and Prayer:
preparing their Hearts to seek the Law of the Lord, and to do it, and to teach
in Israel Statutes and Judgments. They were burning and shining Light, some of
the purest and brightest; and diffused an uncommon Luster, both by their holy
Administrations, and by their exemplary Deportments. Their Hearts and Lips were
touched by a lively Coal from the Altar: and their Faces shone, as Moses just
come down from the Mount, where he had been admitted to glorious Intimacies
with Heaven. In a word, they were Men singularly well accomplished, and full of
a flaming Zeal for the Interest and Honor of Christ and for the Salvation of
Souls. -- And now these things, as Means, operated not a little to the Success
of the Ministry, and so to the Flourishing of Religion. We read concerning
Barnabas, Acts 11. 24. For he was a good man, and full of the holy Ghost, and
of faith: and much people was added unto the Lord. His excellent Character was
that which contributed to his Success. It Is granted, that Success is neither of
Paul that planteth, nor of Apollos that waters, (...) all of and from GOD,
who gives the Increase. However we must allow, that GOD owns Men of
extraordinary Grace and Faith and Holiness above other Men, and usually does
greater Things by Such than by others. And then their lovely Character gives a
singular Repute to their Profession, and their bright Example by a natural
Efficacy adds a peculiar Weight and Force to their Preaching. This acquires a
mighty Interest in the Hearts of all that know and see them: and in Consequence
thereof gives them a powerful Influence. It was one happy Circumstance of our
first Days, that the Churches of Christ here were illuminated with a godly and
learned Ministry: and their Eminency in sacred Knowledge, and in Grace and
Goodness, did subserve very much to the blessed Ends of the Pastoral Care, and
abundantly conduce to the Prosperity of the Kingdom of Christ in this Place.
For the Confirmation of these Characters and my other Remarks, I refer the
Reader to the HISTORIES of New England, and in particular to that of the late
Rev. Dr. Cotton Mather, which contains the Lives of a great Number of our
Patriots in the Magistracy and Worthies in the Ministry of the first Generation.


FURTHER it may be observed,

6. THEY united in using the best Methods, with the greatest Diligence and
wisest Application, for the promoting of Religion: And this was one happy
Occasion of the distinguishing Success of it in that day.

IN chief, the Plantation was carried on, and Religion upheld and promoted, by
the power of Prayer: yet at the same time, they were found in the use of the
most excellent Means. Magistrates in their Places, Ministers in their Station,
Heads of Families in their Capacity, Courts of Justice in their Manner,
Churches and Schools in their respective Ways, all conspired with a holy Zeal
and Vigor to establish and advance the Kingdom of Christ, by an indefatigable
Application of proper Methods. And these under the Direction and Blessing of
Heaven were successful Means to that glorious End. What Prosperity might not,
^y a common Blessing, be expected from such an Union of human Powers and rare
exerting of their best Endeavors! This is a Circumstance, that deserves an
Asterism to be set upon it, when we are speaking of those Things, which might
be of special Advantage to the Success of the Gospel in the first days of
New England and of Boston in particular.

THEN, says One Mr. Shepard of Charlstown in his Election-Sermon.
might be seen Magistrates and Magistrates upon the Seat of Justice cemented
together for the Advancement of the Kingdom of Christ in this Wilderness. --
Then might be seen Magistrates and Ministers together in way of Advice: --
Ministers and Ministers cleaving together in way of Communion: -- Ministers and
their respective Congregations together in way of Prayer and holy Worship: --
Churches and Churches together in way of Consultation by greater and lesser
Synods: -- Magistrates, Ministers, and their People together, -- uniting Hands
and Hearts in the common Cause, and breathing a public Spirit; looking not at
their own Things, but the Things of Jesus Christ. Then might be seen Elders,
both ruling well and laboring in the Word and Doctrine, watching for Souls, as
they that must give an Account; also Deacons using their Office well, and
purchasing to themselves a good Degree. Then might be seen Brethren walking
together in Love, and maintaining brotherly Watch and Fellowship. Then might be
seen Christians meeting frequently in Private for Acts of social Religion, and
serious Conference. Then might be seen the Generality of Heads of Families
walking in their houses with a perfect heart, endeavoring to make them
fruitful Seminaries of Religion; bringing up their Children in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord, and having their Servants in Subjection with all
Gravity. Then might be seen the Multitude of GOD's People flocking to the
Public Worship with a laudable Zea! and Devotion. How careful to keep the
Lord's day holy! How diligent in preparing their Hearts! How attentive in
hearing the everlasting Gospel, and carrying home divine Lessons to feed their
Families with by Conference and Repetition! How fervent in Prayer to GOD for a
divine Blessing on the Seed sown! What earnest Desires in those days after
Communion with Christ in the holy Sacraments! What Solicitude to seek the Lord
after the right Order, as well as in right Ordinances! What pious Care of the
Churches filled the hearts of the Faithful What Readiness to call for and
accept the Help of Councils in any Cases of Difference or Difficulty! And what
Reverence of the Sentence of a Council! In a word, what frequent Renewings of
the solemn Covenant! And what a holy Care of the Children of the Church, to
propagate pure Religion to the rising Generation! Mr. DANFORTH of Roxbury in
his (...) Sermon.


WELL might the Consequence of all this be the flourishing of the Kingdom of
Christ. The Churches had Rest, and were edified: and walking together in the
Faith and Order of the Gospel, and in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost, were
multiplied.

THIS brings me to the remaining Head, under which I proposed,

III. To say something upon the extraordinary Degree of Improvement, which this
Plant of the Lord has been remarkable for.

BUT here I have in a great measure prevented my self by what has been already
said. Shall therefore make no Enlargement on this head.

OUR Text compares the Increase of the GospelChurch to the Growth of a
Mustard-Plant; which, though in its first Principle it be very small, yet when
grown to Maturity and Perfection is the greatest among Herbs, and becomes a
Tree, so that the Birds of the Air come and lodge in the Branches thereof.
Note, The Mustard-Plant in Judea was much greater in its growth, than in these
parts of the World. Some tell us of their having known it to rise to a great
Height and to large Dimensions; so that the Fowls of the Air and Beasts of the
Field lodged under the shadow of it. -- Pol. ^^nops.


THIS Description may denote the Beauty, the Stability, and the Usefulness of
the Mustard-Plant: Which would naturally lead me (in further pursuance of my
present Design) to treat of the State of Christ's Kingdom in this place, when
grown to its Maturity, under each of those Heads distinctly.

IT was beautiful, as a stately and spreading Tree, shooting out its comely
Branches. How goodly thy Tents, O Jacob! Thy renown went forth among the
heathen for thy beauty: for it was perfect through my comeliness which I had
put upon thee, says the Lord God.

IT was steadfast, rooted and established; surviving many shocking Storms, and
threatening Changes. As the days of a Tree are the days of my People, says the
Lord, and mine Elect shall long enjoy the work of their Hands.

IT was a Tree of Righteousness, very fruitful, to the Glory of GOD, and
yielded Seed for After-Generations. In them was fulfilled that Word; The Lord
called thy Name, A green Olive Tree, fair, and of goodly Fruit.

IN a word, it was a Refuge for many, who from other parts of the World have
repaired hither, and under a shadowing shroud found Shelter and Refreshment:
Worldly Men obtruding themselves for worldly Ends, and holy Men for holy Ends,
have made their Nests in the Boughs of this once flourishing Tree. "For the
fruits of Congregational Discipline, as it has been exercised in our Churches
in New England (though in much Weakness) the Lord has not left us without
Testimony from Heaven. Particularly,

"First, in making these Churches a little Sanctuary, through his Grace, to
many Thousands of his Servants, who fled over hither to avoid the unsupportable
Pressures of their Consciences by the Episcopal Tyranny.

"Secondly, in blessing the Ministry of our Preachers here with like fruits of
Conversion, as in our native Country, of sundry elder and younger Persons; who
came over hither not out of Respect to Conscience or spiritual Ends, but out of
respect to Friends, or outward Enlargements: but have here sound that Grace,
which they sought not for, etc. Cotton's Way of Congregational Churches (...).




BUT I must not enter into any Discourse on these Things.

THE APPLICATION remains: and here shall only offer a few Hints by way of
Exhortation.

Use I. LET us frequently look back to our Original, and consider the Beginning
and Progress of this religious Settlement.

WE should do this, to keep us humble: by considering the Meanness of our
Beginning as to Externals, and yet the Glory thereof as to Spirituals; which
spiritual Glory is now so very much lost in the Increase of temporal Comforts.

AGAIN, we should make Reflections on our first Beginnings and Improvements, to
stir up ourselves to give GOD the Glory of his wonderful Works in the days of
our Fathers, when he laid the Foundations of our Earth and stretched our
Heavens over us; when he brought a Vine (as of old out of Egypt) and planted it
here, and prepared Room for it, and caused it to take Root, to stand and grow
and flourish, notwithstanding all the Opposition made thereto by Men and
Devils. "Those Works belong to the History of Providence, which GOD would have
known and red of all Men".

AGAIN, We must make those Reflections in order to encourage our Faith and Hope
in GOD; who is still the same powerful and gracious GOD as ever, loves all them
that seek him, and loves the Posterity of his People the more for their Fathers
sake, when they truly seek him.

IN a word, We should make those Reflections in order to direct and quicken
ourselves in seeking and serving our Fathers GOD.

SUCH Reflections may be directive to us by a View of the Example of our godly
Progenitors, who have left us an admirable Pattern of Orthodoxy in Principles,
Purity of Worship, Strictness of Discipline and Government in the Family,
School, Church, and Commonwealth, virtuous Manners, modest Apparel, grave and
useful Conversation.

AND then such Reflections will tend to excite in us a Care of imitating them;
by a Sense of the peculiar Obligations lying on us, as we are the near
Descendents of such holy Ancestors, whose Names will be a Reproach to us, if we
do not also inherit their Virtues; by a Sense of the Bonds of the Covenant upon
us, and of the Bonds of Gratitude we are under, both with relation to GOD and
our Fathers; by a Sense of the many Prayers they have put up for us, and of the
solemn Charges they have left us, enforced by a very attractive Example, the
Example of such as we have the highest Reason to love and venerate the Memory of,
all which will but serve to aggravate the Guilt of our Apostasies, and will
rise up in Judgment against us, if we forsake the GOD of our Fathers: -- In
fine, by a Sense of the Awefulness of our standing in GOD's Vineyard, by the
Consideration that the Axe is laid to the root of the Trees, that every Plant
which is not of GOD's planting, shall be rooted up, and every Tree which
brings not forth good Fruit shall be cut down.

THUS we see, those Reflections are many ways of useful Tendency to the Ends of
Holiness and the Christian Life; which should strongly recommend them to our
frequent and affectionate Entertainment.

Use II. LET us also reflect seriously on our present State, and lay to heart
the Apostasies of this degenerate Day.

ALAS! Are we not become as an Oak, whose Leaf fades, and the Stock thereof
is ready to die in the Ground! May not Israel be called an empty Vine; bringing
forth fruit unto himself! How is the faithful City become an Harlot! The Silver
become Dross, and the most fine Gold changed! This is for a Lamentation, and
shall be for a Lamentation.

MAY it not be complained, that Strangers having devoured our Strength, gray
Hairs are upon us! We are now become a very mixed Generation: and may I not add
in Consequence thereof, a very apostate one? May there not justly be exhibited
against us a Complaint in the Language of Judge. 2. 10. And also all that
generation were gathered unto their fathers: and there arose another generation
after them, which knew not the Lord, nor yet the works which he had done for
Israel. Has not that Word been fulfilled in our Day? Act. 20. 30. Also of your
own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples
after them.

HOW many in this Land have early corrupted their Ways, and forsaken the Lord
GOD of their Fathers! Have not some renounced the Principles of Truth, and
others the Rules of Practice, in the Worship of GOD, in the Discipline of his
House etc. which a humble search into the holy Scriptures brought their pious
Ancestors to an Acquaintance with and Profession of! Have not many renounced
the Covenant of their Fathers, and become Enemies to the Work of GOD in this
Plantation, as a Plantation for the Purposes of Religion!

AND among those who profess in general an Adherence to the Cause of GOD, which
brought our Forefathers over to New England, how many are there who practically
pour Contempt upon it, by a Coldness in the Defense of it, and by Lives
disagreable to it!

SURE I am, we have Reason to take Shame to our selves; all of us, Magistrates,
Ministers, and People. We have many Defects, Neglects, and Miscarriages to
bewail, by which our Profession has been stained, the Gospel hindered, and the
Flourishing of Religion obstructed. Alas! If we compare ourselves with our
Forefathers (and this let us often do, to humble and quicken ourselves) how
vastly short do we come of their bright Example! It sadly appears, They had
better Heads, better Hearts, and better Management than we. We want their
Capacity, their Character, and their Conduct very much: and therefore no
Wonder, if we likewise want their Success. Alas! we want their eminent Gifts
and Graces. We want their ardent Love to GOD, his Truths and Ways. We want
their peaceable healing Spirit. We want their disinterested Humility and
Self-denial. We want their generous Contempt of this present World: We want
their strong Faith and affecting Views of another. And how many Defects are
there in the manner of our Conduct! In the Seriousness of our Deportment; the
Prudence, the Faithfulness, the Diligence, the Application and Zeal of our
Management, in Affairs spiritual and moral.

IN a word, we want very much the Spirit of Prayer, religious Conference,
brotherly Watch, and Communion of Saints; the Family-Government, the
Church Discipline, the exemplary Sanctification of the Lord's Day, the Value
for Gospel-Liberties, and Affection to the House and Ordinances of GOD, the
Zeal for Reformation, -- which so distinguished our pious Ancestors. We pretend
to excel them in a catholic Spirit, as it is called, and to entertain more
generous Principles than they: but alas have we not very much lost our Zeal
for the great Substantials of Religion, as well as for peculiar Modalities! And
is it not to be feared, that many under the glorious Mask of Christian Charity
hide a cold Indifference to all Religion! O let us see and realise the
Degeneracies of the present Day: that there may be no Occasion for a Rebuke of
our Stupidity, That gray Hairs are sprinkled upon us, and we know it not. Let
us be humbly (...) of our manifold Deficiencies, and lament (...) our Faults
and Follies; our Abuses of Prosperity and Liberty, our Pride and Sensuality,
our Impieties against GOD and Immoralities against Men, our Hypocrisies, and
Envies, and evil speakings, and false Dealings: -- Which our Sins do receive
the highest Aggravations possible, from that peculiar Profession we have made
of Religion, from that rich Abundance of sacred Opportunities and spiritual
Provisions for our Souls, and that glorious Shine of Gospel Light, we have so
long enjoyed.

O that we may have Wisdom to consider these Things, and to repent in time,
that so Iniquity may not be our Ruin! That Is the Voice of Heaven to us, Jer.
6. 8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart from thee. The Lord
Jesus Christ speaks to us, as he did to the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 4, 5.
Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. Let us solemnly consider this
Reproof. O that it may come with a powerful Impression upon our Hearts, and
produce agreeable Effects in our Lives! That New England, which is in danger
this day to be lost in New England (as one expresses it) may not be buried in
its own Ruins, and that Boston may not (in spiritual regards, as once in
temporal) have the reproachful Name of Lost Town bestowed upon it.

BUT now to conclude,

Use III. LET us all have a holy Concern upon our Minds, as we would have the
Lord Jehovah to be NEW-ENGLAND's Savior, that we may answer his just
Expectations from us, and be yet a Tree of Righteousness, bearing Fruit to his
Glory.

WE have Reason to admire the Divine Patience toward a sinning People, That we
have not long since been cut down as Cumberers of the Ground, but enjoy as yet
a Standing in GOD's Vineyard. It is of the Mercy of the Lord, we are not
consumed. O that the sparing Goodness of GOD may lead us to Repentance! Let us
adore the Grace and Power of Christ in continuing us a People yet before him;
that the Root is not dried up from beneath, nor the Branches cut off from
above; but there is yet Life in the Root, and still from Him is our Fruit found.
It is worthy a particular Notice, the Distinction which our gracious Head and
Lord has put upon these Churches, in continuing them for so long a Tract of
Time on their original Foundations; keeping them in possession of the same
Scriptural Principles, Modes of Worship, Government and Order (with so much of
Purity and Liberty) which our Forefathers professed and practiced, and
maintaining vital Godliness among Professors so conspicuously in a Number of
Instances, from Generation to Generation. This is one of the distinguishing
Glories of New England. For very few Places in the World, where the Gospel at
any time has been planted, have continued the space of one HUNDRED Years,
without either a sad Dissipation, or a wretched Depravation of their
Church State; Such as through the Patience and Grace of GOD our Savior, these
Churches remain yet happily preserved from.


WE are weak indeed this day, by the plucking so many Corner-Stones out of our
Walls, and by the frowning Aspects of Providence in other Regards. But still
let us not give way to unbelieving Thoughts and Discouragements, as if the Lord
meant to utterly cast us off. I trust the Lord Jesus Christ has yet a precious
Interest among us, which he will not abandon. We see some Tokens that the
Spirit of Christ remains among us. There Is still a Remnant of praying Saints
and righteous Ones; such as are of the same excellent Principles and of the
same excellent Tempers, that our holy Fathers were under the Dominion of; Men,
who stand in the Gap, Repairers of Breaches, and Restorers of Paths to dwell
in. And then the threatening Clouds, which gather over us so thick and fast in
these shaking Times, they may be meant unto Good; to humble and reform and do
us Good in the Issue. Wherefore lift up the Hands that hang down, and
strengthen the feeble Knees.

LET us encourage our selves in the Lord, who by his Power created the World
out of Nothing, who brought up Israel out of Egyptian Bondage, and who formed
and raised this his People from low Beginnings. With him is the Residue of the
Spirit. He has been mindful of us, and he will bless us: He will bless the
House of Israel, He will bless the House of Aaron. Is it not an applicable
Encouragement to New England, that in Isa. 66. 5. Hear the word of the Lord, ye
that tremble at his word: Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for
my name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your
joy, and they shall be ashamed.

LET us be sollicitous to do all we can to secure the Continuance of the
gracious Presence of GOD among us. To this end, let us be concerned to get
every provoking Evil reformed: let us be inquisitive into the Causes of the
present decay of Piety, and Unsuccessfulness of the Gospel; labor to repair
all our Defects, rectify all our Mismanagements, and retrieve our Characters.
Let us unite all our Endeavors, Cares, and Prayers, for the Recovery of
languishing Religion, for the building up Christ's Kingdom, and carrying on the
Work of the Lord, that we may see the Return of good Days. That Is the Call of
Christ to his People here, Rev. 3. 2, 3. Be watchful, and strengthen the things
which remain, that are ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect
before God. Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast,
and repent. And as in ver. II. Behold I come quickly: hold that fast which thou
have, that no man take thy crown. He that has an Ear, let him hear what the
Spirit says unto the Churches.

LET us often recollect the Errand of our Forefathers into this Land, and
pursue that great Interest, which brought them hither, when it was a Land not
sown, an inhospitable Wilderness, where (as they were wont to say) they
esteemed -- brown Bread and the Gospel good Fair. Let us be mindful of the holy
Covenant, wherein they have bound us to be the Lord's, and teach it our
Children, who shall tell it to the Generation to come, that they also may set
their Hope in the Lord, and that our little Ones may know the Covenant-Care and
Faithfulfulness of the GOD of Israel, under whose Wings their Forefathers came
hither to dwell in Safety. Let us attend to the Words of David's dying Charge
to the Rulers and People of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 28. 8. Now therefore in the sight
of all Israel the congregation of the Lord, and in the audience of our God,
keep and seek for all the commandments of the Lord your God: that ye may
possess this good land, and leave it for an inheritance for your children after
you for ever.

LET us imitate our godly Ancestors in the wise Methods and indefatigable Pains
they took for the Security and Advancement of the Kingdom of Christ in
New England. Let us cherish the same excellent Spirit and Principles, which
were so much their Distinction and Glory. Let us be earnest at the Throne of
Grace for a more plentiful Effusion of the Holy Spirit, in order to a happy
Revival of the Work of GOD; that we may hear many inquiring the way to Zion
with their faces thitherward, and that true and effectual Conversions may be
more frequently seen among us. We are prophesying as in the midst of a Valley
full of Bones, dead Men's Bones, very dry: But if God cause Breath to enter
into them, they shall live, and renew their Strength, and the dry Bones shall
flourish like an Herb. O that we might see it, and our Heart shall rejoice! May
this ancient Church be like a Tree that spreads out her Roots by the River
whose leaf withers not, neither cease she from yielding Fruit. May this
Town be as a watered Garden, that sees not when Heat comes, abounding with
Fruits of Righteousness: and let our Beloved come into his Garden, and eat of
his pleasant Fruits! May Salvation be nigh to us, and Glory dwell in our Land!
Return, O Lord, for thy servants sake, the tribes of thine inheritance: The
people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while. The Lord our God
be with us, as he was with our Fathers; and let these my words, wherewith I
have made Supplication before the Lord, be nigh unto the Lord our God day and
night, that he may maintain the Cause of his People at all times as the matter
shall require; that all the People of the Earth may know that the Lord he is
God, the God of Israel, and our God, our Fathers God, and the God of our
Children. And let us all now agree in making that Resolution, Isa. 62. I. For
Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest,
until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the Salvation
thereof as a lamp that burns.

AMEN.
N. B. Page 12. lin. 1. read -- a Number of the original Settlers.


