Dr. Douglass's Practical Essay Concerning the Small Pox.

A Practical Essay Concerning the Small Pox.

By William Douglass, M. D.

Homo est erranti comiter qui monstrat viam. Publius Syrus. BOSTON: Printed for
D. Henchman, over against the old Brick Meeting House in Cornhil, and T.
Hancock at the Sign of the Bible and Three Crowns in Ann-Street. 1730.

TO Dr. Alexander Stuart, Physician to Her Majesty.
SIR,
OUR former Intimacy at the Universities in Holland and Hospitals in Flanders,
inclined me to this Address. The Station which you have acquired by your Merit,
being one of the highest which our Profession admits of, I mean of being a
Court Physician, seems naturally to demand it, even at this distance. But more
especially your knowledge in this Affair or Subject, obliges me to submit this
Practical Essay upon the Small Pox, to your better Judgment.

My former Inclinations to several branches of Natural History, I have now
contracted to that of Medical Cases; more particularly I continue to make
Observations concerning the Endemial Distempers of this Country and Climate,
especially of a certain Anomalous ill-conditioned Autumnal Fever which
sometimes galls us much. In the Year 1721. after an absence of about twenty
years, the Small Pox rendered this large and populous Town of Boston in
New England a mere Hospital; such Opportunities are seldom to be met with in
Europe, and there being no likelihood of such another as to Numbers and
Varieties in this Country in my Time; I secluded my self from all other Company
but that of my Patients during the Small Pox Illness, and committed to writing
for my own reminiscence and private use, the remarkable Small Pox Cases which
occurred in a very extensive Practice. This last Summer after fifteen years
abscence, the Measles prevailed here, which afforded me a very extraordinary
Opportunity of observing the Varieties which attend that Distemper.

It is the duty of a Man, in times of any public Calamity, to lend a helping
hand, as his Station, Profession or Capacity may enable him: This induced me at
this time, when the Small Pox begins to annoy the Town again, to reduce into
some Method, the Observations I made concerning the Small Pox in Boston 1721.
with what other knowledge I formerly had of this Distemper. Observations
reduced to Method and Analogy from thence is all we know or can learn in any
Distemper. I have heartily and without reserve imparted all that I know of this
Disease, so far as can be reduced to writing in a short Abstract. I have by
choice expressed some few things in the Words of some Celebrated Practitioners,
rather than in my own. To have inserted Formulas of Medicines would be
trifling, they are soon conceived where the Indications and Intentions are
known. I designed to have interspersed Histories of remarkable Cases, by way of
Practical Illustrations; but the nature of an Abstract does not give room, and
more especially being recent, most of the Subjects alive in the place, I was
afraid it might not be so agreeable, as certainly it would have been useful.

Sir, Your obliged humble Servant, William Douglass.

A Practical Essay Concerning the Small Pox.
WHERE the prima stamina Vitae are good, the whole Affair of Health and long
Life would consist in Temperance and moderate Exercise, were it not for some
malignant acute Diseases which have something Mysterious in their Nature,
invading the healthy and Valatudinarians indifferently: Of those some are
Endemial, peculiar to Countries, Climates, Seasons, and Constitutions of the
Air; but not communicable by Infection from Man to Man: Most Countries have at
times Fevers of this kind, in this and the neighboring Colonies, especially in
the Autumn we are afflicted with a certain febris mali moris, not reducible to
any Classical Name of Fevers described by Authors. It begins as all Fevers do
with Horripulations etc. has no perfect Intermissions, but, without any more
horrors, remissions and exacerbations sometimes periodical but more frequently
uncertain, the Symptoms are various, being the most anomalous Fever that ever
came to my knowledge; the most general Symptom is oppressio gravitativa circa
cordis regionem, which the Patients express by a pain at their Hearts, and in
all Fevers except the Eruptive is reckoned a Symptom mali Ominis.

Some malignant Fevers although originally Endemial or the produce of Climates
Seasons etc. may by Infection be spread at home, and in some Constitutions of
the Air, may be conveyed and disseminated in Countries abroad where they are
not natives but Exoticks, and therefore cannot thrive so well there as in their
native Soil. Thus the Plague Endemial in the Levant and Egypt, does sometimes
get sooting in Europe (I cannot learn that it ever visited the American
Continent) it was in London from 1602 to 1648, every Year there died a few of
it, but did not spread excepting 1603, 1625 and 1636; ever since the Year 1665
notwithstanding a continued Trade to the Levant, it has not taken root in
England.

The Small Pox is a Disease of a more singular nature, it is of a very
uncertain Original, we know of no Country where it is a Native or Endemial,
that is, where it is the produce of Seasons, Winds, etc. as is the Plague in
the Levant. It owes the continuation of its being to a variolous leaven
communicable in all Countries and Seasons, but some Constitutions of Years
favor its propagation and mortality more or less; from the London Bills of
Mortality there died there of the Small Pox 1702 only 31, in the Year 1706 died
721, in the Year 1719 dies 3229. There is another Circumstance very singular in
its Nature, that it never affects a Person oftener than once; in the Plague some
have died in the 2d, 3d, 4th etc. Seizure, as Dr. Hodges informs us: It is
therefore an Infection essentially different from the Pestilential, and cannot
be the Effect of some ancient violent Plague in Egypt, as some Authors surmise.

We are beholden to the Arabians or Saracens, not only for many Drugs and
Medicines, as the Purging Rhubarb, Manna, Mercurial Unguents, the Epispastick
Use of the Cantharides, etc. but also for the first Accounts we have of several
Diseases, as Small Pox, Measles, Lepra Arabum, Spina ventosa. Vena Medini, or
Guinea Worm, etc. The Small Pox was a Stranger in Medicine until the Time that
the Arabians or Saracens settled in Egypt, which was soon after Mahomet's
Death. As this People in less than 30 Years did vastly propagate their Religion
and Empire, so they did the Small Pox in a short Time, and might Introduce it
into Europe by Way of Spain, where they settled powerful Colonies. The various
Exanthemata of the Greeks, and Pustulae of the Romans, with other Eruptive
Fevers mentioned by them, were no ways analagous to the Small Pox: At the
Discovery of this Continent of America, not the least Resemblance of it was to
be found.

The Small Pox is an Inflammatory Fever, but with a peculiar Malignancy or
Poison; which requires the Indications of Cure to be taken principally ae
juvantibus and laedentibus. Inflammations, as purely such, require U. S. and
the Body to be kept soluble; but in the Small Pox the Body ought to be bound;
and Dr. Sydenham gives us an Instance of a young Man, who, notwithstanding he
had some short Time before Seizure been frequently let Blood for Rheumatick
Pains, had the worst Sort of confluent Small Pox he ever did see. In some
Families, by a jus haereditarium, it is always very malignant, or fatal; thus
Mrs. A -- and her Daughter, Capt. R -- 's Wife and her Child, two Children of F
-- a Fisherman, two Boys at L -- Cousin Germans, all died with Purples and
Haemorrhages, Mr. W -- and his Sister died in the Innoculated Way: To other
Families it is always favorable; Dr. Morton says, that he could not recollect,
that any Person of his own or his Wife's Family ever died of the Small Pox. We
find by Experience, that a confluent, or very: full Knid, does not always
proceed from a more intense Inflammation of the Blood, or from driving by
Cordials: Frequently it is in the Nature of the Person's Constitution to be so
affected with the Small Pox, having very little of a Fever, no Phrenzy, Coma,
or any other violent Symptom; but merely from a too profuse S^^puration, to die
of a tabid Inanition, in all Stages of Life; thus died J. B -- Esquire an old Man,
W. H -- Esquire a middle aged Man, W. S -- a young Lad, M. G -- Housekeeper, a
young Woman whose Eruptions were too early after Inoculation. Further we may
observe, that any violent Symptom proceeding from an accidental Error, is not
of that bad Consequence as if it did proceed from the Constitution in the
natural Course of the Distemper: Thus the Purples in J. C -- at 19, were from
violent Exercise, in running after Cattle in the Country a few Days before
Seizure; Capt. T -- 's Negro Man in a Confluent Sort, had bloody Urine, having
lately received a Blow cross his Loins; Capt. H -- 's Son, aet 5, had
interspersed Vesicules full of a sharp bluish Serum, from an intense hot
Regimen; they could not have survived these Symptoms if they had been
Constitutional.

Most malignant Distempers have their Crisis in the Glands; the Plague in the
Inguinal, Axillary, and Parotidal Glands; the Small Pox in the Miliary Glands
of the Skin. The Caustic acrimonious Quality of the Small Pox Infection is
evident from the Pittings. That this Malignity is colliquative appears by the
profuse Sweatings or Diarrhaeas in some, in others Salivation, Swellings of
Face, Extremities, Scroti and Preputii, Diabetical Profluviums, Purples and
Haemorrhages. The Small Pox seldom arrives to that Degree of Malignity, as to
be attended with sudden Death; there were but two Instances came to my
Knowledge here, being both young Women, and died before Eruption, by a violent
Necrosis of their Spirits, intense Coma and Stupor.

The Cure of a Fever in the first Intention is by some Specific to extinguish
it, without allowing it to come to a Crisis; because Crisis's are frequently
precarious: So that the Cure of the Small Pox, properly speaking, is so to
manage the infecting Miasma in the first Period or Apparatus of the Disease,
that it shall not come to Eruption, i. e. Suppuration, with a tedious Train of
Symptoms; thus if a Prickle or Splinter is lodged in the Finger, the proper
direct Cure is Extraction, whereby Suppuration, Ulceration, etc. are prevented.
If we could find an Antidote to destroy the Small Pox Infection in Embrio, it
would be a genuine specific Cure; we cannot say it is impossible, but hitherto
it is not discovered to Mankind; may it be the Happiness of future Ages.

Next to a specific Cure, would be a Method to alleviate the Crisis, as to the
Quantity and deleterious Nature of the Inflammations and Suppurations. The
Circassian Method of procuring the Small Pox by variolous Pus, applied
externally to fresh cutaneous Incisions, lately introduced in Great Britain,
and New England, seems to bid the fairest for this; but it is not an absolute
certain Remedy against a bad Sort. Much of the same Nature is what Dr. Williams
of Haverfordwest, says, has been an imimemorial Custom in some Parts of Wales,
called, buying of the Small Pox. The Person procures a few fresh Pocky Scabs,
and holds them in the Hollow of the Hand a considerable Time; about 10 or 12
Days thereafter the Person sickens, etc. An old Midwife, Jane Jones, aged 70,
told him, that she knew it practiced at Times above 50 Years, and knows but one
dying of the Distemper so communicated. Considering the Cases of several of my
Patients who had at the Time Issues, I was very inclinable to think, that by
their Vent they did contribute toward alleviating the Distemper, particularly
in Children abounding with gross Humors, or Faeculencies. Mercurialis says
that he observed few to die of the Plague who ha^ Issues running.

What is commonly called, the Cure of the Small Pox at present, is only from
the Experience of the juvantia and laedentia, to prevent, alleviate, or remove
the various disturbing Symptoms in the several Periods of this Disease.
Formerly Practitioners were zealously bigoted, some to a cool Regimen, others
to a hot Method, reckoning the opposite Practice of pernicious Consequence.
That the Patient ought to be kept in a moderate natural Temper as near as can
be, we learn from Experience. We find that Nature performs her Office best in a
moderate Season; Heat dissipates, and Cold depresses the Spirits too much.

For the cool Regimen, Dr. Sydenham, ever to be celebrated for his Diligence in
observing, and Candor in communicating, was a great Stickler, especially in the
former Years of his Practice, and has been much blamed on that Head; but after
more Years Experience, he was not so rigorous in this Method; and says, that
after the Eruption completed, the Patient ought to be kept close a-bed, not so
much as to expose an Arm or Hand, that by the agreeable and mild Heat of the
Bed, the Plumpness of the Pustules may be kept up, as also the Swellings of
Face and Hands. He considered it chiefly as an Inflammatory Disease, and he
supposed the Confluent, and other Bad Kinds, proceeded from the Fever
assimulating and expelling of too much variolose Matter. I never observed any
Benefit, but frequently Hurt, by exposing the Patients to the Air colder than
the natural Temper of the Body required. I remember some Cases, where in the
Eruption being exposed to the Cold, it was checked for some Time; but soon
after followed a second Crop generally mortal We find by Experience, that
Intermitting Fevers, and such continued ones as are allied to them, are
protracted by a cold Regimen. In other Diseases we may observe, that Coolers so
retard the Circulation, that there may arise a Sort of Ferment from Stagnation;
and instead of allaying Heat, may change a simple Inflammatory Fever, disposed
to a Diaphoresis, into a putrid and malignant one. In the Small Pox the more
perspirable the Body, (I do not mean Sweating, which is a Colliquation) the
better; thus we find, the Face, Neck, Arms and Hands, being continually exposed
to the Air, are indurated, and suffer most from the Small Pox. Extreme cold
Weather is bad in all Eruptive Fevers: In 1713, the Measles raged here in the
Winter, and there died about 150 Persons; in 1729, it prevailed in the Summer,
and there died only about 15.

In the Hot Regimen, Dr. Morton and others allege, that some Part of the
Virulency remaining not protruded to the Surface of the Body, was the Reason of
the Lucta, and Fever, and other Symptoms still continuing; and that this
Languor of Nature protracts the Periods of Maturation and Desquammation to many
Days; and therefore, the more malignant, the more generous Alexipharmicks are
by them administered; thus by a hot Method, they inadvertently conspire with a
most inflammatory Distemper to kill the Patient; the formerly received Notion
of Alexipharmicks being Antidotes to Malignity, has by a dangerous vulgar
Error, in violent inflammatory Cases, sent many prematurely to their cold
Graves. I observed in the most malignant Small Pox with Purples and
Haemorrhages, they immediately and most notoriously multiplied these Symptoms,
and soon procured an Exit. E. G -- aet. 18, by generous Alexipharmicks, had his
Purples multiplied to Millions, with inflated purplish Eyelids, and bloody
faetid Stools, expired soon, before the Eruption was complete. Capt. B -- 's
Child, aet. 8, having Purples, by this Method, the Blood was forced through the
Pores of the Skin under the Nose, on the Lips, and Corners of the Eyes; with
many others I could mention. Cordial Spirits and Volatiles in all Fevers push
Nature precipitately to a Crisis, and besides other Inconveniences, their
natural Tendency being to the Brain, they solicit along with themselves the
Violence of the Disease, occasioning Phrenzies, Delirias, Comas, etc.

It would be tedious to insert here the general Methods of Cure which have been
used by the most celebrated Practitioners. Dr. Sydenham, by a cool Regimen, by
acidulating all their Drinks with Sp. Vitriol. which he calls a Specific in
this Distemper, and by Paragoricks at Night, managed his Patients. Dr. Pitcairn
lets Blood where there is much of a Fever, and repeats it even after Eruption,
if the Fever continues; if the Pustules subside too early, he lets Blood and
blisters; he gives any simple Water in which Sheeps Dung is infused cold, and
for common Drink Barley Water and Watergruel; in the Confluent Kind, toward
the End, he opens the Body. Dr. Morton drives all before him with his
Alexipharmicks or hot Method. D. Friend has very much obliged the World by
recommending early Purging in the Declension in several Cases.

That I may be the more distinctly understood, I shall reduce my Subject under
the following Heads.

1. The Small Pox complexly considered.

2. Preparatories tending toward the more kindly Reception of this Distemper.

3. The Apparatus, or first Fever preceding the Crisis.

4. The Eruption, or Efflorescence.

5. The Maturation, or Suppuration of the Pustules.

6. The Declension, or Desquammation, or Scabbing thereof.

7. Relics, and Consequential Ails.

Small Pox Complexly considered.
In the accidental Contagion, from Infection received to Sickening, are 18 to
21 Days; from Observations which I made in several Families; and as to the Town
in general, we may recollect, that about the Middle of June, 1721, Eruptions
appearing in many Houses, the Watches which had been appointed to prevent its
Spreading, were discontinued; in the next Parcel of Decumbents, the Eruptions
appeared about the 7th and 8th of July; and in the End of July, and Beginning
of August it spread much. The Change and Full of the Moon may more or less
dispose Bodies to receive the Infection; but Sickening and Eruptions do happen
in all Times of the Moon: In Southerly close Weather the Infection is most
susceptible. In the Small Pox received by Incision the Patient sickens the 5th
6th or 7th Day, and after 1, 2, 3, or sometimes 4 Days, the Eruptions begin.

There are vast Varieties of the genuine Small Pox; but in general, the sooner
the several Stadia are accomplished, the more benign; and most frequently, the
Danger is in Proportion to the Number of the Pustules: There are some
Exceptions were a Distinct Sort has been very malignant, and even attended with
Purples, Mr. F -- 's Indian Peter, etc. From the Quantity and Nature of the
Pustules in the Face we generally judge of the more or less Violence of the
Distemper. H. P -- aet. 13, Face and Extremities confluent, but scarce any
Pustules in the Trunk of here Body; she died 11th from Eruption.

To form a general Idea of this Distemper, we must take the distinct plump Kind
as a Standard. It may be described thus; begins with the common Symptoms of a
Fever, but more particularly is attended with Pain in the Head, Back and Loins,
and about the Region of the Stomach, weeping Eyes, Sore Throat. Vomitings,
Dosedness, Startings, and in Children sometimes Convulsions. The End of the 3
d, or Beginning of the 4 th Day, the Small Pox Pustules begin to appear
distinct; 5 th they grow round and enlarge their Bases of a lively red, 6 th
Day they come to a Point, 7 th the Points or Apices turn white, 8 th they turn
yellow, 9 th they are full of laudable digested Pus, 10 th they begin to crust
or scab, 12 th they are dry Scabs, and Appetite returned.

We may comprehend all the Varieties of Small Pox under these. 1. A distinct
dry Sort, being the most favorable of all; yet sometimes with considerable
Apparatus Symptoms; they are few, not large, Bases scarce inflamed, small
Digestion, being hard with a little white Point; 5th or 6th Day from Eruption
they begin to dry away, and gradually vanish, leaving only a Freckle behind
them, but no Redness; I have seen Indians with this Kind. 2. A distinct plump
Kind, already described as the Standard. 3. The Cohaerent, or small frequent
Sort; they are not exactly round, pointed and vivid; but sessile and depressed,
the Symptoms do not entirely cease upon Eruption, but after some Time they
intermit until the Stadium of Maturation, then arises a Fever, etc. 4. The
Confluent, they appear sooner than the 4th Day, or are retarded by some violent
Symptom later; their first Appearance is frequently Erisypilas like, and and at
last appear of on Ash-colored Crust or white Skin, etc. 6. To these add the
Small Pox with interspersed Petechiae brown or red, with Vesiculae miliares, or
small Blisters full of a limpid or bluish Serum, and with Purple Spots from the
black to the more diluted Purples, and Haemorrhages, which are more mortal than
the Plague it sef.

Some general Directions for the Regimen in the Course of the Small Pox.

1. Let not Numbers be pent up in one Room, which can scarce contain Air enough
for the Maintenance of Health in one single Person, especially if kept from
Communication with the free external Air; for the Spring of the inspired Air is
the continued Cause of the Circulation in our Bodies. 2. Where the Design of
Nature is obvious, and her Intentions right, we ought not to disturb Nature by
Medicines. 3. In this or any other acute Distemper, Nature or the Spirits ought
not to be disturbed by Noise or Confabulation. 4. Where Medicines are required,
we are not to insist on any Medicine that continues to be disagreeable to the
Stomach. 5. In this Distemper any violent Symptom appearing must be immediately
obviated; Delays here are dangerous: But we are to expect in this as in most
other acute Distempers, that the Symptoms should have a Sort of Exacerbation
toward Night. 6. Let not your Mixtures be too much compounded, that you may be
the more certain of the Effects of the several Ingredients. 7. The Belly is not
to be kept soluble. It is observed by every Body, that in the Small Pox (Dr.
Friend's Cases excepted) Opening of the Body by Catharticks, however mild,
confounds the Course of Nature, and gives the Small Pox Fever a Determination
to the Bowels of bad Consequence: The Body sometimes bound up for two Weeks,
without any Inconveniency only the Pain of a laboring Stool at last, shows
that this Distemper does not allow of Nature's being disturbed in her Office:
If there happens in any of the Stadiums any undue Evacuation or Colliquation,
use moderate Astringents, Opiats, and mild Cordials. 8. Avoid Grief, Study,
intense Thinking, and the like; they hinder Perspiration, and all other
Tendencies to the Surface or ad extra of the Body.

In the malignant Kinds, a Fever accompanies all the Stadia; the Absence or
Presence of the Fever in the three last Stadia, Diliria, Vigilae, Stupor
profundus, Subsultus tendinum, are always principal Indications of Safety or
Danger. In this, as in all acute Diseases, we ought to observe the Patient's
Pulse, Tongue, Urine, Breathing, as also the Eyes, Temper of the Skin, and
Posture of laving. The best Pulse is the strong, full, equal, and slow; the
nearer it approaches these the better. Because of the Continuation of the
Membrane which invests the Tongue, with that of the Stomach and Intestines,
Physicians judge of the inward Temper of the Body by the Aspect of the Tongue.
In all Eruptive Fevers, the Urine settles from the Beginning; Urine pretty high
colored with Contents is best, thin clear and pale is bad; where Suspensions
follow a laudable Sediment Nature is in Danger; large Quantity of Urine,
especially if without any considerable Thirst, is always a good Symptom.
Respiration is most to be attended to of all Symptoms; just upon the Crisis it
may be magna and celeris, and yet salutary.

Dr. Sydenham is much extolled from introducing Opiats into the Management of
this Distemper. Dr. Morton says, without the Use of Laudanum not much is to be
done in the Cure of the Small Pox. It is certain that Inquietudes, Watchings,
Deliria and the like, so exhaust the Spirits in this Distemper, that they make
the Use of Anodynes unavoidable. Opiats relax the Skin, and give a proper
Determination ad extra; Laudanum in that Sort of Small Pox which is accompanied
with a Salivation, etc. concocts the Spittle, and promotes the Swelling of the
Face and Hands. Discretion however is required in their Use; for where the
Blood is languid, they leave the Patient more languid and faint, Tongues drier,
Pulse weaker, gravitative Headakes, and the like: The indifferent Use of
Narcoticks fix the faeculent Humors, and occasion Pittings and Scars. The
Testacea ought to supyly the Place of Opiats in Children; for they moderate the
inordinate Commotion of the Blood more kindly and salutarily.

Vesicatories by their Stimulus increase the Oscillation of all the Fibers, and
squeeze out the impacted Contents. In Comatoes Cases the most generous
Alexipharmicks without Vesicatories, do not rouse the Spirits. Epispasticks, by
their Stimulus, not only attenuate and derive the Humor to the Parts, but also
discharge them: Translations of morbid Matter from one Part to another, is
sometimes of the greatest Service, especially where it has a Discharge: All
critical Evacuations are of this Nature. When Symptoms threaten the Brain,
Vesicatories are of excellent Use, not neglecting suppedanea irritantia, live
Animals, and the like, to the Soles of the Feet.

Let the Patient drink plentifully of diluting Liquors; for there is something
Caustic and acrimonious in the Infection. Herb Teas much used In this Country,
I cannot recommend; they seem to wash away that soft mellow Moisture of the
Mouth and Throat, and do frequently rather occasion than alleviate Thirst: The
more mellow Diluents I always found to answer better, as Barley Water, thin
Water Gruel, Sack Whey, Vin. Canarin. ad medias coct. as the Patient's Temper
and Condition may require. After Eruption in all their Drinks and medicinal
Mixtures give Sp. Vitriol, Sp. Sulph. per camp, Sp. Nitr^d. they keep the great
Effervescence of the Blood under, and as Sydenham says of the Sp Vitriol. are a
Sort of Specific against the variolous Putrefaction or Foeculency, shorten the
Stadiums, prevent Pitting, and are a Succedaneum to U. S.

As for Preservatives against the Small Pox Infection, we know of none really
such, excepting Flying from the Place where it rages. Some Constitutions, and
in some Seasons or Times, are more or less susceptible of it. Toward
Prevention may conduce, the keeping the Mind cheerful, and the the Body
healthful. When the Vessels are impregnated with rich Food, and generous
Liquors (I do not extend this to Crapula and Ebriety, which are Violence done
to Nature) we are less liable to receive the Injuries of the circumambient Air,
as in catching cold, Epidemical contagious Distempers, etc. because the
Excretories of Perspiration are full, and in a State of emptying, not imbibing;
thus the Poor suffer most in Times of a Plague

Preparatories.
1. The best Preparative for the Small Pox, is to keep the Mind as cheerful,
and the Body as healthful as we can. 2. Proper Evacuations, U. S. in the
Plethorick, vigorous, and youthful, and in those who have accustomed themselves
to U. S. Sydenham's young Man who had been frequently blooded for Rheumatick
Pains, was too much lowered; Purging in gross full Habits, but the Catharticks
ought to be given some considerable Time before the Infection is received, lest
they should weaken and dissipate the Spirits too much. 3. I found gentle
Mercurials, as is AEthiop's Mineral, procured frequently a favorable Small Pox
in Children. 4. Issues, especially in Children, by their Vent and Derivation
are found beneficial.

Avoid violent Exercise when Small Pox is expected. I. C -- from thence had a
few Purples, and narrowly escaped. The Patient ought not to be kept too low in
his Diet, lest the Eruption should not proceed so well. All Fevers when not
distracted by Anxiety perform their Course best; this is reckoned one of the
Reasons why the Small Pox is most favorable to Children.

Apparatus.
Of all Distempers this especially requires Advice in the Apparatus, because on
this depend all the other Stadia, although it is too common not to send for
Advice until the Eruption. Unless you see some Exanthemata praenuncia, or
Forerunners of the Small Pox, (especially when the Small Pox first enters a
Town,) which sometimes appear the first Day of Seizure, be cautious how you
foretell the Small Pox before Eruption; frequently in the Beginning the Feverish
Symptoms are so general, that we cannot say the Small Pox are to follow, but by
Conjecture, from the Decumbent's having never had them, and that he has lately
been exposed to the Infection. In the Beginning of any Fever, v. g. of a
Pleuritick Fever, we cannot positively say it is Pleuritick, before we observe
the Determination to the Pleura.

Seeing there are such very different Varieties, and sometimes contrary
Indications in the following Stages, in some the Spirits to be lowered, in
others the Spirits to be raised, etc. how Emirically do they act (the Care of a
discreet Nurse only is much more safe) who in the first Stage, or Apparatus,
indifferently tread the same Path, Blood-letting, or Alexipharmicks, or
Emeticks, or Opiats, etc. to all. We ought not, by Alexipharmicks, to set
Nature in a more violent Flame and Rage; neither are we by U. S. and other
Evacuations, to depress the Spirits; but we ought to study Nature, and when all
seems to be in a regular Course, tending to its proper Periods in due Time, we
are not to disturb Nature with Medicines, but direct to a suitable Regimen, and
a natural Temperature, with a thin and spare Diet,

This Apparatus, or first Fever, is attended with some or all of the following
Symptoms of Fevers in general, Chilliness, Shiverings, Horripulations, Yawning,
Stretching, Giddiness; then Heat, Thirst, with Tongue foul or dry; Pulse
stronger, quicker, unequal; a deficent Spittle, Loss of Appetite, Nausea and
Vomiting,; Pains in the Head, Back, and Loins; Inquietudes, or Comatoes
Affections: Besides these, in Eruptive Fevers, particularly in the Small Pox,
there is a certain Oppression circa cordis regionem, Sneezings, Coughs,
Asthmatick Breathings, Hoarseness, Sore Throat, Weeping or Splendour of the
Eyes, Dosedness, and sometimes in Children Convulsions.

In Eruptive Fevers (in other Fevers such Symptoms only happen toward their
fatal End) the Apparatus Symptoms are mostly nervosi generis, viz. Oppression
at the Breast, Asthmatick Breathings, Vomitings, Deliria, Comas, Lumbagos,
tendinum Subsultus, Insultus Epileptici in Children. Notwithstanding this
dismal Catalogue of Symptoms in some Constitutions, the Conflict between Nature
and the Distemper is with so little Violence, as not to be sensible before the
Eruption point it out; in others very few of these Symptoms are sensible, In
some Constitutions with very malignant Kinds, the Symptoms are mild; the
Necrosis being so very intense, Nature is so oppressed from the Beginning as
not to be capable of any Lucta or Struggle with the Distemper, as was the Case
of many who died with Purples and Hoemorrhages. In some Constitutions, violent
Symptoms in the Beginning are not always followed by a bad Kind, providing that
Weakness of the Pulse, and a languid Eruption do not concur. Mr. F -- began
with a strangled tumified Countenance, a Diarrhaea and Profluvium, threatening
Purples; she had a distinct Kind, and did well. Several Children had violent
Convulsions, but a favorable Kind of Small Pox soon appeared.

Prognostics. From the Intenseness and Continuance of the Horripulation, we
judge of the Hazard in all Fevers; in some rare Cases, the Necrosis is so
Pestilence like, that this Symptom does not happen. A Bar cross the Chest (as
they express it) with involuntary Sighings, Anxiety, Dejection of Spirits and
Despondency, great Complaints of the Throat, violent fixed Spasmodick Pains, in
Back, Sides, Loins, Bowels, etc. are bad Symptoms; and according to their
Intenseness generally speaking, the more violent Small Pox does follow. Dolor
versatilis of Sides, Limbs, etc. are not so bad. A strangled boufi Countenance,
with a Diarrhaea, frequently prognosticate Purples and Hoemorrhages. A dry
Tongue, quick but weak vacillating Pulse, Urine clear thin and pale, intense
Coma, are bad Signs. Voiding of Urine involuntary, or inscious (where there is
no other violent Symptom) in the Apparatus, is no bad Symptom. H. P -- aet. 18,
M. R -- aet. 15, had favorable Small Pox Notwithstanding the Violence of other
Symptoms, if there be a true feverish Heat, a strong and equal Pulse, Urine
high colored, with Contents, they indicate well the Strength of Nature.

Where the Symptoms are any ways considerable, let the Patient immediately upon
Seizure be put to Bed, but not with too many Clothes. The Temper is not to be
lowered too much by catching Cold, U. S. or any unnecessary Evacuation, so as
to produce a late, imperfect, unequal, or second Crop, which are of bad
Consequence; neither ought it to be raised by Cordials, and a hot Regimen, to
drive the Humors into a Separation more than was designed by Nature, i. e. a
confluent, or very full Kind; as we are not to expect a kind Sort of Small Pox
until the 4th Day, why should we endeavor to drive them sooner? The Blood may
be thus so harrassed as not to allow of any regular Separation, but occasion an
Erysipelas like, or very unequal, or tardive Sort, which are the worst Kinds.
Emollient Cataplasms, especially in Children, to the Feet, have been observed
manifestly to alleviate the Symptoms, and sometimes to solicit the variolous
Matter more plentifully that Way, to the Relief of the other Parts.

Blood letting in the Beginning, without any Exception, would be always useful,
if the Small Pox were a simple inflammatory Case, and not complicated with some
deleterious Miasma, which requires Strength of Nature to subsist under. Where
there is a Plethora, U. S. is requisite to ease Nature of its Load, that it may
the better perform its Office. In Athletick Habits, Winebibbers, those
accustomed to U. S. it is advisable, to prevent a too great Assimulation of
variolose Matter. In violent Vomitings, violent spasmodick Pains of any Kind,
intense Coma, or Convulsions threatening some Apoplectick Symptom, especially if
the Pulse be strong, U. S. is necessary, and afterward an Emetick, (in some
Cases Anodynes) Vesicatories, a cool Regimen, and plentifully to dilute.
Excepting in these, and the like Cases, U. S disturbs the Course of Nature, and
a good Succedaneum for it is, a cool Method and Regimen. In all Depressions,
and Obstructions, if U. S. does not relieve, in confirms them, by lessening the
Force of Circulation.

Vomiturition in the Apparatus is from the Scene being in the nervous System;
most Affections of the Nerves, v. g. Hysterical and Hypocondriacal Paroxysms,
Concussions of the Brain, Nephritick Pains, etc. occasion Vomiting; so that
reaching to vomit does not always signify a foul Stomach. This Symptom ought to
be left to it self, unless there be Suspicion of a foul Stomach, then an
Emetick is of use to clean the Stomach, and prevent Foeculenies being carried
into the Blood already morbid: In some Cases, by a universal Horripulation and
Concussion, Vomiting conduces to render the Circulation more free. Let your
Emeticks be gentle, not violent, lest they may dissipate and put the Economy
of the Spirits in too great a Hurry, and so divert the Eruption. My Emetick was
generally Sal Vitriol. which occasions no great Dissipation of Spirits, it is
easily kept within Bounds, by its Astringency it strengthens the Stomach; it
ought not to be forced downwards by too large Quantities of Drink, but rather
repeat small Doses of the Salt.

Where the Symptoms threaten the Brain, apply Vesicatories. We are to take
Notice that a Stupor is peculiar to this Distemper, and is not of bad
Consequence, unless it turns to an intense Coma. In Childrens Convulsions and
Comatoes Affections preceding Eruption, if violent, don't glyster, nor
confound Nature by Evacuations, but blister and give moderate Cordials.
Vigiliae and Deliria are in this Distemper worse Symptoms, because they waste
and confound the Spirits; when the Pulse is strong, U. S. and Vesicatories are
good, but especially Opiats ( Sydenham will ever be celebrated for his
introducing Opiats in the Cure of this Distemper) are essentially requisite and
unavoidable.

A Diarrhaea, especially if attend with Gripings, in this, and all other
Fevers, (a few excepted where it is critical) confound the Courfe of Nature,
and must be moderated by Opiats, which will not retard the Eruption so much as
the Purging would have done.

Eruption.
The End of the 3 d or Beginning of the 4 th Day the best Sort appeared with
us, An. 1721; so much as the Eruption anteverts the 4th Day, or is retarded
beyond it, so much greater the Danger; either from the Violence of the Fever,
or hot Regimen, in the first Cafe; for the more violent and hasty any
Inflammation is in its Course, the Danger of a subsequent Gangrene is the more
to be apprehended. Dr. Huxham says, that An. 1724, 1725, there was in Plymouth
an anomalous Small Pox, that appeared in less than 24 Hours after Seizure, and
was always of the fluxed Kind: The other Case of being retarded, is from a too
cool Regimen, officious Bleeding, catching cold, or some considerable
Evacuation.

The more universal the Appearance is at first, the more perfect and more
benign is the Crisis; the more gradual, especially with new Sprouts in the
Interstices, the more imperfect is the Crisis, and the Distemper is the more
malignant. F. S -- aet. 22, no violent Complaint in Apparatu, 1st and 2d Day of
Eruption came out like a distinct good Sort, but the 3d Day came out infinite
Multitudes of a small Purplish Pox, he died 17th of Seizure. W. W -- aet. 25,
violent Pain at his Stomach, and dull, was U. S. in Apparatu, the Eruption very
slow and languid, so as not to appear in the Extremities until the 3d or 4th of
Eruption, a distinct, but frequent sessile Kind; he spit, and swelled well,
died 14th of Seizure. Mr. H -- r, aet. 30, a few Purples, with Haemorrhagia
narium, the Pox in his Face had the regular Course of the confluent Kind, but
in his Extremities, at the Time of his Death, being 14th of Seizure, the
Pustules had scarce begun to maturate. Mrs. Y -- aet. 20, just having given
over Suckling, violent Pain in her Back, and Reachings, was brought from an
adjacent Island to Boston, 2d of Seizure some Appearance of Small Pox, and
after 3 or 4 Days more a Sort of second Crop, reddish, with some watery
Blisters interspersed, she did not spit, a continued Nausea and Delirium, died
16th of Seizure. B. I -- aet. 1, by catching cold the Eruption is checked, and
after two Days came out a second Crop, of a very unequal crude Kind, she died
soon.

The Eruptions appearing in the Extremities before they appear in the Face,
presage ill, as in many of the Purple Cases, being from a stifled Fever; for
the Circulation being freer in the Extremities, the Eruptions come out there
more kindly.

If there attends the Eruption a profuse Sweating, Ptyalism, Menstruatio
tempore non debito, Diarrhaea, etc. they are bad Symptoms; because they denote
much of a Colliquation, and divert Nature from her principal Work. Sweating is
a Separation of a different Nature from that of the Small Pox; and therefore by
Reason of its Diversion it is not to be encouraged; a gentle Breathing and
Relaxation of the external Habit, solicites the Eruption, and is good. A
Diarrhaea torminosa (unless from an habitual Colic, as in Mr. L -- 's Negroe
Caesar) even in Children is no good Symptom; with us it frequently attended the
Eruption in Children, and might be sometimes a Complication with that Looseness
incident to Children in the Autumn, or from Worms. In violent Colic Pains
emollient Glysters may be allowed, but with Discretion.

Upon the Eruption the Throat complains. The Ptyalism begins with the Eruption.

A Christalline Small Pox is a Colliquation, and therefore not good. Looseness
with a very hot Temper presage a confluent Sort. The Confluent Sort appear
sooner than the 4th Day, or by some violent Symptom are retarded until after
the 4th Day; the Symptoms continue after Eruption; they make their first
Appearance Erysipelas like.

Strong Diaphoreticks in any Fever, administered before a perfect Concoction of
the morbifick Matter, carry the Humors crude into the Brain, occasioning
Deliria, Comas, Convulsions; they likewise dissipate and expend the smooth
Lympha of the Blood. Opiats in some Cases, administered with Discretion, by
their relaxing Quality, conduce to the Eruption of the Small Pox; it has been a
generally received Opinion, that they check all Secretions, but in partu
dissicili, and Lochiorum fluxu impedito, the modern Physicians find nothing
more serviceable.

In the Winter Small Pox, Coughs, and Sore Throats, are great Complaints; they
occasion Want of Rest, and Sleep, and exhaust the Spirits; therefore if very
troublesome, give Anodynes with Discretion, and a light Pectoral Decoction for
their common Drink; guard the Chops with Flannels.

The Eruption Period admits of no Evacuation, excepting perhaps U. S. in some
Cases where the Fever continues to be very high.

Maturation.
After 3 Days Inflammation the Pustules begin to digest; where the Eruption was
protracted, in the same Manner the Digestion is protracted; first in the Face
and Neck, afterward gradually in the Trunk and Extremities, the lower
Extremities being last: The Duration of the Period of Maturation in bad Kinds
is very uncertain, (it is reckoned to continue until the Declension begins)
especially when accompanied with a Salivation, and Swellings, and may be
protracted to 10 or 12 Days, the longer always the worse: Where Nature is very
low, and no Succedaneum happens, the Fever and other bad Symptoms may continue
to the 18th Day before there is a perfect Maturation.

A round, florid, and turgid Pox is the Standard of Goodness. A turgid Pox,
with florid Interstices, from white becoming yellowish, promise well in all
Kinds: The frequent small, but distinct Sort called the Cohaerent, if they be
nearly round, after 3, 4, or 5 Days of Maturation, the Patient may do well
without Spitting; if they are very close, in the Maturation they enlarge their
Bases so much as to flow together; with a protracted Maturation, they continue
depressed and watery some Time before they turn yellowish, and are saved by a
Ptyalism, Swelling of Face and Hands, and sometimes by a Diabetical Profluvium.
A few, without Spitting or Purging, in a true confluent Sort, did well. After
Eruption is completed, if there appear in the Interstices several miliary
Blisters or Pustules, some filled with a limpid Serum, others of a dark red, it
is generally an ill Symptom, but some survive it. In the Maturation and
Declension, some small Eruptions sometimes appear in the Interstices, and dry
away again the same Day, without any Thing bad to be apprehended.

Frequently the Pustules ripening inflame the whole Habit, and occasion
Inquietudes; the Patient becomes hotter, and Pulse higher, which disturb Nature
in her Course; this is called the Second, or Maturation Fever: Here Paragoricks
(beginning the 6th Day) are as much a Specific as the Cortex Peruv. in
Intermittents. Sometimes U. S. is required. Sometimes a Salivation, with
Swellings of Face and Hands, or Diabetical Profluvium, put off the Return of
the Violence of the Fever. Women frequently have a Profluvium Mensium, 1st or
2d Day of Maturation, even tempore non debito, but it goes off gradually in a
Day or two. A difficult Swallowing, if only from the Small Pox in the Throat,
or Fauces, is tedious, but not a mortal Symptom; a Vesicatory to the Nape of
the Neck is of Use. When any Subsidence of Pox, or Swellings of Face, etc.
happen too soon, give Alexipharmicks (I do not mean Spirituous Cordials, which
are apt to raise febrile Effervescences of bad Consequence) as Vin. Canarin. ad
med. coct. Theriaca, Rad. Serp. Virgin, Bezoar, Lap. Contrayer v, etc.
Vesicatories also must be used to rouse the Spirits.

Salivation does not belong to a good Kind, and is only a Succedaneum; I
observed that in some, though very full, without any considerable Spitting or
Swelling, the Distemper had its Course more kindly and safely, than in others
who from a kind of malignant Colliquation, spit profusely, and swell very much;
where it is Nature's last Resource, it is very uncertain in the Event; W. W --
aet. 25, dies 11th of Eruption, after having spit freely, with Face and Hands
at his Exit well swelled. It frequently begins with the Eruption, and ought not
to decline until about the 11th of Illness; it is at first thin, but afterward
thick and ropy, and therefore requires Diluents plentifully; if too tough and
choky, use Gargles made of Barley-Water, decoct. Rad. Alth. and the like, with
Mel. Rosar, Syrup Violar, Oxymel, etc. If Suffocation is feared, or if the
Phlegm seem to lay low, give gentle Emeticks; I have given Cinabar. Nativ, and
have ventured small Doses of Calomel in a slow viscid tough Salivation with
some Benefit: I cannot recommend it but to the Discreet, it fuseth too much,
the Distemper it self being colliquative, it may occasion a Tabid Inanition. If
any febrile Efflorescence divert its Course, we must have Regard to the Fever.
Swellings of Face and Hands, sometimes Scroti and Preputii, or diabetical
Profluviums, come on as Subsidaries to the Salivation in its Declension; at the
Time when we are to expect the Swelling of the Hands, Epispasticks to the
Wrists may solicit the Humors thither, and the running of these Blisters
sometimes supplies the Defect of Spitting. As the Eruptions on the Hands are
later than those on the Face, so are their Swellings. In cold Weather
Salivation does not go on so kindly as at other Times. Purging sometimes must
be used to supply a deficient Salivation.

Continued Nauseas a bad Sign. Sudden Chilliness, Shiverings, Diarrhaea,
Vigiliae pertinaces, Deliria, and other violent Symptoms, not to be laid by
Opiats, portend a sudden Dissolution: If with the incipient Maturation the Pox
begin to dry, excepting in the most benign small dry distinct Sort, Death is at
the Door; or if in a protracted Maturation, they begin at any Time to dry
before they are filled with Pus, so far as the Species of the Pox will allow,
it is a bad Symptom. Pustules flaccid, or containing a watery Lymph, or
Purplish Sanies, are bad; of a hard livid strangled Color, signify that Nature
declines; sessile, dry, depressed, subsiding in the Center, or turning white,
are very malignant; Interstices livid, or pale, are bad.

Desquammation.
The Absence of Symptoms, with a craving Appetite, are good Signs; the Return,
or Increase of a Fever are bad. Scarce any (Purples and Haemorrhages excepted,
who die in all Stadia, according to the Degree of their pestiferous Malignity)
die but in the Declension; but this Period does sometimes begin with the first
of Maturation, or at any Time of the Maturation protracted, but not perfected.

In the Turning, the more the Scab approaches to a Bees Wax yellow Color, the
more benign. In the Cohaerent, which at length arrive to a complete Maturation,
even with Spittings and Swellings, the Declension is equally favorable as in
the Distinct, only the Patient complains more of being faint. In some
Constitutions, although the Pustules be large, distinct, and not frequent, this
Period was longer than usual (especially if Opiats are much used) with a
cadaverous Stench, and leaving deep Pits, Mrs. F -- aet. 30. This last Stadium,
with a sanious Scab returning fresh and fresh, may be protracted to many Days,
with a most tedious Expectoration of viscid Phlegm, and remaining Hecktick
Heat. Generally speaking, after a protracted Maturation, assisted by Salivation
and Swellings, the Pox do not begin to decline until the 13th or 14th Day; some
are not out of Danger until the 21st; T. I -- aet. 14, in a confluent Kind, a
Diarrhaea protracted the Course of the Distemper; a few not until the 24th Day.
D. L -- aet. 19, in the Apparatus a violent Lumbago, and Haemorrhagia narium
and uteri, intensely confluent, Declension attended with aguish Paroxysms, and
Hecktical Heats.

When the Pus is reabsorbed by the circulating Fluid, or when the dry
inseparable Crusts return the Foeculency into the Mass of Blood, happens a
third Fever (the first is in the Apparatus, called Eruptive Fever, the second
is in the Maturation, from the Inflammation of the Phlegmones) being of a
putrid Kind, and kills some the 11th, 14th, 17th, 21st, 24th Day of Illness,
being Critical Days; if Blisters are thought requisite, let them be applied the
Night preceding the Critical Days, and not delayed until the Fever rises,
because they add to the Heat and Effervescence of the Blood. This putrid Fever
requires immediate U. S. then cooling gentle Catharticks, especially if the
Incrustation is such that the Matter is too thick to be further absorbed; for
the Guts, besides the Inconveniences of being stuffed with Impurities, some
Part of their foeculent Contents re-enter by the Lacteals, and are a Pabulum to
the Fever. As a late Author well observes, upon a Retrocession of Swellings, or
any unlucky Translation upon the Vitals, it is easier directly to solicit the
Intestines to a Discharge than the Salival Glands, or Urinary Ducts. Sometimes
a Diarrhaea is a useful Succedaneum to a Salivation in Children.

Where Nature languishes, the Pustules subside. In the Confluent, if 9th of
Eruption the Face subsides, but Pox does not grow rough, 10th comes a putrid
Heat and Nausea, and 11th, being 14th of Illness, they die. Sometimes the
Patient to Appearance is in a fair Way, but of a sudden grows dull, then hot,
then sickish, and soon dies; Mrs. S -- aet. 25. Many in the Confluent Sort die
of mere Weakness, without any Delirium or considerable Fever; W. H -- Esquire.
Where the Pox turns to an Ash Color or white, then it is bad. A Hecktick Heat,
Eyes suddenly opening from the subsiding of the Face, a bad Omen. Scabs
brownish and blackish are Signs of Sphacelation; where full of Splits and
Cracks, are in Danger. A flat brownish Crust on the Face, with anhelosa
respiratio, and Deliriums at Times, although Temper and Pulse seem promising,
prognosticate Death; Mr. M -- 's Daughter died 14th of Eruption. Turning too
soon, with a dark black Crust, but no rough Scab, next Day came Stools and
Urine inscious I. B -- aet. 15: Some dry, burnt like, crusty Scabs on the Chin,
Nose, or Lips, too soon, a bad Omen, signifying a Hecktick Heat, and Death 11th
or 12th of Eruption; Mrs. C --, M. B --. When the Small Pox begins to scab
reddish, rough and purulent, always a bad Omen, M. T -- 's Beard, Mrs. E -- 's
Maid's Nose. Sanious Eructations instead of Pus, are very bad.

A Diabetical Profluvium, or Micturition, soon after Turning, are bad Symptoms;
Mrs. S -- dies 14th of Illness, with a putrid Heat and Nausea, Swellings in
good Order. M. T -- a full distinct Kind, in Coughing his Water flows from him
involuntary, dies 9th of Eruption, Hands well swelled. Mr. R -- full of a
distinct Sort, after 6 Hours of a Peripneumoniack Paroxysm, dies 9th of
Eruption with a Micturition. Mrs. E -- 's Maid after two Days Obstruction of
Urine, had all Evacuations involuntary for two Days, and then dies. The 12th or
13, a Micturition, and Dysury, followed by a Quantity of turbid Urine, with
Sediment, is good; but if thin and limpid, and in small Quantities, with a
Delirium Tremor and Subsultus, Death soon follows.

A Delirium, a dyspnaea or anhelosa respiratio, are bad Signs, but are
sometimes relieved by U. S. A short and weak Inspiration are Forerunners of
Death; but a difficult suspiriosa respiratio not so always, sometimes
proceeding from being stuffed with Phlegm, and is removed by a gentle Puke. In
the End of the Distemper, when violent, the Patient is sometimes so weak, that
for some short Time a Delirium, or rather Foolishness, continues from
Inanition. A cold Respiration is generally a mortal Sign, signifying some
internal Gangrene; T. N -- aet. 21, is an Exception, after a violent Delirium
of many Days (at other Times upon the least Disorder subject to febrile
Effervescencies) in the Declension had frigida respiratio, a Stammering which
continued ever after, and a Paralitick Weakness in one Arm, of which he soon
recovered. T. J -- aet. 14, had Convulsions 17th of Eruption (a Confluent Kind)
and next Day began to recover; these might proceed from Breast Milk, and some
Milk Punch administered to him unadvisedly, rather than from the Distemper. A
Twitching, a trembling Motion of the lower Jaw and Hands, involuntary Urine,
Tongue in a continued Motion, picking the Clothes of the Bed with the Fingers,
are reckoned mortal Symptoms. D. L. aet. 19, is an Exception; she began to
recover 24th of Illness in the worst Sort of Confluents.

A strong Vibration of the Carotide Arteries is generally a mortal Symptom. In
the End (from Inanition) when the Supply of Spirits to the Muscles and to their
Antagonists begin to fail, the Consequence is Tremblings and Twitchings, with a
weak and interrupted Pulse, and Difficulty of swallowing from a Palsy of the
Oesophagus. Many inflammatory Distempers as well as this, toward their fatal
End, when the Spirits are quite exhausted by the Lucta, much abate in all the
violent Symptoms, and the Patient has a Sort of Euthanasia, and says he is much
better, but soon dies.

The Confluent Small Pox, with an Erysipelas Efflorescence, which begin to dry
the Beginning of Maturation, with a dry Tongue, small and quick Puse, Subsultus
tendinum, etc. are mortal. As the yellowish Color is almost always salutary,
little black Specks and Pits are the reverse, proceeding a fervori intenso.
Itching of the Pustules denotes the Caustic Acrimony of the Matter, and is a
bad Sign, either leaving deep Pits, or if by Mismanagement it recede, must soon
demolish the delicate Texture of the Vitals.

Weakness and Nauseas in the Declension do not allow of Opiats, but a Cordial
Regimen, v. g. some cordial acidulated Julep, or for the poorer Sort some weak
Punch. When the Putrid Fever intermits, or considerably remits, the Cortex
Peruv. sometimes answers after a suitable cordial Cathartick, as is the Tinctur.
sacra. When the Pustules subside, and the Interstices turn pale, the Spitting
declines too fast, or Tumors of Face and Hands abate, give Paragoricks and
moderate Cordials, but nothing spirituous to rise Effervescencies; Mrs. P: had
Vin. Canarin. ad medias coct. Therica Venet, with pulv. rad. Serp. Virginian.
In the Apparatus she was brought to Bed 6 Weeks before her Time, Pox confluent
in her Face, began to recover the 12th of Eruption, had subsequent versatile
Rheumatick Pains and aedematous Legs, but by the Use of the free Air, and
Riding, soon was well. T. J. in the Confluent Kind, with a Diarrhaea in the
Declension, had Vin. rubr. Galic. ad medias coct. began to recover 18th of
Eruption, had subsequent Boils, etc.

Suffocations; if Hysterical, which are not uncommon to Women in the Confluent
Small Pox, use Antihystericks; if from the Glands of the Fauces tumified, use
acidulated Gargles and Vesicatories to the Nape of the Neck. In Urinary
Obstructions, use suitable Diuretics, and alter their Posture. In troublesome
Infarctions of the Nose, use Tents dipped in Butter, Ol. Oliv, Amyd. d. or inject
some emollient Mixture with Mel. Rosar.

A sharp Sanies, and corrosive Ichor, lodged, and at Times gleeting from under
the Scabs, occasion Pittings and Scars, which are not easily prevented. A
protracted Maturation, with a subsidiary Salivation, are most apt to pit;
fretting putrid feverish Heat is sometimes allayed by the Cortex Peruv.
covering the Parts with greased Rags retains the Halitus, oily Leniments stop
the Pores, Acupuncture admits the external Air too soon: foment with warm Milk,
which destroys the Acrimony.

Relics and Consequential Ails.
Most of the Varieties of the Small Pox, after the Patient is recovered
thereof, require no other Medicine than to be duly purged; and the more violent
the Distemper, the greater is the Necessity for Cathartick^* After the Stadia
are all over, the Body having been long bound, and no Sign of a Stool, first
clear the primae viae by soliciting with Suppositories, or give Emollient
Glysters and Lenitives, which open the Body without any Disturbance; afterward
use strong Catharticks, which may cleanse the whole Habit. Let the Temper and
Appetite be restored before we use these strong Catharticks (excepting some
Cordial Purges early in the Declension of some of the Cohaerent and Confluent
Kinds) lest you may thereby rouse and enrage some of the reliquiae, and bring
on a Flux by determining that Way.

After the Small Pox, some have Pthysical Coughs, Hectic Heats, Opthalmies,
aedematous Swellings in the Legs, Whitloes, Furunculi or small Boils, glandular
Tumors. Mrs. F -- aet. 20, had an Anchylosis in the Cubitus Articulation of
both Arms; T. N -- remained with a Stammering, from the Violence of the
Distemper upon these Nerves. The Scropulous Habits run the greatest Risque of
Consequential Ails.

A remaining Cough (which happens especially in the Winter Season) may bring on
a Pthisis, and therefore is not to be neglected: Begin with U. S. endeavor to
thicken and digest the Catarrh, and allay its Sharpness, use suitable
Antihecticks, but especially Change of Air.

If a Hectic Disposition remain after the Small Pox, begin by U. S. and then a
few convenient Catharticks; the Cortex Peruv. administered with Discretion is of
Use, riding in a free Air, and a Milk Diet; Milk new drawn from the Cow has a
peculiar healing Balsam, which it expends every Moment after it is taken from
the Cow, as some Mineral Waters do after their being taken from their Fountain.

In Opthalmies let Blood, give some Doses of Cinabar or Calomel, use Medicines
as if the Case was Scrophulous, wash the Eyes with warm Milk, a Cinabarine
Suffitus is good. Beware of drying astringent Collyriums or Eye.waters, for by
the imprudent Use of these I observed the Humors of the Eye thickened, and the
Sight lost in several.

For Oedematous Swellings use spirituous Fotus's and Riding.

The Spring of the Glands having suffered much, the Small Pox leaves scropulous
and other glandular Swellings. Boils, glandular, strumous or any other
Swellings, if possible, are to be brought to Suppuration, fearing a Translation
upon the Lungs, or any other noble Part; they are therefore upon their
Appearance to be encouraged by some simple Poultis, or Fotus, Empl. Diachyl.
cum. g. and the like.

Mr. P -- who by Way of Amusement applied himself much to Chemistry in England,
told me, that his Wife having suffered much in her Face, from a very bad Kind
of Small Pox; by the Use of a Mask made of Lead beat thin, the Inside smeared
with dissolved Sperma Ceti, and a very small Matter of crude Mercury, became
almost as beautiful as before the Small Pox.

Purples and Hoemorrhages.
Vesiculae miliares, Petechiae, Maculae purpureae, and Haemorrhages, are
Degrees of that colliquative and Caustic Infection which is more fatal than
the Plague it self. This Article cannot be called Practical, because such
Decumbents are not (or scarce) to be saved, the Constitution of the Person
being only in Fault, and not any particular Incident; but as it seldom happens
in Europe, that such Numbers and Varieties of Purples and Haemorrhages are to
be seen at the same Time in one Place, I thought it might be acceptable to the
curious. Even in this Place, last Small Pox Time, An. 1702, only 3 in these
Circumstances were observed, as I was well informed by John Clark, Esquire late a
noted Practitioner in Boston.

Purple Spots appear in the Apparatus and Eruption Periods, the Petechiae
generally appear late; both discover themselves first on the Breast, Neck, and
Arms. Miliary Blisters and Petechiae, their Increase in Number of Dimensions
portend ill, their Decrease are somewhat promising, being Signs of a more or
less Intenseness of the Caustic Affection, some few recovered; with Purple
Spots and Haemorrhages scarce any survived; the three Cases that came to my
Knowledge were not properly such in the Nature of the Distemper; Mr. D -- 's
Indian Boy, aet. 13, with a confluent Kind, his few and small pale Spots,
considering the Indian Complexion, are rather to be reckoned Petechiae; I. C --
aet. 19, confluent Small Pox, his few Purples were the Effects of violent
Exercise just before Decumbiture; Capt: T -- 's Negroe Man's bloody Urine was
from a Blow cross the Loins some short Time before, he had the Confluent Sort.
Dr. Sydenham gives an Instance of a Patient of Dr. Goodale's, An. 1691, in a
continued (but not Small Pox) Fever with brownish Spots on his Neck, Breast,
and Arms, attended with bloody Urine, cured; which he reckons a Prodigy in
Medicine, and the greatest Cure he ever did know. Dr. Morton never knew but one
recover, a Patient of Dr. Slare's, in July, 1692, a sanguine Woman, aet. 20,
with a few Petechiae and bloody Urine, by Spitting, and a very unusual Swelling
of Face and Hands saved. Dr. Huxham says, that in the malignant Small Pox at
Plymouth, An. 1724, 1725, he knew but one Person that survived Purple Spots;
some died 5th or 6th Day, some dwindled till the 10th or 11th Day; he heard of
none who had bloody Urine.

Some Families Blood is more apt to be fused by the Small Pox Infection than
others, as I instanced before. Purple and black Spots are Indices of a begun
Mortification; the cadaverous Stench of the Breath and Stools in many of them,
is a plain Sign of an inward Gangrenous Disposition: Haemorrhages declare the
Consistance of the Blood and Texture of the Solids dissolved. The Degrees of
Spots are, black the most malignant, purple, blue, red, brown, dusky, with
their greater or smaller Dimensions. Purple Spots, if they increase in Numbers
or Dimensions, denunciate some impending Haemorrhage, and soon after the
Catastrophe. E. G -- aet. 18, by generous Alexipharmicks his Purples increased
to Millions, soon after bloody Stools, and dies next Day.

Some few have miliary Blisters or Purple Spots, with a large distinct crude
Kind mali moris; Mr. F -- 's Indian, aet. 25; Mr. C -- 's Indian, aet. 15, they
died the 14th Day.

Purples have generally a strangled Countenance, and an Erisypelas like Small
Pox, especially if Haemorrhages are to follow, frequently a profuse Salivation.
The Symptoms in the most intense Kind of Purples, are only Suspiria, and great
Dejection of Spirits, without any violent Symptom. Capt. C -- 's Indian Woman,
aet. 45, had the first Day Erisypelas like Eruptions in Arms and Hands, dies
the 3d Day with Purples, bloody Stools, bloody Spittle, and vomiting Blood, The
milder Sort are attended with spasmodick Pains in the Breast, Back, etc.

Alexipharmicks, or Emeticks, or Vesicatories, used in Purples, soon bring a
Hoemorrhage and Death by several Days too premature, as I could instance in
many. By U. S. and a cool Regimen (Milk and Water for their Drink) I protracted
the Lives of some to the 14th Day.

In the Year 1721, we had in Boston 5989 ill of the Small Pox, whereof died
844; of these upwards of 80 (that is 1 in 10) died with Purple Spots and
Haemorrhages, whereof 65 came to my Knowledge (not including I. C -- 's
Purples, Capt. T^'^ Negroe's bloody Urine, and Mr. D -- 's Indian Boy's
Petechiae) and whose Cases I committed to Writing. The Varieties of their Cases
at length cannot be inserted in an Abstract, but for the Contemplation of the
curious I shall reduce them thus; Of White Persons died 16 Men, 24 Women, 18
Children, (all under 14 aet. I call Children) 7 Indians, no Negroes; of the
Women 7 were pregnant, whereof 3 at their full Time were brought to Bed, 3
suffered Abortion at 5 or 6 Months; 1. Mrs. L. 5 or 6 Months gone with Child,
had a confluent Sort with a few Spots, and in the Beginning of Maturation a
violent Haemorrhage at the Nose, dies the 17th without Proflavium or Abortion.

In these 65 Cases, 20 had Purples only without Haemorrhages; one D. I. aet.
15, had no Purples, but Spittle and Urine dilutely tinctured with Blood; the 44
following, besides Purples had Haemorrhages, viz. bloody Urine 6, Profluvium (I
mean muliebre) 5, bloody Spittle 11, Haemorrhage at the Nose 2, bloody Stools
1, Urine and Spittle 1, Urine Stools and Spittle 1, Urine Spittle and
Profluvium 1, Urine and at the Nose Spittle and Stools 1, Profluvium and at the
Nose 1, Profluvium and Spittle 2, Stools and at the Nose 2, Stools and Spittle
3, Stools and Vomiting 3, Stools Spittle and Vomiting 1, Vomiting and by the
Pores of the Skin under the Nose, and at the Corners of the Eyes 1, at the Gums
and Mouth 1, Mrs. W.'s Indian Woman, 6th of Illness suddenly seized with all
Sorts of Haemorrhages, soon dies wallowing in her Blood.

These 65 died at various Periods, reckoning from the Beginning of their
Illness. With Purples only, dies fourth Day of Illness 2, fifth Day 5, sixth
Day 1, seventh Day 1, ninth Day 4, eleventh Day 2, fourteenth Day 3,
seventeenth Day 2. With Haemorrhages only, the eighth Day 1: With Purples and
Haemorrhages, the third Day dies 1, fourth Day 6, fifth Day 6, sixth Day 12,
seventh Day 6, ninth Day 5, tenth Day 1, eleventh Day 1, twelfth Day 1,
thirteenth Day 2, fourteenth Day 2, seventeenth Day 1, being only a Haemorrhage
at the Nose, which did not continue:

Hence we may learn that no Ages nor Sex are exempted from Purples and
Haemorrhages. Mrs. C. was 60 aet. Capt. C.'s Child 6 Months old. 2. Of the
various Races or Species of Mankind, if we may so express it, the American
Indians are the most liable to them, and the African Negroes the least; although
in the Year 1721 our Negroe Slaves were ten Times the Number of our Indian,
(the Province having discouraged the Importation of Spanish Indians, because of
their valetudinary state of Health) there died 7 Indians, but not one Negroe
with these dismal Symptoms. 3. Pregnant Women are in some Danger of Purples and
Haemorrhages.

FINIS.
The Booksellers to the Reader.
THE Author's crowding so copious a Subject into a short Abstract, and his
Unwillingness to debase a Physical Performance by using of a vulgar Style with
low Circumlocutions, obliges us for the general Benefit of those who are not
much conversant with Books of this Nature, to give the following Explanations
of some Physical Terms.

To Acidulate, to give it a gentle sowring Smartness. Alexipharmicks, high
Cordials, being generally violent hot Medicines. Anhelosa Respiratio, A short
Asthmatick Breathing. Anodynes, Paragoricks, and Narcoticks, ease Pain, compose
to Sleep, and are generally Opiats. Apparatus, the Period preceding the first
Fever. Boufi, bloated or tumified. Catharticks, Purges. Caustic, Fiery,
consuming Nature. Colliquation, a Melting or Dissoving. Coma, is here meant a
Dosing, or Lethargick Sleep. Crapula, Gormandizing. Crisis, the Change or
Turning of a Distemper. Deliria, Ravings and Talking idly. Diabetical, is an
immoderate Evacuation by Urine. Diaphoresis, Sweating or sensible Perspiration.
Diarrhaea, a Looseness, or more than ordinary Evacuation by Stool. Diuretics,
Promoters of the Secretions of Urine. Dyspnaea, Difficulty in Breathing.
Dysuria, Difficulty in making of Water. Emeticks, Medicines that work by
Vomiting, Endemial, proceeding from some Cause peculiar to the Country.
Epispasticks, Vesicatories, or blistering Applications. Erysipelas, St.
Anthony's Fire. Exanthemata, Pustulae, Eruptions on the Skin. Exoticks,
imported from foreign Countries. Foeculencies, Juices foul and impure. Fotus, a
Fomentation. Fused, dissolved, or having lost its Consistence. Glands Inguinal,
Axillary, and Parotidal, are those Kernels in the Groin, Armpits, and behind
the Ears. Hoemorrhage, an Efflux, or Loss of Blood. Halitus, Vapor, or Steam.
Horripulation, a Shuddering, or Quivering, as Ague Fits begin. Insultultus
Epileptici, Epileptick Convulsions, or Fits. Juvantia and Laedentia, such
Things as are found by Trials to be beneficial or hurtful. Limpid Serum, clear
watery Liquid or Matter. Languor, Faintness or Lassitude. Lumbago, Pain in the
Loins. Maturation, Ripening or filling of the Pox Miasma, infecting subtle
Particles. Micturition, a frequent Inclination to make Water. Miliares, big as
Millet Seed, or small drop Shot. Nausea, a Loathing. Necrosis, commonly
expressed by struck with Death. Oedematous, white Swelling or Tumor.
Opthalmies, Inflammations of the Eyes. Peripneumonick, Inflammations of the
Lungs. Petechiae, Spots in the Skin like Flea-bites. Plethora, a full Habit of
Body. Primae Viae, the intestinal Tract, or Guts. Profluvium, any Evacuation
become immoderate. Pthisis, a Consumption. Ptyalism, a Salivation or profuse
Spitting. Pus, Quitter or Matter. Pustules, the Eruptions in the Small Pox.
Regimen, Government in Diet and Way of living. Sanies, a watery sharp Matter or
Quitter. Scrophulous, like the King's Evil. Spasmodick, Cramp like or convulsed
Pains. Specific, some intrinsic peculiar Property whereby a Disease is
subdued. Sphacelation, a perfected Mortification. Stadia, the several Periods
or Stages. Subsultus Tendinum, Twitching of the Tendons, particularly in the
Wrists. Succedaneum, any suitable Thing substituted in the Place of another.
Suppedanea, Applications to the Soles of the Feet. Suppuration, is the Ripening
of a Tumor by bringing it to Matter. Tabid, Pining away, as do Consumptive
People. Testacea, Preparations of Shells, Crabs Eyes, Coral, etc. Variolous,
belonging to the Small Pox. U. S. Blood letting. Vesicules, Small Bladders or
Blisters. Vigiliae, Watchings, or Want of Sleep. Vomiturition, a frequent
Inclination to vomit.
Errata.
Page 1. Line 7. read Valetudinarians. -- 2. -- 37. read 311 for 31. -- 4. --
13. read kind for kind. -- 27. -- 8. for hard read lurid. -- 28 -- 3. for
Hecktick read Hectic. -- 29. dele for. -- 32. -- 25. for covering read
Covering. -- 39. -- 20. for first Fever read Eruption.

