A LETTER TO Doctor ZABDIEL BOYLSTON; Occasioned by a late Dissertation
CONCERNING INOCULATION; Printed at Boston.

Cum tot in hac -- Populorum vita Salusque Pendeat -- Saevitia est voluisse
mori.

LUCAN Pharsal. l.5. BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN over against the old
Brick-Meeting House in Cornhil, and T. HANCOCK at the sign of the Bible and
three Crowns in Annstreet. M. DDC. XXX.

TO Doctor Zabdiel Boylston.
Dear Sir,
SO great is your Practice both in Town and Country, and such is your Care and
Though It of your Patients, that I believe you have hardly any time to Read D -- s'
Dissertation of the Inoculation of the Smallpox: You will therefore take it
not amiss, if I save you the labor of reading that injudicious Piece, by
giving you this Evening some Strictures upon it.

IT surprised me to find one, who is reputed a Scholar, and values himself upon
a Degree which he little deserves, committing several manifest Grammatical
Blunders in a Sheet or two: And yet if he had reserved them all for the
Dissertation, I should have forgiven them; but I can by no means excuse any one
in a Dedication: Methinks he might, in honor to his Degree and Character, have
afforded good Mr. JEKYLL his Patron good sense for a Quarter of a Sheet without
any Error at all; but it seems he has not; whether it proceeded from an unhappy
Ignorance, or a noble Negligence one may easily conjecture: To speak in Medical
Terms, says he, Integrity seems to be in the Constitution of your Family. He
may call you a Quack, if he pleases; but I am sure he is a Blunderbuss to make
the Constitution of Mr. JEKYL's Family Medical Terms. And by the way, here, he
seems to me to be as much out in point of Decency, as ^n Grammar: For I cannot
but think it a great, invidious and inexcusable Neglect in him, when he
mentions Mr. JEKYL's Family and its Constitution, and applauds his Uncle, to
overlook his Reverend Father, who was an Eminent Clergyman, and as I have been
informed from undoubted Authorities, was highly esteemed for his Probity,
Integrity and many more Virtues.

THERE are one or two considerable Errors more of his in the Dedication, and
diverse gross ones in the Dissertation; but I shall not stay to expose them;
lest You, and others, should think I regard his Words more than his Meaning and
his Sounds rather than his Sense.

BEFORE I come to what immediately relates to the Controversy concerning
Inoculation; I must inform You, that our Author says in his Dedication, With
out Passion or Prejudice -- I shall impartially relate the History, etc. But,
notwithstanding this good Promise, in his Book he shows his old Passion and
Prejudice against You, and your excellent Friend the late Doctor MATHER.

IN page 10. he says, he can seldom have recourse to your Accounts; I expected
his Reason would be, because they were scarce here when he wrote his
Dissertation; but his Reason is, because (as he says) of their being so jejune,
lame, suspected, and only in the nature of a Quack Bill. If this be a good
Reason; many, and I in particular, can seldom have recourse to his insipid
Pamplet: For many things are jejune and lame in it, I suspect several things,
and I verily believe any Quack in Christendom would, with the Assistance he has
had, produce as good a Performance. And as for your part, you need not regard
his Character of your Account of Inoculation here, when it has been approved by
Dr. JURIN the late Secretary of the Royal Society, and many other Persons of
Learning and Figure; and when (notwithstanding he calls your Dedication of it
to the Princess of WALES assuming) it met with a kinder Reception from her
Royal Highness, and a more favorable Entertainment from all the wise and
impartial, than his Dissertation ever ought to or will have among Men of
Understanding, or his Dedication from his Patron. And so much concerning your
Book.

AS to you your self he tells us, that when your Business ran low here, you
went for LONDON, and expected under the Character of an experienced Inoculator,
a profitable Encouragement there, but was entirely disappointed, page 7. This
is an idle surmise, and great Untruth of his; for you went not to LONDON under
that Character he tells of; nor, as you have informed me, would you inoculate
there; though you were often pressed and encouraged to it.

BUT he is not content with a rude Usage of you in his Dissertation; He must
also tell his Patron, that you are a Man of no Literature and habitual
Rashness. I must confess, that I took upon you to be as well acquainted with
your Business as the Graduated Doctor: You seem, from what I can learn, as well
as he, to understand the Theory of Diseases; and as to the Curing of them, I
believe every Practitioner in Physic at BOSTON will give you the Preference.
Nor do I think any of them will blame you for the habitual Rashness, which he
charges you with, so much as they do and will him for his actual Rashness in
many Instances, but especially with Regard to his Excellency our late
Governor. -- Nec te, improbe, Saltem -- Terruit Exempl^ Phaeton. I have now
done with you, Doctor, but not with D -- s; nor shall I, on his Account, leave
off my Letter this good while.

D -- s has but few words and spiteful of Dr. MATHER; but it had been better
for him to have said nothing at all than to traduce and lessen the Character of
that great Man: He might well think every good Man would contemn every
disgraceful word given out concerning that Pious and Learned Gentleman, and at
the same time abhor the Person who speaks or writes it.

I shall not dwell on his saying the Doctor had TIMONIUS' and PYLARINUS's
Accounts surreptiously, which is a paltry word, and has an ill sound. What does
the Blade mean by it? Would he make us believe the Doctor Stole the Book from
somebody he lent it to, that so he might have the Honor of the new fangled
Notition, p. 2. Yes, so his words plainly import: But such an Insinuation,
(besides the weakness he betrays in it; inasmuch as he (imagining the aforesaid
Accounts, published to the World to be his private Property) supposes no one,
but he, had any Right to know the Purport of them) it conveys also in it a
notorious Falsity; and therefore tends to the Disgrace of the Accuser, and is
no Disparagement to the Deceased. -- When the Doctor was alive, he though it it a
Praise and an Honor to be Dishonored and insulted by such Miscreants as D --
s: and if he be maletreated now by such, it is still a Glory to him.

BUT I can by no means put up his 8th page: In that he says, The best of men
have some Foible, and that of Dr. MATHER' s was Credulity. How natural is it to
retort here, that the worst of men have many Foibles; and those of Dr. D -- s
seem to be Incredulity, Malice and Ill Nature. But suppose one should deny
Credulity to be the Doctor's Foible; the Instances he has bro't to prove it, in
the aforesaid Page, will never do it: For several of the Matters of Fact
therein are indisputably true, as there are many in BOSTON who can testify. D
-- s indeed says, that allowing such bold Assertions without disproving them,
would be leading Mankind into a Snare. Why then did not he, first of all,
disprove 'em, and then advise Mankind, as thoughtless Birds, to avoid the
Snare? Surely he was unwise that he did not at large demonstrate, that when Dr.
MATHER said he never knew Blistering miss of saving Life in the Small Pox, etc.
He did know that it had missed, He mistook or He lied. If he had done so in
this particular, and so in the rest, he would have disproved all the Doctor's
Assertions in his Letters to the Royal Society. But after all, (if those
Stories or Accounts were Mistakes,) they were undoubtedly the real Sentiments
of the Doctor; (as well as many others;) and for D -- s to treat his
Communications (which men of the greatest Characters abroad received with
Deference and Respect) with such Insolence and Rudeness, it proves him unworthy
the Nation from which he boasts Original, and undeserving of any Esteem or
Practice in the American Regions.

I shall not run into any long Animadversions on Dr. BRADY of Portsmouth, for
saying (as D -- s quotes him, p. 7.) What wretched work the Gentleman (h. e.
Dr. MATHER) makes in his Accounts? It was ridiculous in him to say so, unless
he knew and could prove (which he could not) his Accounts to be wretched; and
it was wretched Folly in D -- s to produce his Scrible for nothing; unless
indeed it might sooth him in his Misfortune, of being the Doctors Enemy and
Accuser, to find one (as there now and then has happened such an one) who has
detracted from the Doctor as well as he. But I shall not insist here.

NOR shall I add any thing further in Favor of the Doctor, but that I would
have D -- s know, if his Credulity was ever so great in other things; he was
not so credulous as to believe him endued with Learning or Wit, with Virtue or
Honor, with Civility or Manners; and I find a considerable part of the Town in
this of the same Opinion with the Doctor.

I said, I would add nothing further; but I cannot help subjoining, that if D
-- s, or any other of the same rash and illjudging Constitution (he will
forgive the Medical Terms) with him, shall dare to attack the Name and
Reputation of the Doctor, he and they shall know, there are some who will
always rise in his Defense to their Confusion.

AND now for Inoculation! Without any foreign and useless Remarks, which would
swell my Letter to a Volumn, let us come to the Merits of the Cause.

AND here, at the same Time that I am flushed with Joy to find how frankly D --
s owns that Dr. MEAD, Sir HANS SLOANE and PITCAIRN his Countryman, all
celebrated Physicians, countenanced and favored the Practice; (though by the way
this looks as if they had Credulity as well as Dr. MATHER) I am filled with
sorrow that I have not one of those Gentlemen's Books by me, nor any one of the
other Treatises, out of which D -- s has selected Passages; so that I cannot
tell whether he has quoted them exactly or no: For my part my Credulity shall
run so far as to allow it.

GRANTING then that all his Quotations are just and fair; let us Examine the
several Heads he has offered, under which he has collected the Histories of
Facts, as he calls them, from Dr. NETTLETON, Mr. MAITLAND and others.

1. FROM NETTLETON and MAITLAND he says and shows, that some receive not the
Distemper at all. And what then? Some receive not the Distemper at all in the
natural Way, when they are surrounded on every side with it: Perhaps there may
be no proper Pabulum in their Bodies for it to prey on. Why then should this be
accounted an Objection against Inoculation? For how is it likely or possible
that it should take Effect, when the Fluids are not in a Capacity to receive
it? But granting they were, and allowing that the Operation had no such Effect
as to procure the Distemper; still those who are Inoculated are not a whit the
worse for it: Nay, I have Reason to think some have fared the better for it.
The Reverend Mr. W -- now living at Roxbury, on whom it did not take place, (as
D -- s beautifully translates a Passage in PYLARINUS) has enjoyed his Health
since he was inoculated much better than before; and he ascribes it, in part,
to his Incisions.

2. HE remarks, from his Author Mr. MAITLAND that some had only Eruptive
Fevers: I suppose, he means resulting from Inoculation, or he has no meaning at
all. But who will be dissuaded from Inoculation if there really were two or
three such Instances? Pray, Doctor BOYLSTON, when you see D -- s ask him,
Whether these Eruptive Fevers are the natural and genuine Effect of
Inoculation, or whether (to use a word or two of his) they arise only from some
accidental Contagition? If he says the former, you can easily prove the
contrary by numerous witnesses and incontestible: For who among your inoculated
Patients has had this eruptive Fever? Be so kind as to tell him or me, if any
one has. But if he says the latter, it had been better for him to have laid
aside his diabetical Pen, than permit its Dropping to so little Purpose.

3. HE takes notice from Dr. NETTLETON, that others from Inoculation have the
Smallpox to so small a Degree as to admit of Doubt. Dr. NETTLETON may say,
that in three of his Patients the Eruptions were so imperfect as to leave him
in Doubt: But then, as I remember, he somewhere observes, that his Doubts were
dissipated at their Recovery; for then they went any where, regardless of the
Contagion and invulnerable: And if others fare in the same Manner, where will
be the Disadvantage to Inoculation or those who receive it? Sure I am this
looks rather as a Proof and Confirmation of Inoculation than any Objection
against it.

4. OTHERS have the worst Sort. For Peace sake, I am ready to allow D -- s and
his Friends this; but he will allow me to say modestly with PYLARINUS, they
most frequently have the distinct Sort. Here D -- s may learnedly comment on
most frequently, (as in page 11.) h. e. not always so. And I must confess, it
is not always so, that those who are inoculated have the distinct and best
Sort. It would be censured as unfair here, if I should say that such may have
received the Smallpox before Inoculation; but is it not equally unjust to lay
either the coheerent or confluent Kind to Inoculation? It is certainly as
absurd, at least, to say, that even in Times of General Infection none may have
taken the Destemper before they have been inoculated; as it is unfair to
pronounce such infected before Inoculation who have it very bad: So that under
this Head the contending Parties may shake hands. But for Argument sake, I
should be willing to allow that some who have received the Smallpox by
Incisions, have yet been very full of Pocks, and even of the confluent Kind;
but then they are very few in Comparison with those who have a benign Sort and
favorable Symptoms, as all who are not blind, or perversely wilful and
illnatur'd, may See. Even the dull, the heavy-ey'd, the sleepy D -- s himself
can perceive it, and dares acknowledge it in page 25. and 26.

5. SOME have died of it. I am free to grant it, to oblige him, (who never
obliged any body nor favored any Thing, unless for his own Profit, viz.) our
Graduated Friend. But if some have died, their Number is very Small. Dr. JURIN,
as D -- s confesses, has showed that, of those who have been inoculated in
Great Britain, nine only have died in 448, which is one in about 49, or 50. And
the same ingenious Doctor has proved from the Bills of Mortality at London,
that one in about 6, or 7, or 8. at farthest, have died of the natural
Smallpox. For my part I am ready to acknowledge, (what he desires and contends
for page 22.) that but one in ten here have died of the natural Smallpox; or,
if it will satify him and his Chronies, that but one in Twenty have given up
the Ghost with it: And yet, when I have allowed this, the Practice of
Inoculation appears by far the most successful and advantageous; and therefore
every wise Man, in Danger of the Smallpox, will prefer the taking of it by
Incisions.

As for those who have died under, or after, or (if he please^) of Inoculation
in New England; I cannot but think, and I have the Pleasure to find that many
are with me in the Opinion, that, if the sordid D -- s had any Thing of the
Generous in his abject Mind, he would have relied upon it, that you have fairly
acknowleged all and every one you knew to have died under or of it: But it
seems he will not believe you. And why? Because, forsooth, Mrs. G. whispers that
there were many more who died of it. And will Mr. Goose believe her Whisper
sooner than your open Declaration? And not she alone says this; but (continues
he p. 14.) some Porters say that it was whispered in sundry Houses, where the
Dead had been carried from, that the Person had been inoculated. But if he
places such Confidence in what some Porters heard whispered sure I am he
deserves to be treated like a Porter. And I cannot but think it no Small
Reflection on our Ultrajectine Doctor; that he knows what the Porters say; it
looks as if he were acquainted with them. But this is not all. To these Reports
he adds p. 15. I am certain of one more who died after Inoculation, as they
express it, having with her Inoculator attended her in her Illness, this was
Housekeeper to etc. Here I could make You and myself merry with that admirable
Paragraph, having with her Inoculator attended her in her Illness; But I will
not, as long as I know his Meaning. In Answer to which, I protest, first of
all, that I question whether she was Inoculated? But if she was, I maintain her
Death is no Disgrace to Inoculation: For it is whispered, (And may not our
Whispers be as good as D -- s'?) that she was a Strumpet, who (if she had not
at the time of her Inoculation some foul Distemper) had some Remains of the
Venereal Taint in her gross and filthy Body; But if she were as chaste, virtuous
and pure as Diana herself, her Small Pox Fever, he confesses began after two
Days, I suppose he means on the third Day: It is therefore at least probable
that the Wench had received the Infection before; and by consequence it was
hardly worth his while to make any noise about it.

AS to what he has remarked of Capt. OSBORN's Account in the Royal
Transactions; it is enough to say, that those Words, I knew of so many who were
inoculated, were expres'd in a loose and careless Manner by him; and that all
he seems to mean, is, he believed there had been that Number or thereabouts
inoculated; which indeed was all he could pretend to say: For it is
questionable whether he did or could absolutely know, being at London, how many
you had inoculated, unless you had sent him an Account, which I suppose yo^ did
not. From his Account therefore, for D -- s to gather and assert that 20 or 30
Inoculated Persons are concealed, many of which (he says, p. 15.) without Doubt
are in their silent Graves; it shows he has a great deal of ill natured
Partiality, unreasonable Prejudice and faulty Credulity against Inoculation

Upon what he further relates (p. 15. and 16.) of the two Questions, which
either he or some other Noddy asked; I shall only observe that I conceive the
latter did not answer his Question so well as the former: For Silence is the
best Answer to an impertinent Question, whether it be asked by a knowing
Physician or an illiterate Mechanic.

6. D -- s goes on, and says, that Inoculation sometimes leaves Impostumations
and other Ails. For this he quotes a Passage of PYLARINUS, which I wish he had
been so kind as to translate, but he would not; because that Author writes,
however such Things have happened, rarissime tamen, they are most rare and
unusual. So it has proved in New England, and perhaps the same would have
appeared more fully in Britain, if due Care had been taken to purge the
Restored.

7. D -- s plumply affirms page 17. those who have had a Genuine Smallpox by
Inoculation never can have it again in the natural way by Reason and
Experience. A bold Assertion this! But, as bold as it is, he says, We may
confidently pronounce it; so that now he seems to be one of us. I believe, that
he, and some other Doctors in Town, have held the contrary; and I hope they
will show themselves, now at least as ingenuous as he, by making a public
Retractation.

But what if from their Incisions, the Patients have not the genuine Smallpox,
but imperfect Eruptions? Will these excuse them from the Smallpox? To be plain
and open, Doctor BOYLSTONE, I would roundly say No. And I may well say so: For
Dr. JURIN imagines it possible for those who have fairly had the Smallpox in
the natural way to have it a Second Time, and He brings an example for the
Proof of it: This I could not but take Notice of in his Treatise of
Inoculation, dedicated to the Princess of WALES; but not having his Book, which
I obtained of a Friend, now by me, I cannot refer to the Page where this is
reported. But upon it I think it proper to remark, that as ^he Instances of
this Second Infection are uncommon in the natural Way; So they are unusual in
the way of Incisions: They are scarcer, a far greater Rarity than Pious and
Religious Physicians: For ubi tres Medici, ibi duo Athei; but among three
hundred Persons who have had the Smallpox from Incisions, there have hardly
been two, who have had it again.

8. He says p. 20. If it is not used with Circumspection, it is of pernicious
Consequence to populous and Trading Towns. Here I frankly acknowledge, that, if
only two or three Persons have the Small Pox in a City or Town, and there were
no likelihood of its Spreading, it is not so proper, nay, to gratify him, it is
pernicious to inoculate and spread the Infection: But where many already have
it, and several are daily visited with it, unbounded Inoculation (in his Style)
seems to me so far from an Hardship and a damping of Trade, that I am verily
persuaded, if all those in Boston who have not had the Small Pox would be
inoculated in one week, it would be vastly better for the Town: For thereby we
should be speedily rid of the Distemper. But now, if the Small Pox goes on in
the usual Method, the Town must linger under it many Months, and its Trade and
Commerce will not only be damped; but have a Stop in a great Measure put to it
for a considerable Time.

9. I have nothing to write against what he remarks (p. 21.) of the
Communication of constitutional Distempers as a Difficulty: It will perhaps be
found one, if the Pus be taken from those of bad Constitutions and ill Habits:
But where will be the Difficulty, if the Pus be taken from one, who before the
Small Pox, was a sound and vigorous Youth, whose Juices were in a due State of
Fluidity, and who therefore was in Perfect Health. In this Case, I should think
the Patient safe, and (to borrow from D -- s) I should take all Fear to be
chimerical and conjectural.

Thus I have gone through his several Heads or Propositions, which he has
confirmed by Authorities: I could easily animadvert on some more Particulars
under those general Heads; but it is Time almost to conclude my Letter.

Indeed I cannot help thinking, that D -- s himself, in page 25. has in a few
Lines overthrown all the foregoing Part of his Dissertation, wherein the
Difficulties and Discouragements of Inoculation are laid down by him: For there
he allows, that the Small Pox received by Incisions is found not so mortal, and
that the Symptoms are generally more favorable, than when it is received by
accidental Contagition. Now, you, nor I, nor yet any other reasonable Man, can
desire any more: For if the Small Pox is less mortal and the Symptoms are more
favorable by Incisions than by the natural way; then he is a Simpleton, not to
say worse, who when he is in Danger, will not be inoculated. And then, if, as
he further writes in the same Page, one may take the advantage of benign
Smallpox Constitution and a favorable Season of the Year; if one may prepare
his Body for it, and remove the Anxiety which some are possessed with through
Fear of the Small Pox: I say, if all these Benefits and Advantages flow from
Inoculation, he, who is near the Small Pox, and does not get inoculated, either
knows not his Interest or disregards his Welfare. D -- s himself must have
drawn this Conclusion, if he had made any Inference from what he says of the
Advantages of Inoculation.

It pleases me much, that the Physicians in Town don't think Inoculation
criminal now, whatever might be their Conceptions formerly: But D -- s's Reason
(I say his; for it can never be theirs) is poor for obviating their suspicion
that it was so; viz. The Example of the Royal Family. I must confess their
Example is of great Force; and the success the Practice of Inoculation has met
with on the Royal Offspring, the Hopes and Joys of Britain and its Dependencies
is a strong Inducement and sufficient Encouragement to the Practice, were it in
its own nature indifferent: But if the Practice be a Crime in it self, no
Examples, however successful, in favor of it, would make it cease to be
criminal.

What he says, (in page 26, viz. that the Practitioners in Town do generally
resolve to perform the Operation when required) is very greatful to you, I
believe, as well as the other Friends of Inoculation: It shows they have a just
value for the Lives of good People: their Resolution is a credit, and their
Second Thoughts will bring Honors to them: It is frequent for fallible Men ^^
(...) in Mistakes through Pride (...) Obstinacy; and yet it is monstrous, absurd
and disreputable

But it is now high time to break off; I shall do so, by wishing that no one
will be so unadvised as to trust himself in D -- s hands under Inoculation;
(for I believe he still retains some of his old Spleen against the Practice);
by letting you know that, let D -- s write what he will about Inoculation or
any thing else, I will (if no one else will expose him) take liesure
Opportunity to show his Blunders and Errors; and by assuring you, that I am,
with great Esteem and Affection,

Dear Sir, Your very faithful humble Servant.
March 8, 1729, 30.

