A DISSERTATION CONCERNING Inoculation OF THE SMALLPOX

Giving some account of the Rise, Progress, Success, Advantages and
Disadvantages of receiving the Small Pox by Incisions illustrated by sundry
cases of the Inoculated.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed for ^* HENCHMAN in Cornhill, and T. HANCOCK at the Sign
of the Bible and Three Crowns in ^^^street. M. DCC. XXX.

TO John Jekyll Esquire; Collector of His Majesty's Customs in Boston, New England.
SIR,
A Sincere and disinterested regard for the good of my Neighbors, is the
motive of this present Publication: without Passion or Prejudice, laying aside
all useless Speculations and Subtilities, as out of the Question in cases of
Fact and Experience; I shall impartially relate, The History, Success and,
Benefits of the Method of receiving the Small Pox by Incisions or Inoculation,
as it is called, so far as it has come to my knowledge. Altercations in matters
of Fact obvious to the Senses, are trifling and absurd; let Facts be truly
related and set in a proper Method or Light, the generality of Mankind are
capable to judge for themselves. I shall not be too free with Names of Persons,
only where the vouching of Facts may seem to require it. There have been too
early and strong Prejudices, both for and against this Method; People have been
partially Credulous or Incredulous of Facts, as they make for or against their
respective Opinions, viz, In some it savoured much of Credulity, Levity, and
Novelty, to be bigotly Zealous for it; in others it showed too much of strong
Prejudices, Passions or Obstinate Humor, to be furiously against it: they seem
to have acted the fairest part, who exclaiming only against rash and irregular
procedure, were willing to wait patiently until time and a cautious experience
should direct their judgments.

MANY great discoveries in Physic have been opp^sed by the generality of the
Faculty at their first appearance, Antimonial Vomits, Mercurial Preparations,
the Peruvian Bark, etc. had this fate; but are now by experience proved to be
the best of Medicines. It was not by reasoning we learnt that the Bark cures
Agues, that Opium relieves Pain, or Mercury carries off the Venereal taint; it
was by accident, but afterward confirmed by Experience. How mean or rash
soever the beginning of the Practice of Inoculating the Small Pox may have
been; if many Years practiced by Old Women only, and neglected by the Sons of
Art in Turkey; if in another part of the World a Person of no Literature and of
habitual Rashness, from a third hand hearsay of an ever Credulous person, first
attempted it indifferently on all who would pay for it, without regard to Age,
Sex, Constitution, other Circumstances, and Caution's which trials of such
Consequence may require; as it is one of the inconveniences of Humane Life,
that all the World over, Ignorance, Assurance and Rashness pushes on some to
attempt without fear or discretion what would make the most exquisite Artist
tremble to touch; nevertheless if in the Event by repeated experiments it prove
useful, it ought to be embraced.

WE find by some Years Experience, that the Small Pox abstractedly considered,
received by Inoculation is not so Fatal and the Symptoms frequently more mild,
than in the accidental Contagion; yet it is not of that certain safety, to
exempt it from being reckoned precarious, and therefore requires Discretion in
applying it to proper Subjects, and Judgment in managing the Distemper so
received.

THE reason of my Addressing this to You, Sir, Is as a sort of Public
Acknowledgement of your Friendship; but more especially because of your noted
Probity, Integrity, and Impartiality in all Affairs: in your Office with an
unbiassed Duty to the Crown, You are the Darling of all fair Traders; and to
speak in Medical terms, Integrity seems to be in the Constitution of your
Family, Witness, The Honorable Sir JOSEPH JEKYLL, Master of the Rolls, your
Uncle, who without any biassed regard to Times, Persons, or Parties, has by
every body been acknowledged always a Patriot. Panegyric has a great share in
most Dedications, but as my humor and genius does not lay that way, and your
generous Temper does not allow of it, I forbear,

SIR, Your much Obliged Humble Servant, W. D.

A Dissertation CONCERNING Inoculation of the Smallpox.
THE Circassians living between the Euxine and Caspian Seas, time out mind,
have carried on a considerable Trade with Turkey and Persia, in Selling their
own Children, or young Slaves taken by Incursions from their Neighbors; but
more especially their Young Women being very Beautiful, are in great request in
the Seraglios and Harams of the Turks and Persians: while they are Children,
they procure to them the Small Pox by Inoculation or otherways; those who
retain their Beauties, are Merchantable, and bear a good Price: So that the
first Intention of Inoculation was not the Saving of Life, but as a more ready
way of procuring the Smallpox, than by accidental Infection; that they might
know what Beauties were proof and would answer the charge of being carried to
Market.

THIS Circassian Trade conveyed this Practice into Turkey, where the Turks at
first from their Principle of Predestination, would not come into it; only the
Old Women of the Greek Church, practiced it among the meaner sort of People for
some considerable time, says Pylarinus, and that A. 1701, it first began to be
used amongst the better sort in Constantinople. His first Patients, were the
Four Sons of a Noble Greek. In some short time after this Bellini in Italy,
writes an account of it to Dr. Pitcairn in Scotland, desiring his Opinion; Dr.
Pitcarn was very fond of it, but could not persuade himself to venture it in
Practice. Timonius from Constantinople A. 1713, sends to the R.S. in London an
account of this Practice, with a very strong recommendation thereof. Pylarinus
the Venetian Consul A. 1714, sent to the Royal Society a more modest account of
the same. The Small Pox spread in Boston, New England, A. 1721, and the
Reverend Dr. Cotton Mather, having had the use of these Communications from Dr.
William Douglass; surreptitiously, without the knowledge of his Informer, that
he might have the honor of a Newfangled notion, sets and undaunted Operator to
work, and in this Country about 290 were Inoculated.

THESE Communications of Timonius and Pylarinus in England were regarded as
Virtuos^ amusements, until April 1721, Mr. Maitland a Surgeon (who in March
1717, at Bora near Constantinople had seen the British Ambassadors Son at. 6,
Inoculated by an old Greek) from a few scanty observations but mostly from
hearsay, in quality of a Traveller was willing to broach a new thing: he
inocutlated Miss Wortley aet. 4, and Dr. Keiths Son aet. 6 in May, who all had
a very favorable distinct sort. This encouraged many to think well of it, and
in particular The Royal Family were induced to cause make trial of it;
accordingly in August it was practiced on 6 Condemned Criminals in Newgate,
aet. 19 ad 36, no Medicine was used, all was left to nature assisted by a
strict and regular Diet, they all received the Infection, and had a favorable
Smallpox, excepting Evans who had no symptom neither did his Incisions
inflame, having had the Smallpox in Goal last September. Some time after this
Mr. Maitland Inoculates Mr. Batts Daughter aet. 2 and half, Joseph Heath aet.
7, and Benj. Heath aet. 3; being in all eleven persons Inoculated from April to
December: thus gradually and circumspectly did the people in England proceed in
a Practice, which might be of consequence good or bad; few of the English
Physicians favored it at first, but in some short time Dr. Mead began to
countenance it, as did also Sir Hans Sloan.

IN the Spring following, there were Inoculated by order of the Ps. of Wales, 6
Hospital Children aet. 6 ad. 20; four of them had it, and very favorable one
of them received no Infection, having evidently had the Smallpox before; the
sixth had accidents from Inoculation, which continued in a lesser degree for
eleven weeks, and then had a favorable Smallpox. Soon after these, were
Inoculated 5 more Hospital Children aet. 8. to 14 weeks, 3 of them had no Small
Pox, these bodies were morbid. April 19th. 1722. Mr. Amyand Serj. Surgeon,
ingrafted the Small Pox on Ps. Amelia aet. 11, and Ps. Carolina aet. 9. they
had them favorable; this would have been a very great encouragement and
countenance to this Practice, if unluckily it had not happened that in the same
month of April died the E. of Sunderland's Son aet. 2 and half, and next month
died my Lord L. Bathursts Servant aet. 19 of the Smallpox procured by
Inoculation: from this time the Practice continues proceeding, but at a much
slower pace than was expected; so that from the accounts of the Ingenious Dr.
Jurin R. S. Secr. in all Great Britain there were Inoculated in the first 3
years of the Practice only 477; the Principal Inoculators being Dr. Nettleton
in Yorkshire 80 Patients, Mr. Amyand Serj. Surgeon 62, Mr. Maitland 85, etc.

WHEN this Practice was first attempted, some Physicians in England and
New England particularly Dr. Friend, from the experience of disorders arising
in the Animal Economy by some foreign liquids being directly admitted into the
current of Blood, by anology were afraid of the like in case of Inoculation;
but repeated trials soon convinced them of the safety of this method. In some
of the first trials the produced Pustules were either dry without Pus, or like
a Spurious Pox called the Chicken or Swine Pox, containing no thick digested
Pus but a thin Sanies; hence they alleged that Inoculation produced only an
Eruptive Fever but no genuine Smallpox: but in after trials, seeing in many
the Pustules rise with inflamed edges, white and afterward yellow heads, plump
and mellow, and go off about the usual time in yellow Scabs, as also finding
them infectious; they quickly gave up the point, and declared them genuine. The
Odium of spreading infection continues a disadvantage; The ingrafting of
foreign constitutional ails is a stumbling block to the nice and cautious.

THE first Promoters of Inoculation, on the other hand, were much more
extravagant in their deviations; from hearsay and a few scanty experiments with
much credulity and rashness, they positively and without reserve, published as
follows; and in some instances contradict one the other and themselves.

TIMONIUS A. 1713. says, These last years some thousands have been Inoculated
and none died, while at the same time half the affected died in the common way
at Constantinople; and what is valued by the Fair, never leaves Scars nor Pits.
Infants have no Convulsions with it. He knew but of one Boy who did not receive
the Smallpox by Inoculation, his incisions did not swell. The Pustules never
contain a laudable Pus, but a thin watery Sanies.

PYLARINUS the Venetian Consul, the most modest of all its Promoters, says, I
was not an Eyewitness to all that I now relate, I had a great part of it by
hearsay. The Operatrix required the Winter season. The Eruption generally
begins the 7th day; there are instances though but few, where the Eruptions have
appeared the first day. Inoculation sometimes does not take place. In some,
though very seldom, in the glandulous parts and Emunctories, Abcesses do arise
after some time.

Dr. Le Duc a Native of Constantinople, and who was himself inoculated, assured
Dr. Jurin, that out of many thousands that in the space of about 40 years past,
had been inoculated in and about Constantinople by one Greek woman, not so much
as one person has miscarried.

Mr. Maitlands account. Dying is a case which never happened in Ingrafting. The
giving the Smallpox by Inoculation, never yet failed, nor never can. No
Headakes, Thirst, Inquietudes, and other Fever Symptoms, not one in a thousand.
Dr. Nettleton who inoculated great numbers, says from his own experience: The
Symptoms are as in the natural way, a quick pulse, great heat and thirst, pain
in the Head and Back, and about the region of the Stomach, Vomiting, Dosedness,
Startings, and sometimes Convulsions. Mr. Maitland further says, The Pustules
never leaves any Pits behind them: And in his Vindication, printed in Autumn,
1722. says, that out of about 500 Inoculated, by that time only 3 had died: Dr.
Jurin who made it his business, as being R. S. Sec. to be well informed,
exeunte, A. 1722 says that only 182 were Inoculated by that time. This
imposition on Mankind is too gross: what follows is still more gross. In a
loose Poetical rapture Mr. Maitland says, that supposing 200 or 300 Sick in the
natural way, and as many in the Inoculated way, all under the cure of unskilful
and unexperienced people, as few would Survive in the Natural way, as would Die
by the Inoculated way.

Dr. Brady of Portsmouth. Not so much as one ever died of Inoculation rightly
performed, it always is favorable. What wretched work (says Dr. Brady) the
Gentleman (Dr. C. M.) who writes the Letter to Mr. Dummer from New England
makes of his accounts.

Dr. Harris says Inoculation is a certain remedy against the confluent kind.

Mr. Colmans Observations in New England. A Negro Slave in discourse told him,
That Inoculation was practiced in their Country, but of how long standing he
could not tell; that God told it to poor Negroes to save their lives, for they
had not knowledge and skill as we; when the Smallpox gets into a few Families
in a Town, The whole Town is inoculated in one week, and are well the next,
none die, no blains nor bails follow the Practice.

Mr. Boylston's first account. There is no truth in the reports of peoples
dying under Inoculation. Timonius well known to some in Boston, who also
actually knew the truth of his matters of fact; this sort of Quackery is only
fit for a Stage in a Country Market Town. In his second account, published, A.
1726. He complains much that he had heard but of few who have had the benefit
of Inoculation in England. N. B. We are to understand that business running low
with him here, he went for London, and with the character of an experienced
Inoculator, expected a profitable encouragement there, but was entirely
disappointed, not having Inoculated one person there, so far as I can learn;
Inoculation in London had not as yet got into the hands of Quacks. He tells us
he had such Faith in the accounts that Dr. Mather gave him of Inoculation, that
he could have ventured the first trial upon himself; in a few lines following
(forgetting himself) he tells us of his great fright (as he calls it) on
account of his Sons Illness, not having any directions from Timonius and
Pylarinus concerning this Practice: these are his own words, by which he
unthinkingly exposes his own Rashness and Inadvertency.

The best of Men have some Foible: that of Dr. Mathers was Credulity; it was
upon his Authority that our New England Inoculation was carried on. I shall
mention a few Instances of this weakness from his own Letters concerning
Inoculation published in London: in one Letter Dated March 1722 He tells the
world, That A. 1721. in Boston, some Cats had a regular Smallpox and died of
it; that during the Small Pox, the Pigeons and Dunghill Fowls did not lay nor
hatch, that he never knew Blistering miss of saving life in the Smallpox, etc.
In his Letter communicated to the R. S. by Mr. Newman in favor of Inoculation
he says, the Patient is more healthy after Inoculation, it is useful to Women
in Childbed, it dries up tedious running Ulcers, makes the crazy consumptive
people hearty, and rids people of their former maladies. Thus he makes a
Panacea of it. To allow of such gross and bold assertions without disproving of
them, would be leading Mankind into a Snare.

ALTHOUGH Levity and Credulity brought people into it at first, without waiting
the effects of a reasonable number of Experiments, most of the Anti-Inoculators
from repeated trials do now acknowledge, that Inoculation generally speaking is
a more easy way of undergoing the Smallpox Illness, then where the Infection
is received by accidental contagion; but its Salutariness falls much short of
the extravagant recommendations given of it by its Patrons; which were very
unfair, because it appears at that time they knew but little of the Practice.

THIS Method, to speak impartially, is a considerable improvement in Physic;
but we can not say that it Prevents a bad sort, as sure as a Pleuresy is cured
by V. S, an Intermitting Fever by the Peruvian Bark, a chlorosis by Chalybeats,
Venereal Ails by Mercury, etc. In short, it is no infallible Method of
alleviating the Distemper, but in many Instances has proved precarious. Some
receive the Distemper not at all, some only Eruptive Fevers, others to so small
a degree as to admit of doubt, others the worst sort, some have Dyed of it,
Imposthumetions and other Subsequent Ails rather more than in the natural way,
etc.

I shall endeavor to vouch all these particulars chiefly from Histories of the
first Centenary Inoculated in England, and in the very words of the Inoculators
(some of them were too credulous in their first recommendations of it, but they
all seem to be very candid in their Histories of Fact) which I am ready to
produce well vouched. To proceed further down would be too tedious and nothing
to the advantage of the Method, because the proportion of those who Died in the
subsequent Years, is greater than it was in the beginning: and to speak
ingenuously, I kept a correspondence with respect to the benefits of
Inoculation in England from unquestionable Facts, only for the first two or
three Years of its Practice there; but have since, by a sort of indolence been
remiss, I know no more of it for those last Years, than any other Person may
from the Public Prints. I can but seldom have recourse to Mr. Boylstone's
Accounts, because of their being so jejune, lame, suspected, and only in the
nature of a Quack Bill.

1. SOME receive the Distemper not at all. Pylarinus says, Inoculation does not
always take place. In Dr. Nettleton's first parcel it did not take place in two
instances. Mr. Maitland's 20 th, 28 th, 29 th, 30 th, 32 d, 42 d, etc. it did
not Infect. Mr. A -- ds 4 th, 10 th, and 11 th, did not take Effect. In short,
from the ingenious Dr. Jurins account of Inoculation in Great Britain, A. 1721,
1722, and 1723, out of 477 by that time Inoculated, 29 had no Small Pox; which
is 1 in 16.

2. SOME have only Eruptive Fevers. Mr. Maitland's 32 d, Patient. Dr. H -- n
aet. 26, had only an Eruptive Fever, but no Smallpox; Mr. A -- d's Child aet.
17 months, his 4th patient, had only an Eruptive Fever, and a pretty sharp one
during 36 hours. Mr. A -- d's 11 th Patient. My L. M -- a Son to the D. of D --
t. aged 11 years, had a gentle Eruptive Fever but no Smallpox.

3. OTHERS to so small a degree, as to admit of doubt. Dr. Nettleton in his
Letter 16th December, 1722. says, we are ready to own, that the Operation may
sometimes fail: in 3 of my Patients, though the wounds did inflame and swell, and
discharge considerably, yet the Eruptions were so imperfect, as to leave me a
little in doubt.

4. OTHERS the worst sort. Pylarinus modestly says, they are most frequently
(not always) of the distinct sort; the eldest ( aet. 18,) of the 4 Sons of a
noble Greek, his first Patients, after a course of most violent and dangerous
Symptoms narrowly escaped the 14th day. Timonius, who has been found in every
thing partial in recommendation of Inoculation, says, that of about 50 who had
the Inoculation about the same time, 4 came near the Confluent sort, in whom
the Eruptions were too sudden, and Symptoms worse. To make some estimate of the
Confluent and Bad sorts, I shall confine my self to the first Centenary in
England, and in the words of the Inoculators. Dr. Nettleton's 8th Patient, Mr.
Sympsons Child dyed the 7th day from Inoculation with Purple Spots (the Brother
some time before died in the natural way the 4th of Illness full of purple and
lived spots.) His 28 Patient aet. 5. the elder of two Brothers inoculated about
the same time, the younger got through the Distemper with a great deal of ease;
but the other fared quite otherways, and there appeared some signs of
malignity, but without danger, he afterward had a hard Swelling on his
Shoulder, etc. (a former Child of this Family dyed of a very malignant sort of
Smallpox.) Mr. Maitlands 10th patient Joseph Heath aet 7. was very ill before
the Eruption, had a great load of the continued kind, but at last recovered.
His 25th Patient Mr. R -- ds aet. 41, had a great many, some of the coherent
sort, with pretty sharp invading Symptoms, in some time after he had two boils.
His 31st Patient Mr. Spencer at 2 and half Son to the E. of Sunderland had a
mixed sort part confluent, he dyed the 11th day convulsed, having had a violent
Second Fever. His 42 Patient Mr. R -- gs Second Child had a great many, got
over the Smallpox under the care of two Physicians, but in some short time
after dies of a Pthisis. His 47th Patient a Child of my L. T -- ds had a pretty
many of the Coherent sort. Mr. A -- ds 12th Patient My L. Barthursts Servant
aet 19 the Eruption happened in the usual time with a vast quantity of the
confluent kind, dies the 13th day, having been under the care of Drs.
Arburthnot and Mead. In June Mr. Waller Apothecary in Gosport, inoculated his 3
Children, one of them had very severe symptoms preceding the Eruption, had a
great many with 3 or 4 patches of the Fluxed kind. Thus we find in fair
accounts that 9 in 100 have had bad kinds; some Inoculators except against Mr.
Sympsons Child, because the seizure was early.

Dr. Nettleton ingenuously writes, That both in the natural and ingrafted sort
there are almost infinite degrees of the Smallpox. In Mr. Boylston's account
with a good assurance he tells us, we had no resemblance of bad symptoms in
any, where it was not evident that they were infected in the natural way
before. In all his 247 Patients he met with but 5 or 6, and they had received
the infection before; whereof 3 were Confluent and 3 handsome sprinkling as he
terms it. How disingenuous is it to suppress the Histories of those who had the
severe degrees of it; that there were more is certain. The Rd. Mr. Colman in
his Book of Observations, p. 4. writes: that some 10 or 12 of this number (the
first 1^0) appeared to have taken the infection in the common way, and
accordingly had a confluent kind or of a fullness of the distinct sort not known
among the Inoculated in the Levant. Considering that the other 147 were all in
the severest season, and many of them not so well provided for in the adjacent
Country Towns, the proportion of bad kinds must increase; so in the lowest
estimate there must have been 25 or 30 with bad sorts.

5. SOME have died of it. I shall not descend to particulars, seeing the
ingenious Dr. Jurin R. S. Secr. a favourer of this Practice, in his account of
the success of Inoculating the Smallpox in Great Britain, writes, that in the
years 1721, 1722, 1723. there were inoculated in all Great Britain 477, whereof
9 are suspected to have died, and deducting the 29 who did not receive the
infection there died 9 out of 448, where the Subjects were generally culled,
prepared, and all advantages made use of; not including Dr. Nettletons 8th
Patient, Mr. Sympsons Daughter, and others in whom the Eruption was early. I
know nothing certain these last years concerning the Small Pox mortality in
this way, at times we find some mentioned in the London Newspapers; as for
instance in the year 1725. March 16. dyed Mrs. Eyles, Niece of Sir John Eyles,
Alderman of London, of the Small Pox contracted by Inoculation; June 17th dyed
of the Small Pox contracted by Inoculation, Arthur Hill Esquire; Eldest Son of
Viscount Hillsborough; August 12th died of the Small Pox by Inoculation --
Hurst of Salisbury, Esquire; etc.

Mr. Boylston writes, that there were only 6 who died of or after Inoculation.
The precise number of those who died by Inoculation in Boston, I am afraid will
never be known, because of the crowd of the Sick and Dead while Inoculation
prevailed most, the Inoculator and Relations inviolably keep the secret; when
it got into Country Towns it could not be concealed, and we find that out of 72
or 73 persons inoculated by Mr. Boylston in Roxbury, and the adjacent Country
Towns, 5 to have died; this is about 1 in 14. N. B. Mr. White was brought from
Roxbury to Boston. In all fair trials no man of Probity and Candor does stiffle
facts. Mrs. G -- an ancient Gentlewoman who visited much the Small Pox
decumbents of all sorts, whispers that that there were many more. Some Porters
who at that time were employed to carry the dead to their Graves, say, that it
was whispered in sundry houses where the dead were carried from, that the
person had been Inoculated. I could name some who are suspected, but having
only hearsay and conjectural evidence I forbear to affront the surviving
Relations: I my self am certain of one more who died after Inoculation as they
express it, having with her Inoculator attended her in her Illness, this was --
Housekeeper to Mr. G -- bs Apothecary inoculated by himself; soon after the
variolous matter was applied to the Incisions, she began to complain, after two
days began the Small Pox Fever, and in two days more began the Eruption very
full, and confluent in her face, the Incisions discharged very much, was never
delirious; she died the 12th day of weakness or Inanition. Capt. Osborne in his
account of the success of the Inoculations in N. England, signed by himself,
and inserted in the Phil. Transact. for Nov. and December. 1721. His words are,
There were in all at least 280 persons inoculated that I knew of, and I suppose
there might be 20 or 30 more, but of those I can give no certain account; it is
to be supposed that he Sailed for London, before Mrs. Serle in Roxbury died of
her Inoculation because he does not mention her, but after her Death severals
were Inoculated; thus the number of the Inoculated must exceed 300, and 20 or
30 concealed from us, many of them without doubt in their silent Graves. Would
it be candid in a strenuous Promoter of this Practice, supposing he had
suffered much in his Small Pox illness, and thereafter a violent Inflammation
in his Leg, when freely asked the Question, if he had received the Infection by
application of variolous matter or by accidental contagion? to give no positive
Answer. Would it be fair in another, after his Child had recovered of the Small
Pox from Inoculation, supposing a Neighbor put the Question seriously, If your
Daughter had Died, what would you have said? his return should be, If she had,
No body should have known that she was Inoculated. Mr. Boylston in his first
account says, I have made my experiments on great numbers than I judge proper
to mention.

6. INOCULATION sometimes leaves Imposthumations and other ails. Timonius says,
two morbid Children aet. 3. Died soon after; it was judged that this means was
made use of to send them as useless shades to Charon. Pylarinus heartily
writes, Quibusdam rarissime tamen, ad glandulosas parts et emunctoria post
aliquot tempus abcessus erumpunt. Dr. Nettleton ingenuously tells us, some few
after the Small Pox have been subject to other indispositions. For an estimate
of their proportion, as before, I confine my self to the first Centenary
Inoculated in England. Dr. Nettleton's 23d Patient Mr. Hansons Daughter aet. 9
Months, about a fortnight after she was well of the Small Pox, had a painful
swelling in one of her Thighs and Inguinal glands, but went off without
suppuration, there only remaining a hardness above the Knee for some time. His
37 Patient Mr. Haighs Daughter aet. 6. had a subsequent small tumor on the
Muscles of the Loins which ripened speedily, was opened and healed. His 38
Patient her Sister aet. 18, had such another in her Leg, something deeper, it
gave her a great deal of Pain, and discharged a great quantity of matter. Dr.
Brady of Portsmouth Inoculated his four Children the eldest Boy in Sickening
had a painful swelling in his Neck, afterward a swelling in his Lip, and a
scratched Pock in his Leg does imposthumate and is laid open. His eldest
Daughter had a painful tumor in her Arm. Mr. Maitlands 25th Patient Mr. R --
ds aet. 21 in some short time after had two Boils. His 40th Patient Sir D -- O
-- ne had a subsequent Imposthume Axillae. His 41st and 42d Patients aet. 13
Months, and 3 Years; in the first one of the Inoculated Arms, did Imposthumate
and was laid open; the other soon after Died of a Pthisis having had an
Imposthume Axillae and two small Boils in other parts. Mr. A -- ds 14th Patient
my Lady Betty Daughter to my L. B -- y as the Small Pox were a drying away,
appeared a large white tumor under the deltoides, which being opened the
humerus Bone was found discovered, it was cured without any sensible
exfoliation. Thus eleven in the Hundred had these subsequent ails: I do with
all Candor and Sincerity declare that in many Hundreds of Patients I visited in
the last Small Pox time, I had not above half a dozen with subsequent
Imposthumations or Boils, and having upon this occasion enquired of most of the
other Practitioners, I find the proportions were very small when compared with
these.

7. WE may considently pronounce, That those who have had a genuine Smallpox
by Inoculation, never can have the Smallpox again in a natural way, both by
reason and experience: but there are some who have had the usual Feverish
symptoms, a discharge by their Incisions, with a few iwperfect Eruptions, that
may be obnoxious to the Smallpox. One of the 6 Hospital Children inoculated in
the Spring 1722. by order of the Princess of Wales, had the accidents from
Inoculation, and after eleven weeks had a favorable Smallpox. Mr. Degrave
Surgeon in London, his Daughter was sent to a Nurse with some other persons to
undergo Inoculation, at the usual time she had Feverish Symptoms, heats and
flushings, and more Sickness than the other persons who had a fair distinct
Pock; the Incisions discharged about three weeks, ( Timonius assured us that if
the Incisions swell and discharge, they never after will have the Small Pox)
she was purged once or twice, and discharged from her confinement: after eleven
weeks she had a favorable Small Pox. Dr. Clinch in his Historical Essay of the
Smallpox, asserts, that a Son of Mr. Jones Surgeon at Osewestry in Shropshire
inoculated by the Father, had the Smallpox, as was judged, by Inoculation; but
some short time thereafter had it severely in the natural way: In May 1725. the
Reverend Mr. Johnson (a noted undertaker of scrophulous Cases) inoculated a
Person of distinction in Chelsea, who thereupon had a Rash-like Eruption and
small Fever, afterward was physicked and sent home as having had the Small
Pox, but in a short time after had the Smallpox favorable in the natural way.
We have had likewise some instances in the public News-paper from England.
Some of the Inoculators say, that this late subsequent Smallpox was still the
effect of a latent infection received by Inoculation.

IT is beyond all dispute, that some of the Inoculated, may have received the
Infection before, and that the Smallpox was from thence: but if an Inoculated
Person dies, or has had a hard time of it, to impute it always to a former
accidental contagion, is most partial and unreasonable; more especially they
seem to be secure in this Subterfuge, if the Eruptions happen sooner than the
usual time. Timonius says the Eruption sometimes is too sudden and of the fluxy
kind. Pylarinus says the Eruptions generally appear the seventh day, there are
some rare instances where it appeared the first day. The Learned Dr. Huxham of
Plymouth writes, A. 1724, and 1725 there was in the Town a sort of Anomalous
Smallpox, that appeared in less than 24 hours from the Seizure, and were
always of the fluxed kind. Dr. Jurin gives a very singular instance of the
Small Pox appearing in 2 or 3 days, in the forehead of a Nurse, squeezed by a
Gentleman in his delirium against his naked breast full of the coherent kind in
the state of maturation; they observed the regular periods of the distinct
kind, and did inflame so as to close up her Eyes by swelling, which afterward
did soon subside by a blister to her neck: therefore a fortiori, where the
variolous matter is applied immediately to the blood and circulating juices as
by Inoculation, why may not the Eruptions in some constitutions, be premature.
According to the Inoculators themselves the Eruption may be so Serotine as
eleven weeks, and why may it not sometimes be too precoce by some days.

8. IF it is not used with circumspection in regard to our Neighbors, it is of
pernicious consequence to populous and trading Towns by spreading Infection and
damping their Trade; besides the premature deaths of those who do not expect
it. As in some constitutions of years the infection is not so apt to spread as
in others, to force the spreading of it by this Artificial method no man
(excepting one who has less regard for the lives and good of mankind, than the
ready Money) will justify. I am told that about 45 years ago the Small Pox got
into several Families in Boston, and soon went off without disseminating it
self. The Plague which is reckoned more infectious than the Small Pox was in
London, from 1602, to 1632, every year there died a few of it, but it did not
spread excepting in 1603 there dyed of it 30. 561, and in 1625 dyed 35. 417.
The Small Pox in London some years is far more universal and malignant than in
other years, for instance, from the Bills of Mortality, A. 1702 dyed of the
Small Pox only 311, in the year 1706 dyed 1721, in the year 1719 dies 3229.
Last Small Pox left N. England very abruptly, while the Promoters of
Inoculation were endeavoring to force it into the Country Towns; but the
Roxbury deaths bafled their recommendations. To force the spreading of
infection by an unbounded Inoculation is a hardship upon Mankind, to oblige
them to quit their business with their habitations; means used to save my own
life, ought not to endanger my Neighbors. Perhaps it is more infecting than in
the common way, because after the Small Pox confinement is over the Inoculated
walk about, and carry with them a sort of ambulatory Infection, their Incisions
continuing to run a sort of variolous matter. In some measure to obviate this
clamor, they at first gave out, that the infection from the Inoculated
conveyed a better sort: but this point they soon gave up. Mr. Maitland's 9th
Patient Mrs. Batts Daughter at Temple near Hartford, gave the infection to 6
Servants in the House, all of them had them very bad and one died, says Mr.
Maitland, contrary to my expectation. In Boston Mrs. Esther Webb 13th Patient
of Mr. Boylstons was Inoculated, narrowly escaped in the worst sort of
confluent kind, the Salvo was that she had received it from her Inoculated
Father and Mother, and if this be allowed, then it makes our surmise good.

9. THE Communication of Constitutional Distempers, is a difficulty which will
require some series of Years to obviate. This some may call a Chimerical or
conjectural fear; but as all constitution Distempers have some Idea or Seminium
in every drop of our juices, the acute Distemper according to its nature soon
shows itself, the Chronical ails act slowly and imperceptibly on our Bodies. A
Scorbutic taint may lay latent until some disposing cause happens, the
Arthitick from its nature will not exert it self till old age, it is very
uncertain in what stage of life an hereditary Venereal Pox may appear, the
Nephritick, Strumous, Epileptick, Maniack, etc some times intermit one
generation and appear again in the next: thus any subsequent Chronical ail may
occasion inquietude in the minds of the Inoculated, and render them incapable
of the greatest happiness in this World, Men's sana in corpore sano.

As fear, anxiety and despondency or dejection of Spirits are of bad
consequence in all Diseases, and more especially in the Small Pox illness; I
cannot avoid taking notice of the Inadvertency or Inhumanity of some
Inoculation Promoters particularly in this Town, who with false colorings
expose the Mortality of the Small Pox in the natural way. They harangue thus,
The Small Pox always fatal to New England. Mr. Boylstone in his first account
says, The Small Pox was an awful Distemper, whereof so many died as gave an
awful Prospect. In his assuming Dedication to the Princes of Wales, he says the
reason of his undertaking Inoculation was, because the Small Pox raged in
New England with the utmost Violence: let us recollect and we may find that 22d
July 1721 the Select-Men declare that only 17 by that time had died of it, the
Small Pox had then been in Town about three Months, and this was near a Month
after Inoculation began, at that time so far as we could investigate about 1 in
10 died of it; how few Popular Fevers have been so favorable, witness that
Febris mali moris Epidemical here in the Fall. Dr. Mather in his Letters
published in London, gives the reason why they used no precaution: because in
the natural way it raged with the utmost fury, and to make his assertion good,
says that of something more than 5000, decumbents near 900 died, which is 1 in
5. 5 or 18 per ct. by the fallacy of useing the remotest round numbers in each
estimate, he misrepresents the case very much: the true numbers, as I had them
from Mr. Salter were out of 5989, died 844 (or in the nearest round numbers out
of 6000, died 850,) which is Something less than 1 in 7 or 14 per ct. Mr.
Boylstone with his usual candor, in his estimates makes use of round numbers to
a pitch much exceeding this; In his account reckoning up the dismal Symptoms
which attend the natural Small Pox, he endeavors to make the world believe,
That in Boston, A. 1721. near one hundred persons had lost one Eye, I have made
diligent enquiry among the Practioners and others, but cannot muster up near a
score; and some of those not from the violence of the Distemper, as in two
Daughters of Capt. R -- Patients to Mr. Pemberton, who had a kind distinct
sort, with an accidental Small Pox Pustule upon the Pupil of the Eye. How
inhumane is it in affairs of life and death thus to trifle with Mankind, to
indulge a humor, or to serve a base end, and how suspected must all accounts
be that come from such hands.

As cheerfulness of mind is the best preparative for, and restorative in the
Small Pox; for the comfort of those who have not had the Small Pox, I shall
make an estimate of the net Small Pox deaths in Boston, A. 1721. There died
that year of all distempers 1102. whereof 844 were Small Pox, is only 258 of
other diseases; but at a medium of 6 years preceding, A. 1721. there dyed per.
an. 359, and at a medium of 6 years following, A. 1722. (I do not include A.
1722. because the premature deaths of 1721. had much lessened the burials for
that year) there dyed 411: the mean is 385. from which deduct the above 258,
remains 127 deaths of Valetudinarians who (if we may so express it) must have
dyed that year of other ails: or if we compute thus A. 1722. dyed only 273,
therefore the former year had anticipated this 118 of its due Burials; the
medium of both computations is 122, which deducted from 5989 and from 844
leaves 722 deaths in 5867 is something more than 1 in 8. To reduce the Small
Pox mortality further let us consider, 1. The disadvantage of its prevailing in
the Autumn or Fall, the most Sickly time of the year. 2. The Small Pox had been
absent 20 years, and consequently a great proportion of Adults to have it, in
whom Chronical ails might be formed; where it frequently comes, Children are
generally its subjects, and on that account not so mortal. 3. By Inoculation
the numbers of the infected were in all parts of the Town so increased, that
they could not be well attended; perhaps the numbers rendered the contagion more
intense for near 90 dyed of Purple Spots and other cruen^ous colliquations Had
not those disadvantages concurred, I do almost persuade my self, not above 1 in
10 would have dyed; the two former Small Pox times were more favorable, A.
1690 and 1702 as Mr. Colman in his Book observes: and considering that from the
Settling of Boston which is now 100 years, the Small Pox has afflicted the
Town only six times; A. 1649, 1666, 1678, 1690, 1702, and 1721. I cannot see
any reason to magnify the chance, and risque which a Boston man has of dying
by the Small Pox. Dr. Nettleton of Hallifax, Dr. Whitaker of Chichester, and
Dr. Williams of Heverford-west. For the year 1721. make the Small Pox deaths in
their Neighborhood 1 in 5, it certainly must have been with them a malignant
constitution that year. Accidental Years or Times are not to be induced in
forming general estimates; as for instance, A. 1721. In Rhode Island, (a
Neighboring Plantation) out of 30 who had the Small Pox and were sent to
Harbour-Island, only one person died, without any other advice than the care of
a Nurse.

THE advantages of Inoculation. 1 The Small Pox received by Incisions from the
experience of Some years, abstractedly considered, is found not so Mortal and
the Symtoms generally more favorable than when it is received by accidental
contagition. 2 One may take the advantage of benign Smallpox constitution, and
a favorable Season of the year to receive it. 3 The Body may be prepared and
so secure our selves from being taken at a disadvantage and surprise, it is an
advantage to know that we are to have a distemper 7 or 8 days before it seizes
us. 4. It removes that dread and anxiety which is a great uneasiness to some
who have not had the Smallpox.

THE Royal Family by their Example, have obviated the Suspicion, which made the
Practitioners here decline it formerly, I mean of its being Criminal. I find
the Practitioners in Town do generally resolve to perform the Opperation when
required, but without persuading or diswading; so that those who are so
inclined will have a better chance and choice without being oblidged to expose
themselves to a Rash Operator; however safe this method may be, discretion and
care are necessary, out of Mr. Boylstons 72 or 73 Roxbury Inoculated Patients
(Mr. White included) dyed 5: out of Mr. Thompsons 28 Inoculations in the same
Towns and season there dyed not one.

THE Operation of Inoculation is always safe even in the rudest hand; Blood
letting is attended with the risque of pricking an Artery, tendon or membrane
of the muscle; in this the Skin being elevated nothing lays in the way. The
Symptoms in the Inoculated Smallpox are the same as in the natural, and
require the same management.

ALTHOUGH by Inoculation there is a better chance than by accidental contagion,
nevertheless it is not exempted from being precarious, as we have at length
exemplified; but as there is no absolute certainty in humane affairs, mankind
govern themselves by the greatest probabilities. If it is found a better chance
for preserving Life in this Illness, it will not be easy for Enthusiasts and
such like divines to make the world believe it a Sin; thus some Turks and many
of our Neighbors, although rigorous predestinarians, at the cry of Small Pox
malignity, do fly to it as a refuge. Suppose an Epidemical and mortal Diarrhaea
or Dysentery rage in a place, if I can carry off its proper Pabulum by
Catharticks, which is an Analagous artificial Distemper of the same Species,
may it not be done? an impending periodical Haemorrhage may it not be diverted
by an Artificial V. S. The adequate Analogy of this, puts me in mind of the
fallacy of an argument commonly used by the Inoculators, Artificial V. S.
Catharticks, drawing of Teeth, cutting of Corns, etc. have been the occasions
of deaths, must they be disused? In these some accident in the Operation is to
blame, not nature prematurely set at work to acquire an acute distemper by a
safe Operation; A preventive Vomit, Purge, etc. affects only my self not my
Neighbor.

Seeing at present the most zealous Inoculator does not pretend that there is
any absolute certainty in this affair, a Country retreat in my Judgment, may
be advisable to the following conditions of persons. 1. To those who are much
advanced in years, who in the common course of nature may not survive the next
return of this contagion; the infirmities of old age is a disadvantage likewise
to be considered. 2. Pregnant women; and in general all of the Fair Sex whose
buisiness can allow of a Country retirement for some months once in 12 or 20
years, and whose faces are some part of their care and concern, some faces
having suffered last Inoculation time. 3. The consumptive and bad habits, whose
crazy fabrics cannot without a considerable risque, stand the shock of an
acute distemper. 4. Infants, whose green and tender age with the incidents of
crudities, Tormina's, Teething, etc. is of it self precarious, without the
accumulation of a Small Pox illness. 5. Indians, few of them are observed to
survive the Smallpox in the natural way, and therefore are not without
considerable hazard in the other way. 6. Some particular Families of Whites,
who have something peculiar in their constitution that cannot bear this
infection (fire is not always as the flame from whence it is derived, but as
the fuel to which it is applied) we have had instances of this, Mr. White and
his Sister both died by Inoculation, the Family of W -- bs suffered much, etc.
By some singularity of temperament, some are proof against the Pocky contagion,
to others it is always mortal. 7. The exceedingly Timorous need not to be
mentioned, it is to be supposed that fear will give them Wings.

THESE who are in good Health, and not in any of these circumstances, are fit
subjects for Inoculation, more especially whose business requires them to be in
foreign parts where the Small Pox always more or less prevails. Since the
practice is not Criminal, they who from a public Spirit undergo the
experiment, may be reckoned to essay the benefit of Mankind for generations to
come.

The best preparation for the Small Pox to be received either by accident or by
incisions is to keep the mind as cheerful, and the body as healthful as we can.
The symptoms of health are a good Stomach, easy digestion, regular pulse,
quiet and undisturbed Sleep.

FINIS.

