A BRIEF EXAMINATION OF THE Practice of the Times, the Foregoing and the
Present DISPENSATION: Whereby is manifested, how the Devil works in the
My^^ery, which none can understand and get the Victory over but those that are
armed with Light, that discovers the Temptation and the Author thereof, and
gives Victory over him and his Instruments, who are now gone forth, as in the
Beginning, from the true Friends of Jesus, having the Form of Godliness in
Words, but in Deeds deny the Power thereof; from such we are commanded to turn
away.

Remember them that are in Bonds, as bound with them; and them that suffer
Adversity, as being your selves also in the Body,

Heb. xiii. 3. If any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him.

He that leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity,

Rev. xiii. 10. Printed for the Author, Anno 1729

To my Esteemed Friend Matthew Hughes, Esquire
One of the Representatives for the County of BUCKS.
My Friend,
NOT having the Opportunity of thy Company, I take this Occasion to confer on
the Various Circumstances of my Life since I left you; in which Voyage, as the
Beginning of our Sorrows we were robbed by the Pirates, yet through Penury we
made our Voyage to Barbados, where a Prospect of Profit offered for this
Place; but as all Humane Affairs are uncertain, in the Latitude of 27 degrees. 34
min. and 5 degrees. 56 m. Westing from that Island, our Sloop, after many violent
Storms, sprung a Leak, and in 18 Hours sunk before our Eyes; where we were left
to drive before Wind and Sea, in our open Boat; yet through the concurring
Mercies of our God, (after eight Days Tossing on the Ocean, on which we failed
170 Leagues) we landed on One of the Bahama Islands, called Cat-Island, where
with Souls filled with Joy we sang to our Deliverer, rejoicing both in his
Judgments and Mercies, who preserved us on the Deep, and provided for us in the
Desert, where we lay marooned some Months, until Providence brought us to
South Carolina, where I waged with One (esteemed the richest in the Province)
in the same Service I was in with You, and he would have bestowed his Bounty on
me, but there was that righteous Seed in me, which begs not its Bread, neither
would it suffer me to receive more than my Hire, his Riches being the Product
of Negro and Indian Slaves, which would have made me a Debtor and an Oppressor
in the Creation; which was so contrary to me, that the Sight and Sense I had of
it burdened my Life, which hastened me to these Parts, where the Lord blessed
me with Substance again, which was quickly consumed by the Fire, and I
providentially escaped with my Life at your Fair at Bristol. And though the
Christian Life consists not in Outward, yet in Commemorating his Providence
to me in the Day of my Humiliation, both Inwardly and Outwardly, engages me
thankfully to acknowledge his Goodness and Mercies, in that he has again
restored me to Fullness and Plenty. And has not the Lord, by his extraordinary
Providence, opened this America before the Europeans, and given us Peace and
Plenty among the Natives? and shall we go to Africa for Bread, and lay the
Burden which appertains to our Bodily Support on their Shoulders? Is this
Washing one another's Feet, or Living by the Gospel, or Maintaining Liberty and
Property? which we are called into, that we may answer the just Principle in
all Men, which now is Crucified by this Trade in such who can, without Remorse,
cruise on their Coast and up their Rivers, to steal all they can find, which
has introduced so much Wickedness amongst us, as the Fruit of a corrupt Tree,
which was first planted in K. Charles's Time, when the African Company was
Commissionated for that Trade, which no doubt was chargeable in Shipping, and
Forces to build Forts; yet Covetousness, the Motive to it, and Root of all
Evil, soon paid it self without Mercy, that to dispatch their Vessels, they
would present a Negro King with a Sword, or such a Matter, that he may War with
his Neighbors, and which ever Party conquers, the Fort is their Market; which
proves a Temptation to these poor Creatures, privately to Murder the strongest
Part of their Neighboring Families, that they may sell the Rest, though for the
least Bawbles; and sometimes the Betrayers and Murderers they take also, and
secure them with the Rest in the Vessel, lest surprised with their Captivity,
they should drown themselves. O unrighteous Gain! which is the Price of Blood,
the Fountain of which is opened, All that touch therewith are unclean! Let us
read the Law of Separation, and run in the Spirit lest we defile our selves and
our Issue, and so be cut off from the Commonwealth of Israel. And as to taking
away the Life for Theft, it not having its desired Effect though Numbers suffer
on the Gallows, caused the Legislators in England to debate whether
Transporting them to Turkey, for the Redemption of honest Captives, would not
be a more effectual Remedy; in which Men in your Station are the best Judges:
Yet as a living Member in the Body which you Represent, with Submission is
offered to Thee and thy Brethren the ensuing Treatise, intended for the Good of
both Church and State, in that Love that strikes not at the least Member, but
at That which would destroy and bring into Captivity the whole Body, against
which is the Warfare of

Thy Friend, Ralph Sandiford.
Philadelphia, the 1st of the 11th Month, 1728-9.
THE PREFACE.
My Friendly Reader,
UNDER the Consideration of the Shortness of the Life of Man, and the End for
which he was created, engaged my Mind to the Lord that he would make known his
Truth unto me, beyond Custom or Tradition in which most content themselves. And
though in the Time of Ignorance the Lord winks, and the Sincere in Heart in all
Societies and Gatherings are owned by him, yet if he farther manifests himself,
who shall withstand him? Though in Believing I made not haste, but desired to try
all Things, and hold fast by that Universal Love I was then a Witness of, in
which I traveled in my Sprit for the Freedom and Redemption of the whole Body,
as being a living Member thereof; Though I am sensible it would much more have
been recommended to thy Perusal, had it been done by an abler Hand, as many
there are under the same Suffering, to the Overthrow of the Faith of some. Yet
rejoice not thou over such, but be warned by them, lest thou also fall. Yet to
the Glory of the Grace and Power of the Lord, who causes Good to redound from
Evil to those that love him (which does not excuse the Evil-Doer) that many
have known Deliverance from this Atheistical Practice, and the Offense given by
it, being thereby drove into the Sanctuary, where they have seen the Ground and
Nature thereof, and the Fruit it brings forth, the End of which is for the
Fire; Therefore with a single Eye to the Lord, and as it concerns thy own
Eternal Welfare, let it have its due weight with thee before thy Day is
determined, and receive it as a Token of Love, and in that Simplicity in which
it is committed unto thee, in as few Words as my poor Capacity and the Ease of
my Spirit will admit of, without the least Prejudice to any Mortal, much less
to the Cause of the Gospel, or the true Ministers thereof, who are for the
Gathering of all Nations into the same Love; and they that despise them in
that, despise him that sent them; and they that deny him and his Gospel before
Men, them will he also deny before his Father and the Holy Angels: Yet we are
forewarned by our Lord, to try the Spirits which would go forth to deceive, if
possible, the very Elect; and the Apostles saw them gone forth from amongst
them, recommending the Believers for their Protection against such, to the Holy
Unction in them, in which they discern the Voice of the Lord from the
Stranger's, who never since his Fall could bear the Light, much less his
Instruments, therefore it is a sure Defense to the Righteous; for if the
Trumpet give not a certain Sound, who shall prepare for the Battle? Shall such
then, who preach Christ in Words, but in Actions are Antichrist bring forward
the Church, or perfect the Saints Faith, who in this Practice are an Offense to
both Jews and Gentiles, and to the Church of God. And let none think this too
uncharitable a Judgment, considering the Nature of this Sin, seeing the Least
unrepented of is damnable, yet the greatest Sin against Christ as the Son of
Man, with true Repentance (which is always accompanied with Forsaking and
Restitution) is pardonable through the great Mercy of our God in his Son, which
brings Joy to the very Angels in Heaven, and to his Church and Ministers on
Earth, whose Hearts and Souls are open for the Gathering of such unto God.

Our Friend George Fox, in a Sermon taken in Shorthand as it was preached at a
Monthly Meeting in Barbados, though in the Beginning of Time, when many were
convinced that had Slaves, he advised them to use them well, and to bring them
up in the Fear and Knowledge of God, and after a reasonable Service to set them
free, as we may also see in his Journal, page 354 which was far from
encouraging them to buy more after their Convincement: For if they had gone
back again into that Trade, what had their Convincement done for them, but
bring them into greater Judgment for their Disobedience to the Manifestation?
For before Friends were a People, many of them were valiant Men with the Sword,
for which they were had in great Esteem amongst Men, because thereby they
sought the Nation's Deliverance from the Oppression of Priests, Physicians and
Lawyers, the One making a Trade of the Soul, the Other of the Body, and the
Other of the Property of the People: And when our Friend George Fox was called
forth by the Lord to minister, not in the Wisdom of Man, for in that he was
unlearned, but in the Openings of Truth, which manifested to him wherein all
these were out of the Way, and that by the universal Grace all might be
restored in their Services, both for the Good of Soul and Body; which caused
these Worthies to lay down their Swords, as unfit for the Carrying on of so
great a Work, which must be done by a higher Power, in which they went forth,
having the Sword of the Spirit, which gave them Victory over Principalities and
Powers, and Spiritual Wickednesses in High Places: And while Friends stood
here, testifying against this Practice, and against every Thing that is high
and lifted up, as inconsistent with this glorious Day, then did the Work
prosper, that large Meetings were settled herein and flourished. But in Time
this dark Trade creeping in amongst us, to the very Ministry, because of the
Profit by it, has spread over others like a Leprosy, to the Grief of the
Honest-hearted, that they are constrained to sojourn in Mesech or dwell in the
Tents of Kedar, the Habitation of Blood; which the hired Preachers that live by
the Law, have testified against, as the highest Immorality which some have gone
into when all others have failed them, whereby their Hearers have keen
convinced by them of the Evil of it. And shall we fall short and lay Waste the
Ancient Testimony, which was and is for the Bringing down of all Oppression and
Violence, that instead thereof Everlasting Righteousness may be established,
and we may have Confidence before God that we have a Conscience void of Offense
both toward God and toward all Men, is the fervent Desire of

Thy Friend in the Truth, R. S.

A BRIEF EXAMINATION OF THE Practice of the Times.
I. MY FRIEND, Whomsoever Thou art that deals in Slaves, or has had any
Fellowship therewith, in the Love of God that desires the Peace and the
Restoration of the whole Creation, do I now Salute Thee, that thou may
consider that Principle and Foundation on which this Practice stands, since for
every idle Word we must give an Account, and on all our Actions are established
an Eternity, and whomsoever we yield our selves to Obey, his Servants we are,
whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Life.

II. For what comes from God, leads unto God; and what comes from the Devil
(who became such by Rebellion) unto Death and Hell, where he is Centred; from
whom, all Wrath and Violence proceeded. He was not Created such, nor his
Angels, as is observed in the Epistle of Jude, that they fell from their first
Estate, and from their Habitations God created them in: Which great Fall and
Debasement to Lucifer, so proud a Spirit that he is termed the Son of the
Morning, and being thus defeated in his evil Purpose, raised in him a Principle
of Envy against God, and all the Creation, which the Lord made very good,
according to his own Nature, and made Man the Top of the Creation, a living
Soul, an Image of his own Eternity, who is all Love and Goodness in himself,
and his Works are accordingly; and while Man stood in this upright Life, all
was perfect Peace and Love, throughout the whole Creation of God, until Evil
was introduced by the Insinuations of the Serpent, that envied the Happiness
thereof, and enticed our first Parents to Eat of the forbidden Fruit, that was
good of it self, being created by the Lord, but Evil unto them, in that they
disobeyed the Holy Commandment. So that the Lord Created not Death, neither,
has he Pleasure in the Destruction of the Living, but through Envy of the Devil
came Death into the World; and they that do hold on his Side, do find it so,
drawing it to them, by Disobedience; as Eve immediately and Adam
Instrumentally, giving Ear to the Temptation, whereby the Mind became
captivated to Lust, which being Conceived brought forth Sin, and Sin finished
brought forth Death, both to the inward and the outward Man, and a Suffering
and Degeneracy, throughout the whole Creation, which groans and travels in Pain
to be Delivered, even until now, through the Evil Property and barbarous
Disposition of the Natural Man; yet through the Mercy and good Will of God, in
the Promised Seed of the Woman, he was not thus left, but put in a Capacity of
being restored to his Original Purity and Uprightness, whereby he Governs the
Creation, in Love and Tenderness, that they partake of the Benefit of his
Redemption.

III. And these two Births are eminently showed unto us in Cain and Abel;
Abel's Geniture being of the Lord, through the Promised Seed, unto which he was
united, gave his Sacrifice Acceptance, which raised Envy in Cain, who rejecting
this high Birth, as many now do, he became One with the Evil Property that was
introduced by his Father the Devil; and his Works of Violence and Oppression
(the height of Wickedness in respect to Men) he brought forth, which in Time
spread over the whole Earth, for which the Lord destroyed them by the Deluge:
And thus Cain's Race ended, but his Image and Life remains in all them that Act
in the same Principle.

IV. Neither can these Negroes be proved, by any Genealogy, the Seed of Ham,
whom Noah Cursed not, says Josephus as being too nigh of Blood: But Noah's
Curse on Canaan the youngest Son of Ham, is thought a suitable original for the
Negro Trade: But the Curse is not so extensive, as you would have it, but is
thus expressed, Cursed be Canaan, a Servant of Servants shall he be, unto his
Brethren. So that he was to Serve the meanest of the Offspring of Shem and
Japheth; but the Time came that the Canaanites were destroyed with a Mighty
Destruction, according to the Promise of the Lord, D^^. vii. 23. and Josephus,
Lib. 4. Chap. 8. and other places. And their Land given unto the Seed of
Abraham, as the Lord showed him in a Vision, when he sojourned therein amongst
the Canaanites, that then had Possession of it, Genesis xii. 6, 7. also Judges
the v. Deborah in her Song, rejoices that the very Stars in their Courses
fought against Sisera, which is more fully expressed by Josephus, Lib. 5. Chap.
1. and 6. that the Lord fought against the Canaanites, with Hosts of Judgments,
until they were destroyed: So that their Race is ended, as well as that
Dispensation; how then can these Negroes or Indians be Slaves to Christians,
who are the Lord's Freemen? But if these Negroes are Slaves of Slaves,
according to the Curse; Whose Slaves then must their Masters be?

V. It was the Murderous Spirit of the Brethren of Joseph, that Sold him to the
Ishmaelites, the Seed of the Bondwoman, and they again Sold him into Egypt,
add though they paid for him by Bargain Twenty Pieces of Silver, yet it did not
excuse them from Theft, as we may see by the Testimony of that Righteous Man,
when in the Dungeon, Indeed, (says he) I was stolen out of the Land of the
Hebrews, Genesis xl 15. And those things being Writ for our Learning, let us shun
their Sins, that we may escape their Punishments; for God is a God of Justice,
by whom Actions are weighed, who regards all his Works, and will Recompense all
Wrongs; and it is as consistent with his Justice to Revenge the Cause of the
Oppressed, as it is with his Mercy to Reward the Just.

VI. And what greater Unjustice can be Acted, than to Rob a Man of his Liberty,
which is more Valuable than Life; and especially after such a manner as this,
to take a Man from his Native Country, his Parents and Brethren, and other
natural Enjoyments, and that by Stealth, or by way of Purchase from them that
have no Right to sell them, whereby thou receivest the Theft, which is as bad.
And take them amongst a People of a strange Language, and unnatural Climates,
which is hard for them to bear whose Constitutions are tendered by the Heat of
their Native Country; for God that made the World, and all Men of one Blood,
that dwell upon the Face of the Earth, has appointed them Bounds of their
Habitations, Acts, 17.26. Shall we we then undertake to remove them,
wheresoever Interest shall lead us, to sell them for Slaves, Husband from Wife,
and Children from both, like Beasts, with all their Increase, to the vilest of
Men, and their Offspring after them, to all Eternity: Oh! hard Lot! Oh! Eternal
sinking in Iniquity; without Bottom or Bounds, as to the Will of Man, therefore
as Jacob said, of Simeon and Levi, Instruments of Cruelty are in their
Habitations; O my Soul, come not thou into their Secret, nor be united in their
Assembly; for in their Anger they slew a Man, (but these have slain many)
Cursed be their Anger, for it is fierce, and their Wrath, for it is cruel, to
keep the Creature thus in Bondage, whereby we entail Sin on our Posterity, ad
Infinitum, though our Savior says, he that dies therein, where he is gone shall
never come. Like the Jews when they crucified Christ, desired his Blood might
remain on them and their Children; and yet so blind were they, as many are now,
through being accustomed to Sin, that they see not this Trade to be an Evil, though
it is manifest to a Child in the Light: But if the Light in us becomes Dark,
how great is that Darkness, that sees not the Ground and Tendency of this
Practice, and the Design of the Enemy against the Church of Christ, in causing
the Name of God to be Profaned, and the Truth to be Evil spoken of; as though
the Principles thereof led to it; which has Scandalized and hindered the Gospel
of Christ among the Heathen, and Burdened the Upright, and offended tender
seeking Souls, and caused them to dwell as alone, from all Societies, where
this Practice is indulged, and especially in the Ministry, lest they should
have Fellowship with that, that contradicts the Gospel of Christ; and yet
desires nothing more, than to be One with the Spirits of those that are not
defiled with this Iniquity, that now Works in the Mystery, in this Time of
Peace, amongst those that pretend to the Dispensation of the Son of God, and
yet have not fulfilled the Law of Moses, unto which Negroe Masters would recur
for the Justification of their Practice; but let all such be Silent in the
Cause of the Gospel, neither let them charge the Law of God foolishly, which
expressly forbids either the Stealing of Men, or the receiving them, under the
Penalty of Death. Ex. 21.16. Therefore deceive not thy own Soul, for according
to thy Sowing so shall thy Reaping be; if to the Flesh, Corruption, but if to
the Spirit, Everlasting Life.

VII. Had Friends, stood clear of this Practice, that it might have been
answered to the Traders in Slaves, That there is a People called Quakers in
Pensilvania, that will not own this Practice in Word or Deed, then would they
have been a burning and a shining Light to these poor Heathen, and a Precedent
to the Nations throughout the Universe, which might have brought them to have
seen the Evil of it in themselves, and glorified the Lord on our Behalf, and
like the Queen of the East to have admired the Glory and Beauty of the Church
of God. But instead thereof, the tender Seed in the Honest-hearted is under
Suffering, to see both Elders and Ministers as it were clothed with it, and
their Offspring after them filling up the Measure of their Parents Iniquity;
which may be suffered till such Time that Recompense from him that is just to
all his Creatures, opens that Eye the God of this World has blinded. Though I
would not be understood to pervert the Order of the Body, which consists of
Servants and Masters, and the Head cannot say to the Foot, I have no need of
thee; but it is the Converting Men's Liberty to our Wills, who have not, like
the Gibeonites, offered themselves willingly, or by Consent given their Ear to
the Door-post, but are made such by Force, in that Nature that desires to Lord
it over their Fellow Creatures, is what is to be abhorred by all Christians.

VIII. Love to God, and Hospitality to Strangers, was recommended under all
Dispensations, Whereby, says the Apostle, some have entertained Angels
unawares, whose Mission was to the righteous Souls that sought the Good of all
Men; as was testified of just Lot, that his righteous Soul was grieved with
Sodom's Filthiness, which by the Apostle is linked with Murderers of Fathers,
and Murderers of Mothers, and Men-stealers, all which by the Law are under the
Sentence of Death. And were you so living in the Body as to be sensible of the
Sufferings, some Souls go through on this Account, surely you would not be
guilty of it, but act as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty.
Besides, how can a Christian, zealous for the Name and Cause of Jesus, desire
those in his Family, that are not of the same Belief with him. Was it not the
Mind of Joshua, though under the Law, that he and his House would serve the Lord.

IX. Also Abraham, in whose righteous Seed all the Families of the Earth are
blessed, is eminent for his Regard to the Lord's Covenant, in that he caused
all his Household, both Children and Servants, whether born in his House, or
bought with Money, to be circumcised with him, that they might keep the Way of
the Lord, Genesis xviii. 9. So that herein Abraham fought them to the Lord, in the
Faith, which was accounted to him for Righteousness, and his End was answered,
for Abraham believed God with all his House, which, had he come by them as we
do by the Negroes, or Indian Slaves, they would hardly have regarded Abraham,
or believed in the Lord, or his Ordinance. But does this appear in this Trade,
that we seek them to the Lord and his Gospel, or their Liberty and Property to
us and our Children, let the Impartial judge, since we go for them for that
very End: Therefore you are short of the Law, which must be fulfilled before a
higher Dispensation is known, which Moses testified of, that those Souls that
would not obey should be cut off; yet Moses was faithful in that Dispensation,
in ministering to Pharaoh and Egypt for their Oppression. And though they held
Israel as an Abomiation, yet it did not excuse them from being overthrown, and
branded accordingly with the Name of the House of Bondage throughout all
Generations. And then Israel could not offer their Offerings, neither could
they sing the Lord's Song in the strange Land, but hung their Harps on the
Willows when they were captivated in Babylon, whom John the Divine saw should
be overthrown, as a great Millstone in the Sea. Then will the Saints be glad and
rejoice, that have not defiled themselves with any of her Merchandise, the
worst of which is Slaves and Souls of Men; and those Virgin Souls, whose
Garments are not spotted with the Flesh, but are thus redeemed from the Earth,
can sing the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and the Song of the Lamb,
saying, Great and mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty! just and true
are thy Ways, thou King of Saints! Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy Name! for thou only art Holy, for all Nations shall come and
worship before thee, for thy Judgments are made manifest. And when we witness
this Gospel, Oh! how does the Love of God in us abound, for the Welfare and
Restoration of every living Creature, and especially Mankind, that we may be
redeemed from Babylon's Sins, whereby we may escape her Plagues.

X. But to return to the Law, that was given to a hard-hearted People, unto
whom many Things were suffered on that Account, that they made Captives of
those they were at War with, and drove out the Inhabitants that possessed the
promised Land, which they had forfeited by their Wickedness; but what is that
to us, who are not at War with these Negroes, neither can we say their Country
is given unto us, or that we have a Command or a Dispensation for the Trade; (a
Permission you have, and so had Judas to betray Christ, and so do you betray
the Truth for Gain) yet ready are you to fasten on the hardest Thing that was
suffered to them, while you pretend to the Dispensation of that Grace and Truth
that comes by Jesus Christ. Yet even amongst the Jews, if One became poor, to
be sold unto a Brother, or to a Stranger, any of his Kin may redeem him; or, if
able, he may redeem himself; and the Price of his Redemption shall be according
to the Number of Years to the Year of Jubilee; and if he fails of these
Opportunities of Redemption, the Jubilee shall release him, not only from
Servitude, but shall restore him to his Family and Possession.

XI Also, according to the Law of God, Exodus xxii. 3. if a Thief cannot make
full Restitution to the Owner, he shall be sold for his Theft; which Law, were
it in Force now, or Thieves confined to Bridewels according to demerit, would
more suppress Theft than Cutting them off in their Sins; for Idleness being
generally the Cause, it might be removed by teaching them Labor, which may
redound both to their and the public Benefit, and give them Opportunity to go
out of the World in a better Condition. Or if our Minerals or Manufactures were
improved by the Labor of such Criminals, they would be a living Testimony, to
warn others by their Bondage and Slavery, and a just Recompense for their idle
Practices, which lie heavy on those that have done us no Wrong: Yet in that
Love that cements the whole Creation, and bears all Things, I would advise my
Brethren whether Indian, Moor or Tawney Slave for whom Christ has suffered,
therefore let us his Creatures submit with Patience to what our Lord has
permitted in this World, as believing that there is an Eternal Region which
swallows up this, wherein he will vindicate his Justice. Therefore for his Sake
who suffered for us, in whom we may be free indeed, and over the Heads of our
Oppressors, and over our present Suffering, whereby we may cheerfully, for our
little Time here, fulfill our daily Task, and gain the Love of those we are
under in the Land of our Captivity, which will prevent evil Words amongst us,
and Severity and Cruelty toward us, or otherwise they will treasure up unto
themselves Wrath against the Day of Wrath, when we possess a boundless Liberty,
in our eternal Habitations, in which we have a large Room when we are centred
thereto.

Also if any are under, or liable to be under the Sentence of Death for Theft,
let them submit unto it as just unto them, having broken a known Law which
ought to have been obeyed, not only with Regard to the Natural Life, but in an
especial Regard to its striking at Unjustice, which leads to an eternal Death;
therefore with Submission to the Law of Man, but chiefly with true Repentance
before our Lord that was crucified between the Thieves for Sinners, let us,
like the penitent One on the Cross, confess to the Justness thereof for our
evil Deeds, and seek unto Him for Mercy, in which Condition he was received
into the Lord's Favor; therefore despair not; yet, as the Other was hardened,
presume not. Though certain it is, they suffered under the Power of Darkness in
the Jews which rejected the Son to set free Barrabbas the Murderer, and they
crucified the Thieves, all which is contrary to the express Letter of the Law
of God, and the Law of Equity, which goes no farther for Theft than to make
Restitution in Substance or Service, which is more fully expressed by Josephus,
Lib. 4. chapter 8. which our Friend George Fox preached in his Time, as answering
the Law of God, and the just Principle in all, which was before Transgression
was, or the Law against Sin was, which is holy just and good in its
Ministration of Judgment, against all Transgression, and is an Evidence to such
as break it, how far short they are of the Ministration of Righteousness in the
Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ, which contradicts not, nor falls short of,
but fulfils the outward Law, which is so exact in the Ministration of Justice
and Equity, that it appoints Breach for Breach, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth,
Burning for Burning, and Blood for Blood, and that one Manner of Law shall be
as well for the Stranger as for one of their own Country, Lev. xxiv. 20. which
also commands that they neither vex a Stranger, nor oppress him, seeing they
were Strangers in the Land of Egypt, Ex. xxii. 21. And it many Times occurring
that these Strangers the Negroes, have not the same Administration of the Law
to them as is to others, and that the Whites also are liable to the Sentence of
Death for Theft, which being contrary to the Law of God, and through the Regard
which tender-minded People have to the Life of Man, hinders them from
prosecuting the Law on Thieves, or Serving in Offices, or on Juries, though best
qualified for such Services, and would be very glad to the utmost of their
Power to suppress Theft, or any other National Evil, but dare go no farther
than the Law of God admits of, therefore cannot be instrumental to hurry into
Eternity such unhappy Creatures, who being void of the Fear of God, and under
the Instigations of the Devil, would rather hazard an untimely Death than be
confined to labor for an honest Livelihood; But when the Sentence of Death is
passed on them, and they wait for their eternal Habitations according to their
Deeds, the Deceit of the Enemy is then discovered, and his false Supports fall,
and they with them, into the most miserable Condition, that they would then be
glad of the worst Terms of Labor, which before a small Share for their Crimes
(it being the Antidote for Idleness) or Captivity, the Reverse of Nature, which
will subdue the wildest of Creatures) might have prevented, as some Parts of
the World have had good Experience of. And these Things bearing upon my Spirit,
under Suffering with the Afflicted, that their Cause may be considered; it is
not that Sin should be countenanced, which God has forbidden, but that
Judgment may be mixed with Mercy, according to the Law of God, which has such
Regard to Mercy, which always was to overshadow the Judgment Seat, that it
enjoins Compassion, not only to the Widow and Fatherless, and Strangers, and
Servants, but even to the inferior Creatures, though they belonged to an Enemy,
as Ex. xxiii. 4, 5. If thou meet thine Enemy's Ox, or his Ass, going astray,
thou shall surely bring it back to him again; and if thou see the Ass of him
that hates thee, lying under his Burden, thou shall surely help with him. And
the 12th Verse, Six Days thou shall do thy Work, and on the Seventh Day thou
shall rest, that thine Ox and thine Ass may rest. But perhaps thou wilt say then,
Does God take Care for Oxen? Yes, verily, the Law has so guarded against the
hard-hearted Jews, that it tenderly regards the very Birds of the Air, that if
thou find one of their Nests by the Way as thou go, that the Dam should not
be taken with the Young; and though five of them should be sold for one Farthing,
yet not without the Father, unto whom every Hair of our Head is numbered; then
if I abuse one of them, will it not groan unto its Creator, who made it of his
good Pleasure, and every Thing that has Breath gives him Praise; who when he
was entreated for Nineveh, the Seat of Violence, he had a Regard also for the
Cattle, and does hear their innocent Complaint; as we see, when Balaam in his
Anger smote the Ass with a Staff, that the Lord opened the Mouth of the Ass to
reprove the wrathful Prophet, who coveted the Gain which the Righteous-Seed
cannot live on, or submit unto. A good Man, says Solomon, is merciful to his
Beast: The Beast serves us, and should we not be ungrateful for their Service
if we take not due Care of them: For the Nature and Spirit of a Man may be
known by his Government over the inferior Creatures, which the Lord created for
his Glory, and the Accommodation of Man. And should not we, in Love and
Thankfulness to him that made them (in which Sense we are Brethren) and in
Gratitude for their Service, take Care that they have Food and Rest, and what
else is convenient for them? and not only for our own Profit, but from a
Principle of Justice in my self: For should I receive Benefits from them, and
yet be so barbarous as to deny them what is necessary, then certainly I have
estrayed from the righteous Law of God written on my Heart. And if I should
kill or torment any of God's Creatures, only to satisfy my Will, I act
unjustly, and show forth the Tormentor my Master, and the same Measure will be
mete to me again; and though it were a Snake, or a Beast of Prey, let us take
Care of entering into the same Beastly Property to destroy it. The Creature made
not it self, nor was it created in vain. Neither should we oppress the
Creation, by coveting to winter more Creatures than we have provided
sufficiently for. Would this be doing as we would be done by? Were we going a
Voyage to Sea, would we not lay in Store for the worst Weather and the longest
Time? in which Duty the very Be and the Ant are Instruction to us; and shall
we want Wisdom, or neglect to provide for the Creatures under our Charge, when
our Interest is bound up therein? Neither should we deface their Beauty, by
Cutting off their Ears, or other Ornaments which God has given them, according
to his Law in Nature, for Defense from Flies and Weather; and yet we go to the
very Indies for Fans and Umbrella's, which are for the same Service to us; for
which the very Indians upbraid us, for Robbing the Creatures of their natural
Covering, and yet cover our selves with borrowed Hair, which is unnatural,
which shows the great Degeneracy and Fall of Man from his first Creation; but
as Man comes to be restored again thereto, through Christ, he acts in that
Nature, which cannot exert it self otherwise than in pure Love and Tenderness
toward all the Creation of God. And were we come to this innocent Life, of
doing as we would be done by throughout all the Creation, whereby we could not
inculcate any Principles in our Children, that proceed from the wrathful
Nature, then should we much more enjoy our selves, and they would easily be
subdued by Love, which universally governs without a Sword, so that the very
dumb Creatures have a Sense of it, and are governed by such in Peace, not
finding Matter to raise the wrathful Nature in them: For as Love begets Love,
so does Wrath beget Wrath, and they that take up the Sword shall perish by it:
So that every Sin brings its own Suffering; as we may observe by our
neighboring Province of South Carolina, when the Inhabitants in their Commerce
with the Indians, would force their Wives or Captives from them, though for Debt,
for which they sold them for Slaves; which when the Indians beheld, it soon
raised the same Property in them, to the Loss of many Lives, and the
demolishing of their Situations; and many fled in Canoes and Periagua's to Sea
for Safety, rather than expose themselves to the Fury of the Indians; who
before were a peaceable People to them that were in Peace; which gave Robert
Barrow and Company Victory over them, and was their Safeguard beyond the Sword,
and remains so throughout all Generations; which gave them Occasion to bless
the Lord, who removed their Indian Captive by Death, that nothing might appear
to contradict that Love which united us in the Beginning as Brethren, by whom
we were supported, which in Gratitude makes them near unto us, who made Room
for us without Resistance, as a Land given unto us by the Providence of God,
which the Sword could never have done; and they as a wise People perceived
these Things, and may judge many of us, that have betrayed their Innocence by
our evil Example, being derogated from that Love which might have been a Means
of Baptizing them into the Nature of the Gospel, both the Indians and the
Ethiopians also, which excepts not nor despises any for their Complections:
Remember Miriam was smote for it with a Leprosy, though under the Law, being gone
from the Testimony, which is the same in Male or Female, White or Black,
whereby we are brought into Favor with the Lord; as in the Time of the
Prophets, when Jeremiah was under Suffering in the Dungeon, the only Interceder
for his Liberty was Ebedmelech. the Ethiopian, for which he was singularly in
the Lord's Favor, and rewarded accordingly, as one that put his Trust in the
Lord, Jer. xxxix. 18. Also under the Gospel, there was not the least Exception
against the believing Ethiopian's partaking of the Privilege of Baptism;
therefore let us not forbid or hinder them to be baptized, but stand clear of
these Things, which the righteous Seed throughout the Universe (which makes up
the true Church) is redeemed from, who are in the Faith that a more general
Purgation will be, whereby numberless Numbers will be brought in, and the
Lyon's Nature will be subdued by the Lamb's, that the Child may play with the
Asp at the Mouth of the Cockatrice's Den; for not any Thing hurts or destroys
in this Principle, neither makes afraid. But what have they to do with Peace,
who would impose that on another they would not bear themselves? Did not they
lay a Precedent to the Indians, or Turks, or Spaniards, to do to them as they
had done to other Nations? And what can we say against Bondage for Bondage?
Which caused the Legislative Power, wisely to make Laws against making or
receiving Indian Slaves, seeing the Evil Ground, and the Fruit it brought
forth; for every Principle acts in its own Center in Nature, as the Loadstone
draws what has Affinity with it self. So when the Sun draws up the Clouds from
the Sea, which empty themselves over the Universe, how industriously does it
center toward the Ocean again, from whence it was raised, and had its own
Being. So what has its Original from Covetousness, which is the Root of all
Evil, and so leads to Wrath and Violence to effect it, must needs leaven us
into the same Nature, that we may support it by the same Power; therefore we
cannot expect That to be blessed to us, which is the Product from an Evil Root,
for then Satan would be divided against himself.

XII. Though I am sensible that some well-meaning People have unthinkingly run
into it, neglecting the Oracle of God, have looked at others, and especially
those who have presumed to mention the Lord's Name, and to take his Covenant
into their Mouths, who are the greatest of Deceivers, and have betrayed them
into this Practice, as if it was no Evil, till they have seen their own
Captivity and Bondage, and that they have been led astray by the others
Hypocrisy, and then they would gladly have been clear, and to have come to
their former Condition; for whose Sakes am I thus concerned, that you may wait
upon the Lord to know his Will concerning you, who is able and willing to help
the Sincere out of it, that would freely part with all for his Sake, and their
own Redemption, knowing that Sin must bear his Judgments, that we fall not
short of his Mercies; for how can any Man in this Gospel Dispensation, whose
Conscience is not seared, die in Peace, to leave these poor Creatures in such
unhappy Circumstances; for though their Matter might grant them all Enjoyments
but Liberty, how does he know what barbarous Hands they may fall into when he
is gone, which then would make their Bondage and Severity more grievous to
them; which often happens; for those that are trained up in this Sin, become
more hard and dark than the rest of humane Race; which I have often experienced
in my Travels amongst Men concerned; and the more Men have pretended to
Religion, the more dark have they been, striving to cover their Sin.

XIII. Which leads me to caution all that have not defiled themselves
therewith, to shun it as thou valuest thine own Soul, which should be more to
thee than the Gain of the whole World; that if thy Father should offer to give
thee Slaves, center thou to the WITNESS of JESUS in thy Soul, which cannot
consent to Sin, and in the Openings of the Universal Love of God in Christ for
all Mankind, resist the Temptation, whereby thou may come over thy Parents
for Good, by thy denying an Interest so near to thee. I offer nothing but what
I desire to rule my Life by, and take to my own Soul, under the same
Temptation; for I am so far from any Antipathy to the Black People, that if it
was a Trade ordained of God, I would lay out my Interest that Way.

But I have not so learned Christ, as to think, much less to believe, that the
Eternal Love of the Father, in him that suffered that ignominious Death of the
Cross, for the Redemption of the whole Creation, should allow his Followers in
the most arbitrary and Tyrannical Oppression that Hell has invented on this
Globe; which would better become the Religion of Mahomet, which was introduced
by humane Force, than for the Ministers of the Prince of Peace: For he that
would propagate the Gospel thereby destroy it. Therefore let us wait for Access
to the Throne of Grace, that we may have Admittance to the Balance of the
Sanctuary, to weigh these Things; and then put in thy Lordliness and Riches,
and Estates founded on Oppression; and though thou have built a Town with Blood,
and established a City with Iniquity; and thou could put in the Glory of the
whole World, which passes away, and is but according to the Prince of the
Power of the Air; and then see if it will answer to the Loss of eternal Riches,
to thy Soul, which cost the Blood of thy Redeemer; under the Sense of which am
I thus drawn forth unto thee, that if it should please the Lord I might be of
Service but to one Soul, I should be sufficiently recompensed for my thus
exposing my self to the Censures of Men; and for this Labor of Love, and the
Groans and Supplications that have been offered up unto the Lord Night and Day,
that this Trade, with the whole Train of Iniquity attending it, might be swept
out of all Churches that make Mention of thy Name; that the Knowledge of thee,
the Lord, might spread over the Universe, whom to know is Life eternal; that
thy Gospel may be preached in the true Property of it, to the Drawing in of
Souls unto thee; that the Light of the Moon may be as the Sun, and the Light of
the Sun as Seven Days; and that all Oppression and Violence, that has hindered
the Progress of thy Truth, may be centred, with the Author thereof, to the Pit
that is Bottomless.

XIV. And though I esteem my self les than the least of all his Mercies, and the
unworthiest to offer my Mite, yet the Lord knows the Sufferings I have gone
through on this Account, and especially by False Brethren, who, like Korah,
Dathan and Abiram, have known the Work of the Lord, and his Deliverance through
the Sea, from the Oppressors who were overthrown therein, yet afterward return
to the same Nature which strikes at the Life of the true Seed; to fit under
their Ministry, but more to join with their Spirits in Prayer, who are Spots in
our Feasts of Charity, which is Love; though I would not be understood to
despise the least Child in the Truth, that may offer a few Words in Prayer or
Praise, though never so brokenly, if in the Life and Sense of what is offered;
but it is those that have covenanted with this Iniquity, for themselves and
their Posterity to all Eternity; therefore, says Drixelex, shall Men be
punished to Eternity because they would Sin to Eternity; even as God is
eternal; if he would suffer it, which burdens the Church, and the true
Ministers thereof, with the dry Repetition of their old Experiences; and no
Marvel, for Satan himself is transformed like unto an Angel of Light, and his
Ministers according to the Ministers of Righteousness, whose End shall be
according to their Works, and though they might have been of Service in Time
past, yet if through their wicked Lives and Practices the Power withdraws, let
not such Spirits usurp Authority to teach in the Church, who are worse than
those that withstood Moses; or that shipwreck Faith and a good Conscience in an
open Apostasy, are not so pernicious, as this Practice in those that are
esteemed Ministers of the Son of God, and are owned and suffered in the
Churches, to tell of the Goodness of the Lord in the Form and Words of Truth,
and yet deny him in Actions; which leads the young Generation that have not
known the Lord, nor yet the Works that he has done for Israel, to think Friends
were thus in the Beginning; but my Soul, in Fellowship with them in the Spirit,
has witnessed better Tidings of them, who quitted themselves like Men, and the
Lord's Power and Spirit was with them, in their Labors and Sufferings, under
Oppression even unto Death, in which they rejoiced, that they were counted
worthy to suffer with the Seed that Suffered, which forever reigns over the
Heads of Oppressors, though they may wrongfully assume their Names, and their
Master, and his Gospel, which is clear, and denies all such that would
introduce this abominable Practice into the Church of Christ, which ministers
Death and Darkness over the Churches; like the fallen Star that opened the
Bottomless Pit, and let out the Smoke thereof, which darkened the very Sun and
Air, and even perverts the very Order of the Creation, that not any thing
therein has its natural Savor, while such a Darkness has happened to those
that bear the Name of our worthy Elders, should so lay waste their Testimonies
which they maintained with their Blood; for had you denied them and their
Master, you had never been capable of plunging my Soul into such Sufferings and
Death, where I had been swallowed up, and remained unto Eternity, had not the
Lord, who is rich in Mercy, given me a secret Hope which sustained me, and
showed me his Way in the Sea, and his Paths in the great Waters, where he
anchored my Soul unto himself, from all Flesh; and brought to my Remembrance
his Works of Old, and the Times that were past, when his Candle shone upon my
Head, and when by his Light I walked through Darkness; and the Religious
Education I had, though in the Church of England being governed by one, whose
Prayers and Tears to the Lord, and good Counsel to us, in the very Power of
Truth, did more subdue our evil Natures, than Correction; which gave me, though
a Youth, a Sense at my first Landing in these Parts, the Inconsistency this
Trade had with a Christian Education; but especially with the Sense I had of
the Truth of God, and the Extension of his Goodness in this Gospel
Dispensation, wherein he has singularly manifested his Love unto all Men; in
the Sense, and under the Shade of which, I have set with great Delight, and the
Overflowings of his Goodness has been sweet to my Taste, and because of the
Flavor of the good Ointment, which has spread to the very Border of the
Garment, therefore has my Soul loved and delighted in him, as the universal
Love of the Father. And after all these Favors, 0 Lord, and thy manifold
Mercies and Visitations of Love, shall I disbelieve thee in whom there is no
Offense? that have pronounced thy Woe to the Offender against the least
Believer in thee, that it were better a Millstone were hung about his Neck, and
that he fathomed the Bottom of the Sea! Or shall I disbelieve thy Truth, which
testifies against all the Unrighteousness and Ungodliness of Men? And blessed
be thy holy Name, who gave me a secret Hope, and manifested unto my Soul how
this Practice was suffered, to try who would sell thee and thy Truth for Gain;
who give the Blessing to those that are not offended in Thee!

For where no Temptation is, there is no Victory; therefore let us come beyond
Custom and Tradition, or we shall not differ from a Jew, a Turk, or a Pagan,
who remain such according thereto; but let us center to the Spirit of Christ in
our own Hearts, that we may know the Truth for ourselves; and in the Fear of
the righteous Judge of Quick and Dead, consider these Things; that we may be
able to stand Trial when all our Actions, Words and Intentions must be
accounted for, in that Day when nothing can stand before him, but what is of
his own Nature: Therefore, whatsoever we find to do, let us do it with our
Might; for Time is short, and our Works are for Eternity.

XV. Therefore let us try if the Dispensation of the Prophets will allow this
Practice; and if we will not believe Moses nor the Prophets, neither will we be
persuaded though one rose from the Dead. The Prophet Isaiah, who was eminently
favored with the Knowledge of the Humiliation and Passion, and Office of
Christ, and the Government and Glory of his Church, though for Brevity-fake I
shall only mention what the present Occasion may require; of the Passion of
Christ he says, Chap. liii. 6. The Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us
all: He was oppressed and afflicted, who had done no Violence, neither was
Deceit found in his Mouth, as is there more fully expressed. And he declares of
his Office thus, Chap. lxi. 1, 2. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me because
the Lord has anointed me to preach good Tidings unto the Meek, he has sent me
to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the
opening of the Prison to them that are bound; To proclaim the acceptable Year
of the Lord, and the Day of Vengeance of our God, against Sin; and though this
may chiefly regard the inward Man, which is the better Part, yet the Mystery
does not destroy the History, as we may see Chap. lviii. 6. where the Lord
ordains the Fast that he will accept of, which is to loose the Bands of
Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, and to let the Oppressed go free, and
that ye break every Yoke; or in vain were all their Oblations and Sabbaths to
him, who delights in Mercy rather than Sacrifices; which Passage our Friend
George Fox made use of against the Oppressors and Persecutors of those Times,
when they suffered for their Testimony by the Oppressors, both in their Liberty
and Property, and some to Banishment out of their Native Country, but not to be
Slaves for ever; yet how did the Lord deliver them, and frustrate their
Enemies, and afflict the Nations at that Time with the Sword abroad, and Fire,
and Pestilence, and Dissentions at home: And shall we disregard those
Providence, and go beyond them in Oppression, who have known the Lord's
Judgments against Sin, and his great Mercies and Goodness unto us; for which if
we fall short, in humble Thankfulness to praise his Name, by a holy and just
Life, of how much severer Punishment shall we be worthy! When Judgment begins
at the House of God, where shall this Unrighteousness appear; which is far
short of the Duty commanded in the next Verse, that thou deal thy Bread to the
Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out, to thy House; when thou
see the Naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from
thine own Flesh: Then shall thy Light break forth as the Morning, and the Glory
of the Lord shall be thy Rere-ward, etc. The Prophet David, in his Address to
the Lord, says, Psalm. xv. 1. Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, or dwell in
thy holy Hill? it is answered, He that walks uprightly, and works
Righteousness. Agreeable to the Prophet Isaiah, xxxiii. 15, 16. He that walks
righteously, and speaks uprightly; He that despises the Gain of Oppressions,
and shakes his Hands from holding of Bribes, and stops his Ears from Blood,
and shuts his Eyes from Evil: He shall dwell on high, his Place of Defense
shall be the munitions of Rocks, Bread shall be given him, his Waters shall be
sure. Also Ezekiel, xviii. 5. If a Man be just, and do that which is lawful and
Right, that has not oppressed any, but has restored to the Debtor his Pledge,
and has spoiled none by Violence, with other Duties there enjoined, He is
pronounced Just, he shall surely live, says the Lord God. But on the contrary,
He that commits these Evils, for the Iniquity that he has done he shall die,
his Blood shall be upon him. But if he begets a Son that has seen and
considered his Father's Iniquity, and shuns the same, and regards his Duty, he
shall not die for his Father's Sin, but shall surely live. Also in the Days of
Jeremiah, Chap. xxxiv. 17. when the Servants were set free according to the Law
of God by Moses, and afterward brought them again into Bondage, for which,
says the Lord, to the Sword, to the Pestilence, and to the Famine, and I will
make yen to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the Earth. Also another of the
Prophets sums up our Duty in Doing justly, loving Mercy, and walking humbly
with the Lord. Now separate from Custom and thy Profits (which thou must soon
leave, if they leave not thee) and consult the true Oracle, which lives and
abides for ever, that cannot lie, or consent to Sin. If to steal, or force
these People from their Birthright, which is a Country remote from us, with
whom we have no Quarrel (though was there a proclaimed War, it is contrary to the
Law of Nations to rifle and captivate Enemies, without putting them in some
Capacity of Redemption) neither do they owe us any Thing; How then have they
forfeited their Country and Liberty, to entitle me to them? And if so, must the
Children's Teeth also be set on Edge? Is this just or equal? And to live on
another's Labor by Force and Oppression, is this Loving Mercy? And to keep
them Slaves to us and our Posterity to all Eternity, is this Walking humbly,
with thy God? Thus to Lord it in the Creation, that admits of no Release, or
Year of Jubilee, to the Creature: Which leads me to a Passage in which our
Savior instructed his Followers, by the Precedent of a little Child; and that
he that would be greatest, should be Servant to all, for the Children of this
World Lord it in their Generation (in which they are wiser for the World than
the Children of Light) but it shall not be so amongst you. And, We are all,
says the Apostle, Children of Wrath, as well as others by Nature; which by
this Practice is unhappily advanced in our Children, from their Infancy; who
quickly perceiving their Power over the Negroes, grow proud and idle, as
naturally as a Branch springs from and partakes of the Nature of the Root that
bears it; which to support with Fullness of Bread (which was the Overthrow of
Sodom) oppress and abuse their Slaves, and these in the same Nature oppress the
dumb Creatures, till Cruelty and Violence cover the whole Earth: And then what
became of the Old World, for the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive,
which has often visited us, both immediately and instrumentally, whereby our
Ground has been often watered, and if it brings forth Briars and Thorns, it is
nigh unto Cursing; in the Sense of which my Desires have been unto the Lord,
for the eternal Welfare of every Soul; having nothing against the Person of any
Man, but at the Evil, that must end where it had its Beginning: For had you a
Liberty in the Truth for this Trade, I should be so far from begrudging you, or
spying it out with an evil Eye, that I would freely partake with you therein.
But it is so far wide thereof, that if this is not an Evil there is no Evil in
the World but what Tradition and Custom makes such. Neither do I begrudge your
Profit thereby, knowing right well Man's Life consists not in the Abundance of
his Possessions; having known how to be full and to be hungry, how to abound
and to suffer Need, in desolate Parts of the World, yet content with what the
Lord's Providence provided for me, and was more Enjoyment to me than to be a
Captive in a King's Court.

XVI. Also under the Dispensation of John the Baptist, who was the greatest of
Prophets, who preached Repentance as an Introduction to the Kingdom of Heaven
at Hand, who was the Voice crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the Way of the
Lord, make his Paths strait; his Testimony was, to do Violence to no Man,
without excepting either Indian or Ethiopian. And what greater Violence can be
acted, than to rob a Man and his Posterity of their Liberty, so long as they
remain in this Region?

Yet the Least under the Dispensation of the Kingdom, is greater than John; who
have witnessed the divine Life, that is hid with Christ in God; who at sundry
Times, and in diverse Manners, spoke in Time past unto the Fathers, by the
Prophets (which chiefly regarded moral Duties, between Man and Man, to do as we
would be done by) but he has in these last Days, spoken unto us by his Son,
whom he has appointed Heir of all Things, by whom also he made the Worlds; who
does not destroy, but fulfils and swallows up all the foregoing Dispensations,
as the Rock they pointed to, which is the Everlasting Sabbath that gives Rest
to the whole Creation of God; who in his Sermon on the Mount, pronounces the
Merciful Blessed, in that he shall obtain Mercy; and makes this Comparison
between the Law, and the Gospel which signifies Good Tidings, that whereas it
was said, Thou shall not kill; the Lord there says, Whosoever shall call his
Brother a Fool, shall be in Danger of Hell Fire; and if thy Brother Trespass
against thee, 70 Times 7 in a Day, saying I repent, thou shall forgive him. And
ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, unto which
the Jews added by their Tradition, and hate thine Enemy; which was not in the
Law of Moses, but was in their own hard Hearts: But Christ says, Love your
Enemies, bless them that curse, and do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them that persecute you, by which we shall have Victory over the Heads of our
Adversaries. And whereas it was said, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but
shall perform unto the Lord thine Oath; he says that is the Yea and Amen,
Swear not at all. Accordingly the Apostle James, writing to the Twelve
scattered Tribes, who according to their Law were to swear by the Lord, and
perform their Oath unto him, says, Above all Things, my Brethren, Swear not,
but keep to Yea and Nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation. And though Abraham swore
his Servant that ruled all he had, that he should not suffer his Son to take a
Wife of the Canaanites, whom he knew were to be cut off; yet now under the
Gospel, we see Swearing expressly forbidden. And though Abraham paid the Tithes of
the Spoils of his Enemies, which the Lord has now prohibited, unto whom
Abraham and Moses must give Place, who says to his Ministers, Freely ye have
received, freely give. The Priesthood, says the Apostle, being changed, that
took Tithes, and the Commandment disanull'd that gave them, which made nothing
perfect, which the bringing in of a better Hope did, by which we draw nigh unto
God, through him who is not after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after
the Power of an endless Life, which sets free from Sin and Death; by so much
was Jesus made a Surety of a better Testament, established upon better
Promises; which shows the Preference of the Gospel to the Law which was given
by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ; and we beheld his Glory, as
the only Begotten of the Father, full of Grace and full of Truth; and of this
Fullness have all received, having all heard, but all have not obeyed; who has
now commanded, and even constrained by his Love all Men every where to repent;
since all have partook of the Riches of his Goodness, which should lead us
thereto; therefore there is no Cover for our Disobedience, which brings
Ignorance of God, and the Knowledge of his Will, which will not excuse us from
that Wrath, which is revealed from Heaven against all them that know not God,
and obey not (...) Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who at his Birth into the
World, the Multitude of the heavenly Host gave Glory to God in the highest, and
proclaimed Peace on Earth, and Good Will to Men; which was manifested to the
beloved Disciple John, in his Revelation in the Isle of Patmos, who saw an
Angel fly in the midst Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach to them
that dwell on the Earth, which was to every Nation, Kindred, Tongue and People:
But if an Angel from Heaven should preach any other Gospel, than this of
Good Will to all Men, let him be accursed: For the universal Love put no
Difference between us and the Jews; if so, where had we of the Gentiles Race
been? if all were not in a Capacity of being restored by Christ; who in his
great Loving Kindness and Compassion to poor lost Man, left his Father's Glory
to take on him the Fashion of Man, that he might become a Propitiation for Sin,
according to his Promise in the Beginning, when Man fell like the Tempter by
aspiring to a higher Condition; who partaking of all Things in himself as the
Head, must needs deface the whole Creation, which cried loud for Justice, and
awakened the Wrath and Displeasure of God, due thereto, which moved the eternal
Love to commiserate Mankind in this Condition, and to frustrate the Design of
the Enemy, and exalt his own Grace, which prevailed over the Wrath, whereby the
Creation might be redeemed (through the promised Seed) from this evil Quality,
and the Author of it; for which End Christ was manifested in the Flesh, and in
the Spirit; who as the Father works, so does he work, to bring forth his
Wonders in all Regions, and centers, and Principles, whether of Love or Wrath;
and those that believe in the Mysteries of God, and come to the knowledge of
his Love, rejoice in the Boundlessness thereof; which will aggravate the Crimes
of those, who having resisted this Goodness, become blinded with their own
Wickedness, saying, Judgment is not executed upon us, (as though the Justice of
God was limited to this Region) for all Things, say they, continue as they were
before we committed these Things, the Sun and the Rain we have in its Season,
and Riches increase upon us, therefore will we enjoy our Pleasure in all
Voluptuousness to the full, as the Reward of our Lives, and persecute him that
opposes us (who abstaineth from our Ways as from Filthiness) for when our
Breath is extinguished we are as the Beast, our Body shall be turned into
Ashes, and our Spirit vanish as a Vapor. As this Trading in Souls bespeaks; as
though the rational Soul, created and infused by the Lord in Man, which
distinguishes him from the Beast, could be confined to a Body of Earth, or
extinguished with it; though we see, the nigher the Body is to its Dissolution,
the more sensible and apprehensive is the Soul of its eternal Duration, in a
Habitation suitable to its Nature, and to what it has witnessed and had Unity
with, in the earthly Tabernacle, which is centred to its Original as a Seed,
which will be clothed with its own Body, whether of Light or of Darkness;
therefore while we have the Light, let us walk in it, that we may be raised to
a glorious Immortality with the Saints in Light, forever to adore and admire
that Power by which we were redeemed; that dwelt in that Body, that suffered
the Wrath due to us; in which he perfected the Will of God, who went about
doing Good; giving Sight to the Blind, and causing the Lepers to be cleansed,
and unto the Poor is the Gospel preached freely; by him who dispossessed the
Devils, whereby the Creature that was in Bondage and Captivity was set free; by
the great Jubilee and Prince of the Law of Liberty, not only to the Jews, but
to all Nations; who when he was reviled, reviled not again, but suffered all
things from his Enemies, for whom he waded through that bitter Conflict in the
Garden, which he finished on the Cross, when the Sins of the whole World was
upon him, under which he cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! and
he that had known Hunger in the Wilderness, now suffered Thirst, and they gave
him Vinegar to drink, in which the Scripture was fulfilled; and when he had
received it, he said, It is finished and he bowed his Head and gave up the
Ghost. Oh! the unparalled Love of Christ, the immaculate Lamb, to Enemies!
for whom he prayed on the Cross; though he had Power over all Creatures, in
Heaven and Earth, that he might have commanded Legions of Angels for his
Deliverance: But such was the Love of our Redeemer, in whom there was no
Offense, to suffer for Offenders! in which is manifested his great Mercy, and
wonderful Love and Charity, which the Angels themselves cannot fathom! the
infinite Extension of the Love of God in Christ, which is incomprehensible! yet
unto us is this Grace given, that we might partake of the unsearchable Riches
of Christ; which neither Principalities, nor Powers, whether of Angels, or Men,
or Devils, should be able to separate us from him, who is both Precept and
Precedent to his Church; and if the Green Tree thus humbled himself, much more
shall the Dry. Shall we Lord it in the Creation, in Opposition to his Command
which says, It shall not be so amongst us; Or can we behold him in his
Sufferings he went through for Sin, and yet commit these Things whereby we should
crucify him afresh, and put him to open Shame, and deny his Gospel, which
brings Life and Immortality to those that obey the Light thereof; a Measure of
which is given to every Man, to make known the Mystery, which from the
Beginning of the World has been hid in God, who created all Things by Jesus
Christ, who in the Beginning moved by his Spirit on the Face of the Deep, for
the carrying on and perfecting of the outward Creation; so he moves in our
Hearts by his Spirit for our new Creation in Christ, whose first Appearance may
be as a Grain of Mustard Seed against Sin, yet as the first Work of Faith we
are to believe in it, as a Measure of the Revelation of Christ, which was
promised should first reprove for Sin, which was in order to bring those that
obey it out of Sin; whereby, like the Leaven in the Meal, we may be changed
into its Nature, by which we increase in the Faith, and the Comforts thereof
are known; which cannot proceed from Nature, because it contradicts the Natural
Man, which wars against it, to keep the Creature in Bondage to Lust: Neither
will the Devil reprove for Sin; for then Satan would war against himself.
Therefore let us not despise the Day of small Things, but love the Appearance
of the Spirit, till Christ is formed in us; that being baptized into his Death,
we may be made Partakers of his holy Life, and blessed Resurrection; and then
shall we know, not only the Imputing, but the Imparting and Partaking, of the
Blood, which is the Life; and the Life of Christ infused in Man, gives Light to
manifest what is contrary to the Mind of Christ, and gives Victory over the
World, the Flesh and the Devil, that he should not miss of Salvation by it that
abides in it. But some will say, Revelation is ceased; for whose Sakes have I
thus simply delivered my Sense thereof, as believing it the Foundation of all
true Religion: For if Revelation is ceased, the true Knowledge of God, and of
Christ, is ceased; for, says the Text, No Man knows the Father but the Son,
and he to whom the Son reveals him; and no other Foundation can any Man lay,
than that which is already laid, which was the Foundation of all the Righteous
Generations, who drank of the same Rock on which the Church stands; not on
Peter who was a Man, in whom, as such, we are not to trust, but on the Eternal
Word that revealed Christ to Peter; which whosoever is founded thereon, the
Gates of Hell shall never prevail against them: But herein is the Offense and
Scandal to the Gospel, which causes some to disbelieve, through beholding those
that profess and Preach these excellent Principles, are as deep in this
Practice, and more dark than others; and no Marvel, that those that have known
the good Word of God, and tasted of the Powers of the World to come, if such
turn from this Grace into Wantonness that their Fall should be accordingly;
though they might have been Instruments, to have convinced or confounded the
Gainsayers, and have turned the honest Seekers to Righteousness, whereby they
might have shone as Stars fixed in the Firmament of God's Power; yet are by
this Trade drawn down to the Earth, where Pride will not suffer them to remain
contented, in their proper Element, but darkens and troubles the Churches with
their dead Doctrine, whereby they keep the Dead in Death; as our worthy Elder
and Father in Christ, George Fox, observed, that such as had heard the Lord's
Voice, and come out of Egypt, and through the Red Sea, and praised God on the
Banks of the Seashore, where they have beheld the Goodliness of Israel's
Dwelling; also such who in the Gospel. Times can preach Christ in Words, but
forsake him in Life, to follow the Wages of Unrighteousness, like Balaam; these
he saw in the Vision of Life, were and would be the greatest of Deceivers, who
lead the World after them by their evil Example, into the same Fleshly Liberty
from Christ, whom none can touch but those that are clean, neither can any
receive him but the true Virgin, that hates the Garment spotted with the
Flesh; for it was the Virgin that conceived and brought him forth; for this ye
know, that no Whoremonger or unclean Person, nor covetous Man, who is an
Idolater, has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God; How then
can a Minister of Christ own such a Practice, in himself or Flock, or they in
him? who cannot mention Jesus as the Redeemer, but it must overturn this Trade,
with all the Ungodliness attending it. And this Knowledge being so plainly
discovered unto us, it will not avail to say, by this Craft we have our Wealth,
therefore greatly to be adored is this God, that brings this Profit to us. It
were better that our Sins went beforehand to the Line of Judgment, that our
Actions may be levelled and squared by it, and that Righteousness may be put to
the Plumbline, which will discover the Uprightness thereof; that we may be
polished and made fit for our eternal Habitations with God, who will recompense
to every Man according to his Deeds; therefore let not Dust and Ashes contend
with its Maker, but submit the Work to Trial; and if it contradicts the
foregoing Dispensations of Angels, and of Moses and the Prophets, and even John
the Baptist, who testifies he was to decrease, how shall it agree with the
Dispensation of Christ? who in his Bodily Appearance, wherein he laid down to
us many Duties, yet he sums up all in this new Commandment, that we love one
another, as the Badge unto the World of our Discipleship; for he that loves
him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him; and not only so, but
we are to love our Enemies; for if we forgive not Men their Trespasses against
us, how shall we expect Forgiveness of Christ, who died for us, when Enemies;
which is the highest Expression of Love, in which his Gospel consists, and
those that have received it in the Power of it, beat their Swords into
Ploughshares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, having no Use therewith;
whose Weapons are not for the Destruction of the Body, yet mighty through God,
to cut down Sin in the Creature; that the Spirit may be saved in the Day of the
Lord Jesus, who first loved us, therefore do we love him; and in this do we
manifest it, by keeping his Commandments; and he that dwells in Love,
dwells in God who is Love, and God in him by his Spirit, which gives Boldness
in the Day of Judgment, when none will be able to stand before him, but those
that are clothed therewith; who when he commissionated his Disciples to preach
unto the World, before whom the very Devils were subject, because of the Power
that dwelt in them; yet when some resisted the Power, it raised the Zeal of the
Apostles, to desire that Fire might have fell from Heaven to have destroyed
them; and though they produced a Precedent of one of the Prophets, in a former
Dispensation, yet they were rebuked by our Lord, that they knew not what Manner
of Spirit they were of.

And when Christ was offered up, and ascended on high, that they knew him no
more after the Flesh, yet according to his Promise, he gave the Apostles and
Believers a larger Dispensation of the Holy Ghost, which taught them all
Things, and brought all Things to their Remembrance; by which they witnessed
his Divine Life formed in them, in the Aboundings of which they ministered, to
the bringing in of Multitudes into the same Spirit, in which is the Unity, that
they were of one Heart and Mind, who had all Things common, through the Love
that abounded in them; as is fully expressed in their Doctrine and Epistles,
that they sought them to the Lord, not their Property, much less their Liberty,
to merchandise them to their own Advantage: If so, Christianity had not so much
flourished, that Multitudes were converted by that Name and Power which they
preached, whereby there were added to the Church daily such as should be saved;
though they were much persecuted and oppressed by the Spirit that then ruled in
the Children of Pride; yet the Truth gave them Dominion over their Enemies,
while they abode in it.

XVII. But in Time getting into Favor with Princes, and partaking with their
Dignities, were carried away thereby from the Power; who then began to intermix
with the Heathen in their Customs and Grandeur, and to model the Church
accordingly; and losing their first Love and Unity, in which they stood
cemented in one Body, which being now broke, gave the Adversary Advantage to
introduce many Traditions into the Churches, contrary to the Law of God; and so
quarrelled with one another about Ceremonies and Creeds, and many Things
mentioned on Record, regarding the outside Appearance, and setting up of
separate Powers, more than Righteousness (by which the Sheep of Christ are
distinguished at the great Day) which clouded the Churches, and brought a
general Apostasy over the Christian Nations.

XVIII. Yet the Lord often raised his Prophets and Ministers, to testify
against their Practices; who proceeded to a Reformation, not only of
Principles, which of themselves are dead, like Faith without Works, but of
Doctrine and Practice, according as the Day appeared, unto which they were
faithful, having sealed their Testimony with their Blood, as an Army of
Martyrs, from whence have proceeded, as the Seed of the Church, many righteous
Plants, who have at sundry Times made a large Progress toward a Reformation;
which was not so fully accomplished, until the Lord singularly favored our
worthy Elders and Fathers, with the Knowledge of his Truth, as it is in Jesus,
which gave them an Understanding that the humane Part in Man, which is from the
Earth, though never so learned, cannot act in Things divine, which is beyond its
Sphere; therefore they found a Necessity to throw themselves on a higher Power,
that worked in them; which by the Discoveries it made, was known to be a divine
Light, and Grace from Christ, for the Salvation of every Man that comes into
the World, that gives heed thereto; that they may witness the Ministration of
Condemnation, to the very Root of Iniquity; which is to be consumed in the
Fire, that a Way may be opened to a more glorious Ministration of
Righteousness, performed by the Spirit of God, which makes up the Baptism of
Christ, whereby we have Fellowship one with another; and the Blood of Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, thus circulated in his Members, cleanses them from all
Sin, by which a Divine Communion and Fellowship is partook of between Christ
and his Church, who cannot live without that Bread which comes down from
above, and that Water that is in Believers a divine Well springing up in them
to everlasting Life. But these Points of Doctrine not being my immediate
Concern, but as it may discover the Perfection of their Principles, and the
Inconsistency this Trading in Bondslaves has with the Testimonies of these
last Promulgators of the good Old Gospel, of the Good Will of him who appeared
unto Moses in the Bush, in which they were constrained to minister of that same
Love that abounded in them to others, without Exception, that they might
partake of the same Salvation by it; and there are many living Witnesses, that
are as Seals of their Testimonies, that they were of God, having partook of the
same divine Life and Power with them, who were in their own Eyes, and the
Estimation of the World, as the Offscouring of all Things, because of their
Weakness and Meanness; by which is manifested to be the Lord's Strength and
Power through them, who chose the weak Things of the World to confound the
mighty; who as with the Jaw Bone of an Ass slew the Philistines Heaps upon
Heaps, that no Flesh should glory in its Wisdom, or Strength, or Riches, but in
the Knowledge of the Lord, which exercises Loving Kindness, Judgment and
Righteousness in the Earth, For in these Things I delight, says the Lord; and
this was the very Drift of their Testimonies, which they recommended in the
Power and Love of God, unto all Men among whom they traveled, without which
they declared Fasts, and Sabbaths, and Sacrifices, were unacceptable unto him;
yet they were Sons of Thunder against all Persecution and Oppression, whether
in Liberty, or Estate, or Person, that all might enjoy Freedom, both inwardly
and outwardly; as may be seen by their Epistles to the then Powers, and
especially to the Priests of the Nations, who in those Times were so dark, that
they oppressed the Poor of their own Flock, and even those that could not
receive of their Ministry; being come to an Understanding, that no Oppressor
can be a Minister of Christ, nor have Fellowship with those whose Life is in
the unrighteous Mammon, gotten by Oppression, which Geo. Fox calls an
unreasonable Cruelty and Bondage, which is contrary to the Nature of the Gospel
they were Sharers of: And shall we think to perfect by the Flesh that which was
begun in the Spirit? which caused them to lay down many Things, not only for
their present Evil, but because of the evil Ground and Original from whence
they sprung; for if the Root be evil, the Fruit cannot be good, but cursed unto
us, in that it eats out the Good like a Canker in many Families where I have
dwelt; which I was sensible proceeded from this evil Discipline to our Brethren
and Children, whereby we may draw our whole Race after us to Destruction by
such a barbarous Education, which is the High Road thereto, that it has spread
over some Nations like a Leprosy. Remember Dives in Hell feared his Brethren
following him, not from a Principle of Love in the Damned, but as far as he had
been instrumental to their Damnation, they might add to his Torment. And what
has more introduced Iniquity amongst us, and hindered the divine Birth from
coming forth, than this Trade? Therefore let every Soul that regards its own
Good, beware that they defile not their Habitations by touching therewith, and
further the Work; for if there were no Buyers, there would be no Sellers; was
the Cause removed the Effect would cease; which would directly stop the Trade,
and manifest to every open Eye, the Captivity of those that have them. But this
is not to be while the Devil rules in the Children of Disobedience; yet let us
that profess (as all true Christians are) to be led by the Spirit of God, which
changes not, but as in the Beginning, so does now lead those that obey it into
all Truth, which selected them from the World. to bear their Testimonies
against the Corruptions of the Times, and to confess, and proclaim many
excellent Doctrines of the universal Redemption by the Grace of God, unto which
they directed us, and recommended their Testimonies as a Safeguard to us from
Deceivers, by which there is an infallible Discerning of Spirits, and discovers
the Ground and Tendency of every Thought and Principle, whereby we come forward
to Perfection, according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ, that is perfect,
which to the Glory of the eternal Truth, of God is owned, through that Power that
raised Jesus, as the first Fruits of the Resurrection from the Dead, who is the
Wellspring of all our Mercies, through his Blood, and is ascended on high,
making Intercession for us, and has given Gifts unto Men for their Perfection.
But what have thou to do with this Dispensation, that have not discerned thy
own Spirit and Condition? How shall thou minister to Spirits in Prison? Thou,
that teach a Man should not steal, but work with his Hands the Thing which
is good; and yet do thou become a Receiver, which by the outward Law is
judged together? and blame Egypt and Babylon for Oppression, and yet be guilty
of the same Practice? As nothing is more hateful than Oppression, which will
make a wise Man mad, so what can more contradict it self, than to deny the Use
of the Carnal Sword, and yet receive of the Prey, which at best is but gained
by the Power thereof? So that this Trade is far wide of Friends Principles in
the Beginning; and is so to all them that are led by the same Truth: And shall
we be so implicit, as not to see so unjust a Practice, which the darkest Times
or Apostasy has not exceeded? To what Purpose then is it to such to pretend to
a Reformation? But it is not so with the Honest-hearted, that mourns with them
that mourns, and suffers with the Sufferers, even in the natural Body, and much
more in the spiritual Body, that nothing might be suffered in the Ministry of
the Gospel that sacrifices to an Idol, which hurts the tender Conscience that
has a Zeal for the Promotion of the Truth, knowing that the Lukewarm the Lord
will spue out of his Mouth, unto which he will not return: Which is an Answer
to those, who finding that their Testimonies against Oppression return upon
their own Heads, they would have this Practice left passive, as if a Man's
Liberty was a Matter indifferent: But, Beloved, was it your own Case, you would
then make it, as indeed it is, the weighty Matters of the Law, Judgment,
Justice, and Charity which is Love, which is the greatest of all.

XIX. But some object, that they may be brought to the Christian Religion
thereby, which is the greatest of Charity. Which discovers the great Darkness
this Trade brings with it; though the Apostle says of such, that do Evil for
Good to come, their Damnation is just; and it is well known that the Ground of
this Trade had no such Intention; however our Savior's Rule discovers it, By
the Fruit the Tree is known, which produces amongst us no such Consequence; for
how should you be Instruments to gain them to the Gospel, who have joined, or
had Fellowship with their Enemies in Countenancing the Trade, by receiving of
the Benefit; but Christ's Church will not be built up by that Power, who is
able to take the Kingdom from others, and give it unto them.

And though they may be bad in their own Country, yet Vengeance is the Lord's,
and he will repay it in his own Time.

And some also offer, that they are under such a Necessity to be supported by
the Labor of Bondslaves, that they cannot live without them. So might the
Masters of the Gally-Slaves answer; But if it is so, it were better to lose
that Life, that we may find a Life in Righteousness; which I am sensible, in
the lowest Ebb of Poverty, cannot submit to any unjust Means for a Living, and
yet begs not its Bread, but knows its Support port from the Providence of God,
which causes the Grass to grow for the Cattle, upon whom the Eyes of all
Creatures wait, and he gives them their Food in due Season; who opens his Hand,
and satisfies the Desire of every living Thing; and shall we distrust this
Providence, who are under the Gospel, unto whom the Promise is, if we seek the
Kingdom and the Righteousness thereof, all other Things shall be added;
sufficient for the Day is the Evil thereof; and much more the Ministers of the
Gospel who are to live by it; for surely, if you overflow in Spirituals, that
you are able to minister unto the Church for the Good of Souls, you need not go
back to the Heathen for Support in Temporals: Yet if these Things offered are
contrary to the Openings of Truth in any Soul, let not such be wanting in
tender Love to inform me better; which I have endeavored in a private Manner,
but received not the least Satisfaction of its Consistency with either Nature,
Reason, Humanity, or Morality, and much less with Christianity: Therefore,
because of the Love that I bear to Truth and Justice, it remained as a Burden
to my Life, until I in some Measure, according to my weak Capacity, expressed
my self after this Manner, to lay open the Ground and Nature thereof, as a
Caution to those that have not considered it, and that I might discharge my
Conscience, before I go hence, as a Duty incumbent to my Brethren; that we may
all see our Place and Service in the Creation, during our short Abode in Time,
that nothing may hinder our Happiness to Eternity; and though some should resist
the Truth until their Understandings become dark to that Principle, which would
have discovered it fully unto them, in the Day of their Visitation, yet the
Truth and its Witnesses will be clear of their Blood; though their Loss, as
Jerusalem's, may be lamented, in that they have resisted so many Visitations of
the Love of God; whereby they might, as pruned Branches, have shown forth the
Work of the Husbandman, and displayed unto the Heathen throughout the Earth,
the Nature of the Vine that bore them; and then Beautiful would they have
appeared unto them, being shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace, but
terrible as an Army with Banners, against the Whore and all her unrighteous
Merchandise. But how is this Beauty defaced, by thine Eye becoming evil toward
thy Brother, which has darkened thy whole Body; and by how much thou have been
enlightened, by so much the more art thou become dark, or thou would have
understood, that all Unrighteousness is shut out of the Kingdom; How then shall
the Unrighteous teach, or oversee, or discipline the Church, that have not
ruled for God in their own Houses, but have mixed with the Heathen for
Advantage, until they have lost the Savor of the Gospel; which has been the
greatest of Sorrows to those, that are sensible from whence such are fallen,
and for all that are concerned or suffer by the Trade. If David so much
lamented for the Fall of one beloved Jonathan, how shall the very Earth mourn
for the Fall of Multitudes that are born of her! And much more let such Priests
or Teachers, that have not preached a better Doctrine than this, either in
Precept or Example, let them mourn between the Porch and the Altar, that if it
may please the Lord who is Rich in Mercy, to work their Redemption, left while
they preach to others, they themselves become Castaways, and draw their Flock
with them to Perdition. Ah! my Friends! the Consideration of these Things has
been Sorrow of Heart (beyond what may be mentioned) to those that have
considered the Worth of Souls. Let such behold and see, if there is any Sorrow
to be compared to it; which I would rather have chosen to have bewailed in the
Wilderness, were it the Lord's Will, than thus to have appeared against a Crime
so much in Request; which promotes Idleness in the Rich, being furnished with
Slaves, that it hinders the Poor from Bread; which are Evils in the
Commonwealth, and no Doubt had their due Weight with our late Assembly, who in
a great Measure have discountenanced the Trade, which has given them Honor in
the Hearts of the Just, who are refreshed thereby, whose Supplications are to
the Lord, that he would prosper the Work in their Hands, and rejoice that there
are those that seek the Good of both Church and State.

And in the same Love that desires the Welfare of both, is this freely given,
that it may be spread by the Readers amongst such as are concerned in the
Trade, or otherwise, as you may see its Service in Righteousness; without
striking at any Creature, but at the Evil in all, that the Cause may be
removed, and that the Creation may be governed by Love, and this Practice
disowned in all Mankind, and especially by all that name the Name of Jesus,
that every Creature under the whole Heavens may be delivered from Oppression,
as well as

Ralph Sandiford.

To My Select FRIENDS.
Dear Friends and Brethren,
IF any are offended with me, or the foregoing Treatise, because it came not
forth with the Concurrence of the Meeting, it is in my Heart to desire your
Freedom with me therein, that all Offenses may be removed according to the
Ability the Lord gives me.

If the Circumstance of the Meeting had been such, it would have been Joy unto
me, whereby I should not have known the Baptism I have been baptized with through
those that were as my Life, being begotten by the same Love, into the Faith
which gives Victory over the Spots of the World; and shall we forsake this
Hand, to take to the Arm of Flesh, and captivate the Heathen for our bodily
Support? The Sense of it has burdened my Life Night and Day, to behold such go
into it, to the corrupting of the World, that they see no Harm in selling them
at Vendues like Beasts, in a Christian Country, where we are called forth into
that Power through which we might have kept it out of both Church and State,
which now does more Hurt amongst us than either Atheists or Deists: And this I
offer as a true Witness; that it were better we had never known the Truth, than
afterward to charge Sin on it, as though it admitted of such Practices. He that
can receive it, let him; if otherwise, I leave it to God the Judge of all,
before whom, and the whole Host of Heaven, the Truth thereof will be
manifested; and in the Interim I have eased my Spirit in as soft a Style as I
could, to remove that Burden under which I was crushed as under a Mountain,
through this Earthliness in the esteemed Religious, which so darkened my
Understanding, that all seemed lost unto me, being swallowed up in it through the
Violence of the Tempest, that the Elements which should have been Subjects,
prevailed over me, which put Nature out of Course, to the defacing of the whole
Body, that I was as a Sign unto you because thereof; and then as though the Rod
was on my own Back, I suffered with them in the natural Body, in which I would
vindicate them in such Language as proceeded from the Exasperation of
Oppression; which I am not about to vindicate, but to acknowledge my
Infirmities under the Provocation, and the Lord's Mercies in my Deliverance,
who knows whereof we are made, and remembers that we are but Dust; that though I
was as swallowed up in Desperation, yet he caused the Sea to be still, that I
might sing of my Deliverances from Aegypt's Bondage and Darkness, and my
Preservation through the Sea, where I was tossed in Heights and Depths more than
on the outward Ocean, that I was given up as Fuel for the Fire of Hell; in all
which I beheld the Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep, where he
caused his Light to shine again upon me, and mine Eye to see beyond the
Iniquity; whereby he restored me to the Land of the Living, where I am known
unto you; in which I can subscribe my self unto all Mankind,

Your Friend, R. S.


