THE INTEREST OF CITY and COUNTRY To Lay No DUTIES: OR A short Discourse
showing that Duties on Trade, tend to the Impoverishing City and Country.

ALSO, How the Government may be easier and better Supported than by Duties.

New York: Printed and Sold by J. Peter Zenger near the City-Hall. 1726. ( Pr.
4 d.)

THE INTEREST OF City and Country To lay No DUTIES.
WHEREAS there has been of late much Discourse concerning the Duties on
Merchandise, for Support of Government; some being for having Duties continued,
and some not; some being for continuing some Duties, and taking off others, and
laying some New, etc.

I think it may not be amiss for me to communicate my Thoughts concerning this
Affair, which, I am satisfied, would be for the Good and Advantage of City and
Country, if put in Practice, and no ways detrimental to the Government: For,
considering the great Benefits that we enjoy, by a well regulated and happy
Government, I think we should be very Ungrateful, if we did not take Care
sufficiently to support the same; which I hope we shall all agree to. And
therefore all the Question is, How or after what Manner this may best be
accomplished, for the Benefit and Ease of the City and Country in general, and
with the least Burden to the People, and with the least Prejudice to Trade and
Industry.

In the first Place I shall show How that the Laying Duties on Merchandise is
very much to the Disadvantage of both City and Country, as is found by
Experience: And that, on the Contrary, The taking them off, and having Trade
free, would be greatly to the Advantage and for the Interest of both.

I believe that it will be readily granted, that Trade and Commerce is that
which conduces much to the Prosperity and Enriching of both City and Country;
and, that whatever hinders and discourages Trade, hurts both City and Country:
For as the City cannot subsist without the Country, so the Country cannot well
subsist nor thrive without the City, which they depend on for the taking of
their Produce, and furnishing them with many Necessaries, which they cannot
well be without: So that whatever hinders the Country from Selling their
Produce for a good Price, and likewise is a Cause of their Paying dearer for
what they buy, must needs be very Prejudicial to them. And that the Duties on
Merchandise is a Cause of both these Evils, I think is undeniable, and can be
very easily proved, in general and in particular. For although some Duties do
more affect the Country than others, yet (with Submission to better Judgments)
I think all are Hurtful. For if we consider Things rightly, we shall find that
the Country pays most of the Duties, though oftentimes insensibly. For though
it is true the Merchant pays it first, yet he generally takes Care afterward
to sell his Goods for a Price accordingly: And most of the Goods that are
Imported and pay Duty, being sold to, and expended in, the Country,
consequently the Country pays it, by paying so much dearer than otherwise they
need to do; which I suppose very few, if any, will deny. But if any should, it
is very easily proved in the general, and in diverse Particulars, which I shall
consider anon. And also Duties in General are very Prejudicial to the Country,
on Account of their selling the Produce they raise; so that if there was a Free
Trade, they might sell what they raise at a better Price than otherwise they
can Expect to do; for as it is well known that the Duties have oftentimes been
a Cause of driving Trade and Business from this Province to our Neighbors, and
discouraging our Neighbors from coming to trade with us, it must needs be
hurtful to us in General.

Now as to the particular Duties that are paid, we may consider the Hurt that
each does to the City and Country in particular. And first as to Wine, which
does not so much affect the Country as City, yet it is not all Drunk in the
City, the Country has some Part of it, and so consequently pays some Part of
the Duty: Now if some Duties must be continued, I think this on Wine may as
well or better than any other; because it is to be supposed, that, generally
speaking, those that drink the most of it are pretty able, both in City and
Country; and so may be best able to pay toward the Support of Government,
which it is intended for; and does not fall on the Poorer sort of People that
are not able to bear it, as some other Things do. Neither will the
Discouragement of that be so hurtful to the Country otherwise as some other
Things are: so I shall say the less against it, and proceed to Rum, which more
affects the Country, the greatest Part of it being used there (whether well
used or abused, I think not pertinent to my present Purpose to discourse of)
for certain it is that the Country will have it, whether cheap or dear; so that
consequently they pay the Duty that Drink it, almost in general, both Rich and
Poor: For when there is no Duty on it, the Merchant can sell it cheaper, and
when he pays Duty he must and does sell it dearer, as Experience proves; so to
talk of discouraging it, by a Duty, is in vain. Besides it would be a
Contradiction, for such as will have the Duty to help support Government, to
talk of Discouraging it; for if it should do so, pray how would it answer the
End for which the Duty is laid? viz. Support the Government: So that if the
Duty should discourage the Importation, we must seek for another Way for
Support of Government, which we may do without it, as I shall after make
appear. Now, it may be considered, that it would not be any Advantage to the
Country to hinder the Importation of Rum, considering that we purchase it with
the Produce of the Country, without Money, and thereby encourage Manufacture,
Navigation, and many Trades that depend on it, which would Suffer if we
discouraged the Importation and Trade of Rum, Molossus and other Things from
the West Indies: How could we expect they would trade with us, if we refuse to
take of the Produce of those Countries, partly in lieu for our Flour, Bread,
Bacon, etc.

If any should say, Why, bring back Money in Return for our Flour, etc. and so
make Money plenty here.

I say, that we do, in Part, already enough to make Money plenty here, if we
had not another Way for it; and it may be as much as they can well spare us; so
that if we should insist on having our Returns all in Money, it might destroy
our Trade. And as for the Notion of discouraging Vice by it, I think it
frivolous, as not being sufficient to do it; for those that love strong Drink,
will have it one Way or another: so that there will need some other Method for
that of discouraging Vice, which I think not proper to discourse of here.

Now as to the Duty on Molossus, I think that it is a Hardship, that falls
mostly on the Poorest Part of the City and Country who mostly use it, and that
for very necessary Uses (and not to encourage Vice) and they could not well do
without it, for Honey is scarce here and what Sweets might be made of Cider I
know not, but I believe little in Comparison of the Molossus the Country
expends, nor so good nor suitable neither. So that it would certainly be a
great Hardship on the Country to discourage the Importation, as well as it is
some Hardship to make them pay dearer for it than they need to do, were Trade
free without any Duties.

Next as to Salt, it is generally agreed on all Hands, That it were better to
have no Duty on that, so I shall say the less to it, we having so lately had
plentiful Experience to confirm it to general Satisfaction.

Another considerable Branch of Revenue is the Duty on Negroes, which, it is
very certain, the Country in general pays the most of viz. all those that Buy
them. For it must be the same by them as other Things, in that Respect, that
though the Merchant pays it first, he, when he sells them, advances the more
on the Price. If any should say, It may be well to discourage the Importation
of them, there being enough in the Country already. I say, then let the Duty be
so great as to answer that End, otherwise the Objection is frivolous, and then
if so, it answers not the End for which it has been laid, viz. Support of
Government, which we are now upon.

The Duty on Cocoa is another Article which is paid by all those that buy and
spend Chocolate, which though it mostly affects the City, yet the Country is
also partly concerned in it.

Another is the Duty of 5 per Ct. or 7 and an half per Ct. on British Goods
imported from the Neighboring Plantations, and not directly from Great
Britain, which some have thought to be for the Advantage of this Province, but
I am of another Mind: For what does it concern the greatest Part of the People
in this Province (especially the Country) how the Goods are imported hither,
whether directly or round about, provided they can have them as cheap as if
they all came directly. And if they could not be afforded as cheap when they
come from other Places to us, as those that come directly, then that of it self
would discourage the Trade, without any Duty being laid on them. But I can make
it appear that it would be better for this Province in general not to
discourage such Importation, because what we have so imported does not cost us
Money, whereas our Importation from Great Britain drains this Province of Money
which otherwise might be plenty. Now let us consider, particularly Boston and
other Parts of New England, takes off largely of the Produce of this Country,
but finds it difficult to make us Returns; Money they have not, nor but little
else that we want, but are often forced to pay us in British Goods,
notwithstanding the Duty. Now it is easy to conceive that if that were taken
off, it would encourage our Trade with them. But then it may be objected, That
would lessen our Trade with Great Britain. I say, Let it be so, the better for
the Country; for it would not lessen our Exportation thither, but only our
Importation, which would save our Money. So by what is abovesaid, without
enlarging, it plainly appears that it would be better for this Province to take
off that Duty.

Another Thing to be considered is The Tunnage on Vessels not built in this
Province, which seems more difficult to determine than any of the Rest: But I
am entirely of the Mind that it is best to have Trade free and to have no
Duties at all. So I think it best to take off this Duty also. And although
there may be considerable Reasons advanced in favor of this Duty; yet I think
I can advance as good against it. The most considerable Arguments for it are,
That it keeps the Trade of Building in our own Province. This I must own
considerable to the Ship-Carpenters, Smiths and some other Tradesmen, but does
not affect the greatest Part of the City, nor the Country hardly at all.

Another Reason is, It keeps out Foreigners, especially the Bermudians, who
come here to get what they can, and there is little to be got by them, etc.
This I also own to be a considerable Plea, but I think it chiefly concerns the
Builders and some owners of Vessels, and not the Country in general. But I am
of Opinon. That the Encouraging the Bermudians, and all others, by a Free
Trade, would be for the general Good of City and Country, (though not of every
particular Person) as I will endeavor to make appear. But by the Way I think
it may not be amiss to explain what I mean by a Free Trade, which is only with
the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, and not any Foreigners indeed, that
is People of other Nations or Kingdoms. For I think that the Word Foreigners is
improper to the Bermudians, or any of our Neighbors and fellow Subjects,
though belonging to different Provinces and Plantations or Governments. And now
though the Bermudians, as abovesaid, come to get, etc. yet they generaly bring
us plenty of Salt, and did afford it us cheap, before they were discouraged by
the Tunnage and Duty on Salt, which has much hindered them and others of late;
and it is well known we have paid for it since, which has affected the Country
in general, which ought to be more regarded than the Advantage of a few
particular Persons. Besides it very often hinders our Trade in the Exportation
of the Produce of the Country, which is undeniably prejudicial to the whole in
several Respects.

I will give you one Instance thereof, to make it appear plain, and that is,
Last Year here came a Ship into this Harbor, laden with Salt, which we very
much wanted, and would have Traded with us for Wheat and Staves, etc. but by
Reason of the Tunnage and Duty being so heavy, went away to Amboy, (and for no
other Reason,) which was a considerable Disadvantage to City and Country. And
thus our Duties and Impositions drive Strangers and Trade from us to our
Neighbors, who are Gaping for it, and may well Laugh at us for our Pains,
seeing they could no ways get it from us, did not we give it them. By what is
above said, with much more that might be said, we may observe, that it is a
groundless Notion which some have entertained, viz. That when the Government is
Supported by Duties on Trade, that it falls on the Merchants and City, and that
the Country pays little of it: For it will, I doubt not, appear plain to those
that rightly consider it, That the Country pays the most of it, and the
Discouragement of Trade, which is, and must be the Effects of it, if continued,
affects the Country more than some of them are aware of.

Now considering that our Neighboring Provinces are Free Ports, and Support
Government other ways, for to draw Trade thither, is it not highly Reasonable
for us to be Wise and Prudent in this Matter, by taking of all Obstructions and
Hindrances that are already on Trade, and by being careful of Encouraging it
for the future. We may consider how that in the next Province they are
continually contriving and making Laws to increase Trade in their own Province,
and to draw it from us; which has already proved Effectual several times,
something of which is above observed. And shall we be so far wanting to our
selves, as not to consider our own Interest in endeavoring to prevent it,
which as yet we may easily do, but if we do not do it in time, I doubt we shall
repent when it is too late; and I am fully of the Mind that there is no other
way to prevent it, but by making our Port as Free as theirs. They can Support
Government without Duties and Impositions on Trade, and why may not we; I am
satisfied we are as well able as they.

The next Thing to be considered is, how Government shall be Supported without
the Duties, and that both better and easier for both City and Country in
general; and that is by a general Tax on Men's Estates, in both City and
Country, which is the most just and equal Way that has yet been Practiced, that
I know of, for this is no Obstruction to Trade nor Manufacture. Nor has it any
of those Inconveniences attending it, that, more or less, attend, or may
attend, all other ways that have or can be proposed. This way the Burden does
not lie on the City alone, nor on the Country alone, but each bears an equal
Proportion, according to their Abilities. Neither does the Burden fall heavy
on the Poor, for they that have little, will pay but little: So there will be
no just cause of Complaint either in City or Country, by Poor, Rich or those in
a middle Station: Whereas most other ways fall heavy on some, while others that
are better able, go quite free, nay oftentimes make a Gain by their Neighbors
Losses, which I think needful to be prevented as much as possible. This way of
raising a Support for Government, is also much easier and better than by
Duties, on several Accounts; for the Money is raised with much less Charge and
Trouble then the other, and will be more certain, the others having often
failed of* raising the Sums expected, and so fallen short in answering the End
proposed, partly by reason of the Difficulty and Charge attending the gathering
of them in; so that I believe we may safely conclude, That two Thousand Pounds,
raised by Tax, will bring as much Money, or more, into the Treasury clear, as
three Thousand Pounds raised by Duties.

Now, is it not much better for the Province to pay two Thousand Pounds than
three Thousand, if it will as well answer the End? And is it not as good and as
well for the Government to be supported one Way as the other, provided it be as
sufficient and more certain? Nay we may very well afford a larger Supply this
Way than the other, and yet be great Gainers by it.

If it should be objected, That the Legislature of Great Britain have, by long
Experience, found that it is the best Way to support Government by Duties, and
that it is the Practice of other Nations also. I say, Suppose we allow that,
yet it will not prove it to be so here; our Case differs vastly from theirs,
considering we are only a small Province, situate in the midst of several
others, which are free of these Duties; and so we are continually in Danger of
loosing our Trade to them, as is already observed. It must be owned, that if
our neighboring Provinces paid the like Duties as we, it would not be so
inconvenient for us to do the same, but seeing their Ports are Free, ours ought
to be so too.

And I hope our Superiors will take this into Consideration, and that the
Country will be sensible that they have been under a Mistake, in thinking That
if the Government be supported by Duties, it is the City does it; and that if
by a general Tax, they do it: For, by what I have said, they may very easily
see it is otherwise. And they actually pay a large Share of it when it is paid
by Duties, and no more than their Share when by a general Tax on all our
Estates: For if the City be so much richer than the Country, as is said, they
will be to pay so much the more.

If any should object and say, This Way of Supporting Government by a general
Tax will fall heavy on some Men that have large Estates in land that is
unimproved, and so bring in little or no Profit, whilst other Men that have
great Incomes by Money at Interest, etc. may pay but little.

I answer as to the first, The Remedy is in their own Hands, they may dispose
of their Land, or let others improve it if they cannot do it themselves.
Besides I am of Opinion that it may be well to discourage such Engrosers of
great Tracts of Land and not improving them, it being a Wrong to both King and
Country. As concerning the other whose Estates lie chiefly in Cash, etc. and
not visible to the Assessors It may be well to have it ordered for them (and
others too) to give an Account of their own Estates. And indeed if all Men were
to give an Account of their own Estates to the Assessors, it might be more
equal than it often times now is: For can it be supposed that the Assessors can
know what all Men's Estates are, in a Town or Ward (if they were always
impartial;) which may be the Reason that there is often such Complaints, That
some are over rated, and others under rated; whereas if every Man gives a true
Account of his own Estate, or as near as he can well, and be rated accordingly,
it might prevent such Complaints, and be more equal and just.

But if, notwithstanding all that can be said, our Legislature should think
good to continue some Duties, though not all, then let them continue the Duties
on Wine and Negroes imported, these being least prejudicial to the Trade of the
Country, and by all Means take off all other, and make it up by a general Tax.
But by no Means lay any Pole-tax on Negroes already in the Province, for that
would be very hard on some and not at all affect some others better able.

Thus I have, in short, given my Sentiments concerning these Things, which, I
am satisfied, may be for the Good of City and Country, if well considered and
accordingly practiced.

FINIS.

