Mr. Foxcroft On the PLEAS Of Gospel-Impenitents.

The Pleas of Gospel-Impenitents Examined and refuted. IN Two SERMONS At The
Thursday-Lecture In Boston. On Febr. 5. and April 23. 1730.

By THOMAS FOXCROFT, Pastor to the Old Church.

Published by Desire of some of the Hearers.

I do not stick to say, I had rather be the Author of the smallest Book that
shall be instrumental to save a Soul from Sin and Death, and bring it to
Heaven, than of the finest piece of Science or Literature in the World.

Rev. Dr. Wright. BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, and T. GREEN, for S. GERRISH,
in Cornhil. 1730.

The Pleas of Gospel-Impenitents Examined and refuted.
JOHN xv. 22. -- Now they have no Cloak for their Sin.


THAT our Lord Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners, is a faithful
Saying, worthy of all Acceptance: And it might be most reasonably expected,
that miserable guilty Man should give him a joyful and ready Reception. But
alas! he is despised and rejected of men. In the days of his Flesh he came to
his own, but his own received him not. We find him very frequently complaining
of the Neglects and Affronts he met with among his own people, the Jews:
upbraiding them with their Obstinacy and Impenitence, and declaring them to be
inexcusable.

He tells his Disciples, in our Context, that they too must expect to meet with
Indignities and Persecutions from a malignant World, on his Account. They will
hate you and persecute you, says Christ; and all for my Name's sake, because
they know not him that sent me. He makes their Ignorance of God to be the Cause
of their Enmity to Christ and his People.

But to prevent their abusing this Expression of his, and turning it into an
Apology for their guilty Refusal of Christ, and Persecution of his Disciples,
he saw fit to add, as in the Verse out of which I have taken my Text, If I had
not come and spoken to them, they had not had Sin: but now they have no Cloak
for their Sin.

Christ came and spoke in person to the Men of that Generation; preached the
Kingdom of God, and manifested his Name unto them, revealed the Father, and
proved himself to be the Son of God, the true Messiah; he preached
Righteousness in the great Congregation, and declared to them the Things of
their everlasting Peace, wooing and beseeching them to be reconciled to God,
and accept of the great Salvation offered them. Had he not thus done, they had
not had Sin, i. e. they had not been chargeable with this kind of sin, viz.
Unbelief, which is one of the greatest Sins, being against the tender Mercies
of a Redeemer, and the clear Light of the Gospel: Or it may mean, they had not
had this Degree of Sin; for had they not had the Gospel preached to them, their
Sins had not been so heinous and aggravated.

If they had never heard of Christ and Salvation by him, they had had no Sin,
comparatively no Sin. But since I have come and spoken to them (says Christ)
their Guilt is very aggravated, and they have no Pretense, no Excuse, to
palliate their Hatred and Refusal of me.

Now the same may be said of Impenitent Sinners under the Gospel, who though they
profess to know Christ, yet in Works deny him. Christ is still coming to us,
though not in person, yet by his Ministers, and speaking to us in his Word. So
that we who profess the Gospel, and yet don't live up to our Profession, but
practically refuse Christ, I say, we shall be inexcusable, as much as the men
of that Generation, who saw Jesus in the Flesh, and received the Call of the
Gospel immediately from his blessed Lips. If we die in our Sins from under the
Light of the Gospel, we shall have no Covering nor Color of Excuse for our
Unbelief: but in the day, when God will reckon with us, shall be altogether
speechless and self-condemned.

The DOCTRINE then from the Words may be this, Viz.

That Gospel-Impenitents have no possible Cloak for their Sin, but are of all
men the most inexcusable: having none to blame but themselves, if they perish
at last. By Gospel-Impenitents, I mean both such as reject the Gospel in point
of Belief, and those that reject it in point of practice. Wherefore it may be
said,

(1.) Those that reject the Gospel in point of Belief, have no Cloak for their
Sin.

The Infidelity of the Jews was inexcusable; and much more the Infidelity of
such as have had their Birth and Education in places of Gospel Light. There are
multitudes in Christendom that are Deists (so called) who reject Divine
Revelation, and set up for a natural Religion in opposition to all instituted
and revealed Religion. They deny the great Mysteries of Christianity, and
renounce the peculiar Precepts of the Gospel.

But surely they act a most unreasonable and inexcusable part herein. For if we
consult the familiar Dictates of our own Reason, and throw aside carnal
Prejudices, we must acknowledge the Expedience and Necessity of a Divine
Revelation; whether we consider Man in his innocent State, or in his fallen
State. When God had made Man, having made him a capable Subject of moral
Government, the Wisdom, Justice and Goodness of God seemed to require that he
should place him under some Law, guarded and enforced with suitable Sanctions:
and if such a Law or Covenant were made for Man, it was necessary it should be
revealed to him: for as where there is no Law, there is no Transgression, so
where the Law is not published and bro't to the Knowledge of Men, Sin is not
imputed. But much more necessary is it, in the Case of fallen Man, that God
should make a Revelation of his Mind and Will unto us. Our Case indispensably
required it; for we are blinded by our Lusts, and alienated from the Life of
God through the Ignorance that is in us: and without a Divine Light hung out from
Heaven, to illuminate our paths, we must have walked in Darkness even until
now, and all the Discoveries of human Reason would never have sufficed to
conduct us unto our chief End and true Happiness.

And it was certainly a Thing worthy of the blessed God to take so much Pity
upon a lost World, as to reveal himself unto them, tell them their Danger, and
their Remedy, and proclaim the purposes of his Grace toward them. It is
unreasonable therefore to doubt whether God has made a Revelation.

And it is as unreasonable to doubt whether this Revelation, which God has made,
be contained in the holy Bible, the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles,
commonly called the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. For here all the
evident Marks of a Divine Revelation appear to every impartial Inquirer.
Whether you consider the intrinsic Excellencies of the Christian Religion, as
exhibited in the Scriptures, or the external Advantages wherewith it comes
recommended to us, such as the Testimony of Miracles, of Christ's Resurrection
from the Dead, the Accomplishment of Prophecies, and the like; it must be
allowed that Christianity has all the Proof and Confirmation that it needs, or
that any Religion can have. Wherever the Gospel comes, it brings with it the
strongest Motives of Credibility; carries with it the most convincing
self-evidencing Light, added to the force of external Testimony.

Surely then such as do not embrace Christianity, but reject the Gospel, when
brought unto them, must needs be voted obstinate, unreasonable, and without
Excuse, Act. 13.46. It was necessary that the word of God should first have
been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting life; lo, we turn to the Gentiles.

But I pass to say,

(2.) They that reject the Gospel in point of Practice, who profess to receive
the Christian Religion, but at the same time live in a moral Opposition to it,
these also have no Cloak for their Sin.

Practical Unbelief is damning, as well as speculative Disbelief; and
impenitent Professors have as little Cloak for their Sin, as very Infidels.

Alas! how many are there under the Gospel, that practically refuse Christ, and
trample under foot the Son of God! They refuse him as a Prophet, by not
applying to him for the Illuminations they need, and by neglecting his holy
Word. They refuse him as a Priest, by going about to establish their own
Righteousness, and not submitting to the Righteousness which is of God. They
refuse him also as a King, by not walking in his Ways, but rebelling against
his Commandments. There are many professed Christians, that are openly vicious;
others that are secretly wicked; deceived, serving diverse lusts; having a form
of Godliness, but denying the power thereof. Multitudes there are under the
Gospel, to whom one or other of these Characters does belong. And if they die
in their Sins, they must perish without a Remedy. Christ will reject all their
Confidences; and when they plead, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name, and in thy Name done many wonderful works? he will pour contempt on their
vain pretenses, and say to them Depart from me, I know you not. He will upbraid
them, saying, I have called, but ye refused: and now you have no Cloak for your
Sin.

Verily in that day, when Christ shall judge the World in Righteousness, every
mouth will be stopped. Even the Gentiles, who shall perish without the Law,
will be found without Excuse (Romans 1.20.) How much more Jews and Christians,
who have sinned against clearer Light and better Means of Conviction! Thou art
inexcusable, O man, whoever thou art, that refusest him which speaks to thee
from Heaven in the glorious Gospel. Thine own Conscience must needs condemn
thee, and silence all the vain pleas and reasonings of a carnal Mind. Thy
Conscience, O guilty Man, must needs acquit God, and lay all the Blame on thy
self, if thou perishest from under the Gospel. Thou art lifted up to Heaven, in
point of privileges; and if thou be cast down to Hell, thy destruction will
surely be of thy self. You cannot lay the Blame on any thing without your self,
whether God, or Satan, or the World; but if you perish, it is because you love
Death, and refuse Life.

Sinners are apt to excuse themselves, as if no Blame belonged to them, that
they don't repent and believe. In case of gross Immorality, awakened Sinners
are ready to condemn themselves: but in this matter of Unbelief and
Impenitence, men have generally little sense of Guilt, and are disposed to
vindicate themselves, as if it were none of their Fault. But alas! they are
miserably deceived, and flatter themselves in their own Eyes, when they imagine
that their Unbelief is but their Misery, and not their Sin.

To set this matter in a convincing Light, I shall show distinctly,

1. That Sinners cannot lay the Blame on God.

2. They cannot lay it on Satan or the World.

3. Hence they must needs take it to themselves.

Prop. I. Gospel-Impenitents, who finally reject Christ, have no Cloak for
their Sin, from any Pleas or Pretenses they can make relating to GOD their
Maker.

The corrupt Reason of a carnal Mind may suggest many Objections and Excuses,
from the Decree of God, from the Insufficiency of the Means, from his
withholding necessary Assistance, and the like. But they are all vain Pleas;
The Scriptures allow none of them: but notwithstanding all these Excuses, they
fasten the Guilt of Unbelief upon Gospel-Sinners, and charge them with being
the faulty Causes of their own Impenitency and Ruin. Hence that of our Savior,
Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. So Matthew. 23.37.
How often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!

For the Illustration of the Head we are upon, let it be considered,

1. Gospel-Impenitents cannot plead, They are not invited to believe in Christ
for Salvation. Some may be apt to plead in Excuse of themselves, that they have
not those Qualifications, which are sometimes mentioned in the
Gospel-Invitation; as where it is said, Come unto me, all ye that labor; If any
man thirsty, let him come to me, and drink. But then it is to be considered,
that in such places the Gospel-Invitation is only applied to some particular
Subjects; not restrained to them. Such kind of persons are the next Objects of
Gospel-Calls and Offers, who are under Convictions and Awakenings. But yet
unconvinced Sinners are remote Objects of the same Offers. They are called upon
to consider Christ, and are required to hunger and thirst after Righteousness;
They are commanded to believe in Christ, and have the Tenders of Salvation made
to them in case of their so doing. The Gospel-Invitation runs in indefinite
Terms, Whosoever will, let him come. There Is a general Liberty given men to
believe in Christ for Salvation: This is made the Duty of all, whether willing
or unwilling: Absolute Promises of Pardon and Salvation are made to all that
actually do believe: and the Conditional Offer is made to all where the Gospel
comes. The External Call of the Gospel warrants every one's coming to Christ,
that will: and none are excluded from his saving Benefits, but such as exclude
themselves by an obstinate Unbelief. None then under the Gospel can object that
they are not invited; and so they have not this to plead in Excuse for their
not coming to Christ.

Let it now be observed,

2. None have it to plead that they are not elected: It Is no Excuse, that they
don't know whether the Decree of God be for them or not.

It Is true, all that belong to the Election of Grace shall come to Christ, and
obtain Salvation. Act. 13.41. As many as were ordained to eternal life,
believed. And it is as certain, that all who are not elected, will not come to
Christ, nor obtain Salvation. Romans 11.7. The election has obtained it, and the
rest were blinded.

Nevertheless, this Doctrine needs not; and should not discourage any one from
a Care of believing in Christ, since the Gospel-Call runs in indefinite
Language: For, as no Man can be sure of his Election, while in a State of
Unbelief; so neither can any one be sure of his Reprobation, without knowing he
has committed the unpardonable Sin, and is judicially hardened in Impenitency.
Now so long as Men have a doctrinal Belief of the Christian Religion, and are
under the Strivings of the holy Spirit, they may not charge themselves with the
unpardonable Sin, and suppose their case desperate: but ought to presume upon
the Possibility of their Salvation; and act, in the use of appointed Means in
order to obtain it, with the same Diligence, as if their Election were
ascertained to them.

It is nothing less than Sin and Folly for Men to make the Uncertainty of their
Election an Argument against their believing in Christ; because this is acting
in Contradiction to the Command of God, and to the Manner of Men, in all other
Cases of like Uncertainty.

God has connected the Means and the End, in this, as well as other Cases: and
yet in other Cases, Mankind make use of the Means, though altogether uncertain of
the Ends, which is not in their own power, but in the hand of God alone, whose
Counsels and Designs are secret to them. God does as truly decree from
Everlasting whether your Land this Year shall be Barren or Unfruitful, and just
how long you shall Live in the World, as he has Decreed whether you shall be
saved or not. And yet you would think that man but a fool that would forbear
Plowing and Sowing, and say, If God have Decreed that my Ground shall bear
Corn, it will bear, whether I Plow and Sow, or not. If God have Decreed that I
shall live, I shall live whether I eat or not; but if he have not, it is not
eating will keep me alive. Do you know how to answer such a man, or do you not?
if you do, then you know how to answer your selves; for the case is alike:
God's Decree is as peremptory about your Bodies as your Souls. If you do not,
then try first these conclusions upon your Bodies, before you venture to try
them on your Souls; see first whether God will keep you alive without food or
raiment, and whether he will give you Corn without tillage and Labor, and
whether he will bring you to your Journeys end without your travel or carriage:
and if you speed well in this, then try whether he will bring you to Heaven
without your diligent use of means; and sit down and say, We cannot Sanctify
our selves.

Baxter's Pref. to Call to Unconverted.


And is it not then a most unreasonable thing in any to throw off all Care of
believing in Christ, from a Pretense that they are afraid they were not
appointed to obtain Salvation by him? Faith in Christ is the only Means to
secure that blessed End, and the only way to make our Election sure; So that
with all that are truly concerned about their Souls, the Uncertainty of their
being elected is rather an Argument for, than against their laboring to get
Faith, and trying to come to Christ; that so a Case of such infinite Importance
may be resolved and put out of all doubt with them. To act otherwise must needs
be the height of Folly.

And it is also heinous Sin, in that it violates the Command of God, which
requires of all Men a Care to believe in Christ; and in that it calls God a
liar, by disputing his Sincerity in the Gospel-Invitation, which makes the
Conditional Offer of Christ and Life unto all.

In a word, it is not the undiscovered Decree, but the revealed Precept, that is
our Rule, according to which we are to conduct our selves, and by which we
shall finally be judged. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong unto the Lord, our
God: but those things which are revealed, belong unto us, and to our children
for ever, that we may do all the words of this law.

It Is a bold Intruding into the secret Counsels of Heaven, to conclude
positively on our being out of the Decree of Salvation. Since we are left in
Ignorance of the Decree; this will render Gospel-Impenitents utterly
inexcusable: Forasmuch as they voluntarily reject Christ, against all the
Commands, Invitations, and Entreaties of the blessed God, even while yet they
know not but that they may belong to the Election of Grace.

We are sure then the Judgment of God is according to Truth; and though the
Decree of Praeterition be founded in Sovereignty, yet the Sentence of Death
will be executed in Righteousness.

I pass to observe in the next place,

3. Sinners have it not to plead against the blessed God, That he uses any
Compulsion or exerts any positive Influence, to keep them in Unbelief and
harden them in Sin.

Whatever we may read in Scripture Exodus 4.21. Josh. 11.20. Romans 9.8. and 11.8.
of God's hardening Men's hearts, this is not to be understood as if by the
Divine Power there were any positive Infusion of evil Qualities, or that God
put a Force upon Men's natural Faculties, so as to compel them against their
Wills to go on in Sin. No, far be such a dishonorable Imputation from that
righteous Lord, who loves Righteousness, and is of purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity! Far be it from God, that he should have Fellowship with the Workers
of Iniquity, and be the Author of Sin! Can it be imagined that God should put a
Constraint on Men, to rebel against his own Authority, and dishonor his own
Name, and reject his own Son! Our Savior assigns it as the Reason, why the
Jews believed not on him, Joh. 12.39, 40. Therefore thy could not believe,
because that Esaias said again, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their
heart; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their
heart, and be converted, and I should heal them. But we are to understand this
only of a Negative Obduration; not of any actual Infusion of vicious malignant
Qualities, but a mere Suspension of divine benign Influences. Nothing is meant,
which can imply that God compelled them to reject Christ. Vain Sinners may be
ready to complain of God in that Language, Why have Thou hardened our hearts
from thy Fear! But this is a most base Reproach on the glorious God. Hence that
of the Apostle, Jam 1.13. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of
God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. But to
go on,

4. Sinners have it not to plead, That there is any deficiency of suitable Means
on God's part, or that he does not afford them necessary external Helps for
their believing in Christ.

The blessed God is so far from hardening Men's Hearts, in any direct way, and
pushing them forward to Destruction; that on the contrary, he employs a Variety
of excellent Means which have a Tendency to bring them to Repentance, and
promote their Salvation. He actually does all that for them, which it could
rationally be expected a wise Governor should do, to bring reasonable
Creatures to their Duty. He omits nothing proper to be done in the way of
Means; and considered in the order of Means they are such as are every way
suitable and sufficient. Hence that appeal of the glorious God to his rebellious
People of old, Isa. 5.4. What could have been done more to my vineyard that I
have not done in it? Wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes,
brought it forth wild grapes?

Since Men are not able by the dim Light of unassisted Nature to spell out
their Duty, or discover necessary Truth, in the full Extent; therefore it has
pleased God to make a supernatural Revelation to the World; the sum of which is
handed down to us in the holy Scriptures. And these are represented by an
inspired Apostle, as able to make men wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Those
sacred Writings reveal to us the whole Counsel of God, necessary to be known,
concerning fallen Man's Redemption by Jesus Christ. They discover to us the
whole Duty of apostate Man. They call upon Sinners to repent of Sin, and
believe in Christ, and set before them the strongest Motives to excite 'em
thereto; expostulating with them, from the absolute need they stand in of a
Savior; from the perfect Sufficiency and Divine Appointment of Jesus Christ,
to save unto the uttermost all that come to God by him; from the infinite
Advantages of an Interest in Christ, and the aggravated Damnation they will
expose themselves to by rejecting him. They set before them the most alluring
Promises, and the most tremendous Threatenings: fitted to influence the Hopes
and Fears of rational Creatures. They command, they exhort, they beseech
Sinners to come to Christ, and be reconciled to God.

Let it further be observed, God has set in his Church Pastors and Teachers,
who are to give themselves continually unto Prayer and to the Ministry of the
Word; to sound the Calls and Counsels of God in the Ears of Sinners, and to
pray over them; if by any means they may melt their Hearts, and bring them to
Repentance.

In fine, God gives them his Sabbaths; sets his Sanctuary in the midst of them;
reveals his Covenant, and gives them the Seals appointed as Helps of Faith.

So that they have all done for them that can reasonably be expected God should
do for such Creatures. He treats them as rational Agents, capable of
deliberating, choosing and resolving. He affords the best Means to enlighten
their understandings, direct their Judgments, persuade their Wills, and move
their Affections, in a rational and moral way. God is represented, as drawing
them with the cords of a man, Hos. 11.4. He uses all the Methods proper to work
upon Men, and reclaim reasonable Creatures from their Sins. Hence when Sinners
baffle these Methods of Grace, God is represented as at a Stand, and seeming
not to know what further Course could be taken. Hos. 6.4. O Ephraim, what shall
I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a
morning-cloud, and as the early dew it goes away.

Upon the whole then it appears, if Men perish from under the Gospel, it cannot
be imputed to any Defect of proper Means on God's part; but to their own
Stubborness and Obstinacy. They had a Price in their Hands to get Wisdom, but
had no Heart unto it. It is sufficient to justify God, and acquit him of their
Destruction, That he dealt with them as with rational Creatures, Causes by
Counsel of their own Actions; and used Methods of Teaching and Persuasion, and
all proper external Means, to work upon them, in a way suitable to then Nature
as Men. -- But it may serve as a further Vindication of the Divine Proceedings,
to observe,

5. Gospel-Impenitents have no Cloak for their Sin from any Plea they can make,
as to a want of internal Assistances, and a Defect of necessary Influences from
God to make the means effectual.

It must be conceded here, That the best Means God affords any, are not in
themselves alone sufficient to persuade and enable Sinners to repent and
believe: but they depend upon the concurrent Influences of the Spirit of God,
to give them such Efficacy as shall reach the desired End. 1 Cor. 3.7. So then,
neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters: but God that
gives the increase.

And again, it must be conceded, that there is not the same Energy of Divine
Grace accompanying the Means, unto the Souls of those that perish, as to them
that are saved: Neither does God do all that is in his power, by way of
internal Influence, to persuade and assist such as prove finally Impenitent, to
come to Christ. We read, Romans 11.6, 7. And if by grace, then it is no more of
works: otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then it is no
more of grace: otherwise work is no more work. What then? Israel has not
obtained that which he seeks for. Whereas they would have obtained, they
would have been converted and saved, if the Lord had given them Eyes to see,
and Ears to hear, and a Heart to know understanding. Our Savior observes, Joh.
6.45. Every one that has been taught and has learned of the Father, comes
unto me. The Divine Light and heavenly Principle put into the Soul of man in
Regeneration, infers a moral Necessity of his coming to Christ; so that
whatever Corruptions may work within, or Impediments appear without, yet he
finds himself under a sweet Constraint, a pleasing necessity, and cannot but
come to Christ. And if God did as much for others, they also most certainly
would be made willing in the day of his Power. To imagine that God did as much
for Judas, as he did for Peter, to save his Soul, is the absurdest Dream in the
World. And to say, that God absolutely* does all that he can to bring any
Gospel-Sinners to repentance, who finally perish, is to assert the greatest
Contradiction. For are not all Things possible with God? And has he not the
Hearts of all Men in his hand, to turn them as he pleases? Who then can resist
his Effective Will, where he intends, and exerts the Strength of his Grace, to
convert Men? Verily God reserves to himself a sovereign liberty, as we read,
Joh. 3.8 The wind blows where it lists. This spoke he of the Spirit.

But this notwithstanding, Gospel-Impenitents are inexcusable, and cannot plead
a want of necessary internal Aids of Divine Grace, as affording them any Cloak
for their Sin. For let it be remarked in two or three particulars,

1. Sinners do not realise what God tells them of the Necessity of his Grace,
and of their own Impotency, but are apt vainly to magnify their own Abilities,
and to think every man of himself more highly than he ought to think. They
particularly claim such a self-determining Power, and Liberty of Will in
matters spiritual, as supersedes the Necessity of any immediate Energy of the
holy Spirit to work in them to will and to do. They ascribe a great deal too
much of Power to moral Suasion; and think that sufficient, without any renewing
Change on the Heart by the immediate Influence of the holy Spirit, to produce
Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Job 11.12. For vain
man would be wise, though man be born like a wild asses colt. Pride makes men
conceited of themselves, and loath to see how vile and unworthy and helpless
they are in themselves; and loath to be beholden to Divine Grace. It makes men
imagine, They have a Stock of their own to live upon. Their haughty spirits
cannot stoop to own Repentance is the gift of God, or that God gives men to
believe, any otherwise than in a way of moral Suasion. And now it is a
righteous Thing in God to deal with Sinners according to their own Presumption
in this matter; and deny 'em that special Grace, which they think they have no
need of: be sure he is just in charging that Unbelief as wilful, which they
think it in their own power to help. It is a remarkable passage, that of our
Savior to the proud self-sufficient Pharisees, Joh. 9.41. Jesus said unto
them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see; your sin
remains. If Sinners have not an Opinion of themselves, that they are blind,
and impotent, and dead in Sins, and yet reject Christ; their Sin is the more
aggravated, and God may justly withold that Grace from them which they have
so little sense of their need of, and from the Honor of which they so detract
by a vainglorious Apprehension of their own Abilities. They oppose, they decry
the Doctrine of special Grace, and God in his unspotted Justice leaves them
destitute of it. "No men do show less of a free will to all spiritual Good,
than the men who have been the great Assertors and Admirers of man's free Will:
In their own Practice they confute their Opinion; at least render themselves of
all men the most inexcusable". Surely this is enough to stop their Mouths, that
they cannot throw any blame on God.

2. Sinners don't pray to God for his Spirit as they ought, although they confess
their own Impotency. They know that God expects to be sought to for all needed
Blessings, and in special for that Blessing of Blessings, the spiritual
Blessing: Nevertheless they call not upon God; or if at all, yet seldom and
with a great deal of Coldness and Indifference. They set upon Duty in their own
strength, and attend Ordinances in a prayerless careless frame, not looking to
God for that Grace to assist them, without which they can do nothing, and
without which the best means will be insignificant. We read, Psalm. 10.4. The
wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is
not in his thoughts. It may be, they are in some measure sensible of their own
Impotence, of the Insufficiency of moral Suasion alone, and the Necessity of
supernatural Grace; yet they don't apply themselves to Prayer, as becomes them
in order to obtain Divine Assistances in Duty, and a Divine Blessing on
external Means.

Some Sinners, when called upon to turn and live, will object their own
Inability, and plead, I can do nothing: God must do all. And this they commonly
seem to speak with a trifling spirit, and profane Easiness, as if their own
Impotence excused them from all Care and Concern about the matter; neither does
it put 'em upon praying, as it rationally might be expected. Methinks Sinners
should reflect on their own Inability, with a deep self-abhorrence, and with
great Distress of Soul, with Anguish, and with many Tears and Fears. Methinks
the sense of their own Impotence should put them upon crying earnestly to God,
as he, Jer. 31.28. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. Nevertheless how many
Sinners live without Prayer, or do not call upon God with any Care of
Importunity!

It may be they plead, They cannot pray. But then it must be said, they don't
stir up themselves to call upon God. They indulge a Spirit of carnal Security.
They neither take pains with their Hearts to get them into a praying frame, nor
do they with a just Concern and Anxiety of Mind beg of God to teach and help
them to pray. God has reserved a peculiar Agency to himself, even in the
Business of Prayer: and he does as much command our Application to him for his
Assistance in this Duty of Prayer, as he does demand the Rest of the Duty. And
yet Sinners will not apply to the Throne of Grace, that they may obtain Mercy,
and find Grace to help them. Surely such are left without all Excuse. They have
no Cloak for their Sin. No Rock can hide them.

It may be, some will plead; They have not sufficient Encouragement to pray for
and seek converting Grace: because there is no positive Promise for a Sinner to
depend upon. But surely the Calls and Invitations of the Gospel afford
sufficient Warrant, and are an encouraging Ground of Faith and Hope. -- Many
have ventured upon this Foundation of a rational Probability; and have
succeeded. -- And then you have as much Ground for Hope here, as in many other
Cases; where yet, while you use the Means, you depend upon a Blessing. You have
a Peradventure to encourage you. 2 Timothy 2.15. If Peradventure God will give him
Repentance. So, Act. 8.22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray
God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.

We will not dispute this Principle, that the Prayers of unregenerate Sinners
don't entitle them to the Gift of the holy Spirit, by virtue of any Promise,
God has made to them: But allow he is still at Liberty, and may in his holy
Sovereignty deny special Grace to them. Hear how the Apostle treats this
critical Case, and let us set down by his Resolution, Romans 9.14, 15, 16. What
shall we then say? Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. For he says
to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have
compassion on whom I will have compassion. So then it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. It follows,
ver. 19, 20, and 21. Thou will then say unto me, Why does he yet find fault?
for who has resisted his will? Nay, but O man, who art thou that reply
against God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou
made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make
one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor? The mere Pleasure of God
determines who shall and who shall not obtain special Grace. Yet this is so far
from being a Plea to excuse any from praying for converting Grace, that it is
rather an Argument why they should pray for it. Because, if their obtaining
special Grace depends on the mere Pleasure of God, their Unworthiness will not
be an Impediment in the way, neither should it discourage them, that they can
find no Reason or Motive in themselves of God's Love. They are as capable of
being loved by him, and as capable to be the object of his special Blessing, as
any in the World. There Is nothing in them that can hinder a gracious God from
setting his Heart upon them: and for ought they know, it may be his good
pleasure to bless them. This is the same encouragement as they act upon in
other cases: and if they will not venture upon such Encouragement in the
present Case, they must needs be left inexcusable, and condemned as acting a
most inconsistent part. Ye Hypocrites, how is it that you can discern the face
of the Sky, and of the Earth; and when God withholds the Rain of Heaven, you
can howl upon your Beds, and assemble your selves to cry unto him for Corn and
Wine, though you have no assurance to be heard! But how is it that you do not
discern the Time of your spiritual Visitation, as it is said, Hos. 10.12. It is
time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain righteousness upon you. And why
even of your selves judge ye not what is right in this Case!

Let it be added,

3. Sinners under the Gospel, whether they pray for the Spirit or not, do
actually experience those Assistances of common Grace, which are a full
Vindication of God, and leave them without all Excuse.

He not only uses all proper Methods with them in the way of external Means;
but he affords them such internal Assistances, by his holy Spirit, as serve to
leave them without any Cloak for their Sin. The Spirit of God is often at work
in the Consciences of Sinners; He comes in upon their Minds with inlightning
Influences, and awakening Impressions; He convinces them of Sin, admonishes
them of Duty, and stirs up their Affections, Desires, Fears, and Hopes: He
begets in them good Resolutions; lays a Restraint upon their Lusts, etc. Now,
as these common Illuminations and Assistances are capable of being improved to
excellent moral Purposes, so they are apparent Earnests, probable Tokens of the
Spirit's Willingness to come into Men by the Operations of his special Grace.
Herein the holy Spirit does practically offer himself to Sinners; and if they
do not put a Bar in his way, it looks as if he would come and make his Abode
with them. But here is the Misery and Folly of Sinners, they do always resist
and vex the holy Ghost, and oppose the Work of special Grace: by which means
they forfeit the Benefit, and render themselves altogether inexcusable. So that
every mouth must be stopped before God; and none of the Blame, if they perish,
can be cast on him.

It may be remarked here, and we will set an Asterism upon it; such Sinners as
are of Opinion, that it is in their own power so to prepare and dispose
themselves, by an improvement of their natural Abilities, and common Grace, as
to qualify their Souls for special Grace, and oblige God in faithfulness unto
some Promise of his to communicate it to them; these men, if after all they
perish, will be found of all men the most inexcusable. They surely cannot with
any Color of Reason throw the least Blame upon God: for he offered his Grace
to them, and in their opinion obliged himself to bestow it, upon certain Terms,
which they thought were in their own power to fulfill: and yet they supinely
failed of a Compliance. They received the Grace of God, as to his common
Assistances, in vain; they turned the Grace of God into wantonness, and
quenched the Spirit, by carnal Indulgences. So that they forfeited all Right to
the (supposed) Promise of special Grace, and God appears infinitely just in
taking his holy Spirit from 'em, and sealing their Damnation.

Upon the whole, it is evident from what has been said, that God does all that
becomes a wise Sovereign to do, both in an external and internal way, to
reclaim Sinners: and it may be added, He is long-suffering toward them as a
merciful Sovereign. It is said, 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is long-suffering to
usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance. So we read, 1 These. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your
Sanctification. This is his commanding and approving Will, and the plain
Language of his Conduct toward Sinners. He commands all Men every where to
repent; he gives them a Space to repent; and waits long upon them. He does not
instantly let fly the Arrows of Vengeance, and upon the first Provocation cast
them off for ever: but he continues driving with 'em by his Spirit, and
repeating the Gospel-Call, giving them Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept,
from one time to another; and this it may be for a long Course of years. So
that none among all them which perish from under Gospel Light, will have it to
complain of God, that he denied them sufficient Opportunity, or was not willing
that they should come to Repentance and be saved. But they must take all the
Blame to themselves; as having trifled away the precious Seasons of Mercy
allowed them; as having resisted God, and defeated all the Methods of Grace to
save them; led on by the Lusts of a carnal Mind, that is Enmity against God,
and full of Prejudices against the Redeemer and his Righteousness.

Now to conclude, Let us realise these Things, and take Heed that we be not
drawn away with the Error of the Wicked; that we don't impose upon our selves
by any dangerous Fallacies, lest we perish with a Lie in our right Hand. Let us
consider, if we perish, who enjoy such advantages for our Souls, by the
distinguishing Indulgence of Heaven, we shall have no Cloak for our Sin, by any
Plea of Complaint we can advance against God: but He will be clear, when he
judges, and all the World shall confess, The Way of the Lord is equal. He will
convince us that He has acted the part of a gracious and faithful Ruler toward
us, and done nothing inconsistent with that Protestation in Ezekiel. 33.11. As I
live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but
that the Wicked turn from his Way and live. Nevertheless since we would not
turn from our way, He will make us to know that He has as much Delight in
Truth and Righteousness, as in Mercy and Patience; and though as a Lawgiver and
Ruler he expressed a practical Will for our Salvation, having no Pleasure in
the Destruction of his Creatures, as such, and therefore taking the wisest and
most gracious Methods to promote our Conversion; Yet as a Judge, he has
Pleasure in repairing the Honor of his violated Law, and delights in
glorifying his Vindictive Justice. The Rev. Author before cited gives us his
Tho'ts on this Case, in these Propositions.

1. It is through the Glass of the Word and Creatures, that in this Life we must
know God; and so according to the Nature of Man, we ascribe to him
Understanding and Will, removing all the imperfections that we can, because we
are capable of no higher Positive conceptions of him.

2. And on the same grounds we do (with the Scripture) distinguish between the
Acts of God's Will, as diversified from the respects, or the Objects, though
as to God's Essence they are all one.

3. And the boldlier, because that when we speak of Christ, we have the more
ground for it from his Humane Nature.

4. And thus we say, that the simple Complacency, Will, or Love of God is to
all that is Naturally, or Morally Good, according to the Nature and Degree of
its Goodness. And so he has pleasure in the Conversion and Salvation of all,
which yet will never come to pass.

5. And God as Ruler and Lawgiver of the World, had so far a practical Will for
their Salvation, as to make them a free Deed of Gift of Christ and Life, and an
Act of Oblivion for all their Sins, so be it they will not unthankfully reject
it, and to command his Messengers to offer this gift to all the World, and
persuade them to accept it. And so, he does all that, as Lawgiver, or Promiser,
belongs to him to do for their Salvation.

6. But yet he resolves as Lawgiver, that they that will not Turn shall Die:
And as Judge, when their day of Grace is past, he will Execute that Decree.

7. So that he thus unfeignedly wills the Conversion of those that never will
be Converted: but not as Absolute Lord with the fullest efficacious Resolution,
nor as a thing which he resolves shall undoubtedly come to pass, or would
engage all his power to accomplish. It is in the Power of a Prince, to set a
guard upon a Murderer, to see that he shall not murder and be hanged. But if
upon good reason he forbear this, and do but send to his Subjects, and warn and
entreat them not to be Murderers, I hope he may well say that he would not have
them murder and be hanged; he takes no pleasure in it, but rather that they
forbear, and live. And if he do more for some, upon some special reason, he is
not bound to do so by all. -- If God were so much against the death of the
Wicked, as that he were resolved to do all that he can to hinder it, then no
man should be condemned: whereas Christ tells you, that few will be saved. --
Baxter's Call* p. 37.


Because there is Wrath then beware lest he take thee away with his Stroke. Be
not deceived; God is not mocked. O let us diligently attend the Means, and
employ the Seasons of Grace. Let us take heed we don't grieve and quench the
holy Spirit: but cherish Convictions begun, and be concerned that we may
improve 'em to a through Repentance. Hear that awakening Call, Matthew. 7.13, 14.
Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: Because strait
is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be
that find it.

Now consider what I say: and the Lord give you Understanding in all Things!

AMEN.
SERMON II.
I come now to the next Thing,

PROP. II. THAT Sinners have no Cloak for their Sin, from any Pleas they can
make referring to SATAN, and an evil WORLD, their spiritual Adversaries.

They suffer no Violence from external Causes, nor will any Impediments they
meet with in the Way of Duty, afford 'em a Plea sufficient to justify their not
repenting and receiving Christ. What or who should compel the Sinner to refuse
Christ? Who should put a Force upon him to go on in his Sins, and reject
Christ, against all the Calls and Attractions of the Gospel? I have showed, it
cannot be imagined that the Blessed God should put Sinners under any Constraint
so to do; which would be to oblige them to rebel against his own Authority, and
dishonor his own Name, to trample on his dear Son, and despise the great
Salvation, that he has been at an infinite Expense to purchase for us. Nor can
it be said that any Creature puts a Force upon 'em. Surely not this Evil World,
whether the Things, or the Men of it. The Things of the World have a tempting
Influence, but carry nothing of Compulsion in 'em, to bring us into Captivity
to Sin. So the Men of the World, they may persuade and entice, but they cannot
force. They may indeed use a Violence upon the Body, and hinder that from
external Duties; but they cannot reach the Soul, to hinder this from the
invisible Actings of Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
Who then should be the Author of this pretended Violence?

Will it be attributed to the Devil? True, he is our grand Adversary, and he
goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: He Is a most powerful
and malicious Enemy. But yet his Strength lies chiefly in his Policy and Skill
in the Arts of Deceiving. He is more subtle to delude, than powerful to
constrain. What Force can he use? Does the Devil by any secret irresistible
Efficacy bind and compel Men to act in Contradiction to their own real Judgment
and Choice? No verily: he can entice and decoy, affright and terrify; but not
compel and oblige.

When Men forsake Christ, is it the Devil (think you) that draggs them away
from him by Force! Does the Devil chain their Feet, that they cannot go to the
House of God, to seek Christ in his Ordinances! Does the Devil stop their
mouths, and make them restrain Prayer before God! Does the Devil shut their
Ears, that they cannot hear; and close their Eyes, that they cannot read the
Word of Salvation! Does the Devil harden their Hearts and sear their
Consciences, that they should not be affected and consider the Things which
belong to their everlasting Peace? Does the Devil enrage Men's Passions, when
at any time they are full of Clamor and evil-speaking! Does the Devil move
Men's Tongues when they throw out their Blasphemies and horrid Oaths! Or does
he open the Drunkards Mouths, when they take down their intemperate and
stupifying Cups!

What Violence (I pray) does Satan use in any of these Cases! It Is true, he is a
Tempter to all Wickedness, and Enemy of all Righteousness; a cunning, a strong,
and buisy Adversary. He has many Wiles to destroy the Souls of Men: He often
imposes upon them by false Reasonings, and by deceitful Baits draws them into a
Snare and Death. He is very subtle to cast in Objections and raise Prejudices
in Men's Minds against the Truths and Ways of God; He is subtle to represent
Sin and Error in a plausible Dress, in very fair and alluring Colors; He has
also a great Sagacity and Dexterity in applying his Temptations, to suit the
various Tempers of Persons, to hit the Opportunity, and take all Advantages.
And he is very industrious, even indefatigable, in his Efforts to hinder Men
from entertaining the Gospel, and keep them still in their Sins. But when he
has done all, he cannot compel Men against their Wills. Let no man, when he is
tempted, say he is compelled by the Devil: for Satan's power is not compulsive,
but persuasive only. He may persuade the judgment by delusive Arguings, but he
cannot force the Will, against the Judgment. He has no Power but what is
resistible. Hence that, Jam. 4.7. Resist the Devil, and he shall flee from you.

But it is the Fault and Folly of Sinners, They don't resist the Devil. They
don't study his Devices, and watch his Motions, and oppose his Attempts, as
they ought to do. Which certainly must needs make them inexcusable, and stop
their Mouths from pleading the Power of Satan over them in Apology for their
Sin and Impenitence.

And then, it must be considered, if Satan has gained a Power over any, which
seems almost irresistible, so that they are (as it is said, 2 Timothy 2.26.) Led
captive by him at his will; they have bro't this upon themselves. The natural
Power, or the Power which Satan has over Men by Nature, they may be said to
have brought it upon themselves by their Sin and Fall in Adam, their primitive
Head and Representative: But more especially the heightened Degree of this
Power, may Sinners be said to bring themselves under, by giving Place to the
Devil, by yielding to his Temptations, and doing his Lusts from time to time.
Thus he gets an Advantage against them, and acquires to himself a new Degree of
Power over them. This is the natural Effect: since every act of Sin strengthens
the Habit within Men; and the stronger the Habit of Sin is, the more Power
Satan has over them; for he rules them by the Mediation of their own Lusts and
Corruptions. And then it is the moral Effect of the Sinners Conduct, by
provoking God judicially to abandon them, and suffer Satan to exercise a
spiritual Tyranny over them. That is the Case of some forsaken Sinners, 2 Pet.
2.14. They cannot cease from Sin. So it is said, Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian
change his Skin, or the leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are
accustomed to do evil. Now the grand Reason of this their Impotence is the
power and working of Satan in them, which obstructs the Efficacy of the Means
of Grace employed upon 'em. The Apostle resolves all into this, 2 Cor. 4.4. In
whom the god of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine unto them.

But then is this any Excuse, pleadable by Sinners in Vindication of their
Unbelief and Impenitence? No; for had they not first resisted God so
obstinately, so perversely, He had not abandoned 'em: but since they have
forsaken him, he may justly forsake them, and leave 'em to the the Power of
Satan. Hence that account is given of the matter, Psalm. 81.11, 12. My People
would not hearken to my Voice; and Israel would none of me: SO I gave them up.
And therefore they must needs be inexcusable. The Power, which Satan has over
them, affords no Cloak for their Sin: because they have brought this great Evil
upon themselves, both by the just Desert, and by the natural Efficacy of their
guilty and foolish Submissions to the Tempter, against all the Force of Divine
Warnings and Restraints, from time to time. Is not he justly reputed a
self-destroyer, that runs into the mouth of this devouring Lion; that has no
Care to escape, nor takes any Pains in resisting him: but heedlesly and
presumptuously goes in the Paths of the Destroyer, exposing himself for an easy
Prey to so wily and powerful an Adversary! Our Mother Eve would fain have laid
the Blame of her Fall upon Satan: says she, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did
eat. But it was a poor Excuse, and of no Avail. Neither will the like Pretense
be of any significance in the mouth of her Posterity.

But I shall not enlarge any further here. We come now to the last Thing:

PROP. III. IT remains therefore, that Sinners take all the Blame of their Sin
and Ruin to THEMSELVES.

The Devil and his Instruments may lay Temptations before Men, and so be
accessory to their Sinning: but it is their own evil Heart, that deceives and
carcarries them on to comply, and is the principal Cause of their Sin and Ruin.
Hence that, Jam. 1.14. 'Every Man is tempted, when he is enticed and drawn away
of his own Lusts. It is the carnal and rebellious Principle, so deeply rooted
in our degenerate Nature, that draws Men from Christ, seduces them from Duty,
and makes them to pervert the right ways of the Lord. It is their own Lust,
that fills them with Prejudices against Christ, and the way of Salvation by
him. It is their own Lust, that hinders them from submitting to Christ, as the
Lord their Righteousness. It Is their own Lust, that hinders them from
confessing their Sins, and repenting, to give Glory to God. It is their own
Lust, that hinders them from attending, with a suitable Concern and Diligence,
on the Word and Means of Grace. It Is their own Lust, that prevents their
getting the Good of Ordinances and Providence; that gives the Efficacy to
Temptations, and makes Satan so successful in his malicious Essays against
them. It Is all owing to the Lusts of Men's own Hearts. That Is the Censure upon
them, 2 Timothy 3.6. Led away with diverse Lusts. And these are represented as
foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition, 2 Timothy
3.9. Our Savior has told us, Joh. 3.19. And this is the Condemnation, that
light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because
their deeds were evil.

But for the clearer Illustration of the Point, I shall pursue it, in three or
four particulars, as briefly as I can, with Justice to so important a Subject.

1. Let it be considered, Gospel-Impenitents do very much neglect to use, or
trifle in using, those Means, which are in their own power, and which they
might probably hope God would bless, in order to their Conversion and Salvatian.

Although it is true, that Sinners cannot by any innate Power of their own convert
themselves: Yet they can by the help of common Grace attend, with some measure
of seriousness and a moral Sincerity, on the Means of Divine Appointment; and
in this way they might do a great deal more toward their Conversion than they
actually do. Notwithstanding that in the moment of Regeneration we are properly
passive, and the whole Efficiency is of God: Yet in order to God's performing
this good work upon us, he requires us to be diligently attending on his holy
Ordinances; which are the usual Vehicles of saving Grace, and we cannot
rationally expert the sanctifying Operations of the holy Spirit upon our Souls,
but in the way of Duty. To sit still, entirely negligent of our spiritual
Concerns, and yet expect the special Influences of Divine Grace, is wicked and
dangerous Presumption. Hence we are frequently called upon in such terms as
those, Joh. 6.27. Labor for the meat, which endures to Everlasting Life. And
Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate. So Phil. 2.12. Work out your
own Salvation with fear and trembling. And when Sinners are neglective and
slothful, God complains of 'em, as in Hos. 5.4. They will not frame their
doings to turn unto their God. So the Lord Jesus Christ reproved the Jews of
his day in that Language, Joh. 5.40. And ye will not come to me, that ye might
have life. These are Complaints lying against Multitudes of Professors under
the Gospel: and indeed all that finally perish, will fall under the Reproach of
these heavy Imputations. This will be their Condemnation at last, that when
they enjoyed, or had Opportunity to enjoy the Means of Grace, they neglected
the same. Not indeed that all who perish, will be sound guilty of an entire and
universal Neglect: for some may give their Attendance on these and those
Duties, but then they neglect others, and are very formal in all. But the
Generality will be found to have been grossly negligent of the most necessary
instrumental Duties of Religion, and will be found to have habitually trifled
in them.

Now if they would not do what was in their power to do, in order to Salvation,
no wonder if they perish: they perish very justly. Some of Solomon's
Observations may be pertinently enough applied in the present Case: Prove. 13.4.
The soul of the sluggard desires, and has nothing. Chap. 21.25. The desire of
the slothful kills him, for his hands refuse to labor. If men are guilty of
inexcusable Folly, who neglect the Business of common Life, and complain of
Want: how much more they, who neglect their Souls and the great Salvation! O
how shall such escape? And are not many Sinners condemned of themselves, by
their own practice with relation to worldly Concerns! For no man ever yet hated
his own Body, but nourishes and cherishes it. And will you starve your Souls
to Death! Nay, what Man shall there be among you, that shall have one Sheep,
and if it fall into the Pit, will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out: but
how much is a Man better than a Sheep? Are not Sinners then without all Excuse,
who being themselves plunged into Sin and Misery, are yet unconcerned, and will
not be at any pains to seek Deliverance! They have perhaps high Conceits of
their own Power and Liberty; and yet don't use their power, but abuse their
Liberty. They Have a plenty of Means, but are slothful in Business, and hide
their Talent in a Napkin.

Alas! Do not Multitudes of professed Christians let their Bibles lie by
neglected, without an Eye cast into them from day to day, and from Week to
Week! Or if they look into the Scriptures, is it not more out of Curiosity or
Custom, than any serious Aim at getting spiritual Benefit thereby! And how
negligent are many Professors, as to hearing the Word preached! How apt to omit
precious Opportunities of hearing, upon any the most frivolous Excuses! And how
very careless and indolent in their Attendance! How indulgent to Sleep, or
Security; or else carnal Prejudices and evil Passions many times! Again, When
Sinners might as well employ their thinking Powers on religious Concerns, as on
worldly affairs, and if they would but think closely and frequently on divine
Things, this would have a happy Tendency to bring them to a believing
Entertainment of Gospel-Offers, and serious Pursuit of their great and best
Interest: yet how do Sinners live in the Neglect of holy Meditation; suffering
the Amusements of a vain World to engross their Thoughts, and carelessly rushing
on in the pursuit of temporary Profits or Pleasure! They mind earthly things,
and God is scarce in all their Thoughts. They think little or nothing about
their Souls: and if ever they examine themselves, they do but trifle in this
important Duty; not willing to come to the Light, lest their Deeds should be
reapproved. Again, What Strangers are many Professors to the Duty of religious
Conference, and how little is there of a walking with the wise; which might
have a blessed Influence to make them also wise! Furthermore, Although Prayer
is the instituted Way, wherein we are to wait upon God for his renewing Grace;
yet how do Sinners neglect this Duty, or but thoughtlesly attend it!

In a word, although Sinners are often exhorted to make a Trial whether God will
enable them by his Grace, to repent and believe in Christ; yet they have no
Heart to the Experiment. They sit down in Security or Despair, and will not try
to stretch out the withered arm; although bidden to do it, and although they might
hope God would prosper the Essay.

Now, if this be the Conduct of Sinners, while they continue impenitent, it is
surely a vain thing for them to go about to excuse themselves with any Plea
from their spiritual Impotence. For however seasonable it may be to plead their
Impotence, when by Prayer and in the Use of appointed Means they are waiting
upon God for his Spirit to be given them, without whom they can do nothing to
any saving purposes: Yet it must needs be quite unseasonable and hypocritical
to make this Plea, while neglecting Prayer and the Means of Grace, by way of
Excuse herefor. It Is a vanity for Sinners to complain of Weakness and
Inability, that don't do what is in their power as to the material part of
Duty. They must not think to palliate their Sloth by Pretenses of Impotency.
It Is evident that Sinners can do more, both extensively and intensively more,
than they actually do, in the use of Means, toward their Conversion: And this
their Negligence is enough to stop their Mouths, and render their case utterly
indefensible; For this certainly argues a Want of Will to come to Christ and
turn to God. From their habitual Omission of practicable Duties, and being
careless about the Matter of Conversion, we may very justly infer and assert,
They would not come to Christ and turn to God, if it were really in their own
power.

Observe; This coming to Christ and turning to God may be taken two ways;
either in a divided Sense for the Acts of believing and repenting, or in a
compounded sense for the Use of Means and Endeavors to obtain Faith and
Repentance. Now, though unregenerate Sinners have not a power immediately to
exercise Faith and Repentance: Yet having an ability to use the Means, which
they might hope the Spirit will accompany with his Power and Influence, to
beget these Graces in their Souls, and enable them to convert and live to God,
they may for this Reason, if they neglect the Means, or do but trifle in them,
be charged with voluntary Unbelief and resolved Impenitence. It plainly shows,
their not coming to Christ and not turning to God ought to be imputed to their
Wilfulness, rather than Weakness, to their Indisposition rather than
Incapacity. It Is a chosen and delightful Impotence. It Is owing to the Malignity
of their corrupt Wills, that they cannot repent and convert to God. As it is
said, Jer. 6.10. Behold, their Ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken.

But I pass now to say,

2. Gospel-Impenitents a resist the Methods of Grace, which the blessed God
uses with them, and do quench the Holy Spirit striving in them.

They have dreadful Risings of Heart in Opposition to the work of Humiliation;
and not willing to submit to the Righteousness of God, they go about to
establish their own Righteousness. They are of a stubborn and proud Spirit, and
take unhappy Methods to extinguish Convictions, that they may live in carnal
Ease. They not only neglect using means themselves for their Conversion: but
they also oppose the Means used with them by the Spirit of Grace. They not only
refuse to exercise their own Power, in the way of Duty: but likewise appear
unwilling that God should exercise his Power in a way of Grace, to turn and
reform them. It was a Complaint against the Jews of old, Isai. 63.10. They
rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit. And this Charge holy Stephen advances
against the Jews in his day, Act. 7.51. Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in
heart and ears, ye do always resist the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do
ye. Sinners turn a deaf Ear to the Calls of the Spirit in their Consciences, as
well as to the Calls of God in his Word and Providence. They resist his holy
Motions, stifle Convictions, and do what they can to efface any good
Impressions begun upon them. They often quench the Spirit, by one unhappy Means
and another, by Sloth and Carelessness, by Pride and Self-Confidence, by
Impatience, and Despondence, by worldly Business or sensual Diversions, by
affected Ignorance, by studied Excuses, Delays, and the like. Thus they
frustrate the striving Spirit of God, and receive his Grace in vain. So they
fail of a saving Conversion, by their own wilful Folly: and such as reject the
Means, may be said wilfully to refuse the End. Surely then in this regard
Gospel-Sinners are without Excuse, and have no Cloak for their Sin.

Let it now be added,

3. Gospel-Impenitents do actually commit those Sins, which as they have a
natural Tendency to hinder their Conversion, so they provoke God to withold
his special Grace from them.

Sinners might, if they would, by the help of common Grace, reform their evil
Manners, purge their Lives from gross Enormities, and lay considerable
Restraints on the Lusts and Passions of their evil Hearts. They might, if they
would, forbear the outward Act of gross Sins. They might avoid the occasions of
Sinning, and shun Temptations, more than they do. They could argue with
themselves the Folly of their Vices, and Danger of Impenitence: They could bind
their Souls in serious Vows and Resolutions; which might be good Preservatives
and Guards against their returning unto Folly, the Folly of scandalous Practice.

What should hinder Sinners from using these Methods in order to break off
their sins! Have they not a Principle of Reason in them, a natural Conscience,
which condemns their Immoralities, and often prompts them to a Reformation!
Could they not consider, and resolve, and watch, and pray, that they enter not
into Temptation! And if they did these things as well as they could, would they
so often fall into Sin as they do!

What then can we collect from hence, but that they live in chosen Rebellion
against God, whilst they go on in their Trespasses! They will not part with their
Lusts, for the sake of Christ. By their indulging themselves in Sin, they
harden their Hearts in wickedness, and take a natural Course to hinder their
Conversion. So it is complained, Zech. 7.11, 12. But they refused to hearken,
and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not
hear. Yea, they made their heart as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the
law. They are in a corrupt diseased Condition, ('it is true) and cannot cure and
recover themselves to a State of Purity and Soundness. But then if they
perversely take unhappy Methods to make their State worse, and will even drink
down poison to destroy themselves utterly; they must needs perish without
Excuse and without Pity. And then since a compassionate Physician has taken
their Case into Consideration, though they cannot cure themselves, yet they can
forfeit his healing Mercy: and when they reject divine Remedies, and disobey
divine Prescriptions, and will presumptuously expose themselves by venturing
upon the most dangerous Courses; How can they expect but that he should refuse
any more to look upon them! Surely they offer the grossest Indignities to the
blessed God, the Lord that sanctifies us: they forfeit his Grace, and tempt
him to withhold it from them. They provoke him to blast the Means they sit
under and do so abuse. They provoke God to call away his Spirit, to swear in
his wrath, that his Spirit shall no more strive with them, and to resolve
concerning them, as in Ezekiel. 24.13. Because I have purged thee, and thou wast
not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee.

Now all this are Gospel-Sinners warned of: and yet they go on in their Sins,
to add Iniquity to Rebellion, Obstinacy to Transgression. They multiply their
Sins, and proceed from Evil to Evil, crucifying to themselves the Son of God
afresh: though they know how they hereby expose themselves to the Loss of the
striving Spirit of Grace. O amazing Self-Destruction! It is said of Sin, Prove.
6.32. He that does it, destroys his own soul. And in this regard they are
inexcusable. If the Light of Nature left the Heathen without Excuse, besure
Jews and Christians, who enjoy the Light of Revelation, must have no Cloak for
their Sin. See Romans 1.20, -- 32. and Chap. 2.1, -- 5. For brevity I only turn
you to the places, and leave you to read 'em at your leisure.

Now upon the whole, let it be considered,

4. Gospel-Sinners do all this in a free and voluntary manner, and upon Motives
which at the time appear to them founded in Reason.

That they do act freely, is a necessary Deduction from those Scriptures, that
speak of Men's Unbelief as a Refusing of Christ, and of their Impenitence as an
hardening of their Hearts; which implies an Exercise of the Will. And the
Inference as confirmed by those Scriptures, that charge this Unbelief and
Impenitence as a Guilt upon us; which implies that we are under no physical
Coaction, or absolute Necessity of Nature: For if so, how then would our
refusing of Christ be a Sin!

For the clearing this point, it may be observed, Notwithstanding the moral
Slavery Men are under to the Flesh, World, and Devil, who rule in the hearts of
the Children of Disobedience; yet they still retain that Liberty of Will, which
is essential to them as Men, and renders 'em capable Subjects of moral
Government. We still retain all the essential Powers of Men; though the original
Rectitude of them is lost. Our Actions are still under the Conduct of our
internal powers of Understanding and Will. And the Will in us is yet a rational
Faculty; i. e. Conducted by the Understanding and Judgment: and acts upon some
Motives that at present seem to carry Reason and Force with them, though they
often prove upon a stricter Examination of Things, to have little Truth or
Weight. However such is the Constitution of our Nature, even in this fallen
State, that the Will follows the Directions of the Understanding; pursuing what
that exhibits as a Good, and declining what that represents as an Evil. No man
loves or hates, chooses or refuses, but he pretends to do it upon Arguments of
Reason, and has some Idea in his Mind that sways and governs him.

Even thus in the Case before us, if Sinners harden their Hearts and refuse
Christ, they do it upon some Grounds and Considerations, that in the present
View of Things appear to them rational. This is represented in that Clause of
the Parable of the Vineyard, Luke 20.13, 14. Then said the Lord of the
Vineyard, What shall I do? I will send my beloved Son: it may be they will
reverence him when they see him. But when the husbandmen saw him, they reasoned
among themselves, saying, This is the heir: come, let us kill him, that the
inheritance may be ours. And proceeding thus upon seemingly rational Views,
they appear to act with a freedom of Will in rejecting Christ. Which is a Truth
that all must acknowledge, if they entertain a right Notion of human Liberty.

Now the Liberty of the Will does not consist in an aequilibrious Indifference,
a doubtful Suspension, and equal Inclination to two contrary objects: because
this would infer, That the more virtuous or the more vicious any are, the less
they are so, being the less free; and consequently less entitled to Rewards, or
less exposed to Punishments, which belong to free Agents, only in proportion to
the Degrees of Virtue or Vice, their Actions carry in them. Human Liberty then
cannot lie in an Indifference to Good and Evil: but it is an intelligent
Spontaneity, and lies in a Capacity or Propensity to act according to the
present Dictates of the Understanding. To act freely is to act by a voluntary
Motion, agreeable to the Result of our present Thoughts, without an unnatural
Force and irresistible Compulsion from any external Cause. This kind of Liberty
is fundamental to human Nature, and the necessary Property of moral actions.

Of this mere essential Liberty of Will even the vilest Sinners are possessed:
and this they exercise, when they neglect the great Salvation, refuse Christ,
and go on in Sin. They herein act upon Choice, and according to their present
practical Judgment, as intellectual and free Agents.

Indeed the natural man is under a moral Impossibility of determining himself
to that which is spiritually good, and has not an actual Freedom of Will to
choose and embrace Christ. For by the carnal Mind within him, which is full of
Prejudices against Christ, and represents him to the Sinner in a false Light,
under very odious Characters, the Will is disposed to avoid and refuse him, and
the Soul carried out in Acts of Enmity against him: and so long as the
Understanding remains darkened and depraved, the Will must remain unalterably
set in opposition to Christ.

Yet this is not a Necessity that excuses the Sinner from guilt in refusing of
Christ; because it is such a Necessity as is consistent with a freedom of
Action, and does not imply any external Compulsion or Force put upon our Nature.

The Sinner acts with a full Consent of his Will, and with the same Liberty, as
if there were no manner of Necessity lying upon him. He acts as freely, as if
there were no determinate Counsel of God concerning him. He acts as freely, as
if there were no governing Providence over him. He acts as freely, as if there
were no Devil to tempt him; and as if there were no Impediments in the way to
prevent his coming to Christ. The Sinner is voluntary in his Aversation from
Christ: and whatever Necessity he is under, of acting as he does, it is a
chosen and pleasing Necessity, very agreeable to his corrupt Nature. It springs
from a rooted Principle of Enmity in his heart to Christ and his Ways, and from
a radicated Love to Sin and the World, which he cannot submit to part with for
Christ's sake. The man is contented with his fallen Condition; he delights in
his Chains, and abhors the Terms on which Christ offers Deliverance to him. He
refuses Christ with a delightful Spontaneity.

So that whether he is supposed to be under a moral Necessity of acting as he
does, or to have a Power of acting otherwise, it makes no Difference; but
leaves him equality inexcusable: for if he were under no manner of Necessity or
Infirmity, but had in himself a sufficient Strength and Ability to come to
Christ and turn from Sin, yet he would not; such is the Malignity of his Will,
such the Pride of his Heart and Stupidity of his Soul. He loves not the Person
of Christ; he values not his Offices; he inwardly hates the Laws of Christ, and
despises his Righteousness. We read, Prove. 13.19. It is Abomination to Fools to
depart from Evil. They hate knowledge, and do not choose the Fear of the Lord,
Chap. 1.29. So Joh. 3.19. They love darkness, etc. Romans 8.7, 8. -- Not subject
to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the flesh
cannot please God. The Scripture imputes a kind of moral Necessity of Sinning
as they do, unto Sinners in a State of Nature: And yet also imputes their Sins
to their own voluntary Choice. Isa. 66.3. They have chosen their own ways, and
their soul delights in their abominations.

Now thus to choose the ways of Sin, is to choose Death in the Causes of it.
Hence that, Prove. 8.36. But he that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul;
all they that hate me, love death. Their Hatred of Christ and Love to Sin, is
the fundamental Reason of Men's rejecting Christ. They are set upon their
Lusts; and therefore will not have Christ to reign over them. (...) the
Language of Sinners, Jer. 2.25 (...) loved strangers, and after them I (...).
They are Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God: They love the Praise of
Men more than the Praise of God. They prefer the Service of Satan before the
Service of Christ; and the Lusts of their Father the Devil they will do. ( Joh.
8.44.) They prefer the Body to the Soul, Earth to Heaven, and Time to Eternity:
and are resolved upon the Pursuit of this World's Good at all adventures. The
Apostle speaks of some that will be rich: and he says, They that will be rich,
do fall into Temptation and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts;
and pierce themselves through with many Sorrows. Such now may justly be said in
the Language of Scripture, to choose Cursing, and to love Death. They court
Misery, and invite Ruin; they invade Hell, and take the Kingdom of Darkness, as
others do the Kingdom of Heaven, by Violence. Hell suffers Violence, and the
Violent take it by Force; mad upon their Lusts, and bent upon their own
Destruction. Must not such then be stripped of all Excuses! Surely they have no
Cloak for their Sin: they can make no apology for their Unbelief, since it so
manifestly appears to be wilful, chosen and resolute.

But I shall now conclude with some Reflections or Inferences from this
Discourse.

USE 1. Have Gospel-Impenitents no Cloak for their Sin! Hence we may learn the
Justice of God in the eternal Condemnation, and aggravated Punishment of such
in a future State.

An holy, a jealous, and omnipotent God will one day call Sinners into
Judgment, and will judge the World in Righteousness, rendering to every man
according to his Deeds. And as the Rules of Justice require that greater
Sinners should have a greater Punishment; hence Gospel Sinners, who knew their
Lord's Will, and prepared not themselves to do it, shall in that day be
adjudged to peculiar Pains, and be beaten with many stripes. The wilful
obstinacy of Gospel-Impenitents exceedingly increases their Guilt; and makes
the Divine Justice in their Condemnation shine out with a transcendent Glory.
The whole World of intelligent Beings will unite their Suffrages, and proclaim
the Equity of the Divine Sentence in that Day. Yea, the Sinners themselves
shall ascribe Righteousness to their Maker, and as to all Pretenses of
Injustice in his dealings with them, will be speechless, and covered with
Confusion. This is represented in the Parable, Mat. 22.11, 12. And when the
king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding
garment: And he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a
wedding garment? And he was speechless. Every Plea will be wrested out of
Sinners Mouths, by the Advantages they have enjoyed, and the Profession they
made, under the Gospel: Which will all come in as so many Items to accumulate
the Guilt of their Impenitency, and inflame their Account. They shall no more
be able to drown the Voice of Conscience, bribe its Judgment, or elude the
force of its Charges by any deceitful Reasonings. They shall be convinced in
that day, however impotent and unable they were of themselves to turn and live
to God; that yet their not doing it was owing to the Malignity of their Wills,
and the Enmity in their carnal Minds against Christ and his Ways, rather than
to an involuntary Weakness or insuperable Opposition from their spiritual
Enemies.

It might seem sufficient to vindicate the judicial procedures of the great
Day, that God is sovereign. Is it not said, He has Mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardens? Has not the Potter power over the Clay, of the same
Lump, to make one Vessel unto Honor and another unto Dishonor? Where God has
denied effectual saving Grace to any, has he withheld from them what he owed
them? Nay, is it not a just Punishment of their sin in Adam, to take the
Forfeiture he made of Heaven and Happiness for them, by breaking the Covenant
of Life, made with him as our common Head? God might upbraid them in such
Language as that, Jer. 2.21. Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a
right seed: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange
vine unto me?

But God will make Impenitents to know in that day that he does not proceed
with them in a way of mere despotick Sovereignty, but according to the
strictest Rules of rectoral Holiness: That neither does he only condemn them
for original Sin, and punish them merely for their native Infirmity and
Corruption: but for their contracted Impotence and personal Rebellions; for
their carnal Sloth, and indulged Enmity; for their wilful Infidelity, their
affected Ignorance, and chosen Disobedience. He will make them to know that
thus their Destruction is of themselves: the Result of their own criminal
Choice. He will upbraid them, as in Jer. 2.17. Have thou not procured this unto
thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led thee by the
way?

God will wash his hands in Innocence, and pronounce them guilty of their own
Blood. Yea, they themselves will acquit God, and declare his Throne faultless
altogether. Conscience will fly in their faces, and join with God in condemning
them. They will acknowledge in that day, God has done all that became a wise
and gracious Sovereign to do, in the way of Means, for the bringing them to
Repentance; and will bitterly bewail it that they did so grieve and vex the
holy Spirit: that they did so despise their Bible, their Baptism, their
Sabbaths, their Ministers, their Parents, and faithful Reprovers. Thus the Case
is represented, Pro. 5.11, 12, 13. And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh
and thy body are consumed, And say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart
despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined
mine ear to them that instructed me?

They will subscribe to the Equity of the Sentence passed upon them; and though
they once thought the Threatening severe, they will then confess the Execution
is just upon them. Though they were once ready to say, God would be cruel, if he
should punish transient offenses with perpetual Sufferings; they will then own
with loud and bitter Accents, that they were cruel to their own Souls, and
madly run themselves into Hell.

But I proceed to another Reflection.

USE 2. Hence the Awfulness of our standing under the Gospel, and the miserable
Delusion of such as trust to mere Privileges and Externals in Religion.

Our Standing in God's Vineyard is a matter of joyful, and yet also of awful
Consideration. For the Axe is now laid to the Root of the Trees, and every Tree
which brings not forth good Fruit, shall be cut down and cast into the Fire.
Matthew. 3.10. Our Gospel-Privileges are no Security from the Wrath to come. Joab
may fly to the Horns of the Altar; and yet be hewn in pieces before the Lord.
Multitudes cry, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: and think this
will exempt them from the common Doom of ungodly Sinners. But alas! their
Gospel-Advantages will be so far from being Pleas for Mercy, that they will
rather loudly imprecate Vengeance on the guilty Heads of such as have despised
and abused them. These things serve but to enhaunce their Guilt, and so entitle
them to a greater Damnation. The Apostle mentions it as a very aggravating
Circumstance of Sin, Romans 2.23. Thou that make thy boast of the law, through
breaking the law, dishonourest thou God?

O then see to it, that none trust in lying words, and flatter themselves with
vain Imaginations: for the Lord will reject your Confidences, and you shall not
prosper in them. See Mat. 7.21, etc. Be not high-minded then, but fear. Don't
depend on a mere Profession, and religious externals: but look to your Hearts
that they be right with God. Work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling.
Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
also reap*

USE 3. Hence the Folly of Delay in the grand Affair of Conversion.

Have Gospel-Sinners no Cloak for their Sin! How unreasonable then are Delays
in the matter of turning to God, and coming to Christ! O delaying Sinner! you
can never justify your Conduct, but must suffer the Reproach of acting a very
foolish part in neglecting for even one moment so great Salvation. Thou art
inexcusable, O man, whoever thou art, and can never vindicate thy past
Behavior. And will thou yet go on? Will thou go on after repeated Calls and
Warnings, and strivings of the holy Spirit with you! Art thou not convinced,
does not thy Conscience tell thee, that thou have no Pleas sufficient to defend
thee? O how can thou neglect thy Savior and thy Soul from day to day, and
year to year! Art thou not afraid of God's Judgments falling upon thee? What
can screen you from the Strokes of vindictive Justice? What do you think should
stay the Hand of Vengeance? And when God arises to take hand on Judgment, what
will you do? What will you plead? Can thine Heart endure, or can thine Hands be
strong, in the day that he shall deal with thee? Is it not a most fearful and
tremendous thing, to fall into the Hands of the living God! See then the Danger
and the Folly of Delays: and now, even now, while it is called to day, be
striving to enter in at the strait gate, and no longer harden your Heart.

O let us all be exhorted seriously to consider how inexcusable we shall be, if
we die impenitent; and let this be a prevailing Motive with us to come to
Christ and turn to God without Delay.

Whatever way of Sin we may be walking in, O let us reflect upon the
inexcusable Folly we are guilty of, and the Hazard we run of Damning our own
Souls, if we do not instantly turn and give our Hearts to the Lord. God
expostulates with us, as in Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. Cast away from you all your
transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a
new spirit; for why will ye die, O house of Ifsael? For I have no pleasure in
the death of him that dies, says the Lord God: wherefore turn your selves,
and live ye. Let us consider solemnly with our selves, that none of us have any
Cloak for our Sin. The Vicious and immoral have no Cloak for their Sin, who
will not abstain from those gross Acts of Sinning, which they might refrain if
they would, nor avoid those Temptations, which they might easily keep out of
the way of. The Drunkard has no Cloak for his Sin, the Adulterer, the Liar, the
Injurious, the Worldling, have no Cloak for their Sin: since they will not take
any Care, nor use the Power they have, to keep themselves from their own
Iniquity. They love their Lusts, and will not part with them. So the Profane,
the Irreligious, the Formal, and the carnally Secure have no Cloak for their
Sin: for they will not employ, nor study to improve, the natural Abilities God
has given them, by attending only on the Means of Grace, and by striving to
work up their Hearts to a suitable Frame, by Meditation, by Self-Examination,
Prayer, etc. Surely such have no Cloak for their Sin. O let us consider,
whatever Rank of Sinners we belong to, if we perish at last, we shall be found
utterly inexcusable. Neither Christ nor Conscience will have any Plea to make
for us: but will both join in accusing and impleading us. We shall stand
indicted of Murder, the most heinous, even Self-Murder, the Murder of our Souls,
wilful premeditated Self-Murder, and must perish without Remedy. The Guilt of
Blood, of our own Blood, will be upon our heads: and we shall have none to
commiserate us, even our own Consciences will be enraged against us. Satan will
accuse, and God condemn us. No Eye will pity, nor can any Arm save us.

And now may it not well strike a Terror upon us to meditate these things! O
let us earnestly seek to God for his Spirit to renew us unto Repentance, and be
waiting on him in all the ways of his Appointment. Let none be careless and
secure. For how shall you escape, if you neglect so great Salvation? And why
should thou destroy thy self? Are you brought to the very Gate of Heaven, and
will you refuse to enter in? You are now not far from the Kingdom perhaps: and
will you shut your self out by a resolved Impenitence! Will you bid Defiance to
a gracious Redeemer, and do Despite to the Holy Spirit; and will you be false
to that God whose you are, and whom you profess to Serve! Will you gratify the
Devil, and do more against your self, than all your spiritual Enemies could do
against you! Are you lost to all Sense of the natural Principle of
Self-preservation! Shall you not one day regret your Folly! How will you bear
to see others in Glory, who lived under the same Means with you, and your self
excluded! Will it not occasion very bitter and cutting Reflections in your
guilty Breast! Will it not excite Envy, Rage, and Horror, and awaken every
tormenting Passion in you! Read Luke 13.24 to 28.

O let these Reflections sink down into our Hearts, and make us to be looking
diligently left we sail of the Grace of God.

Let us consider the Shortness and Uncertainty of our Opportunities: and if we
mean ever to repent and submit to Christ, let us do it quickly, without any
further Delay. All the pretended Grounds of Delay are absurd, and will not bear
a Test. We are none of us so young, as to make it too early for us to mind the
concerns of our Souls: nor any of us so old, as to make it too late for
pardoning Mercy to be glorified upon us. Whatever Business, Hurry or
Encumbrance may attend us now, yet we cannot hope for a more convenient Season,
than the present, to work out our Salvation. Moral Impediments will increase
upon our hands by every days neglect. If we be not willing to day, it is
probable we shall be less willing to morrow. If we be inexcusable now, we shall
be more inexcusable hereafter. It is a miserable Condition we are in, while
impenitent and without Christ: and we lie exposed to awful Hazards, to the Loss
of the striving Spirit, to the Loss of Reason, and of Life. There is but a step
between us and Death: and woe to us, if we die in our Sins. Alas! we stand on
the very brink of Hell, so long as we refuse Christ and do the Lusts of the
Devil. Let us then immediately renounce our Sins, and yield our selves to the
Lord. Let it be our present and fixed Resolution to seek the Lord while he may
be found; and never give over seeking, striving and praying, until he be found
of us. If we put off this great Concern, we shall sooner or later bitterly
repent our Delays: but if we hasten our Flight to Christ, this will be no Grief
of Heart to us, but matter of joyful Reflection. Yea, there is Joy in Heaven
over one Sinner that repents.

USE. 4. If Gospel-Impenitents are inexcusable, who perish in their own
Iniquity; how much more such Sinners as are voluntarily Instrumental to the Sin
and Ruin of others!

The Apostle speaks of some, Romans 1.32. Who knowing the judgment of God (that
they which commit such things are worthy of death) not only do the same, but
have pleasure in them that do them. They entice others to sin with them, they
rejoice in Iniquity, and take pains to promote it. They act the part of Factors
for Hell, and even glory in their Shame. Surely such are very Devils incarnate:
and must needs be of all Men the most inexcusable. The Guilt of other men's
Sins will fall heavy upon their heads; and this added to the weight of their
own Sins, must needs sink them deep into Hell. Verily the hottest abode in
everlasting Burnings is due to these execrable Wretches.

USE 5. What abundant Reason have they to admire the Grace of God toward them,
who after a Course of great Sin under Gospel Light, have been Converted!

If Paul, who obtained Mercy, when he sinned ignorantly in Unbelief, found
Occasion to say, The Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant toward him; how
much more does the same Grace abound, when such as under the Gospel have sinned
wilfully after they had received the Knowledge of the Truth, do come
notwithstanding to be Partakers of the Benefit! Sometimes we see surprising
Instances of Conversion in such as have long rejected the Calls of the Gospel,
and run great Lengths in Vice and Profaneness. God has met them in some
affecting Word, or awakning Providence; and made them willing in the day of his
Power. -- Though they have been guilty of very aggravated Rebellion, and
inexculable Obstinacy: Yet the God of all Patience would still pursue them with
Convictions, and not leave them until he had bro't them on to a through
Conversion. When he might have glorified his Justice, and made them the flaming
Trophies of his eternal Vengeance; He yet magnified his Grace, and made them
the bright Monuments of his saving Mercy. How should such admire and triumph in
the Riches of free Grace! They should with grateful Souls ever celebrate the
Kindness and Love of God their Savior toward them in such Language as that,
Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Ghost.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 49. line 18. r. reproved.


