A REPLY TO The Objections made against taking the Small Pox in the Way of
Inoculation from Principles of Conscience.

IN A LETTER To a Friend in the Country.

By a Minister in Boston.

Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one Thing, IS IT LAWFUL TO SAVE LIFE
OR TO DESTROY IT?

Luke 6 9. The Third Impres^ion.

BOSTON: Printed for S. Gerrish in Cornhill, and J. Phillips at the Stationers
Arms near the Town-Dock. 1730.

A REPLY TO The religious Scruples against i^^culating the Smallpox.

To the READER.
THE following Letter was wrote and published more than eight Years ago, when
the Town was in great Distress by the spreading of the Small Pox, which had not
visited it for nineteen Years before; and when the new Method of receiving the
Distemper by Inoculation first began to be put in Practice among us. It soon
appeared that the Hazard of Inoculation was much less than of common Infection,
yet it met with much Opposition. Not a few of those who expected to undergo the
Distemper, had religious Scruples in their Minds against receiving it in this
Way; and such would frequently ask my Tho'ts about the Lawfulness of it, with
all the Signs of conscientious Doubters. It was certainly my Duty to answer
them according to the best Light I had, leaving them then to judge for
themselves. And having often done this in a private Way, to save Time and
Trouble to my self and others, I published the following Reply to all or most
of the Objections I then met with. I endeavored to make the Answers short and
plain, and so to fit them for common Use. The Reoder will easily perceive that
some of the Objections relate to the peculiar Circumstances of Boston at that
Time; and he may, perhaps, think many of them weak and trifling; yet they were
such as were commonly offered, and in such Cases the weakest must be
condescended to.

And now that the Distemper has again visited the Town, and Inoculation is
still in some measure the Subject of Dispute, I have been applied to for my
Consent to another Impression. I know of no Reason to be against it, my Tho'ts
continuing still the same, and my Opinion in favor of the Practice being more
confirmed; And I think I have said nothing that can offend any, but such as
will assume to themselves the Government of others Consciences, or will be
displeased with any thing that does not agree with their espoused Sentiments.

By the best Information I can get, the learned and pious, both Divines and
Physicians, do more and more give into the Practice, here and in England. Soon
after the following Letter was printed here in Boston, it was reprinted in
London, together with the Reverend Mr. Colman's Account of the Method and
Success of this Practice; to which was prefixed an historical Introduction by
the Reverend Mr. Neal. I have the Satisfaction to see that Gentleman say of the
Answers, that He thinks they are clear and solid; but whether they are
sufficient to encourage conscientious and tender Parents, to provide for the
safety of their Children in this Way, must be left (He says) to the Judgment of
every Reader. This indeed is a Case I have not directly answered; nor did I
think there was much Occasion for it. It has always been allowed that Parents
have a Power to act for their Children, in Things wherein their Lives, as well
as other Interests, are concerned, till they are capable to judge and act for
themselves. And I believe few Parents who are clear in it for themselves, will
neglect it for their Children.

I would take this Opportunity, now that the Practice is less formidable than
it was, and considerable Numbers are like to go into it, to caution Persons
against acting rashly and precipitantly in so tender and important an Affair. I
would advise none to go into it without a due regard to their Constitution, and
such a Preparation of their Bodies as the Physician whom they consult may
advise to. Much less should any dare to venture upon it till they have
seriously endeavored by the Help of divine Grace, to get the great Concerns of
their Souls well secured; and till they have such a Satisfaction in their own
Minds, as that they can in this way as well as the other, resign themselves and
theirs, to the sovereign Disposal of Heaven. Notwithstanding the great and
unquestionable Advantage on the side of Inoculation, You may miscarry under it;
and I cannot but expect some wi^^ if any Number take the Distemper in this wa^*
For I don't suppose it agreeable to the W^^dom of God in the Government of Man,
(...) grant any Means that shall be an infallib^^ Security from Death, by such
a mortal Distemper. Therefore look upon your selves (...) passing a Trial for
your Lives, and act accordingly. While you hope to live, be sure prepare to
die. And then, If it please the King of Heaven, let your life be given you at
your Petition, and your Children at your Request!

W. Cooper.
Boston, March 4. 1729-30.
A REPLY TO THE Religious Scruples against Inoculating the SMALL POX. In a
Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
THE new Method of receiving the Small Pox by Incision (or Inoculation as it is
commonly called) has been, you know, the Subject not only of plentiful
Discourse, but of angry Debate, and fierce Contention among us in this Town.
And it is a very unhappy Circumstance attending us here, that almost every
thing that is now done or doing among us, if it be at all of a public Nature,
creates Heats and Animosities. I am in hopes our good People will by and by be
sensible of the Folly and Mischief of this, and come to such a Temper as will
suffer them to differ from one another, without being angry with one another.
In the mean Time, I hope that the People in other Towns where the Distemper has
made its Entrance, will preserve a better Temper, if any among them should put
this Method into Practice.

However some among us may appear against it out of Party and Prejudice, yet
there are many who are conscientiously averse to it, I believe; and, if these
preserve the Meekness of Wisdom, they are (as a very Reverend Person has lately
said of them) greatly to be commended and honored, in that they will not act
against a doubting Conscience.

I perceive that the Scruples and Objections commonly offered by People here,
have such a Force upon your Mind, as keeps you from going into this Method,
which may, by the Blessing of Heaven, be your Safety and Preservation. Now
Friendship, (the Offices of which should be sacredly regarded by us) obliges me
to attempt to relieve and help you, in a Matter wherein your Life, so precious
in it self, and deservedly dear to me, is so much concerned.

For Satisfaction about the Method and Success of this Practice, I refer you to
the Observations on it made and published by the Reverend Mr. Colman; having
been my self a Witness to most of the Instances he mentions.

But that which you want Satisfaction about is, the Scruples and Objections of
a conscientious or religious Nature, which are commonly offered by People
against this Method. These I shall endeavor to answer and resolve, as I am
able, in a few Words; and if they afford you any Light or Satisfaction
respecting the same, you may communicate them to whom you please; and if it
should be thought worth while to make them public, I think none can censure me
for starting out of my Line, or meddling with what is none of my Business, since
the Thing I am now upon relates to Religion and Conscience.

Obj. 1. One great Thing urged against this Practice is, That it is not lawful
for me to make my self sick when I am well. Or voluntarily to bring a Distemper
upon my self.

Ans. To bring Sickness upon one's self for its own sake, is what no Man in his
right Wits would do. But to make my self sick in such a Way, as may prabably
serve my Health, and save my Life, and with such a Design, is certainly fitting
and reasonable, and therefore lawful. This is every Day practiced among People
without any Scruple, in Purges and Vomits, and other Things in medical Use.
Now, if I may lawfully make my self sick by taking something in at my Mouth,
why not by putting something in at my Arm? Or, if I may lawfully make my self
sick for one Day, why not for two Days, or more, as the Case may require? Aye,
but this is to bring a Distemper upon my self. I think it can hardly be called
bringing it upon my self, when the Case is so with me, (not having had the
Distemper, and living in an infected Air) that I cannot but expect to undergo it
in a very little time. I know indeed God can preserve me from the Infection;
but when my Neighbors all round me are visited, I know of no Warrant that any
particular Person has to expect an extraordinary Preservation. He that has no
Reason to think, but that he is as liable to the Small Pox as other People are,
and yet keeps in the Way of it, expecting that God will preserve him untouched,
however some may give it the Name of Trust, and Faith, and the like, I cannot
but look upon it and call it Presumption. In short, I cannot but think, when I
am in such Circumstances, that I can neither rationally not warrantably expect
to escape the Distemper, that it is then lawful for me to bring upon my self a
lesser Degree of it, to prevent a greater. I Will put the Case thus, If I have
not had the Small Pox, it is to be supposed there is in my Body, what I Will call
the Fuel of that Distemper, and there only wants the lighting of a Spark to set
this Fuel on burning. The Air I breath in is full of these Sparks; and I may
expect every Breath I fetch to draw some of them in: If now it appears upon
daily Experience, that by making an Incision in my Arm, and letting the Spark
in that Way, the Fuel will burn with less Fierceness, and consequently Danger,
why may not I take it in that Way? Why must I needs stay till it comes in at my
Mouth or Nostrils, or through some of the porous Parts of my Body? For my Part, I
think the Law of Self-Preservation, which is God's Law, requires me to take
this Method of Safety, whereby (to use the apt Words of another) the Disease
is, through God's common Blessing, happily converted into a Remedy.

Obj. 2. But ought we not to wait God's Time for it?

Ans. I think then is the Time Providence calls me to this Method of Safety,
when I am in imminent and immediate Danger of the Distemper the other Way.
Should any one go into the Practice of Inoculation, out of a Bravado, without
his being in known hazard of the Distemper by the common Way of Infection, I
should not think it warrantable. But then is God's time for us to use Means of
Safety, when we are in apparent Danger of any deadly or destructive Evil.

Obj 3. But it is objected again, Can we not trust God?

Ans. I suppose every Body will allow that the Use of Means is not inconsistent
with Trust in God; and why there cannot be Trust in God in the Use of this
Means, as well as other, I cannot imagine.

Obj. 4. But, it is a going from God to Man.

Ans. How! Cannot we make Use of Men and Means in a Time of Danger without going
from God? If any, like Asa, look to the Physician, and not to the Lord, they
are very irreligious and profane therein. But if any do principally and in the
first Place seek to God, may they not then innocently and lawfully make use of
the best human Help the Providence of God affords them? I must profess and
declare on the Part of many of the inoculated, that they, and their Friends
concerned for them have gone into the Practice, with many Prayers to God, and
other suitable Expressions of Trust and Devotion.

Obj. 5. But still some say, this Practice looks to them, like taking God's
Work out of his Hand.

Ans. Indeed this Distemper can arrest none without a Commission from God. But
yet it is not inflicted by God's immediate Hand; we receive it in a Natural
Way, and by Means of second Causes; and this we do in the Way of Inoculation,
as well as of common Infection. If we have the Small Pox in either of these
Ways, it is still the Work of God: For all the second Causes depend on and act
under Him the first Cause. And, the Application of Means natural for this or
that End, is it not an Application to the God of Nature? If God does not
cooperate by his actual Providence, can the Effect be produced? For, Who is he
that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it not? What is
there of the Hand or Power of Man in this Work, after the Incision is made, and
the Matter applied? The Work is still left with God, and we must wait upon him
for his actual Influence and Blessing, even as the Husbandman does for the Rain
and Sunshine of Heaven, after the Seed is thrown into the Earth.

Obj. 6. But the Small Pox (...) a Judgment of God, sent to punish and humble
us for our Sins; and what shall we so evade it, and think to turn it away from
us?

Ans. I fully agree to it, that it is a sore Judgment of God upon us for our
Sins, which we have much deserved: And it is greatly to be lamented that it has
no better Effect upon the Hearts of Men -- But is it unlawful to use Means for
our Preservation from a desolating Judgment? Especially, if at the very Time
that God sends the Judgment, he shows us a Way to escape the Extremity and
Destruction at least, if not the Touch of it. If a gracious God shows us so
much Mercy as this under the Judgment, does it become us to put it away from
our selves, or rather should we not accept it with Adoring Thankfulness?

Obj. 7. But some have said to me, This Method tends to take off the Fears of
this Distemper from the Minds of People; and who knows of what spiritual
Advantage these Fears might be to them?

In Answer to this I would ask, whether God cannot make the Mercy of their
Preservation and Recovery in this Way, of spiritual Advantage to them also, and
by that lead them to Repentance? And, I truly hope, the Salvation of God
bestowed upon some in this Way, as well as the other, will have a gracious
sanctifying Effect upon them, under the powerful working of the Spirit of
Grace. I was glad to see the serious Frames some of them were in at the very
Time; how much affected they seemed to be with the Favor of God to them; what
a good Profession of holy Resolutions, some of them made. And I would take this
Opportunity to call upon them from God to remember the same, and to be daily
performing their Vows.

Obj. 8. Some object against the Practice because of the unhappy Consequents of
it among us; the Feuds and Contention, Sin and Mischief that it has occasioned.
--

Ans. Of this, I hope, I am a mournful Spectator; And it has made me sundry
times ready to take up that Wish, Oh that I had Wings like a Dove! And I must
freely declare, that I look upon that Spirit of Party and Division that is
reigning among us, to be a sorer Judgment of God upon us, than the Distemper
which has so distressed us. But yet, I am far from thinking that the Badness of
the thing in its self is to be argued or inferred from this Effect of it. For
does not the same Effect attend many other things unquestionably good in
themselves; such as the building of Houses for the Worship of God, the Choice
of Ministers, and of Persons to serve in the State, etc? Nay, the very
preaching of the Gospel in the World, though it be the Gospel of Peace, and the
Gospel of Salvation too, has been, and is, accidentally, through the Corruption
of Men's Hearts, and under the Influence of the envious Enemy of Mankind, the
Occasion of all this; according as our Savior has foretold that it would be,
saying (Mat. 10. 34, 35.) Think not that I am come to send Peace on Earth: I
came not to send Peace but a Sword. For I am come to set a Man at variance
against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother, and the
Daughter-in-law against her Mother-in-law. And a Man's Foes shall be they of
his own House.

Obj. 9. Some frame an Objection against this Practice from the Decrees of God.
They say that God has predetermin'd and fixed the Period of every one's Life,
beyond which nothing shall protract it; so that if his time be come,
Inoculation will not save the Person's Life.

Ans. But this Argument may as well be urged against the Use of all Physic,
nay, even of Food, as against this Practice. I truly believe, as my Bible
teaches me, that God has fixed the Period of every one's Life; but I also
believe, that he has done it with a Regard to Second Causes, or that Course of
Nature which he has established; the End and Me^^s are determined together. He
that has find in his own Counsel how long we shall live, has also determined,
that by such and such Means, our Lives shall be continued to that Period of
Time. And how does any one know, but this is to be the appointed Means, of
their preservation in Life?

Obj. 10. Some have asked, Whether we could assure them their Lives in this Way?

Ans. It is strange that any should put the Question! when there is none can
give the Assurance of this, not in the most innocent and common Means, that are
every Day made use of: Why then should they demand it in this? I know of one
who died under a Vomit. Another, whom I also knew, died by pulling out a Tooth;
the bleeding at the Gums, after the Extraction of the Tooth could not be stopped,
and in a little Time he died. And for my own part, as much as I am now for
Inoculation, I am not at all shy to say, that a Person may miscarry under it:
For God is Sovereign, and will keep us in a Dependence upon him, in the Use of
all Means. But if it appear from Matter of Fact, and Experience truly
represented, that the Hazard in this Way is far less than that of accidental
Contagion, this I conceive is sufficient to legitimate the Practice, and
justify any one's going into it, when there is Occasion.

Obj. 11. But suppose I should die in the Way of Inoculation, would it not make
a dying Hour very dark to me, to think that (...) Means to bring (...) upon my
self?

Ans. This is a Question, I must confess, has been the most affecting to me, of
any that have related to this Matter. But after the most serious Consideration
I have bestowed upon it, I thus think; If a Person should die under
Inoculation, he dies in the Use of the most likely Means he knew of, to save
his Life in a Time of common Peril; he dies then in the Way of Duty, and so in
God's Way: If the Blessing is denied, he must humbly resign this his frail
Life, unto the God of it, Looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
Eternal Life.

Obj. 12. There is one thing more said against this Practice, which I am loath
to take any Notice of, because of the Profaneness of it; but it being so
frequently in the Mouths of People, I cannot but name it. It Is this, That it is
originally from the Devil.

Ans. Sure this is the Effect of Transport! I will return a better Answer to it
than it deserves: If it be a Method of Safety, and a Benefit to Mankind, as
hitherto it appears to be, how came the Devil to be the Author of it? Was he
ever a Benefactor to Mankind? No: But he is a Murderer from the Beginning.
Every Age of the World produces some new and useful Discoveries, in one
Profession, Art and Science or another: And if this Discovery be reserved for
our Day, why should it not be accepted in all Places with all Thankfulness? In
a Word, I cannot but think its Original derived elsewhere, because my Bible
teaches me, that every good and perfect Gift comes down from the Father of
Lights.

As to that Objection, of the Danger of others catching the Distemper from the
Inoculated, there needs only this to be said; That as it is to be supposed, the
Practice will not be gone into till the Danger of Infection becomes common in a
Place, so there may be Methods easily taken, to prevent its hazarding of others
that cannot yet come into it. And I think there ought to be a prudent Care in
this respect.

Thus, Sir, I have freely given you my Thoughts about this Practice, so much
spoken against. I must now leave you to judge for your self, praying God to
show you his Way. If you come into the Practice, I know you will not do it in
carnal Security; for that may provoke God to deny the Blessing. And, if God
please to give it the desired Success, you will religiously give Glory to him,
not only for delivering you from Death, but for saving you from such a Bed of
Corruption, as others have many wearisome Days and Nights appointed them in;
you will think your self the more obliged to thank and praise your kind
Physician, (I mean the Great One) who has wrought your Cure by so gentle a
Method.

I have no more to add, but my Prayers, that you and I may be made meet for,
and, in God's Time, brought safe to, that World, where there shall be no more
Sickness, nor any more Death,; where Sin, and all the penal Consequences of it,
shall be done away for ever. I am,

Your hearty Friend, and Servant.
Boston, Nov. 20. 1721. POSTSCRIPT.
HAving Room left for it, I would take the Liberty to offer to your View, a
Scheme of Principles, (which I take from that truly great Man, and bright
Ornament of the Established Church, Bishop Wilkins) in the same Way and Method
as is used in the Mathematics, consisting of Postulata, Definitions and
Axioms; which are indeed no other than the common Dictates of Nature, and
agreeable to the Reason of all Mankind; and which being applied to Inoculation,
seem unanswerably to justify the Practice, supposing the Probability of Success
to be much greater on that side.

A Scheme of Natural Principles.

Postulatum. Every Thing is endowed with such a natural Principle, whereby it
is necessarily inclined to promote its own Preservation and Well-being.

Defin. 1. That which has in it a Fitness to promote this End, is called Good.
And on the contrary, that which is apt to hinder it, is called Evil. Amongst
which there are several Degrees, according as Things have more or less Fitness,
to promote or hinder this End.

Defin. 2. The lessening or escaping of Evil is to be reckoned under the Notion
of Good. The lessening or loss of Good is to be reckoned under the Notion of
Evil.

Axiom 1. That which is Good is to be chosen and prosecuted, that which is Evil
is to be avoided.

2. The greater Good is to be preferred before the less, and the lesser Evil to
be endured rather than the greater.

3. Such kinds of Things or Events, as will certainly come to pass, may fall
under Computation, and be estimated as to their several Degrees, as well as
Things present. Because when such a Space of Time is elapsed; that which is now
future, will become present.

4. And thus likewise is it for such Things as may probably come to pass.

5. A present Good may reasonable be parted with, upon a probable Expectation
of a future Good which is more excellent.

6. A present Evil is to be endured, for the avoiding a probable future Evil,
which is far greater.

7. The greater the Evil is, the more Reason is there to venture the loss of a
less Good, or the suffering of a less Evil, for the escaping of it.



FINIS.

