THE INTEREST OF THE COUNTRY In Laying DUTIES. OR A DISCOURSE, showing how
Duties on some Sorts of Merchandise may make the Province of New York richer
than it would be without them.

Sold by J. Peter Zenger, near the City-Hall in New York. Price 6 d.

THE INTEREST Of the Country in laying DUTIES.
THE Assembly's ordering their Votes to be printed daily, seems to be an Appeal
to the Public of the Reasonableness of their Proceedings; and at the same Time
seems to demand the Advice and Assistance of any without Doors, who may perhaps
have a better Knowledge of some Things, or have been at more than common Pains
to consider any one Point.

Whenever it has been undertaken to Write upon any Subject, under the
Consideration of the Parliament of England, with the View only to Inform, and
with the suitable Deference that is due to the great Council of the Nation; the
Parliament has been so far from discouraging such Attempts, that often the
Person so doing, has been publicly rewarded for his Pains.

The Methods of Supporting the Government have, in the last Sessions of
Assembly, occasioned more Disputes than have of late been usual in this
Province: And therefore it is hoped, An impartial Enquiry into the Matters in
Debate, may be acceptable, not only to those concerned in the Legislature, but
likewise to every One that has any considerable Interest in, or Concern for,
this Country.

Whoever considers the vast Benefits which arise to Mankind from a well
regulated Society, will be fully convinced of the Necessity of Supporting
Government, and that the Security of our Lives and Properties entirely depend
upon it. We have an Instance in the Indians round us and among us, of the
Miseries they suffer by Want of a Government: How do their Nations insensibly
wast away? and how like Brutes do those that remain live amongst us? We need
not go far neither to see the Disadvantages of a bad Government: Those that
have been in Canada, know the poor slavish State of the common People in that
Country. Since then our Happiness so much depends on the Support of a good
Government, I believe we shall find very few in this Country, that will be
against a sufficient and honorable Support for the Government here: The only
Question is, How it may be effected with the least Burden to the People, or
with the least Prejudice to Trade and Industry.

What I undertake, is to show how this may be done. In the first Place I shall
lay down some Maxims, as the Foundation of the following Essay, and which may
be likewise useful in examining any Proposals made for that End.

The first Maxim is, That we should avoid, as much as possible, to add any
Charge to the Trade, Industry or Labor of the People. This will meet with no
Opposition, for every Man is willing to be free of the Burden. But it is
likewise the Interest of the King and our Superiors, that this be, as much as
is possible, observed: For the less Charge upon Trade, the greater the Profit
to the Province: And the Riches of the King consists in that of his People.

When Trade is eased, the Merchant can carry the Produce of the Country to more
Markets, and sell what he Imports for the Use of the People, at a cheaper Rate;
by which the Province gains doubly.

There ought no less Care to be taken to take off all Burden, if possible, from
the Labor or Manufactures of a Country: For thereby, Industry, from which only
the Riches of a Country are obtained, will be encouraged and increased. By this
Means the Merchant will buy his Goods for Exportation at a cheaper Rate, and
therefore will be able to make more Profit, and be enabled to carry them to
Foreign Markets, which otherwise he could not do. The Merchant will likewise be
enabled to sell what he Imports to a better Advantage; because whilst Labor
and Industry are encouraged, the Country People thrive, grow Rich, and are
enabled to pay the Merchant for what they Buy.

The second Maxim which I propose is, That, if possible, the Support of
Government should be wholly put upon Vice, and whatsoever else is prejudicial
to the good of the Society. By this Means we shall have good Men, Industry,
Trade, Labor and Frugality encouraged; all which increase the Riches and
Happiness of the Place: And at the same Time ill Men, Luxury, Drunkenness,
Idleness, Pride and Vanity discouraged; which only impoverish and make a People
mean and miserable.

This Maxim will be generally agreed to.

The third Maxim which I propose, is upon Supposition, that there is a
Necessity of laying Part of the Burden of Supporting the Government, either
upon the Trade, or upon the Labor and Manufactures of the Province; That it is
more the Interest of the Province that the Charge of Support be laid upon the
Trade, than upon the Labor or Manufactures of the People. This I believe will
meet with more Contradiction than any of the former, because the Merchants will
think that it strikes directly at their Interest; therefore I shall take the
more Pains to set it in its proper Light.

For this End let us consider, That Labor and Manufactures are the Foundation
of all Trade without which it cannot be carried on: And therefore if we should
encourage Trade, we must also for the same Reason avoid burthening that without
which no Trade can be carried on. If We had no Laborers, no Plowing and
Sowing, what could the Merchants do? What could they send out of the Country?
Or to whom could they sell their Merchandise which they Import? How could the
Shopkeepers live, or the Tradesmen? Or how could any of their Families be
supported? In short, what would become of the City of New York, and all the
Riches in it.

Now if a total Suppression of the Labor and Manufactury would certainly
entirely destroy all Trade, whatever lessens the Labor and Manufactures of the
Country, will consequently lessen Trade and the Profits by it: And therefore
any Tax or Burden upon, or Discouragement to the Labor or Laboring People,
will, in its Effects, be really a Hurt to the Merchant.

Let us take a View of the Town and the Traders in it, on one side, and the
Country and Laboring People in it, on the other. We find the Country People
Laboring hard from Morning till Night, from one End of the Year to the other,
earning the Necessaries of Life with the Sweat of their Brows: We find them
poorly Clothed, glad if they can defend themselves against the Cold with the
coursest Clothing. If we go into their Houses, we find no Superfluities, they
are glad of a poor Cottage to defend them and their Children from the scorching
Heats of the Summer, the Dews of the Night and the peircing Colds of the
Winter. Let us View their Table, we shall find there no Dainties, no high
Sauces, no rich Wines; we shall see them sit down with good Appetites, to
Suppaun, to a Dish of Roots, or to salt Beef and Pork: At Night we shall see
them glad to repose their weary Limbs on a hard Bed; and early in the Morning
we find them begin their Labor again.

Now let us return to the Town and see how they live there; if we go in the
Morning to the Markets, there we see the poor Country-Folks sitting with the
choicest Beef, Mutton, Veal, Turkies, Wild-Fowl, Fish, and all the Dainties
which they denied their own Appetites, to satisfy that of the rich Townsmen, in
order to get a little Money to buy Clothes for themselves and their poor
Children. If we look into the public Places, how many Idle People shall we see
walking at their Ease? If we look along the Streets, in what rich Silks,
Head-dresses and unnecessary Clothes shall we see the Women walking from House
to House a visiting, to put off the Time that Idleness makes hang heavy upon
them? If we look into the Publick-Houses, shall we not find in many Places,
People Gameing or Drinking to Excess, spending both their Money and Time in a
Manner wholly Useless to the Good of the Country, if not highly prejudicial to
it? If we can get to the Rich-men's Tables, what a Superfluity of Victuals and
Liquor shall we see there? What Time is spent in Eating and Drinking? If we
take a View of their Houses, How much unnecessary sumptuous Furniture? How much
of the Money of the Country is Expended thus, without any Profit or Advantage
to it? Will then any Fair Equitable Man think that these People should be
excused from Supporting Government, that can bestow so much upon Superfluities,
and the Burden lie upon the Country People who hardly find Money sufficient
for the Necessities of Life.

We find all wise Nations have done otherwise. We find that in England
Laborers and Manufactures, are not only freed from Burdens, or Taxes, but
likewise in many Cases encouraged by Bounties. When Wheat comes under a certain
Price, there is a Reward paid to encourage the Merchant to give a higher Price
for Exporting it. They have found by long experience, the Necessity of
Encourageing Labor: And when the Necessities of the State required heavy
Burdens, they have always spared the Laborers and the Manufactures; and have
laid the Burden upon Trade which could bear it. There is no doubt but that the
People of England do all they can at the same time to encourage Trade, in which
the Nation is so much concerned; and they have made many Trials, and have much
Experience to make them judge what methods are most for the Advantage of the
Country: And therefore we may safely follow their Example, in the methods of
supporting Government; in rather laying the Burden upon Trade, which we also
know can bear it, than upon the poor Laborers who cannot.

It may be Objected to this, that we find in England frequently Land-Taxes;
which may seem contradictory to what has been advanced. To this I answer, That
the Land-Taxes are not employed in the ordinary or common Support of
Government, but only in extraordinary Cases, when there is a War, or the Debts
contracted in time of War are to be paid. But besides, there is a vast
difference betwixt Land-Taxes in England, and the Land-Taxes in this Country;
for in England it is not the Labourer, or Farmer that pays them, it is the
Gentleman to whom the Lands and Rents belong who pays them out of his Rents. So
that even in this Case, the Labourer and the Manufactures are entirely free. In
this Country there are very few or no Rents of Lands: All the Taxes on Lands
fall upon the Farmers, the Laborers and the Manufactures of the Province: So
that if Land-Taxes were constantly used in England, there would not be the same
reason for them here, as there.

Another Argument which has been used against this, is, That if the Duties were
taken off from Merchandise, the Country People would buy what they want much
cheaper: and by encourageing Strangers to come, would sell their Produce much
dearer: So that by paying Forty Shillings, or Four or five Pounds only in a
Year, they would gain Forty or Fifty Pounds, in the Cheapness of what they buy
and the Dearness of what they sell.

To answer this, we need only take notice, who they are that use this Argument.
The Merchants tell the Country People, how they are to buy Goods Cheaper, and
to sell their Wheat and Flower Dearer. Pray when were they found so
Self-deny'd? Their more usual Maxim is, to sell as dear as they can to the
Country People, and to buy as Cheap. But to convince every one, that this is
all Sham; I have heard the following Argument put to some of them. If it be
really so, you Merchants have no Reason to complain of the Duties; if you sell
your Goods so very much Dearer, and buy so much Cheaper, you are great Gainers
by them. The Merchant was not upon his Guard, and he therefore spoke out the
Truth. We do not sell our Goods proportionably Dearer. The price of Goods is
not according to what they cost us, but according to the Market, the quantity
of Goods to be Sold, and the number of Buyers. The Trade in this Place is
over-done, there is too much brought in, and too many Ships to load.

The Country Man that put the Question, then stopped the Merchant and told him,
I Have found you out, you would have us pay the Duties for you, and to buy your
Goods at the same Rate we did before; for if already there be more Goods
brought in, than the Country can take off your Hands, and already too much
Shipping for our Produce, all your first Argument falls to the Ground, of our
buying Cheaper and selling Dearer by the Duties being taken off. Though we be
Poor, we are not such Fools as you think us: You can much better afford to pay
the Duties than we can: You grow Rich, notwithstanding that you pay the Duties,
and we have much ado to support our Families now we are free of them. You want
to increase our Necessities by increasing our Poverty: You fancy thereby to
make us your Slaves and Drudges, and to get all our Lands Mortgaged to you. You
will be mistaken in your Aim; and if you could accomplish it, at last you would
deceive your selves; for you make now more Profit by us, while we have
something that we can call our own. We are Laborious and Industrious while we
work for our selves, but if we were only to work for you, we shall be mere
Negroes, grow lazy and careless, neglect both your Interest and our own. If you
Love your selves and your Country, encourage the Industry of the Farmers, for
it is by them that you get all your Money.

Now I shall apply what has been said in general, to the particular Duties by
which this Government is Supported.

The first is the Duty on Wines and Rum. I think, by all the Maxims
aforementioned, this Duty seems to be the most reasonable: The Labourious
Industrious Part of the Country feel nothing of it; it falls only on the
vicious Part of the People. How many Families have these Liquors ruined? How
many good Tradesmen have by Drinking become Useless to their Country? How much
Idleness and Misspending of Time does it occasion, both in Town and Country?
Certainly there is nothing that prevents Industry and Labor more than
Drinking, and consequently that Impoverishes the Country more: And therefore we
find that very wise Nations have entirely prohibited the Use of Wine and Strong
Liquors. And in this Country, seeing it is only the Richest of the People, or
the idlest and most useless Part of them, that make the great Consumption of
Strong Liquors, it seems highly reasonable that such should bear the greatest
Part of the Burden of Supporting Government; because the Rich are most able to
pay, and enjoy the greatest Benefits from the Government: And such Taxes are a
kind of Punishment to the Idle and Vicious Part of the People.

But even, supposing that Strong Liquors produce none of these ill Effects upon
the Industry and Minds of the People, if we consider the Importation of them as
a Branch of Trade only, which either increases or lessens the Stock of Money in
the Country; we shall find this Trade prejudicial likewise in this Sense.

The Traders to Madera know well enough, that the Goods exported to that place,
are not sufficient to purchase all the Wine consumed in this Country; and that
they are obliged yearly to send Gold or Silver, or Bills of Exchange on England
to balance their Accounts: By which it is evident, that that Trade drains this
Country of so much Money yearly, as that Balance amounts to. If so great a
Loss were occasioned by the Importation of necessary Commodities that we could
not be without, we must then sit down contented, and endeavor to make up our
loss another way the best we could: But as it is otherwise, that the
Importation of so much Wine is prejudicial in it self as before shown; the
Country can never be hurt by any Burdens, Duties or Discouragements put upon
it; but on the contrary they will be an Advantage to it.

And herein we have the Example of England, who have laid a double Duty on
French Wines, because the Balance of Trade must be paid to France in Money;
and only a single Duty on Spanish and Portugal Wines, because those Nations pay
the balance of Trade to England in Gold or Silver: But even this single Duty
is very considerable, amounting to about Five and Twenty Pounds the Tun; as the
double Duty does to Fifty Pounds.

I believe the Country Folks may readily join so far with me, as to Wine; but
they will not so readily join as to Rum, because it is, what they tell me they
cannot be without in their hard Labor, to support their Spirits when wasted
with Sweat in the hot Seasons of Harvest and Hay-Time, and to defend themselves
against the piercing Colds in Winter. To this I answer, that if only so much
were to be used as is necessary for those Ends, a quarter part at most of the
Rum now imported would serve: And though we paid dearer for it, seeing we used so
much less, the Country and every Man in it would be Gainers. But again, I say,
we have no Use for Rum, in any of these Cases; we can make a better Spirit of
Cider of our own Produce, and enough for to serve all the necessary Uses: And
if so, then all the Rum that is Imported, is so much unnecessary Expense to the
Country. How much excellent Cider and Beer do we now make in this Country,
wholesome and generous Liquors, and how cheap are they Sold! What Folly then
would it be in the Countryman to encourage the Importation of Foreign Liquors,
merely to give the Profit that is got by them to the Merchant and to Foreign
Countries? When by the same means, he lessens the Profit of the Industrious
part of our own People, and the Stock of Money in the Country. For it is plain,
that if there were less Wine Imported, we need not send out any Money to pay
the Balance of our Trade with Madera: And if less Rum were Imported from the
West Indies, Gold and Silver would be Imported in its room: And the poor
Countryman would have a better price for his Beer, Cider and Spirits made in
the Country. By this means, these Manufactures would be increased, and our
Skill in making of them would daily grow better and better: So that in time, we
should not only lessen our Consumption of Foreign Goods, which certainly saves
so much Money as they cost, but we would be able to send our Beer, Cider and
Spirits to Foreign Markets; by which we should gain as much Money as their Nett
Proceeds amount to. Upon the whole, I think it is evident to a Demonstration,
that the more Duties we lay upon all Foreign Liquors, the more Profit and
Advantage there is to the People of this Province.

The only Objection that can be made to this is, that the Liquors which are
Imported into this Province, are not all Sold in it; but that we Export a good
Quantity to Jersey, Maryland and Virginia.

Now if the Charges upon these Goods be increased so much, as a heavy Duty
necessarily must do, the Merchants here will lose all the Benefit of that
Trade, because they can be cheaper supplied from other Places that are free of
such Duties. The Truth of this is very certain; and yet I think that it is as
certain, that if by encouraging this Branch of Trade, we cannot do it by any
Methods but what will occasion otherwise a greater Loss to the Province; we are
not to consider the particular Advantage of a few Men in it, but the general
Good of the whole; and that these few men must be contented with that
particular Loss; when thereby there is a greater Advantage to the Country in
general. However, I think there is no Need of making this Supposition, for I am
of Opinion that this Branch of Trade may be saved to the Merchants,
notwithstanding of the Duties laid upon all Foreign Liquors. For Example;
suppose there were a public Store for all Liquors designed to be exported,
into which the Merchants were allowed to put their Liquors, without paying any
Duties, or only so much as the Storeage in like Cases would amount to; and that
this Store were under the Custody of two different Persons, who should have
different Locks and Keys, the one to be appointed by the Government, and the
other chosen by the Merchants: in this Case, whenever the Merchant finds a
Market for Exportation, he may ship off his Goods at as cheap a Rate as any of
our Neighbors: Or if he finds it better to sell what he has, in the Country,
he may take out of this Store what he pleases, upon paying the Duty. To prevent
the Abuses which may happen by Running of Goods, and bringing back what is
exported, the Merchant ought to be obliged to return sufficient Certificates of
their being landed: High Penalties should be put upon the running of such
Goods, and sufficient Rewards given for discovering Frauds. This is the Method
now used in England, as to several Goods, and therefore I propose it as likely
to be a good Method; but perhaps a better may be found.

The next Duty I shall consider is that on Molossus.

As this Duty falls chiefly upon a Commodity only used by the poorer People,
and does not encourage any Vice, as the Foreign Liquors do; but only serves the
poor People to make their course Diet more agreeable to them, and furnishes
them with a small Liquor at a cheap Rate; there is less to be said in Support
of a Duty upon this, than upon the Liquors which Encourage Vice, Luxury,
Drunkenness and Idleness: However, as I think that it is a Commodity we can
entirely be without, and hinders our Increase of a much better Commodity of our
own Country, for all the Uses that it can be applied to, (I mean Honey and
Cyder-sweets) the Importation of Molossus, I think, ought to be discouraged, as
a Thing that occasions a needless Expense to the Country, and hinders the
Increase of our own Commodities: Therefore the small Duty laid upon Molossus,
seems to me very Reasonable and Useful.

The same Reasons prove the Necessity of putting a Duty on the Cocoa consumed
in this Province. As to that which is to be exported again, the Method before
proposed, as to Rum, may serve, if it should be found that it cannot bear the
Duty.

I come now to the Duty upon Salt.

This indeed I think Injurious to the Country, for many Reasons; It falls
heaviest upon the poor People that can least bear Taxes: The Rich People Use
but little Salt Meat: The poor People only live upon Salt Beef and Pork,
besides the Salt they are obliged to give to their Cattle. This Duty likewise
is a considerable Injury to our own Commodities, and the Trade of the Place.
Salt Beef and Pork are a conconsiderable Branch of our Exportation; and nothing
ought to be done which may any way discourage our own Manufactures and
Exportation. It seems therefore to be more reasonable to take off all Duty upon
this Commodity, and to lay it upon Liquors, the Importation of which cannot be
too much discouraged.

The Duty of Tunnage upon Foreign Vessels has had more said for and against it,
than any of the others; and therefore may deserve a more strict Enquiry. The
following Arguments are urged against it.

1st. It discourages Strangers in general to come to our Markets, seeing they
can go to others with less Charge to themselves, where they can buy the same
Commodities.

2 dly. It increases the Dearness of the Freight of Goods; for it is well known
That the Bermudians carry Goods much cheaper than any others, and they being by
this Duty discouraged to come hither, our Neighbors can export their
Commodities to a foreign Market cheaper than we can, and can consequently
undersell us.

3 dly. The Discourageing of Strangers, especially those of the West Indies,
who often send their Vessels to the Main to be repaired, is a loss to many
Tradesmen; the Ship-Carpenters, Joyners, Rope-makers, Sail-makers, Butchers,
Bakers, Tavernkeepers, in short, all Tradesmen and Laborers in the Country
receive, more or less Benefit by every Vessel that comes in.

On the other Hand it is said for the Duty. That if we encourage Strangers to
run away with all, or the greatest Part of the Freight of Goods, we will
certainly decrease the Number of our Shipping and of our Sailors, and will
cause an Exportation of a considerable Quantity of Money, which otherwise would
have been saved to the Country; that is, all the Money which is given to these
Strangers for carrying our Goods to and from the West Indies, or any other
Market, except so much as they spend in the Harbor, which every one knows is a
very inconsiderable Part of the whole: Suppose there are Ten Vessels, or ten
different Freights of Vessels to and from the West Indies, and at the Rate of
six Pounds the Tun, forwards and backwards, and that these Vessels carry one
with another thirty five Tuns, then the Freight of these Vessels would amount
to Two Thousand one Hundred Pounds: It is a Question if these Bermudians,
considering what little they spend and how they victual, that they would leave
much more than the odd one Hundred Pounds in the Place; so that the Country
would actually lose near two Thousand Pounds in a Year, that would have been
saved to the Country if our Merchandise had been carried in our own Vessels. It
is probable that the Merchant-Adventurer may save more to himself by Freighting
of Strangers, than by Freighting Vessels belonging to this Place; but then it
is to be considered, That we are not to have this or that Man's particular
Profit in View, but the general Advantage of the Country. Now it is plain, That
what the Freighter loses, the Owner of the Vessel gets; and when they both
belong to the Place, it is no Odds to the Country, whether the Freighter or the
Owner of the Vessel gets: But when the Vessel belongs to another Country, then
very near all the Freight is lost to this Country.

Now if we consider that all Tradesmen get more Advantage by Building of one
new Vessel than by ten Strangers, Bermudians especially: That if Shipbuilding
were left off or discouraged, we would lose a very considerable Manufacture;
and that the Consequence of it would be, our losing even that small Benefit
which we now think we want, viz. The Repairing foreign Vessels; because the
Ship-Builders, for Want of Encouragement would go to other Places.

If we consider how precarious our Trade must be without Shipping and Sailors,
when we depend entirely upon Strangers, how much this will Weaken our Country
and its Trade; For Shipping and Sailors are the Bulwark of all Maritime
Countries, and the Foundation without which no considerable Trade can be
carried on: Whoever, I say, considers these Things and the certain Loss to our
selves of all the Freight which Strangers make, must be convinced. That it is
much more the Advantage of our Country, to have our Merchandise transported by
our own Vessels than by Strangers. How this can be done, but by a Duty upon
Foreign Vessels, I know not: And therefore, I think it is plain, That the
Tunnage Duty, as it now stands, is extremely Useful to the Place, and the
Trade of it.

We may be still further convinced of the Truth of this, by Observing that all
Trading Nations, both the Dutch and the English, encourage Transportation in
their own Bottoms, and discourage that in Strangers: And therefore we may be
satisfied of its being Beneficial to the Country. They have had a long
Experience; if it had been found prejudicial, they had altered this Practice
long before now: But we find to the contrary, That the Distinction between
their own Vessels and Foreigners is still kept up.

From the whole it follows, That seeing we have the Reason on our Side, and the
Experience of all Trading Nations to confirm it, there can be no Doubt left,
but that it is for the Benefit of a Country to encourage Navigation in their
own Vessels, rather than in those of Foreigners; And that laying
Discouragements upon Strangers for that End is useful.

Now that I have gone through all the material Branches of Trade, on which any
Duties are laid in this Province: I shall in the last Place consider a Poll Tax
that was proposed to be laid on all Negro Slaves in this Province. The
Objections that I think may be reasonably made to this is, That it is a Tax
upon the Labor and Manufactures of the Place, which, I have already shown,
are, by all Means, to be avoided. It is true that it were better for the
Country if there were no Negroes in it, and that all could be carried on by
Freemen, who have a greater Interest in promoting the Good of a Country, and
who strengthen it more than any Number of Slaves can do: But the Want of Hands
and the Dearness of the Wages of hired Servants, makes Slaves at this Time
necessary; and seeing they are necessary, nothing that is necessary is to be
discouraged.

The second Objection is, That it is a very unequal Tax, and which will fall
more upon the Poor and Laborious Part of the Province than upon the Rich and
Idle People; and therefore to be avoided, because discouraging to Labor and
Industry: And for this Reason it is, probable, that all Poll Taxes, of all
Kinds, have been of a long Time disused in England. How many poor People have
their Subsistence from their Slaves? How many People are improving Lands by
their Slaves, which at present bring in no Profit to them? What an Expense is
it to poor People to raise Negroe Children, in hopes to help them in their old
Age who are forced to save out of their own Bellies and off their own Backs to
feed and cloth them? And on the Contrary, how many rich People are there, that
have not above one or two Slaves, and give away their Negro Children, because
they don't think them worth the Charge of raising? Therefore it seems to me
highly unreasonable to lay a Tax upon the Poor and Laboring People, with a
Design only to excuse the Rich.

From all that has been said, I think it is plain, That Duties on Merchandise
have been so contrived, as to promote the Interest of the Country, and are a
Means of increasing its Wealth; and consequently that they are so little to be
thought a Burden on the Inhabitants, that we may justly admire the Wisdom of
the Legislature of this Province, in Supporting the Government here, by such
Means only, as are, at the same Time, necessary to promote the Industry and
Manufactures of the People, and restrain the Idleness, Luxury, Vanity and
unnecessary Expense of the Inhabitants.

Now I have given my Thoughts on these Heads, with a Design to serve my
Country; if I be mistaken, I should be glad that those that know better would
show my Mistakes, and inform their Country of its true Interest. It is every
Man's Duty to do so, and it is his Interest likewise; because every Man will in
some Measure partake in it is Happiness or Misery.

If Truth be on the other Side, it will not require much Labor or Skill to
show it; for Truth is plain, it wants no Cunning or Art to set it forth, and it
is lovely and pleasant.

A Man that discovers any Thing for the Use of his Country, gains the love of
his Neighbors and of his Country; and has much Satisfaction and Pleasure in
his own Mind when he is promoting the Good of it.

I therefore again invite those who think, that I have mistaken the true
Interest of my Country, to show wherein it consists. But if instead of
Arguments, those who are of a contrary Opinion, endeavor to gain their Ends
only by Caballing, Drinking, Treating, and Whispering of Stories, We may
suspect that their Designs will not bear being openly defended: Whereas Truth
is never ashamed of the Daylight: And he that thinks his Cause will bear it,
commonly chooses to support it in the most public Manner.

I hope every Man therefore, having this in View, will lay aside Resentments,
private Interest, and every Thing that stands in Opposition to the Good of his
Country.

FINIS.

