The Usefulness of Revealed Religion, to Preserve and Improve that which is
Natural;

As it was Represented in a SERMON Preached at Colchester, On Occasion of the
Ordination OF THE REVEREND Mr. Judah Jews, Pastor of the Third Society there.
December 17th. 1729.

By John Bulkley, M. A.

1 COR. I. 21. For after that, in the Wisdom of GOD, the World by Wisdom knew
not GOD, it pleased GOD by the Foolishness of Preaching to Save them that
Believe.

N. LONDON: Printed and Sold by T.GREEN. MDCCXXX.

The Usefulness OF Revealed Religion, TO Preserve and Improve that which is
NATURAL.
PSALM LXXIV 20. -- The dark Places of the Earth are full of the Habitations of
Cruelty.


IT seems evident, and I think its generally allowed by Expositors, That this
Psalm treats of the Destruction of the Temple, and of Jerusalem, and the People
of GOD by the Chaldeans, at the time of the Babylonish Captivity: And that its
rather to be looked upon as a Narrative of something past at the time of
composing it, than a Prophecy of what was then to come. And for this reason its
matter of Doubt or Quere among them, who that Asaph should be, that in the
Title of it is mentioned, for its Author, and they seem inclined to think it
was rather one of the Posterity of that renowned Asaph, so often mentioned in
the Scriptures, or some other Person of the same Name, than that Asaph himself,
who its certain lived in David's time before the Building of the Temple, and
therefore long before its destruction by the Chaldeans.

BUT whoever was the Author of it, yet herein we have the very Solemn and
Earnest Application or Address of the Church in Captivity to GOD for Relief or
Help, under the Desolations, Ruins or Miseries bro't on them by those their
Enemies. In doing which she gives us a very Lively and Pathetical description
of those Desolations or Ruins, speaks particularly of the Fury and Rage of
those their Enemies in the Places of their Worship; of their Desacing the
Curious, Carved works of the Temple, and their burning of it, together with
their Synagogues; as also of diverse other Marks or Tokens of Divine
displeasure against them, Arguing or Discovering the dark and difficult
Circumstances they were then under, as may be more particularly seen by a
perusal of the Psalm.

AFTER which, with some other things, for a Close of this her Address to GOD on
this Occasion, she humbly implores his Favor in the following particulars,
viz. That he would not utterly give them up to their Enemies; That he would
remember his Covenant with their Forefathers; That he would plead his own
Cause; And finally, That he would remember and punish their Enemies for all
their reproachful Language

THE Verse of my Text contains the Second Article or Thing here prayed for,
viz. That GOD would remember or have respect to the Covenant with their
Forefathers, together with an Argument to enforce it Have respect unto the
Covenant; for the dark places of the Earth are full of the habitations of
Cruelty Have respect unto the Covenant --. i. e. the Covenant made with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, by which thou did give the Land of Canaan to them
and their Seed for ever. This phrase also may relate to such Promises made by
GOD to their Fathers, whereby he did assure them, that if at any time they were
carried Captive into strange Lands, and did there humble themselves, and pray
and turn to him, that he would me reifully restore them. See Lev. 26 latter
end. And its q. d. Do thou now remember and have respect to these things, and
restore us again to that pleasant and lightsome Land which thou have given to
us.

THIS is what the Church here prays for, and the Argument to enforce this Plea
we have in the words of my Text, For the dark Places of the Earth are full of
the Habitations of Cruelty. In which simply Considered I may Observe to you two
Things, Viz.

(1) THE Subject or thing spoken of, viz. The dark places of the Earth: In one
of which they were now Captives, and where Ignorance, Confusion and all the
works of Darkness did abound. By which Places its evident (from the tacit
Opposition there is in the words between them and that Land of light to which
she prays to be restored) must be intended such Places of the Earth, as were
not Enlightened by Divine Revelation, as the Land from which they were carried
Captive was: Such Places as on which that Dayspring from on high had not
risen, or visited; which GOD had not taken into the Relation of an External
Covenant, and were not favored with the Privileges and Blessings of it; which
then was the Condition of far the greatest part of the World, as well as at
this day.

(2) WE have in the words something asserted of them, viz. That they were full
of the Habitations of Cruelty. Hereby intimating how miserable the Condition of
those Places, or of such as were in them, was, q. d. These Places of the Earth
are full of Murders, Bloodsheds. Violence, Injustice, Oppression, Tyranny, etc.
The very law of Nature is almost utterly Obliterated in the hearts of men, and
there is little to be seen even of the things which that teaches and requires
of them. This is the Character the Captive Church gives of those Places of the
Earth in that day or time, and very agreeable it is to the Character the
Apostle ( Romans 1) gives of the Gentile World in his time, and may now in our
Day be given of it. And it suggests to us this truth for our present
Consideration and Improvement. Viz.

Doct. THAT revealed Religion is the great means to Preserve, Cultivate or
Improve Natural Religion in the World.

THIS is a natural and easy deduction from the Character the Church here gives
of such Places of the Earth, as GOD in Sovereignty had left to the Instruction
and Guidance of the unwritten Law of Nature only, and had not favored with the
Blessing of revealed Religion, or his written Word.

AND in speaking to this Truth, I shall essay these three things, viz.

I. TO show what is intended, or we are to understand by Natural Religion. II.
WHAT we are to understand by Revealed Religion. And, III. TO Evidence what is
here asserted, viz. That the Latter is the great means to Preserve, Cultivate
or Improve the Former.
I. WITH Relation to the first Thing, viz. Natural Religion. You may take this
short Definition of it, viz. That it is that Faith and Observance or Obedience
which Nature, or Natural Light teaches men. By Nature here I would not be
understood to intend simple, uninstructed Nature, but Nature or Natural light
under its utmost improvement by Contemplation or Study of the works of GOD in
Creation and Providence, those common discoveries he makes of himself and will
to all mankind. That Faith and Observance or Obedience, which Nature thus
instructed or improved teaches any, is what I here intend by Natural Religion.
Natural Religion, as well as that which in Revealed, objectively taken,
consists of its Credenda and Agenda, i e. Of things to be believed and things
to be done, and by Consequence, subjectively taken, includes in it Faith and
Observance, or Obedience as well as the other; and indeed a considerable part
(yea, may I not say, the main part) of the Faith and Obedience of Revealed
Religion (largely taken) is Primarily and Really no other than the Faith and
Obedience of Natural Religion.

More Particularly here,

1. NATURAL Religion includes Faith in it. There are sundry Doctrinals, or
Articles of Faith, yea and of the Christian Faith too, largely taken, which
Nature teaches the belief of, this in Particular, is the Case with sundry of
its Doctrines relating both to GOD and Ourselves Christianity or Revealed
Religion contains a Doctrine concerning GOD, a Doctrine including in it many
things to be believed concerning him. But how many of them, are no other than
what Nature teaches the belief of, and which we should or might have believed,
had we never been assisted by Supernatural Revelation, or been left to the only
Instruction of Natural light, employed in the study of that common discovery
GOD makes of himself, in his works to all Mankind? This is the Case not only
with his Existence, or Being, but also diverse of his Perfections or
Attributes, such as his Eternity, Unity, Omnipotence, Wisdom, Goodness, etc.
which Perfections are so Legible in his works, that he that could not have seen
them there, or some of them at least (had he not otherwise Revealed them) might
have justly been pronounced Blind and Stupid, even to the degree of brutal
Creatures themselves. Consonant to this the Apostle ( Romans 1.20.) tells us of
these invisible things of GOD, that they are clearly seen, and to be understood
by the things that are made, without the help of Supernatural Revelation; and
accordingly were seen, understood and believed by many in the Gentile World, as
is evident from what we have of theirs in our hands.

THE Case is the same with sundry Doctrines, or Articles of the Christian
Faith, relating to Ourselves: In Particular those Great and Fundamental
Articles of it. viz. The Immortality of the Soul, and the reality of Reward, or
Punishment in the Future Life, according as men demean themselves in this.
These also are Doctrines which the Gentiles that had only the unwritten Law of
Nature, did believe, and have taught us. Cicero speaking of them, tells us they
were Doctrines handed down to his time, from all Antiquity. And hence as on the
one hand, we find in their writings an Elisium or Paradise, i. e. A Place of
pleasant and delightful Fields and Walks, (as they conceived of it) into which
they believed the Souls of just men went after their departure hence; so on the
other a Tartarus, which they believed to be as one says, Career Paenarum
infernum, i. e. A Place or Prison, where the Souls of the Wicked are Coufin'd
and Punished in the Future Life.

2. IT Consists of or includes Observance or Obedience in it: or there is an
Observance or Obedience which Nature teaches. Of this we are assured by the
Apostle Paul, as well as otherwise, when he tells us of the Gentiles, Romans 2.
14 That though they had not the written Law, yet did by Nature the things
Contained in the Law. Though many among them holding the Truth in
unrighteousness, did not do those things, but lived in a sinful Neglect of
them, or at least many of them, as he shows us chap. 1. Yet with others the
case was otherwise, they showed the work of the Law written in their hearts, by
observing or doing the Main, Substantial parts of the Obedience required in it,
at least as to the matter of it.

MORE Particularly here, That Observance or Obedience included in Natural
Religion, or which the light of Nature teaches, relates either to GOD,
Ourselves, or our Fellow Creatures. With relation to GOD it teaches that first
and great, and Comprehensive Duty of the Law, viz. The love of GOD, to love him
with all the Heart, Soul and Strength. It teaches the Fear of GOD; to hope and
trust in him, to Pray to him, and be thankful for his Mercies. Hence we find
the neglect of these things in those Gentiles spoken of, Romans 1. mentioned as
the Reason why the wrath of GOD came upon them ver. 21. Because that when they
knew GOD, they did not in, or by these things Glorify him as GOD. With relation
to Ourselves, it teaches the duty of Self-love, together with such Virtues as
are the Natural Expressions of it. And with relation to Others, the Relative
Duties falling under that Justice and Charity that are the sum of the Second
Table. In which things, be it spoken to the shame of us Christians, many in the
Gentile World have much excelled or gone beyond the most of us. That these
things are but several parts of that Observance or Obedience which Nature
teaches, is evident from that inward Testimony of Conscience, either Approving
and Justifying, or Condemning, the Apostle assures us such of the Gentiles, at
least as were not of depraved Minds and Consciences had Experience of,
according as they either did or neglected them. Romans 2.

IT must be confessed, that many things are to be met with in the writings of
diverse Heathen, Repugnant to what I have now mentioned, as the Religion of
Nature, as might he easily shown: But this no more proves it not to be so, than
that there were in the Gentile World, none whose Minds and Consciences were
Depraved and Vitiated. And from this short Account now given of it, it is
evident that Revealed Religion or Christianity, as we commonly call it, taken
in its full Extent or Latitude, is as to the Main, Substantial Parts of it, no
other than Natural Religion, as will more fully appear by the Account I shall
give of it, which is the Second Thing proposed, and I now come to.

II. AS for Revealed Religion, you may take this Account of it, viz, That it is
that Faith and Observance which is taught in the Scriptures or word of GOD.
This is a Revelation superadded to the light of Nature, and as Natural Religion
is that Faith and Observance which Nature teaches, so Revealed Religion is that
Faith and Observance, which is taught and recommended to us by this Divine,
Supernatural Revelation. From whence its evident to every one that knows what
the Faith and Observance taught us in the Scriptures is, that Revealed
Religion, or Christianity, as we commonly call it, is not a thing altogether
different from Natural Religion, but Contrarily that its very much one, and the
same thing, as I but now hinted: As to a main Part of it, no other than Natural
Religion reinforced, and improved by Divine Revelation. But yet, though this be
the Case with many things in it, yet not with the whole; things of this Nature
are not the whole of what is intended by Revealed Religion; but besides them,
there are included in it matters both of Faith and Practice, which Nature makes
no discovery of. Nature though it teach many Articles of the Christian Faith, yet
not all. Though it teach the Existence or Being of GOD, yet not the manner of his
Subsistence, or that he is Three in One, and One in Three. Though it make some
discovery of Sin to Men, yet as it gives no intimation of the true Origin of
it, so neither of the way of Redemption, or delivery from it. The whole
Doctrine of the Gospel relating to this mystery of Godliness, (I mean the Way
or Means of our Redemption from Sin and Wrath) is wholly Supernatural, and
Nature gives no intimations of it. The Determination or Appointment of this way
of our Redemption, was one of GODs Prerogative, Sovereign Acts, the effect of
his Sovereign Will and Pleasure, and what has no Connection with any thing in
Nature, and what therefore cannot be deduced or argued from it. Consonant to
this we find nothing of these things in the Theology of the Heathen. And the
like may be said concerming the Resurrection of our Bodies at last, and their
Reunion with our Souls; and many other Articles of the Christian Faith,
concerning which its equally silent.

AND the case is the same with diverse things of a practical Nature, included
within the compass of Revealed Religion; they are things which Nature after its
best and utmost Improvements is wholly a Stranger to. Of this Nature is the
Duty of Believing in CHRIST for Righteousness and Life, the Duty of offering up
all our Prayers and Services to GOD in his Name, with a relyance on his
Mediation for the Acceptance of them.

THESE are Duties purely Evangelical, beyond the utmost Efforts of Nature to
make any discovery of, and of which therefore we must have for ever remained
Ignorant, had not Supernatural Revelation made them known to us. And the same I
may say concerning the Duty of Sanctifying the Lord's Day, together with the
Rituals of Positives of that Instituted Worship, an Attendance on which GOD has
made a main part of it. Nature makes no discovery of these things. However
these and such like things, together with those mentioned under the former
Head, are what is here intended by Revealed Religion.

III. I come to show that Revealed Religion is the great means to Preserve,
Cultivate or Improve Natural Religion in the World. And it might Suffice for
Evidence of this, only to say, That this is the Mean which the Infinitely Wise
GOD in all Ages has made use of for this End. Revealed Religion, as it has ever
been One and the same in all the substantial parts of it, so has there not been
any Age or Day since there was a Church on Earth, in which it was without it,
though the way of Communicating of it in different Ages has been Various. GOD
Spoke or Communicated this Rule the Apostle tells us, Heb. 1.1. in diverse
manners to the Fathers, yet the Thing Spoken or Communicated was Ever, in all
the Essentials of it, One and the same, exactly agreeing to the one and only
Archetype or Idea of Divinity that Eternally was in the Divine Mind.

BUT for a more full Illustration of it, I shall Endeavor to make Good these
Two Propositions, viz.

I. THAT there is nothing in Revealed Religion that can any way Hurt, Prejudice
or Hinder that which is Natural. II. THAT it is every way Calculated, Adapted
or Suited to the Preservation and Furtherance or Improvement of it.
Prop. I. THERE is nothing in Revealed Religion that can any way Hurt,
Prejudice or Hinder Natural Religion. Were there any thing of this Nature in
it, this as it would be a just Exception against it, so what at once would
Overthrow what I am now in the proof of. There is no Opposition or
Inconsistency in any, either of the Doctrines or Precepts of the Word of GOD
with those which Nature Teaches. Supernatural Revelation does not in any thing
contradict right reason; for any so to assert were to make the Most High
Inconsistent with Himself. Revealed Religion, or the Word of GOD, contains,
indeed, Doctrines and Precepts diverse from those which Nature teaches, (and
which Surpass its Comprehension) but not Opposite to them, nor such as can in
any wise hinder us in our Belief and Observance of them. Though it tells us that
GOD is One in a manner to us Inconceivable, yet, that he is but One still; One
Simple, Undivided Essence. Nor does it teach us any thing concerning Him
tending or leading us to think or believe otherwise of him, to conceive of him
as One not clothed with those Perfections, which Natural light or reason
Contemplating his Works assures us he is clothed with: But contrarily what
Perfections righ. Reason contemplating him in the Glass of his Creatures and
Works, sees to be in him, the same does Revealed Religion, or Word of GOD,
ascribe or give to him, that same Eternity, Insinity, Wisdom, Power and
Goodness, that are so Legible in his Works to all Wise observers of them. In
like manner, Those other Doctrines of Revealed Religion, viz. The Incarnation
of the Second Person, in the affair of our Redemption, and the future
Resurrection of the Body, though they contain things inexplicable by us, and
which surpass our Conception; yet as none can say there is any inconsistency in
them with any article of Faith which Nature teaches, so all those that are wise
will say there is not more of Mystery in them neither than in diverse of the
other.

THE case is the same as to things of a Practical Nature in Natural Religion:
No Doctrine of the Word of God is of that Nature, as that it can have any ill
influence on them, or any way prejudice them. Those purely Evangelical
Doctrines of it that open to us the way to Pardon and Life, though they are, as
was before observed, what Natural Religion is utterly a stranger to (and direct
us to seek those things in a way, or by means different from what that does)
yet cannot in the least prejudice or hinder us in any Duty it directs us to for
the same end; and that because there is no Duty required by it for this end,
the necessity of which for the same is not taught in those Doctrines of the
Gospel. It were easy to show this in a detail of the particulars on both sides,
but its needless, since the Apostle Paul assures us of it, when he says, Romans 3
31. of these Doctrines of Faith I am now speaking of, That they do not make
void that Law that is the sum of Natural Religion, but on the other hand
Establish it. In a word, What I have said of the Doctrines of Revoal'd
Religion, may with equal truth be said of its Precepts or Duties; there is no
inconsistency in them, with any Precept or Duty of Natural Religion, or any
thing of a tendency to prejudice our due Observance of them.

Prop II. It Is every way Calculated, Adapted or Suited to the preservation and
furtherance or improvement of it. This will be evident when these four things
are considered, viz.

1. THAT it contains all the Truths of Natural Religion. 2. THAT it
Illustrates, Explains and Improves them. 3. THAT it Corrects all the Errors and
Corruptions that with or among any have Crept into it. 4 THAT it improves its
Motives and adds to them.
1. Revealed Religion, or the Word of God, contains and re-inforces all the
Truths of Natural Religion. So far is it from having any thing inconsistent
with any of them, that it contains them all, and re-inforces them, be they of a
Doctrinal or Practical nature. I have already observed that Christianity or
Revealed Religion, taken in its full Extent, is as to a main part of it no
other than Natural Religion, the Religion which Nature teaches adopted by the
Gospel and made a part of it self. And this we may say of the whole of Natural
Religion, all its Doctrines and Precepts, the Gospel has adopted them all, and
accordingly teaches them, and urges a Faith and Observance of them as necessary
in every Christian. And this Consideration (by the way) as its an Evidence of
the suitableness of Revealed Religion, for the Ends to which its here said to
be proper, and bespeaks the peculiar Excellency of it (since the same cannot be
said of, perhaps, any other Religion in the world) so is it all the same time a
strong proof of its Divine Original. Nor need we any further Evidence of the
Falseness of any pretenses the Alcoran of that grand Impostor (Mahomet) makes
to this than its teaching things Repugnant to the sincere and pure dictates of
Nature: Hereby it assures us it never came from Heaven. No Institution of this
sort can do so; for GOD is the Father of Natural Light, as well as that which
is Supernatural, and he cannot contradict himself.

BUT otherwise it is with that Religion of which I am now speaking: There is no
truth of a Doctrinal nature, be it concerning GOD or ourselves, contained in
Natural Religion, which this does not contain and teach too, nor any Duty that
Enjoins, which this does not Enjoin too. Does that teach the Being of GOD, the
Unity of his Essence, this does so too. There is one God, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2 5. i. e. there is but one. Does that teach his Eternity, or Existence
before all time and things, this does so too. That he is the King Eternal, 1.
Tim. 1.17. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had for med
the Earth and the World, even from Everlasting, to Everlasting thou art God,
Psalm. 90.2. Does that teach his Omnipotence, this does the same. Ell and
Shaddai, i. e. the strong God, and God alsufficient, are Names by which he
reveals himself in his Word. And so as to his Mercy, Wisdom, Goodness, etc. The
same is true of all the Doctrines of Natural Religion, respecting ourselves,
and all its Rules for conduct or practice. Here we have the most refined System
of Ethics or Morals: That Sobriety, Temperance, Charity, Justice, Charity,
Humility, Fortitude, Patience, Meekness, and whatever else of this nature,
Natural Religion, either by the remains of the most Polite Heathen, or
otherwise, has recommended and urged, is here taught and urged likewise. It
descends to particulars, and considering us either alone, or as joined together
in Society, or as under the various circumstances of humane Life, or as
disposed of into any of those Relations or Places wherein by Providence we are
made at any time, while here, to stand; And whatever Virtues or Duties in any
of those circumstances or relations, Natural Religion recommends and enjoins,
the same does it enjoin likewise. Now it being thus with Revealed Religion, it
cannot be otherwise than proper for the ends mentioned, inasmuch as its hence
evident that by it Natural Religion, in all the parts of it is recommended to
us with an additional stamp or impress of Divine Authority upon it.

2. IT Illustrates and Improves them. The truths of Natural Religion are by it
delivered to us with an illustration and improvement beyond what the light of
Nature in any, or the Pagan Theology were ever capable of. This will be very
evident on a brief review of some of them. And I Will instance here in its
Doctrine concerning the Divine Perfections of God. Every one must confess that
the truths of Natural Religion falling under this head, are much illustrated
and improved in the Sacred Pages of Revealed Religion, when we have them all
not only asserted there, but those Perfections they ascribe or give to God
represented or set before us as transacting or doing many wonderful works in
Providence; Works in the performance of which the most High published his
Praise, got to himself a Name, and became dreadful even among the heathen, Mal.
1.14.

NOT to mention others of his wonderful works recorded in his Word, with what
an illustration do the truths of Natural Religion concerning the Wisdom, Power,
Justice, Goodness of God, etc. appear, when we there view those Perfections
transacting, i. e. contriving and accomplishing the glorious design of man's
Redemption? This was the result of nothing less than an infinite Wisdom and
Goodness, and an affair in contriving and accomplishing which, as there was a
concurrence of these and other Perfects, so in nothing do they appear so
glorious as in this; nor are we by any thing else so much assisted in forming
just conceptions of them. In this affair we have, if I may so speak, the utmost
stretch of the Divine Wisdom and Power: Here the far distant terms of Infinite
and Finite, Eternal and Temporal are bro't together; GOD is made to become Man,
the Eternal Temporal, Life to Die, and by Dying to give Life to the World; And
without Controversy, GREAT is this Mystery of Godliness. Nor is this the only
way by which Revealed Religion illustrates and Improves these truths of Natural
Religion, and assists our Conceptions of these things, as it were easy to show.

I may instance again in the Doctrines or Truths of Natural Religion relating
to the Soul, its Immortality and a Future State. This I mentioned before as one
thing intimated or taught by the light of Nature, and accordingly find
Intimations of it in the writings of the Heathen. But with how much obscurity
and darkness are the Truths of this Nature attended, as they are delivered to
us by them! And into how much a clearer Light are they brought by the Doctrines
of Revealed Religion! The Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy 1, 10. That Life and
Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel i. e. The Future State of
Immortality, and the Good and Evil things of it, or what the Condition of Souls
there is. And certain it is, that by the Gospel those things are bro't into a
much clearer Light than ever they were before, by the Doctrines of the wisest
Heathen concerning them, or can be by any Essays of mere Natural Light or
Reason in any, though never so much improved. This is true whether we speak with
reference to the certainty of the Thing, or the Condition of Souls there, the
Good and Evil things of that Life or State.

CONSONANT to what is now said; with relation to the Reality or Certainty of
the thing, it is observable that though the Heathen have generally in all Ages
agreed in discovering such Notices of it, and such degrees of Faith respecting
it, as will bear me out in Ranking it among the Articles of Faith delivered by
them to us, yet as some of them (and they of the Wisest and most Learned among
them too) have denied it, so others have spoken of it with much of doubting and
hesitancy. Thus, for instance, the learned Cicero, speaking of the hope of good
men in the future life, calls it, Futurorum quoddam augurium saeculorum, i. e.
A surmise or dream of future ages. And elsewhere having cited the different
Sentiments of the Philosophers about it, he concludes thus, Which of these
Opinions is true, some God must tell us; which is most like to truth, is a
great Question. And Socrates too even at the time of his death, spoke of the
good things of that life or state, not without suspicion or doubt about the
reality of them. I hope, said he, to go from hence to Good Men, but of that I
am not very Confident: Nor does it become any wise man to be Positive that so
it will be. I, says he, must now die, and you shall live; but which of us is
in the better State, the living or the dead, God only knows. Nor is it strange
they should do so, since Natural Light after its utmost improvement could not
furnish them, (nor indeed can it any Man) with those Mediums to bring this
matter into that light and certainty that Revcal'd Religion furnishes us withal.

IN like manner, as to the Nature of that State, the Good and Evil things of
it, or the Condition of Souls there, they were much in the Dark, and speak with
great Obscurity. What in particular the Felicity of Good Men there is, they
tell us not; and as to the Evils or Punishment of the Wicked there, the Dreams
of their Poets of A Styx and Tartarus, are the only Accounts they give us of it.

BUT now Revealed Religion has Illustrated and Improved these Discoveries of
the Pagan Theology, bro't these things out of their Obscurity, and set them in
a clearer light.

IN a word, What I have said of these Doctrinal truths of Natural Religion, is
equally true of such as are Practical; they are by Revealed Religion set in a
much clearer light; greatly illustrated, explained and improved, beyond what
they are in the Morals of the most Polite Heathen: As it were easy to show in
many particulars of them. But,

3. IT corrects all the Errors and Corruptions that with or among any have at
any time crept into and mingled themselves with it. Natural Religion considered
under its Various Forms and Adulterations in the Gentile world, though it
retained some strictures of Truth, yet was so blended with Error and
Corruption, as to render it not only most dishonorable to GOD, but prejudicial
to the Virtue and Felicity of Mankind. As in Doctrine it contained many things
most absurd and repugnant to the Faith of Revealed Religion, so in Practice as
many, to the holy Rules or Precepts of it. I might not stay here, were I able,
to give a Recital of them; (and indeed Nature recoyls at the thought of it) but
must only say in short, That as we have a Specimen of them, ( Rom 1. latter
end,) So such a Medley of Error and Corruption was it, that as many of the
wiser among themselves were ashamed of it, so the only Evasion those
Philosophers had, who undertook the defense of it against Christianity, was to
expound it by Allegories Nor is it strange it should be so, when its considered
on the one hand, what degeneracy and folly Miserable man is capable of, and on
the other, that it had no better Light or Guide than depraved Reason in fallen
man, and that those who were the Authors or Inventors of it, were Either men of
design, who Established themselves in their Power and Authority by it, as Numa;
Or men of Vice, Fancy and Fiction, as the Poets.

BUT as for all such things whereby it was adulterated, corrupted and disguised
in any part of the Gentile World, they are corrected, their folly and impiety
exposed, and its truths Rescued from all impure Mixtures by the better light of
revealed Religion.

Finally,

4. IT improves the Motives of Natural Religion and adds to them. Natural
Religion has its Motives as well as Revealed. That Religion that Suggests to us
the being of God, with many of his perfections, our Relation to him, dependence
on him, and that all we have is from him; and not only so, but at the same time
(as we have seen) discovers to us a future life or state of reward or
punishment of things done in this: This light I say that discovers these things
to us, as it cannot but at the same time discover much of the Duty lying on us,
so also present us with so many moral Reasons or Arguments, strong and
powerful, to a careful discharge of it. Accordingly we find that even in the
Gentile world it self, under all its Deprevations or Corruptions there, it was
never wholly without them: Nor could it be as long as any strictures of those
truths were retained by it. But now how much are those moral Reasons or
Arguments improved by the better discoveries of Revealed Religion! In or by
this we have the Being of God, His Perfections, our Relation to him, Dependence
on him, his tender Compassions toward us, etc. set before us in another light
than Natural Religion was ever capable of, and by Consequence the moral Reasons
of Obedience presented to us, with an additional Force or Strength.

I need not illustrate what I now say, it being known to every one not a
stranger to it. Nor is this all it does of this Nature or Tendency, but over
and above these motives, it suggests or adds others of its own: Considerations
or Arguments arising from other Heads or Topics, which Natural Religion is
wholly a stranger to, as every one also must know that is in any measure
acquainted with it.

NOW these things being so, it must needs be that Revealed Religion is an
excellent means to Preserve, Cultivate, or Improve that which is Natural; or
that its every way well adapted or preportioned to this good design or end.
That which Reveals and Reinforces all the truths of Natural Religion, that
illustrates and improves them, that rescues them from all impure Mixtures, that
improves all its Motives and adds to them, must needs be so.

TO all which I may now add this one Consideration further, viz. That the
Public Instituted Worship of the Gospel or Revealed Religion, is as to the
main parts of it, materially Considered, no other than the worship of Natural
Religion: That worship of GOD which Natural Light or Conscience teaches all
men. This is true of the whole, those Rituals or Positives of it (Baptism and
the Lords Supper) only excepted. As for the rest, its no other than several
Acts of Natural Religion or Worship, under that Restriction of certain positive
Laws, determining the time and manner of performance, which is but necessary to
the orderly and due Performance of them.

EVERY one will see this that does but turn back to the account before given of
Natural Religion, and at the same time considers what this Instituted Worship I
am now speaking of is, as to the main parts of it.

AND agreeable to it, that great light of the Church, Dr. AMES thus defines it,
viz. That it is a Medium Ordained by GOD for the Exercise and Improvement of
Natural Religion or Worship. Vid. Amesii Medul. Theolog. page 287.
I mention this in this place, not only for further illustration of this
Argument, but as what I think is proper for and deserves the particular
Consideration of all, and more especially such as are Enemies, or but too
indifferently affected toward the Public Instituted Worship of the Gospel, and
many ways express that its a thing of little Esteem or Price with them.

AND I would on this occasion entreat such to Consider how unable they are to
excuse themselves in these things. Sirs, What Apology can you make for your
selves? What, does not Conscience tell you the truth of what is now asserted,
that this worship you thus Slight, Despise and Neglect, as to all the main
parts of it, materially Considered, is no other than Natural Worship, that
Worship which Nature tells you is intrinsically Good, and therefore of moral
and perpetual Obligation? I am sure it does if it be not utterly Depraved and
Vitiated. And it being so, will not thy heart condemn thee for these things,
and what Confidence can thou have toward GOD when he shall come to enter
into judgment with thee.

BUT I come to the Improvement of the Doctrine, which shall be in a few
Inferences from it. And,

Inf. 1. IT Suggests to us the Excellency of the Word of GOD or Christian
Institation. What matter of Thankfulness the Gift of it is, and with what
Expressions of Affection and Regard it deserves to be received and entertained
by every one. This is the Revealed Religion (Objectively taken) I hay been
speaking of, and although there are many considerations recommending and
bespeaking its Excellency, yet among them all there is none perhaps that more
does so than this now before us. This must be evident to every one that
considers either the Intrinsic Excellency or Goodness of Natural Religion, or
how much all our Interests, present or future, depend and are embarked upon
it. There is an Intrinsic or Inherent Goodness in all the parts of it,
Doctrinal or Practical. This cannot be said of every thing in Revealed Religion,
there being some things in it concerning which we may say, they are not
intrinsically Good, or have no Goodness in them Antecedent to their being
matters of Divine Positive Command or Institution. They are not in themselves
Good and therefore Commanded, but Good only because Commanded, what of Goodness
is in them results from the Command or Institution only.

BUT otherwise it is with the several parts of Natural Religion, there was a
Goodness in them Antecedent to the Command, and which was the reason of it.
This is the case, I say, not only with such things in it as are of a Practical
Nature, but also such as are Doctrinal or Speculative. There is an Intrinsic
Goodness or Excellency in them, as they all tend to advance our Nature, to make
us better, more wise and good, and Consequently more happy; are not proper only
to Gratisy a vain and useless Curiosity, but to excite in us the Love of GOD,
and a concern for our own Happiness, as every one cannot but see that considers
what they are.

Again, WHEN its considered how Essential Natural Religion in all the parts of
it is to all our Interests, Present or Future, it further bespeaks the
Excellency of the Christian or Revealed Religion on the score of this property
of it mentioned in my Doctrine. Who can pretend, or so much as flatter himself
with an hope of doing well either here or hereafter without it, or in the
neglect of the Faith and Observance of it? To instance in the last only, What
Man is there, who abstracting or separating from is such Duties or Rules of
Christianity as are purely Supernatural, or known by Revelation only, should
make them his only Rule or Guide; who, I say, thus doing could so much as
flatter himself with an hope of doing well hereafter? Be sure if there be such
a man, he must be one of a very depraved Conscience indeed; and every one will
say the hope of such a Person is an hope against hope, an hope without any
Warrant or Countenance from the Word of GOD, yea in direct Opposition to it.
What, can that man that observing only the Rituals or Positives of
Christianity, shall at the same time live in the Neglect and Defiance of those
Weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith, Mat. 23.23. Can such a
Man, I say, do well at last? Has not the Word of GOD told us, (and does not
Conscience assure us of the Truth of it) That all Murderers, Whoremongers,
Liars, Thieves, etc. shall have their part in the Lake that Burns with Fire and
Brimstone? Rev. 21.8. In like manner, as to our Comfort or Wel-being here, how
much is it dependant on this part, or these Duties of Natural Religion? Who
could live in the World, or would so much as desire it, were Judgment, Mercy
and Faith banished from it; and did men universally live in an open Defiance of
them, and the many Relative Duties comprised under those more general heads?
Certainly no man would; for this at once would turn the world into an Hell, and
render it a Place intolerable to be endured or born.

NOW this being the case with Natural Religion, how well deserving of our
utmost Esteem, Affection and Regard must this Institution (I mean the Word of
God) be, and how strange is it that the Deists of our age should seek to weaken
its Authority, and procure its Banishment out of the world, by forming many
senseless Objections against it, as they are wont to do! I must confess I am at
a loss to know what Religion (if any) such men would have. Natural Religion,
rescued from its Errors and Corruptions, its certain they would not; since were
this (as some of them pretend) what they would, they would be more sparing in
their Objections and Invectives against this Institution of Christians; which
has been showed to be so proper a Mean to preserve and improve it. And it seems
evident that either they would have no Religion at all ( would burst all hands
and cast all cords from them) or some Religion opposite to the sincere and pure
Dictates of Nature And doubtless something of this Nature would best suit with
them.

IN a word, of this (I mean the Word of God) may we say, That so many ways does
it recommend it self, and so much consult all our Interests, that were it not
true (as these Men say) yet both the Interest and Wisdom of every Man obliges
him to wish it were; nor can any man have any reason to wish it otherwise, but
his own sin and folly.

Inf. 2. IT being as we have heard, there is little reason to wonder at the
Dark or Dismal Character of the Gentile world given us in the Word of God. This
in part we have in my Text, but more fully, Romans 1. where the Apostle tells us
of the Gentiles, That though they knew God, yet glorified him not as GOD,
neither were thankful. That though they Professed themselves to be wise, yet
became fools and vain in their Imaginations; And changing the truth of God into
a lie, i. e. The glory of the Incorruptible God into an Image made like to
corruptible man, and to Birds and Fourfooted Beasts and Creeping things, they
Worshipped and Served the Creature more than the Creator, who is Blessed for
ever. That for this cause God gave them up to Vile affections, for even their
Women did change the Natural Use, into that which is against Nature. And
likewise also the men leaving the Natural use of the Woman, burned in their
lusts, one toward another, men with men working that which is unseemly, and
Receiving in themselves that Recompense of their Error which was Meet And that
even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them up to
a reprobate Mind, to do those things which are not convenient, Being filled
with all Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness, Maliciousness,
full of Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit, Malignity, Whisperers, Backbiters,
Haters of God, Despiteful, Proud, Boasters, Inventers of Evil things,
Disobedient to Parents, without Understanding, Covenant Breakers, without
Natural Affection, Implacable, Unmerciful, Ver. 22 ad 31. It Is of the Gentile
World the Apostle here speaks; and a very dark Character every one will say, it
is indeed. Well might the Church when it was in Captivity there, complain of
it, and groan under it as an Insupportable Burden; and beg of GOD that he would
have respect to his Covenant, and deliver them from it. How amazing was their
Corruption in matters both of Faith and Practice! And how little to be seen (at
least among many of them) even of the primary and more known truths of Nature,
is hence manifest. Whith relation to matters of Faith or Doctrine the Apostle
says of them ver. 21. They became vain in their Imaginations, or Reasonings.
Some of them denied the being of GOD, others doubted of it, some affirmed there
was but one GOD, others that there was a Plurasity, yea a Multiplicity of them,
which they distinenish'd into various Orders, and assigned them their several
Provinces: Some that acknowledge the Being of GOD, yet denied his Providence;
others who owned his Providence, yet confined it in its exercise, and excluded
many things from the inspection and care of it. Thus Vain were they in their
Imaginations, concerning these things: Nor were they better in things
Practical, as appears by their bloody Spectacles, their humane Sacrifices,
their Feasts in honor of the Goddess Cybele, their Floralia, Bacchanalia,
Saturnalia, etc. in which things their Debaucheries and Lewdness were indeed
too shameful and notorious to relate.

AND if a reason of these things in the Gentile world be demanded, my Text in
short, suggests it, when it sets it forth by the Phrase of the dark places of
the Earth, i e. Those Places where there was nothing of Supernatural
Revelation, or Revealed Religion; nothing but the imperfect light of Nature to
guide and govern men. For this reason it was that there was so little of
Natural Religion to be seen in many of them Its true indeed those abominations
of the Gentiles there spoken of by the Apostle, are mentioned as what were in a
great measure Penal, as Evils they were given up to by GOD in way of Punishment
for their Idolatry. But then if a reason of that ( viz. their Idolatry) be
demanded, it must be Finally resolved into this as one main reason of it, viz
their want of Revealed Religion, or Word of GOD. Hence it was that they changed
the truth of GOD into a lie, changed the glory of the Incorruptible GOD into an
Image made like to Corruptible man, and to Birds and Fourfooted Beasts and
Creeping things.

Inf. 3. IS Revealed Religion a thing of such benign Influence, as we have
heard, on that which is Natural, then how Inexcusable are such Persons
(Favored with the blessing of Revealed Religion) as in whom Natural Religion
sinks or declines and comes behind what is to be found in the Gentile world, or
in persons not so favored. This its certain is many times the case with
persons thus indulged and advantaged. Natural Religion, instead of making those
Advances or Improvements in them that might Reasonably be expected, under the
benign Influences of Revealed, declines or goes back even to that degree as to
come much behind what may be found in persons that have only the light of
Nature to Improve or Cultivate it. And is not this the case with Multitudes
within the Christian Pale in this our day? To their great reproach and shame
may it not be said, that there is more of Natural Religion in some, yea many in
the Gentile World, than in them? More of the love of GOD, and other Acts of
Natural Worship: And more of the Second Table duties both Solitary and Social:
More Temperance, Chastity, Justice, Charity, Unanimity, Peace, etc. than there
is in them. This is an Undoubted truth, how much soever it may be to the
dishonor and reproach of such persons: Yet it being as we have heard its a
Lamentation, and should be for a Lamentation. Christ tells Capernaum, Chorazin
and Bethsaida, Mat. 11. 21 -- 24. That it shall be more tolerable for those
dark places of the Earth, Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrha, in the day of
Judgment, than for them. And Mat. 12 41, 42. He tells the Jews that the men of
Ninive and the Queen of the South should rise up in Judgment against that
Generation and condemn it, etc. And might not the same be said of many in the
Heathen World now, to Multitudes within the Compass of Christianity?

In Particular here.

AS for Ourselves in this Land, is there not reason to fear we are hastening
apace to this state or case? For how does this Main or more Momentous part of
Christianity decline in many among us every day? Yea as for the most of us, may
it not be said that some of the Positives or Rituals of Revealed, Instituted
Religion, or Worship only, are Enough, we are Contented with them, and as for
those more weighty matters of Natural Religion, Judgment Mercy and Faith they
are little regarded by us. And how many in the Gentile world have there been,
and now are, in whom more of these things may be seen than in us? Finally,

Inf. 4. WHAT we have heard Suggests to us the great design of God in Revealed
Religion and the Instituted Worship of it: what it is that he has in View
therein. And it lets us know that the Preservation and Improvement of Natural
Religion in the World, is the great thing he Scopes at in these things. For if
Revealed Religion be so fit and proper a means for these Ends, as we have
heard, then we may well presume this is the great design of GOD therein and in
all the Institutions of it.

AND this consideration furnishes me with proper matter of Address to such of
my Reverend Brethren as are here present on this Occasion. Reverend and much
Esteemed, I am sensible that in what I have said I have gone in somewhat an
Untrodden Path: And perhaps it may be though it by some here present, that the
Argument I have been upon is improper and very aliene from what might be
Expected on such an Occasion as this. However I cannot think it altogether so,
since as its a matter well deserving to be more universally known and
considered by Christians than it is, so furnishes me with fit matter of Address
to you: and suggests to you and me, and all others of our Character, one great
Article of Duty, needful to be observed by us in the whole Course of our
Ministry, viz That therein we take Care to show due regard to the great,
Important matters of Natural Religion, and seek the furtherance of Persons in
them by all the means we are capable of. This is an easy deduction from the
Inference now made of GODs design in Revealed Religion, and the Instituted
Worship of it. For if the Preservation and Improvement of Natural Religion in
the hearts and lives of Men, be his great End therein, then this sure is what
we also in the Course of our Ministry should very much scope at, and lay out
ourselves in. It Is very obvious to every one that reads the Scriptures, that
the things falling under this Head, are there spoken of as of an Importance and
Obligation above others: Those great Duties of Natural Religion, Judgment,
Mercy and Faith are called The weightier matters of the Law. Mat. 23.2^. And
are all along spoken of as what GOD requires above, and are far more pleasin,
to him, than any things in Religion of a Ritual or Positive Nature. Deuteronomy.
10.12, 13. 1 Samuel 15 22. Hos. 6 6. Mic. 6.6, 7, 8. Mat 9 13. Hereby intimating
to us what is now suggested as our Duty. I would not here be understood, to
suggest as if this were to be our only Work in our Ministry, or that we were to
Preach and Press no other Truths and Duties than these No we must Preach and
Press Doctrines and Duties purely Evangelical, as well as those of Natural
Religion. That Mystery of Godliness, the Doctrine of man's Redemption by Christ,
we must handle it in all the parts of it; and thereby let sinners know that
their life is in CHRIST. We must Preach the unsearchable riches of CHRIST; set
before sinners those Treasures of Wisdom and Grace that are laid up in him. We
must preach also Duties of Religion purely Positive: But yet at the same time,
we must not so insist on these things, as to Neglect the other (I mean the
Doctrines and Duties of Natural Religion) and not allow them their due time and
place in our Ministry. Moses must not be divi-from CHRIST, the Law from the
Gospel: Paul as Evangelical a Preacher as he was, yet was far from this. We may
not therefore separate them.

AND unless we take care in this point; we shall in vain attempt the Conversion
of Sinners to CHRIST; these things being of the Essence of every true Convert.
Faith without works is Dead, and let a man's mind be never so well enriched and
stored with speculations in Faith, be they never so curious, yet after all, if
this be all he has, he is so far from being a true Convert or Christian in
reallity, that he is but a wise or learned Fool We must therefore let
Discourses of this nature and tendency have their due time and place in our
Preaching.

I shall conclude this Particular with a passage or two from that learned Man
and good Christian of our own Nation (Mr. Hales) Two things (says he) make up a
Christian, viz. A true Faith, and an honest Conversation: And though the former
ordinarily gives us the Title, the latter is the surer For true Profession
without an honest Conversation, not only Saves not, but increases our weight of
Punishment; but a good Life without a true Profession though it bring us not to
Heaven, yet it lessens the measure of our Judgment; so that a Moral Man, so
called is a Christian by the surer side. And afterward he adds, 'I confess,
says he, I have not made that proficiency in the Schools of our Age, as that I
can see why the second Table and the Duties of it, are not as properly the
parts of Religion and Christianity, as the Duties and Observation of the first:
If I mistake, then its St James has abused me, for he describing Religion by
its proper Acts (or Duties) tells us, That pure Religion and undefiled before
GOD and the Father is this, To visit the Fatherless and the Widow in their
affliction, and to keep ourselves unspotted from the World, so that (says he,)
that thing which in an especial and refined Dialect of the New Christian
Language signifies nothing but Morality or Civility, that in the Language of
the HOLY GHOST is true Religion.

I have not spoken this to instruct, but remind you of what you already know:
it being our duty to assist the Memories as well as the Understandings of our
Hearers.

I have now done with my Text and Doctrine, and shall Conclude with a Word
directed,

First, TO him who is now to be set apart to the Work of the Ministry in this
Place.

Secondly. TO those of that Society of which he is to have the more especial
Oversight and Charge.

Thirdly. TO you of this Society, who are my own Care and Charge. And,

1. I would direct my self to You, Reverend Sir, who are now entering into and
taking on you the Relation and Character of a Minister of CHRIST. And though I
may not presume to act the part of a Teacher to some others here present, yet
doubtless my Years and Experience, if nothing else, will bare me out in doing
so to you. I shall therefore on this Occasion, take the liberty to suggest a
few things by way of Instruction and Direction. And,

TWO things there are which Wisdom obliges every man to be thoughtful about,
whatever Affair it is that at any time he engages in. These are a good
Beginning and a good End: Not only that he may end well, but also begin so too.
For although it be possible for a man sometimes to end well, that makes not a
good beginning, yet it must be allowed that a good beginning is one proper step
to a good end also. And this wisdom as it ought to lie with Concern on the
Spirit of every man in any Affair at any time before him, so ought it more
especially on Ministers in the Affair now before you, since if they end not
well at last, their End is like to be worse than that of other men.

AND as I would hope that these things now lie with Concern on your Spirit, so
if you would not fail of them, then observe the following Hints. Viz.

(1) TAKE upon You the Sacred Character you are now putting on with purity of
Aim or Design. With an eye fixed upon and levelled at those things which every
one ought to have in view in this Affair. You know what these are, and its
needless for me to hint. Let not a Mercenary Spirit, or any base Views now have
any room or place in you. This is hinted by the Apostle 1 Pet. 5 24. -- Not for
filthy Lucre --. Again, (2) TAKE it upon You in the strength of CHRIST, with
humble Suits for his Pardoning Mercy, and with the actings of Faith on him for
Grace and Strength, Direction and Support throughout your whole Course. With
these actings of Faith to enter on the work before you, he allows and
encourages you by that most Gracious and Comfortable Promise, Mat. 28.20. Lo I
am with you always, even to the end of the World. Again, (3) DO it with renewed
Dedications of your self to him, and with Resolutions and Purposes of giving
your self to your Work as far as possibly you can. This you find Enjoined, 1 Timothy 4 15. -- These things are included in a good Beginning, and thus you will
now do if you begin well.
AND if you would End well too, a due observance of the following hints will be
further needful, viz.

[1] GET and keep alive in you a Sentiment of your Ministerial work as the main
thing lying on you, and of main importance to be attended by you, as being of
an Obligation superior to other things. Keep alive a sense of this at all
times. Again, [2] WOULD you End well, then Live much in the View and Meditation
of your End. That time when your work shall be done, and warfare accomplished,
and you must account for it. This was the case with Paul, and by this means he
was much assisted in his work, and unto a good End at last; as appears Act.
^0.24. Let this be much in your view, frequently under your serious
Consideration. Further, [3] SET the LORD always before you. This is a Duty of
very extensive Influence, as being of great advantage in whatever it is that in
any Relation we are at any time called to and do engage in. At no time allow
your self in long intermissions of this Duty; and least of all in times of your
Retirement for your public Appearances. Then you should not fail of bringing
and keeping GOD near to you by Faith. You will find it of advantage both for
Restraint, Motive and Support Ps. 16. [4] LABOUR to be furnished not only with
such good Principles as are necessary to prepare you for times of Trial, but
will be of use to you in the whole Course of your Ministry. By Principles here
I intend not only good Habits seated in the Mind, or Virtues as they are
sometimes called, but such Principles or Maxims Theological (or rather
Ecclesiastico Political) as are useful, like a skilful Pilot, to direct our
way, as well in cases of particular Emergency, as at other times. Of the former
sort are those Cardinal Virtues, Justice, Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, with
Others: And for the latter, I must rather refer you to such Books of
Ecclesiastical Policy as are in the Hands of many, than here particularly to
account for them. Some of these are of a more general Aspect, and will
therefore be of use at all times; others of a more particular, and will
therefore be of more especial use, both to prepare you for and direct you in
those Circumstances of Temptation or Trial, which in one degree or other, are
almost inseparable from the Relation of Ministers. Again, [5] IN the whole
Course of your Ministry, let your Study be more what Duty is, than what the
Event of it may be. This is a Rule well deserving to be Ranked among those of a
Superior Obligation or Necessity. And how often is it that through the want of
a due Observance of it, we go Aside and are Unfaithful in our Work! I know its
wont to be said, Sapiens incipit a fine. i. e. A Wise Man in the Affairs at any
time before him, begins at the End of them, or considers what the Event of them
may be, and is thereby directed in his way; But this (though in the common
affairs of Life, that are not determined one way or other by the Divine Law,)
it may be a good Rule, necessary to be Observed, yet will in no wise hold, when
brought into Religion and applied to things so determined; In things of this
Nature not the Event, but the Divine Law must be our Guide; which we must
Consult and Attend, leaving the Issue to GOD in whose Hand all Events are. [6]
NEVER do any thing as a Minister which you cannot do in Faith. i. e. With a
belief GOD will Accept and Bless it. And if you are duly observant of this
Rule, you will take care to keep close to the Institution, and not do any thing
for which you have not a Divine Warrant. Further, [7] LIVE much upon CHRIST
throughout the whole Course of your Ministry, and be much in those Exercises of
Religion, that are the Expressions of a Faith or Trust in him. Thus Paul did,
Gal. 2.20. And the Life which I now Live in the Flesh, I Live by the Faith of
the SON of GOD. Finally, not to add more,

[8] WOULD you End well at last, then let the Ministry of CHRIST while on
Earth, as far as may be, be your Pattern or Example. Speak and Act and ou all
occasions Conduct yourself as he on the like was wont to do. There are diverse
Examples in Scripture, which being Eyed by us, are proper to assist us in our
Work, and thereby promote a good End at last, but we may say of them all as its
said of the most of David's Worthies, whose Praise is mentioned with this
Dimunition, viz. That they attained not to the First Three. Of all Examples
left on Record in Scripture for our imitation, there is not One that comes up
to this, or is of equal Advantage to the End for which its now recommended. O
how did he Pray, and redeem Time for Prayer! How did he Preach! With what
Authority! With what Energy! Never Man spoke like this Man, say his Hearers.
How Excellent was his Speech and Conversation! Out of his Mouth proceeded none
but Gracious Words. Words proper to Communicate at the same time, both Light,
Life and Heat. How carefully did he embrace all Opportunities of doing Good
both to the Souls and Bodies of Men! What time did he spend in Idle,
Impertinent Discourse, who made the Hearts of those Burn within them, whom he
Occasionally fell in Company with? Luke 24.32 And how did he go up and down
doing Good! And always and only the things that were well pleasing to GOD! Let
HIM be your Pattern, so doing, you cannot fail of a good End at last.
In a Word,

WITH respect to those who now more immediately call you to this Work or
Office, I would say, that as they were and are Mine, i. e. My Care and Charge,
so I do now resign them up, or put them over into your Hands under GOD; And as
Luther Once, viz When making his Will (speaking of his own Poverty, or want of
such Temporal Good things as many others had to leave to their survivours)
commended his Family to GOD with this Significant and Pertinent Prayer, Tu
Domine, Nutri, Doce Serva. So I now commend them to you, desiring yea charging
in the same words (turned to another sense) that you feed them, teach them and
keep them.

2. THE relation I stand in to you of that Society now going off from us,
allows me also to demand your Attention to a few Words, which I Entreat your
remembrance of, as some of the last words, perhaps, you are like to hear from
me, at least, in this wise. And it must suffice to hint here also, Then

(1) ACCOUNT it a Favor that the Kingdom of GOD is coming among you: I mean
the Gospel of the Kingdom, in the Dispensation, Worship and Ordinances of it.
Look not upon these things as the Generality of Men in our Day are wont to do,
but with the same Sentiments the Wise and Good in all Ages have done. What a
raised Esteem have they had of these things, you may see it, Isa. 53.7. How
Beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of him that brings Good Tidings,
that Publishes Peace, that brings good Tidings of Good, that Publishes
Salvation, that says unto Zion, Thy GOD Reigns? Psalm. 27.4 One thing have I
desired of the LORD, says David, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in
the House of the LORD all the Days of my Life, etc. q d. Though I am exercised
with many Troubles, there is but One thing I am very Solicitous about, or
Desirous of, and that is not Victory and Triumph over mine Enemies, not the
Peace, Wealth and Glory of my Kingdom, but that I may not be disturbed in, or
driven from the Sanctuary and Worship of GOD as I have been, but may have
Opportunity of constant Attendance there: (2) LOOK to your Principles, Aims or
Ends, in the Affair you are now engaged in; and take heed of those low, mean
and base Views many are wont to be Influenced by in such Affairs. And as you
ought to look upon the Conduct of the Divine Providence toward you in the
present Day as a Token for good, so take heed how by this means or any other
you deprive your selves of it. Again, (3) LOVE the LORDS DAY and remember to
keep it Holy. There is no Duty more Reasonable than this, and yet there is,
perhaps, none more Neglected. That Man that Loves not SABBATHS in this World,
nor the Duties of them, let him know and consider it, that as he has no just
reason to hope he has Right or Title to the Eternal Sabbatism, or Rest of the
People of GOD in the other World, so shall he never enter into it. (4) REMEMBER
that your time is short and passing every Day: And in the whole of your Conduct
Express and hold forth a sense of it. Live for Heaven every Day, and carefully
embrace all favorable junctures or opportunities to secure the rest of the
Blessed there, and gather fruit unto Eternal Life. I must, says CHRIST, Work
the Works of Him that Sent me while it is Day, the Night comes wherein vo Man
can work. (5) TAKE heed of this Deceitful World, the many Perils and Snares of
it; And particularly those seemingly Innocent and Lawful things of it by which
such Multitudes are wounded, and ruined er'e they are aware. Alas, how many are
there that perish by lawful things! In a word, (6) HIM who is now to be set
over you, receive in the LORD, and in all respects Conduct your selves toward
him as the Character he is putting on, will demand at your hands. This is what
Paul demands of the Philippians in behalf of his beloved Epaphroditus, Phil.
2.29. Receive him in the LORD with all gladness, etc. The same I demand of you
in behalf of him, who is now to be set over you, and that you carry it toward
him as the Character he is putting on will require. This, in short, is that of
A MINISTER OF CHRIST, i. e. A Person Deputed by the Command, and Invested with
Authority from CHRIST to Minister in Holy things: To Preach the Word,
Administer Sacraments, and to Rule over you. You have it Accounted for, 1 Cor.
4.1. Let a Man so Account of us as of the Ministers of CHRIST, and Stewards of
the Mysteries of GOD. This in short is the Character he is now putting on. And
various are the things it will Entitle him to, and Demand at your Hands, as
viz. That you hold him in Reputation, carry it toward him with Deference and
Respect, That you Submit yourselves to him in the LORD. That you Provide for
his outward Subsistence and Comfort as far as you can. That you Avoid every
thing tending to Grieve and Wound his Spirit, Discourage him in his Work, or
Weaken his Hands in it. And Finally, that by your Prayers for him, you assist
him therein. To Conclude, Labor to be Complete in the whole Will of GOD,
Faultless and without Rebuke, holding forth the Word of Life, that both He and
I may Rejoice in the Day of CHRIST that we have not Run in vain, neither
Labored in Vain.
AND now Brethren, I Commend you to GOD and to the Word of his Grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them that are
Sanctified, Act. 20.

I have done when I have added

3. ONE Word, to You of this Society, of which I my self as yet have the Care
and Charge. It is this Day Twenty Six Years wanting Three Days only, since I
was set apart to the Work of the Ministry in this Place. We were then Small and
Few in Number, not Thirty Families, I think, but now are grown up to more than
Two Hundred, and are become Three Societies for Divine Worship.

MANY and very Signal have been the Mercies of GOD to us in this Place since
that time.

IN Particular, Besides that first and chief of Blessings, the Gospel or
Revealed Religion, which we have all along enjoyed, besides this I say, very
remarkable has been the Health we have been favored with: no Sickness having
been sent among us, that has carried off any considerable Numbers of us in a
short time, as has been the Case with many other Places. The whole Number of
those of any Age, Sex or Nation that have been removed by Death in this Place,
amounts not yet to Two Hundred: I think it rises not higher than One Hundred
and Seventy. An Instance of sparing Mercy is this which perhaps can scarcely be
paralleled. We have had also the Blessing of Peace and Unity so far that no
common, general Breach or Division has as yet been among us. GOD has also
established our Handy Work so far, that many of us who came hither Poor and
Needy, are now become men of Substance. Other instances of Mercy expressive of
the Divine Regard to us, I might now reflect upon. But Sirs, What have our
returns been to them all? How mean, and poor? And how can we without shame and
blushing, call them to mind while we are thus reflecting on the Mercies of GOD
to us? How few by these and other Cords of his Love have been drawn to him? And
now many yet stand out, hardening their hearts against both his Favors and
Frowns, and strengthening their Resolutions in sin, and refusing to come in and
surrender themselves to him, though by these his mercies (as well as otherwise)
he has entitled himself to such a service? I have not shunned to declare to you
the Counsel of GOD in this, as well as other Points; and how often have I
pressed this Duty, and what pains I have taken, by removing Obstacles and
Difficulties, to clear your way to it, you your selves are my Witnesses. But
after all, how many still remain Deaf and Unperswadeable! And will such
continue thus to do still? Will you thus requite the LORD? O Foolish and
Unwise! Thus Requite thy Father that Begat thee, the GOD that has Made thee,
and Established thee? If so, you will have reason to expect the Past Indulgent
Methods of his Providence toward you will be changed, and that by some
Terrible things in Righteousness He Will visit you.

TO Conclude, I am now arrived well nigh to the End of my Ministry among you:
The Levites of Old were Discharged from their Ministrations in the Tabernacle
and Temple at the Age of Fifty; and as I am now arrived to that Age, so diverse
things there are that plead hard for a Release; In particular, and more
especially the difficulty of Preaching does so; the Bellows are almost Consumed
and Burned, and rare it is that I Preach a Sermon without such Effects
following, as assure me the End of my Ministry (if not of my Life) is not far
off, and occasion Flesh and Blood many times to say, Never Preach a Sermon more.

HOWEVER, while I stand Related to you as now I do, as I shall not cease
bearing you on my Heart, so neither to stir you up by putting you in
Remembrance of your Duty.

I Conclude with that Excellent Prayer of the Apostle. Enclosing, as one says,
the whole Mystery of Divine Grace, both in its Original, and way of
Communication by CHRIST; Heb. 13.20, 21. Now the GOD of Peace that brought
again from the Dead, Our LORD JESUS, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through
the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make you Perfect in every Good Work to
do His Will, Working in you that which is well pleasing in His Sight, through
JESUS CHRIST, to whom be Glory for Ever and Ever, MEN.

FINIS.

