Historical AC^^^^^ OF THE SMALL^^^^ INOCULAT^^^ IN NEW ENGLAND, Upon all Sorts
of Persons, Whites, Blacks, and of all Ages and Constitutions.

With some Account of the Nature of the Infection in the NATURAL and INOCULATED
Way, and their different Effects on HUMAN BODIES.

With some short DIRECTIONS to the UNEXPERIENCED in this Method of Practice.

Humbly dedicated to her Royal Highness the Princess of WALES, By Zabdiel
Boylston, F. R. S.

The Second Edition, Corrected.

LONDON: Printed for S. CHANDLER, at the Cross-Keys in the Poultry. M. DCC.
XXVI.

Reprinted at BOSTON in N. E. for S. GERRISH in Cornhil, and T. HANCOCK at the
Bible and Three Crowns in Annstreet. M. DCC. XXX.

TO Her ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCESS of WALES.
Madam,
IT is with the deepest Sense of humble Gratitude that I am allowed to lay
these Papers at the Feet of Your Royal Highness for Protection.

The Countenance which Your Royal Highness has given to the Practice of
Inoculation, is a noble Instance of Your Royal Highness's superior Judgment and
Parental Tenderness; and the Success with which it has been attended in Your
Royal Family, is alone sufficient to recommend it to the World; and may be
justly esteemed as a plain Testimony of divine Providence in Favor both of the
Lawfulness and great Advantage of this Method: And all his Majesty's Subjects
must, under GOD, own their Obligations to Your Royal Highness, for conducting
so many valuable Lives, the hopes and Glory of the British Nation, through a
Distemper that has proved fatal to so many of the Royal Family here, and to the
greatest Families in Europe.

This Method, Madam, ought now no longer to be styled new, but a well
experienced and established Practice: And as a further Confirmation of it, I
have ventured to lay before Your Royal Highness, and the World, a faithful
Narrative of my Practice in New England, at a Time when the Small Pox raged in
that Country with the utmost Violence, and carried off great Numbers in a Week;
and though I was then so unhappy as to incur the Displeasure of many of my best
Friends, for my sincere Endeavors to serve my Country, I have now the utmost
Pleasure and Satisfaction in observing Your Royal Highness's Steadiness in a
Practice, which I am satisfied will in Time appear to be the happiest Discovery
of the Age.

That Your Royal Highness, and every Branch of Your Illustrious Family may
enjoy the best of Blessings, is the sincere Prayer of,

Madam, Your Royal Highness's most dutiful, most obliged, and most devoted
Humble Servant, Zabdiel Boylston
.
THE PREFACE.
WRITING is a Talent which, of all Things, I never made any Pretensions to, and
little thought of giving at this Time the Public an Account of my Practice;
but being again importuned thereto, by a great and worthy Physician, and having
also received a Message from a superior Person, that an Account of my Success
of inoculating the Smallpox in New England might be grateful, as being of
great use, and beneficial to the Public, I esteemed it as the strongest
Obligation upon me so to do, and in Compliance to that Command I have done it
faithfully. If I had proposed any Advantage to my self, in the Practice here, I
should have done it above a Year past, at my Arrival in London, and not now at
my returning home. And I have given this Account with the greater Cheerfulness,
in hope, that my Mite may influence some few at least to save their Lives this
Way, seeing, from Time to Time, in the Weekly Bills, Numbers who died of the
Smallpox, and hearing of but few who have had the Benefit of Inoculation,
compared with the others in the natural Way, notwithstanding the many and
handsome Accounts which have been given the Public, greatly in Favor of this
Practice.

And it may be of some Service, was it only on Account of the great Proportion
of Adult Persons, and others advanced in Years, to whom the Smallpox, in the
natural Way, has been most fatal: And yet from my Experience, I may be allowed
to say, that even such have a very fair Prospect of passing well through that
Distemper by Inoculation.

I began the Practice indeed from a short Consideration thereof; for my
Children, whose Lives were very dear to me, were daily in danger of taking the
Infection, by my visiting the Sick in the natural Way; and although there arose
such a Cloud of Opposers at the Beginning, yet finding my Account in the
Success, and easy Circumstances of my Patients, (with the Encouragement of the
good Ministers) I resolved to carry it on for the saving of Lives, not
regarding any, or all the Menaces, and Opposition that were made against it.

I have not, in this Practice, left room for any one to cavil, and say, that my
Experiments have not been fair, and full Proofs, that inoculating the Smallpox
is a certain Means of moderating that Distemper, to the greatest Demonstration.
This, the warmest Opposers of that Practice, who have seen my fair Trials made,
are convinced of; and the only Difficulty of convincing all Mankind, is how to
make them Eyewitnesses to a Number sick of the Smallpox in both ways of
Infection; and this would do it at once, and very much to their Satisfaction
in, and Approbation of this Method. And here it should be considered how rashly
our Patients, even whole Families together, rushed into this Practice, without
any Physical Preparation, or other needful Provision, especially in such a cold
Season as November and December, being convinced of the Success of this Method:
There was no withstanding them: I must inoculate all, without Exception, they
being in danger of having the Distemper in the natural way. In March and April,
indeed, we inoculated none, and but few in the Summer Season. But although this
Practice from the Levant comes recommended to be made use of in the Winter as
the most proper Season; yet I did not find it to succeed so well, and prove so
gentle with us in the pinching cold, as in the temperate and hotter Seasons of
the Year.

I have not used this Practice only to the healthful and strong, but to the
weak and diseased, the aged and the young: Not only to the rich, but have
carried it into the houses of the poor, and laid down whole Families; and though
through my own Hurry in Business, and their living out of Town, I have been
forced to leave them to the Management of unexperienced Nurses, yet they all
did well.

And as to those six who died under Inoculation, I would observe that Mrs.
Dixwell, we have great Reason to believe, was infected before. Mr. White, through
splenetic Delusions, died rather from Abstinence than the Smallpox. Mrs.
Scarbrough and the Indian Girl died of Accidents, by taking cold. Mrs. Wells
and Searle were Persons worn out with Age and Diseases, and very likely these
two were infected before. Neither can it be said, that there was one sound and
healthful Person amongst them.

We met with no such terrible Effects (save that Death is terrible in all its
Shapes) from the Smallpox inoculated, as was common amongst us in the natural
way, viz. Purple Spots, Convulsion Fits, bloody Urine, violent Inflammations in
the Eyes, Throat, and other Parts, scarr'd Faces, some who had lost both Eyes,
and, as it has been thought, near an hundred one Eye, with many more melancholy
Symptoms too tedious here to enumerate; not to mention Parents being left
Childless, Children without Parents, and sometimes Parents and Children's being
both carried off, and many Families broken up by the Destruction the Smallpox
made in the natural way. Indeed, we had some Resemblance of those Effects; but
in none where it was not evident, that they were infected in the natural way
before; and though we met with but five or six cases that bordered on, or
resembled more or less those Symptoms, yet it would not have been strange had
there been six times that Number; for in Boston, and in the middle of Roxbury,
no one knew who were, or who were not infected, before inoculated; and I verily
believe that twenty five, if not thirty of my Patients were infected before
inoculated: And this Reason I can give for every one's believing so, that in
all and every one whom I Inoculated, and that had not been exposed to an
infected Air, and which were above one hundred, not any of them had the least
Shadow of such Symptoms upon them, through the whole Course of their Distemper.
However, I do not recommend this Practice to be carried on and managed by old
Women and Nurses; no, I would have it carried on and managed by good Physicians
and Surgeons, where they are to be had; but rather than the People should be
left a Prey to the Smallpox in the natural Way, let it be managed by Nurses,
for I cannot help thinking that even in their Hands, many less would die of the
Smallpox by Inoculation, than there does in the natural Way, though in the best
of Hands, and under the best of Care.

And for those that have not yet come into this Practice, for their Assistance,
until they have gained better Knowledge, I have given some short Directions how
they may proceed with their Patients, when they begin this Practice of
inoculating the Smallpox. And if what I have done, in giving this Account, may
(with the Labor and Pains which has been taken by many worthy Gentlemen on
this Head) contribute to the leading People into a Method for saving their
Lives, and their Bodies from many other Miseries that do frequently attend
those that have the natural Smallpox; I shall obtain my End, and the World
will have the Benefit.

I ought to apologize, and ask Pardon of my good Friends in New England, for
this Liberty I have taken, of publishing their Names, Ages, and Cases, without
their leave, more especially the young Ladies. And when they consider how
difficult a thing it is, to set Truth in a clear Light in this Case to the
Satisfaction of an unbelieving World; and how much room there would have been
left to those who are not willing to believe, and that are Wranglers against
this Practice, to have slighted, and argued against the Truth and Validity of
these Accounts, were it not for those Particulars; for I must stand or fall by
these Accounts,: I say, when they consider that it was done for the good of
Mankind, they will forgive me, and upon that Account only I hope and desire to
be forgiven.

I do not call upon or exhort the Physicians and Surgeons who are already in
the Practice, and have used their Endeavors to promote it, nor do I pretend to
inform or instruct them. My Design is only to stir up those who have not yet
come into and used this Method, and to lay before the People a fair state of
the Distemper in both ways of Infection, that they may be appriz'd of the
danger in the one, and the reasonable Expectation they have of doing well in
the other. My Reasonings and Opinions I submit to those of better Judgment, but
as we are rational Creatures, we do, or should delight in acting upon
Principles of Reason; and those who consider this Method, and make use of it, I
think may be said so to act.

I hope the Reader will excuse me for troubling him with some of the
Difficulties that I met with. I have been basely used and treated by some who
were Enemies to this Method, and have suffered much in my Reputation and in my
Business too, from the Odiums and Reflections cast upon me for beginning and
carrying on this Practice in New England; which ill Usage I think justly
intitles me to make the necessary Reflections, and relate Matters of Fact in my
own Justification, and to recommend and do Justice to the Method, which was so
exposed and condemned by their Misrepresentations, which have been spread
abroad in the World; and to set things in a good Light, that the World may
impartially judge between the Parties (if I may be allowed the Term) which of
the two have acted most like Men and Christians, viz. Whether those who have
opposed and exclaimed against this Method without due Consideration of, or
knowing scarce any thing about it; or those who have considered well, been in
the Practice of, and have proved by their own Experience, or that have seen the
good Effects and Benefit of it, and from such Reasons have recommended it to
others?

Indeed I can easily forgive and pity those who through Tenderness, or in Point
of Conscience, have refused the offered Mercy, and that have gently appeared
against it: Such, with the Assistance of a Divine, together with the Exercise
of their own Reason upon it, may easily get through their Difficulties. But for
those who out of private Piques, or Views, have exclaimed and railed against
it, and who have trumpt up the groundless ill Consequences that would attend or
follow it: Such I leave to sweat it out with just Reflection and due
Repentance. As for my own Part, I know of no better Way of judging between
moral and immoral Methods of Medical Practice, than from the good or ill
Success that does, or may attend them.

I have, for Distinction sake, called the Smallpox taken in the Air (only)
natural; though I know not any Reason why that by Inoculation may not be called
so too, for I think the distinct, in either Way, to be the most genuine Effect
of Nature; and the Difference between them seems only to be, as in that of
improving Plants, the one is propagated by Nature accidentally, and the other
by Nature with Industry, with Intent to make them better. The one is called
wild, the other tame, or improved; and as the Ground is good or bad, so will
the Plant or Fruit be differing, more or less: So it will be in the Smallpox
transplanted. Forgive me this Comparison, it may not hold good in strict
Philosophy. None of our inoculated Patients afterward took the Smallpox, though
they were continually exposed. I make this Observation lest the Question should
be asked, though I think it high Time that groundless Scruples should be laid
aside.

There is a large Field open for much to be said by the Ingenious and Learned
in Praise of this Method, and I hope, good Improvement will be made in, and by
it.

Z. B.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE Smallpox, which had been a Terror to New England since first it paid a
Visit there, coming into Boston, and spreading there in April, 1721, put the
Inhabitants into great Consternation and Disorder. Dr. Mather, in Compassion to
the Lives of the People, transcribed from the Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society, the Accounts sent them by Dr. Timonius and Pyllarinus of
inoculating the Smallpox in the Levant, and sent them to the Practitioners of
the Town, for their Consideration thereon. Upon reading of which I was very
well pleased, and resolved in my Mind to try the Experiment; well remembering
the Destruction the Smallpox made 19 Years before, when last in Boston; and
how narrowly I then escaped with my Life. Now, when my Wife and many others
were gone out of Town' to avoid the Distemper, and all Hope given up of
preventing the further spreading of it, and the Guards were first removed from
the Doors of infected Houses, I began the Experiment; and not being able to
make it upon my self, (such was my Faith in the Safety and Success of this
Method) I chose to make it (for Example sake) upon my own dear Child, and two
of my Servants.

JUNE the 26th, 1721. I inoculated my Son Thomas, of about six, my Negro Man,
Jack, thirty six, and Jackey, two and an half Years old. They all complained on
the 6th Day; upon the 7th, the two Children were a little hot, dull and sleepy,
Thomas (only) had twitchings and started in his sleep. The 8th, the Childrens
Fevers continued, Tommy's twitchings and startings in sleep increased; and though
the Fever was gentle and his Senses bright, yet as the Practice was new, and
the Clamor, or rather Rage of the People against it so violent, that I was put
into a very great Fright; and not having any Directions from Dr. Timonius and
Pyllarinus concerning this Practice, I had nothing to have Recourse to but
Patience, and therefore waited upon Nature for a Crisis (neither my Fears nor
the Symptoms abating) until the 9th; when early in the Morning I gave him a
Vomit, upon which the Symptoms went off, and the same Day, upon him and the
black Child, a kind and favorable Smallpox came out, of about an hundred a
piece; after which their Circumstances became easy, our Trouble was over, and
they soon were well.

Jack's Complaints, in two or three Days were over, and though he had but a few
Pustles about one of his Inoculations, I am inclined to think he had had the
Smallpox before.

It was plain and easy to see, (even in these two) with Pleasure, the
difference between having the Smallpox this way, and that of having it in the
natural way.

And as this Practice was new in Europe, so it must needs make a strange Figure
in New England, and more especially so when one or two of our learned
Esculapian Tribe had made the Discovery how this Practice would produce the
Plague viz. because Timonius told them that it sometimes happened that
Swellings were produced by it in some Emunctory of the Body; and likewise they
cavilled and said, that Dr. Mather had not given a fair Representation from
Timonius and Pyllarinus's Accounts. I prayed that they might be read; but Dr.
Douglas, who owned them, and had taken them from Dr. Mather, refused to have
them read, or even afterward to lend them to the Governor to read; such was
his extraordinary Care, lest the People, in time, should have been reconciled
to the Practice, and taken the Benefit of it.

And upon July the 21st, 1721, being a third time called to an Account for
using this Practice by some Gentlemen (influenced thereto) who bore Authority
in Boston, I then having seven Persons more under Inoculation, whose Illness
were not yet come on: I then gave a public Invitation to the Practitioners of
the Town (who were then present) to visit my Patients, who were under that
Practice, and to judge of and report their Circumstances as they found them.
But Dr. Lawrence Dalhonde's terrible Account (see the Account at the End) that
he then gave of that Practice was such, that none of them saw Cause to accept
my Invitation and visit my Patients. Instead of this, and reporting their
Circumstances justly and fairly, as it was their Duty, and the People's Right,
for them to have done, some of them made it their Business to invent, collect,
and publish idle, unjust, and ridiculous Stories and Misrepresentations of the
People's Circumstances under it, and the Practice; though none of them had ever
been concerned for, or had seen one single Person of them in their Illness,
from the beginning of this Practice, to the end of it, except by Accident, save
Mr. White once or twice, or that knew any thing of their Circumstances, but
that they saw them come well and early abroad after their Smallpox. And not
satisfied with such unjust Proceedings in New England, lest the Truth should be
made known to Great Britain, and that our good Success might influence them to
use this Practice, Douglass favored them with his pretended wonderful
Knowledge of things which he knew little of, as may be seen in Dr. Wagstaff's
Book against Inoculation.

And as for Dalhonde's most surprising Instances, the knowing Part of Mankind
now believes as little of them as if he had said that their Heads had dropped
off, or that Inoculation had turned Men into Women, or any other strange Though It
that might have come into his Head.

I have made diligent Enquiry in England, but could never meet with any one who
had heard of any such Practice in these Parts of Europe, until within these
five Years past, or that believes there ever was, and especially in an Army,
the most unlikely Place to begin it in; and if began there, the most likely
Place he could have thought of to have made it public to the World. So that if
he does not get well-attested Proofs from Drs. Helvetius, Bollatio, and
Barrera, of the Facts, I doubt, for the future, his Affirmation will not have
that Credit in the World, as an honest Man's ought to have.

These were some of the Oppositions and Difficulties I met with in the
Beginning of this Practice, and which was the Means of keeping out hundreds, if
not thousands, from coming into the Practice of Inoculation, which might have
saved many valuable Lives that were lost by the Smallpox in the natural way,
as may better appear when the Success in each way is compared.

July the 12th, 1721, I inoculated Mr. Joshua Cheever, about 39 Years old. He
had upon the 6th and 7th Days some light shivering and feverish Turns, and upon
the 8th they went off, the Scarifications being almost dried up, so that we
concluded the Operation had not taken effect.

On the 9th in the Evening (he being well) a Fire breaking out, he run with
others to help put out the Fire, and in laboring at it, got wet with Water and
Sweat, returned home very ill and full of pain, and continued so all Night;
upon visiting him in the Morning, I found him under the signs of a high Fever,
a dry inflamed Skin, full of Pain, with a hard and quick Pulse, and I feared he
would have had the Confluent Small Pox. He being lusty and strong, I bled him
largely, gave him a Vomit, and blister'd him, upon which the Symptoms went off,
and the Smallpox came out of a kind distinct Sort, and his Pains, and our
Fears, were soon over, and in a short time he was well.

His Inoculations never inflamed and come to run, as is usual, but dried away
almost from the first.

Until now, I used the Turkey Way of scarifying and applying the Nut-shell, etc.
which I soon left off, and made an Incision through the true Skin, and applied a
Plaster over; which I found since to be the better Way.

July the 14th, I inoculated Mr. John Helyer, of about 34, and my Negro, Moll,
of 37 Years old. Mr. Helyer had the Smallpox at the usual time, and of a kind
distinct Sort, the Symptoms gentle, and he soon was well. Moll had a slow Fever
a Day or two, and some Pain, which both went off, and her Inoculation soon
dried up: I suppose she had had the Smallpox before; and the Reason why the
Negro Man and she was so disordered from Inoculation, might be from their being
exposed to the Evening and Morning Air: The Weather being hot, I did not
confine them before they complained.

17th, I inoculated my Son John, about 13 Years old; he had the Smallpox at
the usual Time, a small sprinkling of a kind Sort, and the Symptoms gentle; but
upon eating Milk, his Nose bled, and he appeared feverish. I forbad the Milk,
and both left him. He being a Lover of Milk, a Day or two after, he had Milk
and Water for his Drink, upon which his Nose bled, and flushing Heats returned:
After which, Milk was denied him, and the Symptoms went off and never returned
again. In lieu of Milk and Water, he drank Teas, which finished the Cure, and
he was well.

19th, I inoculated Mr. John Webb, about 67, Mr. Joseph Webb, 50, and his Wife
43 Years old. The eldest and youngest of these were weak infirm Persons, they
all had the Smallpox at the usual Time, and of the distinct Sort. Mr. John
Webb had an ill turn of Faintness and Oppression of Spirits, at the coming out
of the Pox; but when they were out, the Symptoms went off, and he, with the
other two, passed gently through the Distemper, and soon were well.

August the 5th, I inoculated Mr. Larabee and Mrs. Hunt, each about 30, Mrs.
Esther Webb, 19, Mr. Cheever's Lad, 16 Years old. Three of these had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a good distinct Sort, their Symptoms
gentle, and they soon were well. Mrs. Esther nursed her Father and Mother through
the height of their Smallpox, by Inoculation, before she was inoculated; and
they having it so very favorably, it was hoped that she had not taken the
Infection of them; but we were soon convinced of that Error, by her falling
sick and the breaking out of the Confluent Smallpox on the 4th or 5th Day
after her Inoculation; and it was with a great deal of Care and Pains that she
lived through it. She also was restored to Health in a short time after.

12th, I inoculated a young Gentlemen under 25 Years old, and much against my
Inclination, this being the only Instance in which I was obliged to Secrecy.

I inoculated Mr. Edward Langdon, 25, Mr. Larabee's Servant-Man, about 18 Years
old. They all three had the Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a distinct
Sort; the two last had but few in Number, and their Symptoms gentle. The young
Gentleman had them pretty full, and (near the filling) for two Days, his Fever
was brisk; but upon bleeding and the Use of an Anodine, the Fever went off, and
he, with the other two, were soon recovered to Health.

22d, I inoculated Mr. Samuel Valentine, about 19 Years old; he had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a kind distinct Sort, the Symptoms gentle;
and he soon did well.

23d, I inoculated Mrs. Thornton, about 21 Years old; she had the Smallpox at
the usual Time, an handsome sprinkling of a distinct Sort, and complained much
of the Soreness; and her Pox continued longer on her than usual, before they
fell off and dried away; the Symptoms were gentle, and in a little Time she was
well.

I inoculated Mr. Nathaniel Langdon, of about 27, my Son Zabdiel, 14, Mrs.
Margaret Langdon, 20, and Mrs. Joanna Syms of 15 Years old. They all had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, of a very distinct Sort, their Symptoms gentle,
and they soon were well; though my Son lay two Nights in an infected Chamber
before inoculated.

30th, I inoculated Mr. John Colman, 18 Years old, and Mrs. Dixwell, about 37.
Mr. Colman had a kind and favorable Smallpox, as is common in this Way, and
soon got well. Mrs. Dixwell was a fat Gentlewoman of a tender Constitution, she
came frightened into the Practice, as most of the others had done; not only by
living near the Infected, but passing some Days before by a Door wherein lay a
Corpse ready for the Grave, which died of the Confluent Smallpox, the Stench
whereof greatly offended and surprised her with Fear of being infected:
However, she went the usual Time of nine Days before Eruption, and broke out
full of a distinct Sort; but being of a very moist Habit, they fluxed in her
Face, about the 7th Day: She had a sore Throat, was often restless, and by
Turns had a Difficulty of Breathing, her Fever and Thirst being yet moderate:
The 11th, her Pox began to turn; the 13th, her Face became crusty; and the
14th, the Scabs began to fall off, and she appeared more comfortable; her
Incisions grew wider, and run plentifully. All this while we were in good Hopes
of her doing well. This Afternoon her two Children were brought to her, just
recovered in the natural way, which gave her great Joy, but put her Spirits
into too great a Motion; and the Weather changing cool (I apprehend) she took
some cold, for that Evening she was taken with hysteric Fits, which held her
about two Hours; but upon the Use of an Anodine and some Antihysterics, she
became quiet, and rested some Hours that Night, and seemed refreshed in the
Morning, and held it good part of the Day: But the Evening returning, brought
on her Fits, together with a new Fever; upon which I bled her and repeated her
Blisters, and used many other Means, but to no Effect: The Fits and Fever
followed her close until the 17th of Eruption, and 26th from Inoculation, when
she died. Note, this was the only case, wherein we met with Fits in all my
Inoculated Patients.

31st, I inoculated Mr. Samuel Jones, of about 32, and Mrs. Waldran of 35 Years
old: The former had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a favorable distinct
Sort, and was soon well. Mrs. Waldron suffered some light touches of a feverish
Disorder on the 6th and 7th Days, and on the 8th they vanished. Knowing (through
her Fears) I had done it the first Time but slightly, I then inoculated her
again; which took Effect, and at the usual Time produced a kind distinct Pox,
which she easily passed through, and was soon well.

September the 4th, I inoculated Mrs B -- t, of about 32 Years old, upon a
Pimple she had scratched off on one Arm, and on the other, where she had
pricked the Skin, so as to raise a small Drop of Blood: This Inoculation was
attended only with some feverish turns, which upon the 8th Day vanished; and
upon the 9th, her Fears being great lest she should take it in the natural way,
she suffered me to make the proper Incisions; after which at the 7th Day, her
Fever came on, and the Small Pox came out on the 9th pretty full of the
distinct Sort: She had something more of a Fever than is usual this way, and
about the height of the Distemper her Menses came down, which added to her
Uneasinesses a few Days; but all went over, and she soon got well. It was
strongly reported, that she miscarried; but upon strict Inquiry of the Nurse, I
found it false and groundless, she not being then with Child.

I inoculated Mrs. Dodge, about 20 Years old, who had nursed her Sister, then
lying sick of the Confluent Smallpox, until the 7th Day from her Eruption: She
being terrified with the Circumstances of her Sister, I was persuaded by her
Mother and self to inoculate her, which I did, by way of Experiment: She had
the Smallpox at the usual Time, with very little Sickness or Pain, and scarce
an hundred in all: She was so soon well, it could hardly be said she had been
sick.

5th, I inoculated Justice Lynde's Negro Boy, about 17 Years old, he had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a very kind distinct Sort, and soon was
well.

6th, I inoculated my three Daughters, Jerusha of about 10, Mary 8, and
Elizabeth 4 Years old; the eldest had but about 40 or 50, the other two were
pretty full in their Faces; and all their Symptoms proving gentle, they soon
did well.

7th, I inoculated Mr. Elias Adams, about 18 Years of Age, he had the Smallpox
at the common Time, and full of the distinct Sort; about the height, he was
very restless and hot; but upon the use of an oily Mixture and two blistering
Plasters, the Symptoms went off, and he got soon well.

I inoculated Mr. Abiel Walley's Negro Girl, about 14 Years old; she had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind distinct Sort, and was soon well.

8th, I inoculated Mrs. Pierce, about 32 Years old; she had the Smallpox at
the usual Time, and of the distinct Sort, and soon did well.

9th, I inoculated Mr. Thomas Boyston, about 31 Years old; he had the Smallpox
at the usual Time, and of a kind distinct Sort, a little fuller than ordinary
this Way; but the Symptoms proved gentle, and he soon was well.

I inoculated Mrs. N -- s, who had been coming into the Practice for some Time
before, and had lived in the Way of Infection above a Month; but now, through
Hope and Fear, though too late, she submitted to it. The 3d Day she fell sick;
the 5th, the Smallpox appeared, and continued coming out until the 8th or
ninth, when she was full of a small, depressed, confluent Sort, and her Throat
was dry and sore; she had no immediate Signs of Danger until the 16th, (she
being, as it might be supposed, a breeding, and 8 or 9 Weeks gone) when her
Menses came down upon her, upon which her Strength failed, and her Spirits
sunk. The 17th, she flooded, and began to talk idly, conceiting she was in the
Waters, etc. I visited her about 12 that Night, and found her delirious,
extremely cold, and in a clammy Sweat, and her Pulse so low, that I could
hardly be sensible she had any at all; I ordered her some Drops of Oil of
Cinnamon and Liquid Laudanum in Sugar, (expecting little from a weaker Cordial)
of which she had given her two or three times that Night. I visited in the
Morning, and found her much revived, and her flooding stayed; there was a small
imperfect Substance found in the Bed. Afterward she mended slowly, a violent
Inflammation attending her Eyes, her Face being much swelled, and her Eyelids
closed; we were not sensible of the Danger, until the sharp Humor had
ulcerated the horney Coat of one Eye the Sight of which she lost; she otherways
recovered and did well.

11th, I inoculated Mrs. Jane Colman of about 14, and Mr. Grafton Feveryear of
about 30 Years old; on both these the Smallpox came out at the usual Time, of
a kind distinct Sort, the Symptoms friendly, they soon grew well. Mrs. Jane had
about 50 or 60, Mr. Feveryear a good handsome Sprinkling; he had lived in an
infected House about a Month before inoculated.

12th, I inoculated Mr. Daniel Berry's Son, about 20, and his Daughter about
16, and Mr. Melvin about 22 Years old: These three had the Smallpox at the
usual Time, of a kind distinct Sort, and they soon were well.

13th, I inoculated Mrs. Margaret Salter, about 30 Years old, a weakly
hysterical Woman, and often ill; and though she had the Smallpox very
favorably, as to Number, yet she complained much of Pain in her Head, and
Vapors, which gave me some Trouble; but in a short Time those Symptoms went
off, and she soon was well.

I inoculated Mrs. Eliz. Melvin, about 19 Years old! she had the Smallpox at
the usual Time, and of a kind distinct Sort, and soon did well. She lived some
distance from me, so that I saw her but twice after I inoculated her.

16th, I inoculated Mr. John Adams about 35, and Mr. Jones's Child, 4 Years
old; they both had the Smallpox at the Time expected, few in Number, the
Symptoms gentle, they soon were well. Through Neglect, Mr. Adams's Inoculations
inflamed, and became painful for 3 or 4 Days, but were afterward easy, and
soon healed.

I inoculated Mrs. Adams about 30 and her Daughter about 4 Years old; it had no
Effect upon Mrs. Adams, which a little surprised me; and upon proposing to
inoculate her again, she said she remembered, when a little Girl, the Smallpox
was in her Father's Family, and she ill, and that there was a Dispute between
the Doctor and Nurse whether here is was the Smallpox or not, having but three
Pustles; the Mark of one she showed me. I advised her to nurse her Child, which
was now ill, and be out of Fear; and she did so. The Child, at the usual Time,
had the Smallpox pretty full in the Face, and had a considerable Fever,
attending. I gave it a Vomit, which over worked, and weakened it for the
present, instead of relieving it: The Child continued very ill until about the
6th or 7th Day of Eruption; when the Pock ripened, the Fever went off, and it
soon returned to Health.

I inoculated Mr. Richard Tucker, about 40 Years old, of a broken Constitution;
he had the Small Pox at the usual Time, few in Number, good in Kind, the
Symptoms gentle, and he soon was well.

20th, I inoculated Mrs. Eliz. Valentine about 18, Mr. Warner 21, and Mr.
Procter's Indian Man 20 Years old; these all had the Smallpox at the usual
Time, of a good distinct Sort: The Indian had 3 or 4 uneasy Nights, after which
his Rest returned, and they were all soon well. Mrs. Valentine had but very few.

21st, I inoculated Mr. Nathaniel Airs of about 62, (he was a Gentleman very
Asthmatical) his Son Nathaniel Airs about 25, and Mrs. Elizabeth Kitt about 22
Years old; she had been in infected Houses and was taken down the next Day, had
the Smallpox full of a good Sort: The other two had the Smallpox at the usual
Time, of a very kind distinct Sort, and few in Number. The old Gentleman was in
his Clothes every Day, for his Asthma rendered him uncomfortable in Bed. They
all soon recovered and did well.

22d, I inoculated Mrs. Woodbury, about 28 Years old; she had the Smallpox at
the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, the Symptoms gentle, and she soon was
well.

23d, I inoculated the Hon. Thomas Fitch, Esquire; his only Son, about 14 Years
old; he had the Smallpox at the usual Time, few in Number, the Smptoms easy,
and he soon was well.

October the 6th, I inoculated Mrs. Eunice Willard, about 22 Years old; she had
the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, and was soon well.

13th, I inoculated Mrs. Hannah Breck of 16, and Nathaniel Loring of 12 Years
old; these had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, and
soon were well.

I should have inoculated these, had I been able, last Night, with Mr. Daniel
Loring's eldest Son, about 15 Years old, (Brother to Nathaniel) who had been
sent into the Country about a Fortnight before to escape it in the natural Way;
he came home well last Evening to be inoculated; in the Night was taken with
the Symptoms of the Smallpox, which this Day brake out of the confluent Sort:
He soon lost his Reason, and died on the 6th or 7th Day. I mention this Case
for these Reasons, viz. Had I inoculated him as was intended, few would have
believed him infected before; and that it may be supposed, at least, that the
Smallpox lurks in the Body longer when taken in the natural Way, than when
taken in the artificial Way; as has been often observed, in many Cases, where
People have been but once in the Way of Infection, or that have come from
infected Towns or Vessels, etc.

14th, I inoculated Mrs. Martha Fitch about 16, and Mrs. Mary about 15 Years
old; they both had the Smallpox at the usual Time very favorably, few in
Number, the Symptoms pleasant, and they soon were well.

26th, I inoculated Mrs. Sarah Boylston, at Roxbury, of about 26-Years old; she
was at Lodgings in the Country to escape the Distemper: Before her Travail came
on, the Smallpox broke out in the Family; and about two Days after she was
delivered, her Fear of that being over, she was now distressed with the danger
of having the Smallpox in the natural Way. My Brother came to me to advise in
the Affair, and desired me to go with him to see her; accordingly I did, and
that prepared; and upon both their Requests, I inoculated her. A Coach was
provided, and, wrapped up in a Bed, she was brought home to Boston, and on the
10th Day broke out with the Smallpox, of a kind, distinct Sort, and passed
through it without any sensible Danger, and soon recovered her Health, from
lying-in, and having the Smallpox together.

At the same Time, and at the same House I inoculated Mrs. Mary Lane of 20, and
Mrs. Rebecca Abbot of 11 Years old; they both had the Smallpox at the usual
Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, the Symptoms proved easy, and they being out of
Town, I saw them but twice, after Inoculation, before they were well.

I inoculated Mrs. Blague's Negro Girl, about 5 Years old; she had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, as favorably as any of the rest, and soon got
well.

30th, I inoculated Capt. John Osborne about 36, and his Wife about 33, Judge
Davenport's Son John about 17, Mr. Caleb Lyman about 43 and Susanna Lyman about
7 Years old; they all had the Smallpox at the usual Time of a fine distinct
Sort, the Symptoms gentle, and they were soon well.

31st, I inoculated the Reverend Mr. Thomas Walter, Mr. Samuel Aspingwall and
Mr. Dana, each between 25, and 30, they all had the Smallpox at the usual
Time, and of the distinct Sort. Mr. Aspingwall had several restless Nights,
which obliged me to give him an Anodine for two or three Nights following. The
other two Gentlemen laughed at him and said he was troubled with Vapors. They
all in a short Time, were well. These Gentlemen came from Roxbury into Boston
to be inoculated, and lay in one Room; and their Recommendation of this
Practice, at their Return proved to be of great Service to that Town, in
carrying the Inhabitants soon through that distemper, and in saving many Lives,
if I may be allowed to judge from the Success of the different Ways of
Infection, viz. out of the first thirteen men and they chiefly heads of
Families who had the Smallpox in the natural way, ten of them died; and in
above 40 Men that were inoculated at or near the same Time, in the same Town,
not one Man died.

I inoculated Mr. Nathaniel Loring's only Child about 9 Years old, his Father
being much concerned for him, on Account of the Smallpox having been very
fatal to their Family; he had the Smallpox at the usual Time, very kindly, few
in Number, and he soon was well.

November the 1st, I inoculated Mrs. Sarah Bromfield about 25, Mrs. Mary
Bromfield 23, Mrs. Cheekley 24, and Mrs. Willard's Daughter 18 Years old; they
all had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, and were
soon well.

2d, I inoculated Mr. Webb, of Charlestown, about 32, and his Wife about 28;
they both had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, and
were soon well.

I inoculated the Reverend Mr. Ebenezer Pierpont, of Roxbury, 24 Years old; he
had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, few in Number,
and he soon got well.

3d, I inoculated Mrs. Winslow, about 21 Years old; she had the Smallpox at
the usual Time, of the distinct Sort, but pretty full. She was hot and restless
at the filling of the Pock, which occasioned me to bleed her; after which the
Symptoms went off, and she soon recovered her Health.

7th, I inoculated Mr. Ebenezer Holmes, about 17 Years old; he had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, and was soon well.

9th, I inoculated Mr. Joseph White of about 32, Mrs. Goodwin 36, and Mr.
Edmond Wells of 23 Years old; these all had the Smallpox at the usual Time,
and of the distinct Sort. Two of these complained a little more than ordinary
at the coming out and filling, which soon went off, and they all soon were well.

13th, I inoculated Mr. Daniel Loring's Wife about 41, and her Daughter about
12 Years old; they both had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind,
distinct Sort, and soon did well.

14th, I inoculated Mrs. Mary Bath, 15 Years old; she had the Smallpox at the
usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, and soon did well.

16th, I inoculated Anthony Stoddard, Esquire; his Son Simeon about 13, and his
Indian Man about 21; they both had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind
Sort, few in Number, the Symptoms gentle, they soon were well.

17th, I inoculated Mr. James Alford, about 28 Years old; he had the Smallpox
at the usual Time, of a kind Sort, few in Number, the Symptoms gentle, and he
soon was well.

18th, I inoculated Capt. Samuel Greenwood about 31, Mr. Isaac Greenwood 18,
Mr. Obadiah Air 32, Capt. Prince 28, and Mr. Lyman's Negro Woman 30 Years old;
all these had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, but
few in Number, and they soon did well.

19th, I inoculated Mrs. Rebekah Adams, about 14 Years old; she had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, few in Number, the Symptoms easy, and she soon did
well.

20th, I inoculated Mr. John Gardner about 18, and Mrs. Morris 55 Years old;
they both had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, the
Symptoms easy, and they soon did well.

21st, I inoculated John White, Esquire; of about 52 Years old; he was then a weak
infirm Man, and had been so near 30 Years, some time consumptive and very
splenetic: Thus knowing his unhappy Constitution, I persuaded him to remove
further into the Country to avoid the Infection. He, tired with a Country Life
already, and not knowing when Boston would be freed from the Smallpox, though
very cautious and timorous, yet would be inoculated. The Smallpox came out on
the 9th, as usual, of the distinct Sort, the Symptoms easy they continued
coming out the 10th, and 11th, at which Time he was pretty full of a very
distinct Sort, and the Symptoms easy, except that he was splenetic and dull,
which he was from the 6th, when he first complained; 12th and 13th the Pock
came forward, though slowly, and of but an indifferent Complexion. Now his
splenetic Darknesses increased, and whereas the first Days he took but little
Nourishment, now he would take none, by his Good Will, and refused to be spoke
to, or comforted, notwithstanding he had no Complaints either of Pain or
Sickness, Heat or Oppression at his Breast. Thus he lay languishing, and
withering away like a Plant without Moisture (the Pock not ripe, and of a livid
Color) until the 12th of Eruption and 21st from Inoculation, when he died.

22d, I inoculated Mrs. Russel, 30, and two of her Children, one 4 and the
other 2 Years old, Mrs. Abigail Willard 22 Years old; these had the Smallpox
at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort; the Symptoms gentle, they all soon
did well.

I inoculated, at Roxbury, Mr. Samuel Stevens about 37, his Child of 14 Months,
his Servant Girl 15, his Indian Boy 14, Mr. Warren 28, and his Brother 18 Years
old; six of these had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind distinct Sort,
the Symptoms gentle, they were soon well. The Girl was taken ill the next Day,
broke out the 3d of the confluent Sort, had a high Fever, a bad Throat, and
with much a do she escaped with her Life, and did well. How to account for this
Accident, we were at a Loss, (they living distant from infected Houses) until
the Girl was well; and then she confessed how she got the Distemper: viz. About
a Week or ten Days before I inoculated her, she went into an infected House, to
see some Acquaintance there, but dare not speak of it before now, for Fear of
Anger.

23d, I inoculated Mr. Ebenezer Pemberton, and Mr. John Lowel, each about 18;
Mr Thomas Dimond 14 Years old.

24d, I inoculated the honorable Judge Quincy's Son Edmond, Mr. Ebenezer
Turil, Mr. Ebenezer Gee, each 18, Mr. Samuel Dunbar, 16, Mr. Samuel Freeman,
15, Mr. Benjamin Fitch, and Mr. James Varney, each 14, Mr. Edward
Wigglesworths, (Mr. Hollis's Professor, 32) Mr. William Welsteed, Fellow, 24,
Mr. Benjamin Gibson 21, Years old.

25th, The honorable Judge Sewall's Grandson, Samuel Hirst, 17, the honorable
Jonathan Belcher's Son Andrew, 15, Mr. James Pitts, 14 Years old. Meeting in
this Practice, within three Days such a Number of our College young Gentry (and
with them two of their Overseers) I take the Liberty of mentioning them as
such, and I hope the Youths will manage well. Fifteen of these had the
Smallpox at the usual time, and of a kind, distinct Sort, few in Number, and
their Symptoms gentle. Mr. Wigglesworth had the Smallpox at the same time, of
a very distinct Sort, but not so kind; between the coming out and filling of
the Pock, he suffered, two or three Days, an Oppression of the Spirits,
wandering Pains, and Sickness at Stomach, which all went off at the ripening of
the Pock, and he, with the other Fifteen soon recovered and did well.

I inoculated at Roxbury, Mr. Barnard, of about 30, Mr. Benjamin Woods, 23, Mr.
Eleazer Williams, 25, Mr. Edward Dorr, 35, and three of his Children, one 11,
one 5, and one three Years old. The three former of these had the Smallpox at
the usual time, and of a distinct Sort (the Weather, it being December, was
very cold, and the Country-Houses not so warm as those in Boston) they
complained a little more of the Soreness of the Pocks, and of their
Inoculations, but passed bravely through it, and soon were well.

I shall omit the Account of Mr. Dorr and his Children here, and give it with
the other Part of his Family, which were inoculated five Days after, viz. the
29th of November.

25th, I inoculated Mr. Thomas Jeners, of about 29, and Mr. Parker 26 Years
old, both of Charlestown; they had the Smallpox at the usual time, and of a
distinct Sort, Mr. Jeners's very few and favorable, but Mr. Parker had a great
many, and suffered a great deal of Soreness, Heat, and want of rest two or
three Days at the filling; which soon went off, and they both did well.

26th, I inoculated Mr. Samuel Gardner, about 20 Years old; he had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, few in Number, and he
soon was well.

I inoculated Mr. Tufts of Cambridge, about 31, and his Negro Boy 12 Years old.
I was now so much employed in Boston and Roxbury, when their Sickness came on,
that when Mr. Tufts sent for me, I could not go to them, and only sent
Directions, with some few Medicines, and never saw either until they were well,
They had the Smallpox at the usual Time, and of the favorable Sort, as he
gave me the Account some time after, when he came to pay his Bill.

27th, I inoculated Mr. Francis Foxcroft, of about 30, Mr. Samuel Danforth 28,
both of Cambridge; and at Roxbury the Reverend Mr. Nehemiah Walter, about 58,
and Daughter, 17, his Son, 12, and another Child about 7 Years old, the
Reverend Mr. Thomas Walter's Wife 23, Mr. Harbottle Dorr, 25, his Sister
Clemence, 22, Eight of these had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind,
distinct Sort, their Symptoms gentle, and they soon were well. Mr. Walter's
Inoculation had no Effect upon him. He said, when he was a Child he had an
Illness, with breaking out, but they did not know that it was the Smallpox.
This his Mother told him when alive.

28th, I inoculated Major Bowls of Roxbury, about 37 Years old; he had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, and of the distinct and favorable Kind, and soon
was well.

I inoculated Mr. Varney's Negro Boy, about 18 Years old; he had the Smallpox
at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, and soon was well.

29th, I inoculated, at Roxbury, Col. Joshua Lamb, about 45, his Son about 17,
his Niece 13, Negro Boy, 15, Mr. William Bant, 23, and Mrs. Morris's Girl, 15,
Years old. Five of these had the Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a kind,
distinct Sort, the Symptoms gentle, and they soon were well. Mr. Bant's
Inoculation had no Effect upon him: I should have inoculated him again on the
8th or 9th Day, but that a Gentlewoman declared that she had seen him sick of
the Smallpox when a Child; his Mother having been dead some time, few
remembered any thing of it.

I inoculated Mr. John Pierpont, about 27 Years old; he had the Smallpox at
the usual Time, and of a very distinct Sort, an Inflammation attending his
Throat, gave him some Uneasiness for three or four Days after Eruption; but
upon filling of the Pock the Inflammation went off, and he soon recovered; and
did well.

I inoculated Mr. Edward Dorr's other three Children, one of 9, and one of 7
Years, and the other about 18 Months old, his Servant Man 20, an Indian Girl
about 17 Years old. Mr. Dorr would have had these five inoculated when he and
the three Children were, but that I refused to do it then. But for the
Convenience of nursing, they were put into one Chamber, and for better Stowage,
two or three in one Bed, (the End of the Chamber being partition'd off for a
private Lodging, in which was laid the Indian Girl) and by the time the first
three were broken out a Day or two, the other five began their Sickness. Here
was a melancholy Sight indeed; I had often three or four, but never nine in a
Room together; the poor Children with their sickness and the Winter's Cold,
proved froward, one crying, another coughing; one wanted Drink, another to do
its Needs; one to get up, another to go to Bed, and so on; so that together
with opening and shutting the Doors, the gingling of the Warming-pan,
Fire-shovel and Tongs, there was scarce a Minute in the 24 Hours that all was
still and quiet. They all had the Smallpox at the usual Time, and of the
distinct Sort: Mr. Dorr was full, his Pock inflamed and his Fever too high:
This, with his great Concern for his Children, the continual Noise, and Want of
Sleep, made the poor Gentleman almost distracted, which obliged me to bleed him
twice, to apply Epispastics, use Anodines, etc. at the turning of the Pock, the
Symptoms went off. The Indian Girl was taken ill the 7th with a gentle Fever,
which continued to the 9th, when the Smallpox came out upon her of a kind,
distinct Sort, she having about twenty in her Face, so that she was easy, and
laughed, as I found her half naked, sitting up in the Bed. The 10th I visited
the Family late in the Evening, and the Nurse said the Indian was very dull,
and did not care to speak; I found her very ill, the Pock sunk in, her Pulse
too frequent and uneven: I ordered her near a Fire, and many Means were used to
get the Pock out again, but to no purpose; for she died before Morning. Two of
the Children were a little fuller than ordinary, complained of Soreness, etc.
the other five had it very favorably, and eight of the nine recovered, and did
very well. The Smallpox had broken out in Mr. Dorr's House before any of them
were inoculated: Though I believe the Indian Girl was no ways infected before,
but was lost by taking Cold and striking in the Pock. She was a weakly Girl,
subject to Humors breaking out upon her Years before.

30th, I inoculated Mr. Thomas Smith, 19, Mr. John Smith, 17, Mr. Thomas
Goodwin, 16, at Charlesttown: Mr. Brasier about 31, his Wife 35, and four, of
their Children, viz. one of 8, one of 6, one of 3 Years, and one of nine Months
old; Mrs Wire about 50, and Son 14, Mr. Webb's two Children, one of 2 Years,
and the other 10 Months old, Mrs. Hendry 25 Years, and her Child 15 months old;
All these Fifteen had the Smallpox at the usual time, and of a very distinct
and kind Sort. The three first were in Boston, whom I often saw, Mr. John Smith
had but 3 Pustules that filled and turned, and but one of them very Fair, so
that I cannot call this a perfect Smallpox though I know not why these may not
defend him for the Future, as well as if he had had but one or two in the
natural way, the other two but very few: The twelve at Charlestown I saw but
twice in all their Illness, I was so engaged in Boston and Roxbury; however,
they all soon recovered, and did well.

December the 1st, I inoculated Mrs. Foy 27, Mrs. White 24, and their Negro Boy
6, Mrs. Elizabeth Calf 16, her Sister 14, and Capt. Langdon, 26 Years old; at
Roxbury, Mrs. Scarbrough, Widow, 67, her Son Joseph Scarbrough 34, and Daughter
Bethiah 22, Mr. Timothy Parker 26, Mr. Stephen Chute 22, Mr. Searl's Servant
Boy 16, Mr. Scarbrough's Man, about 20 Years old. Twelve of these had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a distinct Kind, the six at Boston had each
but few, and the Symptoms very gentle: The four Men and the old Gentlewoman at
Roxbury were fuller, and their Symptoms a little harsh, viz. Pains in their
Head, or Bones; sick, or oppressed at Stomach; and the old Gentlewoman
complained of being faint: And but little good Rest, or Sleep, did they get for
three or four Days and Nights, four in one Room, and two in another, and but
one Nurse for them all, and she a Toper. But these Symptoms abated as the Pox
ripened; and as they turned, they went off. The Boy had but few in Number, and
the Symptoms gentle. All these twelve soon recovered, and did well. Mrs.
Bethiah Scarbrough had her Illness begun the 7th Day, a gentle Fever, and so
continued until the 9th, when her Fever increased, and she complained of her
Head, Back, etc. as is usual, and no more; no Pox yet appearing; she had
Blisters ordered, and other Means prescribed to bring out the Pox, and that she
should be kept warm in Bed, and so I left her that Night. The next Night I
found her (unexpectedly, in her Clothes) upon the Bed, faint and weak, with a
faultering, weak, and dangerous Pulse; and the Nurse told me her Courses were
upon her, and that she could not keep her in Bed. I did the best I could for
her, (being late at Night, and no Shop at Hand) but to no Effect; she died
before Morning. She had been several Years, as her Mother and others told me, a
very sickly young Woman, and never well. In short, through my great Hurry, she
was poorly Doctor'd, and badly Nursed, and so she died before the Pox came out.

2d, I inoculated Madam Davenport about 40, her little Daughter Mrs. Lucia 6,
Madam Thacher 40, Mr. Philip Serle, 61, his Wife 63, their Daughter 24, Mr.
Edmond Wells 58. his Wife 54, their Daughter 19, their Son 16. Mr. Elias Monk
30, and three of his Children, one 6, one 4, and the other 2 Years old; the 3
first in Boston, the other 11 at Roxbury. Those three in Boston had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a kind, distinct Sort, their Symptoms easy,
they soon were well. Mr. Serle, Wells's Son, Monk, and his three Children, had
the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a very distinct Sort, and the Symptoms
moderate. Mr. Wells, his Daughter, and Mr. Serle's Daughter, had the Smallpox
at the usual Time, and of the distinct Sort, but a little fuller, and their
Complaints greater, viz. of Pain and Soreness, Want of Rest, etc. which at the
turning of the Pox, went off; and all these nine, in a little Time, recovered
and did well. Mrs. Wells was a very weakly Gentlewoman, always complaining and
of an ill Habit of Body, and so very splenetick as often to be deprived of
Reason; and for many Years not capable of managing her Family Affairs. She had
the Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a very distinct Sort, and the Symptoms
continued moderate for the first five Days, save that the cold Weather pinched
her very much; the 6th, 7th, and 8th Days she was more uneasy, slept but
little, grew faint and weaker, the cold Weather affecting her still more, and
the native Heat declining apace; the Pock not filling, she sunk under it, and
died the 9th from Eruption, and the 17th from her Incisions. Mrs. Serle,
likewise, was an ailing old Woman, Hysterical, Splenetic, and of an ill Habit
of Body; she had the Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a very distinct Sort;
the Symptoms were moderate, though she was often complaining of one Uneasiness
or other, as is common in the Smallpox, and the cold Weather, likewise,
affected her much. Thus she continued until the Pock filled and turned, and the
Scabs cast off; one Day a little better, and another worse; sometimes up, and
other times in Bed: The Perspirations being stopped by the cold Weather, and a
Complication of Humors being put in Motion, at last fell upon her Bowels. She
had a Purging three or four Days, which carried her off. She died the 24th from
Eruption, and the 33d from Inoculation. All these 11 at Roxbury had lived in
the Way of Infection about three Weeks before inoculated.

6th, I inoculated Mr. Bradford, 25, Mr. Joseph Belcher about 22, his Brother,
18, Mr. Jos. Richards 22, and Mr. Carry 21 Years old; these five had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a good distinct Sort, not many in Number,
nor were the Symptoms harsh; they complained of Soreness, and the Weather
pinched them, but they passed soon through it, and did well. These were of
Dedham, and inoculated at Roxbury.

8th, I inoculated, at Boston, Mrs. Harris about 22 Years old; she had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, of the distinct Kind, and a pretty handsome
Sprinkling; she was very vapourish and timorous; full of Complaints, when I was
absent; but when present, had few or none. She soon was well.

I inoculated, at Roxbury, Mr. Samuel Williams about 64, his Wife 62, his Son
36, his Daughter 22, Dr. Elijah Danforth, 35, and Mr. Bass 27; all these had
the Smallpox at the usual time, and of a kind, distinct Sort, and but few in
Number. The old Gentleman, through the cold Weather, had an Inflammation in his
Wrists, where he was Inoculated, which gave him much Pain, and me some Trouble.
The Doctor, by the Cold, had a Tumor in the Axilla, which came to Suppuration.
Except these two Accidents, (which soon afterward were cured) they were very
favorably dealt with, and soon well.

9th, I inoculated, in Boston, Mrs. Turell about 32, and a Negro Boy 10 Years
old; they both had the Smallpox at the usual Time, and of the distinct and
kind Sort; their Symptoms gentle, they soon were well.

12th, I inoculated, at Roxbury, Capt, Joseph Mayhew about 57, and his Grandson
11 Years old; they both had the Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a kind,
distinct Sort; the Symptoms gentle, they soon were well.

18th, I inoculated, at Roxbury, Mr. Samuel Stevens's two eldest Daughters, one
of about 11, and the other 6 Years old; they both had the Smallpox at the
usual Time, and of a kind distinct Sort; their Symptoms gentle, they soon were
well.

20th, I inoculated, at Roxbury, Mr. Bernard's Maid about 17 Years old; she had
been at her Father's some Time to escape the Infection; taking cold, she
complained of her Head and Bones; they concluding she was taken with the
Smallpox, sent her back to her Master to have it there, and she was put into
an infected Room and Bed, and I was desired to take the care of her. After she
had been kept warm about 48 Hours, her Complaints were gone, and now, through
Fear, she would be inoculated; she had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a
kind, distinct Sort, (about 200 in all) the Symptoms gentle, she soon was well.

24th, I inoculated Capt. Mayhew's Maid about 18 Years old; She had the
Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, the Symptoms gentle, she
soon was well.

26th, I inoculated Mr. Samuel Stevens's two other Children, one 4, the other 2
Years old, and Mr. Barnard's Son 4 Years old; they had the Smallpox at the
usual Time, of a kind, distinct Sort, few in Number, and the Symptoms being
gentle, they soon were well.

January the 28th, 1721-2, I inoculated, at Cambridge, Madam Goff about 45, her
Nephew 12, her Maid 27, the Maid's Child 2, their Man 30, Servant Girl 15, and
Mr. Stephen Hall of Charlstown, about 27; six of these had the Smallpox at the
usual Time, of the distinct Sort; and their Smptoms moderate; all these soon
did well. Upon Madam Goff it had no Effect; it appeared afterward, (by one
that remembered) that she had the Smallpox in her Infancy.

February the 8th; I inoculated, in Charlestown, Mr. Kettle of 26, and his Wife
of 23 Years old; they both had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a kind,
distinct Sort, their Symptoms gentle, and they soon did well.

23d, I inoculated, at Charlestown, the Reverend Mr. Willard of Rutland, 30
Years old; he had the Smallpox at the usual Time, of a most kind, distinct
Sort, few in Number, and the Symptoms gentle, he soon was well.

24th, I inoculated, at Charlestown, Mrs. Hall about 22 Years, her Child about
14 Months old, they both had the Smallpox at the usual Time, and of the
distinct Sort: Mrs. Hall was ungovernable, refused Management and Medicine,
exposed herself in caring for her Child, and took Cold, which brought on new
Complaints, viz. Pain and a Swelling in her right Thigh; which Swelling
continuing, increased her Thigh to a large Bulk, and which suppurated, and upon
opening, discharged a great Quantity of undigested Pus; upon which she became
easy, (the Smallpox being favorable, was now turned and gone.) Her Fears
prevented me laying open the Sinus, I ordered large Poultices of white Bread
and Milk, with suitable Compress and Bandage; to be applied once or twice a
Day, as the Case might require; which Method and simple Means alone in ten Days
or a Fortnight's Time compassed and completed the Cure. The Child's Symptoms
were favorable, and it soon was well.

May the 11th, I inoculated Mr. Samuel Sewall of about 34, Mrs. Sewall 30, and
her two Sons, one 10, the other 8, Mr. Benjamin Woodbridge 13, and Mrs. Joanna
Alford 20 Years old; Mr. Sewall was a weakly Gentleman, often ill, and thought
by many Consumptive; and all the other five of tender Constitutions. And
notwithstanding the many Difficulties and hard Shifts they were put to, in
being removed some Days after inoculated to an Island to have the Smallpox
there, the Particulars too tedious to be related here, but well known in
Boston, yet these all had the Smallpox at the usual Time, and of a distinct
Sort. Those three who were capable of reflecting on their Treatment, suffered
twice as much as the other three did; but all their Symptoms proving gentle,
they all did well.

The Smallpox now leaving us, Inoculation ceased; and when it shall please
Providence to send and spread that Distemper amongst us again, may Inoculation
revive, be better received, and continued a Blessing, in preserving many more
from Misery, Corruption, and Death.

There were in the Towns near Boston about 36 Persons more inoculated, which
all did well, viz. by Dr. Roby about 11, and by Dr. Thompson about 28, which
together with my 247, make up the Number of 286, out of which Number died only
six persons, notwithstanding all the Difficulties this Practice labored under,
etc.

Now if there be any one that can give a faithful Account or History of any
other Method of Practice that has carried such a Number, of all Ages, Sexes,
Constitutions, and Colors, and in the worst Seasons of the Year, through the
Small Pox; or, indeed, through any other acute Distemper with better Success,
then I will alter my Opinion of this; and until then, I shall value and esteem
this Method of inoculating the Smallpox, as the most beneficial and successful
that ever was discovered to, and practiced by Mankind in this World.

In the Year 1721, and Beginning of 1722. there were, in Boston, 5759 Persons
who had the Smallpox in the natural Way, out of which Number died 844, (this
Account I took from one of our Prints, published by Authority) so that the
Proportion that died of the natural Small Pox there, appears to be one in six,
or between that of six and seven.

The following Table will show the Difference between the Success of the
natural Smallpox, and that of the inoculated, in New England.

Their Ages. Persons inoculated. Had a perfect Smallpox by Inoculation. Had an
Imperfect Smallpox. Had no Effect. Suspected to have died of Inoculation. From
9 Mon. to 2 years old 07 07 00 00 00 2 to 5 14 14 00 00 00 5 to 10 16 16 00 00
00 10 to 15 29 29 00 00 00 15 to 20 48 47 01 00 01 20 to 30 67 65 00 02 01 30
to 40 44 42 00 02 01 40 to 50 08 07 00 01 00 50 to 60 07 06 00 01 02 60 to 67
07 07 00 00 01 Total 247 242 01 06 06 Inoculated by Drs Roby and Thompson in
Roxbury and Cambridge 39 39 00 00 00 Total 286 281 01 06 06

It appears by the foregoing Table, that Inoculation upon six Persons did not
produce the Smallpox, by Reason they had had it before. And that out of 286,
six died, though they had not all the Smallpox only by Inoculation, as we have
Reason to believe, but were some of them infected in the natural Way, before
Inoculated. And it further appears by our Practice in New England, that if a
Number of Persons should be inoculated, of all Ages and Constitutions, and even
some of them living amongst the Infected and in the worst Seasons of the Year,
without Exception, as was our case, then the Proportion that dies under
Inoculation may be one in 46, or thereabout. It is my Opinion, from Reason, and
as far as I can judge, from Experience too, that a Person may be infected in
the natural Way, four or five Days, if not longer, before inoculated; and yet
go the usual Time of nine Days before Eruption. And it is further my Opinion,
that a Person may be served by Inoculation, if not infected above a Day or two
before Inoculated. And the Reasons for such my Opinions are as follows: 1.
That the Infection received by Inspiration does not so immediately enter into,
and ferment the Blood and other Juices of the Body, as that does which we
inoculate, or apply to the opened Blood and other Vessels in the Incision. 2.
That this inoculated Infection does immediately enter in, and communicate its
Leaven like Quality (by the Mouths of the divided Vessels) to the Mass of
Humors in the Body. And if any there be of that Kind, it will ferment and put
them into Motion, and bring the Smallpox out in about two Thirds of the Time
that the Natural usually does; and that before the deep, secret, and hidden
Fermentations have had Time to divide and subdivide the Particles of that
Humor, and by a greater Mixture deprave the other Juices, so as to produce the
confluent Sort. I believe also that there is a Difference between the Particles
of Infection, viz. those in the natural Way, being more volatile, may be more
malignant, than those contained in the Pus or Matter of the Pustules: And that
if there were no Difference in the Malignity of the Infection; yet as
Inoculation communicates the Infection to an Outside and firmer Part of our
Body, the Malignity may (being strained through so many minute Vessels) lose part
of its Force, before it reach the more principal Parts, and that a part of that
Infection may be discharged by the Incisions back again: Whereas in the natural
Way, our Nostrils, Throat, Mouth, Lungs, and Stomach are the first Parts
infected; or through which the Infection passes, and which are frequently the
Parts that most complain. And there may be something allowed me (from
Experience) on this Head, when I declare, that amongst the whole Number that I
inoculated, though many of them amidst the stifling Heat of Infection, and in the
extreme hot and cold Weather; yet not above three or four Persons had their
Throats very sore, and their Mouths filled, and Nostrils stopped with the Pock
and Scabs, as are common in the natural Way. And I dare appeal to all that have
been in this Practice, whether they have met with such a Case, except the
Person has been first infected in the natural Way; which, indeed, may be a hard
thing to determine, in any Place, where the Smallpox may have been before the
Person was inoculated. And yet notwithstanding what I have said, as to
lessening the Danger of a prior Infection, I would have the utmost Care taken
to prevent Infection before Inoculation: However, that may be of Service, in
Case a Person may have been so exposed, either through Ignorance, or Necessity.
There is a saying; that one Sort of Smallpox the Nurse cannot kill the Patient
with; and likewise another Sort, that all the Physicians cannot cure the
Patient of. It will be easy for any one to guess what those two Sorts are, viz.
the Distinct, and the Confluent; these two are put in Opposition to one
another, as being the Extremes of each, viz. the best and worst Sort, or Kind
of that Distemper. But however favorable the Smallpox appear to be, there
must be Care taken of the Sick, and not only in this, but in all acute
Diseases; and especially in those called Eruptive Fevers, by Reason they are
more exposed to Accidents, as taking Cold, etc. flatting, or striking in the
Pock, or producing some other Symptom, which has cost many thousands their
Lives: Though the Smallpox, Measles, or any other Fever the Patient had, may
have seemed very gentle and easy; yet with a small Accident they are snatched
away. And who would have though it it, says the Nurse, if not the Doctor too. But
so it is, has, and will be, if not through great Care, Skill, and Pains,
prevented.

Now Inoculation, at the worst, is but a Medium between the two Extremes,
provided it be done according to Art, and the Patient be clear from a prior
Infection; I say, it prevents the worst, and generally procures the best, or a
kind, distinct Sort of Smallpox.

And pray let us consider what this Method, in procuring the distinct
Smallpox, does prevent; it prevents the confluent, which, in itself, is a
Plague, and that in a high Degree; some of the bad Symptoms attending which,
are as follows: Purple Spots, the bloody and parchment Pox, Hemorahages of
Blood at the Mouth, Nose, Fundament, and Privities; Ravings and Deliriums;
Convulsions, and other Fits; violent inflammations and Swellings in the Eyes
and Throat; so that they cannot see, or scarcely breathe, or swallow any thing,
to keep them from starving. Some looking as black as the Stock, others as white
as a Sheet; in some, the Pock runs into Blisters, and the Skin stripping off,
leaves the Flesh raw, like Creatures flayed. Some have a burning, others a
smarting Pain, as if in the Fire, or scalded with boiling Water: Some have
insatiable Thirsts, others greedy Appetites, and will crave Food when dying.
Some have been filled with loathsome Ulcers; others have had deep, and
fistulous Ulcers in their Bodies, or in their Limbs or Joints, with Rottenness
of the Ligaments and Bones: Some who live are Cripples, othets Idiots, and many
blind all their Days; beside the other Deformities it brings upon many, in
their Faces, Limbs, or Body, with many more grievous Symptoms, which the World
has had too great Experience of, as being the Attendants of that fatal
Distemper called the Confluent Smallpox.

What this Humor of the Smallpox, in us, is, or when, and how it is
communicated to us, the Learned have not yet informed us. If from our Parents,
then how should such as have had the Smallpox before (and consequently then
have it not in them) give it to their Children's Neither are Infants in the
Womb freed from that Distemper, although the Mother have the Smallpox while the
Child is there. However otherways it may be, this is certain, that as it is a
most loathsome, painful, and destructive Distemper; so Providence has wisely
and mercifully ordered it, that once only, in our Lives, we shall be distressed
by it; and has now, in greater Goodness, discovered to us a Way or Method how
to moderate that Distemper, and to render the Smallpox, inoculated, no further
dangerous than a common intermittent Fever, under the prudent use of its
specific Bark. And shall not the World gratefully accept, and thankfully make
use of such a Method, (when known) and especially Great Britain, which has had
so much Experience of its good Effects, and that for five Years following?
Shall not they come fully into, and take the Benefit of it? And shall not the
Physicians, who are the Medicinal Guides, with the Surgeons, recommend and
bring it into greater Esteem and Practice, and save (under God) thousands and
ten thousands by it; and make further Improvements in it; and set more
vigorously about it, when they consider their great Pattern and Example for it,
viz. the greatest and wisest of Kings, their Royal Highnesses the Prince and
Princess at the Head of it; and that it has been used upon their Royal Issue
with great Success?

The Smallpox in the natural Way, has not been less fatal to Royal Blood, than
it has been to their meaner Subjects; and shall not such great Examples, and
such great Success, influence the World, give Credit to, and recommend a
Practice which is so very valuable in it self, as that none other can compare
with it?

When the World has had Experience of the good Effects of this Method, it will
no longer remain a Doubt; but it will be made use of, and acknowledged to be
the most certain procurative Means to produce the better Sort; and the only
preventive Remedy against the worst and confluent Sort.

And it is, and shall be acknowledged, to the Praise and Glory of God! that
whereas a most wild, cruel, fierce, and violent Distemper, and which has
destroyed Millions of Lives, is now (by that happy Discovery made of its
Transplantation) become tractable, safe, and gentle.

And it may be further said of this Practice, that if it were not to save the
Life of one single Person in the Smallpox, yet inasmuch as it saves from loss
of Eyesight, a Sense and Ornament so very valuable and dear to us, and from
other Deformities, and from abundance of Pain and Misery to the Sick, and from
a great deal of Distress, Charge, and Trouble to the Well; so it would, or
ought to be thought, a valuable Practice, by some at least.

Notwithstanding we recommend this Method to be so very favorable in it self;
yet however, there ought and must be just Allowance given, why some are fuller,
and have more complaints than others; as some may have it, more than others, in
the Disposition of their Blood, and other Juices, to produce larger Crops, and
to bring on, and subject them to more and worse Complaints than others; and
more especially those that come into the Practice loaded or filled with other
Diseases, not to mention ten thousand Accidents we are exposed to, more or
less, each Day we live. And shall Inoculation be charged with, and answer for
these: No: It should rather be considered, how much worse it might have fared
with them, if they had happened to have had it in the natural Way. And though it
is looked upon as Criminal, while now the Practice is but young, to use it upon
infirm, and sickly Persons; yet where such Persons are in Danger of taking the
Infection in the natural Way, I think it much more criminal to refuse such
Subjects, and trust them to the Cruelty of a merciless Distemper, who have a
much less Chance to get well through it, than those who are of a more healthful
and stronger Constitution. But where they can be preserved from both, I think
it highly just and necessary that they should. Women with Child, I would have
them to avoid the Smallpox every way, but if they cannot, let them receive it
by Transplantation, and it is my opinion that to save the fruit, it would be
best in the middle or later Months than before, and to save the Mother, at any
time, rather than to have it in the natural Way. I shall conclude this whole
Account with some Directions, which may be of Use and Service to the
Unexperienced, in managing the inoculated Smallpox, viz.

1 IF the Persons you would inoculate are of ill Habits of Body, let them be
first purged, vomited, and bled; one or other of these, if not all, as their
Circumstances may require, and repeated, as there may be Occasion, once, twice,
or oftener; and be dieted for some Time, and that a Fortnight, more or less, as
you may think proper, after they have done taking Physic, etc. that they may
have Time to recruit, and their Bodies to become settled before you bring a
Distemper on them.

2. If they are of healthful Constitutions, it may be as well to inoculate them
without any previous Preparation; for if they are ever so well prepared, yet a
small Accident may happen to put them into such Disorders, or such Symptoms may
arise, as may call for Bleeding, Vomiting, etc. although these have been used
but just before: And I would observe that in all my Number, there was not ten
that had any Medicinal Preparation before the Operation was made upon them.

3. Take your Medicine or Pus from the ripe Pustules of the Smallpox, of the
distinct Kind; either from those in the natural Way, or from the inoculated
Sort, provided the Person be otherwise healthful, and the Matter good. The Time
when this Matter is fittest to be taken, is uncertain; in some it may be on the
9th, others on the 11th, 12th, 13th, or 14th, Day after Eruption, and two,
three, or four Days after the Pox is turned upon them; the best is white, even,
and thick, and without smell. My Way of taking it, is thus: Take a fine cut
sharp Tooth-pick, (which will not put the Person in any Fear, as a Lancet will
do many) and open the Pock on one side, and press the Boil, and scoop the
Matter in your Quill and so on: When your Quill is full, empty it into a clean
dry Viol, and so take what you can, or what you have Occasion for; which keep
close stopped for Use, and in a cool Place, except you are going to use it
presently; for Heat soon ferments and destroys it. And so long as it retains
its white Color, and even Consistence, and that without smell, you may depend
it is good. And when it is otherwise, throw it away, wash your Viol very clean,
or take a new one, before you gather any more.

4. The Places I have made choice of to inoculate in, for the Convenience of
dressing, are, viz. upon the outside of the Arm above the Elbow, and the inside
of the Leg near, or in the Place where Issues are commonly made; and two
Incisions are sufficient for one Subject. Let the Incisions be made with a good
Lancet through the true Skin, (by pinching of it up between your Fingers) across
the Fibers, and about a quarter of an Inch long, such as would receive a common
Pea in case you were to make an Issue, and drop one full Drop (after wiping off
the Blood) into the Incision; or moisten a small bit of Lint in the Matter, and
put that into the Incision, applying over it a simple Diachylon Plaster, and
gently bind it on with a Compress, Fillet, or Roller, and keep them in the
House, and from the Air.

5. The next, and so every Day, dress with the same Plaster, or with Cabbage
or Colewort Leaves, in order to digest, or bring them to running Sores.

If at any Time an Inflammation should arise in or about the Incisions, or Pain
and Swelling in the Arm-pit or Groin, apply hot Poultices made of white Bread
and Milk, to the Sores, (and Swellings, if any there be) twice a day at least;
and so continue them until the Inflammations, Pain, and Swellings go off or
disappear, which, if you keep your Patient warm, will be accomplished soon;
continue those Applications some Days after, least the Symptoms should return.

6. After they are inoculated, until the 4th or 5th Day, (unless they are ill
before) let them eat and drink, sparingly, such Diet as usually they did
before, and take gentle Exercise in their Chamber.

7. When the Illness comes on, be it sooner or later, with Sickness or
Shiverings, flushing Heats, wandering, or other Pains, etc. keep them warmer,
and from Flesh and Fish of all Sorts, and Cheese and Milk too: And if they
appear much out of Order, put them to Bed, darken the Room, and let them rest.
Now let them take all their Food, as Spoon-meat hot, and Drink aired; and if it
be a young Child, it may have a Milk Diet, or Milk in its Pap or Gruel, etc.

8. Let their Drink be Water with a well brown'd Toast in it, Barly-Water, or
about a Thimbleful of Oatmeal, and four Spoonfuls of Milk boiled in a Quart of
good soft Water, or common Teas, as they may best suit your Patient's Palate
and Stomach; and some may be allowed good White Wind in their Drink, more or
less, as their Stomach may require, supporting them with innocent Spoon-Meats,
and other Harmless Diet, and wait on Nature, observing the Indications which
she may give you, and act accordingly; that is, if she is oppressed in any Part,
and is not able to help herself, assist her; but if she is not so oppressed,
leave her to herself, for she is the best Physician, when able. And if you err,
let it be in under, rather than in over-doing, for such Errors are easier to
reconcile, or be recovered than the others are.

9. Their Illness does usually begin on the 6th, some few on the 7th Day after
Inoculation, and the Smallpox break out on the 9th; it happens sometimes to
break out on other Days, though but seldom. If your Patient has been ill two
Days, and full of Complaints; as for Instance, taken ill on the 6th, and the
Pox not out upon the 9th, give a gentle Vomit, either in the Morning or the
Evening: And if the Smallpox does not come out in 4, 6, or 8 Hours after, and
the other Symptoms do not abate, apply some blistering Plasters, and, if
Occasion, some drawing Applications to the Feet, and renew them daily until the
Patient is relieved, and the Symptoms are gone off. And for the better coming,
and keeping out of the Pox, let them have Virginian Snake-root, or Sheep's Dung
Teas between whiles, or a little Saffron or Gascoine's Powder, etc.

10. If they are hot and thirsty, and the drinking plentifully of hot Teas, or
other cooling small Drinks (as they may crave) does not take off those
Symptoms, and there appear Signs of Inflammation, take away some Blood, as the
Age and strength of the Patient may admit of, and the Case require. You may
bleed them, if full of Blood, and the Symptoms urgent, at any Time, viz. at the
coming out, filling, or turning of the Pox.

11. Your chief Care in this Method should be at the beginning of their
Sickness, to govern the Symptoms (if any bad ones should arise) in time, and to
see that the Smallpox does well come out; which you may know by the Patient's
Ease and Quiet (except they are uneasy by their Soreness, which is not to be
regarded) in order to accomplish which, when wanting, your Vomit and blistering
Plasters, and sometimes your Lancet, will be of great Service: But be very
careful in your Vomits, lest they over-work, weaken, and hurt your Patient, and
your Reputation too: You had better give the Patient three or four, than one
too strong; therefore, if possible, be sure to know your Vomit. Antimonial are
better than Vegitable Vomits, though not so safe and gentle.

12. Do not be too free with Anodines, or Pacificks, at the Beginning of the
Distemper; more especially, until there be proper Evacuation made: And if your
Patient should be attended with more Fever than is necessary, and want Rest,
give a Spoonful of the following oily Mixture, every four or five Hours,
shaking the Viol well each Time of taking.

Take of Oil of Sweet Almonds, new drawn, and Syrup of Marsh Mallows, of each
two or three Ounces, mixed in a Viol.

Or if your Patient requires something more warm, Cordial, and driving out,
give them this, as follows,

Take of Treacle and Plague Water, of each six Drachms; black Cherry Water, Oil
of Sweet Almonds, and Syrup of Violets, of each one Ounce; of British Saffron,
in Powder, ten Grains; Tincture of Castor, one Dram, mixed in a Viol.

Let the Patient take of this, as there may be Occasion, sooner or later in the
Distemper, at proper Intervals of Time, a spoonful, more or less, at once, in
three, four, or five Hours Time, observing to shake the Viol each Time of
taking. If your Patient nauseates oily Mixtures, give this in lieu of that
above, viz.

Take of Milk, or black Cherry Water, three Ounces; Treacle, or Plague Water,
one Ounce; compound Piony Water, three Drachms; Diaphoretick Antimony, and
Gascoin's Powder, each half a Dram; Loaf Sugar, six Drachms, mixed in a Viol.

If your Patient wants a Stool, procure one with a Suppository; if too loose,
check or stop it; their being a little bound may be well, but their being loose
(except in Infants) may be hurtful.

13. However, when there is a real Occasion for Anodines, you must give them as
in other Distempers; but Note, that there is not a Necessity for their common
Use here, as is prescribed in the natural Smallpox; for this inoculated
Smallpox does not affect the Brain and Viscera, or corrupt the Blood and other
Juices, as the natural commonly does. And in many there is no more Fever than
is necessary, or other Symptoms, that justly may require such Medicines. And in
others, where there is a Show of such Symptoms, they may go off at the coming
out of the Pox, or at three or four Days after the Pox is out, and never return
again, as I have often seen.

14. I have given but few Receipts, or directed to but few Medicines; yet more,
I hope, than there will be Occasion for to make Use of in one of twenty
Patients in this Method; and because I know there is no Want of Prescriptions
in the Smallpox, they being already given by others; and that the Physician,
in Cases of Difficulty, will use his own Judgment, and order what he thinks
most proper to suit the Case, and help his Patient.

15. Generally speaking, (if your Patients are of tolerable Habits, and came
into the Practice free from a prior Infection) you will have but little to do,
after Eruption, but to watch against Accidents, and regulate the nursing Part;
and when any new Symptoms do arise, make diligent Enquiry, and consider well
from what Cause they proceed; if you can find it out, the Remedy may be near at
Hand, viz. if from any Thing you have prescribed that did not suit the Patient,
forbid the further Use; and, if necessary, order something that may set all
right: If from a Fault in Nursing, let that be rectified, viz. in Meat, Drink,
or Clothing, up or in Bed, too many or too few; and if they have taken cold,
nurse the Part where the Cold began, by adding more Coverings to keep it warm,
(be it in one Part of the Body, or other) as well as order suitable Diet and
proper Medicine.

Such Rules well observed, may save you much Trouble, and the Patient much Pain
and Sickness, and his Life too, in many other Diseases, as well as in this of
the inoculated Smallpox.

There should be great Care taken in inoculating, viz. that the Medicine be
good, and that the Incisions be made through the true Skin, lest the Operation
should prove fruitless, and the Patient afterward should take it in the other
Way; as two of mine might have done, had I not, in Time, inoculated them again,
and so prevented that Misfortune.

In case you should have, through ill Habits of Body, or the like, any of your
Inoculations that will not give way to, and heal with white Bread and Milk,
treat them as you would do other common Sores, viz. with Fomentations and
stronger Digestives, etc.

A TABLE showing the Number Inoculated by me in each Month in the Year 1721 and
1722. with the ill Success attending the same, viz. Who dyed and When.

June 3 0 July 7 0 August 17 1 September. 3^ 0 Mrs. Dixwell September 24 th.
October 18 0 Mr. Dorr's Indian Girl December 9th. November 103 2 John White
Esquire; December 10 th. December 50 3 Mrs. Bethiah Scarborough, December 11 th.
January 7 0 Mrs. Wells, December 18 th. February 5 0 Mrs. Serle, January 3 d.
March April May 6 0 247 6

FRom my Experience in them that lived as well as those 5 who died in the Cold
Weather, I would advise those who are weak and infirm, that may come into this
practice, and that live in a cold Country, to avoid November, December, and
January, for I have reason to believe that if Mrs. Wells, Serle, Scarborough,
and the Indian Girl, had been Inoculated in a temperate or warmer Season, they
would have done well. And it may be worthy of Note, that in above One Hundred
and Fifty Males, that were Inoculated here, and of which Number Eighty odd were
Men, but only one died.

APPENDIX.
AS this was a melancholy day to Inoculation, in its infancy, that so many
appeared (who were supposed Judges) to oppose and condemn it, and the following
Print coming out so powerful and strong against it, which was sufficient to
inflame and set almost the whole Town and Country against me and this Method;
and whereas it has been industriously spread abroad, doing Mischief in the
World where it came, I thought it just and proper to confront it with my own
Account, that it might in some Measure prevent those ill Effects for the future.

This 21 st of July, 1721. Four Clock, P. M. Being summoned by Authority to
appear at the Townhouse in Boston, before the Select-Men of the said Town, to
give an Account of what might come to my Knowledge in Relation to the Operation
called Inoculation, lately practiced in this Town by Dr. Boylstone of this
Place.

The first Instance.

ABout twenty five Years ago I was at Cremona, in Italy in the French Army,
where there were thirteen Soldiers upon whom this Operation was performed, of
which Operation four died, six recovered with abundance of Trouble and Care,
being seized with Parotidal Tumors and a large Inflammation in the Throat; one
of them was opened, his Diaphragm was found livid, the Glans of the Pancreas
tumify'd, and the Caul gangreen'd. On the other three the Operation had no
Effect.

The Second Instance.

In the Year 1701, being in Flanders, there was committed to my Care, by
Monsieur Le Duc de Guiche Col. of Dragoons, one Capt. Hussart, taken ill of the
Smallpox, who told me in these very Words, Ten Years ago I was inoculated five
or six times, without that cursed Invention's taking Effect upon me; Must I
then perish? He was so violently seized, that he had several Ulcers on his
Body, especially one on his Arm, which occasioned a Lameness thereof for Life.
It was not the Fault of the Care of the Surgeon, Major of the Regiment, De
Guiche, and several other Surgeons who came frequently to visit him.

The Third Instance.

At the Battle of Almanza in Spain, the Smallpox being in the Army, two
Muscovite Soldiers had the Operation performed upon them; one recovered, the
other receiving no Impression, but six Weeks thereafter was seized with a
Frenzy, swelled all over his Body. They not calling to Mind that the Operation
had been performed upon him, believed that he was poisoned. It was ordered by
Dr. Helvetius Physician to his Royal Highness the Duke of Orleans, Don Larencio
Bollatio, Don Bentura Barrera, two of the King of Spain's Physicians, that the
Body should be opened; his Lungs were found ulcerated, from whence they
concluded that it was the Effect of that Corruption which having infected the
Limphae, did throw it self upon that Vital Part, which occasioned his sudden
Death.

By me, Dr. Lawrence Dalhonde
. Boston, 22d July, 1721.
The aforegoing is a true Translation from the Declaration made in French, by
Dr. Dalhonde; done at the Instance and Request of the Select-Men of the Town of
Boston.

By Will. Douglass Jos. Marion.



Suffolk, ss. Boston, July 22d. 1721.
The above-written being read to Dr. Lawrence Dalhonde, he made Oath to the
Truth thereof with this Caution, That whereas in the second Instance it is
said, that the Ulcer in Capt. Hussart's Arm occasioned a Lameness thereof for
Life, the Deponent only deposed, that he believes that Lameness was incurable.

Jurat coram Nobis, Tim Clark, Wm. Welsteed.
Just. Pac.



At a Meeting by Public Authority in the Townhouse of Boston, before His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace and the Select-Men; the Practitioners of
Physic and Surgery being called before them, concerning Inoculation, agreed to
the following Conclusion.

A Resolve upon a Debate held by the Physicians of Boston, concerning
Inoculating the Smallpox, on the twenty first Day of July, 1721.

IT appears by numerous Instances, That it has proved the Death of many Persons
soon after the Operation, and brought Distempers upon many others which have in
the End proved deadly to 'em.

That the natural tendency of infusing such malignant Filth in the Mass of
Blood, is to corrupt and putrify it, and if there be not a sufficient Discharge
of that Malignity by the Place of Incision, or elsewhere, it lays a Foundation
for many dangerous Diseases.

That the Operation tends to spread and continue the Infection in a Place
longer than it might otherwise be.

That the continuing the Operation among us is likely to prove of most
dangerous Consequence.

By the Select-Men of the Town of Boston, July 22d.

The Number of Persons, Men, Women and Children that have died of the Smallpox
at Boston, from the middle of April last (being brought here then by the
Saltertuda's Fleet) to the 23d of this Instant July (being the hottest and the
worst Season of the Year to have any Distemper in) are, viz. 2 Men Strangers, 3
Men, 3 young Men, 2 Women, 4 Children, 1 Negro Man, 1 Negro Woman, and 1 Indian
Woman, 17 in all; of those that have had it, some are well recovered, and
others in a hopeful and fair Way of Recovery.

It is a thousand pities our Select-Men made so slight and trifling a
Representation of the Smallpox, that had always proved so fatal in
New England, as they seem to have done in this Advertisement.

FINIS.

