Mr. Cook's SERMON TO Young People.

A SERMON Preached to a SOCIETY OF YOUNG PEOPLE in Sudbury, On a Lord's Day
Evening, October 1730.

By William Cook, A. M. Pastor of a Church there.

Tit. ii. 12. Teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world.

2 Timothy ii. 22. Flee also youthful Lusts. --

BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. Green, 1731.

A SERMON Preached to a SOCIETY OF Young People.
1. PETER II. Chap. 11. v. Dearly beloved, I beseech you -- abstain from
fleshly lusts which war against the Soul.


THE Words now read, are a general Exhortation, the Apostle gives to those, to
whom he directs this Epistle, and it is made to them in the utmost compassion
and tenderness, with the greatest humility and meekness* Dearly beloved, I
beseech you, etc. He does it that the exhortation might the more agreably slide
into, and be the more likely to fix on the Mind. This may be the grand design
of this tenderness, and of his friendly Language: A good Example to be followed
by the Gospel Minister. And having laid so good a foundation by his soft and
tender address, for the entertainment of his Exhortation, he proceeds directly
to the Matter of it; and that is the most weighty and important. He persuades
them to abstain from fleshly lusts. By fleshly lusts I would understand in
general, all inordinate cravings and desires of the Soul after sensual Objects,
after the gross enjoyments of the present Life and World. This is the light and
view I purpose to consider these Lusts in, and no doubt is the true meaning of
them in the Text. I know they are frequently elsewhere taken in a different and
more restrained sense. Sometimes they intend some particular gross acts of Vice
which flow from Lust in the Heart, as the Streams do from the Fountain; and so
those Sins mentioned Chap. 4. v. 4. of this Epistle, are called the Lusts of
the Gentiles. Sometimes they intend the general Corruption of the Nature;
sometimes the desires after, and the gross acts of Uncleaness. But I would take
them here in the largest sense, to mean all worldly Lusts, the same with that,
Tit. 2.12. And as all these in particular, so all other kinds in general of
these fleshly Lusts are to be avoided, and abstained from, and not to be
indulged. And this weighty advice, the Apostle backs and enforces with two of
the most important Reasons in the World, with two of the most moving Arguments;
the one is drawn from our unsettled State and Condition in the present World. As
Pilgrims and Strangers. We all know with what carelessness and indifference
Travelers abroad in the World are wont to treat the Objects they meet with:
These they are not wont to be much affected with, looking upon themselves as
absent from and quickly to return home. And such should our carriage be toward
the enjoyments of the present World, we should carry it with the like coldness
and indifference toward them. The other Argument is taken from the great
danger of indulging these fleshly Lusts, and the great wrong and injury they
will most certainly do the Soul: they war against it, and if indulged, will be
likely to gain the victory and conquest over it, and finally will ruin and
destroy it. And although both these Arguments are very weighty and forceable to
persuade Men to abstain from fleshly Lusts; it is the last of them only, even
as they will be exceeding hurtful and injurious to the Soul, that I purpose in
the present Discourse to confine my self to; though the other may have some place
in the Discourse. And the general Observation I shall make as the ground and
foundation of the Discourse shall be this viz.

OBSER. That we should abstain from the inordinate indulgence of fleshly Lusts,
as they are very hurtful and injurious to the Soul.

I say sinful or inordinate Indulgence of fleshly Lusts, because taking of
fleshly Lusts in one sense, the indulgence of them is lawful, and so cannot be
hurtful or injurious to the Soul. Man in his two Constituent parts is Body and
Soul. And there are the Lusts or desires of the Body after these and those
sensible Objects, after those things that are necessary to the support and
comfort of it. And these desires are implanted on purpose to move Mankind to
pursue those things that are in such respects necessary for the Body, to render
it easy and happy. And it would most certainly carry in it a gross reflection
upon the great Creator and wise Author of our Being, to suppose that He had
made us with these desires, and all in vain; yea, and when it must needs be a
Crime in us to seek after the gratification, or the satisfaction of them. But
it is so far from this, that GOD Himself is pleased to propound these sensible
things to us as so many motives or arguments, to persuade us to the practice of
Religion. How often is He pleased to make the promises of Temporal Rewards to
Mankind, to encourage them to Obedience. The arguments like that, in Job 36.11.
are frequent, if they obey and serve him, They shall spend their Days in
prosperity, and their Years in pleasures. Now, can it be though it reasonable, that
GOD should thus propound these things to us, as arguments to Obedience; when at
the same time it would be unlawful for us to love and esteem them in some
degree and measure; and in the same proportion to look upon our selves
favored, and so far happy, when we are arrived at the enjoyment of them. There
are then these Desires that may be termed Fleshly, such as are to these and
those sensible Objects, that are adapted to the support and comfort of the
Body, and without which Mankind could not possibly Subsist, much less be happy,
that are lawful; and when these desires are confined within their proper bounds
and limits, extend no further than the Nature and the Necessity of them do in
reason allow, though they are still Fleshly, they are not injurious to the Soul;
not hurtful but subservient to the vigor of it, and the exercise of its Powers
in this imbodied State, wherein the Soul and the Body bear so intimate a
relation to one another. It is then the inordinate indulgence of these Desires,
that now falls under Consideration, and is so injurious to the Soul: And how
hurtful and injurious they are in all respects to the Soul, is exceeding hard
to declare. There is no one respect that can be though it on, wherein these fleshly
Lusts inordinately indulged, are not warring against the Soul. I would mention
a few of the most obvious, important and comprehensive Instances wherein they
are injurious to the Soul; which is all that can be allowed me, in the limits
of a short Discourse: which will abundantly discover to us of how great weight
the Argument is, to persuade us to abstain from them.

1. The inordinate indulgence of these Lusts, is Degrading and Debasing to the
Soul; and in this respect injurious to it. As the two Constituant parts of Man
are Body and Soul, and make the humane Compound, so the Soul is by far our most
superior Part, and from this we are principally and chiefly to draw our
Character. This Soul is truly and strictly Heaven-born: is the immediate
Offspring of GOD; without so much as the Agency and Instrumentality of any
second Causes at all; and on this account claims kindred with the Supreme of
the works of GOD, with the Angels, those Morning Stars, those bright
Intelligences. By this we stand nearly related to the World above. While the
other part of us, the Body was formed out of the Dust, made of the same vile
Materials, that the inferior Creation was made of; and on the account of this,
we very much resemble and stand nearly related to the World below: and while
this Body is thus gross and earthy, the Soul is Spiritual and Immortal, endowed
with the exalted Powers of Understanding, Willing, Choosing, Refusing, and the
like: is capable of more rational, manly and superior Pleasures, than what can
possibly flow from the gratification of the senses, from any bodily
satisfactions. And must it not then be a great dishonor to the Soul, an
Eclipsing of the Glory and Dignity of it, to make it a Servant, a Slave to the
Body? That while it is so excellent and superior in it self, capable of a far
greater happiness than can possibly flow from the indulgence of fleshly Lusts,
the Soul should be made to lie grovelling in the Dust, and converse with nothing
but Flesh and Sense. It is most certainly a horrid Degradation to the Soul, and
it brings Mankind upon a level with the Beasts that perish. Upon the account of
this Soul it is that we (especially) excel the (...) World; and if we enslave
this to our Lusts, where is the mighty difference between the Man and the
Bruit? A sensual happiness, is the highest they both aim at, and that both are
pursuing after. Where then is the difference? To make the Soul thus to truckle
to the Body, and to bring it down to serve only the mean purposes of it, and to
converse with nothing but Flesh and Sense, while it is capable of, and should
be employed in the service of GOD, and be conversing with things Heavenly and
Divine, most certainly is a shame to us; a horrid stain to our Nature; the
greatest dishonor to us: and so far the destoying of our Character, is
injurious to us.

2. The indulgence of these fleshly Lusts, tend greatly to darken and obscure
the Understanding of the Soul, and in this regard is very hurtful and
injurious. There is nothing that tends more directly to render the Soul cloudy
and dark, than the steams of sensual Lusts: as these tend directly to quench
the Motions of the Holy SPIRIT, so they do to put out the Light of
Understanding in the Soul. The subduing and mortifying these sensual Lusts, has
a tendency to improve and brighten the Understanding; and upon this account the
Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 19.7, 8. The Testimony of the Lord is sure, making
wise the simple, the Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the Eyes. And
a good Understanding have all they what keep his Commandments. And on this
account he was wiser and excelled his Teachers; while the indulging these and
those sensual Lusts tends directly to render the Soul, unactive, dull and
sottish. How does Intemperance, Unchastity and the like fleshly Lusts, not only
exhaust and drink up the very Spirits of the Man that indulges himself in the
Practice of them, but also cast a Mist and a Cloud over his Understanding, and
render him insensible, and keep him in a constant Doze, as tho'tless and
inadvertent as the very Beasts that perish. We see this in many a Sensualist;
not only that his Body becomes a walking Hospital, full of all kinds of
loathsome Diseases, but his Soul full of Darkness and Confusion; and the Light
of Understanding by GOD light up in the Soul, almost totally obscured and put
out. And is not this a great Injury to the Soul, to have any Mists and Clouds
hang upon the Understanding, upon which we absolutely depend to direct our way
for us, and in all cases to make it plain before us? We are unspeakably Unhappy
(yea it is one of our greatest Miseries) on the account of that Darkness that
has wrapped up the Understanding by our first parents Fall; and yet every
sinful Lust indulged tends to render that Darkness thicker and more total
still; so injurious is it to the Soul.

3. The indulgence of these fleshly Lusts is Destructive of the Peace and
Quietness of the Soul. The happiness of Man on Earth consists in the quietness
and easiness of his Mind; and the only way to attain and enjoy this happiness
is to mortify our Lusts and Corruptions, and to be steady in the Practice of
Religion; and the indulging sinful Lusts tends directly to render the Soul
restless and uneasy both while Men live, and very commonly when they come to
die.

1. The Peace of the Soul is destroyed by the indulgence of sinful Lusts for
the present, even while the Man Lives. It is impossible but Vice should make
the Soul uneasy; for Sin is the Sickness and Distemper of it; and the Soul can
no more be easy and calm, while it is infested with it, than the Body can be
easy, with a dislocated Bone or a raging Fever. If the Sensualist has not
stupefied and sinned away his Conscience, it is impossible but that he should
be always uneasy and discontented, and his Soul like the troubled Sea. What can
the lively apprehensions of the Wrath of GOD produce in the Soul, but uproar
and confusion! And this is every where represented to be the true State of a
Sinner, that he enjoys no true Peace. He may seem outwardly Easy and Merry; but
alas! it is only from the Teeth outward: Could we but retire into the Breast of
such a Man, we should find a great deal of uneasiness and sorrow. The
Observation of the wise Man concerning them is, That in the midst of laughter
their Heart is sorrowful, and the end of their Mirth is heaviness. And the
Prophet in the most lively manner represents their restlesness, by the Sea when
ruffled by a Storm or Tempest, whose Waters cannot rest, but are continually
casting up Mire and Dirt. There is no Peace says my God to the Wicked, Isa.
57.21. The Foundation of present Peace must be laid in Holiness. Great Peace
have they (says the Psalmist) that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend
them. The work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of Righteousness
Quietness and Assurance forever. Religion tends to allay those guilty Fears
that commonly arise in the Sinner's Soul, and to create that Peace and Joy,
that the Sinner never intermeddles with, and must forever be a stranger to, let
him be in what Place, in what Employment, in what Company soever. This is
generally the Sinner's Case; except by the repeated Acts of Vice, and the
frequent indulgence of fleshly Lusts, his Conscience is grown callous and
stupid; which is a Condition next to desperate; for while he that is awake and
in danger, is like to use Means for his safety, he that is asleep perishes
without Though It or Care. And as the indulgence of these tends to destroy the
Peace of the Soul, while the Man Lives; so,

2. They have the same tendency when Men come to Die. And truly, however Men
for the present may amuse and stifle their guilty Fears, then they will be
boisterous and break forth; and if they are not prevented by the violence and
stupefaction of the bodily Disease, they will then fill the Soul with uproar
and confusion. And indeed what can be the consequence of a sensual Life, but
this uneasiness and discontent? If the Man that has led such a Life when he
comes to Die be awake there is nothing most certainly in that gloomy Hour, that
can possibly be a solid Foundation of Peace and Comfort to him, let him cast
his Tho'ts which way he will. Suppose he then runs back in his Tho'ts upon the
past Passages of his Life, he finds them all filled up in the gratification of
his Lusts; finds his whole Life to have been spent in pampering the Body, and
in serving the Interests and the Desires of it. And all the while his Soul has
been never once though it on to any purpose, but left starving and dying; nothing
done for the Safety and Happiness of it. Can there be any ground of Peace in
this, thus to run back in his Tho'ts for Years past, be it Twenty, Thirty, or
Forty Years together, and find not one Action that he can rest satisfied in?
none but must needs administer uneasiness and terror to him. And if he looks
inward, turns in upon the Tho'ts of his Soul, will the prospect be more
comfortable than to reflect upon the Actions of his Life past? Verily No! There
he finds the imaginations of the tho'ts of his Soul to have been evil only evil
and that continually. There he finds all the Powers of his Soul disordered and
defiled by those sensual Lusts, that his whole Life has been spent in the
gratification of. He finds his Understanding destitude of the Knowledge of
things Spiritual and Divine; such gross Ignorance that the things of the Spirit
of GOD are counted foolishness; the Will fixed on sensual Objects, choosing
them, and full of enmity against GOD, and refusing any subjection to Him and
His Law. And from a lively sense of these things, there we shall find
Conscience rouzing like an angry Lion, and arraigning and condemning the Sinner
for all his sinful Indulgences and worldly Lusts, that his Memory in a fresh
and very lively manner brings now before him, and sets in the light of His
Countenance, as they have always been in the light of GOD's. And can there be
any Ease of Comfort in this prospect? No verily, nothing but distress and
anguish! And suppose he casts his Eyes around him, there he beholds no ground
of Comfort or Relief neither. He beholds, it may be, his old Companions in Sin
and Wickedness, those that have tempted him, and those that he has tempted into
these and those Vices! But all these are only so many Remembrancers of his Sin
and Guilt unto him, and so many additions to his present Misery and Torment.
And he may behold others also, that may drop a Tear to behold his Distress and
Anguish, and in tender Pity and Compassion will pour out a Prayer for his poor
distressed Soul: and that is all they can do; for when they would gradly speak
Peace to him, they dare not in faithfulness to GOD and his Soul; they see no
solid Foundation for it. And then, O how dreadful the Prospect to look upwards!
there to behold the Heavens gathering blackness and thundering; GOD armed with
revenging Justice, hastening to punish him for all his horrid Crimes;
resolvedly fixed (as he has the greatest reason to fear) never to show one
article of Mercy to him more. And therefore though he would now gladly be looking
up to GOD, who before has been in none of his tho'ts, he dare not: he is now
afraid to look unto Him, whom he has so often and so greatly affront'd; and yet
he dare not cast an eye any other way, every prospect is so full of horror. He
sees nothing before him but Legions of Devils, waiting for, standing ready to
catch, and greedily to seize on his guilty Soul, and to drag it away with them,
to their uncomfortable abodes; to be its unhappy convoy to the Place of
Torments, even to Hell, which he beholds gaping to receive it. And in this
confusion, the unhappy Creature would be glad to Repent and cannot; he knows
not where to begin this important business, nor where to end: and in this
confusion, the bodily disease draws on apace, and shuts up the Scene of his
unhappy Life; and in this dreadful horror he dies. Are not then, these fleshly
Lusts inexpressibly injurious to the Soul, when they lay such a foundation for
its misery, while the Sensualist Lived, and when he came to Die?

And then,

4. If we follow the Soul into the separate State, there we shall find how
infinitely more injurious these Lusts are unto it. Where the Soul is
immediately lodged upon its separation from the Body, in what Place, may not be
so easy perhaps to determine; though in a different Place, it may be, from what
it will be after the Resurrection of the Body, and the final Judgment. Wherever
the Place be, whether in some dismal Cavern, some gloomy Vault underground, it
is certainly where the Soul is miserable; unhappy beyond all though it and
expression. It is immediately gathered with Sinners like it self, into the same
Place of misery, horror and despair; placed at an infinite distance from the
Fountain of all Good, and the Center of our Happiness; shut out from His
favor, and under His frowns, and the bitter effects of His Anger, that, O who
knows the power of! but these unhappy Creatures, that feel the dreadful weight
of it: Condemned to the most wretched Society; to the Company of Devils and
damned Ghosts, like it, tormented in every Power of it: having Misery adapted
to the Nature of every Faculty, and particularly tormented with the strongest
desires after those sensual Satisfactions, that it sinfully indulged while on
Earth: and at the same time despairing, utterly of the gratification of them;
and all the while, full of direful expectations of more wrath and misery to
fall upon them, at the final Judgment, (so the Devils believe and tremble) and
of raging despair, arising from a full assurance of their being by the
immediate Decree of Heaven, chained down to endure this Misery to all Eternity.
This in brief is some small part of the injury, these fleshly Lusts, when
inordinately indulged, do to the Soul in the future State; as GOD has plainly
threatened, and as is the natural tendency of them. And who now can question
(even from these general hints) whether these Lusts are injurious to the Soul
or not? when they are so hurtful to it for the present and for the future, in
this World and in the next. And what more powerful Argument can be though it on to
persuade all Mankind to abstain from them.

This then is the only IMPROVEMENT I would make of what has been said, viz.

That as we love and regard our Souls, we would be persuaded to abstain from
fleshly Lusts that thus war against them. Arguments drawn, only from the
present Welfare of the Body, are will not to come with great Force upon us. When
we see this is for the Health, that for the Ease, and the other for the
Pleasure of the Body, we are easily persuaded to attend to them, and pursue
after them: And shall we be more easily moved to take care of the Body than of
the Soul? And be sooner awakened to guard against any Injury that may happen to
that, than of wronging the Soul, and that in the most substantial manner that
can be? There are many and the most weighty Considerations that can be, to
dissuade us from exposing our Souls to so great a Misery, as we shall do by
indulging of sinful Lusts; but what more weighty than these? We must be
regardless of the Dignity and Glory of them, destroy the Peace of them for the
present, and lay a sure Foundation for their unspeakable Misery in the coming
World: And yet we cannot be persuaded to abstain from them. These
Considerations, in point of our own Interest, make it the most reasonable thing
in the World, that we should always be upon our Watch and Guard, that the Soul
be not enslaved to the Body, and be made to serve the mean Desires and the
sordid Lusts of it. All Mankind are in great danger of being inordinate in the
indulgence of these Lusts. The natural Man's Life is spent in little else; and
therefore the Warning is very necessary and seasonable for us all. But among
Mankind, none are in greater danger, and more prone to give themselves a
greater Liberty herein, than the Youth. To you then, O Young Men, is this
Exhortation, with the greatest tenderness, and yet with the greatest
importunity, to be addressed.

Dearly Beloved, I beseech you abstain from fleshly Lusts, that war against the
Soul: That war against the Honor, the present Peace and future Happiness of
it. Be persuaded now to wage open War with these Lusts, and never suffer them
to gain the victory over you. You see how unspeakably injurious they will be to
you, (if indulged) while you Live, when you come to Die, and what a Misery they
lay you open to in the other World. And these Considerations are of vast
weight, to move you now to engage in this Warfare: And to encourage you into
this War, I would add a few Considerations (though general) yet the most moving;
and then leave with you an important Direction or two for the management of it,
and conclude the Discourse. And to persuade and encourage you then to wage War
with these Lusts, that War against the Soul, consider these three things only,
viz.

1. That no other Advantage you can possibly propound to your selves, will
recompense the Damage of Soul, you will sustain by indulging these fleshly
Lusts. You may propound the Advantage of Pleasure or of Profit, and the like.
And particularly the advantage of Pleasure, is one of the strongest Temptations
to Men in Youth to indulge their Lusts: But alas! What are these, compared with
the vast wrong and injury that is done the Soul? Our Savior has already
determined this for us: He has summed up the Account, and declares this to be
the foot of it, that if for the sake of all the Pleasures, Riches and Honors
of this whole World, a Man should expose and lose his Soul, he would be an
infinite loser; would make the like foolish Bargain with him, who exchanges
Pearls for Pebbles, Gold for common Dust; and infinitely more foolish, Mat.
16.26. What is a Man profited, if he gain the whole World and lose his own
Soul, or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? This Misery, this
Injury we bring upon the Soul, cannot be weighed down, by all that the most
extravagant Sensualist could possibly wish for, should he arrive to the
Enjoyment of it all. And you will but infinitely cheat and deceive your selves,
if you hope to obtain any thing that will equal this Misery, and be a Balance
to it.

And then Consider,

2. There is a possibility, and if you engage in the Warfare while in Youth, a
probability of obtaining the Victory and the Conquest. Now you have a greater
and more hopeful Prospect of it, than you will have hereafter. Indeed it is a
Warfare that must be maintained, and will continue as long as we remain in the
Body. We must wage a constant War with these Lusts: we must be always
mortifying and subduing of them; but the greatest struggle and conflict is at
first: Then is the opposition greater, and the conquest the more difficult to
obtain. The after conflicts will be more easy. And multitudes by the help of
the SPIRIT of CHRIST, have conquered them; and by the help of the same SPIRIT
are going on conquering and to conquer. And the same SPIRIT and Grace are ready
also to assist your sincere Endeavors: Yea, if you now early engage in this
Warfare, you of all others, have the most hopeful prospect of the Victory. For
nothing is more pleasing to Heaven, than to behold one in Youth, that is
surrounded with the most powerful Temptations to indulge them, waging open War
with these sensual Lusts; and whoever hopes to obtain Divine Aid and
Assistance, such a one has no reason to Despair of it. The longer these Lusts
are indulged, the more difficult and hard does it grow to mortify and subdue
them; for repeated Acts of Vice do most certainly strengthen the Habit, and
render a Man's Repentance and Reformation the more difficult and unlikely.
Hence is that of the Prophet, Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard
his Spots? Then may ye that are accustomed to do Evil, learn to do well. And
will you now expose your Souls to this Misery, by indulging sinful Lusts, when
you may thus conquer them all! And when if you engage against them, depending
on the SPIRIT and the Strength of CHRIST JESUS, you may be sure of Success. How
inexcusable will you be, when there is a possibility, and the highest
probability of securing your Souls from it, if after all you thus wrong and
ensnare them?

And then consider,

3. Finally, An incorruptible Crown of Glory will be the Issue of the Conquest.
If you get the Mastery over these Lusts, you not only deliver the Soul from
that Misery, that otherwise it is in every respect exposed to; but you will lay
a sure Foundation for a Crown of Life and Glory that will never fade away. That
most certainly will be the happy Conclusion of the Conquest. And will you not
strive for the Mastery, when in the Promises of GOD, so great a Prize is in
view? Most certainly, very unworthy are his Tho'ts of the Joys and Pleasures of
the heavenly World, that prefers the Pleasures of Sin before them; and at the
same Time, does it at the loss and expense of his Soul.

These, among the many Considerations I might have left with you, are weighty
enough to persuade you to engage with Courage and Resolution against these
Lusts that War against the Soul.

I have now a few general and plain Directions to leave with you; and I have
done.

1. Beg of GOD to give you a just notion of the World, a right view of it is
Enjoyments. The wrong apprehensions and the false notions that Mankind
entertain of the present World and it is Enjoyments, is one of their greatest
Miseries here on Earth: for from mistaken apprehensions of these things; from
looking upon these things as most excellent, easily and very naturally follows
the mistake of exercising our greatest Care about them. And none are more prone
than Persons in Youth to entertain an unjust Thought of these things. They look
gay and tempting to them, and commonly make a fair show of Happiness; and they
above all others, are in the utmost danger of pursuing them under that notion.
They cannot see that the Riches of this World are uncertain, that the Pleasures
are all short-lived, flashy and unsatisfactory; and that worldly Honors are
more empty than either of them: They cannot be persuaded, but that Happiness
consists in the Enjoyment of these. They see not these things in their true
Colors; they view them in a false Light, and no wonder they make a false
Judgment of them. And as through the darkness and blindness of their Minds, they
do not see through the deceit of these things; so they may be imposed more easily
upon, having not met with so many Disappointments in their Expectations from
them, and in their pursuits after them. And therefore, one of the first things
you should beg for and labor after, is, that you may have a true sight of the
Vanity of the World, and of the insufficiency of all it is Enjoyments to make
you substantially Happy, that you may not be imposed upon and cheated by the
seeming and transitory Glory of these things. In this lies your greatest hazard
as you first appear in the World and on the Stage of Action. And here then
should be your greatest Guard. Until your Tho'ts are corrected, and your Views
set right about the present World, it is not possible that any Considerations
should prevail upon you, to dissuade you from indulging sensual Lusts; from
pursuing the Riches, Honors and Pleasures of this World to make you Happy. As
the Foundation of all then, Cry to GOD, as you are setting forth into the
World, That He would open your Eyes, and effectually convince you, that
Happiness lies not below the Skies, and that He would turn away your Eyes from
beholding Vanity.

2. Seek earnestly for the Divine SPIRIT to help and assist you in the
conquering and subduing your fleshly Lusts. Though it be upon all accounts
reasonable in you now to wage open War with these Lusts, yet engage not in it
trusting and depending on your selves. You are not strong enough, nor
sufficient to conquer and overcome the least Corruption, that your sensual part
calls upon you to gratify and indulge, entirely of your selves; but will fall
down an easy Conquest before the least Assault. You absolutely need the SPIRIT
and Grace of CHRIST to aid and assist you; and these you have the strongest
ground to seek for, from that encouragement or Promise our Savior gives to
move you to plead for them, Mat. 7.7. Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and ye
shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you. And in the (...) words, He
there tells you, that He is more willing to give His HOLY SPIRIT to you, than
ever you can find the most indulgent of your earthly Parents to bestow these
things upon you. And will you not then, under a deep sense of the need you have
of the SPIRIT, to assist you to mortify your Lusts and Corruptions; and under a
sense of our Savior's willingness to afford Him to you, be persuaded to go
earnestly to our Savior by Prayer, that you may obtain those Assistances from
His SPIRIT that may be sufficient for you? Though you cannot of your selves
conquer your Lusts, you can do it by the SPIRIT of GOD: And GOD never denied
His SPIRIT to those that sincerely and earnestly cried to Him that they might
obtain Him. Go then to GOD, and plead His readiness to bestow, and your need to
obtain the SPIRIT; and you will be successful, and so gain the victory and
conquest over all your Lusts and Passions.

3. Watch and Guard against the first Motions and Inclinations of your Soul
toward sinful Lusts, and reject them with Abhorrence. Dally and parley with no
Temptation: This proves the fall and ruin of multitudes of Mankind. When they
are first moved by their own corrupt Hearts, or assaulted with any Temptation
from without, to indulge this or the other sinful Lust, they stand still to
argue and to reason the Case; and every moment they are debating, the
Temptation gains ground upon them, and they insensibly and suddenly fall by it.
There is no trifling in such a Case. To hesitate is to be undone. Whenever then
you are Tempted, reject the first Motion that is made, with Abhorrence, if you
would be safe and come off a Conqueror. You all know how dangerous it is to let
down the Watch, and to enter into a Parley with an Enemy that is waiting for an
Opportunity to surprise us. The Apostle declares, Jam. 1.15. Then when Lust
has conceived, it brings forth Sin. The first approaches of Sin are usually
Modest; but afterward it makes bolder Attempts. Your Wisdom then is to resist
the first beginnings of Sin, to suppress it in the Thought, to mortify it in
the Heart, before it breaks forth in the Life.

And then finally,

4. Be frequent in your Contemplations on the Frailty and Mortality of the
Body. You of late in special, have had by the Providence of GOD the fullest
Convictions and the plainest Demonstrations of it that can be. The repeated
Deaths of late, and the removal of those of the same Rank, Order and Society
with you, are clear Discoveries of your Frailty also, as well as the (...) of
Mortality that you carry about with you in your own Bodies. And no doubt, you
have been following them in your Tho'ts, into the Grave. Your highest Wisdom is
then to cherish such Tho'ts in you. Don't stifle them, nor suppress them: for
nothing is a better Preservative, a more effectual Motive to dissuade you from
indulging fleshly Lusts. View the Body in the Grave; there behold the State and
Condition of it; and then judge, and say, whether it be worth the while to
spend the whole Life in the present World to indulge it, and to gratify the
Lusts of it.

Look upon your selves as Pilgrims and Strangers upon Earth, and upon your Body
as mouldering apace into Dust, and it will most certainly tend greatly to the
mortification of fleshly Lusts. This is one Argument used by the Apostle in the
Text; and it is most certainly very weighty and moving.

O who could indulge these Lusts, that looked upon his Body really as Dying;
and shortly to lie senseless and tho'tless, mixed with the common Dust! Into
the Grave then frequently carry your Thot's: And diligently observe these
Counsels; and the LORD give you Understanding in all Things.

AMEN.

