Capt. Clap's MEMOIRS

MEMOIRS OF Capt. Roger Clap. Relating some of GOD's Remarkable Providence to
Him, in bringing him into New England; and some of the Straits and Afflictions,
Good People met with here in their Beginnings. AND Instructing, Counselling,
Directing and Commanding his Children and Childrens Children, and Household, to
serve the LORD in their Generations to the latest Posterity.

Heb. xi. 4. -- He being dead, yet speaks.

BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. Green, 1731.

TO THE New England Reader.
UPON my searching for Materials for our Chronology, the following Piece with
others coming to hand; I cannot but think it worthy of the public View. Not
that I suppose it will please the Eye of the politer World: But because it
gives a strong and lively Image of the extraordinary pious Spirit and Design of
those English People, who first came over and dwelt in this Indian Wilderness;
and in every serious Mind cannot but raise a Veneration for them, and a
Pleasure to review their bright Examples.

The Author was One among them; an Eyewitness of the things he writes of; and
by the public and continued Esteem his Country paid him in his Day, his
Testimony comes with Power upon us; and the Style so plain and natural, that in
the Reading, it seems as if we came over with Him, and were living in those
pious Times.

He shows the mighty Spirit of Love to GOD and Zeal for his instituted Worship
that moved and wrought in our Predecessors: How heavenly-minded, how humble,
and how contented under all the Straits and Difficulties of a new Plantation,
at so great a Distance from any humane Succor.

He was desirous that GOD should have the Glory of his Providence, in bringing
Him with so many pious People into this hideous Land, in Preserving and
supplying them, increasing, prospering, and working wonderful Salvations for
them. And he was greatly concerned that Posterity, and especially his own,
should both know these things and walk in the good ways of their Forefathers:
To this* He therefore most pathetically charges and commands them; warning them
of Evil, and relating his own Experience for their Direction and Encouragement.

The Account subjoined is drawn by another hand: and though it advisable to be
Published also; that his Offspring may know the religious Ancestor from whom
they come, and their awful Obligations to fear and serve the GOD of their
Fathers.

And on this Occasion, I cannot but recommend to our grave and pious Heads of
Households, the useful Practice of Leaving in Writing their solemn Charges to
their Posterity: That when the Parents speak and live no more on Earth, their
Children after them may frequently review both their Examples and Instructions,
and preserve them better in their Minds. I cannot but think that this, with the
Divine Blessing would be an happy Method of preventing the Declension of many
Families, and of keeping alive the things that remain among us, and are ready
to Die. And methinks, as every pious Father would in a lawful way desire to
speak to his Children after his Decease; He can do no less for the Preservation
of the Life of Religion, and for the Souls of his surviving Offspring. His oral
Counsels are too like the Wind, which quickly passes: But impressed in written
Monuments, remain to excite them every Day; and if neglected, to witness
against them.

T. Prince.
Boston, Aug. 16. 1731.
Capt. Clap's MEMOIRS, etc.
I Thought good, my dear Children, to leave with you some Account of God's
remarkable Providence to me, in bringing me into this Land, and placing me
here among his dear Servants, and in his House, who am most unworthy of the
least of his Mercies. The Scripture requires us to tell God's wondrous Works
to our Children, that they may tell them to their Children, that God may have
Glory throughout all Ages. Amen.

I was Born in England in Sallcom in Devonshire, in the Year of our Lord 1609.
My Father was a Man fearing God, and in good esteem among God's faithful
Servants: His outward Estate was not great; I think not above Eighty Pounds per
Annum. We were Five Brethren (of which I was the youngest) and Two Sisters. God
was graciously pleased to breathe by his holy Spirit (I hope) in all our
Hearts, if in mine; which I am not altogether without hopes of. Four of us
Brethren lived at home: I did desire my dear Father (my dear Mother being dead)
that I might live abroad, which he consented to: So I first went for trial to
live with a worthy Gentleman, Mr. William Southcot, who lived about Three Miles
from the City of Exon. He was careful to keep a Godly Family. There being but a
very mean Preacher in that Place, we went every Lord's Day into the City, where
were many famous Preachers of the Word of God. I then took such a liking unto
the Revd. Mr. John Warham, that I did desire to live near him: So I removed
(with my Father's Consent) into the City, and lived with one Mr. Mossiour, as
famous a Family for Religion as ever I knew: He kept Seven or Eight Men, and
diverse Maidservants; and he had a Conference upon a Question propounded once a
Week in his own Family: With him I Covenanted. I never so much as heard of
New England until I heard of many godly Persons that were going there, and that
Mr. Warham was to go also. My Master asked me whether I would go? I told him
were I not engaged unto him I would willingly go: He answered me, that should
be no hindrance, I might go for him or for my self which I would. I then wrote
to my Father who lived about Twelve Miles off, to Entreat his leave to go to
New England; who was so much displeased at first, that he wrote me no Answer,
but told my Brethren that I should not go. Having no Answer, I went and made my
Request to him, and God so Inclined his Heart, that he never said me Nay: For
now God sent the Reverend Mr. Maverick, who lived Forty Miles off, a Man I
never saw before: He having heard of me, came to my Father's House, and my
Father agreed that I should be with him and come under his Care, which I did
accordingly.

Mind by what I have already expressed, That it was God that did draw me by his
Providence out of my Father's Family, and weaned me from it by degrees; It was
God put it into my Heart to incline to Live abroad; and it was God that made my
Father willing. God by his Providence brought me near Mr. Warham, and inclined
my Heart to his Ministry: God by his Providence moved the Heart of my Master
Mossiour to ask me whether I would go to New England: It was God by his
Providence that made me willing to leave my dear Father, and dear Brethren and
Sisters, my dear Friends and Country: It was God that made my Father willing
upon the first Motion I made in Person, to let me go: It was God that sent Mr.
Maverick that pious Minister to me, who was unknown to him, to seek me out that
I might come hither. So God brought me out of Plymouth the 20th of March in the
Year, 1620, 30, and landed me in Health at Nantasket on the 30th of May. 1630,
I being then about the Age of Twenty one Years. Blessed be God that brought me
Here!

Now coming into this Country, I found it a vacant Wilderness, in respect of
English. There were indeed some English at Plymouth and Solemn, and some few at
Charlstown, who were very destitute when we came ashore; and Planting Time
being past, shortly after Provision was not to be had for Money. I wrote to my
Friends, namely to my dear Father to send me some Provision, which accordingly
he did; and also gave order to one of his Neighbors to supply me with what I
needed (he being a Seaman) who coming hither supplied me with diverse things.
But before this Supply came, yea and after too (that being spent) and the then
unsubdued Wilderness yielding little Food, many a Time if I could have filled
my Belly, though with mean Victuals, it would have been sweet unto me. Fish was a
good help unto me, and others. Bread was so very scarce, that sometimes I though it
the very Crusts of my Father's Table would have been very sweet unto me. And
when I could have Meal and Water and Salt boiled together, it was so good, who
could wish better?

I took Notice of it, as a great Favor of God unto me, not only to preserve my
Life, but to give me Contentedness in all these Straits; insomuch that I do not
remember that ever I did wish in my Heart that I had not come into this
Country, or wish my self back again to my Father's House: Yea I was so far from
that, that I wished and advised some of my dear Brethren to come hither also;
which accordingly one of my Brothers and those two that married my two Sisters,
sold their Means and came hither. The Lord Jesus Christ was so plainly held out
in the Preaching of the Gospel unto poor lost Sinners, and the absolute
Necessity of the New Birth, and God's holy Spirit in those Days was pleased to
accompany the Word with such Efficacy upon the Hearts of many; that our Hearts
were taken off from Old-England and set upon Heaven. The Discourse, not only of
the Aged, but of the Youth also, was not, How shall we go to England? (though
some few did not only so Discourse, but also went back again) but How shall we
go to Heaven? Have I true Grace wrought in my Heart? Have I Christ or no? O how
did Men and Women, young and old, Pray for Grace, beg for Christ in those Days;
and it was not in vain: Many were Converted, and others established in
Believing: many joined unto the several Churches where they lived, confessing
their Faith publicly, and showing before all the Assembly their Experiences of
the Workings of God's Spirit in their Hearts to bring them to Christ: which
many Hearers found very much Good by, to help them to try their own Hearts, and
to consider how it was with them; whether any work of God's Spirit were wrought
in their own Hearts or no? Oh the many Tears that have been shed in Dorchester
Meeting House at such times, both by those that have declared God's Work on
their Souls, and also by those that heard them. In those days, God, even our
own God, did Bless New England. I find by what I heard from those that have
publicly declared what God had done for their Souls in bringing them unto
Christ by Faith, that God does work diverse ways upon the Hearts of Men, even as
it pleases him; upon some more sensibly, and upon others more insensibly;
verifying that Text in the 3d Chapter of John, 8th Verse, The Wind blows
where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence
it comes, and whither it goes: So is every one that is born of the Spirit.
Though we may hear the Sound of it, that is, be sensible that the Spirit works,
or has been at work; yet not know whence it comes, etc. If ever there were the
Work of Grace wrought savingly in my Heart; the Time when, the Place where, the
manner how, was never so apparent unto me, as some in their Relations say it
has been unto them.

I shall hint a little unto you what I have found. I remember God did long ago
convince me of my Sin, (I cannot tell you how) and also of a corrupt Nature,
whereby I feel my self prone to Sin. I had in my younger Days a love to Sin;
and had it not been for the Fear of Hell, and of my Parents and Friends, I
doubtless should have been as Vile as the worst of Men. The Care and Counsel of
my dear Friends, by the Restraining Grace of God, kept me from committing of
those horrid Abominations that some fell into; yet am I not thereby Justified.
I had such a love to Play with Children and Youth, that I did too often Play
with them upon the Lord's Day, if I could hide it from my dear Relatives. But
God was pleased to make my Conscience to be out of quiet, which made me Pray to
God many Times in Secret; yet I had a Love to the Pleasure of Sin, and did love
to see others Play though it were on the Lord's Day. But on a Time on the
Lord's Day, when I was standing by, and seeing some Youths Play, they gave me
those Points which they played for, to hold for them until their Game was out;
and my Conscience not being quiet, God brought that saying of Saul, afterward
Paul, to my Mind, who did acknowledge that he was guilty of the Death of
Stephen; for he stood by, and kept the Garments of them that slew him: I then
put down that which I had in keeping for them, and went away; and God did help
me afterward to delight more in Them that feared him. I did often go to hear
the Word of God preached, with my Brethren and others abroad, when we had no
Preaching at home; and God inclined my Heart to love those that feared him.
That Text in 1 John iii. 14. I have often heard alleged, We know that we have
passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren; though I heard also it
must be because the Image of God was on them. Upon Examination of my self,
whether I did love the Saints upon right grounds? I did and do still hope that
my Love to the Saints was and is rightly grounded; and that for these Reasons;

1. In former Times I do remember there was a Young Man came into the
Congregation where I was, a Stranger to me, and a very hard favored Man; I had
no love to his Person; but not long after I heard, that he feared God; and upon
the very Report thereof my Heart was knit unto him, although I never spoke with
him that I know of.

2. Because I find my Heart does contemn vile Persons. I do not desire their
Society: But when I am by God's Providence called to be with such, so that I
cannot avoid it, I say in my Heart. Woe is me that I am constrained to be with
such Persons.

3. To this very Day if I perceive or do but hear of a Man or Women that
fears God, let him be Rich or Poor, English or Indian, Portugal or Negro, my
very Heart closes with him.

4. Because my Heart does most close with, and most highly prize those that are
most excellent, most holy, most worthy Instruments of God's Glory and his
People's Good. My earnest Desire and Prayer is, that God will help me to love
his Graces more and more in all Men wherever the Grace of God appears to be.

After God had bought me into this Country, He was pleased to give me Room in
the Hearts of his Servants; so that I was admitted into the Church Fellowship
at our first beginning in Dorchester, in the Year 1630. Jesus Christ being
clearly Preached, and the way of coming to him by Believing was plainly shown
forth; yet because many in their Relations spoke of their great Terrors and
deep Sense of their lost Condition, and I could not so find as others did, the
Time which God wrought the Work of Conversion in my Soul, not in many respects
the Manner thereof; it caused in me much Sadness of Heart, and Doubtings how it
was with me, Whether the Work of Grace were ever savingly wrought in my Heart
or no? How to cast off all Hope, to say, and verily to Believe that there was
no Work of Grace wrought by God in my Heart, this I could not do; yet how to be
in some measure assured thereof was my great Concern: But hearing Mr. Cotton
Preach out of the Revelations, that Christ's Church did come out of great
Tribulation, he had such a Passage as this in his Sermon, That a small running
Stream was much better than a great Land Flood of Water, though the Flood makes
the greatest Noise: So, says he, A little constant Stream of godly Sorrow, is
better than great Horror: God spoke to me by it, it was no little Support unto
me. And God helped me to hang on that Text (and through his Grace I will continue
so to do) viz. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all Acceptance, that
Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners. God has made me sensible that
I am a Sinner, and Jesus Christ came to save Sinners, and why not me, though a
very sinful Man: Through the Grace of God I desire to rest alone upon Jesus
Christ for Salvation.

In my saddest Troubles for want of a clear Evidence of my good Estate, I did
on a Time Examine my self upon my Bed in the Night, concerning my spiritual
Estate; Putting my self upon this Trial, How my Heart stood affected to Sin?
The Question to my Soul was this (pitching upon that Sin which I did confess my
natural Corruption most inclined me to) The Question, I say which by God's
help, I put to my very Heart and Soul was, Whether if God would assure me that
I should be saved, although I should commit such a Sin, my Heart were willing
to commit it or no? And my very Heart and Soul answered, No, I would not Sin
against God, though I should not be damned for sinning, because God has
forbidden it. At that Time my Conscience did witness to me that my State was
good: And God's holy Spirit did witness (I do believe) together with my Spirit,
that I was a Child of God: and did fill my Heart and Soul with such a full
Assurance that Christ was mine, that it did so transport me as to make me cry
out upon my Bed with a loud Voice, He is come, He is come. And God did melt my
Heart at that Time so that I could, and did mourn and shed more Tears for Sin,
than at other Times: Yea the Love of God, that He should Elect me, and save
such a worthless one as I was, did break my very Heart. I say again, When I had
most Assurance of God's Love, I could mourn most for my Sins.

Dear Children, Slight not serious Examination: It is good to commune with your
own Hearts upon your Bed. That Glimpse of God's eternal Love which I had at
that Time, was better to me than all the World: yea for better than Life it
self. But Oh wretched Man that I am, I have a Body of Death that presses me
down, and hinders me from living always in such a heavenly Frame: But I do
desire to devote my self unto God to be His; resting and relying upon Him alone
for Grace and Glory. If God shall be pleased to save me, find a poor Worm, from
my Sins, and at last bring me to himself in Heaven at my Death, let him have
everlasting Honor, Glory and Praise, World without end. Amen.

The Scripture says, He that Believes shall be saved: I hope God has not only
wrought Historical Faith in me, but also true Justifying Faith; Faith to
receive Jesus Christ to be my King, Priest and Prophet: If my Heart do not
deceive me, I do prize him above Kingdoms: I desire him more than Life, and to
be made more and more like him in Holiness and Righteousness all the Days of my
Life. Oh the Riches of his free Grace to put any holy Desires in my Heart! I
leave this with you, that you may plead God's free Promises, which are, That He
will circumcise our Hearts and the Hearts of our Seed. God's Covenant is unto
the Faithful and to their Seed. Pray earnestly that God will be pleased to
circumcise your Hearts, and cause you to walk in his ways; so shall you be
serviceable to him here, and be everlastingly Happy in the World to come. I
also leave these my Experiences with you, not knowing but it may be some
Support unto you, although you cannot find that methodical Work in your
Conversion, as some say they find in theirs. Sure God works diversely on the
Hearts of his Children in their Conversion. If God works any manner of way for
the bringing of you to Christ, to rest on Him alone, and fill your Hearts with
Love to God and his People, and help you to be low in your own Esteem, and to
hate all Sin in your selves and all Men; Bless God for such an unspeakable
Gift, though you know not the Time, nor the Manner of God's working in you.

I now return to declare unto you some of the wonderful Works of God in
bringing so many of his faithful Servants hither into this Wilderness, and
Preserving us and ours unto this Day; notwithstanding our great Unworthiness,
and notwithstanding the many Assaults and Stratagems of Satan and his
Instruments against God's People here. I say wondrous Works! For was it not a
wondrous Work of God, to put it into the Hearts of so many Worthys to agree
together, when Times were so bad in England, that they could not Worship God
after the due manner prescribe in his most holy Word, but they must be
Imprisoned, Excommunicated etc. I say that so many should agree to make humble
Suit unto our Sovereign Lord the KING, to grant them and such as they should
approve of, a Patent of a Tract of Land in this remote Wilderness, a Place not
Inhabited but by very barbarous Nations! And was it not a wondrous good Hand
of God to incline the Heart of our KING so freely to Grant it, with all the
Privileges which the Patent expresses! And what a wondrous Work of God was
it, to stir up such Worthys to undertake such a difficult Work, as to remove
themselves and their Wives and Children, from their Native Country, and to
leave their gallant Scituations there, to come into this Wilderness, to set up
the pure Worship of God here! Men fit for Government in the Magistracy, and in
Families; and sound, godly, learned Men for the Ministry, and others that were
very precious Men and Women, who came in the Year 1630. Them that came then
were MAGISTRATES; Men of Renown were, Mr. Winthrop Governor, Mr. Dudley,
Deputy Governor, Sir Richard Saltonstall, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Rossiter, Mr.
Ludlow, Mr. Nowel, and Mr. Bradstreet: Mr. Endicott came before, and others
came then, besides those named. And there came famous MINISTERS in that Year,
and afterward: as to name some; Mr. Wilson, Mr. Warham, Mr. Marverick, and Mr.
Phillips In our low Estate God did Cheer our Hearts in sending good and holy
Men and Women, and also famous Preachers of the Word of God; as Mr. Eliot, Mr.
Weld, Mr. Cotton, Mr. Hooker, Mr. Bulkley, Mr. Stoughton, Mr. Nathanael Rogers,
and Mr. Ezekiel Rogers, Mr. Shepard, Mr. Mather, Mr. Peter's, Mr. Davenport, Mr.
Whiting, Mr. Cobbet, Mr. Hubbard, Mr. Brown, Mr. Flint, Mr. Thomson, Mr.
Newman, Mr. Prudden, Mr. Norris, Mr. Huit, Mr. Street, and many others. Thus
did God work wonderfully for his poor People here.

Then in those Days did God manifest his Presence among us, in converting many
Souls, in gathering his dear Ones into Church Fellowship each with other, by
solemn Covenants; wherein they gave up themselves and their Seed to the Lord,
choosing Him to be their God, who has freely promised so to be, and to our
Seed for ever, if we and they do not forsake him. But if any of you (dear
Children) forsake the Lord, though you were the Sons of David, he would cast you
off for ever. Cleave to God, and never, never depart from Him; and He will
never fail you nor forsake you. In those Days great was the Tranquillity and
Peace of this poor Country: And there was great Love one to another: very ready
to help each other; not seeking their own, but every one another's Wealth. Then
Sin did not so openly abound among us: Drunkenness, Adultery, Fornication,
Oppression, and abominable Pride which now abounds among us, and threatens our
Ruin, was then loathsome almost in every ones Eyes. Then God did Bless us in
the Fruits of the Earth, but especially in spiritual Things; many Souls were
converted to God, and very often many added to the Churches.

But this glorious Work of God toward his People here was soon maligned by
Satan; and he cast into the Minds of some corrupt Persons very erroneous
Opinions, which did breed great Disturbance in the Churches. And he puffed up
his Instruments with horrible Pride, insomuch that they would oppose the Truth
of God delivered Publicly: and some times, yea most times they would do it by
way of Query, as if they desired to be informed: but they did indeed accuse our
godly Ministers of not preaching Gospel, saying they were Legal Preachers, but
themselves were for free Grace, and Ministers did Preach a Covenant of Works;
which was a false Aspersion on them. The Truth was, they would willingly have
lived in Sin, and encouraged others so to do, etc. And yet think to be saved by
Christ, because his Grace is free; forgetting (it seems) that those whom Christ
does save from Hell, he also freely of his Grace does save from Sin; for he
came to save his People from their Sins, to give Repentance and Remission of
Sins.

In our beginning many were in great Straits, for want of Provision for
themselves and their little Ones. Oh the Hunger that many suffered, and saw no
hope in an Eye of Reason to be supplied, only by Clams, and Muscles, and Fish.
We did quickly build Boats, and some went a Fishing: But Bread was with many a
very scarce thing: and Flesh of all kind as scarce. And in those Days, in our
Straits, though I cannot say God sent a Raven to feed us, as He did the Prophet
Elijah; yet this I can say to the I raise of God's Glory, that He sent not only
poor ravenous Indians, which came with their Baskets of Corn on their Backs, to
Trade with us, which was a good Supply unto many; but also sent Ships from
Holland and from Ireland with Provisions, and Indian Corn from Virginia, to
supply the Wants of his dear Servants in this Wilderness, both for Food and
Raiment. And when Peoples Wants were great, not only in one Town but in diverse
Towns; such was the godly Wisdom, Care and Prudence (not Selfishness but
Self-Denial) of our Governor Winthrop and his Assistants, that when a Ship
came laden with Provisions, they did Order that the whole Cargo should be
bought for a general Stock: And so accordingly, it was, and Distribution was
made to every Town, and to every Person in each Town, as every Man had need.
Thus God was pleased to care for his People in Times of Straits, and to fill
his Servants with Food and Gladness: Then did all the Servants of God Bless his
holy Name, and love one another with pure Hearts fervently.

Before I proceed any further, I will inform you that God stirred up his poor
Servants to use Means in their beginning for their Preservation; though a low
and weak People, yet a willing People to lay out their Estates for the Defense
of themselves and others. They having Friends in diverse Places who thought it
best for our safety to build a Fort upon the Island now called Castle-Island;
at first they built a Castle with Mud-Walls, which stood diverse Years: First
Capt. Simpkins was Commander thereof, and after him, Lieut. Monish, for a
little space. When the Mud-Walls failed, it was built again with Pine Trees and
Earth; and Capt. Davenport was Commander. When that decayed, which was within a
little Time, there was a small Castle built with Brick Walls, and had three
Rooms in it; a dwelling Room below, a lodging Room over it, the Gun Room over
that, wherein stood Six very good Saker Guns, and over it upon the Top Three
lesser Guns. All the Time of our Weakness, God was pleased to give us Peace,
until the Wars with the Dutch in Charles the II's Time. At that Time our Works
were very weak, and Intelligence came to us that Durother Or, DE RUITHER, a
famous Dutch Admiral.
a Dutch Commander of a Squadron of Ships, was in the West Indies, and did
intend to visit us; whereupon our Battery also was repaired, wherein are Seven
good Guns. But in the very Time of this Report in July 1665, God was pleased to
send a grievous Storm of Thunder and Lightning, which did some hurt at Boston,
and struck dead here at the Castle-Island, that worthy, renowned Captain
Richard Davenport; upon which the General Court in Aug. 10th following,
appointed another It was Capt. CLAP Himself.
Captain in the Room of him that was slain. But behold God wrought for us; for
although Durother intended to come here, yet God by contrary Winds kept him
out; so he went to Newfoundland, and did great spoil there. And again when
Danger grew on us by reason of the late Ware with Holland, God permitted our
Castle at that very Time to be Burnt down; which was on the 21st Day of March
1672, 3: But still God was pleased to keep this Place in Safety: The Lord
enlarge our Hearts unto Thankfulness.

I will now return unto what I began to hint unto you before; namely, that
Satan and his Instruments did malign us, and oppose our Godly Preachers, saying
they were legal Preachers, but themselves were for free Grace, and for the
Teachings of the Spirit: And they prevailed so by their Flatteries and fair
Speeches, that they led away not only Silly Women laden with their Lusts, but
many Men also, and some of strong Parts too; who were not ashamed to give out
that our Ministers were but legal Preachers, and so endeavored to bring up an
evil Report upon our faithful Preachers, that they themselves might be in high
Esteem. And many of them would presume to Preach in private Houses, both Men
and Women, much like the Quakers. They would talk of the Spirit, and of
Revelations by the Spirit without the Word, as the Quakers do, talk of the
Light within them, rejecting the holy Scriptures. But God by his Servants
assembled in a Synod at Cambridge in 1637, did discover his Truth most plainly,
to the Establishment of his People, and the changing of some, and to the
recovery of not a few, which had been drawn away with their Dissimulations.
Thus God delivered his People out of the Snare of the Devil at that Time. Let
Us, and do You in your Generations, Bless the holy Name of the Lord: the Snare
is broken, and we and ours are delivered. There were some that not only stood
out obstinate against the Truth, but continually reviled both our godly
Ministers and Magistrates, and greatly troubled our Israel: But by Order of the
General Court they were Banished out of this Jurisdiction. And then had the
Churches Rest and were mulplied.

Many Years after this, Satan made another Assault upon God's poor People here,
by stirring up the Quakers to come amongst us, both Men and Women; who
pretended Holiness and Perfection, saying they spoke and acted by the Spirit
and Light within, which (as they say) is their Guide: And most Blasphemiously
said, that the Light within is the Christ the Savior; and deceived many to
their Persuasion. But, blessed be God, the Government and Churches both, did
bear witness against them, and their loathsome and pernicious Doctrine; for
which they were Banished out of this Jurisdiction, not to return without
License, upon pain of Death. The Reason of that Law was, because God's People
here, could not Worship the true and living God, as He has appointed us in our
public Assemblies, without being disturbed by them: And other weighty Reasons;
as the Dangerousness of their Opinions, etc. Some of them presumed to Return,
to the loss of their Lives, for breaking that Law, which was made for our Peace
and Safety.

Dear Children, Beware of False Teachers, though they come unto you in Sheep's
Clothing as some of the Anabaptists do, yet they will prove many of them (I
doubt) but as ravening Wolves; their Doctrine being so corrupt, as appears in
their printed Books. One of them says, That it is an Article of his Faith, that
the Miseries and Death that came by Adam's Fall, extends not unto all
Eternity. Another cries down all Learning of Sciences and Tongues to fit Men
for the Work of the Ministry. Others of them deny that the Magistrate has any
Power to punish the Breach of the first Table of the Law; although the
Scripture be plain, that the Magistrate ought to pull down the Groves, and
overthrow the Images set up for Idolatry, yea though it were the brazen
Serpent, and call it Nehushtan.

Now as Satan has been a lying Spirit to deceive and ensnare the Mind to draw
us from God by Error, so has He stirred up evil Men to seek the Hurt of this
Country; but God has delivered his poor People here from Time to Time:
Sometimes by putting Courage into our Magistrates to punish those that did
Rebel; and sometimes God has wrought for us by his Providence other-ways. Here
was one Ratcliff spoke boldly and wickedly against the Government and
Governors here, using such words, as some judged, deserved Death. He was for
his Wickedness Whipped, and had both his Ears cut off in Boston A.D. 1631; I saw
it done. There was one Morton that was a pestilent Fellow, a Troubler of the
Country, who did not only seek our Hurt here, but went to England, and did his
utmost there, by false Reports against our Governor; but God wrought for us,
and saved us, and caused all his Designs to be of none Effect. There arose up
against us one Bull, who went to the Eastward a Trading, and turned Pirate and
took a Vessel or two, and plundered some Planters thereabouts, and intended to
return into the Bay, and do Mischief to our Magistrates here in Dorchester and
other Places: But as they were weighing Anchor, one of Mr. Short's Men shot
from the shore, and struck the principal Actor dead, and the Rest were filled
with Fear and Horror. They having taken, one Anthony Dicks a Master of a
Vessel, did endeavor to persuade him to Pilot them unto Virginia; but he would
not. They told him that they were filled with such Fear and Horror, that they
were afraid of the very Rattling of the Ropes: This Mr. Dicks told me with his
own Mouth. These Men fled Eastward, and Bull himself got into England; but God
destroyed this wretched Man. Thus the Lord saved us at this time, from their
wicked Device against us. There was also one Capt Stone about the Year 1633 or
1634 who carried himself very proudly, and spoke contemptuously of our
Magistrates, and carried it lewdly in his Conversation. For his Misdemeanour,
his Ship was stayed, but he fled and would not obey Authority; and there came
Warrants to Dorchester to take him dead or alive; so all our Soldiers were in
Arms, and Centinals were set in diverse Places; and at length he was found in a
great Corn-Field, where we took him and carried him to Boston; but for want of
one Witness, when he came to his Trial, he escaped with his Life. He was said
to be a Man of great Relation, and had great Favor in England; and he gave out
threatening Speeches. Though he escaped with his Life, not being hanged for
Adultery, there being but one Witness; yet for other Crimes he was fined, and
paid it: And being dismissed he went toward Virginia; but by the way putting
into the Pequot Country to Trade with them, the Pequots cut off both him and
his Men, took his Goods and burnt his Ship. Some of the Indians reported, That
they Roasted him alive. Thus did God destroy him that so proudly threatened to
ruin us by complaining against us when he came to England: Thus God destroyed
him; and delivered us at that time also.

About that time, or not long after, God permitted Satan to stir up the Pequot
Indians to kill diverse English Men, as Mr. Oldham, Mr. Tilly and others: And
when the Murderers were demanded, instead of delivering them, they proceeded
to destroy more of our English about Connecticut; which put us upon sending out
Soldiers, once and again; whom God prospered in their Enterprises, until the
Pequot People were destroyed. See Mr. Increase Mather's Relation of the
Troubles which have happened in New England by reason of the Indians, from
1634, to 1675. I say nothing to you of the late War, but refer you to the
Histories in Print. Thus was the Lord pleased to deliver us at that time also,
and to put a Fear and Dread of Us into the Hearts of the Indians round about
us: And many of them did voluntarily put themselves under the Government of the
English.

It also pleased God to put it into the Hearts of some of our Worthies, to
consider that one End of our coming hither was to Preach the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ to the Indians, for the saving of God's Elect, and for the
bringing into Christ's Kingdom those that were as in Highways and Hedges. Some
did therefore set themselves to learn the Indian Language, and so taught them
to know GOD and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, whom they never knew or heard of before,
nor their Fathers before them; and to know Themselves, namely their Misery by
Nature and by reason of Sin. Among others, the principal was that Revd. Man of
God Mr. John Eliot, Teacher of the Church of Christ at Roxbury; whose great
Labor and Pains in Catechizing, preaching the Word, and translating the BIBLE
into the Indian Language, God has blessed, I doubt not, to the converting of
many among them. He that Converteth Souls shall shine as the Sun in the
Firmament. Oh how glorious will the shining of that Star be in Heaven! I
rejoice to think of it.

Furthermore, know ye, that God wrought wonderfully for our Preservation, when
Men Abroad (and doubtless some at Home) endeavored to overthrow our
Government; and prevailed so far, that Commissioners were sent from England
hither with such Power and Authority, that doubtless put themselves, (and too
many among us) in Hopes that they had attained their Ends. They proceeded so
far that they set up a Court, appointed the Time and Place, and gave out their
Summons; yea for our then Honored Governor and Company, Personally to appear
before them: But the Lord our God was for us, though Troubles were very near: He
stirred up a mighty Spirit of Prayer in the Hearts of his People, This poor
Country cried and the Lord heard and delivered them from all their Fears. And
the Lord put Wisdom and Courage into the Hearts of his Servants then sitting in
the General Court, to give such Answers, and to make such a Declaration,
published by a Man appointed on Horseback, with the Trumpet sounding before
the Proclamation to give the People notice that something was to be published,
which was done in three several Places in Boston; that it put an End to their
Court, and (through God's Goodness) to our Troubles at that time about that
matter. And as our Court did assert our Privileges granted unto us by Patent,
and did adhere thereto, so our God has hitherto continued the same unto us:
Blessed be his glorious Name! I humbly beg of God that He will in Mercy
continue those Privileges unto You and Yours in your Generations, for Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen.

I gave you a hint toward the beginning, that I came out of Plymouth in Devon,
the 20th of March, and arrived at Nantasket (now Hull) the 30th of May 1630.
Now this is further to inform you, that there came many Godly Families in that
Ship: We were of Passengers many in Number (besides Seamen) of good Rank: Two
of our Magistrates came with us, viz. Mr. Rossiter and Mr. Ludlow. These godly
People resolved to live together; and therefore as they had made Choice of
those two Revd. Servants of God, Mr. John Warham and Mr. John Maverick to be
their Ministers, so they kept a solemn Day of Fasting in the New Hospital in
Plymouth in England, spending it in Preaching and Praying: where that worthy
Man of God, Mr. John White of Dorchester in Dorset was present, and Preached
unto us the Word of God, in the forepart of the Day; and in the latter part of
the Day, as the People did solemnly make Choice of, and call those godly
Ministers to be their Officers, so also the Revd. Mr. Warham and Mr. Maverick
did accept thereof, and expressed the same. So we came, by the good Hand of the
Lord, through the Deeps comfortably; having Preaching or Expounding of the Word
of God every Day for Ten Weeks together, by our Ministers. When we came to
Nantasket, Capt. Squeb, who was Captain of that great Ship of Four Hundred
Tons, would not bring us into Charles River, as he was bound to do; but, put us
ashore and our Goods on Nantasket Point, and left us to shift for our selves in
a forlorn place in this Wilderness. But as it pleased God, we got a Boat of
some old Planters, and laded her with Goods; and some able Men well Armed went
in her unto Charlestown: where we found some Wigwams and one House, and in the
House there was a Man which had a boiled Bass, but no Bread that we see: but we
did eat of his Bass, and then went up Charles River, until the River grew
narrow and shallow, and there we landed our Goods with much Labor and Toil,
the Bank being steep. And Night coming on, we were informed that there were
hard by us Three Hundred Indians: One English Man that could speak the Indian
Language (an old Planter) went to them and advised them not to come near us in
the Night; and they hearkened to his Counsel, and came not. I my self was one
of the Centinals that first Night: Our Captain was a Low Country Soldier, one
Mr. Southcot, a brave Soldier. In the Morning some of the Indians came and
stood at a distance off, looking at us, but came not near us; but when they had
been a while in view, some of them came and held out a great Bass toward us;
so we sent a Man with a Biscuit, and changed the Cake for the Bass. Afterward
they supplied us with Bass, exchanging a Bass for a Bisket-Cake, and were very
friendly unto us.

Oh Dear Children! Forget not what Care God had over his dear Servants, to
watch over us, and protect us in our weak beginnings. Capt. Squeb turned ashore
Us and our Goods, like a mercyless Man; but God, even our merciful God, took
pity on us; so that we were supplied, first with a Boat, and then caused many
Indians, (some Hundreds) to be ruled by the Advice of one Man, not to come near
us: Alas had they come upon us, how soon might they have destroyed us! I think
We were not above Ten in Number. But God caused the Indians to help us with
Fish at very cheap Rates. We had not been there many Days, (although by our
Diligence we had got up a kind of Shelter, to save our Goods in) but we had
Order to come away from that Place, (which was about Watertown) unto a Place
called Mattapan (now Dorchester) because there was a Neck of Land fit to keep
our Cattle on: So we removed and came to Mattapan: The Indians there also were
kind unto us.

Not long after, came our renowned and blessed Governor, and diverse of his
Assistants with him. Their Ships came into Charles River, and many Passengers
landed at Charlstown, many of whom died the Winter following. Governor
Winthrop purposed to set down his Station about Cambridge, or somewhere on the
River; but clewing the Place, liked that plain Neck that was called then
Black-stones-Neck, now Boston. But in the mean time, before they could build at
Boston, they lived many of them in Tents and Wigwams at Charlstown; their
Meeting Place being abroad under a Tree; where I have heard Mr. Wilson and Mr.
Phillips Preach many a good Sermon.

In those Days God did cause his People to trust in him, and to be contented
with mean things. It was not accounted a strange thing in those Days to drink
Water, and to eat Samp or Homine without Butter or Milk. Indeed it would have
been a strange thing to see a piece of Roast Beef, Mutton or Veal; though it
was not long before there was Roast Goat. After the first Winter, we were very
Healthy; though some of us had no great Store of Corn. The Indians did
sometimes bring Corn, and Truck with us for Clothing and Knives; and once I
had a Peck of Corn or thereabouts, for a little Puppy-Dog. Frost-fish, Muscles
and Clams were a Relief to many. If our Provision be better now than it was
then, let us not, (and do you dear Children take heed that you do not) forget
the Lord our God. You have better Food and Raiment, than was in former Times;
but have you better Hearts than your Forefathers had? It so, Rejoice in that
Mercy, and let New England then shout for Joy. Sure all the People of God in
other parts of the World, that shall hear that the Children and Grandchildren
of the first Planters of New England, have better Hearts, and are more heavenly
than their Predecessors; they will doubtless greatly Rejoice, and will say,
This is the Generation whom the Lord has Blessed.

And now, Dear Children, I know not the Time of my Death; my Time is in God's
Hands; but my Age shows me it cannot be far off. Therefore, while I am in
Health and Strength, I though it good to put into Writing and leave with you, what
I have desired in my Heart, and oftentimes expressed to you with my Tongue. I
say, I do here Charge you solemnly, and every one of you, as if I did Charge
you every one by Name: Sons, Daughters and Grandchildren, that now are capable
of Understanding, and as you shall be capable from time to time; and Servants,
or any other whom God has placed within my Gates: I say, I Charge you that
every one of you Fear the Lord our God, and Obey his Cowmandments; which is the
Duty of every Man, and much more Yours, whom He has graciously taken into
Covenant with Himself, and has promised to be a God to you in your
Generations. The Promise made to Abraham and his Seed in their Generations,
does extend it self to the Believer and his Seed in the Gospel Times: for the
Apostle says, Acts 2.39. For the Promise is to You, and to your Children. He
spoke this in Gospel Times, after Christ was gone to Heaven: and he does not
say, The Promise was, but the Promise is, and shall be so hereafter, to those
that are afar off also, yea to as many as the Lord our God shall call, to the
end of the World; the Promise is to them and to their Seed. Oh then, if God be
your God, you are his People: Then see that you Fear him, and stand in awe and
Sin not: See that you do Honor him; A Son Honors his Father: See that you
Love Him with all your Souls and Strength. If you do truly Love God, you will
keep all his Commandments, and you will hate Evil: Ye that Love the Lord hate
Evil. You cannot Love the Lord, and Love Sin too: No Man can serve two contrary
Masters. If you Love the Lord, you will very often think of Him: How do Lovers
think of one another, though far absent? but God is not far absent from a
Believer. I Charge you, Think often on God: Those that forget God, are wicked
Men and Women, and shall be turned into Hell. And if you truly Love God, you
will Love the Word of God, and all his holy Appointments, the Habitation of his
Holiness. And if you Love God dearly, as you ought to do, it will grieve your
Hearts to see Him dishonored, and his Laws Transgressed: David's Eyes ran down
with Tears, because Men transgressed God's Laws. And if you Love God, you will
delight to have Communion with Him, and to pour out your Hearts into his Bosom.
Beg of God, that He would put his Fear into your Hearts, and that He would
cause you to Love Him. Entreat Him to Love you freely. God must Love Us first,
before we can Love Him: And I can tell you, The Love of God unto your Souls is
better than all the World: His loving Kindness is abundantly better than Life.
Oh prize it; seek for it more than for earthly Treasure: Seek and you shall
find: God will give his Holy Spirit to those that ask it. If you ask the Spirit
of God out of a deep Sense of the Want of it; if you ask it in Christ's Name
and for his sake; if you ask the Holy Spirit to Sanctify you, and cleanse you
from your Sins; if you ask the Spirit to lead you into all Truth, and to guide
you in all the Ways of God, and to enable you to do all that Duty God requires
of you; Doubt not, but know assuredly, God will give his Holy Spirit unto you.

Oh my dear Children and Grand Children! for the the Lord's-sake labor for
better Hearts, and to live better Lives than your poor Parents have done before
you! And that you may so do,

I. Study to Know your own Hearts, to know the Plague that there is in them.
There is a Plague in every Man's Heart, the deadly Plague of Sin; which the
Apostle Paul by study and diligent search found in himself, which made him cry
out, Oh wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death:
And again, In me, that is, in my Flesh, dwells no good thing. And blessed Job
also by searching, found it out; which made him say, Behold I am vile: And
again, I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes. Surely when Men see the
Plague of Sin in their Hearts, and the Danger of Death thereby, (for the Plague
is a deadly Disease) it will make them cry out, What shall we do to be saved?

II. Come to the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Come as the Woman of Canaan did for her
Daughter, and say as she did, Lord, help me. Oh come you to Jesus Christ the
great Physician for Help! He can help you, and He is willing to help: He said
to the Leper, I will: He bids you Come to Him; and again, Whoever will, let him
come, and take freely. And as He is able and willing, so if you come to Him for
new Hearts and holy Lives, He will certainly bestow the same upon every one of
you. Those that come to me (says Christ) I will in no wise cast out. And
again, If you ask any thing according to his Will, He will give it.

III. Labor for true godly Sorrow, and Grief of Heart for Sin. If Sin be a
Plague, yea a deadly Plague, as in Truth it is, (for the Wages of Sin is Death)
and Sin be in all your Hearts, as indeed it is; will you not Mourn and Lament
your wretched State by reason thereof. Yea, though you are through Grace
enabled to come to Christ by Faith for the Pardon of your Sins, for his sake,
through his Blood; (as I hope diverse of you are) yet what cause is there of
Sorrow and Mourning because of the Remainder of Sin dwelling in you: which
although it cannot Rule and bear sway in your gracious Hearts, yet it will make
War with your Graces, and sometimes catch you at Disadvantage and strike a Dart
that may deeply wound you. Therefore mourn that you have such an Enemy within
you.

IV. Watch over your Hearts, your Hands, your Eyes, your Ears and your Tongues.
For Sin will assault you in every part, by every Sense, and cast in some
Infection, if possible, to destroy, or at least to wound you, and make your
Names to stink. Satan, the great Enemy of all Mankind, labors by Sin to
ruinate both Body and Soul.

(1.) Watch the Heart. God's Counsel is, that we should keep the Heart with all
Diligence. You will find (if you will observe) when you are Praying, or
Meditating on heavenly and spiritual Things, your Heart will be in Danger of
being drawn away to think of carnal Things; or grow heavy and dull in the Duty,
like Moses his Hands when they were lift up against Amalek. Watch therefore;
and when you perceive your Hearts falling downward and grow heavy, cry unto
Jesus Christ to stay up your Hearts steady to the end of your Lives; that so
Amalek (I mean Sin and Satan) may not prevail, but be at last utterly destroyed.

(2.) Watch over your Ears. So Christ commands us, that we must Take heed how
we hear. Watch therefore, Dear Children, and let not your Ears receive false
Doctrine. Hearken to God's Word, Hear that; that is, receive it, believe it,
obey it, and your Souls shall live. But as for those that bring another Gospel,
and serve not the true God, such as the Quakers; do not you hear them, no not
so much as with your outward Ears.

(3.) Watch over your Eyes. That adulterous Lust got in David's Heart through
his Eyes. So did Achan's Covetousness, to his utter Ruin: He saw the Wedge of
Gold with his Eye, then coveted it with his Heart, and then took it.

(4.) Watch over your Tongues. The Tongue is an unruly Evil. Do not backbite or
slander your Neighbors. Speak not Evil of Dignities. Do not Curse, Swear
profanely, nor Lie. Let no filthy corrupt Communication come out of your
Mouths. Do not you, my dear Children, (nor suffer your Children to) speak the
sinful Language of many wicked People, who commonly in their Discourse add, I
Vow, or I Swear, when in Truth they do not know what a Vow or an Oath is. Oh
let your Words be gracious, always such Words as may edify the Hearers.
Remember, and forget not, that Christ our holy and just Judge has himself told
us, that for every idle Word that Men do speak, they must give an Account
thereof at the Day of Judgment. And again, By your Words you shall be
Justified, and by your Words you shall be condemned.

V. Another Thing which I Charge you to observe, is, To Worship GOD in your
Families. Do not neglect Family Prayer, Morning and Evening. And be sure to
Read some part of the Word of God every Day in your Families, in ordinary
Course. And be sure to Instruct your Families in the Grounds of Religion. And
be your selves Patterns, by your holy Lives and Conversations, unto your
Children. And as you ought to follow and imitate good Examples in any godly Men
or Women, so especially in your Parents: you ought to follow them as they
followed Christ, and in nothing else. Where you have seen them missing the
Rule, as doubtless you have often done; let them be your Warnings, not your
Patterns. I say where I missed the Rule in Word or Deed, (for I am a weak
imperfect Creature, one of the worst of Men) be you sure to avoid that Rock,
and follow not me in any Evil, but avoid it. And if you observed any Virtues in
your Parents, (though they were but few) Imitate them in that which is Good,
that God may be with you, as He was with your Fathers.

VI. And I lay it as a solemn Charge upon you, That you Pray to God in Secret;
and that often too. Our Lord and Savior bids us, Enter into our Closets, and
shut the Door, and Pray to our Father in Secret. There you may tell God your
very Hearts, and lay open to Him your worst Plague Sore, your vilest Sins,
which no Man knows, neither is it meet they should know. Yet all Men shall
know your vilest, lewdest, most notorious Wickedness, both of Heart and Life
that ever was committed by you, though never so long ago, or never so secretly
done; except you confess them to God, and make your Peace with Him, in and
through Jesus Christ, by Repentance and Faith: Then the Blood of Jesus Christ
the Righteous cleanses us, and will you from all your Sins: Otherwise God will
bring every secret Thing into Judgment. I say again, Pray in Secret, though you
have not a Closet or Door to shut; you need none: You may Pray alone in the
Woods, as Christ did in the Mountain: You may Pray as you walk in the Field, as
Isaac did: When employed in Business, you may lift up your Hearts in Prayer, as
Nehemiah did. And when you are alone at any Time, Think with your self,
assuredly God is present though none else; I will Confess my Sins, and I will beg
God's Favor and Grace, I will Wrestle with God by Faith and Prayer. And you
may every one of you prevail, if you Pray sincerely, and persevere in it: If
Importunity prevailed with the unjust Judge, will it not much more prevail with
God.

VII. And I do also Charge you, To live in Love and Peace among your selves.
Love is of God; but bitter Envy and Strife is of the Devil. Love as Brethren:
Brethren must Love one another. Oh! How amiable a thing is it, for Brethren to
dwell together in Unity! It is like the precious Ointment that was poured on
Aaron's Head; and that Ointment was such, as none might be made like it for
other Uses. Does not Love exceed other Graces? Then strive after that which is
most excellent. So strive to live in Love and Peace with all Men, as much as
possible in you lies. [ Be at Peace with all Men:] That is, if there be any
Breach of Peace, let not the Fault be yours. You must not partake of, delight
in, nor connive at, the sinful, pernicious, wild Practices of Men, to be at
Peace with these. Those that are God's Children and must dwell in God's
Tabernacle, a vile Person must be contemned in their Eyes. Sure, his Vileness
will make him loathsome; yet if it be possible, be at Peace with Him: Endeavor
to Reclaim him from his Wickedness, by Reproving him plainly for sinful
Practices; and if nothing else will do, complain to Authority; and if that will
not do, complain to God, and mourn for him.

Finally, Be good Examples unto others. Walk humbly with God. Be Holy in all
manner of Conversation. Be Courteous; be Sober; be Charitable; Ready to
Distribute, given to Hospitality. Be humble-minded. Set your Affections on
Things above, not on Things below; not on Riches, Honors and Pleasures. Prize
highly the Word of God, and the Preachers of it. Labor to draw others to Love
and Fear God. Flee the Lusts of Uncleanness, and the Occasions of it. Abhor
Drunkenness, and excessive Drinking. Come not into a Tavern, but on just and
weighty Occasions. Choose God to be your Portion: Receive Christ by Believing
on Him; so you shall be the Children of GOD. Amen.

A short ACCOUNT OF THE Author and his Family. Written by one that was
acquainted therewith.
CApt. Roger Clap the worthy Author of the foregoing Discourse, was a Man
generally known, honored and esteemed by those that were contemporary with
him; but most of those are also removed by Death, and the present Generation,
(among whom he has a numerous Posterity of Grandchildren and
Great-Grand-Children,) know but little of him: And there being no Memoirs
preserved of this good Man, and his Posterity being likely otherwise to have
little or no Knowledge of this their Progenitor; it is thought highly proper,
and desired by some who are no way Related, that a short Account might be given
of Him and his Family. The Memory of the Just is blessed, Prove. 1O.7.

He was Born in Salcom in the County of Devon, on the 6th Day of April, Anno
Domini 1609, of pious and creditable Parents; whose religious Education God was
pleased to accompany with the early Strivings and Convictions of his Holy
Spirit, that ended in his happy Conversion. In his younger Years, while he was
under the immediate Government of his Father, he had such a Love to the Word of
God and the most eminent Preachers of it; that he obtained leave of his Father
to live in the City of Exon, under the Ministry of the Rev. Mr. John Warham,
with whom he afterward came to New England.

In the Year 1629, when many of the most godly Ministers and People were driven
out of the Kingdom for their conscientious Nonconformity to the Esta, blished
Way of Worship, and Mr. Warham and Mr. Maverick. (who were afterward Colleague
Pastors of the Church of Dorchester in New England) and with them a
considerable Number of pious Persons were preparing for a Remove into this
Country; Mr. Clap found in himself a strong Inclination to go with those good
People, and cast in his Lot with them. He had taken a great liking unto the
Ministry of the Rev. Mr. Warham, and was not willing to be left behind, when He
was to go: and therefore having with some Difficulty obtained his Father's
Consent, he set himself to assist in the great and good Work the People of God
then had in hand. -- He with those good People that came over with him, (who
were the first Inhabitants of Dorchester) set sail from Plymouth in England the
20th Day of March 1629, 30; and after a comfortable (though long) Passage of Ten
Weeks, they arrived at Hull the 30th of May 1630. This was the First Company
that settled on this side Salem: and therefore besure they met with Trials and
Difficulties enough, which did not at all dishearten Mr. Clap; for his Heart
was so taken off from temporal Things, and set upon serving and glorifying God,
and finding here such Advantages and Opportunities therefore, beyond what he had
in England, that he could not forbear crying out in a sort of Ecstasy of Joy,
Blessed be God that brought me here!

In the same Year that He came over here, He joined himself a Member of the
Church in Dorchester, where he lived, and continued a Member of this Church for
the space of Sixty Years; being a useful Instrument both in Church and Town.
When he had been about Two Years and half in the Country, in the Year 1633,
November. 6th in the 25th Year of his Age, he married the virtuous Mrs. Johanna
Ford, Daughter of Mr. Thomas Ford of Dorchester in England, when she was but in
the 17th Year of her Age: who with her Parents came over in the same Ship with
himself, and settled also here in Dorchester; with whom he lived in the Conjugal
Relation for the space of 57 Years. She was a godly and exemplary Woman, given
to Hospitality: She abounded in Acts of Charity; so that when proper Objects of
Pity and Charity came to her Knowledge, she never failed to relieve them
herself, or procure them Relief from others: Thus the Blessing of those that
were ready to Perish came upon her.

Among other Blessings wherewith it pleased God to Bless this pious Couple, the
Blessings of the Breasts and of the Womb were not the least; for they had
Fourteen Children, Ten Sons and Four Daughters. But God was pleased to prove
these his Servants with Afflictions also, as well as Mercies; for Five of their
Children Died in their Infancy; their Son Thomas died at 15 Years of Age, and
their Son Unite at 7 Years. And in the Year 1686, their Son Supply, a hopeful
young Man in the Flower and Prime of his Age, was suddenly taken out of the
World, by the Accidental Firing a Gun at the Castle; where his Father was then
the Captain, and himself an Officer, in the 23d Year of his Age. The rest of
their Children being Four Sons and Two Daughters, lived to fulfill the ordinary
Course of Nature, and were great Blessings in their Generations.

Mr. Clap being thus settled as he himself expresses it, in God's House and
among his People, he set himself to serve God and his Generation according to
the Will of God. His Qualifications were quickly observed by the People of
Dorchester; and they early Improved him in the Affairs of their new Plantation.
He sustained both Civil and Military Offices in the Town; being Captain of the
Militia, Representative for the Town, and Authorized to Join Persons in
Marriage. And on the 10th of August 1665, the General Court appointed him
Captain of the Castle (the principal Fortress in the Province) upon the Death
of Capt. Davenp^^^ who was killed with Lightning the Month before.

Capt. Clap having now the Command of the Castle, discharged that Trust with
great Fidelity; and was therein serviceable to the whole Province, and
universally Respected and Honored. He continued in that Command for the space
of 21 Years, even until the Year 1686; when by the Loss of our Charter there
was a Change of Government, and some things were required of Him that were
grievous to his pious Soul and foreseeing a Storm of Troubles coming on the
Country, and he now in his old Age, voluntarily resigned his Command.

There is another Instance that shows what an Interest Capt. Clap had in the
Hearts of God's People, and what an extensive Blessing they accounted him: it
is this; In the Year 1672, he being then Captain of the Castle, it pleased God
to visit him with a Fit of Sickness; and the good People of Dorchester, unto
which Church he belonged, kept a Day of Fasting and Prayer, to beg his Life of
God: And God was pleased to hear and answer their Prayers; and when he was
restored to Health, they kept a Day of Thanksgiving.

When he commanded the Castle, he resided there with his Family; and a well
ordered Family it was: Capt Clap and his Wife were Examples of Piety: Their
Light shone before others, to the Glory of their heavenly Father. He was a very
Prayerful Man, and was observed to retire often for Secret Duties: And in his
Family (unto which all the Soldiers under his Command also belonged) he daily
offered up the Sacrifices of Prayer and Thanksgiving; in which, if he
understood his Prolixity were disagreeable to any, he would be Troubled
thereat. He with his Family were constant Hearers of the Word preached; going
(I think) commonly to Dorchester Meeting, when the Weather permitted, and
sometimes to Boston. He bear a universal Love and Respect to Godly Ministers,
honoring them for their Works sake: and also he bare an endeared Love to all
the People of God; so that the very Indians whom he thought to be Fearers of
God were welcome to him, and he would instruct them in the Principles of
Religion. He constantly attended the Lectures in the Towns of Dorchester and
Boston: particularly the Lecture at Boston; concerning which, if any of the
Soldiers or young People asked, Whose Lecture it was? intimating thereby (as
Capt. Clap very well knew) that they thought some were not so excellent
Preachers as others, and so had less Inclination to hear them; He would answer,
Let the Preacher be who he will, if be Preach the Word of God I will go and
hear him. His Eyes were upon the Faithful of the Land, that they might dwell
with him: He chose those to serve him that walked in a perfect way; and He
would entertain none in his Service, but those that He could reduce to good
Orders. He would often recommend to his young People the Example of his pious
Gunner, Mr. Baxter when he was absent, saying, The Walls of the Cast would
testify how many Prayers that good Man made to God in Secret. In his time it
might be seen, that Religious and well disposed Men, might take upon them the
calling of a Soldier, without danger of hurting their Morals, or their good
Name, or lessning their Advantages and Opportunities for the Services of
Religion. He had a great Aversion to Idleness, would warn his Family against
it, and made Conscience of employing himself and all about him in some lawful
Business. He was a hearty Lover of his Country, a well wisher to it, one that
Prayed often for it, being chiefly concerned that pure and undefiled Religion
might flourish here: and was a good Instrument in his Place and Station to
promote and encourage that which was Good, and to discountenance Evil, and keep
out Error and Heresy.

He was a meek and humble Man, of a very quiet and peaceable Spirit, not apt to
resent Injuries; but where he thought the Honor of God was concerned or just
and lawful Authority opposed, he was forward enough to exert himself. His Parts
as well as his Piety, and his Knowledge of the Word of God and the true
Christian Religion, may be seen in the foregoing Discourse; which is only the
Substance of those verbal Counsels, Warnings and Exhortations which he
frequently Inculcated on his Children, committed to Writing: Which Discourse is
doubtless worthy any serious Man's Perusal, and especially those of his
Posterity.

As to his natural Temper, it is said, He was of a cheerful and pleasant
Disposition, courteous and kind in his Behavior, free and familiar in his
Conversation, yet attended with a proper Reservedness; and he had a Gravity and
Presence that commanded Respect from others.

When he left the Castle which was in the Year 1686, he removed to the South
End of Boston, and Associated with the South Church there; where he lived about
Four Years, and after about a Fortnights Sickness, in which he often repeated
Words to this purpose, I suppose in the joyful Contemplation of the late
wonderful REVOLUTION.
The Lord Reigns; blessed be the Name of the Lord; The Lord fitteth upon the
Flood; yea the Lord sits King forever; Blessed be his holy Name. He there
departed this Life, Feb. 2. 1690 91, in the 82d Year of his Age. He was Buried
in the old Burying Place in Boston; the Military Officers going before the
Corpse; and next to the Relations, the Governor and the whole General Court
following after; and the Guns firing at the Castle at the same time.

Mrs Clap who was born June 8th 1617, lived his Widow between 4 and 5 Years,
and died at Boston in June 1695, being about 78 Years old, and was Interred by
her Husband.

Capt. Clap (as was said before) had six Children that lived to old Age, and
were Blessings in their Generation. Their Names and the Order of their Birth is
as follows, Samuel, Elizabeth, Preserved, Hopestill, Wait and Desire.

1. Mr. Samuel Clap was born the 11th Day of October. 1634, when his Mother was
but in the 18th Year of her Age. He was a wise and prudent Man, partaking of
the choice Spirit of his Father, treading in his Steps, and making good his
Ground: He was eminent for Religion, and of a blameless and unspotted
Conversation. He was early and constantly employed in Public Affairs: He was
Captain of the Military Company, Representative for the Town; and the seven
last Years of his Life a Ruling Elder of the Church of Dorchester where he
lived. He Married Mrs. Hannah Leeds, Daughter of Mr. Richard Leeds of
Dorchester. They had Two Sons and Two Daughters that lived to be grown up He
Died about Eight Days after his Wife, on Oct. 16th, 1708, being about 74 Years
old. His eldest Son Samuel deceased in his middle Age, a very pious useful Man
also. He was chosen one of the Deacons of the Church in Dorchester, where he
lived and was Lieutenant of a Military Company in the Town. His other Son died
a hopeful young Man.

2. Mrs Elizabeth Clap was Born June 22d 1638. She married Mr Joseph Holmes.
She was a virtuous and prudent Woman. They had Five Children that lived to be
grown up. She Died at Boston, Dec. 25th 1711, in the 74th Year of her Age; and
was buried by her Parents.

3. Mr. Preserved Clap was Born Nov. 23d 1643. He was a good Instrument and a
great Blessing to the Town of Northampton where he lived. He was Captain of the
Town and their Representative in the General Court, and Ruling Elder in the
Church He married Mrs. Sarah Newbery of Windsor. They had Seven Children that
Lived to be grown up. He died at Northampton, Sept. 20th 1720, Aged about 77
Years.

4. Mr. Hopestill Clap was born Nov. 6. 1647. He was a very gracious Man,
endowed with a great measure of Meekness and Patience; studied and practiced
those things that made for Peace. He was first a Deacon of the Church of
Dorchester, where he lived; and afterward in the Year 1709 he was Chosen and
Ordained a Ruling Elder in the same Church: He Represented the Town in the
General Court for the space of Fifteen Years. He was much honored and
respected by those that had a value for vital Piety. He married Mrs. Susannah
Swift. They had Two Sons, and Four Daughters that lived to be grown up. One of
his Sons died a Young Man, the other is now living in Dorchester. Elder
Hopestill Clap died at Dorchester, Sept. 2d 1719, in the 72d Year of his Age.

Upon his Gravestone is written by his Pastor as follows, His Dust waits till
the Jubillee:
Shall then shine brighter than the Sky;
Shall meet and join to part no more,
His Soul that is glorified before.
Pastors and Churches happy be
With Ruling Elders such as he:
Present Useful, absent Wanted;
Lived Desired, died Lamented.


5. Mrs. Wait Clap was born March 17th 1649. She was a godly Woman, following
the good Example of her Parents. She often spoke of that Charge which her
Fatter left his Children, viz. Never to spend any Time in Idleness; and
practiced accordingly in a very observable manner. She married Mr. Jonathan
Simpson of Charlestown. They had but Two Children, one Son and one Daughter,
that lived to be grown up. She lived a Widow about Twelve Years, and died at
Boston, in the House that her Father and Mother lived and died in, May 3. 1717.
in the 69th Year of her Age, and was buried near her Parents.

6. Mr. Desire Clap was Born October. 17th 1652. He lived in Dorchester, was a
sober, religious Man. He married Mrs. Sarah Pond: They had Four Children that
lived to be grown up, one Son and Three Daughters. In his old Age he Buried his
first Wife, and married again to Mrs. Deborah Smith of Boston, with whom he
went to live; and there he Died in December 1717, in the 66th Year of his Age,
and was interred near his Relations.

Thus God was pleased to Bless this Pious Family and make them Blessings in
their Day and Generation. They have all of them finished their Pilgrimage in
the World, and are gathered to their Fathers, and entre^ into the Rest that
Remains for the People of God leaving behind them their good Names, and the
bright Examples of Piety and Virtue. Diverse also o^ the Grandchildren are
removed by Death.

May the Blessings of these Godly Ancestors rest upon their Posterity, even
unto the latest Generations And may their Posterity put themselves in the way
to Inherit those Blessings, by continuing steadfast in the Covenant of their
God, under which their Ancestors have brought them; and by walking in, and
cleaving to, the good ways of their fore Fathers, treading in their Steps and
making good their Ground.

Capt. Clap had one Brother, and two Sisters with their Husbands, that upon his
Advice and Encouragement, afterward came over and settled themselves here in
Dorchester. His Brother Edward Clap was a godly-Man, a Deacon of the Church of
Dorchester, as two of his Grandsons have been since. His Sisters were the Wives
of Mr. George Weeks and Mr Nicholas Clap, religious Families. Deuteronomy. 7.9 Know
therefore that the Lord thy God, He is God, the Faithful God, which keeps
Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, and keep his Commandments, to a
Thousand Generations.

James Blake, jun


