Mr. Edwards's SERMON AT THE Public Lecture in Boston, July 8. 1731.

GOD Glorified in the Work of REDEMPTION, By the Greatness of Man's Dependence
upon Him, in the Whole of it. A SERMON Preached on the Public Lecture in
Boston, July 8. 1731. And Published at the Desire of several, Ministers and
Others, in Boston, who heard it.

By JONATHAN EDWARDS, A.M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Northampton.

Judges 7.2. -- Lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, mine own hand
has saved me.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, and T. GREEN, for D. HENCHMAN, at the Corner
Shop on the South Side of the Townhouse. 1731.

TO THE READER.
IT was with no small Difficulty that the Author's Youth and Modesty were
prevailed on to let him appear a Preacher in our public Lecture, and afterward
to give us a Copy of his Discourse, at the Desire of diverse, Ministers and
Others, who heard it. But as we quickly found him a Workman that needs not to
be ashamed before his Brethren; our Satisfaction was the greater to see him
pitching upon so noble a Subject, and treating it with so much strength and
clearness as the judicious Reader will perceive in the following Composure.

A Subject which secures to God his great Design in the Work of fallen Man's
Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ, which is evidently so laid out as that the
Glory of the whole should return to Him the blessed Ordainer, Purchaser and
Applier. A Subject which enters deep into practical Religion; without the
Belief of which, that must soon die in the hearts and lives of Men.

For in proportion to the sense we have of our Dependence on the Sovereign GOD,
for all the good we want, will be our Value for Him, our Application to Him,
our Trust in Him, our Fear to offend Him, and our Care to please Him; as
likewise our Gratitude and Love, our Delight and Praise, upon our sensible
Experience of his free Benefits.

In short, It is the very Soul of Piety to apprehend and own, That all our
Springs are in Him; the Springs of our present Grace and Comfort, and of our
future Glory and Blessedness; and that they all entirely flow through CHRIST by
the efficacious Influence of the HOLY SPIRIT. By these things Saints live, and
in all these things is the Life of our Spirits.

Such Doctrines as these, which by humbling the Minds of Men, prepare them for
the Exaltations of GOD, He has signally owned and prosper'd in the reformed
World, and in our Land especially in the Days of our Forefathers; and we hope
they will never grow unfashionable among us: For, we are well assured, if those
which we call the Doctrines of Grace, ever come to be contemned or disrelished,
vital Piety will proportionably languish and wear away; as these Doctrines
always sink in the Esteem of Men, upon the Decay of serious Religion.

We cannot therefore but express our Joy and Thankfulness, that the great Head
of the Church is pleased still to raise up from among the Children of his
People, for the Supply of His Churches, those who assert and maintain these
Evangelical Principles; and that our Churches, (notwithstanding all their
Degeneracies) have still a high Value for such Principles, and for those who
publicly own and teach them.

And as we cannot but wish and pray that the College in the neighboring
Colony, (as well as our own,) may be a fruitful Mother of many such Sons as the
Author, by the Blessing of Heaven on the Care of their present worthy Rector;
so we heartily rejoice in the special Favor of Providence in bestowing such a
rich Gift on the happy Church of Northampton, which has for so many Lustres of
Years flourished under the Influence of such pious Doctrines, taught them in
the excellent Ministry of their late venerable Pastor, whose Gifts and Spirit,
we hope will long live and shine in this his Grandson, to the End that they may
abound yet* there in all the lovely fruits of Evangelical Humility and
Thankfulness, to the Glory of GOD.

To His Blessing we commit them all, with this Discourse, and every one that
reads it; and are

Your Servants in the Gospel, T. Prince, W. Cooper.
Boston, August 17. 1731.
GOD Glorified in Man's Dependence.
1 COR. 1.29, 30, 31. That no Flesh should Glory in his Presence. But of him
are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness,
and Sanctification, and Redemption: That according as it is written, He that
glories let him glory in the Lord.


THOSE Christians to whom the Apostle directed this Epistle, dwelt in a Part of
the World where human Wisdom was in great Repute; as the Apostle observes in
the 22. Verse of this Chapter, The Greeks seek after Wisdom. Corinth was not
far from Athens, that had been for many Ages the most famous Seat of Philosophy
and Learning in the World.

The Apostle therefore observes to them how that God by the Gospel destroyed,
and brought to naught, their human Wisdom. The Learned Grecians, and their
great Philosophers, by all their Wisdom did not know God, they were not able to
find out the Truth in divine Things. But after they had done their utmost to no
Effect, it pleased God at length, to reveal himself by the Gospel which they
accounted Foolishness: He chose the foolish things of the World, to confound
the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the things which are
mighty, and the base things of the world, and things that are despised, yea and
things which are not; to bring to naught the things that are. And the Apostle
informs them why he thus did, in the Verse of the Text, That no Flesh should
glory in his Presence etc. --

In which Words may be observed,

1. What God aims at in the Disposition of things in the Affair of Redemption,
viz. that Man should not glory in himself, but alone in God; That no Flesh
should glory in his Presence, -- that according as it is written he that
glories let him glory in the Lord.

2. How this End is attained in the Work of Redemption, viz. by that absolute
and immediate Dependence which Men have upon God in that Work, for all their
Good. Inasmuch as,

First, All the Good that they have is in and through Christ; He is made unto
us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. All the Good of the
fallen and redeemed Creature is concerned in these four things, and cannot be
better distributed than into them; but Christ is each of them to us, and we
have none of them any otherwise than in him. He is made of God unto us Wisdom:
In him are all the proper Good, and true Excellency of the Understanding.
Wisdom was a thing that the Greeks admired; but Christ is the true Light of the
World, it is through him alone that true Wisdom is imparted to the Mind. It Is in
and by Christ that we have Righteousness: It Is by being in him that we are
justified, have our Sins pardoned, and are received as righteous into God's
Favor. It Is by Christ that we have Sanctification: We have in him true
Excellency of Heart, as well as of Understanding; and He is made unto us
inherent as well as imputed Righteousness. It Is by Christ that we have
Redemption, or the actual Deliverance from all Misery, and the Bestowment of
all Happiness and Glory. Thus we have all our Good by Christ who is God.

Secondly, Another Instance wherein our Dependence on God for all our Good
appears, is this, That it is God that has given us Christ, that we might have
these Benefits through him; he of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness etc.

Thirdly, It Is of him that we are in Christ Jesus, and come to have an Interest
in him, and so do receive those Blessings which he is made unto us. It Is God
that gives us Faith whereby we close with Christ.

So that in this Verse is shown our Dependence on each Person in the Trinity
for all our Good. We are dependent on Christ the Son of God, as he is our
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. We are dependent on the
Father, who has given us Christ, and made him to be these things to us. We are
dependent on the Holy Ghost, for it is of him that we are in Christ Jesus; it is
the Spirit of God that gives Faith in him, whereby we receive him, and close
with him.

DOCT. GOD is glorified in the Work of Redemption in this, that there appears
in it so absolute and universal a Dependence of the Redeemed on him.

Here I propose to show, 1. That there is an absolute and universal Dependence
of the Redeemed on God for all their Good. And 2. That God hereby is exalted
and glorified in the Work of Redemption.

I. There is an absolute and universal Dependence of the Redeemed on God. The
Nature and Contrivance of our Redemption is such, that the Redeemed are in
every thing directly, immediately, and entirely dependent on God: They are
dependent on him for all, and are dependent on him every Way.

The several Ways wherein the Dependence of one Being may be upon another for
its Good, and wherein the Redeemed of Jesus Christ depend on God for all their
Good, are these, viz. That they have all their Good of him, and that they have
all through him, and that they have all in him: That he be the Cause and
Original whence all their Good comes, therein it is of him; and that he be the
Medium by which it is obtained and conveyed, therein they have it through him;
and that he be that Good it self that is given and conveyed, therein it is in
him.

Now those that are redeemed by Jesus Christ do in all these Respects very
directly and entirely depend on God for their all.

First, The Redeemed have all their Good of God. God is the great Author of it;
He is the first Cause of it, and not only so but he is the only proper Cause.

It Is of God that we have our Redeemer. It Is God that has provided a Savior
for us. Jesus Christ is not only of God in his Person, as he is the only
begotten Son of God; but he is from God as we are concerned in him, and in his
Office of Mediator; He is the Gift of God to us: God chose and anointed him,
appointed him his Work, and sent him into the World.

And as it is God that gives, so it is God that accepts the Savior. As it is
God that provides and gives the Redeemer to buy Salvation for us, so it is of
God that that Salvation is bought: He gives the Purchaser, and he affords the
thing purchased.

It Is of God that Christ becomes ours, that we are brought to him, and are
united to him: It Is of God that we receive Faith to close with him, that we may
have an Interest in him. Ephesians. 2.8. For by Grace ye are saved, through Faith;
and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God. It Is of God that we
actually do receive all the Benefits that Christ has purchased. It Is God that
pardons and justifies, and delivers from going down to Hell, and it is his
Favor that the Redeemed are received into, and are made the Objects of, when
they are justified. So it is God that delivers from the Dominion of Sin, and
cleanses us from our Filthiness, and changes us from our Deformity. It Is of God
that the Redeemed do receive all their true Excellency, Wisdom and Holiness;
and that two Ways, viz. as the Holy Ghost by whom these things are immediately
wrought is from God, proceeds from him, and is sent by him; and also as the
Holy Ghost himself is God, by whose Operation and Indwelling, the Knowledge of
God and divine things, and a holy Disposition, and all Grace are conferred and
upheld.

And though Means are made Use of in conferring Grace on Men's Souls, yet it is of
God that we have these Means of Grace, and it is God that makes them effectual.
It Is of God that we have the holy Scriptures; they are the Word of God. It Is of
God that we have Ordinances, and their Efficacy depends on the immediate
Influence of the Spirit of God. The Ministers of the Gospel are sent of God,
and all their Sufficiency is of him. 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this Treasure in
earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may be of God and not of us.
Their Success depends entirely and absolutely on the immediate Blessing and
Influence of God.

The Redeemed have all,

1. Of the Grace of God. It was of mere Grace that God gave us his only
begotten Son. The Grace is great in proportion to the Dignity and Excellency of
what is given: The Gift was infinitely precious, because it was of a Person
infinitely worthy, a Person of infinite Glory: and also because it was of a
Person infinitely near and dear to God. The Grace is great in proportion to the
Benefit we have given us in him: The Benefit is doubly infinite in that in him
we have Deliverance from an infinite, because an eternal Misery, and do also
receive eternal Joy and Glory. The Grace in bestowing this Gift is great in
proportion to our Unworthiness to whom it is given; instead of deserving such a
Gift, we merited infinitely ill of God's Hands. The Grace is great according to
the Manner of giving, or in proportion to the Humiliation and Expense of the
Method and Means by which Way is made for our having of the Gift. He gave him
to us dwelling amongst us; he gave him to us incarnate, or in our own Nature;
he gave him to us in our Nature, in the like Infirmities, in which we have it
in our fallen State, and which in us do accompany, and are occasioned by, the
sinful Corruption of our Nature. He gave him to us in a low and afflicted
State; and not only so but he gave him to us slain that he might be a Feast for
our Souls.

The Grace of God in bestowing this Gift is most free. It was what God was
under no Obligation to bestow: He might have rejected fallen Man, as he did the
fallen Angels. It was what we never did any thing to merit: 'Twas given while
we were yet Enemies, and before we had so much as repented. It was from the
Love of God that saw no Excellency in us to attract it; and it was without
Expectation of ever being requited for it.

And it is from mere Grace that the Benefits of Christ are applied to such and
such particular Persons. Those that are called and sanctified are to attribute
it alone to the good Pleasure of God's Goodness, by which they are
distinguished. He is sovereign and has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and
whom he will he hardens.

Man has now a greater Dependence on the Grace of God than he had before the
Fall. He depends on the free Goodness of God for much more than he did then:
Then he depended on God's Goodness for conferring the Reward of perfect
Obedience; for God was not obliged to promise and bestow that Reward: But now
we are dependent on the Grace of God for much more: We stand in need of Grace,
not only to bestow Glory upon us, but to deliver us from Hell and eternal
Wrath. Under the first Covenant we depended on God's Goodness to give us the
Reward of Righteousness; and so we do now. And not only so, but we stand in
need of God's free and sovereign Grace to give us that Righteousness; and yet
not only so, but we stand in need of his Grace to pardon our Sin, and release
us from the Guilt and infinite Demerit of it.

And as we are dependent on the Goodness of God for more now than under the
first Covenant, so we are dependent on a much greater, more free and wonderful
Goodness. We are now more dependent on God's arbitrary and sovereign good
Pleasure. We were in our first Estate dependent on God for Holiness: We had our
original Righteousness from him; but then Holiness was not bestowed in such a
Way of sovereign good Pleasure as it is now. Man was created holy, and it
become God to create holy all the reasonable Creatures he created: It would
have been a Disparagement to the Holiness of God's Nature, if he had made an
intelligent Creature unholy. But now when Man is made holy, it is from mere and
arbitrary Grace; God may for ever deny Holiness to the fallen Creature if he
pleases, without any Disparagement to any of his Perfections.

And we are not only indeed more dependent on the Grace of God, but our
Dependence is much more conspicuous, because our own Insufficiency and
Helplesness in our selves is much more apparent, in our fallen and undone
State, than it was before we were either sinful or miserable. We are more
apparently dependent on God for Holiness, because we are first sinful, and
utterly polluted, and afterward holy: So the Production of the Effect is
sensible, and its Derivation from God more obvious. If Man was ever holy and
always was so, it would not be so apparent, that he had not Holiness
necessarily, as an inseparable Qualification of human Nature. So we are more
apparently dependent on free Grace for the Favor of God, for we are first
justly the Objects of his Displeasure, and afterward are received into Favor.
We are more apparently dependent on God for Happiness, being first miserable,
and afterward happy. It Is more apparently free and without Merit in us,
because we are actually without any kind of Excellency to merit, if there could
be any such thing as Merit in Creature Excellency. And we are not only without
any true Excellency, but are full of, and wholly defiled with, that which is
infinitely odious. All our Good is more apparently from God, because we are
first naked and wholly without any Good, and afterward enriched with all Good.

2. We receive all of the Power of God. Man's Redemption is often spoken of as
a Work of wonderful Power as well as Grace. The great Power of God appears in
bringing a Sinner from his low State, from the depths of Sin and Misery, to
such an exalted State of Holiness and Happiness. Ephesians. 1.19. And what is the
exceeding Greatness of his Power to us ward who believe, according to the
working of his mighty Power --.

We are dependent on God's Power through every Step of our Redemption. We are
dependent on the Power of God to convert us, and give Faith in Jesus Christ,
and the new Nature. It Is a Work of Creation: If any Man be in Christ he is a
new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. We are created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10. The
fallen Creature cannot attain to true Holiness, but by being created again. Ephesians.
4.24. And that ye put on the new Man which after God is created in
Righteousness, and true Holiness. It Is a raising from the Dead. Colos. 2.12,
13. -- Wherein also ye are risen with him, through the Faith of the Operation
of God, who has raised him from the Dead. Yea, it is a more glorious Work of
Power than mere Creation, or raising a dead Body to Life, in that the Effect
attained is greater and more excellent. That holy and happy Being, and
spiritual Life which is reached in the Work of Conversion, is a far greater,
and more glorious Effect, than mere Being and Life. And the State from whence
the Change is made, of such a Death in Sin, and total Corruption of Nature, and
depth of Misery, is far more remote from the State attained, than mere Death of
Nonentity.

It Is by God's Power also that we are preserved in a State of Grace. 1 Pet.
1.5. Who are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. As Grace is
at first from God, so it is continually from him, and is maintained by him, as
much as Light in the Atmosphere is all Day long from the Sun, as well as at
first Dawning, or at Sunrising.

Men are dependent on the Power of God, for every Exercise of Grace, and for
carrying on the Work of Grace in the Heart, for the subduing of Sin and
Corruption, and increasing holy Principles, and enabling to bring forth Fruit
in good Works, and at last bringing Grace to it is Perfection, in making the
Soul completely amiable in Christ's glorious Likeness, and filling of it with a
satisfying Joy and Blessedness; and for the raising of the Body to Life, and to
such a perfect State, that it shall be suitable for an Habitation and Organ for
a Soul so perfected and blessed. These are the most glorious Effects of the
Power of God, that are seen in the Series of God's Acts with Respect to the
Creatures.

Man was dependent on the Power of God in his first Estate, but he is more
dependent on his Power now; he needs God's Power to do more things for him, and
depends on a more wonderful Exercise of his Power. It was an Effect of the
Power of God to make Man holy at the first; but more remarkably so now, because
there is a great deal of Opposition and Difficulty in the Way. It Is a more
glorious Effect of Power to make that holy that was so depraved and under the
Dominion of Sin, than to confer Holiness on that which before had nothing of
the contrary. It Is a more glorious Work of Power to rescue a Soul out of the
Hands of the Devil, and from the Powers of Darkness, and to bring it into a
State of Salvation, than to confer Holiness where there was no Prepossession or
Opposition. Luke 11.21, 22. When a strong Man armed keeps his Palace his
Goods are in Peace; but when a stronger than he shall come upon him and
overcome him, he takes from him all his Armor wherein he trusted and divides
his Spoils. So it is a more glorious Work of Power to uphold a Soul in a State
of Grace and Holiness, and to carry it on till it is brought to Glory, when
there is so much Sin remaining in the Heart, resisting, and Satan with all his
Might opposing, than it would have been to have kept Man from falling at first,
when Satan had nothing in Man.

Thus we have shown how the Redeemed are dependent on God for all their Good as
they have all of him.

Secondly, They are also dependent on God for all, as they have all through
him. It Is God that is the Medium of it, as well as the Author and Fountain of
it. All that we have, Wisdom, and the Pardon of Sin, Deliverance from Hell,
Acceptance into God's Favor, Grace and Holiness, true Comfort and Happiness,
eternal Life and Glory, we have from God by a Mediator; and this Mediator is
God; which Mediator we have an absolute Dependence upon, as He through whom we
receive all. So that here is another Way wherein we have our Dependence on God
for all Good. God not only gives us the Mediator, and accepts his Mediation,
and of his Power and Grace bestows the things purchased by the Mediator, but he
is the Mediator.

Our Blessings are what we have by Purchase; and the Purchase is made of God,
the Blessings are purchased of him, and God gives the Purchaser; and not only
so but God is the Purchaser. Yea God is both the Purchaser and the Price; for
Christ, who is God purchased these Blessings for us, by offering up himself as
the Price of our Salvation. He purchased eternal Life by the Sacrifice of
himself. Heb. 7.27. He offered up himself. And 9.26. He has appeared to take
away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself. Indeed it was the human Nature that was
offered; but it was the same Person with the divine, and therefore was an
infinite Price: it was looked upon as if God had been offered in Sacrifice.

As we thus have our Good through God, we have a Dependence on God in a Respect
that Man in his first Estate had not. Man was to have eternal Life then through
his own Righteousness; so that he had partly a Dependence upon what was in
himself; for we have a Dependence upon that through which we have our Good, as
well as that from which we have it: and though Man's Righteousness that he then
depended on was indeed from God, yet it was his own, it was inherent in
himself; so that his Dependence was not so immediately on God. But now the
Righteousness that we are Dependent on is not in our selves, but in God. We are
saved through the Righteousness of Christ: he is made unto us Righteousness;
and therefore is prophesied of, Jer. 23.6. under that Name of the Lord our
Righteousness. In that the Righteousness we are justified by is the
Righteousness of Christ, it is the Righteousness of God. 2 Cor. 5.21. That we
might be made the Righteousness of God in him.

Thus in Redemption, we have not only all things of God, but by and through him, 1
Cor. 8.6. But to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things,
and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

Thirdly, The Redeemed have all their Good in God. We not only have it of him
and through him, but it consists in him; he is all our Good.

The Good of the Redeemed is either objective or inherent. By their objective
Good I mean, that extrinsick Object, in the Possession and Enjoyment of which
they are happy. Their inherent Good is that Excellency or Pleasure which is in
the Soul it self. With Respect to both of which the Redeemed have all their
Good in God, or which is the same thing, God himself is all their Good.

1. The Redeemed have all their objective Good in God. God himself is the great
Good which they are brought to the Possession and Enjoyment of by Redemption.
He is the highest Good, and the Sum of all that Good which Christ purchased.
God is the Inheritance of the Saints; he is the Portion of their Souls. God is
their Wealth and Treasure, their Food, their Life, their dwelling Place, their
Ornament and Diadem, and their everlasting Honor and Glory. They have none in
Heaven but God; he is the great Good which the Redeemed are received to at
Death, and which they are to rise to at the End of the World. The Lord God He
is the Light of the heavenly Jerusalem; and is the River of the Water of Life
that runs, and the Tree of Life that grows, in the midst of the Paradise of
God. The glorious Excellencies and Beauty of God will be what will for ever
entertain the Minds of the Saints, and the Love of God will be their
everlasting Feast. The Redeemed will indeed enjoy other things; they will enjoy
the Angels, and will enjoy one another: but that which they shall enjoy in the
Angels, or each other, or in any thing else whatsoever, that will yield them
Delight and Happiness, will be what will be seen of God in them.

2. The Redeemed have all their inherent Good in God. Inherent Good is twofold;
it is either Excellency or Pleasure. These the Redeemed not only derive from
God, as caused by him, but have them in him. They have spiritual Excellency and
Joy by a kind of Participation of God. They are made excellent by a
Communication of God's Excellency: God puts his own Beauty, i. e. his beautiful
Likeness upon their Souls: They are made Partakers of the divine Nature, or
moral Image of God, 2 Pet. 1.4. They are holy by being made Partakers of God's
Holiness, Heb. 12.10. The Saints are beautiful and blessed by a Communication
of God's Holiness and Joy as the Moon and Planets are bright by the Sun's
Light. The Saint has spiritual Joy and Pleasure by a kind of Effusion of God
on the Soul. In these things the Redeemed have Communion with God; that is,
they partake with him and of him.

The Saints have both their spiritual Excellency and Blessedness by the Gift of
the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of God, and his Dwelling in them. They are not only
caused by the Holy Ghost, but are in the Holy Ghost as their Principle. The
Holy Spirit becoming an Inhabitant, is a vital Principle in the Soul: He acting
in, upon and with the Soul, becomes a Fountain of true Holiness and Joy, as a
Spring is of Water, by the Exertion and Diffusion of it self. John 4.14. But
whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but
the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of Water springing up
into everlasting Life. Compared with Chap. 7.38, 39. He that believes on me,
as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water;
but this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive.
The Sum of what Christ has purchased for us, is that Spring of Water spoken of
in the former of those Places, and those Rivers of living Water spoken of in
the latter. And the Sum of the Blessings, which the Redeemed shall receive in
Heaven, is that River of Water of Life, that proceeds from the Throne of God
and the Lamb, Rev. 22.1. Which doubtless signifies the same with those Rivers
of living Water, explained John 7.38, 39. which is elsewhere called the River
of God's Pleasures. Herein consists the Fullness of Good, which the Saints
receive of Christ. It Is by partaking of the Holy Spirit, that they have
Communion with Christ in his Fullness. God has given the Spirit, not by Measure
unto Him; and they do receive of his Fullness, and Grace for Grace. This is the
Sum of the Saints Inheritance: and therefore that little of the Holy Ghost
which Believers have in this World, is said to be the Earnest of their
Inheritance, 2. Cor. 1.22. Who has also sealed us, and given us the Spirit in
our Hearts. And Ver. 5. Now he that has wrought us for the self same thing is
God, who also has given unto us the Earnest of the Spirit. And Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
Ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of our
Inheritance, until the Redemption of the purchased Possession.

The Holy Spirit and Good Things are spoken of in Scripture as the same; as if
the Spirit of God communicated to the Soul, comprised all good Things, Mat.
7.11. How much more shall your heavenly Father give good Things to them that
ask him. In Luke it is, Chap. 11.11. How much more shall your heavenly Father
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him. This is the Sum of the Blessings
that Christ died to procure, and that are the Subject of Gospel-Promises. Gal.
3.13, 14. He was made a Curse for us, that we might receive the Promise of the
Spirit through Faith. The Spirit of God is the great Promise of the Father,
Luke 24.49. Behold I send the Promise of my Father upon you. The Spirit of God
therefore is called the Spirit of Promise; Ephesians. 1.13. This Promised Thing
Christ received, and had given into his Hand, as soon as he had finished the
Work of our Redemption, to bestow on all that he had redeemed; Acts 2.33.
Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the
Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this, which ye both
see and hear. So that all the Holiness and Happiness of the Redeemed is in God.
It Is in the Communications, indwelling and acting of the Spirit of God.
Holiness and Happiness is in the Fruit, here and hereafter, because God dwells
in them, and they in God.

Thus it is God that has given us the Redeemer, and it is of him that our Good is
purchased: So it is God that is the Redeemer, and the Price: and it is God also
that is the Good purchased. So that all that we have is of God, and through
him, and in him, Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him, and to him, or in him
are all things: The same in the Greek, that is here rendered to him, is rendered
in him, 1 Cor. 8.6.

II. God is glorified in the Work of Redemption by this Means, viz. By there
being so great and universal a Dependence of the Redeemed on him.

1. Man has so much the greater Occasion and Obligation to take notice and
acknowledge God's Perfections and All Sufficiency. The greater the Creatures
Dependence is on God's Perfections, and the greater Concern he has with them,
so much the greater Occasion has he to take notice of them. So much the greater
Concern any one has with and Dependence upon the Power and Grace of God, so
much the greater Occasion has he to take notice of that Power and Grace. So
much the greater and more immediate Dependence there is on the divine Holiness,
so much the greater Occasion to take notice of and acknowledge that. So much
the greater and more absolute Dependence we have on the divine Perfections, as
belonging to the several Persons of the Trinity, so much the greater Occasion
have we to observe and own the divine Glory of each of them. That which we are
most concerned with, is surely most in the Way of our Observation and Notice;
and this kind of Concern with any thing, viz. Dependence, does especially tend
to commend and oblige the Attention and Observation. Those Things that we are
not much Dependent upon, it is easy to neglect; but we can scarce do any other
than mind that which we have a great Dependence on. By Reason of our so great
Dependence on God, and his Perfections, and in so many Respects; He and his
Glory are the more directly set in our View, which Way soever we turn our Eyes.

We have the greater Occasion to take notice of God's All Sufficiency, when all
our Sufficiency is thus every Way of him. We have the more Occasion to
contemplate him as an infinite Good, and as the Fountain of all Good. Such a
Dependence on God demonstrates God's All Sufficiency. So much as the Dependence
of the Creature is on God, so much the greater does the Creatures Emptiness in
himself appear to be: and so much the greater the Creatures Emptiness, so much
the greater must the Fullness of the Being be, who supplies him. Our having all
of God, shows the Fullness of his Power and Grace: Our having all through him,
shows the Fullness of his Merit and Worthiness; and our having all in him
demonstrates his Fullness of Beauty, Love and Happiness.

And the Redeemed by Reason of the Greatness of their Dependence on God, han't
only so much the greater Occasion, but Obligation to contemplate and
acknowledge the Glory and Fullness of God. How unreasonable and ungrateful
should we be, if we did not acknowledge that Sufficiency and Glory, that we do
absolutely, immediately and universally depend upon?

2. Hereby is demonstrated how great God's Glory is considered comparatively,
or as compared with the Creatures. By the Creatures being thus wholly and
universally dependent on God, it appears that the Creature is nothing, and that
God is all. Hereby it appears that God is infinitely above us; that God's
Strength, and Wisdom, and Holiness are infinitely greater than ours. However
great and glorious the Creature apprehends God to be, yet if he be not sensible
of the difference between God and him, so as to see that God's Glory is great
compared with his own, he will not be disposed to give God the Glory due to his
Name. If the Creature in any Respects sets himself upon a Level with God, or
exalts himself to any Competition with him, however he may apprehend that great
Honor and profound Respect may belong to God from those that are more
inferior, and at a greater Distance, will not be so sensible of it is being due
from him. So much the more Men exalt themselves, so much the less will they
surely be disposed to exalt God. It Is certainly a Thing that God aims at in the
Disposition of Things in the Affair of Redemption, (if we allow the Scriptures
to be a Revelation of God's Mind) that God should appear full, and Man in
himself empty, that God should appear all, and Man nothing. It Is God's declared
Design that others should not glory in his Presence, which implies that it is
his Design to advance his own comparative Glory. So much the more Man glories
in God's Presence, so much the less Glory is ascribed to God.

3. By it is being thus ordered, that the Creature should have so absolute and
universal a Dependence on God, Provision is made that God should have our whole
Souls, and should be the Object of our undivided Respect. If we had our
Dependence partly on God, and partly on something else, Man's Respect would be
divided to those different Things on which he had Dependence. Thus it would be
if we depended on God only for a Part of our Good, and on our selves, or some
other Being, for another Part; Or if we had our Good only from God, and through
another that was not God, and in something else distinct from both, our Hearts
would be divided between the Good it self, and him from whom, and him through
whom we received it. But now there is no Occasion for this, God being not only
he from or of whom we have all Good, but also through whom, and one that is
that Good it self, that we have from him, and through him. So that whatsoever
there is to attract our Respect, the Tendency is still directly toward God,
all unites in him as the Center.

USE.
1. We may here observe the mavelous Wisdom of God, in the Work of
Redemption. God has made Man's Emptiness and Misery, his low, lost and ruined
State into which he is sunk by the Fall, an Occasion of the greater Advancement
of his own Glory, as in other Ways so particularly in this, that there is now a
much more universal and apparent Dependence of Man on God. Though God be
pleased to lift Man out of that dismal Abyss of Sin and Woe into which he was
fallen, and exceedingly to exalt him in Excellency and Honor, and to an high
Pitch of Glory and Blessedness, yet the Creature has nothing in any Respect to
glory of; all the Glory evidently belongs to God, all is in a mere, and most
absolute and divine Dependence on the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

And each Person of the Trinity is equally glorified in this Work: There is an
absolute Dependence of the Creature on every one for all: All is of the Father,
all through the Son, and all in the Holy Ghost. Thus God appears in the Work of
Redemption, as all in all. It Is fit that he that is, and there is none else,
should be the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the all and the only, in
this Work.

2. Hence those Doctrines and Schemes of Divinity that are in any Respect
opposite to such an absolute, and universal Dependence on God, do derogate from
God's Glory, and thwart the Design of the Contrivance for our Redemption. Those
Schemes that put the Creature in God's stead, in any of the mentioned Respects,
that exalt Man into the Place of either Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, in any
thing pertaining to our Redemption; that however they may allow of a Dependence
of the Redeemed on God, yet deny a Dependence that is so absolute and
universal; that own an entire Dependence on God for some things, but not for
others; that own that we depend on God for the Gift and Acceptance of a
Redeemer, but deny so absolute a Dependence on him for the obtaining of an
Interest in the Redeemer; that own an absolute Dependence on the Father for
giving his Son, and on the Son for working out Redemption, but not so entire a
Dependence on the Holy Ghost for Conversion, and a being in Christ, and so
coming to a 'Title to his Benefits; that own a Dependence on God for means of
Grace, but not absolutely for the Benefit and Success of those Means; that own
a partial Dependence on the Power of God, for the obtaining and exercising
Holiness, but not a mere Dependence on the arbitrary and sovereign Grace of
God; that own a Dependence on the free Grace of God for a Reception into his
Favor, so far that it is without any proper Merit, but not as it is without
being attracted, or moved with any Excellency; that own a partial Dependence on
Christ, as he through whom we have Life, as having purchased new Terms of Life,
but still hold that the Righteousness through which we have Life is inherent in
our selves, as it was under the first Covenant: and whatever other Way any
Scheme is inconsistent with our entire Dependence on God for all, and in each
of those Ways, of having all of him, through him, and in him, it is repugnant
to the Design and Tenor of the Gospel, and robs it of that which God accounts
its Luster and Glory.

3. Hence we may learn a Reason why Faith is that by which we come to have an
Interest in this Redemption; for there is included in the Nature of Faith, a
Sensibleness, and Acknowledgement of this absolute Dependence on God in this
Affair. It Is very fit that it should be required of all, in order to their
having the Benefit of this Redemption, that they should be sensible of, and
acknowledge the Dependence on God for it. It Is by this Means that God has
contrived to glorify himself in Redemption, and it is fit that God should at
least have this Glory of those that are the Subjects of this Redemption; and
have the Benefit of it.

Faith is a Sensibleness of what is real in the Work of Redemption; and as we
do really wholly depend on God, so the Soul that believes does entirely depend
on God for all Salvation, in its own Sense, and Act. Faith abases Men, and
exalts God, it gives all the Glory of Redemption to God alone. I is necessary
in order to saving Faith, that Man should be emptied of himself, that he should
be sensible that he is wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.
Humility is a great Ingredient* of true Faith: He that truly receives
Redemption receives it as a little Child, Mark 10.15. Whosoever shall not
receive the Kingdom of Heaven as a little Child, he shall not enter therein.
It Is the Delight of a believing Soul to abase it self and exalt God alone: that
is the Language of it, Psalm. 115.1. Not unto us, not unto us, O Lord, but to
thy Name give Glory.

4. Let us be exhorted to exalt God alone, and ascribe to him all the Glory of
Redemption. Let us endeavor to obtain, and increase in, a Sensibleness of our
great Dependence on God, to have our Eye to him alone, to mortify a
self-dependent, and self-righteous Disposition. Man is naturally exceeding
Prone to be exalting himself, and depending on his own Power or Goodness, as
though he were he from whom he must expect Happiness, and to have Respect to
Enjoyments aliene from God and his Spirit, as those in which Happiness is to be
found.

And this Doctrine should teach us to exalt God alone as by Trust and Reliance,
so by Praise. Let him that glories glory in the Lord. Has any Man Hope that he
is converted, and sanctified, and that his Mind is endowed with true Excellency
and spiritual Beauty, and his Sins forgiven, and he received into God's Favor,
and exalted to the Honor and Blessedness of being his Child, and an Heir of
eternal Life; let him give God all the Glory; who alone makes him to differ
from the worst of Men in this World, or the Miserablest of the damned in Hell.
Has any Man much Comfort and strong Hope of eternal Life, let not his Hope
lift him up, but dispose him the more to abase himself, and reflect on his own
exceeding Unworthiness of such a Favor, and to exalt God alone. Is any Man
eminent in Holiness, and abundant in good Words, let him take nothing of the
Glory of it to himself, but ascribe it to him whose Workmanship we are, created
in Christ Jesus unto Good Works.

FINIS.

