Mr. Prince's ELECTION SERMON

In COUNCIL, June 1 st, 1730.
Ordered,

THAT Thomas Fitch and Daniel Oliver, Esqrs give the Thanks of this Board to
the Reverend Mr. Thomas Prince, for his SERMON Preached to the General
Assembly, on the Day of Election of Counselors, and desire a Copy thereof in
order to its being Printed.

J. Willard, Secr.

The People of NEW ENGLAND Put in mind of the Righteous Acts of the LORD to
Them and their Fathers, and Reasoned with concerning them.

A SERMON Delivered at Cambridge BEFORE THE Great and General Assembly Of the
Province of the MASSACHUSETTS May 27th MDCCXXX.

Being the Anniversary for the Election of His Majesty's COUNCIL for the
Province.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And one of the Pastors of the South Church in BOSTON

Psalm. cv. 5, 6. Remember his mavelous Works that HE has done, his Wonders,
and the Judgments of his mouth; O ye Seed of Abraham his Servant, ye Children
of Jacob his Chosen!

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by B. Green, Printer to His Honor the Lieut.
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, for D. Henchman in Cornhil. 1730.

A SERMON AT THE General Election.
1 Samuel ^ii. 6, 7. And SAMUEL said unto the PEOPLE; It is the LORD that
advanced MOSES and AARON, and that brought up your FATHERS out of the Land of
Egypt; Now therefore, stand still, that I may Reason with you before the LORD,
of all the Righteous Acts of the LORD, which He did to YOU and to your FATHERS.
THAT we may form a clear Prospect of the Occasion and Propriety of this
Address of SAMUEL; we must imagine we see the Tribes of ISRAEL assembled now
before Him at Gilgal, to behold this illustrious Person laying down the chief
Part of his Civil Power and resigning it to another, whom the GOD of Heaven had
so highly honored as to raise Him up from among his Brethren and set Him over
that distinguished People.

And it is indeed astonishing to see with what a noble, unaffected and
inimitable Majesty, this most extraordinary Judge and Prophet makes the public
Resignation: With what a just Concern for the Security of his own unblemished
Character, and with what a flaming Zeal for the continued Honor of GOD, the
Maintenance of his pure Religion, the Welfare of his People, and the Prosperity
of the succeeding Governor.

Read this admirable Chapter, and keep in view the great Occasion, the
superior Person speaking, the vast and attentive Audience, the chief Ruler now
before Him, the Things delivered, and the Air and Manner of the whole
Transaction -- and you will see in all, such a plain, venerable and sublime
Grandeur, as I know of nothing among the mere Sons of Men has been ever like
it, unless it were in MOSES, and none but one apparently inspired and filled
with the DIVINE SPIRIT can pretend to imitate.

Having first received their universal Approbation of his entire Conduct; He
cannot leave his beloved People without the most public, plain and solemn
Admonitions and Advices; that they may prove a wise and happy People under the
Influence of their new Governor.

Resigning therefore now the chief Seat of Civil Power, but retaining the
superior Office and Authority of a Public Prophet; He becomes a Divine
Preacher to the listening Congregation, and begins his Sermon with the
awakening Introduction in the Words before us. Of which I now propose by the
Divine Help to treat, under these three general Heads,

1. To consider the Words as applicable to that special People, to whom they
were at first directed.

2. Raise some general Observations from them. And then,

3. and lastly, Apply the Words and those Observations to this particular
People in our own Land.

I. To consider the Text as applicable to that special People to whom it was at
first directed.

And SAMUEL said unto the PEOPLE --

i. e. To the whole Assembly then and there convened, not only comprehensive of
the common People, but also, in a special manner, the Heads and Representatives
of the several Tribes and Towns of ISRAEL.

In the first Verse of the Chapter, they are said to be all ISRAEL; in the last
of the foregoing, to be all the Men of ISRAEL; and by the 8th Verse, it seems
they were at least Three hundred Thousand.

But we may by no means imagine, that this was a mere confused Multitude
without any comely Order or Distinction. For they had an excellent Frame of
Government established over their several Tribes and Families; whereby their
Tribes and Families were both kept in order and preserved entire from their
original.

It would be a very instructive Entertainment, to trace it out in all its
Branches and Alterations, as they are successively represented in the sacred
Records. But the time would fail me: And I may only observe, that before ever
they came out of EGYPT, they had their ELDERS in their several Tribes, who
were Men of chief Renown and Esteem among them for their singular Abilities and
public Virtues; who by reason of these had a public Influence over them, and
to whose especial Conduct they resigned their public Affairs and Interests.

For thus says GOD to MOSES, at his first Appearance, in the burning Bush,
Exodus iii. 16, 18, Go and gather the ELDERS The SEPTUAGINT here calls them the
SENATE of ISRAEL: And the learned AINSWORTH observes, they were not only Men of
AGE, but also TEACHERS and RULERS among the People, as there were among other
Nations, Genesis L. 7. Numb. xxii 4, 7. Josh. ix. 11.
of ISRAEL together, etc. In the following Chapter, verse. 29, we read that
MOSES and AARON went and gathered together all the ELDERS of the Children of
ISRAEL: And these very Elders are called the People, in the following Verses:
which seems to intimate, that either there were a considerable Number of them,
and it is likely all their Rulers both of the higher and lower Orders; or they
represented the Community, or that a great Company of others out of every Tribe
attended and assembled with them; on which account the whole Convention is
styled the People.

Of these Elders we also read upon their coming into the Wilderness in the xii,
xvii, and xviii Chapters. And then under their sovereign Ruler MOSES, there
were chosen out of every Tribe, the most known among them for Ability, Wisdom,
Understanding, Religion, Truth, and the Hatred of Covetousness; to preside over
them, and the several Thousands, Hundreds, Fifties and Tens, i. e. not of
Persons but of Households in them. Exodus xviii. 13, -- e. Compared with Deuteronomy.
I. 9, -- 18.
And in Chap. xix. 7. we read again of MOSES calling for the Elders of the
People: And these are also styled the People, in the two following Verses Of
these see likewise, in Lev. iv. and ix. Numb. xvi. Daut. v. xxvii, xxix, xxxi
Josh, vii, viii, xxiii, xxiv. Judge. ii, xxi, and 1 Samuel iv. And by the general
Tenor of their History, they seem to be not merely RULERS over the People, but
their REPRESENTATIVES also; or rather Representatives in a double quality; i.
e; They both represented the Privileges and Mind of the PEOPLE, who chose them,
to their sovereign Ruler, and the Mind and Power of the SOVEREIGN RULER, who
approved them, to the People: They seem to be wise and grave MEDIATORS between
the Will and Power of the one, and the Privileges and Inclinations of the
other, and their Business was to observe, advise and temper both, and balance
them together.
.

In Exodus xxiv. and Numb. xi, we read of seventy Men selected out of the
abovesaid Elders, who with MOSES and AARON seem to be formed into a supreme
Court of Judicature over all the Tribes; not destructive of the other Orders,
but superior only to them. And in Deuteronomy. xix, xxi, xxii, xxv, and Josh. xx,
there are several Laws requiring Elders in every City. Agreably to this we read
in Gideon's Days, of the Princes and Elders of SUCCOTH, a City in the Tribe of
Gad Genesis xxxlii. 17. Josh. xii, 27. ^^ 1 King. vii. 46.
, even seventy seven Men, Judge. viii. 6 -- 16. In Jeptha's Days of the Elders
of GILEAD, Judge xi. 5, -- 11. In the Days of Boaz, of Ten of the Elders of
BETHLEHEM, Ruth iv 2, -- 11. And in Samuel's Days, of the Elders of JABESH, in
the Chapter before our Text, Verse the 3d.

In 1 Samuel viii. 4. we read of all the Elders of ISRAEL gathering themselves
together to Him: and in the following Verses, these are likewise styled the
People. By these Elders may be therefore meant, not only all the Members of the
supreme Court of the Seventy, but also all others in Place of Power throughout
their Tribes and Cities. And in that great Convention, they may be styled the
People; because they seem to come as their chosen Representatives, and it is
likely that a numerous Company of others assembled with them.

To such another Great and General Assembly, comprehending all ISRAEL in a
regular Epitome, together with a vast Confluence of People of the Civil,
Ecclesiastical and Military Orders, does this great Prophet now direct his
inspired Oration.

And in the Text are these two things --

1. A preliminary Observation made, as the general Ground of his designed
Argument.

2. A general Inference He derives from thence, to excite their close Attention
to his Treatment of it.

3. A preliminary Observation made, as the general Ground of his designed
Argument. It is the LORD that advanced MOSES and AARON, and that brought up
your FATHERS out of the Land of EGYPT.

Behold, how this wise and great Master of Assemblies, first leads them back to
the Fountainhead of their present State and Happiness: that they may take a
lively and short Review of the Divine Appearance for their FOREFATHERS; in
Raising up such superior Persons as MOSES and AARON, as their distinguished
Heads and Leaders; and by these renowned Men Conducting them out of the Land of
their Oppressions, and through all the difficult and hideous Scenes of their
Progress through the Wilderness to their desired Country.

And in this Review we in the first place see the soaring Piety this Divine
Preacher would infuse into his listening Hearers. For He first Raises up their
Minds to Heaven, and begins with this -- It is the LORD that advanced those
extraordinary Leaders MOSES and AARON, and that brought up your FATHERS out of
the Land of EGYPT.

By their FATHERS is most plainly meant, not the immediate Fathers of the
Generation then subsisting in SAMUEL'S Days, but those more ancient Fathers who
came out of EGYPT about 400 426. according to the accurate Mr. TALLENTS.
Years before, and were first in Forming their Civil and Ecclesiastical State.
They were the near Descendants of JACOB, ISAAC, and ABRAHAM, who had a little
before renounced the Idolatry of the Nations round about them, reformed their
Families, embraced the pure Worship of GOD, and were accepted into Covenant
with Him.

EGYPT a very fruitful Land, and where all sorts of Arts and Sciences both for
Use and Ornament were flourishing in those early Ages, was the Place of their
Nativity and Education; and there they had both Houses, Flocks and Pastures of
their own Propriety. But they were of a particular Religion, purely revealed
from GOD, and free from all those Humane Inventions and Superstitious Customs
which were then the established and reigning way of Worship in that ancient
Kingdom. And those pious Fathers adhering closely to their inspired Religion,
refusing Mixtures with their Neighbors, preserving a visible Destinction from
them, and growing numerous and powerful, they became ocnoxious to the Egygtian
Jealousy.

Through the Reigns of some of their former Sovereigns, they were very kindly
entertained and indulged. But upon the rising or a New King over EGYPT, who
had no Favor for them; He though it to deal wisely with them, and as the Martyr
STEPHEN expresses it, Act. vii. 19. He evilly entreated our Fathers. Yea MOSES
a public Eye Witness, tells us, that the King and his Courtiers set over them
Taskmasters to afflict them with their Burdens; and these cruel Officers made
the Children of ISRAEL serve with so much Rigor, that they made their Lives
bitter (...) hard Bondage, Exodus i. 7 -- 14.

However, as they sighed and cried, their Cry came up to Heaven; and GOD heard
their Groaning, and remembered his Covenant, and had respect unto them; as in
the latter end of the following Chapter.

Now therefore He advances MOSES and AARON to espouse their Cause, and head
their Tribes, and lead them out of this inhospitable Land, to distant Regions
of Ease and Liberty.

If I were to display the Characters of these illustrious Persons, I should not
know when to end. And yet I cannot forbear observing, They were two most lovely
Brethren, the Sons of AMRAM, the Son of KOHATH, the Son of LEVI; of vastly
different Educations, but remarkably raised up by Heaven, inspired and
strengthened in a happy Union, to lead the People out of EGYPT, and become the
several Heads, MOSES of the Civil, and AARON of the Ecclesiastical Orders,
under GOD in ISRAEL.

As for MOSES -- He was exceeding fair and beautiful when born. Act. vii. 20.
The Original (...)
seems to intimate as if a Divine Beauty appeared upon him. But his parents
being afraid to keep him in their own House, through the cruel Inquisition of the
times, laid him in an Ark of Rushes among the Flags on the River NILUS: where
Pharoah's Daughter finding him, had compassion on him, took him up and
nourished him as her own Son. By this means he came to be learned in all the
Wisdom of EGYPT. He lived in the Royal Family for Forty Years: and then from a
Principle of Faith and Piety, he renounced it: Refusing to be called the Son of
Pharoah's Daughter, rather choosing to suffer affliction with the People of GOD
than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a Season, esteeming the Reproach of
CHRIST greater Riches then the Treasures in EGYPT; for he had respect to the
Recompense of the Reward. Forty Years more he lived as a Strange Shepard in the
Land of MIDIAN. And then the LORD appeared to him in a flaming Bush, yet
unconsumed, and called him to take the care of his afflicted People, and lead
them out of EGYPT.

He was the meekest Man upon the Face of the Earth: and on this account most
eminently fitted to bare the Burden of so difficult and great a People. He was
made a GOD to Pharaoh, by a Divine appearance that attended him in all his
Transactions with that haughty Monarch. He was mighty both in Word and Deed.
And he became KING in JESHURUN, when the Head of the People and the Tribes of
ISRAEL were gathered together. And then with what wonderful Patience did He for
Forty Years bare their ungrateful Murmurings and Strivings! -- With what an
astonishing Greatness of Soul, that all their Provocations could never but once
roil him into an indecent Expression! How often did he stand in the Breach, to
turn away the Wrath of GOD, that He might not destroy them! How nobly refuse
the Offer of having his own Posterity made a greater Nation, rather than They
should perish and the Name of the GOD of ISRAEL be dishonored in their utter
Ruin! How He Prayed that GOD would rather blot Him out of his Book, than not
forgive their provoking Sins: And how earnest, pressing and persevering in his
Intercessions for them!

In short, Of all the Prophets that arose in ISRAEL, there was none like Him,
whom the LORD knew Face to Face, and spoke to Him as a Man speaks to his
Friend. And behold -- what surprising Honors the GOD of Heaven was pleased to
do Him, above every other mere Man that ever lived on the Earth! While all the
Tribes are trembling round about Mount Sinai -- MOSES goes up into the glowing
Fire, and speaks with GOD, and bares it for Forty Days and Forty Nights
together: While the Divine Brightness wro't such transforming and astonishing
Impressions on Him, as to make his Face to shine with so great a Luster; that
when He came down the Mountain, AARON and all the Children of ISRAEL were
afraid to draw near Him, and He was forced to vail it, that they might be able
to endure his Presence. When He goes into the Tabernacle, in the sight of all
the People, the Pillar of Fire descends down to the Door in Honor of Him: When
He comes out, it rises up in the midst of the Firmament, to signify, it nothing
now to do but enlighten and awe the Congregation and observe the Reverence they
paid Him. And when some of the Chief among them spoke against Him, the LORD
came down in the Pillar of the Cloud, and stood in the Door of the Tabernacle,
and called them and said Numb. xii. 6, -- 8.
" Hear now my Words! If there be a Prophet among You, I the LORD will make my
self known to Him in a Vision, and will speak to Him in a Dream. My Servant
MOSES is not so, who is faithful in all mine House: With HIM will I speak
Mouth to Mouth, even apparently and not in dark Speeches, and the Similitude of
the LORD shall HE behold: Wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my
Servant MOSES? And the Anger of the LORD was kindled against them.

And as for AARON -- he was the elder Brother of MOSES, commended of GOD for
the Grace of his Lips, and honored with this distinguishing Title -- The Saint
of the LORD. He made him the Spokesman and Prophet of MOSES, both to the People
and to Pharaoh. The GOD of Heaven also spoke immediately to him, and sent him
to meet and unite with MOSES: and he went and met him in the Mount of GOD and
kissed him, and they rejoiced in meeting and uniting for the Redemption of
ISRAEL. He first spoke the Words of the LORD to the Elders of the Tribes, and
did the Signs in the sight of the People. He went in with MOSES to Pharaoh with
the Rod of GOD in his Hand; and he said to the King; Thus says the LORD God of
ISRAEL, Let my People go. He cast down the Rod before him, and it became a
Serpent, which swallowed up the Rods of the Magicians: He stretched it out upon
the Waters, and they were turned into Blood: He stretched it out again, and the
Frogs came up and covered the Land: He smote the Dust of the Earth, and it was
turned into swarms of Lice round about; and the Magicians owned it to be the
Power of the ALMIGHTY.

With MOSES he combined in leading ISRAEL out of EGYPT, in receiving the
Revelations of the Mind of GOD, and in delivering, them to the Congregation.
And when he came to SINAI, he was by the Divine Appointment raised to the Head
of the Priesthood: He was chosen out of all Men living to offer Sacrifice and
Incense to the GOD of Heaven: and he had the singular Honor of the Priestly
Office conferred upon his Offspring, as long as the Seed of ISRAEL should
continue a Nation.

These are that MOSES and AARON which the LORD advanced in the Days of their
Fathers, to lead them out of EGYPT and found their State, to establish their
sacred Relation to GOD, to give them their excellent Constitutions and Laws,
and make them so renowned in the World.

The Word -- Advanced -- signifies both Provided, created, Arab.
made, Sept. Sir. Chal. Vulg, and Mont, in Bib. Pelyg, etc.
prepared, instructed, trained and raised up, improved, adorned, furnished,
fitted, constituted, preferred and promoted to Power and Dignity. It is
comprehensive of all these Senses, and so it is rendered by learned Men Vid.
Mercer. Buxt. Castle, Leigh and Pol. Synops.
. And the general Meaning is -- It is the LORD that made them in such a special
Season when his People wanted them: that gave them their several excellent
natural Powers, that brought them forth, that raised them up; that every way
accomplished them for the superior Works and Stations He designed them for;
endowed them with such admirable Gifts and Graces; inspired them with such a
public Zeal and Spirit, Courage, Wisdom, Meekness, Faith and Patience. In
fine, that called them out and sent them, made them such illustrious Persons,
magnified them in the Eyes of all that saw them, prosper'd them in their great
Undertakings, and made them so renowned, admired and reverenced among all the
Nations round about them.

And as it was the LORD that thus Advanced MOSES and AARON; It is HE that also
Brought up the FATHERS of the Tribes of ISRAEL out of EGYPT.

This is often indeed ascribed in Scripture to those Two eminent Humane
Leaders, and even this in the Verse immediately following our Text, Because the
GOD of Heaven was pleased to honor them as Agents under Him, and to put upon
them some of his own transcendent Excellence. But MOSES and AARON were only
distinguished Instruments, made, accomplished and employed by this SOVEREIGN
AGENT: And to Him does the pious Preacher therefore justly carry up the Minds
of the People, and render Him the Glory of that whole Transaction.

And here we must observe, that the Bringing them out of EGYPT, implies the
Doing it through mighty Obstructions, and the surmounting every Difficulty. The
Egyptians were then an independent, great and powerful Nation; and utterly
averse to let the People go. The Children of ISRAEL were small and feeble in
comparison with them; and their Spirits broke and sunk with beverity, Labor
and slavish Usage in the Land of their Affliction. Nor was their Coming out of
EGYPT any other than the Beginning of their Deliverance. For they had a Sea to
pass; a great and terrible Wilderness to go through; a wast and howling Desert,
wherein were fiery Serpents, Scorpions, Drought and Scarcity both of Bread and
Water Deuteronomy. viii. 15. and xxxii. 10.
: And they had also to beat their way through many mighty Nations, to the
Possession of their designed Land.

In short their Case was so perplexed, helpless and desperate, that none could
see how they could be delivered; the utmost Wit and Power of Men were
insufficient; And none but GOD could Begin and Carry on the mighty Work, and
bring it to Perfection. To MOSES He therefore first appears and says. Exodus
iii. 7, 8. I have surely seen the Affliction of my People in EGYPT, and have
heard their Cry by reason of their Taskmasters: For I know their Sorrows; and
I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring
them out of that Land unto a Good Land and a large, to a Land flowing with Milk
and Honey So Verse. 15 -- 17. and Ch, vi. 4 to 8*
.

It would take up too much of the present Hour to mention the particulars of
this surprising History. It would lead us into a vast Field of Wonders, into a
perpetual Train of Miracles for above Forty Years together. I shall therefore
only now give it in this brief Abridgment --

The LORD did great things for this People of his in EGYPT, wondrous Works in
the Land of Ham, and terrible things at the Red Sea. Besides the three several
Judgments we mentioned before, He went on to pour out seven others yet heavier
than these, till He forced the Egyptians to let ISRAEL go. He sent innumerable
swarms of Insects among them, which corrupted the Air and vexed the People. He
destroyed their Cattle with Plagues, and tormented the Inhabitants with very
sore Diseases. He thundered, lightened and rained down Hailstones mingled with
Fire, which run along upon the Ground and consumed their Substance. He sent
infinite Numbers of Locusts, which clouded the Heavens, and devoured the Fruits
of the Earth. He wrapped them up in Chains of thick Darkness, that they could not
stir from their Places. He sent Evil Angels among them, and smote all the first
Born of their Land.

But he brought forth his People with Joy and his Chosen with Gladness. In the
Day time He led them with a Cloud, and all the Night with a Light of Fire. He
rebuked and divided the RED SEA, and led them through the Depths as through the
Wilderness. He brought them to Mount SINAI, and showed them his Glory. He spoke
aloud to them out of the midst of the burning Flame; and there He gave them his
Law, and confirmed his Covenant. He rained Flesh among them as Dust, and
feathered Fowls as the Sand of the Sea. He commanded the Clouds from above, and
poured down Manna every Night for Forty Years. He opened the Rocks in the dry
Desert, and the Waters gushed out: The Streams run down and overflowed like
Rivers. He set up his beautiful Pavilion among them, and dwelt in a Cloud of
Glory between the Cherubims. He marched before them in his Pillar of Light,
which in the Day time appeared as a Cloud, in the Night as a Body of Fire, that
covered their Camp and cast a Terror round about. He smote great Nations and
slew mighty Kings: and gave their Lands for an Heritage, even an Heritage to
ISRAEL his People.

Thus we see how the LORD had Bro't up their FATHERS out of Egypt, as well as
advanced MOSES and AARON to lead them; which was the Preliminary Observation
made by the sacred Orator as the general Ground of his designed Argument.

We proceed to consider --

2. The general INFERENCE He derives from thence to excite their close
Attention to his Treatment of it; Now therefore, STAND STILL, that I may REASON
with you before the LORD, of all the RIGHTEOUS ACTS of the LORD which He did to
You and to your Fathers.

Herein with a Divine Authority, He therefore now demands their most reverent
and devout Attention to the solemn Argumentation He was, in the Holy Presence
and Name of GOD, a going to make with them, upon all his righteous Acts, both
to Them and their Fathers.

To those more Ancient and signal Works of GOD which concerned the Raising up
of those admirable Leaders, and the Bringing up their Fathers out of EGYPT,
the pious Preacher here adds the other Acts of the LORD to that destinguished
People, as worthy likewise of their most serious Remembrance and Consideration:
Both the Works of GOD to them, which their own Eyes had seen; and to their
Fathers, which they had read or heard of, from their first becoming a separate
People to that very Day. He comprehends them all; and He points them out to the
Review of all, in the universal Term: And for their better Observation and
Improvement, He calls them Righteous Acts, or Righteous Things or Dealings, as
the Word ( for it is but One) may be rendered.

It is by some indeed Translated Mercies; by others, Benefits; by others,
Judgments: But other ancient and modern Versions render it by --
Righteousnesses, or Righteous Acts or Things Vid. Bib. Polyg. Pol. Synops. Eng.
Marg, etc.
. And the word indeed includes them all; as might easily be proved from other
Scriptures, and as sufficiently appears by the Preacher's Instances He proceeds
to mention: For He goes on to recollect both signal Acts of Judgment and of
Mercy to that peculiar People.

The Word in Scripture is by no means restrained to Works of Judgment, but in
general signifies Works of Righteousness, and is comprehensive both of
Judgments and Mercies to a Covenant People, as the Tribes of ISRAEL, in a
special manner were. For when the Righteous GOD either chastens or visibly
shows Favor to such a People, He is in both those Kinds of Dispensations,
Righteous: He is just and faithful to fulfill his Word; and all his Dealings
with them are in a just Conformity to his peculiar Covenant Relation and
Engagements to them.

By these Righteous Acts of GOD are therefore meant both Chastizements and
Mercies, and especially those of a public Nature or signal Observation. And
the Prophet here would signify; that the LORD in all his Dealings with them,
had shown Himself a Righteous and Faithful GOD, both in bestowing greater
Mercies on Them than Others, and in dispensing more severe Corrections when
they publicly sinned against Him.

What these Righteous Acts in particular were, I may not stay to mention. I may
only observe in general, They were on the one hand, very sore Afflictions for
their Forgetting the GOD of their Fathers; and on the other, wonderful
Salvations, upon their humbling themselves before Him and Crying for Mercy.

To the pious Commemoration of these does the inspired Preacher invite this
obliged People. For as He had doubtless observed with Sorrow, how soon they
forgot the Works of the LORD, when they had been singing his Praises for his
Appearances for them in their Times of Extremity; He would have them know, that
those wonderful works both to them and their Fathers, were not merely to serve
a single or transient Occasion, but were also designed for future Benefit. And
as they were now partaking in the Influence of them; it became them therefore
to rise up in their Minds to the original Works themselves, and to that
adorable Wisdom and Goodness, which had in them, a gracious View to their
present both temporal and spiritual Advantage, and began the Train which
brought them to their present Felicity.

Nor was it merely the grateful Remembrance of these, that the inspired
Preacher had in his Eye, but a pious and suitable Improvement of it. He would
now REASON with them of all these Righteous Acts of the LORD both to Them and
their Fathers; i. e. He would plainly show this People the Divine Ends and
Motives in these Works of GOD, with the destinguishing and great Obligations
they were thereby laid under to adore and obey Him more than others: He would
faithfully show them how unsuitable and sinful their Behaviors had been, with
their present eminent and growing Guilt and Danger: And He would earnestly
argue with them, of their future Duty, Wisdom and Interest, thence arising.

And all this He would Do Before the LORD, in a lively Apprehension of his
Presence, citing them to his awful Tribunal, which He represents them as
standing now before, with his Holy Eye looking on them: And therefore He
requires them, with great Authority, to stand still, be silent, and give Him
their most reverent and religious Attention.

And thus have we considered the Words as applicable to that particular People
to whom they were at first directed.

We proceed in the

II. place, To raise some General Observations from them; which are as so many
practical and momentous Lessons they very clearly teach and strongly urge upon
us.

And they are plainly such as these --

1. When there at any time arise, either in the Civil or Ecclesiastical Order,
MEN of eminent Wisdom, Goodness, Power and Usefulness among a People of GOD; we
must consider, It is the LORD their GOD, that made, accomplished and raised
them up, and this in special Favor to that particular People.

2. That when such a People are in a remarkable manner Brought out of the Hands
of those that vexed them, to a Place or State of Ease and Liberty; the gracious
Conduct of the LORD their GOD, is herein to be religiously observed and
acknowledged by them.

3. It behooves such a People so treated of GOD, to Remember all his signal
Operations, both of Judgment and of Mercy, both to Them and their Fathers, to
view them as Acts of Faithfulness and Righteousness to them, and consider the
special and great Obligations arising from them.

4. and lastly, It becomes their Public Teachers to Remind them therefore of
all these things, and from thence to Reason with them before the LORD about
their answerable Carriage toward Him.

All these Articles are so many fair Deductions most naturally rising from the
Text, or rather so many Doctrines clearly represented in it. They are the
general Grounds themselves upon whioh the inspired Orator goes in his
pathetick Applications to that Ancient and highly favored People. They were
the very Reasons of his Public Addresses to them on that great Occasion. They
are as well obliging upon every other People of GOD, whom He has treated with
signal Favors, Chastizements and Mercies, as well as those: And they are
therefore written for Our Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are come.

All the Difference we can imagine between Their Obligations and the
Obligations of Others, can only rise from this; That the Works of the LORD for
Them were of a miraculous Nature, they were the visible Operations of GOD
beside the Course of natural Causes; whereas his Righteous Acts for Others are
done in a more veiled way, by his invisible though real Influence on material and
intellectual Agents, according to the Course of Nature, which is nothing else
but his usual manner of acting and ruling the World.

But if we search these things exactly, we may clearly see, that the
Obligations in both these Cases, are either the same, or at least nearly equal.

For let us here consider, that the Great GOD might if He pleased not only have
raised up MOSES and AARON, but also brought up his People out of EGYPT, led
them through the neighboring Countries, given them the Victory over their
Enemies, and put them in the Possession of CANAAN, by his Operations in the
Course of Nature, as well as by a continual Train of Miracles.

There was no Necessity in the Nature of Things, that any of those Wonders
should be wro't in EGYPT, in order to make the Egyptians willing to let the
People go: He might have raised such an Hatred in the Egyptians toward them,
as that Pharaoh might rather in Displeasure have banished or commanded them to
get out of the Kingdom. No necessity they should go through the Sea, or that the
mighty Waters should be divided for them: There was another and a near Passage
by Land, and they even took a circular March to go to the Sea. No necessity
they should travel through the terrible Wilderness: They might have gone a much
shorter and easier way in beaten Roads by the sides of Towns and Cities, from
whence they might have had Supplies of Bread and Water. No necessity of their
Journeying Forty Years in the Desert: It was but about Two Hundred I take this
Account from the Map in the Apparatus of the POLYGLOT BIBLE; where the Way is
measured as running between the Ranges of Mountains, and amounts to SEVENTY
Horary Miles, which is the same as Leagues with us. And MOSES tells us, there
were but ELEVEN Days Journey from HOREB to KADESH-BARNEA which say on the
Southern Border of CANAAN, Deuteronomy. I. 2.
Miles from the RED SEA to the Southern Border of CANAAN. No necessity of a
Pillar of Fire to Guide them: MOSES was a great Mathematician, Historian and
Geographer, and the Scituations of the Countries about them were perfectly
known. No necessity of dividing the Waters of JORDAN: They went a great way
about to get to the River. In fine, no necessity of Miraculous Victories: For
GOD might in the Course of Nature have swept away the People of CANAAN, either
with wasting Wars or Plagues, and emptied the Land of almost all it is
Inhabitants: Or when they came to fight with a numerous Host of the most
powerful Nations combined against them; He might either have set them a
contending together, or have struck their Minds with Fear, or have raised such
a violent Tempest of Wind and Hail to beat in their Faces at the first of the
Battle, as to bear them away before the Armies of ISRAEL.

Or instead of these and many other natural Causes, He might have accomplished
it all by this one easy Course of his Providence; ( easy I mean for us to
conceive) -- The Royal Family of EGYPT being without a Male-Heir; He might
have made both Pharaoh's Daughter and the other Egyptians so fond of the wise
and excellent MOSES her adopted Son, as to raise Him to the Throne, upon the
King's Decease; And then MOSES might send a powerful Army, to make way for the
Tribes of ISRAEL, to bare down all Opposition before them, and put them into
the Possession of CANAAN.

And now, If the sovereign GOD, in the midst of their sore Oppression, Anguish
and Despair, had appeared to some of their Elders and said, -- I have heard the
Groaning of the Children of ISRAEL, whom the Egyptians keep in Bondage, and I
will soon deliver and bring them into the Land of CANAAN. I will set the
Nations there to fight against and destroy each other, and I will send wasting
Plagues among the Survivors, till they are almost consumed. And then I will
raise such an Aversion in the Egyptians to You, as they will even drive You
out of their Country. And the Nations remaining in CANAAN shall through Enmity
among themselves be indisposed and unable to combine against you: And those
that agree, shall be struck with Terror when they come to the Battle. But I
will give you Courage; and in their last and most united Effort, I will raise
up a furious Storm of Wind and Hail, that shall beat in their Faces as they
begin the Fight, and make them fly before You, And You shall destroy them and
take their Land for your own Inheritance. -- Or, that little Infant MOSES,
which now lies crying in the Flags of Nilus, and is doomed by the King to Die,
shall be quickly found by his own Daughter, adopted by Her, brought up with
Her, raised to the Throne of EGYPT; And He shall send a mighty Army with You,
that shall Conduct You with Triumph to CANAAN, destroy and expel the Nations
there, and put You into the Possession of the Land.

And if these things were soon to come to pass accordingly, would not they all
appear to be the Operations of GOD, though they were brought about agreeable to
the Course of Nature? would not their Deliverance out of EGYPT and their
Entrance into CANAAN be as truly the Works of the LORD, and as happy to ISRAEL,
as if they were accomplished in a way beside the usual way of his acting? Or
would not these Works of GOD have been exactly the same in themselves, and as
happy in the end to the People, though He had never declared his Designs
beforehand, as if He had given a previous Discovery of them?

And these beneficent Acts of GOD being the same, wrought by the same Wisdom,
Power and Goodness in this particular way of his acting in the Course of
Nature, as well as in the other beside it, having the same benevolent Design,
and the same happy Influence in their Operation -- They very nearly, if not
equally Oblige his People, to Adore Him and be Grateful to Him, to Love and
Fear Him, to Obey and Honor Him, and to keep in Mind the lively Memory both of
his Remarkable Works of Providence, and their continued Obligations to Him for
them.

And as a Confirmation of all this; Though the Holy PROPHET hints at the
extraordinary and miraculous Works of GOD for ISRAEL in the Verse immediately
following our Text; yet in the Rest of his Sermon, He only mentions the
Righteous Acts of the LORD toward them according to the ordinary Course of
Nature -- As his suffering their Enemies to prevail against and oppress them
for their heinous Sins, and his working out their Deliverance and Safety upon
their penitent and earnest Supplications: And from these Ordinary Acts of GOD,
the Prophet Reasons with the People they immediately concerned.

Having said thus much to clear our Observations, it is needless to endeavor
further to enlighten them. We therefore now go on to the --

III. and last general Head, which is to Apply the Words and those Observations
to this Particular People in our own Land.

And here I cannot forbear observing, that there never was any People on Earth,
so parallel in their general History to that of the ancient ISRAELITES as this
of NEW ENGLAND. To no other Country of People could there ever be so directly
applied a Multitude of Scripture Passages in the literal Sense, as to this
particular Country: that excepting Miracles and changing Names, one would be
ready to think, the greater Part of the OLD TESTAMENT were written about us; or
that we, though in a lower Degree, were the particular Antitypes of that
primitive People.

However, I Am sure, that upon the present Occasion, I may justly turn the Text
into a like Address, in the Name of GOD, to this Great and General Assembly,
comprehensive both of Rulers and People of every Order; and say, -- It is the
LORD that advanced your Primitive Civil and Ecclesiastical LEADERS, and that
brought up your FATHERS out of the Land of their Affliction; Now therefore,
stand still, that I may Reason with you before the LORD, of all the Righteous
Acts of the LORD, which He did to YOU and to your FATHERS!

And how extremely proper is it, upon the Close of the FIRST CENTURY of our
Settlement in this chief Part of the Land, which will now within a few Weeks
expire, On Saturday June 12. 16^0. Arrived in Salem River, the Arrabella, with
Governor WINTHROP and some of his Assistants, bringing the Charter of the
MASSACHUSETTS Colony, and therewith the Government transferred hither: The other
Ten Ships of the Fleet with Deputy Governor DUDLEY and the other Assistants
arrived in Salem and Charles Rivers before July 11. In the same Month the
Governor, Deputy Governor and Assistants came with their Goods to
CHARLESTOWN: And the first Court of Assistants was held There on Aug. 23, the
same Year.
To look back to the Beginning of this remarkable Transaction; and first
Commemorate the Righteous and Signal Works of GOD toward us, both in our own
Days and in the Days of our Fathers; and then consider the great and special
Obligations they have laid upon us, with the Nature of our Carriage toward Him
for the time past, and our Interest and Wisdom for the future.

Give ear therefore O my People to my Law: incline your Ear to the Words of my
Mouth! I will utter things of old, which we have heard and known and our
Fathers have told us. We will not hide them from their Children; showing to the
Generation and Century coming on, the Praises of the LORD, and his Strength,
and his Wonderful WORKS that He has done. For He established a Testimony in
JACOB, and appointed a Law, a Law of Gratitude in ISRAEL, which He commanded
our Fathers, that they should make known the WORKS of GOD to their Children:
that the Generation to come might know them, even the Children which should be
born, who should arise and declare them to their Children; that they might also
set their Hope in GOD, and not forget his Works, but keep his Commandments.

And here we must own, that very many have been the wondrous WORKS which the
LORD our GOD has wrought for us: they cannot be reckoned up in order before
Him: if I would declare and speak of them they are more than can be numbered.
We may now therefore only touch on some of the most material; those of the most
important, public and comprehensive Nature.

And 1st, Let us consider Who the FATHERS of these Plantations were, and what
were their destinguishing Characters; that we may give to GOD the Glory of the
excellent Honor He was pleased to put upon them, and see our own Obligations
to Him for deriving us from such eminent Ancestors.

For the Generality of them -- They were the near Descendants of the first
Reformers in ENGLAND. They were born of pious Parents, who brought them up in a
Course of strict Religion, and under the Ministry of the most awakening
Preachers of those Days. Like so many Timothies, they were from their Childhood
taught to know the HOLY SCRIPTURES, to reverence them as the Inspirations of
GOD, as the only Rule of Faith and Piety, and to aim at both a pure scriptural
way of Worship, and at the vital Power and Practice of Godliness: And they
continued in the things they had learned and had been assured of, as knowing of
whom they had learned them.

Under such Means as these they became inspired with a Spirit of Piety, and
with a growing Zeal to reform the Worship of GOD to the most beautiful and
perfect Model of his own Institutions.

In Points of Doctrine, they entirely held with the Church of ENGLAND, their
Judgment of Orthodoxy being the very same: But they apprehended it to be the
sole Prerogative of GOD Himself, and a Glory that He would not give to another,
To appoint the Orders of his own House, and the acceptable Ways of his own
Worship: That RELIGION is a free Obedience to the known Laws of GOD; and it is
neither in the Power of Men or Angels, to make that Religion which He has not
made so Himself: That His own Institutions ought not to be set on a Level,
mixed or debased with the low Devices of Men; and that it is a plain, full and
decisive Rule of his own Injunction -- To the LAW and to the TESTIMONY; if they
speak not according to THIS WORD, it is because there is no light in them.

This is the Pure Religion which our Father's admired and aimed at, and at
nothing in Religion but what was inspired of GOD. This and nothing else, they
earnestly breathed and labored after: But for laboring after it, though some of
the most pious on Earth, they were censured, pursued, seized, imprisoned,
fined, and suffered a World of Hardship not now to be named.

Their native Country, which ever since the Glorious Revolution, has been an
happy Land of Ease and Liberty, was in those former Times as the Land of EGYPT
to those Pious Men; and their Lives were made exceeding bitter with Religious
Bondage.

However, through the infinite Mercy and Wisdom of GOD, it was well for our
Fathers, and for Us, in the End, that they were thus afflicted. For had there
been then a Succession of such indulgent PRINCES and Bishops in ENGLAND, as
there have since the PRINCE of ORANGE ascended the Throne; there never had been
such a Country as This, for Religion, good Order, Liberty, Learning and
flourishing Towns and Churches; which have given us a destinguishing Name in
the World, and have reflected a singular Honor to the Persons and Principles
of it is original Setlers for this Hundred Years. But having a rougher Surface,
a barrenner Soil, a more inclement Air than the Southern Countries; it would in
all humane Prospect, have been at this Day as the Wastes of NEW-SCOTLAND or the
wilder Deserts between us, but abundantly fuller of barbarous Natives; or at
most in no better Condition than the bordering Plantations.

But the omniscient and sovereign GOD had espied and chosen this Land for our
Fathers, for a Refuge and Heritage for them and their Children; that here they
might set up his Worship and Churches according to the inspired Pattern, behold
the Beauty of the Divine Appointments in their Scriptural Purity, and leave
these inestimable Privileges, which they justly preferred above all things else
in the World, as a Blessed Inheritance to their Posterity, as we see at this
Day.

And now let us look back and behold in what a remarkable manner, the GOD of
our Fathers was pleased to Bring them out of the Land of their Sorrows, to this
far distant and quiet Recess of the Earth, and put it into their Hands.

First, He sends a smaller Company into a neighboring State Viz. Into Holland
in 1610.
; that there they might form themselves into a regular Ecclesiastical Body,
till this hidden Part of the Earth should appear to the Light, and yet come
under such a discouraging Character, that none but Men inspired with a Zeal for
Religion would go on to settle it. He disappoints the successive Endeavors of
others who came hither only out of secular Views, till the Country comes to be
given up and abandoned as not worthy the looking after by any Trading Nation.
And then He sends both wasting Diseases among the native Inhabitants, and
fierce Contentions among the Survivors, that greatly diminished their Numbers,
and made Room for his People.

But O how horrid and dismal do these New found Regions appear! On the Shoars
and Rivers, nothing but Sights of wretched, naked and barbarous Nations,
Adorers of Devils -- The Earth covered with hideous Thickets, that require
infinite Toils to subdue -- A rigorous Winter for a third Part of the Year --
Not a House to live in -- Not a Christian to see -- None but Heathen of a
strange and hard Language to speak with -- Not a Friend within Three Thousand
Miles to help in any Emergency -- and a vast and dangerous Ocean to pass over
to this!

But the ALMIGHTY inspires with a Zeal and Courage that nothing can daunt, with
a Faith and Patience that nothing can brake. He raises up Men of superior
Piety, Resolution and Wisdom to lead and animate in the Great Design Such as
Mr. CARVER, Mr. ERADFORD. and Mr. WINSLOW, successive Governors of PLYMOUTH
COLONY, Who came together in the first Ship, which set sail the last time from
PLYMOUTH in ENGLAND on Sept. 6. and arrived in CAPE COD Harbor on Novem^ 11th
16^0.
. And on they come, all alone, a small and feeble Number, through contrary Storms
and boisterous Seas they were never used to: though twice driven back, a terrible
Winter approaching, their Wives and poor piteous Children with them, and like
ABRAHAM of old they know not whither. But the LORD is their Guide: He divides
the Seas before them: He leads them through in Safety: He brings them with Joy to
the Border of his designed Sanctuary, to this mountainous Country which his
Right Hand had purchased. And having cast out multitudes of Heathens before
their Arrival, He gives them Favor in the sight of the Rest: He divides his
People an Inheritance by Line, and makes them to dwell in Peace in the midst of
many powerful Nations, that could have swallowed them up in a moment, for above
Fifty Years together.

But a Greater Colony is now coming on, to strengthen the other, and to fill up
the Land from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the Ends of the Earth. And
here, Behold and Wonder how this is also accomplished.

Great Numbers of eminent Persons, and others, of the same pious and pure
Dispositions in the main with the former, yet continued in the Churches of
ENGLAND and in Communion with them as long as the higher Powers indulged them,
with earnest Desires, Labors and Hopes of a farther Reformation of Worship.
But a Spirit of severe Imposition is now let loose upon these. The Book of
Sports on the Holy Sabbath of GOD must be Read by the Ministers in the Public
Assemblies; and their Assent to unscriptural Ways of Worship must be Subscribed
as a necessary Term of their Preaching, even though they were solemnly Ordained
in the Church to the Office, required by CHRIST Himself to discharge it, and
had a Woe laid on them if they desisted to do it. And for Preserving their
Consciences pure, they are driven out of their Churches, they are forced from
their Flocks that loved them as the Light of their Eyes, and are more harassed
and worried than the vilest of Men

And now, at once, to the Surprise of the Nation, in almost every Corner they
are moved of GOD to look to this part of the Wilderness He had been preparing
for them. Many Persons of shining Figures are raised up to espouse their Cause
and venture with them. Their Prince is prevailed on to grant them a Charter of
destinguishing Privileges. They hear, they rise, they flow together: Their
Flocks in great Numbers attend and follow them. They all relinquish their
delightful Seats and their dearest Friends, they put off their fair Estates,
they cast themselves and their Children on the tumultuous Ocean; and nothing
can move them, so they may come into a Wilderness, rude and hideous, to hear
the Voice of their Teachers, become a Covenant People of GOD, observe his Laws,
set up his Tabernacle, behold his Glory, and leave these things to their
Offspring forever.

And the LORD preserves them, He makes the Depths of the Sea a Way for the
Ransomed to pass over: He brings them in Thousands to these peaceful Shoars:
And here, They that knew not each other before, salute and embrace with Joy: He
unites them in the most lovely Agreement to Profess and Serve Him: They
publicly and solemnly enter into Covenant with Him, to Love and Obey Him, to
make his Doctrines the only Rule of Faith, and his Institutions the only Rule
of Worship: And with united Joy they Sing to the LORD -- Thou in thy Mercy have
led forth the People which Thou have redeemed: Thou have guided them in thy
Strength to thy Holy Habitation: Thou have bro't them in and Planted them in
the Mountain of thine Inheritance, in the Place O LORD which Thou have made for
Thee to dwell in, in the Sanctuary which thy Hands have established: and the
LORD shall Reign for ever and ever.

At first indeed, they met with very grievour Trials, and endured a World of
Hardship and Affliction: For though the LORD had thus Redeemed and gathered them
out of other Lands, and bro't them hither; yet here they had only solitary Ways
and Thickets to wander through, and no Towns or Houses to receive or cover them.
Those who before had lived in the midst of Plenty and Delights, now greatly
suffer for want of Lodging, Bread, and Defense from Weather. Hungry and
Thirsty, their Souls fainted in them. They are Wet with the Showers of the
Mountains, and embrace the Rocks for Shelter. They quickly sink their worldly
Substance; they are forced to give their pleasant Things for Meat to relieve
the Soul; and many of their Wives and Children expire about them. -- But they
endure with Patience, and cry to GOD, and He sends Relief. He satisfies their
longing Souls and fills them with Goodness. He builds them Houses and Towns
for Habitation; He prepares them Fields for Planting, and He turns the Desert
into a fruitful Land. He increased their Cattle; and He blessed their Persons,
so that they multiplied greatly, and He made them Families and Churches round
about.

And now the WILDERNESS and the solitary Place is Glad for them: The Desert
rejoices and blossoms as a Rose; it blossoms abundantly with Peace and
Righteousness; it rejoices with Joy and Singing. The Glory of LEBANON is given
to it, the Excellency of CARMEL and SHARON; they see the Glory of the LORD and
the Excellency of our GOD. The Waters of the Divine Influence break out in the
Wilderness, and the Streams in the Desert: The parched Ground becomes a Pool;
and the thirsty Land, Springs of Water: In the Habitations of Dragons where
they lay, there grows up the Grass; and an High Way now is there, which is
called the Way of Holiness, over which the Unclean do not pass, and the
Wayfaring Men do not err therein.

And to the great Glory of GOD be it spoken -- There never was, perhaps, before
seen such a Body of Pious People together on the Face of the Earth. For those
who came over at first, came hither for the sake of RELIGION, and for that pure
Religion which was entirely hated by the loose and Profane of the World. Their
Civil and Ecclesiastical LEADERS were exemplary Patterns of Piety: They
encouraged only the Virtuous to come with and follow them: They were so strict
on the Vicious both in the Church and State, that the incorrigible could not
endure to Live in the Country, and went back again. Profane Swearers and
Drunkards are not known in the Land. And (...) quickly grew so famous for
Religion abroad, that scarce any other but those who liked it, came over for
many Years after. And indeed such vast Numbers were coming, that the Crown was
obliged to stop them, or a great Part of the Nation had soon emptied it self
into these American Regions.

And for those who were here -- The SPIRIT from on high is powered upon them,
and the WILDERNESS becomes a fruitful Field: Judgment and Righteousness
continue in it, and the Effect of Righteousness is Peace. While a cruel War
rages in the Kingdom they left, lays it waft, and drowns it in Blood; the
People here dwell in peaceable Habitations, in sure Dwellings, in quiet resting
Places. And the LORD enlarges the Bounds of their Tents: He stretches forth the
Curtains of their Habitations; He makes them to break forth on the Right hand
and on the Left; He makes their Seed to inherit the Lands of the Gentiles, the
desolate Places to be inhabited. And in Fifty four Years from the first
Plantation, there appear above Fourscore English CHURCHES, Twelve or 13 in
PLYMOUTH Colony. 47 in the MASSACHUSETTS, 19 in CONNECTICUT. ^ in LONG ISLAND,
and 1 at MARTHAS VINEYARD.
composed only of known, pious and faithful Professors, dispersed through the
Wilderness.

But now comes on a Cloud which covers our Glory! This excellent Generation
passes away, and there arises another which provokes the HOLY ONE of ISRAEL to
Anger.

The LORD set up our neighboring Enemies against us: He united them together,
who never could unite till now: The Western INDIANS before, and the Eastern
behind: They devoured our ISRAEL with open Mouth.

The Western Nations first came up In 1675 and 1676.
like the Waters of a Flood, strong and many: They came up over all our Banks,
they passed through our Country, they overflowed and came over, they reached to
the Neck, and filled the Breadth of our Land! They lay our Country desolate;
They burn our Towns round about with Fire; They devour our Land in our
Presence! -- They draw near and threaten even the Chief and central Town it
self: And there are those now living, who remember, that every Man therein was
ready to shut up his House and go out for the Preservation of the Remnant of
the People! -- There was the Noise of a Multitude in the Mountains, like as of
a great People; a tumultuous Noise of the Kingdoms and Nations gathered
together: The LORD of Hosts mustered the Host of the battle! -- All hands grew
faint, and every Heart melted: We were afraid: Pangs and Sorrows took hold of
us: We were in Pain as a Woman that travaileth: We were amazed at one another:
For the Day of the LORD came, cruel both with Wrath and fierce Anger, to lay
the Land desolate!

But when the LORD had brought us to the Brink of Destruction, then He heard
our earnest Cries, and arose for our Rescue. At the lifting up of Himself, the
Nations were scattered -- He rebuked and set them against one another: He made
them to flee afar off: He chased them as the Chaff of the Mountains before the
Wind, and like a rolling thing before the Whirlwind. As smoke is driven away,
so He drove them away: As Wax melts before the Fire, so they perished at the
Presence of GOD.

And then, How often has He made In FOUR several terrible WARS, especially the
THREE former, from 1675, to the Conclusion of the last Peace in 1726.
the Eastern INDIANS, the Rod of his Anger, and the Staff of his Indignation
with us! He has sent them against us, and given them the Charge to take the
Spoil and tread us down as the Mire of the Street. They came with open Mouth
upon us: They thrust through every one they found abroad: They ensnared and flew
our mighty Men who went forth for our Defense: They spoiled our Fields and
Pastures: They burnt up our Houses: They destroyed our Towns and Garrisons:
They murdered our Wives: They carried our Young Men and Virgins into Captivity:
They had no Pity on the Fruit of the Womb; Their Eyes spared not our Children,
they dashed them in Pieces --

But when the LORD had performed his Work, his righteous Work upon us; He
punished the Stoutness of their Hearts and the Glory of their Looks. For they
said, By the Strength of our Hands we have done it, and by our Wisdom; For we
are Prudent, and have removed the Bounds of the People, and have robbed their
Treasures, and have put down the Inhabitants, like a valiant Man. -- Therefore
the LORD of Hosts has sent among their Fat ones Leanness, and under their Glory
kindled a Burning like the Burning of Fire: and it consumed the Glory of their
Forest, and they were as when a Standard Bearer faints: And the rest of the
Trees of their Forest are now grown so few, that a Child may write them.

I might go on to mention a great Variety of other Righteous Acts of the LORD
our GOD to this Covenant People, both corrective and merciful -- As distressing
Droughts and Scarcities; contagious and wasting Sicknesses; impoverishing
Disappointments, Fires and Losses of a Public Nature and Influence: Vexations
from those that have envied and hated us; the cruel taking away of our most
dear bought Privileges, the most grievous Affliction of all others, and their
wonderful Restoration; The in supportable Power of strange Oppressers, and the
surprising Appearance of GOD for our Rescue, when no other Arm could save us,
and our Hope was almost perished from before Him -- But the time would fail me
--

I shall therefore only mention one remarkable Work of GOD which appears to me
to be full of Wonder, and a visible and constant Monument of his special Favor
and Appearance for us -- and that is this -- On the account of our pure
Religion, we have been all along a People misrepresented, envied and maligned
above any other on Earth. We have had continually for this Hundred Years many
powerful and active Enemies, and but few and feeble Friends to stand up for us
and plead our Cause -- How comes it then to pass that we have greater civil and
religious Privileges than almost any others! -- The most high GOD has been our
mighty Friend. To Him have our dear Forefathers and We consigned our greatest
Interests, and He has stood up for us: He has removed Kings and set up Kings;
He has carried the Devices of the crafty headlong, that those who mourned might
be raised to Safety: And when our Case has been so helpless that we could only
Pray, we have then stood still and seen the Salvation of GOD. -- It is all a
continued Work of his: It can be asemb'd to nothing else: Let it be ever
mavelous in our Eyes: And let Him have all the Glory.

And so let Him have the Glory likewise of all his other Works both of Judgment
and of Mercy to us. Let us frequently call them to mind, peruse the published
Histories of them, and teach them to our Children after us.

But I must now come on, To REASON with You before the LORD, of all these
Righteous Acts of his, which He has done to YOU and to your FATHERS.

And here, in the first Place then we see what a surpassing Favor and Honor,
the MOST HIGH has shown to this particular People in our first Formation, and
so down to this Day. He formed us of a pious People, devoted to Him; and He
brought them and their Offspring into a special, open, express and solemn
COVENANT with Him. They began with this, and this has been successively laid in
the Foundation of every Church, and explicitly owned at the Administration of
every Sacrament, and at the Admission of every Member.

Now the Substance of this COVENANT is, That HE will deal with Us, and We will
carry to HIM, according to his INSPIRED WORD. The SACRED SCRIPTURES, the
Promises and Threatenings exhibited in them, are the declared Rule of his
Dispensations to us; and the same Divine Writings, the Doctrines and
Injunctions represented in them, are the professed Rule of our Carriage to Him.
This is the Rule and the only Rule for the People, Churches and Religion of
NEW ENGLAND. We hold to nothing but what we apprehend to be revealed, taught
and required in them; and we leave every one to search and judge for themselves.

By our sacred Covenant, we are therefore under the most solemn Obligations to
preserve an entire and strict Adherence to this DIVINE STANDARD, both in Belief
and Practice, both in Life and Worship: And Woe unto us, if we depart there
from! For if we do -- We break our Covenant with the Holy GOD, and become
exposed to all the fearful and signal Judgments denounced in Scripture upon the
Violaters of it; and He is a True and Jealous GOD, and will signally avenge the
Quarrel of his broken Covenant. But if we faithfully keep to this Holy
Engagement, then we are entitled to all the destinguishing Promises which GOD
has made to his Covenant People; and He is a Gracious and a Faithful GOD, and
will surely fulfill them for us.

We are also to look on all his past Dealings, both afflictive and merciful,
both with us and our Fathers, as his Righteous and Faithful Acts, according to
his wise and well ordered Covenant: They are nothing else but his just and
faithful Performance of it: And by the Tenor of this sacred Indenture, we are
to expect his Treatment of Us for the Future.

But then, O the extraordinary Obligations we are under, both from the Covenant
of the LORD our GOD, and from all his signal Works both of Judgment and of
Favor to us!

Have any of the other Plantations suffered so much as We, by cruel Wars,
Depredations and Bloodshed, impoverishing Disappointments, Fires and Losses,
both by Sea and Land, contagious Sicknesses and other Evils, which have marked
us out for the Censure and Condemnation of the World?

And yet, What People on Earth have had more destinguishing Advantages than we?
-- Derived of pious Ancestors; possessed of a good and large Land, with
commodious Harbors and fruitful Seas; living in a clear and healthy Air, and
in the Enjoyment of great Privileges civil and sacred: having wise and
religious Laws; pious and learned Magistrates and Ministers; sober and virtuous
Educations; Grammar Schools in every Town of an hundred Families, free for the
Poorest without Expense -- Well-ordered Colleges to perfect the Accomplishments
of our growing Youth for the Public Service -- In fine, free and pure Churches
PURITY in CHURCHES is opposed to Humane Mixtures, and the Freer they are from
these the Purer they are: which is the great and professed Design of OURS, who
in Religious Matters make the Revelations of GOD their only Rule, and admit of
Nothing but what they apprehend these Revelations require, both in Discipline
and Worship as well as Doctrine and Manners. And FREEDOM in CHURCHES, is a
Liberty to judge of the Meaning of these Revelations, and of Professing and
Acting according to our Judgment of the Meaning of them; and in particular the
Free Choice of our own Pastors and Ways of Discipline and Worship, and our
Consciences in these things not subjected to any Power on Earth.
, divine Institutions, sacred Sabbaths for the Preservation of Religion in it is
Power and Practice -- And as the Effect of this in general, A sober, civil,
charitable, quiet, loyal People; who earnestly wished and prayed for, and now
greatly rejoice in the happy Advancement and Succession of the illustrious
House of HANOVER to the BRITISH THRONE, in which alone, under GOD, we Trust, to
Preserve our Constitution, Laws and Liberties; and desire nothing but the
Continuance of all these things -- And where can they be found in so great a
measure as in this happy Land?

And here give me leave to observe, That though the Principal Seaport Towns of
the Province are exceedingly exposed and depraved by the Pouring in of Trade
and Strangers; yet we may by no means judge by These of the Rest of the
Country. For to tell you my own Experience -- Though for the acquirement of
Grammar Learning, I lived when Young in Four considerable Country Towns; yet I
never heard a Profane Oath or Curse till I was Fifteen Years of Age, when I
came down and heard them first from a Profane Youth of our Metropolis.

And are not all these destinguishing Advantages the plain Consequence under
GOD, of the Pious Principles and Characters of the first Settlers of these
Plantations? Don't they reflect a singular and everlasting Honor on them? And
are they not the strongest Obligations on Us, to maintain the same happy
Principles and Characters; that we may transmit the same Advantages to our
Posterity?

But then as all these Advantages have been bestowed upon us by the LORD our
GOD, and on these Accounts we may with humble Admiration say -- He has scarce
dealt so graciously with any other People under Heaven -- How destinguishingly
great and multiplied are our Obligations to Remember, Love and Praise Him, to
persevere in our ancient Choice and Profession of Him, to preserve his pure
Worship without imposing on any, to obey his Laws, to fear Him, and trust in
Him for the Time to come: And how ungrateful, how sinful, how provoking, how
dangerous -- to Forget HIM and his signal WORKS which both our Fathers and we
admired and were greatly affected with in the Days wherein He wrought them for
us -- and much more so, to Forsake Him, and Rebel against Him.

But O! Alas! Our great and dangerous Declensions! To what an awful measure are
they gone already, how transcendently guilty do they make us, how threatening do
they grow! What a melancholy Prospect would lie before us -- were we to draw
the Parallel between the First and Present Generation! In comparison with this,
They made a Heaven upon Earth -- But as when their Heads were laid in the
Grave, there arose another Generation after them, which did not so much know
the LORD, nor the WORKS He had done for ISRAEL; so the following Generation has
still declined further: And now We are risen up in our Fathers stead, an
Increase of sinful Men, to augment the fierce Anger of the LORD against his
People.

And is not this the Word of the LORD this Day -- Go and cry in their Ears, and
say, Thus says the LORD, I remember Thee the Kindness of thy Youth, and the
Love of thine Espousals, when Thou wentest after me into the Wilderness, into a
Land that was not Sown: This Land was Holiness then to the LORD, and the First
Fruits of his Increase. All that devoured Thee, offended ME, and I brought Evil
upon them. And now thus says the LORD, What Iniquity have You or your Fathers
found in Me; that You are gone far from Me, have followed after Vanity, and are
become so vain a People? Nor do you say, where is the LORD, that brought us up
out of a distant Land, that led us through the Wilderness, through a Land of
Deserts and Pits, a Land of Drought and of the Shadow of Death? and He brought
you into a plentiful Country, to eat the Fruit thereof and the Goodness
thereof. But now ye have entered, ye have defiled my Land and made my Heritage
an abomination. Wherefore I will yet plead with you, says the LORD, and with
your Children's Children. Has a Nation changed their Gods; -- But my People
have changed their Glory for that which profits not. Be astonished O ye
Heavens at this -- For my People have committed two Evils; they have forsaken
Me the Fountain of living Waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns
that can hold no Water.

Now we are Guilty of these provoking Evils; when we Turn from the praedominant
Love of GOD and of his Holy Ways, neglect his Interest, and seek the Pleasures,
Wealth or Honors of the present World, with a greater Ardour, as a more
desirable Source of Good and Happiness. And though it is true, we still maintain
in general the same religious Principles and Professions with our Pious
Fathers; yet how greatly is the Spirit of Piety declined among us, how sadly is
Religion turning more and more into a mere Form of Godliness, as the APOSTLE
speaks, without the Power, and how dreadfully is the Love of the World
prevailing more and more upon this Professing People! And this notwithstanding
all the zealous Testimonies which have from time to time for above this
Threescore Years been born against these growing Evils.

Like as to ISRAEL of old, so the LORD has sent Us, from the early Days of our
Apostasy, his faithful Ministers to testify against it, and to warn us of the
fatal Consequence. With what wonderful Life and Earnestness have they upon all
Occasions, and especially on such as these, delivered their anxious Souls and
mourned over us, as their Printed Sermons show See the Excellent Election
Sermons of Mr. HIGGINSON, MITCHEL, STOUGHTON, DANFORTH, SHEPARD, OAKS, TORREY,
etc. which might be of Public Service, were they Reprinted and Dispersed.
: And how solemn, plain and faithful in their Public Admonitions of our Sin
and Danger! But like that ancient People also, we have not hearkened to the
Voice of GOD, but hardened our Necks against Him, and have done worse and worse
in every Generation. And what will be the Consequence of this, unless a
Reformation save us -- but severer Chastizements than others suffer, a growing
Separation between our GOD and Us, the Withdrawment of his HOLY SPIRIT from us,
the Loss of Piety, the Increase of all Corruption both in Worship and in
Manners, as they usually go together, and a terrible Entail of Vice and Ruin to
our dear Posterity!

And have we not sufficient Cause to apprehend that we are already come to such
an awful Pass, to such a stupid, careless and incorrigible Frame as they --
when the LORD directed such a Word as this to be delivered to them, Jer. vii.
25, -- 28. Since the day that your Fathers came forth out of the land of EGYPT
unto this day, I have sent unto you all my Servants the Prophets, daily rising
up early, and sending them. Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their
Ear, but hardened their Neck, they did worse than their Fathers. Therefore thou
shall speak all these Words unto them, but they will not hearken unto thee:
thou shall also call unto them, but they will not answer thee. But thou shall
say unto them, This is a Nation that obeys not the Voice of the LORD their
GOD, nor receives Correction --

The following Verse I dread to Read -- and hope is does not yet belong to this
backsliding People. But I must needs confess, that considering the Inclinations
in the Children of pious Ancestors to degenerate, and the usual Course of
Providence among them, with our own past Behaviors and present State and
Prospects -- I cannot but fear, that this declining People will grow worse and
worse in every Age, if the World continues, till they come to be as much
remarked for Sinfulness and Miseries, as they have been heretofore for Piety
and great Advantages.

Now then, Let the affecting View of all these things, both Present, Past and
Future, excite us all in our several Places, to do our utmost, that we may not
share in the dreadful Guilt of this Declension, nor have our part in drawing on
the lamentable Consequences of it. But let us lay it to Heart, and mourn before
the LORD, first our own Apostacies and Sins and then the Apostacies and Sins
prevailing among this People. Let us cry earnestly for the SPIRIT of Grace to
be poured forth on us and them, that the Hearts of the Children may be returned
to the GOD of their Fathers, and may continue steadfast in his sacred Covenant.
And being revived our selves, let us labor to revive Religion in our several
Families; and then rise up for GOD in this Evil Day, bare our open Witness
also, against the Public Degeneracy, and do what in us lies for the Revival of
the Power of Piety among all about us.

And to direct and quicken us here, Let us improve the shining Patterns which
our ancient FATHERS have set before us --

Let our Honorable RULERS of every Kind and Order, from the highest to the
lowest, Remember those admirable CIVIL LEADERS of this People, that have gone
before us, and imitate their great Example.

They were mostly Men of good Estates and Families, of liberal Educations, and
of large Experience: But they chiefly excelled in Piety to GOD, in Zeal for the
Purity of his Worship, the Reverence of his glorious and fearful Name, the
strict Observance of his Holy Sabbaths, the Respect and Maintenance of an
unblemished Ministry; the spread of Knowledge, Learning, good Order, Quiet,
through the Land, a Reign of Righteousness, and the Welfare of this People. In
short, the making and executing wholesome Laws for all these Blessed Ends: And in
Wisdom, Courage, Patience, Meekness, Self-denial for the Public Good, and
steadfast Perseverance in their Endeavors after it.

They laid the wise Foundations of our succeeding and present Happiness: They
united with their Pastors in Consultations and Endeavors for the Advancement
and Preservation of Religion, and the Privileges, Peace and Order of the
Churches: By their grave and prudent Carriage, they happily preserved a
Veneration for their Persons and Authority among the People: And yet carefully
protected them in the full Enjoyment of their precious Liberties.

Mr. MITCHEL speaking of them in his Election Sermon in 1667, observes, that
"That was the 37th Year Current with the MASSACHUSETTS Colony [I may add -- the
47th then with PLYMOUTH] that GOD had given them Godly Magistrates -- And that
the Sun did not shine upon an happier People than they were, in regard of this
Mercy.". And Mr. OAKS in his Election Sermon, in 1673 -- "Many and wonderful
are the Favors and Privileges which the LORD your GOD has conferred upon You.
As to your CIVIL GOVERNMENT; You have had MOSES, Men I mean of the same Spirit,
to lead and go before You: The LORD has not given Children to be your Leaders
-- but Pious, Faithful, Prudent Magistrates, Men in Wisdom and Understanding --
Men of Nehemiah's Spirit, that sought not themselves, but sincerely designed
the Good, and consulted the Welfare and Prosperity of these Plantations -- Men
that did not rigorously exact the Bread of the Governor, but cheerfully
receeded from their own Right, sympathizing with, and compassionately
considering the low Estate and Condition of this People. -- Good Magistrates,
good Laws, and the vigorous Execution of them, has been the Privilege and
Glory of NEW ENGLAND, wherein You have been advanced above most of the Nations
of the Earth."

In fine, They faithfully served their Generation according to the Will of GOD:
They were greatly concerned for the Religon and Welfare of their Posterity:
They now enjoy the glorious Fruits of all their Services, and have left their
excellent Examples for those to follow who should rise up in their Places, as
You are this Day.

We the Ministers and People account it happy, that we see so many in Place of
Public Power, descending from the ancient Founders of these Towns and
Churches, and others, in such a measure like them, in exalted Stations. We also
esteem it a joyful Smile of Heaven, that our most Gracious KING has given us
Principal Rulers out of Our Selves; Men of known Virtue, and well acquainted
with our Constitution, Genius, Circumstance, and chief Concern and Interest.
And the late surprising Turn of Providence in Favor to this disstressed
People, fills us with humble Adorations of the Sovereign Power and Government
of GOD; and gives us such raised Apprehensions of the gracious Dispositions of
our KING and QUEEN to favor us, as both inspires us with universal Joy and
Gratitude, and also assures us, that YOUR HONORS will best please their
Majesty's, by pursuing your own Inclinations to render us an easy and happy
People.

And how is it imaginable that this can be better done, than by following the
destinguishing Examples of the ancient Fathers of this Country; by whose
auspicious Conduct, this Plantation grew and flourished under many
Disadvantages, without any Expense or Help from the Crown, and soon out-strip'd
all others in Virtue, Learning, Power and Figure, though not in Riches.

Let our MINISTERS likewise call to mind and imitate, the Burning and Shining
Lights that were first set up in this dismal Wilderness.

Instead of my drawing their exalted Character, I would rather give it in the
more authentic Terms of those who personally knew them. They are the joint and
expiring Testimony of the venerable and aged Mr. HIGGINSON and HUBBARD Mr.
WILLIAM HUBBARD of Ipswich.
in the Year 1701.

" Above Seventy Years [say they] have passed away, since One of Us; and above
Sixty since the Other of us came into NEW ENGLAND -- We are therefore capable
to make some Comparison between the Condition of the Churches when they were
first erected in this Country, and the Condition into which they are now fallen
and more falling every Day -- We that saw the Persons, who from Four famous
Colonies, assembled in the SYNOD, that agreed on our Platform of
Church Discipline, cannot forget their excellent Character. They were Men of
great Renown in the Nation, from whence the Laudean Persecution exiled them:
Their Learning, their Holiness, their Gravity struck all Men that knew them
with Admiration. They were Timothies in their Houses, Chrysostomes in their
Pulpits, Augustines in their Disputations. The Prayers, the Studies, the humble
Enquiries, with which they sought after the Mind of GOD, were as likely to
Prosper as any Men's upon Earth. And the Sufferings wherein they were
Confessors for the Name and Truth of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, add unto the
Arguments which would persuade us, that our Gracious LORD would Reward and
Honor them with communicating much of his Truth unto them. The famous
BRIGHTMAN had foretold, Clariorem Lucem adhuc Solitudo dabit; GOD would yet
reveal more of the true Church State to some of his faithful Servants, whom He
would send into a Wilderness, that He might there have Communion with Them. And
it was eminently accomplished in what was done for and by the Men of GOD, that
first erected Churches for Him in this American Wilderness.

Thus those two ancient Witnesses, who brought up the Rear of the first
Generation that came from ENGLAND.

Indeed the inspired SCRIPTURE, as was observed before, is our only
Authoritative Rule of Faith and Worship: and our Platform is no other than the
declared Judgment of the Sense of Scripture in matters of Church Order,
Discipline and Worship which our ancient Ministers and Others I say OTHERS;
Because it has been a Fundamental Principle with us, that as CHURCHES are
composed both of MINISTERS and BRETHREN; and Ecclesiastical Councils or Synods
are proper Representatives of Churches; that therefore there should set in all
such Assemblies, not only MINISTERS, but also OTHERS chosen by the Churches to
represent them: That they may not be merely CLERICAL, or Synods of the CLERGY,
but ECCLESIATICAL, or Synod of the CHURCHES. And such have been all our
NEW ENGLAND Synods and Councils from the First; agreeable to that (...)
Precedent in Acts. xv.
, with abundant Prayers and humble, free and diligent Enquiries and
Conferences, almost unanimously came into. But then as no other People in these
later Ages have been favored with such Advantages as the Founders of these
Churches, to search into, discover and put in Practice the Christian Way of
Church Order, Discipline and Worship described in the WORD of GOD; they being
entirely Men of Piety, Knowledge, Judgment, the most about the middle Age of
Life, who had made the Bible their familiar Study, many of them Persons of
Superior Learning, and all free from any Influence of Humane Powers and
Constitutions in Religious Matters; they wholly relinquished all devised
Scheams of Men, and set themselves to consult the Sacred SCRIPTURES only, that
they might happily see what these directed, and submit thereto; and having
renounced all Prospects of worldly Riches, Powers and Dignities, for this very
End. -- They were on these accounts most likely to find out the Truth in those
Affairs. And though our Faith is not to be subjected to Their Judgment, but We
should also humbiy, sincerely and carefully Search the SCRIPTURES, and try
these things by Them, and see whether they are conformable to those Oracles of
GOD or no, as the noble BER^ANS did when even the APOSTLES taught them; yet the
Result of their united, pious, anxious and laborious Enquiries, under such
Advantages, demands a very extraordinary Veneration from all impartial Men, and
especially from us their dear Posterity.

And can we do any thing better, both for the Advantage of our Ministry, the
Satisfaction of our People, and the Quiet of our Churches, than to go on upon
the Scriptural Foundations these excellent Men have already laid? not to set
aside, or build anew, but to go on further as the Light of Scripture leads us,
for our common Peace and Edification. And I know of nothing of greater moment,
than to advise to Methods about calling Councils in a fairer, more peaceable,
equal and harmonious manner, than we are now unhappily liable to; that so this
sacred Ordinance may not be so subject to be frustrated by the dark Intreagues
of crafty Men, ^or Anti-Councils raised to support contending Parties, to the
great Dishonor of CHRIST, the Grief of all good Men, and the Inflammation and
Continuance of Hatred and Divisions.

And how happy for these Churches, and for all this Country both to this and
future Generations, as I would with Submission hope, if with the Countenance
and Invitation of our CIVIL FATHERS, we might have a SYNOD in due time
Convened: not to make the least Injunctions upon any, which is contrary to our
known Principles, but only to advise and propose those Methods which may
conduce to the promoting Piety, Peace and Good Order in our own Churches; but
left to every one to receive or not, as they think best. Two such happy Synods
we had in the Reign of King CHARLES I. and two more in the Reign of King
CHARLES II, without Offense; invited by the Civil Rulers, who also sat among
them as chosen Representatives of our Churches, and as grave Advisers with the
Rest, but all without the least coercive Power. Even the Protestants in FRANCE
were often allowed by their Kings to meet in Synods, and Benevolences given
them out of the Royal Treasury. Nor can we think HIS MAJESTY can be displeased
with us, if He were to know, that our New England Synods are not like those of
other Countries, to make Decrees or Canons, but for Counsel only, for the Peace
and Order of the Churches who send their Pastors and other Delegates to Consult
together and give their free Advices: And that as no Authority is or ever was
put forth by our Civil Rulers by deriving any Power to such a Synod, or in
inviting the Churches to them, the Churches being always left at Liberty
whether to send or no, to comply or (...); there can be no Invasion on any
Power in such a free Invitation: it being impossible as I humbly apprehend,
there should be any Power invaded, where there is none assumed.

In fine, Let THE PEOPLE in General, both now and frequently look back to their
excellent Forefathers, and labor after that Spirit of Grace and Prayer, of
Purity and Charity, of Zeal for GOD and Love to Men, which dwelt so eminently
in them.

And that we may know something more concerning them; Let us hear that great
and immortal Honor of his Country, Mr. WILLIAM STOUGHTON, in his Election
Sermon in 1668, Then a PREACHER of the Gospel in Dorchester: But Three Years
after Chosen a MAGISRTATE of the MASSACHUSETTS COLONY: And afterward made by
King WILLIAM and Queen MARY of ever Glorious Memory -- LIEUT, GOVERNOR and
Commander in Chief of this PROVINCE.
who lived among them.

" As for EXTRACTION and DESCENT; if we be considered as a Posterity, O what
PARENTS and PREDECESSORS, may we the most of us look back unto, through whose
Loins the LORD has stretched forth the Line of his Covenant, measuring of us
out, and taking us into be a peculiar Portion to Himself! -- And then -- As to
NEW-ENGLAND'S First Ways, What glorious things might here be spoken unto the
Praise of free Grace, and to justify the LORD's Expectations upon this Ground!
-- O what were the open Professions of the LORD's People that first exter'd
this Wilderness? How did our FATHERS entertain the Gospel, and all the pure
Institutions thereof, and those Liberties which they brought over? What was
their Communion and Fellowship in the Administrations of the Kingdom of JESUS
CHRIST? What was the Pitch of their Brotherly Love, of their Zeal for GOD and
his Ways, and against Ways destructive of Truth and Holiness? What was their
Humility, their Mortification, their Exemplariness? How much of Holiness to the
LORD was written upon all their Ways and Transactions? GOD sifted a whole
Nation that He might send choice Grain over into this Wilderness". [Again,] "
Those that have gone before us in the Cause of GOD here, Who and what were
they? Certainly Choice and Picked Ones, whom He eminently prepared and trained
up and qualified for this Service: They were WORTHIES, Men of singular
Accomplishments, and of long and great Experience: Yet did they walk with Fear
and Trembling before the LORD, in the Sense of their own Nothingness and
Insufficiency for the Work here to be done". [And again] " Consider and
remember always that the Books that shall be opened at the last Day will
contain Genealogies in them. There shall then be brought forth a Register of
the Genealogies of NEW-ENGLAND'S Sons and Daughters. How shall we many of us
hold up our Faces then, when there shall be a solemn Rehearsal of our Descent,
as well as of our Degeneracies! To have it Published whose Child thou art, will
be cutting to thy Soul, as well as to have the Crimes reckoned up that Thou art
guilty of!"

These were the destinguish'd Setlers of NEW ENGLAND! And as we are now
rejoicing in the happy Fruits of their excelling Piety, Wisdom Magnanimity,
Hardships, Pains and Labors -- Does it not become us to remember and mention
them with the most grateful Esteem and Honor, to treat their Names with
Veneration as the worthy FATHERS of this Country, to rise up and call them
Blessed, to follow their bright Examples, to observe their living Exhortations
and their dying Charges, and constantly adhere to the Great and noble Ends of
all their arduous Undertakings, Sufferings, Cares, Prayers and Labors for us?

But in a steady adherance to these great Ends, Let Us continue also to Exceed
all Others in our Extensive Charity. To account their Churches, to be true
Churches, and their Ministers to be true Ministers, as we have always done,
whether they will ours or no: to own and treat them as our Christian Brethren,
though they should refuse to own us in the same Relation: To assume into our
Worship nothing but revealed Religion, or what we apprehend of Scriptural
Example or Appointment; that so the Doors of our Communion may be as wide as
CHRIST allows, there may be nothing on our Part to hinder it, and we may still
have the Glory, Safety and Satisfaction (...) of the most generous and
charitable of (...) being one of the brightest Marks as well as Ornaments of
true Religion and of pure Christianity.

And now, "Blessed be the LORD our GOD, even the GOD that formed this People
for Himself to show forth his Praises: who redeemed them out of distant Lands,
who brought them through the Depths of the Seas, and showed them (...)
Salvations; who took them into his Covenant (...) them the Land of the Heathen,
that they might observe his Statutes and keep his Laws. They have seen thy
Goings O GOD in the Sanctuary! Bless ye the LORD in the Congregations; even the
LORD, ye Descendants from the Fountain of our ISRAEL! Thy GOD has commanded
thy Strength: Strengthen O GOD that which Thou have wrought for us! Let thy
Work appear to thy Servants, and thy Glory to their Children! Let the Beauty of
the LORD our GOD be on us, and establish Thou the Work of our Hands to future
Generations.

May our PRINCES always Rule us in Righteousness and Mercy: May our Governors
be tender Fathers to us as they have been of old: May our Country never want of
her own Sons (...) up in Her, to take Her by the Hand and Guide Her: May those
that lead us never cause us to Err, nor destroy the way of our Path, but rule
in Judgment and the Fear of GOD! -- May those be always wise and pure both in
Heart and Life, that bare the Vessels of the Sanctuary: And may the LORD our
GOD create upon all our Churches, as it were a Cloud and Smoke by Day, and the
shining of a flaming Fire by Night; And on all the Glory create a Defense. --
May this Seminary of Learning, so fair and pleasant in our Eyes, which our wise
and pious Fathers set up so early to enlighten and rejoice our Land; yet still
produce such illustrious Persons as Stoughton, Dudley, Saltonstal and Belcher;
and send forth such Great and Burning Lights, as it has already, into our
Churches, and may they flow for ever! -- May the LORD of Hosts Reign among us,
and be for a Crown of Glory to us, and our Salvation in Times of Trouble: May
He for ever plead the Cause of this his People, defend this Country to Save it
for his own Name's sake, contend with them that contend with us, and save our
Children: May no Weapon formed against us ever Prosper, and every Tongue that
shall rise against us in Judgment be condemned! -- May we be the Blessed of the
LORD, and our Offspring with and after us: May they spring up as the Grass, as
Willows by the Watercourse: May they be taught of GOD, and their Peace be
Great: May they take Root and Blossom, and fill the Face of the Land with
Fruit: And may the Kindness of the LORD never depart from us or them, nor his
Covenant of Peace be removed from them! -- May we be EMMANUEL's Land, the
People of the Holy one of ISRAEL; And may the LORD make us an eternal
Excellency, a Joy of many Generations: May our Righteousness go forth as
Brightness, and our Salvation as a Lamp that burns: May the Nations see our
Righteousness, and all Kings our Glory: And may the LORD delight in us, and
rejoice over us, and make us a Praise in the Earth.

And to Conclude, with that most public, solemn and final CHARGE of another
illustrious Prophet, to all the Princes of the Tribes and others assembled then
before Him, in 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 8. Now therefore, in the Sight of all ISRAEL,
the Congregation of the LORD, and in the Audience of our GOD; Keep and seek for
all the Commandments of the LORD your GOD, that ye may continue to possess this
Good Land which the LORD has given You, and may leave it for an Inheritance to
your Children after you for ever.

FINIS.

APPENDIX.
To fill up these vacant Pages, I take leave to insert the following Passages
from Mr. STOUGHTON'S Election Sermon, April 29. 1668.

AS for special Relation unto GOD; Whom has the LORD more signally exalted
than his People in this Wilderness? The Name and Interest of GOD, and
Covenant Relation to him, it has been written upon us in Capital Letters from
the beginning. GOD had his Creatures in this Wilderness before we came, and his
Rational Creatures too, yea a multitude of them; but as to Sons and Children
that are Covenant-born unto GOD, Are not we the first in such a Relation? In
this respect we are surely the LORD's firstborn in this Wilderness. Of the
poor Natives before we came, we may say as Isa. 63. 19. They were not called by
the LORD's Name, He bear not Rule over them: But we have been from the
beginning, and we are the LORD's. --

As for Restipulations, and Engagements back again to GOD, what awful public
Transactions of this kind have there been amongst us? Has not his Ear heard us
solemnly Avouching him, and him alone, to be our GOD and Savior? Has not a
great part of the World been a Witness of these things, even of our explicit
Ownings of, and Covenantings with the LORD as our GOD, laying this as a
foundation-stone in our Building? And of this we may say, It has been a
special Exasperation unto Adversaries and Ill-willers, that despised
New England has laid Claim to, and publicly avouched and challenged a special
Interest in God above others.

As for our Advantages and Privileges in a Covenant-state; here time and
strength would fail to reckon up what we have enjoyed of this kind: If any
People in the World have been lifted up to Heaven as to Advantages and
Privileges, we are the People. Name what you will under this Head, and we have
had it. We have had Moses and Aaron to lead us; we have had Teachings and
Instructions, line upon line, and precept upon precept; we have had Ordinances
and Gospel-dispensations the choicest of them; we have had Peace and Plenty; we
have had Afflictions and Chastisements in measure; we have had the Hearts and
Prayers and Blessing of the LORD's People every where; we have had the Eye and
Hand of GOD, watching and working every way for our Good; our Adversaries have
had their Rebukes, we have had our Encouragements, and a Wall of Fire round
about us. What could have been done more for us than has been done? --

What the LORD expects from us is, not any thing of doubtful Disputation, not
merely Civils or Prudentials; but the sure and certain, the often acknowledged,
and stated, common Interest of the People of GOD, and of you the LORD's People
in special; The Interest of practical Piety and Holiness; -- The Interest of
unmixed, spiritual Gospel Worship, and of the sincere and open Profession and
owning of the Truths and Ways of CHRIST; -- The Interest of Unity and Peace in
the ways of Reformation, and of expecting and waiting for the Issue of all
those great and astonishing Providence that are working every where; The
Interest of these Things, and of just and righteous Liberties in order
hereunto, is all that which I intend. The Times are come, and hastening more and
more, wherein Faithfulness to GOD in all these things, will be the most
glorious Crown that can be worn upon Earth; A Crown upon which it shall be
graven, Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints. This then is the word of
the LORD unto his New England Churches and People this Day, Let no Man take
your Crown from you; No Temptations, no Corruptions, no Insinuations, no
Threatenings, no Fears, no Adversaries. --

And this we must know, that -- He that is not with CHRIST is against him; --
He that gathers thereth not with CHRIST, scatters abroad; we must declare
for whom we are, and Choose our side. We indeed of these Ends of the Earth have
long since made our Choice; we have given up our selves to the LORD JESUS as to
our Spiritual King and Lawgiver, to be his Portion and Inheritance: Now that
which the LORD expects is, that we stick to this our Choice; that we give not
back a whit, so as to become Liars unto that GOD who unto us has not been as
Waters that fail. --

Take heed of and watch against all the various Steps, Degrees, Methods whereby
Men come to forsake and turn off from the LORD and his Ways. 1. Men use the
Ordinances of GOD slightly and carelessly. -- Church-watch, Fellowship,
Discipline does them no real inward Good. 2. Now Men grow secretly weary of all
these things, as of a Garment that warms not, and Bread that strengthens not --
3. Now Men begin to question the Ground and Warrant of Things. 4. Now they
hearken after Objections, and what may be cavill'd against the Ways and
Institutiof GOD. 5. Now they are imposed upon by deceitful Workers, they
greedily listen unto what may be said for the Ways and Institutions, Courses
and Customs of Men. 6. Now they take Offense at Persons and Things, and suffer
their Spirits to be imbittered. 7. Now being given up by GOD, they fall quite
off; Men gather them, they are joined in with the Instruments of Satan, and
turn Underminers at least, if not open Persecutors. O take heed and watch
against all these Things. Enquire after all the first Warpings of your Hearts
and Spirits; Be not Ignorant of Satan's Devices.

THE END.

