Mr. Whittelsey's SERMON On the DEATH of John Hall, Esquire

The Regards due to such as have been Eminent and Useful. A DISCOURSE
Occasioned by the Death of John Hall, Esquire One of the Council in the Colony of
CONNECTICUT, who died April 29th. 1730. in the 60th. Year of his Age.

By Samuel Whittelsey, Pastor of the First Church in Wallingford.

Psalm. 112.6. -- The Righteous shall be in Everlasting Remembrance.

BOSTON: Printed for S. GERRISH, in Cornhil, MDCCXXX.

The Regards due to such as have been Eminent and Useful.
II. CHRON. xxiv. 16. And they buried him in the City of David among the Kings,
because he had done good in Israel. --


Although the Person, to whose Departure, our Text has Reference, sustained a
Sacred, and the Person, whose Removal we this day lament, sustained a Civil
Character, yet the ground and reason of that Respect which was paid to his
Remains, will afford proper Meditations on this mournful Occasion; which was,
that he had done good in Israel. The man of God so honorably distinguished in
his Sepulcher, was Jehoiada the High Priest; Venerable on the account of his
Office: Prince and Primate in the Sacred Order; who bore in his Breast Plate
the Urim and the Thummim, Emblematical of light and perfection; who annually
entered into the Holy of Holies, with blood, and made atonement for the Sins of
the People; and was a Type of Christ; and venerable on the account of the
wisdom and excellent Spirit, which was in him; his eminency in his Office, and
the great Service, which he did among his People: and our Text signifies the
honor done him in his burial, and the reason of it.

1. The honor done him in his burial: They buried him in the City of David
among the Kings: A singular honor this, that he should make his grave with the
Princes and supreme Rulers of his People. David, when he was settled in his
Kingdom, took from the Jebusites, the strong hold of Zion, and called it after
his own name; made it the place of his Residence, and the Seat of his Kingdom;
in some part of which he was interred at his decease, ^ King. 2.10. So David
slept with his fathers, and was buried in the City of David; which afterward
became the burying place of the Kings: for this is the account generally given
concerning the Kings of Judah, that they slept with their fathers, and were
buried in the City of David: And this was the honor done to Jehoiada when he
died; they buried him in this City, and laid him among the Kings: an honor
denied to some of the Kings, who had by their mismanagements, forfeited the
Regards due to their Character: It is Reported of Jehoram, that he departed
without being desired: howbeit they buried him in the City of David, but not in
the Sepulchers of the Kings, 2 Chronicles. 21.20. and of that ungrateful and
barbarous King Joash, that his Servants conspired against him, for the blood of
the Sons of Jehoiada, and slew him on his bed, and he died, and they buried him
in the City of David: but they buried him not in the Sepulchers of the Kings, 2 Chronicles. 24.25. which imports that they accounted it a great honor to any one to
have his Corpse lodged in them.

2. The reason of it, because he had done good in Israel? By Israel here, is
meant the Kingdom of Judah, as in 2 Chronicles. 21.2. All these were the Sons of
Jehoshaphat King of Israel; who was King of Judah, and not of Israel, when we
speak of them in contradistinction: Had done good in Israel: This is a Meiosis,
more is implied than expressed; for if he had only done some small Service, and
in as small a degree, it might have been said, that he had done good in Israel;
but this is far beneath' the lofty Intention of the expression, which is, that
he had been Eminently Serviceable, and had done very much good.

DOCTRINE.
That honor and respect is due, and ought to be paid, to the Remains and
Memory of such as have been eminently Serviceable, and done much good among
their People.

Such are rich blessings while they live, and those whom God is pleased to
honor, by furnishing of them, making them Eminent, and great and good
Instruments, in his Providence, all men should honor and acknowledge; which is
a clear dictate of natural reason, and strictly just; because exactly agreeable
to the reasons and proportion of things. Such ought also to be honored after
their Decease, in such ways as the state of the matter gives room for.

Honor is due to all men on account of the Dignity of human nature, because
man was made in the Image of God, 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all men. A greater degree
of honor is due unto religious, holy and vertous men; and by how much the more
they excel in piety, and shine in virtue, by so much the greater Regard is due
unto them, Psalm. 15.4. He honors them that fear the Lord. But more especial
honor still is due to them, who are placed on high, and bear Offices of
distinction among Mankind, according to the degree of improvement and
exaltation which they are advanced to, 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor the King.; and the
greatest honor is due to them who are eminently Serviceable, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let
the Elders which rule well, be accounted worthy of double honor, especially
they who labor (more abundantly, and exert themselves) in the word and
doctrine; neither does the obligation hereunto cease, when their breath goes
forth; but honor is due to their remains and memory, 2 Chronicles. 16.13, 14. And
Asa slept with his fathers, and they made a very great burning for him. This
Doctrine may be considered in two Propositions.

PROP. I. Some men are eminently Serviceable, and do much good among their
People.

There is not a greater diversity and contrariety in the World of things, than
there is in the World of men. Some things are very hurtful and destructive to
the nature of man, as the poison of Asps; some things are of the middle kind,
and do neither good nor hurt; some are salubrious and very serviceable,
nourishing, strengthening, restorative, and comfortable.

So among men, some are very hurtful and pernicious, tyrannical and oppressive,
deceitful and unrighteous, turbulent and unpeaceable, vicious and debauched;
they are of little benefit to mankind, while they live; nor is it any loss to
the world, when they die. They seem to be sent in Judgment, and are taken away
in mercy; not to themselves, but to mankind. Others are as the Twilight, in the
middle between good and evil, useful, and pernicious; they have a being upon
the earth; but none are much obliged to them, neither have we any great
complaint to advance against them, they serve to swell the number of mankind,
and this is well nigh all; that they are harmless and inoffensive finisheth
their Character.

Others exceed in their usefulness, and are rich Blessings in their day. God
does well furnish them, and well spirit them: and they are as the light of the
morning, even a morning without Clouds, and as a clear shining after Rain: They
expand their Beneficence as the rays of light, and men in every Order,
Condition and Degree are the better for 'em; all men esteem and love them;
because all men, at one time or other, are obliged and served by them, and when
cruel death does forcibly take them away, all hearts are oppressed with sorrow,
and all eyes are full of tears, and are ready to look upon it, that a great
part of their comfort is buried in the same grave. Such were David, and
Jehoshaphat, and Hezekiah, and Josiah, among the Kings of Judah, and almost in
every generation God. raises up, and bestows some such men.

We may expatiate a little and illustrate this in some instances.

1. Some do much good with their Estates. The God from whom does come Riches,
as well as Honor, does honor them, in making 'em his Stewards of much worldly
substance, and with all does give them an heart to do good with their
abundance: They are of a public Spirit, and when there is opportunity, they
discover a laudable generosity and openness of hand: It does not suffice them
to give to eevery man his due, and to owe no man any thing but love; and to pay
without grudging (which many do not) what the Support of the Public does
require: but moreover, they devise liberal things, and by liberal things they
stand; and are of the same public and generous spirit with the Centurion well
respected among the Jews, because he loved their Nation, and built them a
Synagogue, Luke 7.5. When any matter is set forward, which may be for God's
Glory, the Interest of Religion, and the good of men, and requires money for
the carrying on and perfecting of the same, you shall never find them opposing,
declining, and drawing back; but always ready, forward, cheerful, and rejoicing
at the opportunity.

They are also good to the poor; are touched with a sense of their indigencies,
and effectively pity them: they don't eat their morsel alone; and when they see
the poor without covering, they cause their loins to bless them: because they
make them warm with the fleece of their sheep, and the blessing of such as were
ready to perish does come upon them.

2. Some do great and good Service in the public Stations, which they are
exalted into. Providence does call them forth from a private to a public
Capacity, having antecedently fitted and qualified them therefore; and they do
worthily, and become famous, in the wise and faithful attendance to, and
discharge of the Trust, which they have received from God by men. If it be a
civil Office which they sustain, that they bear Rule over men, they are just
and rule in the fear of the Lord: when they sit upon the seat of Justice, they
take heed what they do; because they account, and consider that they judge not
for men, but for God. That the power of judgment is God's Right, that the
matter of Judgment is God's Cause, and that the issue of Judgment is God's end;
and desire nothing more than that God would be with them in the Judgment; they
are watchful over themselves, that they be impartial, and do not decline after
many to wrest Judgment; nor countenance a poor man in his cause; nor favor the
great and the Rich, because they are so; neither do they bear the Sword in
vain; but by the prudent execution of just Laws, they become a terror to them
that do evil; and if the Sons of vice, and insolence will not otherwise be
reclaimed, they use a just severity, and bring the wheel over the wicked; nor
are they less conscientious as to Religion and the Precepts of the first Table;
they are a swift witness against the Profane. against vain Swearers,
Sabbath Breakers, and such as dare boldly affront the Majesty of Heaven; and
they speak comfortably to those that teach the good knowledge of the Lord.

They are endued with wisdom, and a spirit of Government, and by the
application of their Wisdom and Power, they keep all in peace and good order
about them; they defend the Righteous, and protect the Innocent, and every one
sets under his own vine, and under his own fig tree, socure in his just Rights,
and enjoying the fruits of his own labors.

In like manner some in the sacred Employment, do eminent Service for Christ,
his Truth, and the Souls of men, and are the Chariots of Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof: and others, who move in a lower sphere of public Order, do
much good in the worthy discharge of their Trust.

3. Some do great and good service by their counsel and advice. God gives unto
them a wise and understanding heart, and they are well inclined to do good with
their Talents. The Public is much the better for that excellent Spirit of
wisdom which is in them: when Emergencies arise; and dark clouds hang over the
public Affairs, they have a comprehensive discerning in the present juncture;
and by their wisdom do direct unto that which does extricate from the impending
difficulties, and make all of a right spirit to rejoice in the happy issue,
Eccles. 9.15. And he by his wisdom delivered the City. They also do much good
by their Counsel and Advice more privately: their ability is known, and their
integrity depended upon; they are much sought unto, and many appeal to them, as
judges and arbiters of right and wrong, and by their wisdom and integrity,
entitle themselves to the blessing of the Peacemaker.

4. Some do much good by their Example. They live a religious and exemplary
life, worthy of imitation; and by their example have a good influence upon
others. They are exemplary in their Families, walking in the midst of their
houses in a perfect way; and hereby they have a good influence upon those that
are under them, who insensibly fall into imitation, and grow up into a likeness
and conformity to Parents: They are patterns in their regards to Religion,
things sacred and the house of God, constant and seasonable, decent and
reverent in their attendance upon the public Worship of God; and their general
walk and conversation is both instructive and attractive: their speech is
always with grace, seasoned with salt, good to the use of edifying, and apt to
minister grace unto the hearers: they are patterns of truth, righteousness,
fidelity, goodness, forgiveness, neighbourly kindness, and a tender conscience:
the conscientious and virtuous see that in them, which they esteem, admire and
would imitate; those who are otherwise, see that in them, which is some check
and restraint upon them, that they dare not give the loose to their vicious
inclinations as otherwise they would do: but their consciences are hereby
somewhat assisted, and are a greater curb upon them; and some, are by what
appears so good and amiable in them, allured to the choice and practice of
Religion and Virtue themselves; are won by the good conversation of others, 1
Pet. 3.1, 5. Those are eminently serviceable in whom all these are found
happily united; in whom there is both ability and goodness, who feed many with
their Estates, and with their lips also, who are good in counsel, and as good
in Government, of a meek and moderate spirit, and yet faithful in all that is
committed to them, who have at heart the interest of Religion, practice it
themselves, and in the best manner promote it in the places where they live;
are hearty friends to the public weal, and hearty well-wishers to all men.

O how rich blessings are such! and how happy the people, who are favored with
them! when any trouble does begin to arise, they seasonably obviate the same,
lay the spirit of contention, and quench the spark before it breaks out into a
flame, and have so strong and extensive influence; that they maintain peace and
truth, decency and good order, in their day.

Sometimes one such man will cause all things to go well in a place, and make a
people happy; will change the countenance of all Affairs among them, and bring
all things into sweet and excellent order; will rectify disorders, and
meliorate the manners of a people, that strangers, who come among them, shall
observe and say, that there is much of a Reformation among them: one such man
is so great a blessing, as few are sensible of 'till deprivation does convince
them.

PROP. II. Honor and Respect is due, and ought to be paid to the Remains and
Memory of such men.

Death prevails over such as well as others: though they may sustain a Divine
Character, and are Gods by Office; yet not in immutability; for they die like
other men; though they are very useful, much needed, and can be very difficultly
spared; yet death is cruel and spares 'em not: for in the Grave are Kings and
Counselors of the earth, as well as others, Job 3.14. and such, whether they
come to their grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes in, in his
season; or, whether they are taken away in the midst of their capacity and
usefulness, honor is due, and regard to be paid to the name and memory of
such, after their spirits are removed, and they are no more conversant among
us: and that so to do is decent and fitting, just and grateful, appears to be a
clear dictate of natural reason, and what has been the though it and practice of
mankind generally; we shall not therefore labor in the demonstration of that
which we presume all will readily acknowledge; but shall proceed to show in
what way, honor and respect ought to be paid unto such, and assign some
Reasons of the Doctrine, which will invite into the Application.

I. As to the first, some of the ways in which honor and respect ought to be
paid unto such, are these which follow.

1. By a suitable and honorable Burial. It is a practice, which has obtained
in the world, when persons die, to return back their Bodies, earth to earth as
it was; and the light of reason has guided most, if not all nations, to pay
some respect to persons of Distinction and Character, by some peculiar rites
and ceremonies in their Obsequies; and it is decent that such should be honored
in their Interment, according to the decent rites and customs, which have
obtained among their people.

Different modes of doing honor to the Honorable, have obtained in different
Times and Countries. Among us we give honor to such, by Titles of Distinction,
by uncovering of the head, by rising up before them, by bowing of the knee,
etc. and it is equal and just that men of worth and improvement, have respect
shown them in such ways as are customary; and not to do it, is neglect and
contempt; so likewise when they decease, honored they should be in their
burial. Thus they honored Jehoiada, by laying him among the Kings; and it was
a custom in Israel to do honor to men of worth, by making odoriferous burnings
for them. It is said concerning the good King Asa, that when he died they made
a very great burning for him, 2 Chronicles. 16.14. and not to do this, was a token
of neglect and disrespect; for it is said of that wicked King Jehoram, who
departed without being desired, that his people made no burning for him, like
the burning of his fathers, 2 Chronicles. 21.19.

This burning of sweet odours, was a signification of respect, and an emblem of
a good reputation, that they gladly were at cost to manifest their Regards to
such a worthy person, and that his name was sweet, and as ointment poured
forth, which gives a delightful sensation to all that are near; and this may
probably, let us into a right understanding of the wise man, Eccles. 7.1. A
good name is better than precious ointment, and the day of death than the day
of ones birth: for when a man comes to die, it is better and more elegible, to
leave a good name and reputation behind him, than to be honored with a great
burning of sweet odours and costly perfumes.

Another custom of respect to the worthy Deceased, was the erecting of
Monuments over their graves; after Rachel's death, Jacob erected a monument
over her grave, which continued for a long time, Genesis 35.20. And Jacob set a
Pillar upon her grave, which is the Pillar of Rachel's grave unto this day.
King David's Sepulcher remained in the Apostles day, Act. 2.29. Men and
Brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the Patriarch David, that he is both
dead and buried, and his Sepulcher is with us unto this day.

2. By lamenting and mourning for them, and attending the decent rites and
customs thereof: As, where there is a just esteem of, and regard to worthy and
useful persons, there will be deep sorrow and hearty mourning, when they are
removed; so it is becoming, and a doing honor to such, that this should be
made manifest in proper expressions, according to the lawful modes and customs
of the time and place; both ancient and extensive has been the usage of
mourning Apparel; putting on of Sackcloth, and an attire significative of
sorrow and regard, 2 Samuel 14.2. Put on now mourning apparel, and anoint not thy
self with oil, but be as a woman that has a long time mourned for the dead. As
Josiah was an excellent Prince, so, great and lasting was the mourning for him,
2 Chronicles 35.24, 25. And all Judah and Jerusalem (not his near Relations only,
but all Judah and Jerusalem) mourned for Josiah: And Jeremiah lamented for
Josiah: and all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their
lamentations to this day, and made them an Ordinance in Israel: and, behold,
they are written in the lamentations: the omission of which is an evidence of
disregard. Jer. 22.18, 19. Therefore thus says the Lord concerning Jehoiakim,
the son of Josiah King of Judah, they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my
Brother! or ah Sister! they shall not lament for him saying, Ah Lord! or ah his
Glory! He shall be buried with the burial of an Ass etc.

3. By acknowledging their worth, and speaking forth their amiable qualities,
and great and good Services. Praise is one of the just Rewards of virtue, Phil.
4.8. and if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise. It is our duty to
bless God, and adore his infinite perfection, and praise his beneficence and
goodness to his creatures: So we ought likewise to see and acknowledge the
gifts and grace which he does bestow upon men, and give them the honor of
their good Services, by a suitable acknowledgment, Prove. 31.30. A woman that
fears the Lord, she shall be praised.

It is just and right that we do, in our minds esteem, and account of every
man, according to the virtues and good qualities, which are manifest in him. If
a man be truly eminent, and manifest himself by worthy actions to be so; not so
to account of him, is unjust, and a withholding of that which is his due; and
as we ought thus inwardly to esteem good and deserving men; so it is but just
to acknowledge it in words, and speak it forth to their honor; and as this is
a regard due unto them, while living; so it is an honor due to their name and
memory, when they are dead; for it has pleased the most High in his Wisdom to
order upon record in his word, the excellent spirit, and great and good
Services of many eminent and holy men in this way. The Righteous should be had
in lasting remembrance; and we should bless the name of the Just: This is to
embalm them indeed, and better than the most costly and the most precious
Aromatic burning.

4. By showing a proper regard unto theirs, whom they leave behind them. A man
who is serviceable and honorable, respect is due to his upon his account; and
every man esteems that which is done to his Children, as done to himself. It
is natural to every man to desire, that his Children may be esteemed, loved,
and respected in the World, and a dying man cannot but desire this for this
Children when he has left them; and a paying of respect to his nearest
Relations whom he leaves behind, is gratitude, and a doing honor to the
departed.

Jonathan begs this favor of David, 1 Samuel 20.14, 15. And thou shall not only,
while yet I live, show me the kindness of the Lord, that I die not; but also
thou shall not cut off thy kindness from my house for ever: no not when the
Lord has cut off the enemies of David, every one from the face of the earth:
And David did accordingly: When he came to be settled in the Kingdom, he made
inquiry, 2 Samuel 9.1. And David said, is there yet any that is left of the house
of Saul, that I may show him kindness for Jonathan's sake? And when
Mephibosheth was found and brought, how kindly does he receive him? v. 6, 7.
And David said, Mephibosheth, and he answered, behold thy servant, and David
said unto him, Fear not, for I will surely show thee kindness, for Jonathan thy
fathers sake, and will restore thee all the land of Saul thy father, and thou
shall eat bread at my table continually. It was a part of the dying charge of
David, to Solomon his Son and Successor, 1 King. 2.7. But show kindness to the
Sons of Barzillar the Gileadite: And it is laid as a perpetual infamy and
reproach upon the children of Israel, that they did not show kindness to the
house of Jerubbaal, namely Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had
showed unto Israel, Judge. 8. ult.

5. By following of their Example, and imitating what was excellent and worthy
in them. Imitating and copying after another is an expression of esteem: we are
inclined to copy after those whom we esteem considerable; and think, that we
serve and recommend our selves in doing so: and therefore, hereby we honor
them; for honor is an inward esteem, made manifest externally by significant
expressions, whether in word or action. We glorify God by the transcript of his
moral perfections into our hearts and lives; and this is one of the ways in
which it is our duty to honor him: and in this way we should do honor to the
name and memory of those who have done good in Israel.

The good spirit which was in them we should covet and labor for: the piety
and virtue, the truth and goodness, the kindness and liberality, the
faithfulness and public spirit, which showed forth themselves in them, we
should think of, for our own direction and quickening. Were they exemplary in
their regards to things sacred? this should be a motive to us to be so too:
were they regular and virtuous in their conversation? we should aim to be like
them: were they kind and neighbourly, affable and courteous to all? we should
think hereupon, and say within our selves, such will we endeavor to be: were
they always forward to appear against sin and disorder, and bear their
testimony against evil, according to their place? it should be our resolution,
that we will do the same thing: did they always discover a readiness to promote
that which might be for the public interest and good? we should determine
within our selves, that we will be like them in this: were they always for
peace? let it be our hearts desire and purpose that if it be possible we will
live peaceably with all men, and be instrumental unto love and peace, as much
as in us lies: so shall we honor the dead who were good and exemplary while
they lived.

II. As to the Reasons of the Doctrine, we may offer as follows.

1. Not that it is any benefit to them who are departed. What we do in this
World has no influence, as to those who are departed into the world of
spirits. Manifesting esteem and regard may be of advantage to such, when alive;
may be an encouragement to them in their duty and work; may be a quickening to
them to exert themselves, that they may be more abundantly serviceable: and
doubtless, it is sometimes of service to public men, to know that their
service is well accepted, and that they have an interest in the esteem of their
people, when they are well balanced, and have grace to make a right
improvement of it; but the doing honor to their name is of no service directly
to them who are departed. The great and good departed, need not any farther
service of ours; they hear not our commendations; they are exalted above our
praises; neither can our encomiums augment their beatitude.

2. It is in it self just and right. There is a certain dependence of things
one upon another, and references and relations of things one unto another,
which is the foundation of just and right. Such a being as man, a creature
endowed with such powers, situate in such relation to, and dependence upon, the
only uncreated and eternal mind, it is in it self just and right, that he
should think of, be affected and act toward God according to his nature and
perfections; and his own relation to, and dependence upon Him: and such is the
relation of men one unto another, as that it is in it self just and right, that
every man should enjoy what is his own, his life, reputation, worldly
possessions, without infringement or molestation; so it is in its self just and
right, that respect should be paid to them who have been useful and
serviceable; though they being now placed at such a distance from us, can receive
no benefit by it; for this is no reasonable objection against the equity of the
thing: for it is just and right, and our bounden duty, to honor and glorify
God, though he be exalted above all blessing and praise, nor can we be profitable
to Him.

3. It may be profitable to the Living: And by means of the living, the dead
may yet speak, and be an occasion of good after they are laid in their graves.

1. It may be some support and comfort to bereaved and mourning Relations. It
must needs be some alleviation of their grief, and lightning of their burden,
to find that their dear relative, whom death has separated from them, had a
good interest in the esteem and love of others; and to observe that many do
feelingly condole in their loss and sorrow.

2 It may be profitable to others, as it may be a motive and an incentive to
goodness and usefulness. A thirst and desire to be well though it of, both while
living, and when dead, is natural. For no man of though it and sense, is willing
that his name should be utterly forgotten: men would be remembered, which is one
cause of their desire to children, that since they are mortal in their own
persons, they may obtain a kind of immortality in their descendents; and hence
men of no religion will engage in, and vigorously prosecute great and worthy
enterprises; yea, sacrifice their lives in the service of their Country, that
they may (as the phrase is) die in the bed of honor; that their names may
live, and be renowned when they themselves are not: nor is this a mere Chimera,
and vanity; though it must be acknowledged as of small value and light, when laid
in the balance against the better blessings of the Eternal World; for it is
mentioned in holy Writ as one of the rewards of goodness, Prove. 10.7. The
Memory of the just is blessed. Now the paying of respect, and doing honor to
pious and useful men, when they are gone, evidently sets before the living the
way of honor, and how they must live and improve themselves, as they would be
respectfully mentioned, when they shall be no more seen among the living.

USE I. Hence learn that there is little regard, after their departure, due to
those who have been vicious in their lives, and have done little service among
mankind. Though they have been bad, yet humanity does require that they be put
into the ground; but, as there is but little respect due unto them while they
live, so there is as little when they come to die, it is just and best that
they should pass off in silence, and that little should be said of them:
barbarous it seems to rake in their dust, and to blaze their reproach, when
they are gone to receive the just deserts of an ill-spent life; and there is
little good to be said of them, and therefore it is best that they should lie in
silence; and agreeably the wicked are threatened in Prove. 10.7. The name of the
wicked shall rot; and it is best that it should be so: Some are so very vicious
and wicked, pernicious and hurtful in their lives, as that, when they are gone,
it is pity their name should be mentioned any more, except in way of admonition
and caution; it would be well, if such bad examples, might be utterly
forgotten; and therefore when such die, there is commonly much silence as they
are carried to the place of silence; when good and useful men die, every one is
speaking in their praise and commendation; but when the wicked die, there is
silence, and men return from their grave as those who are ashamed.

USE II. Hence we may be instructed that to reproach and vilify such worthy
men, when they are dead; or any ways to treat ill theirs, whom they have left
behind, is highly criminal and faulty, ingratitude and baseness: Of which we
are presented with a sad instance in our Context: Jehoiada was an excellent
man; had done great service in Israel, and had done abundance for King Joash;
he and his wife had saved him from death, from the hands of that wicked woman
Athaliah, who destroyed all the seed Royal of the house of Judah beside, and
^ould have murdered him, if she could have come at him; but they kept him hid
in the house of God six years, and then Jehoiada made an interest for him, and
strengthened himself, and set Joash upon the throne, and was a father, and an
excellent guide and counselor to him to his dying day: and what was the
gratitude of Joash to Jehoida after his death? He was so barbarous and base,
that he slew his Sons, though they were his near kinsmen; he forsook the Lord,
and thus requited his benefactor.

But how did he prosper? accordingly the Judgments of God followed him; his
enemies came upon him, and prevailed against him; sore Diseases seized upon his
body; and his own Servants had such an abhorrence of his ingratitude and
barbarity, that they conspired against him and slew him; and the people had
such a detestation of him, that they would not suffer him to be buried in the
Sepulchers of the Kings: and this is written for admonition and warning.

USE III. Let this be an argument and motive to us, to do all the good and
service in the world that possibly we can. Let us live Religion, as well as
profess it, and be concerned for the things of CHRIST JESUS; let us be
solicitous for the public weal, and seek the welfare of our Israel all the
days of our lives; let us be subject to those above us, and good to those about
us; faithful in our families, and exemplary in our lives.

This will procure us an honorable remembrance when we are gone, and give us a
name in some respects better than the name of Sons and of Daughters; will give
us a lasting name that shall not soon be cut off; and thus it will be in
corrupt and degenerate times; It was not a very good time in Israel when
Jehoiada died; yet what Honor was put upon him. There was not much true
godliness in Josiah's day; yet how greatly was his Death lamented. It was a
corrupt time in the days of Jeroboam; yet when Abijah his Son died, all Israel
mourned for him, and buried him, Because there was found in him some good thing
toward the Lord God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam, 1 Kings, 14.13.

Consider we also, that if we, from a right Principle and sincerely, live thus,
this will recommend us to God's approbation, who, as he is Goodness it self,
and abundant in goodness and truth, so he delights in those who are good and do
good. This also will give us inward Peace, sweet Reflections, and cordial
Supports and Views, in a dying hour, if then with Hezekiah, we have the
Testimony of our Consciences, that we have walked before the Lord in truth, and
with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in his sight: this also,
of Grace, will entitle to glorious rewards in the Eternal World.

USE IV. Of Exhortation, To pay all due Honor and Respect to the Remains and
Memory of such as have been serviceable, and have done good in Israel. These,
when Providence does remove them, are not suddenly to be forgotten, or their
names be suffered to sink into oblivion; which directly leads to speak of that
worthy and useful Man, John Hall, Esquire
whose removal from us has given occasion to these Meditations: I am well
aware that Funeral Sermons are too often stuffed with Flatteries; but there is
not such danger of this, when the Person lamented, was eminent, and eminently
serviceable, which is the present case, as you yourselves know: to pass over
such a man in silence, would be great injustice; wherefore Men and Brethren,
let me freely speak unto you of this Honorable Counselor, and Just Judge, who
is now both Dead and Buried and his Grave is with us.

If we look to his descent, he was born of credible and worthy Parents, who
approved themselves well in their day; and having served God and their
generation by his Will in a various capacity, are fallen asleep.

If we consider him in his Natural abilities, the Father of lights, from whom
comes down every good and perfect gift, had well furnished him; of which there
needs no other evidence, than his rising to be so considerable under so small
advantages: He had a large understanding, a singular discretion, and a good
temper; But yet, when prudence justified him in it; could discover that he had
spirit, though he held the same under agood regimen and command.

And as the Most High, who gives Gifts to every man as he pleases, had
accomplished him for service, and given him a right spirit therefore; so in the
ordering of his Providence, he called him forth thereunto; and in every
employment of Life, he discharged himself well and worthily, to the general
satisfaction of those concerned with him, and to his own honor. While he was
pleased to continue in a military capacity, how well accepted! how much
esteemed! and in a civil capacity, he was one of the best of Men, and did
Govern in the integrity of his heart, and by the skilfulness of his hands; in
matters of controversy between plea and plea, it may be said, that he made
Judgment to run down as waters and righteousness as a mighty stream; and in
causes of delinquency, he was in a great degree a terror unto evil doers, and
was so feared as well as loved, that he scattered the wicked with his eye: in
the executive Court he was a skilful and righteous Judge; and in the
Legislative, a wise and able Counselor: He had an extended foresight, a clear
discerning, and an uncommon dexterity in the management of affairs, and was
truly fitted for Government and Public Service; therefore he was not long in
the General Court, before his excellent talents were observed, and the Wisdom
of that Honorable Assembly has often improved him in controversies and
difficulties in Towns and Societies; which, he (with other worthy Gentlemen)
has done good service, in composing and bringing to a peaceable and
satisfactory issue.

And as in this regard he has been a great and blessed Instrument of Public
Service abroad; so in the same way he has done much good among his own people:
many differences he healed; many contending parties he reconciled; scarce ever
a man more applied to for Counsel and Advice in matters and difficulties of
every nature and kind; or that did more good (according to his sphere) in such
a way than he: his House was as Abel; here they asked Counsel and so ended the
matter. And here, I cannot but mention to his honor, the uncommon talent he
had, not only to determine controversies according to righteousness and
justice; but also commonly in such a manner as would be to the good
satisfaction of all parties, that they were wont to go away contented, pleased,
in perfect amity one with another; and admiring the man that had done them so
great service; that it may be in a good measure said of him, as Job says of
himself: Unto him men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at his counsel.
After his words they spoke not again, and his speech dropped upon them, and
they waited for him as for the rain, and they opened their mouth wide as for
the latter rain. He chose out our way and sat chief, and was one that comforted
the mourners, Job 29. 21, 22, 23, 25.

Neither may I omit to Recognize some special virtues, in which he did shine
with a particular luster. He was courteous and very obliging to all, and had a
particular sweetness of Conversation: his riches and exaltation did not render
him offensively assuming, but gave him the opportunity of recommending himself
so much the more by his affability and condescentions; he was as free from
sourness and morosity, as almost any man living; naturally disposed to an
innocent and moderate pleasantness; and yet had a particular skill in
commanding reverence from all that conversed with him.

He was pitiful and compassionate to his fellow creatures in their distresses,
and troubles, and always ready as well as able to help them; often has he
delivered the needy, when they came to him, the poor also and him that had none
to help him. How often and how gladly has he assisted the fatherless, and made
the widow's heart to sing for joy: He put on righteousness and it clothed him,
his judgment was a robe and a diadem, he was eyes to the blind, and feet was he
to the lame; he was a father to the poor, and the cause which he knew not, he
searched out, he brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of
their teeth.

He was of a peaceable and quiet spirit, and watchful and diligent in
maintaining and preserving peace and quietness among his neighbors, and among
his people: he had a particular greatness of soul, and was of a right public
spirit; and as God blessed him with a plentiful Estate, so he gave him an heart
to do good with the same; for he was truly generous, as he made manifest on all
inviting occasions; liberal both in public contributions and donations, as
also in private charities beyond what the world knew any thing of.

Amiable also he appears if we view him in every relation; a dutiful Son, very
respectful to his aged Parents, neither of which have been many, and one of
which has not been two years dead; a most kind and loving Husband; a wise and
a tender Father; a good Neighbor; a fast Friend; a faithful Reprover;
Ministerial; a hearty Lover of his Country, and of all good men.

In Religion, he was sound in the faith, careful and conscientious in the
practice, as well as in the profession of it: he was not a talkative, but a
real Christian: never admired the noise, but always the thing: great was his
regard to the house of God, and very exemplary in a constancy, seasonableness,
and reverence of attending upon the public Worship: in lesser and controverted
points, he was of a moderate and charitable spirit, and was mainly concerned
for the great things of God's law, mercy, judgment and faith: to practice them
himself, and to promote them in others. His conversation, was pure, and
blameless, and unstained from his youth up: and I am persuaded that he acted
under the governing influence of the fear of God, and a sincere aim to honor
and please him in the conduct of himself, both in a public and a private
capacity; and as he visibly lived the Christian, so he had the advantage
thereof in his last hours; patient, resigned, and supported by a comfortable
hope: his tho'ts and his speech were much of Religion, and the things of
another world: and among other savoury expressions, he said, He hoped God would
not gather his Soul with Sinners, when he should die; for he had not loved
their company, when living, and that above all places he had loved the
habitation of God's house, and the place where his honor dwells. And some of
the last words which I ever heard him speak, at the conclusion of some
religious discourse, were, That after all he could venture himself upon the
Gospel way of acceptance and Salvation. And the sentence of charity is, that he
is gone to the Hades of the blessed.

USE V. Of Address in a threefold Direction.

1. Unto the Family; which is filled with Sorrow and covered with Mourning:
Madam, and the Children; It has pleased the most high God, the Sovereign Lord
of Heaven and of Earth, to take away your Head from you, and your Glory is
departed; your loss is exceeding great and irreparable; yet you must consider
that it is an instance of divine goodness, and an honor to you, that you have
had such an Husband and such a Father: and you have cause of Thankfulness that
you have enjoyed him so long. And now since it has been the pleasure of the
Supreme King to take him from you, silence and submission, patience and
composedness, are your duty; studying rightly to improve so great a Providence.

Madam, my Hearts desire and prayer for you, is, that you may not faint, now
you are so sharply rebuked of the Lord: you are now entitled to many rich and
supporting promises, which you were not before entitled unto. Trust therefore
in the Lord, and let thy spirit be sustained and comforted by those words of
God, Isa. 54.5. For thy Maker is thine husband, (the Lord of Hosts is his name)
and thy Redeemer the holy One of Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be
called. Your languishing husband, when he beheld your sorrow and your tears,
said to you, I shall leave you in the hands of a good God, and among Christian
friends, and I hope and trust that you will experience the tenderness and
faithfulness of an All-sufficient God, and the respect and kindness of
christian friends. So be it.

And you the Children; my hearts desire and prayer for you is, that you may
follow your father in all his good qualities and virtues; that each of you may
do good, and be serviceable as he (...) was: in this he expressed himself, as
the principal thing which he desired for you: That God would remember his
everlasting Covenant to you, and make you useful and serviceable while you live
in the world. Now may it please the Eternal King to fulfill the desire of his
Servant, and grant unto each of you to be so minded: And you his Sons, who are
yet in your minority; great was the concern of your departing father for you:
may his dying counsel and charge never be forgotten by you: take heed and
beware, watch and pray against the temptations of your age and your day;
remember your Creator in the days of your youth, seek and serve the Lord
betimes; and may you all herein agree and say, this God is our God, we will
serve him and trust in him: our fathers God and we will exalt him: So shall you
have an happy meeting with him, who is gone before, another day.

2. To the people of this Town: Men, Brethren, and Fathers, I account it an
honor to this place, that God has raised up such a man in it: We have enjoyed
a rich blessing in him; he has been the instrument of much good among us; the
sober and well disposed among us, have for a number of years sat under the
shadow of his conduct and administration with great satisfaction; and how
heartily could we have rejoiced, might he have been continued many years more
to do service among us, according to the largeness of his ability, and
excellency of his disposition; but the Supreme over all has determined and
ordered otherwise, and it is now with us a day of darkness and gloominess, a
day of clouds and of thick darkness, as the morning spread upon the mountains,
for our breach is great like the Sea, who can heal us?

And since it is such a day of rebuke and displeasure, what should we do but
consider seriously, and humble our selves before God; search our hearts, and
try our ways, and turn unto the Lord: O let us beg and plead with God, that he
would not depart away from us, and give us up unto our own ruin and
destruction. Our head and gap-man is removed, O! that God would not suffer all
our hedges to be broken down, and we laid waste, as an uncultivated wilderness:
Oh! what shall we do in this dark and distressing day! unto you do I call, all
ye sensible and tho'tful, all ye pious and religious ones, and my voice unto
you is, All ye that affect and love good order, Oh! let us know where our help
is, in God alone; and let us pour out our hearts before him in most fervent
Supplications, that he would yet dwell among us, and build up his interest in
this place. O let us be united in heart and hand, and strengthen the good
things which remain, that they languish and die not: O that love and peace
might continue among us and good order flourish; and no other Emulation be
found among us but this, who shall excel in goodness and exceed in usefulness.
O pray for the rising generation; pray one for another; and for me, that my God
would teach me discretion, give me grace to be faithful, and enable me to do
some service the little time I may have to continue among you.

3. Here is a proper place for an Address to the People of this Government. O
what means the fierceness of the Lord's Anger, that he is thus going on in a
way of rebuke and judgment, that he does thus multiply his witnesses against
us, and make so many of his waves and his billows to pass over us? how has he
made us from year to year, for a number of years past, to experience the sad
execution of that awful threatening, Isa. 3.1, 2, 3. For behold, the Lord, the
Lord of hosts, does take away from Jerusalem and from Judah -- the mighty man
-- the judge -- the prudent -- the honorable man and the counselor! How are
we weakened, and how is our Glory made thin at this day! as God threatened,
Isaiah 17.4.

O that God would sanctify his judgments to our reformation, that he would be
with our honorable and worthy Men, who yet survive, that they may be continued
to us; and that a double portion of the spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, of
Counsel, Government, and the Fear of the Lord, may rest upon them; and that He
with whom is the residue of the Spirit, would pour it out, and restore our
Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at the beginning; that we may be
called a Colony of Righteousness, a faithful Government; that he would continue
our Privileges; give us favor in the King's eyes and with his Counselors;
Heal all the unhappy divisions found among us, and bless his People with peace.

FINIS.

