Mr. Fisk's Election-SERMON,
May 26. 1731.

In the House of Representatives, May 27. 1731.
ORdered, That Daniel Epes and Benjamin Lynde, Jun. Esqrs. be a Committee to
give the Thanks of the House to the Reverend Mr. Samuel Fisk, for his Sermon
preached Yesterday before the Court; and that they desire a Copy thereof for
the Press.

J. Quincy, Speaker.

The Character of the Candidates for Civil Government, especially for Council.

As it was drawn in a SERMON Delivered at BOSTON, Before His Excellency
JONATHAN BELCHER Esquire;

The Honorable the Council, and Representatives of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND.

On May 26th. MDCCXXXI.

Being the Anniversary Day for the Election of His Majesty's COUNCIL there.

By Samuel Fisk, M. A. Pastor of the first Church in Salem.

Ezekiel. 27. 8. Thy wise Men, that were in thee, were thy Pilots. BOSTON, N. E.
Printed by T. Fleet, Printer to the Honorable House of Representatives, 1731.

AN Election-SERMON, etc.
PSALM. 101. 6. Mine Eyes, shall be upon the Faithful of the Land, that they may
dwell with me.
THrough the tender Mercies of Almighty God, being returned, on this
Anniversary, and great Occasion, to this principal Seat of the Government, we
are met together in this his House, pursuant to the laudable Institution and
Usage of our devout Predecessors, to give Thanks to his Holy Name, to view the
Beauty of the Lord, and inquire as in his Holy Temple.

That I might properly and faithfully perform this part of Divine Service,
assigned to me, by the late Honorable House of REPRESENTATIVES, I have read
these Words of the inspired Royal Psalmist, very naturally leading us to the
Business of the Day: nor will it be thought unfit immediately to apply our
selves thereto; since for this Purpose we are called together: Especially
having so excellent a Teacher and Guide, to assist our Meditation as this Royal
Prophet, who furnishes the entire Design, and very much the Materials of our
Discouse, in the particulars which compose and complete the Character of the
Persons, whom he designed to take into the Administration of the Civil
Government in general, especially in Council. This Honorable and Great
Assembly will therefore be pleased to allow me, with some Explanations, to
refresh their Minds and Memories thus seasonably, with the recital of those
things, with which this admirable good Ruler did his own; that, like him, you
may more fully discharge your high Office and Trust of electing and fixing the
most eminent Persons in the important Office of His MAJESTY's Council. In order
whereto, you will make proper Observations on the People of the Land, that you
may discern and promote the faithful in it. It may be a Circumstance worthy of
a particular and close Thought, viz. The time when this Psalm was composed,
with the special Occasion thereof; about which, though there has been a different
Sentiment among Expositors, some conceiving it was before he was invested with
the Royal Power; Yet others, more agreeably and consistently with the Psalm,
conclude he had been in Possession of the Crown, and was now advanced over all
Israel, having in the course of Providence, experienced a great Variety of
Prosperity and Adversity. And if it be thus, certainly it was but a very
becoming Acknowledgement and Return made to the great Ruler of the World, in
whose Hands his own times were, and by whom his Changes were ordered, to go
into the general Resolve he here makes, which is the Imitation of the Divine
Clemency and Chastisement to him and his People, by filling up his own
Administration with Mercy and Judgment, as Occasions therefore should (...)
particularly to form a Scheme and Method of Behavior and Management of
personal and public Conduct, in his Close^, Family, the Church, Court and
Kingdom, to the end Piety and Virtue might revive, and a general if not
universal Reformation be happily accomplished. But because he needed
COUNSELORS to advise, and other Officers to assist him, he resolves on the
turning Character of the Persons on whom he would fix his Eye, and lay
Authority, as the effectual, successful Instruments of so great and good a
Work: which general Circumstance and Occasion is increased by what is supposed
had lately occurred, at a time when he was moving the Ark, the Residence of God,
to his own City and House; for Uzza, who beheld the Ark trembling and
tottering, contrary to the express Prohibition of God, touched it and died;
which gave Occasion to this good and zealous King to think of the divine Mercy
and Judgment, and to form a Method of preparing himself, his House, Court and
Kingdom, for the return of their God. And what other could he have judged God
or Man did expect from him. On which, I need not say to this Audience, how
applicable, the great Variety and Succession of merciful and afflictive
Providence to this Province, have rendered these Words to our selves at this
Day. In general, on the Text, I would observe the Character here given of the
Candidates for Government and Council: For though it be in a single Term, is very
comprehensive, as the original Word, translated faithful, imports. And indeed
Fidelity and Truth, more strictly taken, are very great Virtues; much more when
considered as attended with all others. These were the Objects of the King's
Eyes, which, though the Translators have taken the liberty to turn only forward,
doubtless the Reason of the thing leads to the past and present as well as
future time. For, without Question, he had long since though it on the matter; his
present thought was upon it; and for the same Reason ever should be. And as he
had frequent Opportunity to see his People, at their public Solemnities, and
in his own Progress and Circuit, he would single out the best qualified,
investing them with proper Power and Authority.

Agreeably whereto, at this time, we may do these following things.

I. Unfold the Character here given, descriptive of the proper Candidates for
Election. II. Consider the proper Business and Office of the Electors,
described by having their Eyes on these Faithful of the Land. III. Present some
Arguments and Motives, to induce hereto, that they may prefer the Faithful
alone. And finally, IV. Make some more particular Application on the whole.
I. Let us open the general Character here given, of the Persons proper to be
elected.

In general, They should be faithful and true Men; for they stand opposed to
the Vicious, and Ill-qualified, whom he Names with design to reject and exclude
them. It Is observed, the Persons, whom he resolves not to employ, are not the
most scandalous and gross Sinners; for the putting such into Authority was too
barefaced to be done in any Government, where Virtue and Order have any
tolerable Influence: but Persons of a far less undesireable Character; who yet,
by their real Wickedness, and secret Designs and Practices, were unfit for a
public Trust. Now the Faithful must design a Character the reverse of both
these: and that the Psalmist so meant, is very evident on the bear reading of
the Psalm. They must be Persons of real good Abilities, of apparent and visible
Virtue; not grossly Vicious, such as Drunkards, Adulterers, Fornicators,
Murderers, Blasphemers, and profane Swearers. For it would be an Insult on
God Almighty for such to represent Him. They should be Persons of real and
inward Virtue, as well as apparently fober, just and good. To which we must
add, they were to be very much of King David's Spirit, Ability and good Life;
wearing his own Character. This appears from his Design in promoting them,
which was, as he expresses it, to dwell with him: which very good Expositors
interpret, to sit in his Council, advising, and assisting in the
Administration; so that the particulars he mentions of himself, as well as
those pertaining to such whom he renounces, as unfit for Office, are justly to
be considered in the Description. I shall therefore, agreeably hereto, mention
two Things which generally enter into it.

1. They are described from the place of their Nativity, Education and Abode.
2. By some special moral Virtues, and political Perfections necessarily
required.
1. They are Natives and Inhabitants of the Land: Born, Educated, Principled
and Settled in it; and so have a Right by Birth, and common Inheritance, to be
Chief and Rulers among the People, their Brethren; who can say truly and
affectionately of them, they are Flesh of our Flesh, and Bone of our Bone.
Their Family and Stock, Acquaintance, Business and Estate, are in the Land;
partaking of the same Rights and Privileges; exposed to the common
Difficulties, Hazards and Expenses of the Public; sharing in it is Fortune;
equally engaged, by Inclination and Interest, to seek it is Prosperity, and to
ward off the fatal Blows which are threatened. These are the Men who love the
Country as their Native Soil, as well as for its being a good and pleasant
Land, which the Lord their God has given their Fathers and themselves: and
who, therefore, will concern themselves for the public good, as Members of the
same Body, and in Trust for Posterity in all succeeding Generations. Thus the
ancient Law by which King David governed, forbid Strangers ruling over his
People, which is but the agreed Sense of Mankind. And therefore a Government by
Strangers, was threatened as a Judgment to the Israelites, and often times has
proved fatal to many flourishing Countries: For which Reason, the Faithful in
the Land, were the Persons whom this excellent Ruler accounted proper for
promotion.

But 2. We are to consider some special moral Virtues and political
Excellencies, which render Persons faithful, and are peculiarly eyed by this
Royal Prophet.

1. The Faithful are Persons of eminent Skill and Wisdom: which good Qualities
first enter into the Character of a Counselor. Such therefore should be
remarkably distinguished in the Powers and Faculties of their Mind; the Compass
and Extent of their Knowledge; the clearness and method of it; the turn and
quickness of their Thought; it is Comprehension* Penetration and Sagacity: For
readiness and justness of Thought are great Perfections of the humane Mind,
very needful for Rulers, particularly on Emergencies, and where the public
Affairs resemble a Labyrinth. They should be Men understanding the Times,
knowing what their People ought to do. Like Moses and Daniel, they should be
Men of Superior and Incomparable Wisdom, to discern Things which are obscure,
unriddle what is doubtful, descry what is distant, clearly seeing through the
Artifices, Colors and Pretexts, which, as a Cloak, wrap up secret Designs, and
cover designed public Mischiefs. They should be very well acquainted with the
frame of humane Nature; with it is Capacities, Weaknesses, Appetites, Passions,
Humors, Disadvantages, Conveniences and Dependances. In short, with it is
Virtues, Vices, Wants and Supplies. They should know the Law of Nature and
Nations; the present Policy and Power, Interest and Course of the World;
especially of those on whom they border and depend, and with whom they Trade.
They should have an exact Knowledge of the civil and religious Constitution of
their own Country, it is Rise and Planting, Changes, Interests, and the like;
peculiarly of the present Situation, Aspect and tendency of Affairs; and of
the Persons whom they serve and advise, and with whom they are associated. To
this purpose we may remember the Words of King Solomon the Preacher, Prove. 20.
5. Counsel in the Heart of Man is like deep Water, but a Man of understanding
will draw it out. These things therefore, should very plainly be opened, fully
comprehended, exactly compared and adjusted, and, to this end, be closely and
often considered; by which means, good Designs may be laid, wise Schemes
formed, suitable Laws enacted, and answerable Endeavors and Conduct applied,
for the happy Issue of Affairs: For Wisdom is profitable to direct.

2. They are Persons of inflexible Justice and Impartiality. Otherwise their
Skill will degenerate into Craft and Cunning, which, instead of being
Serviceable, will be of pernicious Consequence. For there is something due to
every Man in the Community, which should be rendered to him in particular.
Therefore the business of the Ruler is to consider and adjust the proportion,
season and manner, and then make a Distribution. This is the Application of
Government to Persons and Cases; for which some have special Powers and
Talents, which they should improve, by framing suitable Laws and Orders for
proportioning Rewards and Penalties; the advising whereto is one especial
Office of the Counselor. Thus Honor, Fear, Custom and Tribute will be
rendered to all, who respectively may claim them; but without this there can be
no Truth or Fidelity, in the Administration; for which Reason, a most strict
regard ever should be had to it, and such Council given as has an evident and
strong Tendency to distribute it; for we read, He that rules over Men must be
just: not being biased by any thing but strict Equity and Justice: and
therefore in all the Advice they give, and Assistance they afford, they should
aim wholly at what is strictly just: This we are taught by David in this Psalm,
v. 3 I hate the Work of them who turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. And
before this, I will set no wicked thing before mine Eyes.

3. They are Persons of inviolable Truth and Veracity. Not allowing a Thought,
much less a Word, lest of all any Action opposite to the Truth. They will not
injure the Name and Reputation of any, though it could be done ever so secretly
and closely. Thus the Psalmist speaks, Context v 5, 7. Whosoever privily slandereth
his Neighbor, him will I cut off: He that works Deceit shall not dwell
within my House; be that tells Lies shall not tarry in my sight. They will
not reproach any, nor supplant them, with design to make room for themselves or
others, much less allow themselves in any Falsehood: for what Trust can be put
in such, or what Credit given to their Report or Advice? They will therefore
represent Persons and Things, as they truly are, without any Artifice or
Disguise. They are such as have great regard to the public Faith and
Engagements, though made to private and meaner Persons: not advising or
consenting to the Violation thereof, without a just Compensation for the
Damages that may arise to the whole Body, or any of it is Members. They will not
dissemble and disguise their Principles, Views and Compliances; but declare and
act openly. They are not ashamed, nor afraid, the public should know, what
themselves are, design, maintain, and will prosecute: for they will abide by
their disinterested Views. They are of such Truth and Fidelity, that they will
not defraud the Government to whom they are engaged, of their Time, Skill and
Strength. Their Faith differs from the public only in degree and extent; not
in kind and quality. They do not fear the strictest Enquiry into their Councils
and Measures, nor the most public Inspection and Examination. For as the
Psalmist elsewhere says, They speak the Truth from their Heart, Psalm. 15. 2.
Their whole Action and Management is an exact Transcript of their Mind and
Heart. They are not of a double Heart and Tongue. Nor do they conform their
Temper, Discourse, Principles and Conversation, to the change of Times and
Company into which they fall; but preserve an Harmony in their entire Conduct
and Management, without acting the part of public Hypocrites, who trim and
shift Sides and Parties, as they apprehend their Interest may be promoted by
it. But this leads me to say,

4. They are of a public Spirit, which is but Justice and Fidelity to the
Government, and their own Office. They make not their private Interest their
End, nor Self the Center, to which all things in the Circle and Compass of
their Ability, Authority, Influence and Opportunity, tend. They readily
unclothe themselves of all private narrow Views, and put on a most enlarged
Spirit; not regarding their own Profit in preference, much less in opposition
to the common Interest, which engrosseth their own. They disdain so mean a
Thought as this, viz. I have, by various Artifices, Flatteries and Compliances,
wrought my self into the Favor of those who have promoted me to a public
Station, now therefore I will improve all my Skill, Strength and Opportunity to
increase Honors on my self and Family, and to carve out an handsome and
growing Estate. They are such whose personal Benefit will not be the Spring and
Motive of their Projections and Prosecutions, much less will they cloak their
selfish Designs with the profession and show of public Zeal, that they may not
be exposs'd to the Observation and Censure of the World. They are such who will
make their own Fortune a Noble Offering to God and the common Wealth. And who,
discerning a contracted Spirit in others, are so far from kindling the Sparks
of it in their own Bosom, that they quench it. They are such who divinely
desire the prosperity of the Body Politic, never converting it is Strength to
the Head, or any particular Members, however Honorable or less Comely, so as
to deprive the others of their just measure of Influence, Nourishment or
Protection; but say with the Psalmist, v. 3. I will set no wicked thing before
mine Eyes, I hate the Work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me.
This will render them Benefactors, while they seek not their own Wealth, but
that of others.

5. They are Persons of indefatigable Application and Industry. Who account
their Office a Calling, in which, therefore, they must employ not divert
themselves. Their Station must be preserved and maintained, the proper Business
of it being continually done, they must be resolute to do their part of it,
whatever Difficulties may arise, or attend them: not shrinking from any Service
to which their Office leads, whatever Perplexities are forseen, however long
the Sessions, or vast the multiplicity, and increase of Affairs. They must
proportion their Industry to its proper Occasions, and be early and constant,
ready and cheerful, whenever they are called, or Summoned, to go and give the
best Advice they can. Like King David, serving their Generation by the Will of
God, till they fall asleep, or are decayed by Age and Infirmities, or otherwise
are providentially discharged. Nor will they eat the Bread of the Government,
without Labor for it, it may be, more than proportionable; but imitate the
great God, by unceasing Care and Diligence; striving to be in Labors abundant,
more than any others; continually turning their Eyes, and Thoughts on the
public Concerns; ever employing their Heart and Hands in them.

6. They have rising Courage and fixed Resolution. Such presence of Mind, and
strength of Spirit, as not to be moved by any thing. So fixed in their Post,
that neither can Flatteries soften, nor Frowns and Menaces affright them:
resolute to sacrifice their Life, Reputation and Estate, as well as Office and
Influence, to the public Weal. They, with Zeal, tempered and softened with
Modesty, and a becoming Defference to others, maintain and adhere to that,
which, to them, appears just and fit; though differing from any, or all others:
and therefore dare speak their own Sense, and act their own Judgment, though the
subtle and mighty should be on the other side of the Board. They are not
unstable as Reuben, not oppressed with the Prospect of gathering and impending
Storms, nor are their Joints loosed with the terror of the Mighty, but nobly
sustain themselves and their Station. They will knit their Brow against the
Designs of the Wicked; discountenance Vice, Disorder and Injustice, whenever
they behold them; and scatter away Iniquity with their Eyes. They will, with
the excellent King in our Context, drive away all the Wicked from their
presence, and Company; cut off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord, and
early destroy all the Wicked of the Land: many of whom, with their particular
Vices, David expressly mentions, in this Psalm, with Abhorrence, and a fixed
Resolution and Courage, to break and destroy them. In fine, like Pillars in the
State-house, they will endeavor to be immovable.

7. They are Persons of very great Humility, Patience, Meekness and
Condescension; who have Rule over their own Spirit, subduing it to the
Discipline of Virtue. They cool and moderate their Passions and Resentments;
and raise themselves above the Provocations, Scorn and Contempt, yea, above the
Malice and Spite of any. They give no place to Wrath; not desire, nor seek to
crush those who oppose their Views or Interests. They are not of an ambitious
and haughty Spirit, for such an one this Prince would not suffer; nor him that
has a froward Heart. They strive to temper their Powers and Perfections, with
goodness, gentleness and sweetness, which will render their Persons very
accessible, and very much the Delight of Mankind; for by this means, they more
easily enter into the Affections of the People, and render every Person about
them easy, and all Business pleasant and delightful. They are content others
should offer and enjoy their Opinion, as well as themselves: and so do not take
upon them to dictate to all about them; nor are they uneasy, if they are not
permitted to do so. They endeavor that others may enjoy the Benefit of their
Abilities, and rejoice if any others are so happy, as to suggest any thing more
pertinent and agreeable then themselves have done.

8. They are Men of strict, and exemplary, personal Virtue and Devotion: in
whom all moral Virtues are very Conspicuous; abhorring Vice, but admiring
Virtue. Their Moderation is known to all Men. They are cautious of what is
doubtful, or of ill Report. Their Appetites are bridled. They are Persons on
whom the divine Image is evidently impressed, and visibly represented, in their
Spirit, Design and Life. They continually ^^ar and reverence the great God in
their Heart, and ever are awed with the Sense of his Presence. They apply to
him, the Fountain of Knowledge and Wisdom, and of every Grace and Virtue; being
assured, he will give them liberally, and not upbraid them, either with their
Unworthiness, or great Importunity. They are as sensible of their entire
Dependence on the Almighty, as they would have others on them, and infinitely
more. They are convinced that his Power, and Providence, overrule every thing
pertaining to themselves and their People. And then besides, they will not go
into the evil Principles and Customs of this present World, or the Vices proper
to the Age or Place where they live. They will not consume their Skill, Time
and Substance, in Sport and Games; much less in unlawful or suspicious ones.
They will not compel the World to believe they are, or design to be unfaithful
in another Man's Affairs, by being so in their own; for as it justly has been
observed, He that will throw away his private Estate, will not scruple
Bartering away the public. Again, they will be Patterns of all goodness: much
concerned that themselves be Virtuous, that all about them may become so. They
are also careful in the Education, Government, Order, and Disposal of their
Families. And herein they strive to imitate the noble Example of the Royal
Psalmist, in our Context, who being desirous of God's gracious presence with
him and his, would admit none into his Family that were Vicious, or if unawares
they had crept in, he would immediately dismiss them; as he declares in 2d. and
7th. verses, I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way. O! when will thou
come unto me. I will walk within my House with a perfect Heart. He that works
Deceit, shall not dwell within my House: he that tells Lies, shall not tarry
in my sight. For he considered well the great danger of one infectious Member
in his Family, and would not countenance and employ such, lest they should
prove unhappy Instruments to promote and prosecute ill Designs. For by being
the Servants of Sin, he knew they necessarily were Rebels to God. Again, they
will maintain divine Worship in their Houses, and diligently attend the
Devotions of God's House. And besides, they have very much at Heart the Morals
of their People, seeking their secular Prosperity by their real Virtue. To this
end, they endeavor the Government of Almighty God may be supported, his
Worship maintained, his reverend Name hallowed, his Sabbaths sanctified, his
Word and Council regarded, and his Institutions duly observed. Once more, they
commend Religion and Devotion by their own good Example; themselves walking in
all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless. Their own Dwellings
are Oratories, and their Families Churches. And besides, they will never
countenance, much less associate, with loose and vain Persons, who, by being
so, affront the Government, violate its Laws, break its Hedges, and disturb the
public Peace. In short, like David, they are Men after God's own Heart,
serving him with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind: Endeavoring that his
Kingdom may come, and Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. And
particularly in their own Land, purging it of the Wicked, that the City of the
Lord may flourish, as in the 8th. verse of our Context, wherein David shows
that his greatest Concern was to promote pure and undefiled Religion. And
elsewhere he says, Depart from me, ye evil doers, for I will keep the
Commandments of my GOD. But at the same time they will speak comfortably to the
Lord's Ministers, endeavoring their Labors be duly Rewarded, and their
Office and Person held in high Reputation, being defended, and protected from
the Insults of bold, designing and profane Persons.

9. Which is the last Thing here to be observed, They should be such as have
approved themselves able and faithful heretofore, either in that Office, into
which they may now again be elected, or in some other Station, in which divine
Providence has placed them. Such a proof, wise Men are apt to seek. And this
naturally and powerfully draws the Eyes of the Elector, and procures his Voice;
which we may learn from the true Reading of the Text. But this leads me as
naturally to the next general Head, which is,

II. To consider the proper Business and Office of the Electors, as it is
described in the Text, by having their Eyes on these faithful of the Land, that
they may dwell with them. The varying from the Text in the Number of the
Electors, is a Circumstance, not of material, but minute Consideration. Their
Eyes are here named, as the Instruments used by the intellectual Powers: and
their being turned on the Faithful of the Land, suggests these following
things, viz.

1. That the Electors make themselves acquainted with the People; more
especially with such, who, it is probable, may be promoted to public Trust;
and among these, the best qualified, that they may certainly know their true
and just Character. For which purpose, they should obtain, as they are able, a
personal Knowledge of them, not depending wholly or chiefly on Report and
Representation, which of necessity would leave the Elector very doubtful and
uncertain. If a Ruler hearken to Lies, all his Servants are wicked: and if he
hearken, many Mis-representations will be made to him. King David was aware of
this, therefore resolves in v. 7. He that works Deceit shall not dwell within
my House, he that tells Lies shall not tarry in my sight. And again, v. 5.
Whosoever privily slandereth his Neighbor, him will I cut off. Doubtless, he had
felt the Mischief of partial Representations, of Persons and Things, wherefore
he would use his own Eyes, make all the personal Observation he could, that he
might act with the clearest Knowledge, and greatest Safety. He had known many
of his People, especially the principal Persons, and had born their Names and
Virtues in Mind and Memory, that he might advance them as there were Vacancies
or Necessity. Electors are in great danger of having the Virtuous and Faithful
slurr'd by the disaffected, and the Mean and Vicious commended by false and
designing Men. Hence as Mr. Henry naturally observes, The Country must be
searched for the best Men, and indeed, there is much Occasion for it; for such
are modest, and do not urge themselves upon the Government, but wait for the
Observation, and Choice, and Call of their Rulers. The most forward are not
usually the most fit Persons for public Offices.

2. That they actually make Choice of such, and those alone; to which purpose,
their Knowledge of them serves, and must be applied: without it they betray
their Trust. Hence the Expression in the Text, That they may dwell with me,
that is to say, I will invest them in their Office, that they may assist the
public Councils, and further the entire Administration. They shall be near at
Hand, abide in my House, and keep at Court; which will necessitate their
Promotion, and continual Presence. And all this, that he might observe their
Fidelity, improve their Abilities, and (...) Public reap the Harvest of all.
He would no^ corrupt his Court or Council, with any unfaithful Members, nor
render it Party-colo^^^^ (...) any were of differing Opinions, still their
governing Character should be, the faithful; which naturally would bring on an
Union of divided Parties and Interests: for wise and faithful Men will sooner
or later find some means or other to coalesce. Not one Person of a bad, or
suspected Character, should be publicly honored and employed. Thus after this
good King had said, who should not be promoted by him, he sums up generally in
the Text, Mine Eyes shall be on the Faithful: Not on any others, no, not one,
that is to say, if he knew, or though it them unfaithful*

3. That they observe, remember, and countenance their Persons, Names and
Administration: that they observe their Spirit, Design, Carriage and
Expression. Their Eyes once being fixed, should feed on them, feasting on their
Wisdom and Virtue. They should highly prize, and freely praise their good
Qualities and Counsels, protecting their Persons and Reputation: they should
continue them as they prove themselves faithful, not laying them aside, (...)
^urmises and Suspicions, for small (...) Infirmities, or mere diversity of
Opinion about less momentous Matters; much less through personal Disgust and
private Quarrels; for this would prove the Electors themselves unfaithful;
unworthy of the Countenance and Choice of others. They may not reflect on and
abuse any, but give them deserved Honor and Commendation, for their good
Principles and great Fidelity; at least, they should remember their good Deeds,
as well as their Faults; considering none are perfectly innocent, and all
Mankind dread a severe scrutiny. They should support their Person, Office, and
Influence in it.

4. That they Recompense and Reward them, in some proper and proportionable
manner, by a suitable Subsistence and further promotion: that being vested with
greater Authority, they may move in a larger Sphere. Their Virtue and Industry
should not be discouraged, nor their Powers weakened, nor their Talent hid: for
this would greatly detriment the public Weal. Their Commission should rise
with their Accomplishments, and their Opportunities with their Abilities; their
public Honors and Rewards being commensurate to both, that all the Land may
see the Value and Preference given to the Faithful in it. From which I pass to
the third general Head, which is,

III. To present some Arguments and Motives to persuade hereto, that they may
prefer the Faithful alone. And in the first place,

1. Let it be considered how much the Honor of Almighty God, the great Ruler
of the World, is concerned herein. There is but one God the Father of all, and
one Lord Jesus Christ, especially to us Christians. The Kingdom is the Lords,
and he is the Governor among the Nations. His Supremacy is undoubted; for by
him Kings reign, and Princes decree Righteousness. Wisdom and Counsel are his;
yea, sound Knowledge and Understanding. Earthly Rulers are his Ministers, and
for good to his People. As his Servants, they are qualified, commissioned,
clothed, assisted, succeeded, and rewarded by him. His Instructions they must
regard sincerely, and obey them strictly and steadily. His Kingdom and Glory
should be their chief Concern; for of him, and through him are all things; to him
therefore all the Glory and Praise ever should be ascribed. His Name is put
upon them, which they may not defile. Now who but the Faithful can, or will
give him the Glory which is his due? If Rulers fight against GOD, profane and
blaspheme his sacred Name, discountenance Religion, and encourage Vice, they
hereby reproach his Government, and dishonor his Name, which they wear as
their civil Style: and many will be apt to think God himself is altogether such
as his Servants on Earth; so that in their secret Thought, they will be tempted
to charge him with Maladministration, inasmuch as his Providence permits such
to be gods over his People. What higher Motive than this, of the divine Glory,
which should be the chief design of Man, can I possibly present to you? or what
Argument equal to it?

2. Let it be considered, how much they should be moved hereto, on the account
of Government it self: the due Administration whereof cannot be expected on any
other grounds than those we have laid. For what can be well done without these
good Qualities in Rulers? especially this Care of those, whose Business it is
to dispose of public Offices? Without this there will be no due Circulation of
the Blood, nor Transfusion of the Spirit, Life and Strength of the whole Body;
but every thing will stagnate, languish and mortify. If due Regard be had to
this divine Resolution of King David, the Eyes in the Head will be cleared, the
Hands strengthened, every Member will flourish and thrive in its due
proportion; do its Office, maintain its Station, and perfect the Constitution:
the preservation of which very much depends on a proper Administration, and
this on the Persons entrusted with it; and that these be suitable, depends on
those who elect and appoint them. For undue promotions in process of Time, will
bring great Weakness and Convulsions, and it may be, issue in a Dissolution: to
be sure, the Benefits designed from Government will not be enjoyed by them;
upon which the People will be apt to despise it, trample on Authority, and
think it an Artifice to serve some dark Designs, and particular Persons.
Doubtless the Decays into which States and Kingdoms has fallen, till at last
total Ruin has come upon them, are much to be attributed, to Supineness,
Cunning or Wickedness, the Selfishness or tyranous Ambition, of those who have
had the public Offices in their Hands, and led into the Councils and Measures
which have been taken. This brings on a corruption and degeneracy of Principles
and Manners, which provoke GOD Almighty to leave them to their own Councils,
and take the Fate they have chosen; giving them Children to Rule over them, or
ranging Bears to devour them. A healthy Constitution, by good Conduct, and
prudent Care, may be preserved Athletick, and be ripened by the Fidelity and
Ability of the Officers under it* But the decay thereof must gradually ensue,
as there is a Neglect of filling up all Stations with the best Officers; or if
there be such an intermixture of the feeble, false, and wicked, as to give too
many bad Examples, neither doing any good themselves, nor assisting or
consenting others should do it. Hence a civil Constitution, however perfect and
adapted to a Country, is but useless, unless it be animated and exercised with
the Life and Spirit of its Members, especially of the Head, Heart and Hands: It
is but a Notion, not the Substance of Government, in which the Fruits and
Effects must be answerable to the Design of it. Wherefore the visible Danger,
and Destruction of the Form of a People's Government, arising from their not
preferring the Faithful, and taking proper pains to observe and promote them,
is a strong and affecting, because a very near Motive.

3. The reformation of a People's Manners should be a quickening Consideration
hereto. Reformation ever was, and will be a necessary Work: for in the Land of
Uprightness many will deal perversely. Sin, and Immorality usually are too
flourishing, oftimes bold and rampant. Hence the Temper, Design and
Administration of earthly Rulers should answer their Title, for they are gods:
and in Imitation of God the great King, they should be a Terror to Evildoers,
praising and promoting such as do well. They should acquaint their People with
their public and prevailing Disorders, warning and charging against them. They
should do Execution on bold Transgressors, and as the Royal Psalmist resolves,
cut off and destroy them. They should also distribute and impart their Powers
and Virtues, among their People: especially by Example, which will greatly
influence to a happy Reformation: for Virtue or Vice will very much ebb or
flow, as it is in the Fountain of Government: These in their People will very
much be accounted to their Leaders. And therefore if all who are in Government
be not faithful, how will an effectual Stand be made against Disorder and
Wickedness? For can it be thought a vicious Ruler can have Zeal, or so much as
the Face, to punish Vice in general, or his own particular Vice coppied by
others, and this publicly? Who can have such little Conduct, while they know
the Vice and Sentence upon it, will instantly be retorsed, and rebound on the
guilty Judge? Possibly no Age of the Christian World, since the Reformation,
more needed the revival of that Work than the present, nor any Day, of any
particular Age, more than this. Wherefore, the most faithful Persons should
have the Power and Authority to effect it, put into their Hands; and such
alone, that one public Officer may not wink at the Crimes which another
punishes, nor openly violate the Laws which all should support. For we know
that one Sinner will destroy much good. Therefore the greatest Gravity,
Sobriety, Self-denial, Circumspection and Zeal, become all those who are
Guardians of the Virtue of a People, designing to lead them back to the Life of
God. But this leads in the last place,

4. To observe the revival and flourishing of Religion requires this. For if
the Wicked are exalted the Righteous mourn, and well may they do so; but if the
Righteous are promoted there is rejoicing; for then may they live quiet and
peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty. And then besides, the Enacting
good Laws, and their due Execution, are herein greatly concerned; therefore the
promotion of faithful Men is of the first Consideration, and greatest Moment.
For Religion is the Life of a People, the Perfection of humane Nature, and
therefore its truest Life. If this be discouraged, neglected, contemned and
starved, gradually all will decay. Civil Government will loose its chief
Support and Security; for the strength and virtue of Oaths, which usually are
the great dependence of States, have their entire foundation and force in
Religion. Wherefore it is but their Self-Interest to promote Religion; since
the profit is their own. Nothing contributes to the civilizing and thriving of
a Country like it: nothing truly without it. Hence some really irreligious Men
fondly support it among their People, knowing they will be more easily ruled,
and themselves more secure in the Administration. The Ministers of Religion do
very much to better the Morals of a People; (...) they teach and enjoin Virtue
in a very taking manner, and declaim with equal force against all Vice. In the
Name of GOD, their great Master, they command Obedience to lawful, civil Power,
urging it with stronger and more persuasive Motives than Civil Rulers
themselves can, that is to say, with such as are taken from the next World.
They also pray both for Rulers and their People: and which is of great
Influence and Consequence, give good Example of Life; going before their Flocks
in all Virtue and Goodness, thereby teaching them in the best manner how to
Obey those who are over them. From all which Reasons, it appears that Civil
Government owes very much, in Justice and Gratitude, to the Pastors of our
Churches, and the Religion which it is their business and endeavor to promote.
Hence their Persons, Office, Order and Administrations, cannot reasonably be
too much encouraged, defended and supported. Not that I design to say, it is
the Business of the Magistrate, as such, to define the Faith, determine the
Worship, and administer the Offices and Discipline of the Church; any more than
it is the Pastors Right, as such, to Enact civil Laws and execute them, for
these Officers are in their Nature very different. There is no public
Conscience, nor infallible humane Guide in the Church, much less in the State:
for Jesus Christ alone is Lord of Conscience, and by his infallible Spirit of
Truth, leads his Disciples into all Truth, teaching them all things: Yet the
civil Ruler should be careful that his People be humane and moral, practice the
Religion of Nature, observe the Decalogue, and protect and encourage the
Christian in his Faith, Worship and Discipline; provided he maintain, no
Principle, propagate no Opinion, nor go into any Practice, subversive of the
rights of Mankind, the public Peace and Prosperity: but the suppression of
Profaneness, Licentiousness, Intemperance, Uncleanness, Pride, Prodigality,
Covetousness, Murder, Cursing, Swearing, and the like, evidently is his
Province, and greatly tends to the flourishing of Religion. Now faithful Men
alone will do these things; wherefore, for the sake of the Religion of this
People, which certainly is the very best Thing we have, such Persons alone
should be elected. To all which Arguments and Motives, I might add the express
Law of Almighty God; the Character he gives of Rulers; the Choice he has made
of them; with the Advice and Charge he has given to those who may elect them;
the Principles and Examples of good Rulers, such as Joseph, Moses, Jethro,
Samuel and David, particularly in this Psalm, and elsewhere: Also what wise
States have Instituted, prescribed and Practiced; the desire and expectation of
all Mankind; the great design of all Government; with the good Fruits and great
Advantages ever deriving from the good management of it. Nor did any People
ever yet flourish, however happy their Constitution was, but by this Care and
Fidelity. For which we need look no where else than into the History of the
British Empire, where some of the greatest Proofs of it are most legible; not
to speak of our selves. But a particular Consideration thereof, must, for
Brevity's sake, be omitted. And thus I have insensibly already entered upon the
last Thing propounded, which was in the fourth place,

IV. To apply these things more immediately to this Honorable, Great and
General Court and Assembly now present. But much of what usually has been said
on such Occasions in the close of the Sermon, has been thought fit, should be
the first Business of it. Only with your leave and patience, which I very much
need, I would Congratulate my Native Country with its great Happiness this Day,
that I come, as it were, with your own Words, and am your Mouth to all the
People of the Land, declaring on your behalf, as Holy David in our Text.
Yourselves of this Land are entrusted with this Power, and acquainted with the
Faithful of it; for whom alone, we trust, you will give your Voice. It should
be remembered that, once and again, we have seen the chief Chair of Government,
with other Posts, reserved to be filled by the King's most Excellent MAJESTY,
by his special Favor, filled with Persons of principal Note and Figure, taken
from among ourselves: I must remember it at this time in gratitude to His
Majesty's paternal Goodness and Condescension, especially in observance to the
Government, who have publicly and thankfully acknowledged it. For which, the
least we can do, is, to approve ourselves religious to God, loyal and dutiful
to the King, and by both, wise for ourselves: praying down, with most fervent
Devotion, the best of Blessings on the King's MAJESTY, our most gracious QUEEN,
and their illustrious Issue and Family, as we have done this Day, and ever
shall do. And as this People should be thus sensible and loyal in their entire
Body, so more especially will it increase the Occasion thereof, for yourselves,
our Honorable Rulers, to give us to see the happy Event of this Day in your
making Application, of what has been offered for your Assistance, to your
selves. Your EXCELLENCY, has the Happiness which this Text represents, not
only to be honored with the chief Commission over your Native Land, and the
particular Power of approving your Council; but in order to the management of
that Trust, by Virtue of the public Circumstances into which your Birth,
Education, Acquaintance, and public Offices have brought you, are very well
acquainted with your People, and which among them you most safely may approve
and appoint, for the Royal Honor and Interest, which, in Obedience and
Gratitude, must ever very nearly affect you, and for the welfare of this whole
People, now yours. Your Honor's also, of each House in the Legislature, at
least many of you, by the same means but now mentioned, and by reason of your
Dwelling in the several parts of the Land, have a very happy Advantage to know,
observe, nominate and elect such this Day, as are faithful. You are, or may be
acquainted with their Persons, Principles, Capacities and Inclinations, with
their disinterested View of the public Good. And we assure ourselves, nothing
will influence you, to wink at any thing unbecoming, to open your Eyes on the
dis-qualified, much less to fix them on such, or shut them against the eminent
and approved. Many things, in particular, your own superior Powers and Skill,
can suggest, which may move to a most exact and careful Discharge of your
important Trust. But because your Desire has commanded some more close
Application of my Thoughts of late to this Subject, I shall now take the
liberty, humbly, and with great Defference, to remind you of some near
Considerations which may unite with the Current of your public Thoughts this
Day. The Royal Charter and Trust, with the good Laws of the Land, still
subsisting, very much require, and urge your following the good Resolution
which this Text exhibits. So does the Royal Commission, Example and
Expectation; to which we cannot but add the earnest Desire, and great
Expectation of this good and loyal People. For what Province, subject to the
British Crown, more values the Royal Family and Succession, or more constantly
and heartily prays for the King? to which our wise and good Governors have not
failed to bear their honorable and faithful Testimony. This good People, I
say, have their Eyes upon their Rulers, especially on Those, whom they have
chosen to represent them, on this great Occasion, to act their Power, that they
faithfully perform this weighty Trust. And here, particularly, it should be
considered of how great Importance a Seat in His Majesty's Council, in this
Province, is: For the Council being a Branch, an eminent Branch of the
Legislature; partaking, as it were, of the King and People, in whom both meet
and unite, moderating matters between them, renders them very considerable and
important. They have a proportionable interest in framing Laws, passing Acts
and Orders, and their Concern is great in filling up civil Offices of every
kind; particularly, Judges and Justices, the Offices for Probate of Wills, and
settlement of Intestate Estates, being of their Approbation; and together with
the Governor, finally subject to their Decision; the Oversight of our Colleges
partly under their Care; the advising on Emergencies of Government, specially
during this Court's Recess, when often times but a few of this Order can be
present; the Hand they have also in disposing of the public Treasure, and c.
These things, singly, how much more together, may be supposed to give a vast
Weight to this Order. And when to all these, we add the Consideration, that the
Royal Charter has very much left it with the People of the Land, to choose out
the most accomplished and faithful, (which certainly argues very great Wisdom
and Goodness in the King) these things, which, I doubt, I have very imperfectly
expressed, will give new Force and Conduct, for the performance of your Trust,
that you ^ay have and exercise a becoming Care in it. And we cannot but expect
the better Issue, since not only the Number of Electors do daily increase, but
we have also a continual growth of Families of Distinction, Education and
Substance; which yield an increase of Candidates for the Council Board, as well
as for all other Offices. Nor can we forget here the Difficulties of the Times
and public Affairs; the mention whereof is sufficient for me. Unto all which I
would add, We may well remind ourselves of the original Purchasers, Planters
and Magistrates of this Country, who made this Rule of King David's their own;
therein giving the best Example to all their Posterity. For by this means they
laid the Foundation of that Growth and Perfection unto which, at present, we
are arrived. And if so, we cannot think any other, but that our full Maturity
must arise from the same essential Principles, which hitherto have preserved
and ripened us.

If I do not mistake, we are now, in the Affairs of this Day, entering on the
second Century of choosing our Magistrates, within this Territory of the ancient
Massachusetts. And therefore, on this Occasion, to call to mind our Fathers
public Spirit, and the good Success of it, is a proper Reverence for their
Persons, Principles and Proceedings: and the just Improvement we are to make of
it, is our strict Imitation of them. This is due to their Patent, Purchase,
Piety and Prayers, and the alone fit Discharge of that Trust thereby committed
to each succeeding Generation. What we have, we should account the purchase of
their Money, yea, of their very Lives; Watered with their Tears; Sanctified by
their extraordinary Virtue, Example and Prayers to God; transmitted by their
solemn Charge to their Children; enriched and sealed with their Toil and Blood,
which was shed by the inhospitable and merciless Heathen: wherefore we should
be as careful and tender of ourselves and Successors, as they were.

But to be more particular,

Your EXCELLENCY has drawn the Eyes of this People upon you, in your many
Declarations and Resolutions, most publicly made, on behalf of Virtue and
Religion. You very well know the great and growing degeneracy of this Land, and
will therefore permit us to expect a happy Reformation in the suppression of
all Vice, and encouragement of Virtue and good Men.

And as we thank God for the good Example, you long since gave, in your Person
and Family, and in our Churches, of which, you are so happy, as to be a very
Honorable Member, by Birth, Baptism and Choice; so we hope it will have a
great and becoming Influence on all about you, and whom you employ: especially
while you are careful to continue and brighten your good Example, it may, more
particularly, have an happy Influence on our Families, and on those of
principal Figure, to provoke and prevail with them to Consecrate themselves to
the Lord, and their Houses to be Bethels: an emulation of you, in which, we
trust, will very much please you, as we are sure, it will greatly Honor you.
And then besides, as Your EXCELLENCY, is advanced to the chief Seat of Honor
and Dignity among your Brethren, and have either alone, or in Conjunction with
your Honorable Council, a Power, to dispose of many Offices, of very great
Consequence to this People; such as Civil and Military Posts; we trust you will
never empower or employ any in these Offices, who evidently fight against God
and Religion, or are slack in their own Principles and Lives: but will ever
remember and maintain the Resolution of King David, in the latter part of the
Verse, where our Text lies, and which exactly suits to my purpose, He that
walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me, that is to say, in some Station
and Service of Honor, which the original Word designs.

And now, as for the Honorable Persons who may this Day be elected: The
Description, which has already been given, sufficently shows, what our
Expectation from them must be, namely, That they faithfully discharge all the
Duties of their Office; especially, considering of how vast Importance it is,
of which we have heard before, and by how much more critical the Times, and
Affairs of the Province are, or may be.

In a word, There is very great need of Wisdom, Zeal, Steadiness and Courage,
in the whole Government at this Day; considering the great Decays, into which
Religion, I do not mean, that of a Party, (for true Religion disdains such
limits, the Name and Thing) but Vital and Catholic Religion; the deep Decays
into which that is fallen and falling.

And here suffer me, with a becoming Humility, to put you in mind, That the
Pastors of our Churches need much Countenance; it may be more still, and more
effectual measures, for their Support, that such Parishes, which, to say the
best of them, have neglected the Instruction and Resolve issued by this Court,
a few Years since, may find the Legislature was as sincere and fixed fully to
perform and effect that just and necessary Design and Work, if that more mild
and gentle Method did not take the desired Effect. Again, it is evident, that
Numbers among us will carry off the Excise laid on a single Gallon of Strong
Liquor with one Draught: the Conclusion therefore is open, That if Intemperance
must be reformed, (and all agree that it is necessary) it should be clogged with
Penalties and Difficulties which equal or exceed the strength of the vicious
Appetite: and that the Excess should strictly be observed, and punished by all
proper Officers. Once more, Pride, with other rising fashionable Lusts,
Swearing, Cursing, Sabbath-breaking, Idleness, Lasciviousness, Covetousness and
Prodigality, should be treated with great Severity; but especially I must
observe, on behalf of God Almighty, that, while we set a very great Value on
our own Name, and would recover vast Damages for the Injuries done to it, we
ought not, in common Decency, to set His at a lower rate, permitting the vilest
Breath to sully it, almost unpunished. And now this would carry on the Address
to all the civil Officers of the Land, that they be faithful; otherwise our
good Laws will fail of Execution, and certainly sap the Foundations of Virtue,
Religion, and the Government. Nor will it be less fatal if any Persons are
promoted to Office, merely for the sake of their Family, Relations,
Acquaintance, Education and Estate, or indeed for any other Reason, beside
their Fidelity.

I might, in the next place, speak to all the People in the Land, could I reach
them; but this being practicable only by the Honorable their Rulers, and
especially their Representatives, I would only say, It is hoped your Honors
will ever Influence your Principals to elect such as have been described, into
the several Offices proper to the Affairs of your Towns, Districts and Courts:
and by yo^^ own good Principles and Practices, especially your Conduct and
Faithfulness this Day, draw their Eyes upon you. For the neglect of making a
due Choice in our several Societies, gradually will bring on great Corruption,
and in the end it may be, Confusion and a Dissolution.

And now before I conclude, there is an Application of this Subject, so
naturally arising from all I have said, to the Youth of the Land, and of such
Importance, that I may by no means be allowed to omit it. For nothing can be
more suitable, than, on this Occasion, to put you in mind of your excellent
Parents and Progenitors; that, like them, you may be faithful to God, to
Religion, to your Country and Families: but mine Eyes particularly are upon
such, whose temporal Circumstances, Descent and Education, open a prospect of
their being called to public Service. It would therefore be very happy indeed,
if the young People among us, especially the Gentry, would seriously consider
this matter, and endeavor every way to conform themselves, to the Temper and
Life here described: not presuming to expect any Countenance or Promotion
without it; but with it you may stand fairly among the Candidates for
Authority. Wherefore, be ambitious of serving God in your Generation, and being
best qualified for it. This will render your Persons honorable and lovely,
your Advancement universally acceptable, and your Administration, just and
easy. But more especially should Those regard this Advice, whose Predecessors
or Ancestors have been thus publicly honored, that you may rise up in your
Fathers stead, and, if it may be, with superior Accomplishments. So the Eyes of
the People shall feed upon you. And as a prevailing Motive hereto, consider
Degeneracy and Corruption in the Youth procures and portends nothing but
Disgrace to their Families and the Land. For if the Vicious and Un-qualified
should desire, and have the Face to ask, or seek, and be permitted to sustain
public Offices, it would secretly spread, and anon become common: from all
which the utter Dissolution of Manners must ensue. Therefore it is highly
incumbent on their Parents, Guardians and Instructors, very watchfully to
observe them, that they may discover their Principles, Spirit, Appetites,
Designs, Diversions and Company; forming them for future Service, unto which
the Honor, Virtue, Safety and Prosperity, of their Houses, as well as the
public Weal, are natural and powerful Inducements. Let the Royal Preacher's
Exhortation to the Youth, with all his and its attending Circumstances, be
Engraven on the Hearts of your Children, and be very legible in their Universal
Life.

I come now to observe. That agreeably to the usual Form of the Discourses of
the Day, I should have applied my self to the Reverend, the Ministers of the
blessed Gospel of GOD our Savior; entreating the Elder as Fathers, and the
Younger as Brethren; but, as I conceive, I am happily prevented by the Sermon
to the Clergy of late Years, following the Day after this Solemnity; performed
by such as are every way my Fathers. But that I might not assume too much to my
self, and abruptly omit all Notice of so excellent a Body, as the Pastors in
this Land are: I would humbly take the liberty to remind them of a few Texts,
which turn on the important Term of our Text, and are of as great Note and
Consequence in their Character, as in the Magistrates. For by our high and holy
Office we are Stewards of the Mysteries of God, and of Christ, the Mysteries of
the Gospel. Now of such it is required, that a Man be found faithful. We trust
he has counted us faithful, therefore has he put us into the Ministry. Who
then is a Faithful and Wise Servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over his
Household, to give them their Meat in due season; Blessed is that Servant, whom
his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, He shall
make him Ruler over all his Goods. Hear we then the Voice of the great
Shepherd, Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. He
that has an Ear to hear, let him Hear what the Spirit faith unto the Churches.

To close all, and resume the great design of this Discourse, we the Lord's
Ministers, the Pastors of the Churches, under your civil Jurisdiction, are
equally concerned, in our private and public Capacity, with any of the Land in
the common Prosperity. We therefore come together, on such Occasions as this,
to bear our public Testimony to the faithful and acceptable Words, that are
spoken, by any of our Order, whom you are pleased Annually to invite, to lay
the sacred Councils before you. We come with our best Wishes, and most hearty
Prayers, thereby commending your Honorable Persons, Offices and
Administrations, to the great and good God. We do therefore now most sincerely
wish you a Blessing out of this House of the Lord; where you used to be
Blessed. We pray God may be with you, this and all succeeding Sessions; and
this Day peculiarly, giving you Wisdom and Fidelity, Union, Unanimity and
Success: -- That he will graciously preserve your Persons, Families, and the
Cities of your People, while you are absent from them; and render your Return
and Journeying homeward, your Tabernacles, and more especially the Churches of
our God, prosperous: -- That this may be the happy beginning of a second
Century of Elections, and that the best of Blessings may now, and ever,
descend, and rest on the British Empire, and on the KING. And now with whose
Words, and among all his, with which more suitable, can I shut up all, than
those of this admirable good King, who gave them in our Text: May you therefore
with him, always have your Eyes on the faithful in the Land: And when you have
served your Generation according to the Will of God, and fall asleep, have an
open Entrance ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, where you shall stand and Minister before him
for ever. Which God grant of his Infinite Grace, through our blessed Redeemer,
unto whom, that is, unto the Father and Son, with the Holy Ghost, be ascribed
all Honor and Glory, World without End. AMEN.

FINIS.

