Trade and Commerce INCULCATED; IN A DISCOURSE, Showing the Necessity of a
Well-governed Trade, in order to a Flourishing Commonwealth.

With some Proposals for the bringing Gold and Silver into the Country for a
Medium of Trade, as also for the better Supporting the Credit of the Paper
Currency.

By Amicus Reipublicae.

Printed for the AUTHOR. 1731.

Trade and Commerce INCULCATED, etc.
THE Knowledge of the True Interest of ones Country, although the Study of it
be most Commendable and Necessary, most Delightful and Natural to the Generous
Enlarged Soul; yet perhaps there is no kind of Learning more generally
neglected. The many dependent Causes, and seeming Counter-workings of things in
relation to the Common Interest, renders the Science very abstruse and
intricate, and very difficult to acquire in any measure of Perfection, it being
difficult to distinguish the first moving, from dependent causes, or rather the
Cause from the Consequence or Effect; and then that Selfish principal that
naturally leads the minds of men, very rarely finds opportunity for Studies of
a Public nature, except what may be merely in subservience to Self Ends, which
is not always the best for the Public good.

Hence proceeds the many different notions in men and the many warm Debates
that happen about measures for promoting the public Interest, every one being
jealous for his own Interest, is ready to mistrust, condemn, and oppose all
measures proposed for public Benefit that himself don't understand, or at
least fancys not to be consonant with his own particular advantages.

It may be observed, that not only in New England, but also in the English
American Plantations in general, (notwithstanding the multiplying of the
Inhabitants and increase of Business in some respects) there is evident
declinings in, and many growing inconveniences attending the Business, Trade,
and Affairs in general. And although many are apt to complain of the
disadvantages of the times, and almost all are persuaded that the Current of
Affairs runs very much out of order, yet very few agree in Judgment as to what
may be the prime or principal causes of these distempers in the State, and much
less as to means proper for the removal of the same.

Some are prone to be of opinion that the mere Imprudence of men in their
private Capacities must needs be the Cause; others are apt to suppose the
defect to be in the public Administration or Leading of Affairs; some in this
respect, and some in that: And while people are thus divided in their opinions,
nothing can be agreed upon as proper to prevent the Inundation of Misery
flowing in upon us.

Now what I would here attempt, is, to unfold the Causes of these
Inconveniences that attend our State, in order step by step as they have slyly
and insensibly taken hold upon it; and then to consider of some means proper
for the removal of those Inconveniences, and for the preventing the miseries
Impending thereby.

In order to which I shall observe,

That Trade or Commerce is principally necessary to a Peoples flourishing in
the World.

Although the Wealth and Flourishing of a People depends upon Diligent Labor as
the Efficient of its Substance, or as a Cause without which it cannot be; yet
Labor will not be improved to any considerable degree of Wealth, without the
advantage and encouragement of a profitable Commerce. In all Labor there is
profit, because none will Labor, but with a foresight of Profit; for Profit
it the final Cause of Labor; and as there cannot be much profit by Labor
without Commerce, so Commerce is the Cause of Profit by Labor, and
consequently the cause of Labor, that is of the abundant Labor in order to
Wealth and Flourishing.

The various constitutions and circumstances not only of Countries but also of
particular Persons in the same Country, calls for a mutual communication of
Goods or useful Commodities to supply each other with what the one wants and
the other has to spire.

No Country has in it every thing that is useful and conducive to the
comfortable Subsistence of its Inhabitants, independent of exchange or
communication with other Countries; nor will the Accommodations, Faculty or
Means of any particular Persons, afford them the same but by Commerce. And
since each Country has but its peculiar Commodities to be raised in abundance,
Commerce is necessary to a suitable distribution and digesture of it, holding
it in value, and therefore necessary to the encouragement and support of Labor.

Trade or Commerce, is an Engine of State, to draw men in to business, for the
advancing and enobling of the Rich, for the support of the Poor, for the
strengthening and fortifying the State; and when it is wisely conducted and
vigorously carried on, it is the King of Business for increasing the Wealth,
Civil Strength, and Temporal Glory of a People.

Solomon the wise King of Israel, by his policy in Trade, advanced the Business
and Wealth of his Kingdom filling it with Riches, Strength, Beauty and
Magnificence, above all the Kingdoms of the Earth.

Tyrus, the Crowning City, being situate at the entry of the Sea, became the
Merchant of the People for many Illes; although seated upon a mere Rock, yet
she became Renowned for Temporal Glory and Beauty; many Kingdoms and Countries
occupied in her fairs; the Ships of Tarshish did sing of her in her markets,
for that she was replenished and made very glorious in the midst of the Seas.

Holland (by relation) was such an obscure spot of Earth, as though GOD had
reserved it only for a place to dig Turf in for the accommodating of those
Countries wherein he hoards up the miseries of the winter. It naturally
affording scarcely any one Commodity of use; yet by Merchandise and Trade it is
now become the Storehouse of all those Merchandises that may be collected from
the rising to the setting of the Sun, and gives those People a name as large
and as high as any Monarch this day on Earth; and this their Glory is owing to
their peculiar Policy, good Regulations, Customs, and Restrictions in Trade;
that being the principal object of their Care and Protection, having little
besides to depend upon for their Support; whereas in other Countries, being
well accommodated for other business, the Trade has been sometimes carelessly
neglected and lest to private discretion, which has proved the Ruin of all.

It is observable, that such Countries who have had the least dependencies upon
other means, have gained such Policy in Trade, as to outvie the more Fertile
and Productive Countries in Strength, Riches, and Worldly Grandeur.

Hence it is, that Trade, Merchandise and Commerce, are become the only object
and care of the great Princes and Potentates of the Earth, as knowing that the
Returns and Effects of Commerce is Riches, and the plenty of all things
conducing to the benefit of humane life, for the Supporting of their Crowns and
Grandeur, and Fortifying their Countries and Kingdoms with Reputation and
Strength. Mol. Pres. De Jure Maritisino.

It is the Bounty, Pomp, and Grandeur, peculiar to a free and vigorous carrying
on in Trade, that ordinarily makes good Business for Laboring men.

The proper Fees and Immunities of a free and liberal Commerce, are very
enriching to the Commonwealth, naturally providing Stores and Plenty for a
commodious and profitable carrying on; when with a dull Trade plenty makes
little profit, but rather a discouragement in business; but as a People
advances in Wealth and Worldly Magnificence, so the demand for all kinds of
business will be enlarged. It requires much labor and business to furnish the
Rich and Noble with their magnificent Buildings, rich Furniture, costly
Apparel, and sumptuous Fare; also to provide for and replenish the Storehouses
of the rich Merchants, and also for the effecting a Produce to exchange for
Money to line their Purses, Bags, Coffers, etc. in order for an able carrying
on, all which must be produced by Labor and good Business. And then,

According to the demand for Labor, so will Labor be undertaken and carried
on.

Men are ordinarily allowed to work six Days in a Week for their support; but
yet one or two Days in a Week, will serve well for an Indian, or one that will
live like an Indian, or an Hermit. Now if all were disposed to live mean,
saving and plain, there would be but a small demand for the produce of those
who effect great Stores for the Market, more than to purchase what they have
occasion to expend; there would then be more Sellers than Buyers; which would
soon discourage the Industry of the Laborious and Prudent.

Sometimes the Charges of Religion, as Tithes, Offerrings, Magnificent
Buildings, and costly Preparations, Dedicated to Religious Services, as also a
great part of time set apart for Holy Exercises, greatly enlarges and quickens
the demand for Labor.

Sometimes the Charges of War, Military Service, Building of Fortifications,
and other Warlike Provisions, greatly enlarges and quickens the demand for
Labor; as also does any great and notable Works or Undertakings of the Public
Charge. But,

The most wealthy and liberal demand is, when there is valuable Riches, Silver
and Gold as well as other precious Substance to be had in exchange for Labor
to a plentiful degree, advancing of the Commonwealth, enabling Men to improve
and dispense with Labor in an able and forehanded way of living.

Now either of these occasions hinted at, may serve greatly to draw a people
out of an Idle habit, encouraging Industry, Virtue, etc. being Profitable to
Laboring Men, and a support to Poor Men; but when a People have no Business
but only to provide for Common Occasions, or Necessities in a poor declining
Reipublick that have no means to Convert their produce into that which shall
enable and set them before hand for Business, (though this demand is apt to swell
into many Extravagancies in an active fruitful Country,) yet this is most
oppressive to Poor Men, and ruining to the Commonwealth, being an Inlet to
Idleness and almost every other Ill-habit.

Had Sodom and Gomorrah been Politic in Trade and accustomed to Manners of
Civility and Magnificence according as the fertillity of their Soil, would have
endured it, they might have been diverted from the Sins of Idleness, fullness of
Bread, etc.

But what I would have understood, is this, that any People whatsoever
considered as a Commonwealth, have Rich Mines in their Capacity of Labor, and
carrying on Business, and with suitable policy in Trade, it may be drawn out
and refined to a wealthy and flourishing State, although of but mean advantages,
as to the produce of their Soil; and when quick profit lies ready to embrace
the Business and Trade in general, as it may be undertaken and enlarged, the
Business will be undertaken and carried on to very great degrees, and by
continuance will do more to reduce a People to a habit of Prudence and Industry
than is possible to be effected by Whip, or Hunger or by all the penal Laws
that can be Invented for the Suppressing of Idleness, etc.

And contrariwise, a People may be possessed of a Fruitful Rich Country, and
yet for want of good Regulations, and Policy in Trade, the business of the
Country (considered in the mean) will be rendered greatly disadvantagious and
unprofitable, as to any enlarged undertaking. However some through their better
means may enlarge their Business with Profit, yet it must be upon the
disadvantage and discouragement of some others, which disposition in a Public
State will inevitably in continuance reduce the most industrious Generation of
People to an habit of Idleness, etc. And the more fruitful the Country, the
more Intolerable the Consequence, as Idleness is the leader of most kinds of
Vices.

To show how this Indisposition may take place in a Reipublick, I shall lay
down a few Principles or Maxims in Trade, which may be serviceable to the
Purpose.

And in the first place,

1. To a profitable carrying on of Trade, there must be some suitable Specie of
Universal Currency to be made use of as Money to accommodate, facilitate and
even the Exchange.

The benefit of a suitable Current Medium in Commerce, is so obvious and well
understood, that no Country or People of Policy and Trade is willing to do
without it; and those who esteem it the least, are willing to take it upon
occasion. That steady Value which the esteem of Men has put upon Gold and
Silver, but Silver especially, it being aptly formed into pieces of greater and
lesser quantitys, and those of a determinate value convenient for Exchanging,
and easy to be known, has rendered it the most agreeable Medium, by which to
rate the value of all Merchandise, and to be made use of in purchasing the
same. Now whatsoever is thus Useful and Current, is called Money, and into such
a universal Currency, the overplus of produce may be converted, maintaining the
value in greater abundance, than what could be without it; upholding the vend,
by a free and profitable Commerce, digesting every thing to the best advantage,
enlarging the demand for, and encouraging of, all good Business; and for a
Country to be well stockt with Money renders it Able and Powerful: for Money is
not only a Defense, but, Money answers all things.

2. There is a certain proportionate quantity of running Cash, requisite to the
carrying on of a current free Trade, and that more or less according to the
ability of the People to effect, purchase, improve, dispease with and consume
of the produce.

When there is not a sufficiency of money to accommomodate the Commerce, the
produce or merchandise of the Country will be like stagnate (...) and the
Commerce may not be carried on with Profit to the commonwealth, but the Trade
being incommodious and dull, there will be nothing in demand but to answer
necessities, and the vendible species being searce will domineer over and
discourage all other kinds of Merchandise, and the Barter will be so
disagreeable and incommodious, that men will rather carry on their dealing by a
general Trust and running in Debt, than which there can hardly be a greater
Snare to the Commonwealth: for in this case, every thing must be discouraged
to very scarcity to maintain the Currency of it, and the Business and Trade
will jumble and run retrograde, and by so much the more as the money falls
short of a suitable supply to set people before hand for undertaking and
carrying on Business.

But Money being plentiful, it will not only enable them that possess it to
undertake and furnish for themselves largely to the encouragement of Labor,
but like a princely able Merchant, it will freely and voluntarily collect all
kinds of necessary and useful Commodities in store for the Market, maintaining
a due decorum in the valuation of every kind of thing, the exchange being
managed to the best advantage. Therefore,

3. As the Business and Trade of a Country is or may be enlarged, so there
should be Money always ready or impending to be brought in, by Trade to
increase, and enlarge the Current stock proportionably thereunto.

For as a Country increases with Inhabitants, Riches and Trade, so there will
be more Money requisite to carry on the Trade withal; and if the Trade be
regularly managed, it will naturally supply it self with Money. For,

4. The Medium of Trade (or Money) is ordinarily gained by, and comes in the
balance of Trade.

When the produce of a Country is so large that the Export exceeds the Import,
of Goods brought in from other Places to be consumed in it; the overplus will
be coming in Cash to balance the Trade.

Hence some have urged the necessity of lessening the (...) of (...)
Merchandise, by retrenching our expenses in Apparel, Tables, etc. as a
necessary means to turn the balance of Trade to our advantage in order to
accommodate our Commerce with Money, as it were by an immediate and forcible
Change in our manners.

But,

5. To hold the Balance of Trade to the advantage of bringing in Money, it is
necessary that money should be maintained in such Credit, that it may be
profitably brought in for a Medium of Trade in exchange for the Countries
Produce.

The balance of Trade hangs upon the Credit of Money, and where Money is in
best Credit or heaviest in esteem, there turns the balance of Trade.

When any Country can afford its produce at so cheap a rate that those who
improve themselves in Trade can purchase the same with Money, and export it to
advantage, their own interests will put them upon bringing Money into such a
Country for that end, and so long as the Merchandise or Labor of the Country
is held to a suitable valuation, the Money will come in and remain in a
sufficient plenty for its ordinary occasions; but so long as the Labor or
Merchandise of the Country is rated higher than it is worth in Money, we shall
find but few employed in bringing in the balance from other places in Money;
but it will be the interest of every Merchant to send it out of the Country as
fast as it comes to his hand. And let our Export be ever so large our Import
will exceed it so long as there is money to balance the same, which will be so
much to the Countries disadvantage and to lessen the Import, would but lessen
the demand for the Export.

Thus the Premises being granted this Conclusion necessarily follows, viz.

That the Flourishing of a People or Common Wealth depends upon the maintaining
a first Credit upon Money, or holding a suitable low valuation upon
Merchandise.

The Truth of this Conclusion may be illustrated under two Propositions.

I. That the most valuable of Money, as it is used for a Medium of Trade, is
not only liable but very apt to sink below its just Credit.

II. That the undervaluing of Money or over rating the value of Merchandise, is
most detrimental and ruinous to the Common Wealth.

Prop. I. That the most valuable of Money, as it is used for a Medium of Trade,
is liable and very apt to sink below its just Credit.

This Proposition may be resolved in answer to two Queries that may be raised
upon it.

1. Wherein does the Credit of Money consist?

2. When may Money be said to be undervalued or sunk below its just Credit?

1. Wherein does the Credit of Money Consist?

Answ. The Value or Credit of Money does not consist merely in the denomination
of its Weight, as being rated upon it self, by reckoning so many Shillings to
an Ounce, or the like for let there be ever so many Shillings reckoned to an
Ounce of Silver, or Pounds to an Ounce of Gold, this does not determine the
value or credit of Money. But,

The Credit of Money consists in its validity in purchasing the necessaries of
livelihood: and therefore when its said that such a certain weight in Silver,
will purchase such a certain quantity of Labor, or Produce, this determines
the Value or Credit of Money and as the Labor or Merchandise of the Country is
high or low valued, so Money is low or high Credited.

2. When may Money be said to be under valued, or sunk below its just Credit?

Answ. There is a certain just and proportionable value belonging not only to
Money, but also to every kind of useful Commodity, and that more or less
according to the Labor that is necessary to produce the same. As suppose one
Man employed to raise Corn while another is employed to dig and refine Silver;
at the end of some certain space of time, the complete produce of Corn and that
of Silver, are the just and natural prices of each other, and each the value or
price of so much time as is required to effect or produce the same: and if a
days labor be taken up to produce a Bushel of Corn or one quarter of an ounce
of good Silver, then the bushel of Corn is worth one quarter of an ounce of
Silver, and either of them the just price of a days work. Ceteris Paribus.

Or if the Mines should fail or prove so difficult that a days labor will
produce but one eighth part of an ounce of Silver, then one eighth of an ounce
of Silver, will be worth either the Bushel of Corn or the days work, as well as
the quarter was in the case aforesaid.

And so likewise if the Silver he brought in by Trade, what the produce of a
days labor will ordinarily exchange for of Silver, allowing reasonable profit
to the Trader, so much of Silver is the just and honest price of the produce.
Thus Labor is evermore the true and just measure of values, and so the Riches
of a Country are to be valued by the quantity of labor it can purchase, and
not by the quantity of Money they possess: for a man may be as rich, or live as
long with one ounce of Silver in one Country as in another with two ounces of
the same, for his support. Therefore not the intrinsic virtue, but the outward
esteem bears the Currency and value upon Silver, and the labor or cost of
producing, gives the Rule for a just and honest valuation: for in ages past
Silver has been more than six times of the value that now it is, viz. in Great
Britain, good Wheat sold for four pence per Bushel, and Labor at no more than
one penny per Day.

Now when any Country so values their Labor or Merchandise, that he who
undertakes to dig and refine Silver, or to raise a produce in order to gain it
by Trade, if he may not produce enough in a day by the means to pay himself for
his days work, so that he may ordinarily purchase the produce of a days labor
in any other specie by his Silver so obtained, then Silver is under-valued. Or
if the value of Merchandise or Labor in general, be so high upon Money or
Silver, that there becomes a peculiar profit in the export of Silver for
foreign Trade, above what may be in the export of the Countries Produce, so
that the Silver becomes exhausted and very scarce for a Medium of Trade, then
Silver is undoubtedly under-valued.

But this in general, when Money will not ordinarily answer for it self, in
bringing of it in for a Medium of Trade, then it is under-valued and sunk below
its just Credit.

But some may argue, that the reason why men don't ordinarily Trade for Money,
but always bring in Goods, is because the Goods are wanted, which gives the
profit to the bringing in Goods. Now this cannot be the reason, because Money is
always, or for the most part, in a more severe demand than Goods or
Merchandise; but the profit peculiar of bringing in Goods, is occasioned by the
discount of Money, in the general high valuation of Merchandise or Labor; were
it not for the discount or low value of Money at home, the profit would be as
well in the export of our produce which is wanted in other places, (or would be
with due encouragement upon our own business) as foreign Goods are wanted among
us; but when Money is under-valued, there is no advance in the export, for if
the Return be in Money, there will be loss in the Voyage.

When Connecticut goes to Boston with its Produce, there is profit in the
Export, because Money is in as good Credit in Connecticut as in Boston, and the
same advantage has Boston, with Connecticut, in their Goods; but when New
England Trades with the West Indies, or elsewhere, the advance or profit is in
the Import, but none in the Export.

Now there is a natural propensity in all People to raise the value of their
Produce or Merchandise, in which men so universally agree, that the value of
Merchandise is much more naturally strained up above the just value of it, than
held down to a just valuation as valued upon Money. And this is occasioned from
diverse motives. And principally in the first place,

1. From a Greedy desire of Gain. It is the principle of some People to strain
up and get as much as ever they can for what they have to Sell, without regard
to Reason or Justice, and when this Principle comes in vogue, he must suffer
wrong that don't stand by it. And then,

2. From Scarcities of Provisions. When any kind of necessary Provisions are
become scarce, such as are straightened, will give an extravagant price, rather
than suffer; and ones necessity being another opportunity; the price is
raised, and then other things will naturally rise to the fixing a general high
price, rather than for that which is raised, to fall: for says one and another,
If I cannot have so much for it, I Will not sell it.

3. From the Monopolizing Spirit of the Merchant. It is the Practice of some
Merchants to bid high for any Commodities that are in demand, to engross the
Trade, enlarging their Business, and Custom thereby: and sometimes they will
Monopolize such kinds of provisions as are much wanted, and then raise the
price at their own discretion, occasioning the prices of things to raise in
general.

4. From the Scarcity of Money. Money is put into the Balance in competition
with all kinds of Merchandise, and so there is an everlasting struggle for the
preferrence in value: for in all dealing, Money stands a party on one side or
the other, even in Barter, each Specie that is laid on the board, magnifies it
self against Money, to bear up its own value; so that the Credit of Money is
bartered in all dealing; and when Money is scarce, it can but seldom appear in
the defense of its own cause, but is forced to make use of Trust for its
Advocate; but Trust being in no great esteem (however necessary) cannot deal
with that advantage in the behalf of Money, as ready Money it self might do;
and this gives Merchandise a peculiar advantage against it, to bear down its
Credit; the scarcer Money is, the less able to maintain its Credit, being
employed chiefly in a necessitous Trade, Buying the most dear and scarce
Provisions, or in Paying long trusted Debts, which Trust has made to its great
disadvantage. Some indeed being straightened for Money, may be forced to part with
their Estates upon base terms, as things in general run high, yet, there is
nothing occasions Money to sink in Credit, so much as the scarcity of it; and
although it be in a severe demand, when scarce, yet this only supports Extortion;
for however poor Men get their Money, they are yet forced to lay it out in the
most scarce and dear Provisions, or to very little advantage; and thus Money
for want of a plentiful substance, becomes soiled and out of Credit, being over
run with Trusting and Bartering and a necessitous Trade. It may seem
unreasonable to some, that the scarcity of Money should sink the value of it,
when the scarcity of other things does but raise their value, but it must be
considered, that the nature of Money in its use and improvement, is quite
different from that of Merchandise. But more of this as I may find occasion
afterward. And in reflection upon the several Motives as before hinted, I
shall make this Observation, viz.

That from some one or more of these several Motives, the value of Merchandise
has almost ever a disposition to rise, sinking the Credit of Money; and however
the customs and laws of some Countries, may provide well against it, yet it is
a disposition natural to all, and if the Commerce or Trade of the Country be
not well protected and guarded against it, it will prove ruinous to the
Commonwealth, this propensity to sink the Credit of Money, has been eminently
prevailing in New England, as in three particular Instances.

1. This occasioned the odds formerly made between a payment in Money, and a
payment in Pay (as the Countries produce was then called) which was one third of
the value, the Countries produce was indeed as good as Money, at a just value,
but being rated one third too high, Money was found one third better in foreign
dealing, and this occasioned the Merchants to make that odds. Again,

2. This occasioned the alteration in the weight of Money, adding near one
quarter of the value to the same weight; it being easier to persuade People to
take a less weight under the same denomination, than to lower the high prices
of things. And indeed one half of the weight would have done as well under one
half of the denomination, by a suitable low valuation upon Merchandise, and as
near to any rule of Justice in the valuation of things. However, it is an
irregular way of maintaining the Credit of Money by such shiftings, though no
other than what some of the more Arbitrary Powers in Europe find occasion to
practice, where the subjects have not that politic freedom as some other
states are vested with; the power of regulation being lodged more in the head,
and not in the States.

But then the last instance to be mentioned under this head, may be,

3. This occasioned the wretched Fall, and still increasing Discount upon Bills
of Credit, of which I shall have occasion to speak something afterward.

And so I now pass to the second Proposition, viz.

That the undervaluing of Money, or over rating the value of Merchandise, is
most ruinous and detrimental to the Common Wealth. As has been already noted;
the Balance of Trade, is dependent upon the Credit of Money, and the suffering
the Credit of Money to sink below its just value upon Merchandise, looses the
advantage of this Balance; for the turning of the Scale is either to advantage
or to disadvantage, and when the advantage of this Balance is lost, by the
turn of the Scale, the impending disadvantages (like the breaking up of a dam)
will flow in without measure.

But to consider of the disadvantages or Ill-consequences of sinking the Credit
of Money in particular, in order to clear up the (...) Accommodate the
Commerce; but the Country will be able to purchase and dispense with more in
Credit and Grandeur, which must all be erected upon the foot of Labor, and all
would be found profitable by the increasing demand for it. On the contrary,
Money being discouraged, the demand shrinks, Men become Poor, and behindhand,
unable to purchase, and consume; Idleness will prevail, the Business of the
Country become starved, and Men hardly able to Live one by another.

Secondly, The undervaluing of Money, or over rating the value of Merchandise,
in a Country, exchanges the peculiar advantages or best means of gaining of
Wealth, for the common Labor of other Countries discouraging its own Labor.
When the Labor or Merchandise is in general, high valued, the Merchant may not
make profit by it, but only in the high value of the Return, which must not be
in Money, for that is undervalued, but the return must be in the common and
cheaper Labor of other Countries; and so let the Advantages of Mines, Fithery,
Timber, Tar, Turpentine, or the best means that possibly may be had, he ever so
great in themselves, yet there can be no profit by them, except in ballancing
the same with foreign Goods or Labor, which serves to lessen the demand for
Business at home: for the less of Labor bestowed upon the Commodity, the more
profit in the Exportation.

Thirdly, The undervaluing of Money, or over rating the value of Merchandise,
dreins a Country of Money. It is natural for Money to Center and Circulate
where it is in best Credit, every Trader chooses to lay out his Money where he
can have the best penny worth; and when Money is in good Credit in a Country,
it naturally flows in, and centers there; but when the Labor or Merchandise of
the Country comes to be prized above what it is worth in Money, then the Money
becomes Merchandise, and the Merchants will gather it together, and (...) the
Country for advantage in foreign Trade; and when it is so, the Medium of Trade
will become very scarce.

The disadvantages that attend the want, or scarcity of Money, are indeed many
and great, and the difference between a Country well supplied with Money, and a
Country that is destitute, are much the same in proportion as the difference
between a Rich and a Poor Man; I don't mean a poor man merely with respect to
the meanness of his possessions, but with respect to his Misery, Entanglements
and Thraldom, for these will inevitably abound in an active Trading Country,
that has not a suitable stock of Money to set it beforehand in Trade.

But there is great difference in men's opinions as to the sufficiency of the
Stock, some complaining of scarcity, when others suppose it to be sufficiently
plentiful.

Now to decide this Controversy, I would lay down one certain and undeniable
Rule to be observed in the case, viz. Whenever it is so that men being
straightened for Money, will allow exorbitant Interest for the use of Money,
giving good security for it, then Money is most certainly too scarce for the
good of the Commonwealth.

Although some men through their mere imprudence, may be reduced to great
straits for Money, or for such necessary provisions as must be purchased with
Money; yet such will never give large Interest when Money is reasonably
plentiful, or may be ordinarily had for moderate Interest, with good security,
nor can any one extort large Interest for Money when it is reasonably
plentiful, any easier than he can extort an immoderate price for any other
Commodity when it is plenty.

Some of the necessary Concomitants and proper Consequences which naturally
accompany and follow the scarcity of Money, are these, viz. 1. Obstruction and
Discouragement in Business. 2. Running in Debt. 3. Exorbitant Usury. 4.
Devasiation of Estates. 5.Extortion in Dealing. 6. Sinking of Credit. All which
with the scarcity of Money, are mutually enforcing causes and consequences of
each other.

1. (...) conveniently improved for a Medium of Trade as what (in common
speaking) we call Money, is the thing which makes way for Wealth, the general
Currency, is a Vehicle into which the superfluity of produce may be converted
to the maintaining the value, in great abundance; and the great demand there is
for a general Currency in a wealthy Trading Country, makes room to increase
their Wealth to a great degree, and with an ample supply of Money the Trade and
Business shall remain profitable, maintaining all in Credit and value,
digesting every thing to the best advantage. And with this encouragement the
business of the Country would be followed with a common industry, when
otherwise the People might become like the Cretians, always liars, evil beasts,
and flow-bellies. As a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, so a little
indisposition in a Public State may be an occasion of wretched Consequences.
But howsoever,

No People can be able and beforehand for business or in a way of advancing of
the Commonwealth with only their ordinary provisions, for as Money is the
thing that enables and gives life to business, encouraging and making profit in
Commerce, so without Money a large produce of any kind so as men may have in
store to enable to undertake largely in business, would under value it so that
it would not answer the cost of producing; unless many others are straightened for
want: for who would change a wanted scarce Commodity, for that which is plenty,
or that which he does not want, or is not in demand; so I say the business must
(in that case) be carried on with the scarce and not with the plenty. But Money
when (...) suffering for want, not having acceptable species to purchase
withal: so that the business of the Country must needs suffer discouragement,
and poverty increase through such incommodious means; he that gains must multiply
in Bills, Bonds, etc. and so be in a way of making purchase upon some declining
man's inheritance; but this makes no good business for Labor nor interest to
the Public, but the more labor is discouraged through such means the more it
will be, for as People become behindhand they become the less able to purchase
and dispense with the produce of Labor.

2. The Scarcity of Money occasions People to run in Debt.

The direct or immediate exchange of Commodities is seldom agreeable and
Commodious for each party in Commerce, and he that has to sell, will rather
wait a considerable time for his Money, rather than take the trouble of what he
don't want; and not only the fore handed Farmer that wants Money to buy land,
but also such as are under engagements for Money and want to redeem their land,
these will always stand for Money, and will readily embrace a promise rather
than fail, especially with an advance in the price. And when the Country is so
declining and Money may not be increased or brought in as the People increase,
as their Trade and Business should increase, and as their running into Debt
will increase, the generality of men will become involved, disappointed and
failed, and the disadvantages will be such that every one that looks into the
management and discipline of the times, may read 'em without my trouble of
writing. For as these debts which naturally disperse through the Commerce of
the Country increase, so the necessary produce falls more and more short of
ballancing the (...) were a suitable stock of running Cash to circulate and
balance the Accounts and not to be consumed, this might serve to release one
debtor from another and remain circulating over and above to the great
advantage of the Commonwealth

3. The Scarcity of Money occasions Interest to be at a very high Rate.

To what proportion some men will, and do advance for the Interest of Money in
cases of necessity, it is a scandal to the Country and its Religion, and
Policy, to say; and how this cursed gain is inclined to eat and devour men's
Estates that are forced to submit to its Tyranny, the undoing and ruining
experience of many in these times may Witness.

When Money is scarce, the allowing of Interest steals into the whole Trade of
the Country, first by advance in the price, for a long trust, and then there
must be allowance for further forbearance, so the allowing of Interest
interposes instead of Moneys circulating, and the Debts remain obstructed,
swelling and breaking out in the ruin of many. And when men may have a great
and certain profit in letting their Money to use, they will be the less
inclined to improve their Money in Trade, or in any good undertaking for the
Commonwealth: but the Money must circulate chiefly in cases of necessity,
being hired from the Usurer, and naturally gathering to him again, whereby the
yearly Interest allowed, may be much more than what there is of Money passing
through its repeated going out upon hire as well as by the common allowing
Interest for Money where the Principle never was in Money, as in Cases of
purchase, without Money to pay, and thus the course of Money is turned to the
spoiling of Trade, and to the ruin of the Common wealth. And although the letting
Money to Use is the most Ignoble practice a rich man can follow (except to lock
it up in his Chest like a miser) yielding no profit, but by wrong to the
Commonwealth, to the hirer, and to the poor in general, undermining and
cutting off deeds of Man hood and Charity, yet poor men must esteem it a high
favor to hire Money at 10, 15, or 20 per Cent, looking upon the Usurer as the
only man to stand him in stead; but certainly if Money could be improved
without hire it would afford more profit in business: for an intolerable
company of Usurers must be maintained out of the common business of the Country
for the mere non-improvement of their Money; It is a mysterious moth to the
Commonwealth.

4. The Scarcity of Money occasions extraordinary shiftings and devastation in
Estates.

When through the Scarcity of Money People are generally become involved, it is
morally impossible but that there must be now and then a Farm set off to
balance Accounts; for the Creditors will never take the produce of the Debtors
to full balance, for it is almost impossible for the Creditors who have been
and are the most productive party to find occasion for a produce sufficient,
but these being under the best advantages can supply the market, upon cheaper
terms than the other can, and live by it; and then when men become foiled and
boggled and their land begins to shake, the Usurer begins to look out, and
having the command of the Money he gathers in a Sum to about one third of the
value of the Farm, which he fancies to get, and lets it to the owner, and
taking good security for it upon the Farm, he needs to take no further care; or
if he sees a man inclining to fall behind-hand, he will readily find him Money
upon large Interest, and so the man falls in and becomes a prey to the Usurer
before he is aware.

I have known good Estates of land spunged out for little more than half the
worth with all the Interest. And thus the estates of many good honest men must
fall a sacrifice to the straitness of the times, and men must generally stand
upon their guard, or suffer and thus lands become the Merchandise and the
(...), and Bonds must be the Medium; Estates scarcely remaining with the second
generation. Now if the Land-Mongers and Usurers of the times, could bequeath
their Faculty with their Estates, to their children it might answer their
highest end and concern; but then Children are commonly as good Game for the
Extortioners of the next age as (...) for commonly those that begin low get the
art of rising as well as any, and them that begin high as well gain the art of
falling; so that the best we can do for our Children is to promote the
flourishing of the Commonwealth by encouragement upon business.

5. The Scarcity of Money occasion, Extortion in dealing.

As has been observed, the want of Money discourages the business of the
Country to very short stores, subjecting the Country to extreme scarcities: for
when a People are obliged to run so near the Wind, it is but a small variation
to make a glut or a scarcity, and seldom if ever but that there will be both in
some particular species; but then the scarce will run exceeding high, and men
must buy for necessity with very great disadvantage; for the scarce provisions
however dear, must be purchased with Money, and that which is plenty however
cheap will hardly fetch Money, and however the prices of things may be raised
by trust or bartering, yet the necessitous man must give after the dearest rate
in Money, when his own labor or produce will hardly fetch Money one third
below the just market price, so that he will rather hire Money of the Usurer
than part with his Labor upon base terms, and thus plenty is discouraged by
the Tyranny of Scarcity, and in the end banished or bandied from one specie to
another, so that men become variable in business, now in this and then in that,
being discouraged from one thing to another; the necessitous man being
oppressed on both sides; the mean time being obliged both to buy and sell to
disadvantage, and the number of such increasing through the many disadvantages
attending.

6 The Scarcity of Money causes the Credit of Money to sink.

However Money when scarce will play the Tyrant, and (...) one plentiful specie
for another; or it will deal with Money behind its back, or at a distance by
the mediation of trust, who being an unfaithful representative of Money suffers
his Credit to sink, and Money being forcibly employed in dealing with Scarcity
is (...) run down by it, and when it comes to fulfill the (...) Trust has made
in its behalf, it is forced to stand by them be they ever so mean, so that as
scarcity runs down the Credit of Money in its own advance, plenty standing at a
distance dealing with (...), and Trust will maintain its Credit and Advance of
possible, in some proportionable Degree, to that Money must either sink and
die, or flee the Country, it must certainly yield but only as Extortion may
take its part, but then Money must be a Slave to Extortion, so that the scarcer
Money is, the scarcer it may be both by its sinking the Value, and by sending
of it out of the Country, but since Bills have been in Use, the Effect appears
only in sinking, and had not Silver-Money been supported by a foreign Credit,
it might have sunk in some considerable Measure as the Bills have done; but the
foreign Credit, and not the intrinsic Value of Silver and Gold, has supported
their Value among us, so high as that there might be but just a reasonable
Profit in sending of it out of the Country; but since Silver being 23 or 24
Shillings per Ounce, and West India Goods being plenty has fallen among us here
has been great Quantities of Silver brought into the Country as it were, in
Lieu of West India Goods; but as the West India Goods have fallen, so the
Plenty of Silver not being in Demand as Money has caused it to sink in Value;
and then the Notion of Calling in and hoarding up Bills has not only raised
their Value, but has out off almost all Trading for Money, so that what passes
is as it were only by Force in paying Debts, and the Market of Provisions
greatly spoiled, because not Money to purchase, nor will they answer
Engagements for Money because Money is in such severe Demand through the Notion
of the Bills and so of Debts in general, their Capacity of being raised equal
to Money, and that by Force in a short time; not that the Scarcity of the Bills
does in the least incline to raise their Value but only from the Necessity of
their being answered in Money upon Penalty of rigid Forfeiture: For according
as before observed the mere Scarcity of Money or Bills (when free to pass as
Money and not to be hoarded up with a Notion of a speedy Advance by calling in)
does not tend to raise their Credit, but rather to sink it, and however the
Plenty, Thraldom, and Inability of the present time has glutted the Markets,
spoiling the digestive Faculty of our Trade putting great Wrongs and
Discouragements upon all commendable Negociations, yet we see that such Species
as are so scarce as to command Money, will maintain their Credit against it,
and other Species will barter at an equal high Rate, and when Debtors find
themselves bitten by the mad Dog, there will scarcely be any more promising
Money upon the present Terms of Dealing, but yet we must expect that if the
Bills must be called in without suitable Provision against the vile Injustice
and Wrongs impending, there will be Multitudes forced to surrender their
Estates upon base Terms, and many even undone, which Overture will be
abundantly aggravated from the mere Fear or forethought of it: For when once
the Rumor is spread, that Bills are like to rise in Value, and the Prices of
Provisions and Merchandise to fall, every one will be eager to put off what he
has to sell, and more than he can well spare, at any tolerable Rate, for Fear
of being forced to a worse Market; so that no more than the mere Persuasion or
Belief of it, is enough to make it so; and not only from the Fear of some but
also from the Desire of others to take the Advantages of such a Turn; but then
to let those pass which are already involved, let Money or Bills be brought to
what Degree of Credit soever, in a Way of such Irregularity and Fraud; yet we
shall find the general or mean Value of it to sink and decline in the ordinary
Course of Trade, and by so much the more as the medium shall be found scarce:
For as it has been, so it will probably be again, when the Merchant considers
the Disadvantage of Trusting, he will advance the Price of his Merchandise; and
not only in Consideration of being out of the Use of his Money, but also
because he sees the Prices of Goods rises and Money sinks; and agreeable to
these trusting Prices will be the market Prices of Things in general, and the
more certainly as the Money is scarcely used in Trade. For when it is so, it
must be improved chiefly in purchasing the most scarce and dear Provisions, or
in paying old and long trusted Debts; and although Money down will command
Respect and a due Deference before Trust, yet the Presence of it is so scant
that the Prices of Things in general will rise under the Notion of trusting;
and although scarce Provisions will be current, and answer the greater Part of
these Debts, yet as they must be scarce to make them current, so they will be
dear to the sinking the Credit of Money whose stead it answers; and thus the
scarcity of Money sinks its Credit, and the faster it sinks the faster it may
until by some extraordinary Interposition of Causes (as in the present
Juncture) alters the Course of Things.

Here I would a little demonstrate what kind of Credit the Bills have lost as
in their Discount upon Money from time to time. In Order to which observe,

1. The Bills of Credit have all along carried a full and just Credit, and an
undoubted Currency according to the market Price of Things. However for Want of
a distinct, foreign and steady Value, they could not become one Quarter, or one
third better than Merchandise or Provisions as they have been raised so much
and more above their just Value upon Money in the market Prices; whereas Money
being maintained in a steady Value, by a steady Value upon Merchandise in
foreign Countries, so our Merchandise being raised one third above its just
Value, Money became one third better than other Species to improve in foreign
Trade. Therefore,

2. That Discount that is made upon Bills of Credit additionally from time to
time (...) no other than the cutting off, and taking away the Hold of
Extortion, not giving to the Bills that cruel oppressive Value (which some
fancy to be (...) placed in Silver) which the foreign Credit of Money holds
upon Money as it is undervalued at Home, when used for a Medium of Trade, by
the raising the Value of the Merchandise or Provisions valued thereupon. That
Gold and Silver are intrinsically valuable I don't deny; but that the
intrinsic Value is the Rule by which the steady Credit of Money is maintained
as a Medium of Trade, I absolutely deny: For Men don't look at the intrinsic
Worth of Money as they deal, but at the Value of the Commodity that is
purchased, how it agrees with the market Price.

When Money was found one third better than the Countries Produce at the high
market Price as in foreign Trade; the Extortioners would nevertheless take the
full Price in Money, being the M^n that so raised Things to such Extremity, and
although in the Way of ordinary Commerce, this Rigor was taken off by the just
Lenity and Interest of the Merchant, in discounting one third of the Value of
Merchandise, when paid in Money, yet the Extortioner would take all the
Advantages of Scarcity, Necessity, etc. to strain up the Value of his Produce,
taking the full Price in Money, and (...) the poor (...) Man was forced to
(...) however hardly he came by his Money.

Now the Bills of Credit don't carry this unjust Rigor so long as not
especially to be answered in Money but at the market Price, as may be valued
from time to time; for when the Extortioner has raised the Price of his
Produce, he may expect to give in some suitable Degree as dear for what he has
occasion to buy be it Lands or Merchandise, for ought any Discount that will be
made in the Behalf of his Money; and in these Respects Bills of Credit are
greatly to be applauded for their exact Justice between Man and Man; when as
Silver Money being subject to be undervalued is a very (...) and common Plague,
if recoverable by Law: For it must be brought in and held by Force, remaining
extremely Scarce, through its Propensity to leave the Country being in better
Credit abroad, whereby it becomes a Medium of Extortion and Injustice; and it
is but an Act of Justice for either Money or Bills to submit to a Discount, as
the Price of Provisions or Merchandise is raised; for why should Money be
undervalued in dealing, and yet hold a certain intrinsic Worth making an
unequal Exchange? But then although it be just for Bills to submit to a Discount
when Goods are raised in Value, yet thereby they become a deceitful Standard by
which to rate and fix the Value of Credit; the Wrongs of this has been greatly
complained of and indeed has been intolerable, especially to Salary-Men, Land
Lords, Widows and Orphans, or Legatees, as in many Cases; under which
Consideration there has usually been Allowances made; but the Usurer especially
more than doubling his yearly Interest; and the Creditors in the Advance of
their Goods as they trusted them out; so much the more sinking their own
Credits by their unreasonable asking for Goods; but then suddenly to regain the
Credit of the Bills, and so consequently of all Credits when Men have generally
run themselves in Debt at large, as in the Allowance of large Interest making
great Purchases, advancing Salaries, Legacies, etc. and all according to the
Intention of Money sunk one half or two thirds in its Discount upon Silver, I
say then, to make a sudden Retrieve of the Value of Money without some Way to
relieve and right the Debtor by a suitable Abatement in the Payment of his Debt
according to the true Intention of the Contract, so that the same Labor may
pay the Debt as was intended, will (as seems to me) be as grand a Cheat as ever
the Country endured: For no Men more likely to gain by this Cheat, than those
who gained by the former, for many Men by running in Debt have by this Time
ordered their Business so as to become able Creditors, their Estates it may be
consisting chiefly in Credits; but a foreseen gradual sinking of Credit cannot
be a Wrong comparable to the Wrong of an unexpected, sudden Advance by hoarding
up for a speedy calling in, for how many ingenious generous spirited Men must
be ruined by the Means

The most of the outstanding Bills have been emitted equal to Money, not to
Silver at Proclamation rare, but equal to our former sunken Bills, or Silver at
16, 18, or 20 Shillings per Ounce, then what Justice can it be for these to be
answered in Silver at 6 or 8 Shillings per Ounce? If I am newly become
Possessor of an old sunken Bill, sunken gradually through 500 Men's Hands, or
be it a new Bill put out upon the old sunken Tenor, never passing better than
Silver at 20 Shillings per Ounce, what Reason can there be that I should have
it answered to me in Silver at 8 Shillings per Ounce, the Debtor never having
received half that Value for it?

Indeed every Debtor ought to answer his Debt to the same Value as was intended
when the Contract was made and therefore those that have taken Bills out of the
public Treasury upon Loan ought to return as good a Value in to the Treasury
again even to the same Value in Silver as what the Bills would have purchased
when taken out, notwithstanding the Bills sinking in their passing from Man to
Man in the mean time, for since it is not possible to right those that have
suffered the Wrong (if such there be by the Bills gradual sinking) the King
ought to have the Profit; for as the Loss has been a general Loss in the Hands
of all Possessors of the Bills from time to time, so the Profit should be a
public Gain, and not to those whose Lot it shall be last to possess the Bills,
and perhaps vilainously hoarding up for the Purpose, hindering their due
Circulation; nor yet to those who have taken the Bills out of the public
Treasury at five per Cent, and let them out at ten per Cent, or if they have
improved them in their own private Use, yet they ought to return the same Value
in to the public Treasury as they took out; for doubtless they put them away
in the first Place, for that Value in some good Specie as they best liked. They
that take out of the Bank ought to be obliged to return a certain Value even
the same that they take, either in Silver or some other Currency to the same
Value, and if they return the same Bills not to have regard to the Denomination
of the Bill, but to the Credit of it, at the Time as it will answer for Silver
Money, whether risen or fallen, and yet the Bills must be lawful Money in all
Payments public or private according to their current Rate as the Law now
provides; but only the Loan Office to be made good as aforesaid: for if Traders
or Market-men will sink the Bills, and undervalue them in their Commerce, so
let it be, the Law is not obliged to make the Bills better than what Traders
are pleased to call Pounds, Shillings, and Pence, in their Way of Dealing, and
it would be unjust so to do; for if Merchandise and Labor, public and
private, be raised above their Worth in Silver, why should it be answered to
that Value, but this ought to be a Rule, that every Debt except passing Bills
be answered to what was intended in the Contract, and therefore as Merchandise
is raised, so Credits, Salaries, Rents, and yearly Payments should in Honesty
be raised, and this would be a Means to prevent the sinking of the Bills.

1. By diverting the Creditor from raising the Value of what he trusts out, to
make up the Damage of his Credits sinking. For when the Merchant sees that his
Credits will sink, he still advances the Value of his Merchandise to make up
the Damage which still sinks it so much the more. Now if the yearly Discount
upon Bills were computed, and Allowance to be made accordingly, with respect to
the Time when the Debt was contracted, this might in some measure divert the
raising of Merchandise to make up the Damage as aforesaid.

2. This would greatly discourage and divert such leading Merchants and Traders
who are greatly indebted to the Loan Office, as well as to other Merchants,
Usurers etc. from raising the Value of Merchandise and sinking the Credit of
Money to lighten and facilitate their Payments. For it is to be feared that
such Men have been very accessory to the sinking of Credit, for indeed their
Interest would lead them much that Way; could I persuade my Creditor to let me
have my Bond for one half or two thirds of what I gave it for, it would be
considerable Gain to me. But as to the Occasion of the sinking of our Bills of
Credit, People are of various Opinions. Some say that the Occasion of their
sinking was from some particular Gentlemen of ours, that traded with New York
Merchants, and refused to accept of our own Bills equal to Money, therefore
they have ever since been disposed to sink. O hers say the Occasion of their
sinking is the Want of a Demand for our Produce at Home, viz. Great Britain,
whereby Money being in a peculiar Demand to make Returns is rather advanced
above the Bills, being bid up for to the Discredit of the Bills; but it is most
certain that neither of these is the Cause or Occasion of the sinking of our
Bills, but rather the Consequence of their being sunk: For what Man would be so
foolish as to take a Connecticut Bill equal to Silver Money, when the Bill
might lawfully be answered with Indian Corn at two Shillings and six Pence per
Bushel, and Wheat at five Shillings per Bushel, which is not so good as Silver
Money by near one half? Or when the market Price of our Provisions and
Merchandise, valued either upon Money or Bills is double of their real Worth in
Silver? And who would not give Silver its just Preference for making a Return
to Europe, where Silver is of a much greater Value? Had not our Provisions and
Merchandise been over-rated in Value, our Produce would have answered the
European Trade sufficiently, and with as much Profit as Silver and Gold; and
what that would not answer might have been supplied by our own Manufacture
without purchasing more than we can pay, engaging what we have not, if our
European Trade cannot be carried on without Silver Returns, what shall we do
when the Silver is gone? But the high Valuation of Merchandise not only spoils
the Demand for our Produce, but it has dreined us of Money and sunk our Bills
of Credit to the exceeding Detriment of the Commonwealth; the same Cause that
reduced us to the Use of Bills of Credit in Lieu of Money, has likewise caused
the Bills of Credit to sink from time time; and those are exceedingly mistaken
that impute the misfortunes of our Trade to the Use of Paper Money: For our
Condition was not good when we first came to the Use of Paper Money; our Paper
Money has indeed done us exceeding good Service, and might be yet cultivated to
exceeding Advantage; but yet one while to have a tolerable Stock of running
Cash, or passing Bills, and another while, when Men and Trade has increased and
Money should increase, then to have the Bills a calling in and hoarding up
without farther Additions or Stocks to fill up the Vacancy is intolerable
irregular State Policy, if not a fraudulent Cheat; but there has never yet
(since I can remember) been near a Sufficiency of Currency to accommodate the
Commerce, not in the most plentiful Times, and how our Trade can be carried on
with a less Supply this Year than it could do with some Years ago, I cannot
conceive, unless by some means our Numbers had been diminished, or if we think
to force in Silver Money and turn our Credits into Silver, by lessening the
Paper Stock, we shall find the Silver come in very slowly rather like a
Captive, than a natural Subject taking the first Opportunity to depart, so long
as our Commerce remains under the present Regulation.

But this we may take up for a Lamentation, viz. That such kind of Policy
smothers the best Principles, obstructs the best Proceedings and Discourages
the best Men, advancing Oppression, Extortion and Usury with all close handed
ignoble Principles and Practices.

Having rambled over some of the Inconveniences and ill Consequences of an
irregular Trade, I come now to consider of some Measures proper to revive a
drooping Commonwealth, or to prevent the Inundation of Miseries flowing in by
an ungoverned Commerce. And how a new English Plantation, or People may best
advance themselves in the Interest of the Crown and Government, both of which I
shall endeavor to resolve in one, for to me it seems that the best Account
such a People may stand in to the Interest of the Crown, must be by
strengthening themselves in Trade, encouraging their own Business enabling
themselves to take off, improve and dispense with as much of the Effects and
Produce, of Great Britain, as may be in a Way of Commerce, strengthening and
fortifying themselves against the Invasions of the common Enemy, and by their
Prudence and good Managements to encourage as many good Subjects as may be to
come in and settle among them.

When a People are low and behind hand, and under Incommodious Circumstances
they cannot be of that Importance to the Crown, nor of that Account or
Advantage to their Correspondents in Trade, as they might be if under a
flourishing State, not only because they are unable to exchange for, improve
and dispense with the Effects of their Correspondents, but also because their
Poverty and Disadvantages discourages the replenishing and strengthening of the
Country by the coming in of laboring, and handy-crafts Men. Men of Business
and Trade from other Countries, besides many other Disadvantages attending,
which in new Plantations must needs be great Damage to the Crown, by suffering
the Interests of other Princes and States to prevail and gain the Ground, and
for a few People to hold and obscure a large fruitful Country by such
Incommodities is of no Advantage to themselves nor their Posterity, but rather
tends to spoil and corrupt their Manners to the great Detriment of Church and
State.

Therefore to consider of some proper measures to cultivate and encourage Trade
and Commerce, may well answer the matters proposed.

That a competent Stock of running Cash is highly necessary to the Support of
Trade and Commerce is very evident, and it is no less certain that as a Country
replenishes with People, and the Business and Trade to be enlarged the current
Stock must of Necessity be enlarged, or the Trade must suffer. For the
obtaining the medium of Trade, two methods are more commonly in Use in the
World.

First, By trading for Money, viz. Silver and Gold bringing of it in from other
Places in Commerce.

Secondly, By emitting Bills upon the public Credit to be improved and
accepted as Money.

New England has practiced both of these methods and in both has been miserably
foiled falling short of maintaining or holding the Substance of the one, or the
Credit of the other. The Occasion of which I imagine has been the Want of
regular well governed Markets not holding a just Valuation upon Provisions and
Merchandise: For, to the bringing in Money by Trade, or to the Support of the
Credit of the Bills valued thereupon, it is absolutely necessary that Money
should be held in a just Esteem, by a suitable low Valuation upon Merchandise.
Now whether to endeavor the Acquisition of a plentiful Stock of Money to carry
on our Trade, or to supply the Want thereof with Bills of Credit shall be
judged best by our Rulers at Home, I cannot determine: For to some it may seem
not right for any particular Plantation to raise the Value of Money higher than
others do: For their so doing may tend to rob other Plantations of their
necessary Medium to the Detriment of their Commerce; but I do believe it is
more Criminal, for any of the Plantations to undervalue Money to the Detriment
of their own Commerce, I say more Criminal because Self Preservation is first
required.

And since it is so that the English Plantations in general, have so far sunk
the Credit of Money by their repeated advancing of the Value of their Produce,
that in all Parts Money is become intolerable scarce, I cannot but think it
commendable for any People to be first in the just and most necessary Cause of
advancing the Credit of Money, and let others advance as they see Occasion. For
as Money becomes scarce so should the Value of it be raised both to encourage
the bringing of it in, and for the extending its Validity and Serviceableness
in Trade.

Again, Some may fancy that to increase the current Stock with Bills of Credit,
must needs put us out of Favor with our Rulers at Home, supposing that we have
not Power to maintain the Credit of the Bills, and therefore to increase the
Quantity of the Bills must needs increase and aggravate the Wrongs that will be
suffered by the increasing Discount upon the Bills.

But it may be considered that although our Bills should remain under their
present Disadvantage of sinking, yet the Increase of the Stock will not
increase or aggravate the Wrongs impending by their sinking, but rather lessen
them. For in the first Place,

1. We must consider that the Wrongs sustained by the increasing Discount upon
the Bills is not so much to the Possessor of the Bills, but chiefly to him
whose private Credits are valued upon the Bills depending upon the Credit of
the Bills for their Value. The Bills ought to be kept circulating and then the
Damage in their sinking would be little or none to the Possessor. But private
Credits depending upon the public Credit for its value, being more than ten
fold of the value of the passing Bills, and to be answered with sunken Bills,
or advanced Provisions or Goods, causes the Wrongs suffered by the Bills to be
beyond compare with the Wrongs suffered in the Bills.

And if there were but the one tenth Part of the Bills passing that now there
is, yet if all the private Credits must bear their Weight upon them as now they
do, the Damages of their sinking would not be the less but the more; because
the less Currency the more trusting and the worse pay. For in the next place,

2. We must consider that (as has been already demonstrated) the Scarcity of
the Medium or Currency does but hasten the sinking of Credit. The scarcer the
Medium or Money, the greater will be the Weight of Credits depending upon it
for Support, and the more obstructed and invalid will these Credits be through
bad and difficult Payments, and upon this Consideration the Prices of Goods
will rise the faster, and Money being more used in Name, and less in Substance,
the more it will cripple under the Weight of Credits depending thereupon for
Support; unless the foreign Demand for it (as in the Case of Gold and Silver)
causes a Discount upon Merchandise at the market Price, when good hard pieces
are laid upon the Board, but this will not bear in Bills of Credit, a So that
the Plenitude of Bills is, the support of their Credit and lessening to the
Damage of their sinking.

Many are of Opinion that we cannot have flourishing Times until Gold and Silver
are called in for a Medium of Trade, and the Use of Bills laid aside, laying
the Blame of every unlucky Turn to the Bills of Credit, as if they were a Flam
put upon the Country to maintain our Trade and Genteelity, beyond our Industry
and Ability; and that the only Way to call in Money, must be to lessen our
British Trade, retrench our Expenses, etc. living more upon our own and less
upon foreign Labor, condemning our Finery, Prodigality, etc. In answer to
which a late judicious Writer having considered of our Case, as being a
dependent Government in our civil Relation to the Crown of England, also in
some Degree a dependent Merchandise upon the same Kingdom, and in no Capacity
to be otherwise, until come to a greater Perfection in Manufactures, Therefore
(says he) Men may talk of shortening our British Trade, whilst they are weary,
upbraiding us with our Finery, etc. which are Themes more proper for the
Pulpits, than for Statesmen to talk of, [for what were ingenious Mysteries and
Inventions dignified for with Laurels for working Wood, Iron, Brass, leather,
etc. into fine Coaches and Chariots; and Horses as fine and proud as they
suited to them; why were these made, etc. And turning glittering Earth and
glutinous Matter of Worms into Embroideries, etc but to furnish a generous
People that would banish Sordidness, and live bright and civil with fine
Accomplishments about them.] Therefore I say if we will live upon Ground Nuts
and Clams, and cloth our Backs with the Exuviz or Pelts of wild Beasts, we may
then lower our Expenses apace, and renounce this Branch of our Merchandise; but
if we intend to live in any Garb or Port as becomes a People of Religion,
Civility, Trade and Industry, then we must still supply our selves from the
great Fountain --

To this I would add that to lessen our Import of British Merchandise, or to
lessen our Expenses in Provisions in Furniture, Apparel, Buildings, etc. would
indeed lessen our Business in providing the Balance, lessening the Demand for
our Produce, but it would not persuade one Penny in Money to come in among us,
as Money to purchase our produce, so long as our high prices forbids the profit
in bringing of it in, unless Men are laid under a Necessity to answer their
Obligations or pay their Debts in Money, which would be a main Support to
Extortion under our present Regulations, for ready Money would have so little
Influence in the Valuation of Things, and Money would be so seldom engaged that
those who would be obliged to bring it in of procure it, must do it to their
very great Disadvantage, and the Trade would greatly suffer through the
Scarcity of it, and all the Advantage would be to gratify the Humors of
miserly Men, that want a peculiar very hard and difficult to be obtained to be
a Medium of Extortion and Oppression, to be a plague to poor Men We are twice
better without it than with it, unless we could have it come in freely with
profit, and kindly accepted at its just value, which must be by fixing a
suitable low value upon all our Merchandise, and not left to the Will of every
Cutthroat, to raise the Price. I cannot think our Rulers at Home, would be
against our encouraging such Quantities of Money to come in among us as might
enable us to carry on our Trade ably and freely, to support our public
Ministry, Civil and Ecclesiastic, to which a good Stock of Currency is
absolutely necessary. Or if we may not trade for Money to such a Degree as our
Commerce would require, I cannot imagine our Rulers at Home would disallow of
our emitting such Supplies of public Credit from time to time, as might set us
in a Capacity for a liberal Commerce. Since this is the practice not only of
Great Britain. but also of many other of the most politic States in Europe,
where jealous Ignorance, don't forbid good Proceedings for the Common Wealth.

It is undoubtedly for the Interest of his Majesty that every one of his
Plantations be provided with a sufficient current Stock to uphold a flourishing
Trade, and whether we obtain it in trading for Money, viz. Gold and Silver, or
whether by emitting Bills of Credit, yet it seems to me the first good step to
be taken in order to either, will be to set a just Value upon all the principal
Produce and Merchandise of the Country, that may be conveniently rated by
Number, Weight or Measure, which Value is scarcely one quarter of the
Denomination of their prices at this Time, being valued upon Bills of Credit,
that is their just value in Silver at Six Shillings and Eight Pence per Ounce;
so then the just Value of our passing, Bills is no more than one Quarter of
their Denomination in Silver at the rate aforesaid, and so likewise the Bills
should be valued, since they are so much fallen, and so let the Credits of the
Country be valued, so that the same Bills, or the same Species whatsoever may
be of the same Validity and Consequence in Trade, or in paying of Debts, as now
they are only that Money might be advanced and encouraged to come in and
circulate five Shillings in Silver being as good as twenty Shillings of our
Bills, as they now pass, or of our Credits or Merchandise, only giving to and
fixing the value of Money as Gold and Silver, this would not wrong one Man but
be a Benefit to many; but then there must be heavy Duties laid upon all Export
of such Species as don't submit to the stated market price, and let the Ports
of Entry be well guarded andthe Markets be carefully regulated, giving to every
thing its just Due, and necessary Encouragement, as may be thought convenient
by judicious Men from time to time. And if only the principal Commodities of
our own Produce were thus stated, other things would easily and naturally
submit to an equal value in the course of Trade, and if once the great Swells
of advancing Prices were (...) every ones Interest would lead him to a
Conformity to the Market, and then Men would know their Business without
huckling and bartering: For such a Limitation would be no more of a Bondage
than to oblige a Traveller to go the straitest and best Way to the End of his
intended Journey. I should as soon choose to travel in a strait Lane, at to have
all the Woods before me to choose out a better Way.

Holland is renowned for good Regulation in their Markets, and mercantile
Affairs, if we go there with a Cargo to trade, we have no occasion to barter
about the Price, only say what we have to sell, and what we want to buy, the
price is judiciously set on both sides, you shall have your Lading ready for
Return immediately, of that which is choice in its kind, the just decorum in
the value of their Merchandise, encourages Stores of all kinds, so that no
Business suffers, but then they hold such a value upon their Money, that we
shall rather take their Goods than their Money to bring away, for we may have
our Choice which we will take at the market Price.

Some may think it a great Wrong to be limited to a low price for their
Produce; but what Damage could it be, if they may buy as cheap as they fell: it
matters not how small the Weight of the Money is, if the value be but steady
and the Credit good.

The several Governments in New England being mutually dependent in Trade, it
may seem the more difficult for any one of them to fix upon good Regulations,
and where there is several Communities in Government under one in Commerce, it
would be best for them to concert their measures with each other, but yet every
Government may regulate their own Markets, if they take suitable measures for
it. Any one Government might take in and send out their Merchandise under the
Regulation proposed, carrying on their Commerce with the other Governments, as
New England trades with New York, and the same of their Produce might answer
their Trade with other Places, nearer or farther off as it would otherwise do;
we might improve their Money and they ours as it might seem profitable in
Trade, and however other Places value their Merchandise, yet when it comes into
our Jurisdiction we may denominate it by what value we please. And although we
might not make so much Profit in laying out our Money with them, yet we might
make as good Profit in the Exchange of Goods.

Now if by any such Means the Prices of Things might be limited (as the
Practices of some Places in the World, as well as Reason it self teaches it
might and ought to be) so that Merchandise in general should not be over-rated,
being valued upon Money we might emit Bills to such a Degree, that Men would
not hire Money to give above five per Cent, with undoubted Security, and yet
the Bills would hold equal Value to Silver and Gold. But to pretend to make
Bills equal to Money, when Money it self is undervalued (as when we reckoned
Wheat 5 Shillings, Barley 4 Shillings and Indian Corn at half a Crown per
Bushel) I say then to pretend to make Bills to hold equal value with Money, we
had as good value our Bills upon Carbuncles, or any other precious Stones that
we know nothing of the Value, as to value them upon Money only as the
Denomination of Money is put upon Merchandise in general, the Name it self
cannot suddenly fall to the Ground, and the mere Name of Money put upon our
Merchandise and Credits is all that has supported the Credit of our Bills.

But only let our Produce be justly valued upon Money, and our Bills being put
out equal thereunto, would hold equal value with Money, and being of equal
value they are preferrable to Money at their current Rate. I say they would
hold equal value with Money, because the market Price of things being held to
their just value upon Money, the Countries Produce will be as profitable in
foreign Dealing as Money, and as the Bills always have been, so they would be
then current for any kind of Produce, at the market Price, the Merchants would
not then allow the Advance or bid higher upon Money for the Advantage of it in
foreign Dealing, it being as good at Home as abroad, or if they should advance
upon Money, yet the Prices of things not being suffered to rise, the Bills
would hold their value notwithstanding so long as current for Goods at the
stated market Price.

That Bills are preferrable to Money at their current Rate appears in three
particulars, as has been observed by a credible Author.

1. In the Ease of compting and carriage, and preventing Damage to the Receiver
by Counterfeit, clipped light or base Coin (which is obvious to all).

2. In its Safety in traveling, laying up, etc. as visible as the other.

3. In the Advantage that is to be made by the Exchange on the Account of such
Conveniences.

Whereof take two Examples,

1. Examp The Bank Bills of Holland are ordinarily better by at least three per
Cent.

2. Examp. Those in Venice are better than Money by twenty per Cent; and the
odds would have been more but that Laws were made with severe Penalties to
prevent their rising higher. Now the Cause of this Advance upon the Bills was
as follows; The Bills at their first putting out being of equal value with
Money, they were preferred because of their Convenience as aforesaid, so that
Men would ordinarily give ten Shillings to have One Hundred Pounds changed for
Bills, which Practice soon advanced the current Rate of Bills to that
proportion, and when this was become the current Rate of the Bills, then other
ten Shillings was allowed for the Exchange of a Hundred Pounds, upon Account of
the peculiar Convenience of the Bills as aforesaid, and so ten Shillings upon
the Hundred Pounds would be advanced successively upon the current Rate; the
Advance of the current Rate following up the Advance for the special
Convenience of the Bills, until the Bills became twenty eight Pounds in one
Hundred better than Money, and with much Difficulty restrained and reduced to
twenty per Cent odds, and there fixed.

And if it be demanded, What induced that State to allow it so high?

The Answer is easy, viz. The State of Venice had made Use of the Moneys
deposited for Security, in their public Occasions, and having promised for
Satisfaction of Creditors to raise the like Sum if they should have Occasion
for it, they reap this Advantage of the People's high Opinion of the Bills,
that they are thereby assured that never will any Creditor come to ask them a
(...) for a Bill or Bills, when he may have 120 l. from another Hand: A notable
Way to pay a vast Debt; and all the while (it may be) not one Ducket in the
Bank to answer it.

The Venetians under divine Providence owe their present good Fortune, Strength
and Glory in a peculiar Degree to their Bank Bills. They are a People who have
raised themselves from a Company of unfortunate mortals, who to escape the
Extremity of their Condition, pursuing them on the Continent, sell upon the
broken Banks or Islets at the upper End of the Adriatic Sea, many Ages ago;
where they built their Town, now become the famous City of Venice. And after
some time they projected a Bank of Credit to support them in their Settlements
of Trade. And in a peculiar Sense by this means, etc. are become one of the
most splendid People on Earth; and are able both by Sea and Land, to vie it
with the Great Turk, and now stand on that side of the World, a firm Barrier to
Christendom against the haughty Inside'. Their Bills of public Credit have
been exceeding Serviceable in supporting their worldly Affairs, and yet
possibly for some scores, if not some, hundreds of Years, have not kept one
Ducket in their public Treasury to keep up the Credit of them. The Bank of
(...) subsisting of two Millions and three hundred Thousand (...), which is
about the Value of twenty hundred thousand Pounds of our Bills as they now
pass, which has been improved in their Commerce for many Ages with as much
Advantage as if it had been so much good Silver.

Now if Money were held in such Credit among us, that it would remain
circulating for a Medium of Trade as a (...) with the Bills, by holding a just
Valuation upon Merchandise, we should soon find the Bills the most current and
acceptable pay, at their full value or Denomination, as now they are and always
have been at their current Rate, since their Currency has been experienced. But
some are of Opinion that it is not in the power of the civil Authority to
command or state the value of Merchandise, so that it shall not rise: And
indeed Experience teaches that a bare Law for stating the value is not
effectual for the purpose, it has been proved in New England; nor indeed will
the setting up of one Post in a Frame, cause it to stand firm without others to
support it. Now in Order to hold the value stated, it is necessary,

1. That the value of the most principal Commodities improved in Commerce,
especially for Exportation be stated.

2. That the stated Price be rather below than above the real value thereof in
Money; otherwise it cannot be serviceable in respect to the holding of Money
among us.

3. That the Export of any Specie be incumbered so long as not submitting to
the market Price.

4. That not only the Power of giving Law unto, but also the Power of lending
in the Affairs of Commerce, should fall into the hands of honest, wise, prudent
and public (...) Men. Therefore

It is very proper that Governors, Magistrates and Rulers, should be not only
Men of the greatest Integrity, Policy and Largeness of Heart, but also Men of
great Influence in Trade.

Solomon the royal Merchant of Jerusalem was an eminent Patron of Trade; his
Interest, Wisdom, Policy and exceeding Liberality and largeness of Heart, moved
him to undertake notably in Trade, which not only enriched himself, but also
his Kingdom in an extraordinary manner, the Benefit thereof extending unto all
the correspondent Nations round about; his Interest in Trade was so great that
without Question he had the Advantage of governing and leading the Trade of the
Kingdom in the best manner, he put such a value upon Money, without Question as
would make it profitable bringing of it in, encouraging other Nations to come
and lay out their Money with him for his Merchandise.

Had not King Solomon studied or projected in matters of Trade, as well as in
matters of Justice and Equity, or had he not largely undertaken in Trade and
Merchandise, as well as in Husbandry and Farming, his Gold might have remained
at Ophir, his great Buildings and Merchandises, with the chief of his Wealth
might have remained in it is Chaos. But his great Wisdom could not overlook
Trade, nor the proper measures for it is promotion and management, or any of the
Requisites thereunto belonging.

Nor is it beneath the Quality of the greatest Princes to promote Trade and
Commerce; for why? their Interest and Safety depends upon it; and according to
the Saying of Sir Edward Cook; Trade and Traffic is the Life of the
Commonwealth.

But forasmuch as it is very rare and not ordinarily to be expected; that the
leading Part of Trade, falls into the Hands of such trusty, skilful, unanimous
public spirited Managers, as will without fail accommodate their private
Interests to the true Interest of the public. Therefore the practice of Great
Britain as well as others of the most politic free States of Europe has been
found not only necessary but very effectual for the holding of Trade and
Commerce under good Regulations; viz. The setting up Companies for Trade.

These Companies being constituted under good Regulations and many Interests
united therein of the heads of the Commonwealth, as well as of Undertakers in
every kind of Business and Calling, are able to lead the whole Trade of the
Nation, so that no Interloper or private Merchant can monopolize or make head
contrary to the public or common Interest. These Companies will take the value
from one Specie and put upon another as they see occasion giving encouragement
to what kind of Business they see good, and what they loose in the one hand
they gain in the other; and being compounded of good Common Wealths Men, of
every kind as aforesaid, their Influence is very benign both to Planters and
Traders (for indeed that which is the best for the one is best for the other,
being mutually dependent upon each others Prosperity for their own) and being
Men of Generosity and largeness of Heart, they are neither afraid to trust
Providence with their Estates in Trade, Seafaring etc. nor yet their Trustees,
or Factors, but engage like Men in earnest to do their Country good; the
footing of their Trade being laid by the Generosity of public spirited Men.

And this is what I take to be the next good Step to be taken in order to upset
the declining State of New England. If each Government would constitute and set
up a Company for Trade, with suitable Regulations, Privileges, and Power for
ordering the matters of their Trade, it might do much more to enliven,
strengthen and encourage the Business of the Country, than what private Trade
will ever attain unto Each Company being made up of interested Men from every
part of the respective Governments might uniform and concert their measures and
Rules, agreeably to the Times and Places of their Trade, and their Interests
being united thereby in every Branch of their Trade, would influence the
Commerce of the whole Country, to such a Degree as to lead it in the best
Channels for the public Good, when a private Trade cannot be so well governed
being in many separate Interests, and variously disposed, acting under various
Principles.

It is not the great Estates of a few Men, that will answer the End or Notion
of a public Trade, but such a Composition would be liable to lean and (...)
according to the Disposition and Circumstances of the Undertakers. Nor would
such a Trade have that influence nor Assistance in every Part of the Country,
nor would the Interest of the Country so readily concert with its Regulations:
But the Strength of the public Trade is to have many Proprietors, some in
every part of the Country, Men of Business to assist and accommodate it with
the best Means; and a Company so qualified and composed would undoubtedly wax
and become great, enduring for many Generations, increasing not only with the
Advance of the beginning Stock, but also with the Addition of the Interests of
more Proprietors uniting from time to time, and none to be drawn out but by the
Advice and Consent of the Majority of the Proprietors; whereas if but few
concerned therein, the Death of one, the bad Fortune of another, and the
Discouragement or fickle Mind of another might break up and dissolve the
Company. The public Trade is not so much for the particular Benefit of the
Proprietors, but for the Commonwealth, and therefore he that expects a direct
present Benefit to himself in the Trade, and would therefore join therein,
merely for Self Interest, has a wrong Notion of it, as well as he that expects
to bear sway or have power of voting according to his Interest there in,
according to the manner of a private Trade Indeed such as would contribute
largely into the public Stock, should be first regarded for Betrustments
therein, as having approved themselves great Benefactors to the Public, and
Well wishers to the Cause by their great Liberality in and toward the Affair.

But the public Trade must not be ruled or swayed to accommodate any
particular or private Interest, or lean from the Commonwealth for its own mere
Advance or Gain, as will and may a private Trade, but the public Trade must
stand upright for the Commonwealth, which cannot morelikely be than by there
being many Proprietors, and each of them to have an equal Vote. And then if
Money may not be traded for to a sufficient Plenty for carrying on of the
Commerce, or in order to a more speedy bringing of it in, there might be Banks
of Credit emitted, and the Bills might be more safely and conveniently
committed to the Use and Improvement of such Companies, to be answered by them
in Money, by a certain Time, if Occasion be, the Bills being emitted upon the
Security of their Estates, and under the Patronage and Inspection of the
Government, than in any other Way whatsoever.

To illustrate this, I will borrow a few Arguments from the judicious Writer
beforementioned, which are as follows.

As to a private Bank, there be very good Reasons to be given, why a particular
Company of Gentlemen should be entrusted with such a grand Affair, for the
Service of a Country ( s^il under the Inspection of the Government etc.) that
is to say in our Case, if our Country and Government find their own Bank (as to
their Apprehension etc.) is fatigued with some such Encumbrances and
Inconsistences as that they neither can nor will dispense with -- So that the
Country is quite Heart sick of their own measures; I am very well assured upon
very good Argument that a private Bank shall cure them, and do every thing to
their Satisfaction.

I shall with convenient Brevity offer a few preliminary Thoughts relating to
the present Subject, and then point at Persons proper to be entrusted with the
Affair, and the Reasons of it.

1. A few preliminary Thoughts, wherein I shall distinguish between a public
and private Bank, viz.

Imprimis, A public Bank of Credit is somewhat precarious, yet it carries a
vast Bounty with it, to to those Countries who have the Wisdom to give it an
honorable Reception; but to others it is but a common Plague. There be two
Principles absolutely needful to preserve it in a Country, viz. Prudence and a
public Spirit in Men of Estates; if such Men will but wisely govern their
private Interests in Favor of it, they will soon shackle other Men's and
bridle their Recusancy, and bring them to Conformity. A wise Government may
project, but it is wise and great Men under Government, must cultivate such a
Projection for a public Good --. 1. As to their Trade. When Men come to buy a
Supply with Bills, they accommodate them at the old Money Price, and take the
Bills without higling or making any Distinction etc. 2. As to their Bonds and
Obligations for Specialties. When the Debtor comes, possibly he inquires Sir!
there is a Bond of one thousand Ducats in your hands against me, Will you take
Bank Bills? Reply, Bank Bills Man! there is nothing will suit me better than
Bank Bills, -- I will abate Part of my Interest if you will clear the rest, and
the whole Principal by the Bills. I do assure you my good Friend, and you may
tell it to your Neighbors, that we in the Merchandise do prefer the Bills,
above the Money. (For Reasons etc.) -- Now such a prudent Temper circulating
and influencing the principal Members of such a grand Community, (or
Government) will soon become a Law for all other Men, etc. Thus it has been in
Holland, Venice, New York etc.

But on the other hand, Where the Bills have gone up and down and been
ridiculed, its owing to head Men, and Men of Fortune, Aviae Versa; as in
France, Sweedland and South Carolina etc. Now it seems to me plain, that if
those civil Powers, or States that have stood and looked on, and seen their
noble Projections for the Advance of Trade trampled upon, and could not
possibly prevent the Prostitution; if they had (I say) when they discerned
things lapsing into such Confusion, resigned the Management of the Bank to
principle and suitable Gentlemen, or turned their public into a private Bank;
they might have easily recovered the Glory and sufficiency of their Bank etc.
Especially if supporting and reinforcing the Bequestment with due Sanctions. As
(1.) That the Profit shall be fixed in the Trustees etc. (2.) That the
Government inspect etc. (3.) That the Bills shall be held as current and lawful
Money in answering all Assessments, and also in discharging all Creditors to
the Public, as their own Bills etc. And though in this Method the sensible
Profit seems a Booty to some particular Men; but the general Good by keeping up
a valuable Medium for all Business, is as equally Beneficial to all Men in
common, as though done by the Government; so it will hold in any Example in the
World, as I imagine, and so in our own Case, where there is found such Defects
as cannot be remedied otherwise etc.

2. The Persons to be entrusted must be Men of known Integrity, of real
Estates, good Influence, and considerable Trade. A convenient Company of such
Men imbodied by a Charter from the Government, etc. may manage a Bank of Credit
as matters may be circumstanced better than the public Government, viz. when
things are out of Joint as in France, etc. and as some think in our own Case,
in some Degree as has been said, etc. I say such Men by their Example and wise
Management, can do more to bring things to right and keep them so, than all the
Menaces, penal Laws, or Wisdom of a Government. -- Now I say it appears to me,
that there may be such Gentlemen involved in this Affair, who (can upon the
aforesaid Presumptions) do more than the Government, or than any regular
Monarch upon Earth. I shall just point at such Men as are proper in this Case,
scil. Landed Men etc great Merchants, who (though worth many thousands) keep
the main of their personal Estates, stirring in a way of Trade, both in their
own and other Countries. And also such other Gentlemen of great Estates, and of
great Wisdom, who though they keep up a very considerable Trade and
Merchandise, yet let out Money at Interest; and as their Gain this Way is less,
so also is their Risque: There is a sort of wise and very prudent Men, that are
a kind of amphibious Beings, who live in both both Elements, I and and Water,
these are eminently qualified as Members for a private Bank; and also rich
Farmers and Mechannicks, Men of Character and Influence (according to their
Sphere) in the Places where they live.

Note, These Qualities are pointed at in the Supposition of a Company embodied
merely for the Management of a Bank, to be taken and improved in their private
Affairs, severally according to their Securities given, when as in the
Supposition of a Company for Trade, and improving a Bank only in their united
Interests, under public Regulations by Officers or Committees appointed
(though such noted Men are the best and most suitable yet) those Qualifications
are not so necessary to every Member, but the Majority should be of such Men,
and farther what Man soever he be that will venture considerably of his Estate,
to be improved in such an Affair, though but, by being Surety for such a Value
or Part in the Bank so improved, must be looked upon as a true Friend to the
Commonwealth, for that mean spirited Men will not venture their Estates out of
their own private Management; and the greater the Number of such public
spirited Men, the less requisite for each to be vested with large Possessions.
But farther he faith,

The main of these Men must belong to our Metropolis, and other Seaports and
Towns of Trade, and others to be dispersed through the Province. A convenient
Company of such Persons so qualified and incorporated, I do imagine, shall be
capable to carry on a Bank of Credit, with greatest Advantage, with an immense
Good and Benefit to the Public. --

And that such a Community are capable of doing great Service in this Affair is
obvious from the following Reasons.

1. For that this Company of Gentlemen can regulate the Prices of all things
yearly, in the common Course of Trade and Commerce. The wild and insulting
Prices of Things have ruined the foreign Banks, etc. and possibly something of
this Nature has been a Diminution to our own etc. Now there is a sovereign
Remedy provided in this Projection against such an Inconveniency and Mischief,
for by the Wisdom, Precautions and Examples of those Men, they will thereby
conduct all such Points, as though Controulers and absolute masters of the
Market, and yet hurt no Man's Property, or insringe Liberty, and hereby Equity
in Commerce will be better upheld, excessive Demands suppressed; the Honor and
Credit of the Medium maintained, and the just and reasonable Gains and Profits,
of all Men suited and secured; for we must note that they are Men of different
Functions, and their own Interests as well as Honor will oblige them always to
steer right and do well for other Men; for if they hurt others, they hurt
themselves, and no Man need suspect or fear, no not a Knave, much less a wise
honest Man under this Head, for that it is a sure Maxim, viz. Self Interest
will neither cheat nor lie; for that is the string in the Nose (through the
World which governs the Creature. -- Other Reasons I shall omit the Recital of;
this being enough to the Purpose.

I am greatly persuaded that the well managing of the Banks in Europe with
their regular holding of the Credit of Money is greatly owing to the Conduct
and Rule of their Companies, as well as to their peculiar good Laws and Customs
in Trade; when as the Kings of Spain and France are obliged by their
prerogative Power (as their Occasions sometimes require) to advance the Credit
of their Money with notable leaps, whereby their Money is rendered very
unstable in Value; nor could the King of Sweden with his big and majestic
Looks or imperial Orders rescue his Bank Bills from the Contempt they met with
in his common Markets.

Indeed the Nature of the Produce or staple Commodities, manner of Business
etc. of some Countries is such that renders the Trade much the easier governed.

As in New York, Wheat being the staple Commodity, and so largely produced, it
is very rare that ever they fail of a large Export in that particular, and
although if a Scarcity should happen one Year, yet another Year may fully
recruit their Stock, whenas the Produce of New England, being more variably
advanced, sometimes abounding in this, and sometimes in that, and when Stocks
for Pasturage become shortened, it requires some Years to recruit them, by which
means the Prices of things becomes wild and advancing, but then New York is a
more direct Market, being almost the sole Port of Entry, for the whole
Community in Trade, and their Markets much better regulated than in
New England, which is the Cause of the steady value upon their Bills, and not
so much in the mere certainty of the Fund. Wherefore it must needs be highly
necessary to the flourishing of the Commonwealth of New England, to encourage
and promote the setting up of Companies for Trade, laying aside all doubtful
mistrustful Apprehensions of what may be the Event, but rather expecting the
same good Success which has occasioned so many Companies to be set up in Great
Britain, and that has occasioned the Constitution of one in Virginia by a
Charter from the Crown, Our Rulers at home greatly regard their Companies,
enlarging them with great and peculiar Immunities and Privileges. Then how
comes it to pass that we must be so wary as not to venture into such a method?
Although we are not so able yet we might do something in proportion to our
means; the less able we are, the less Trade will serve, and not only so, but
the more need to unite our Strength and Interest in the Promotion of what is so
much wanted, viz. a regular leading in Trade. And the Government by giving no
greater Power to a Company of Traders, than they have ordinarily to bestow,
upon a Body of Proprietors in any other Concerns for a regular Management,
would be sufficient to hold them in Form.

But alas! Mistrust some, this is only an Intregue to introduce that forlorn
Enemy to the Public, viz. A Bank of Credit! What to allow a parcel of
whimsical Fools to turn their Estates into so fickle a matter as Bills of
Credit! Certainly these inadvertent Persons will undo themselves, and then we
shall have them come crying to the Government for Relief; an awful Thing! And
not only so but there may be many more Snakes in the Grass that we don't see,
we have Credits lie at Stake, and to multiply Bills will certainly sink them,
i. e. and now if we should emit no more Bills our Credits may for ought we know
turn all into Silver Money.

But Gentlemen, You take us wrong, we consider thus in our Schemes, The Affairs
of our State are under a miserable Indisposition, our Trade (which is the Nurse
of the Commonwealth) sorely languisheth for Want of a sufficient Medium, and a
regular Leading. Our Medium of Trade (for want of a larger footing, and a more
direct and forehanded Improvement) sinks and cripples every day, at a great
Rate, and so sinks the Common Wealth; and the faster it sinks the faster it
may; and although we have waded thorough a long plunge of Difficulty,
maintaining our Commerce in some sort hitherto with the help of Banks,
additionally as our Medium has more and more fallen short; yet since the
perpetual sinking has put a Damp upon farther proceeding in this method for
Relief, and yet the sinking Disposition still remains upon all our Credits, and
our Trade still becomes more and more destitute and incapable of digesting our
Produce to Advantage (however dear as well cheap some of our Produce is
rendered through Gluts and Scarcities) these things does evidently portend or
forebode some notable Overture in our State. For,

To suffer our Banks to dwindle and die, (as they must if something in special
be not done to prevent it) waiting for the Bills to recover their Credit, or
for Silver to come in Voluntier, or by forcing of it in by Law, without giving
of it an honorable Invitation in the Advance of its Credit, more than what
mere Obligations will do, the Country cannot endure it: What Injustice,
Oppression and Misery will break in upon us, and what an overthrow in our State
and Affairs will be intolerable to undergo, and a Shame for a politic People
to suffer.

We are got very far upon the Shoals, and if we cannot alter our Course, nor
have no way to help our selves, but by making the best of a common Wreck, our
Case is bad, some may make (...) in small Floats, but the Body of Wealth must
sink, some of the dire Effects we may already see and feel, but they will yet
appear much more notorious, as our Banks approach their Exit. And therefore it
is out of good Will and Pity, to our Country, to our selves, and our Brethren,
and for the Benefit of the public, and for the Interest of our Sovereign, his
Crown and Government, that we do consult the Promotion and Enlargement of Trade
in these measures. And although if our honorable Rulers don't see it so
necessary or so likely to be beneficial to the public; yet if they don't see
any evident Injury coming thereby to the Public it may be hoped that to
gratify a number of generous well meaning Subjects, they will (as Saul to David
when he would go forth to fight with the Philistine) give some suitable
Allowance and Protection, notwithstanding the Disdain of some of our elder
Brethren.

For who is this irregular Monster that he should defy or threaten the State
or Commonwealth of New England? Let no Man's heart fail because of him; for
your Servants will go and fight with him, only bid us go, clothing us with
your Armor of Protection, allowing us the Power and Privileges of a Company
for a Coat of Mail, and a small Bank of public Credit, (such as we can give
good Security for) for a Sword; and who knows but we may prevail,
notwithstanding our Smallness and Youth in matters of Trade. For although but few
may appear in the forefront of the Battle, yet the Smiles of the Government in
their Regards to those will doubtless be an Inducement to a great Body to
advance and join with them; there is a great Army of Israel ready to pursue the
Conquest, when once the Champion of the Philistines is smitten in the Forehead.
However some may (for want of good manners and a rational Ingenuity) ridiculize
and undervalue the Persons appearing to undertake in the Cause, upbraiding them
with their Circumstances, Callings etc. (as Eliab did David) yet if the Cause
be good this Defect may well be made up with the Addition of able, wise and
suitable Men, let such join with them, here is an Opportunity for generous
public spirited Men, to distinguish and signalize themselves in behalf of the
public; for that other kind of Men dare not venture their Estate in the
Improvement of a public Trade. Men may talk of doing great for the public,
but who will venture their Money in a public Stock, except virtuous and noble
Men? If the Cause be not good produce strong Reasons, let us consider the
Practice of the Nation, the Principles of politic States, let us consult
Reason and not fancy, if New England never saw it; yet if old England has
proved it, methinks it might be allowed of. We may raise Scruples and Doubts
against the best Schemes, but methinks we need not be very curious, when we
cannot readily go into a worse Way than we are in of Course. Indeed the mere
possibility of miscarrying or being unfortunate, is a slender Reason to forbid
a good Proceeding. What we ask is but a rational thing to ask for, and what
every rational Man would with to succeed, and no more than what free Subjects
might rationally be indulged with. Do any mistrust the Privileges and Benefits
too great to be monopolized, let such join and take Part; the Cause groans for
want of Undertakers, the more the better; does any mistrust that the emitting
of Bills are not favored by our Rulers at Home, then why does the more
depending kingly Governments so freely emit large Banks as some does? Or does
any mistrust that to increase the Quantity of our Medium of Trade must needs
sink the Credit of it? Let these exercise Reason and they will know better;
however, I have heard them that should be wise Men argue, that only the
advancing three or four thousand Pounds in Connecticut, to pay their Agent,
caused the Bills of Credit to sink evidently the faster in New England; then
what a sorrowful Drugg would they become, if ten or twenty thousand Pounds
should be advanced to encourage a public Trade? but alas! this would scarcely
be perceived, for that I presume that no less than (...) hundred thousand
Pounds, in our Money is wanting of a competent Supply for our ordinary
Commerce, which gradually emitted as it might be received in Exchange with Time
for the Business of the Country to recruit, would but maintain, rather than
sink the Credit of Money. Could I but think of any rational Objection against
our Cause, I would rationally solve it, or I would give over the Cause, but I
cannot find one, and so I cannot tell what to say farther. Indeed there may be
many frivolous Scruples made against the best Projections, and in matters of
temporal Profit Men are apt to be Wary and Skettish, rather choosing to remain
as they are, than run the venture of a new Project, especially those that can
make the best of the Times, but this Disposition will never stand New England
in stead; we must be more generous and charitable in our thinking and look with
Sympathy upon reasonable Proposals, as if they come from Men, and not from
Fools, for when Projectors must be treated with Frowns and Disdain, it
discourages the most necessary kind of Men from showing their Faces.

One necessary Principle more I have to urge, and that is public Bounty in
carrying on public Affairs.

In Times of Peace and Tranquillity it is not only convenient but very
necessary, to undertake great and notable Works for public Benefit, as
building Fortifications, Castles, Bridges, State-houses, Colleges or any other
great Works of a public Nature. The common or ordinary demand for Labor is
not sufficient to prevent the prevailing of Idleness, especially among a People
that are not in the Way of advancing their worldly Grandeur in the Expenses of
Labor.

So Weak and Feeble as New England is, or any Part of it, they might carry on
such Works to an eminent Degree, and yet the Commonwealth should flourish
never the less. We might spare abundance of Labor from our ordinary Occasions;
only to say we are an idle, prodigal, lavish People proves it; for our
Prodigality enlarges the Business of Labor, and if Idleness will maintain us
at a prodigal Rate, then surely we have Labor to spare.

It signifies but little for every one to try who shall do most of the little
there is to be done, for he that can with the most advantage gain the Business,
will certainly supplant the other of his Profit, and put him out of the Way of
Business; and the Extravagancy of some must make a Demand for the Prudence of
others. I cannot suppose that King Solomon's great Buildings in the least
impoverished the People, though his Burthenis might seem heavy; for as soon as
the great Undertakings were finished, the Business scanted, and the Kingdom
faded, and the manners of the People corrupted. It is a certain Truth that
great Undertakings upon the public Account, if regularly managed never hurts
the Commonwealth, but rather inures a People to Principles of Virtue, when
otherwise Principles of Licentiousness will prevail. But Men must be drawn
gradually into public Service, as others may have Time to lay out their
Business accordingly as they find the Demand for their Produce increases; for
sudden drawing Men out of the common Business might occasion great Wants and
Scarcities. Now it would be much better for the State of New England if such
great and notable Works, as aforesaid, might be carried on upon the public
Account. If we should advance largely to the encouraging of Colleges and
Schools etc it would but be our Glory and Interest, for we may well spare the
Labor, but then Learning would be encouraged, and we might have many the more
well accomplished Statesmen bred up among us. In many Cases the seeming
advance of Burdens is but the giving of Strength to bear them. But then in the
first Place, It is very necessary that we be in a Way of Exchanging a
considerable Quantity of our Labor either for Money or for Bills of Credit, to
some convenient Degree to set us beforehand, that we may have Money to pay the
Labourer, and not that we should remain plunged with only our necessary
Provisions for a current Stock being discouraged down to very Scarcity to make
them current, and consequently to mere Poverty: Besides, Men will work for
Money, when they will not work for other Species: Therefore I say that it is
necessary there should be a good large Stock of Currency, that instead of
spending our Time seeking Money, waiting for our Dues, suffering Damages and
Perplexities, we might be plying our Work and Business to Advantage like able
Men.

But some may object that such public Liberalities would tend to lay Burdens
on the poor Widows etc. to help the Rich. To this I answer, that the Polls of
Widows and helpless kind of People, such as are not able to labor, does but
little to public Charges, not do the Poor pay Taxes upon what they don't
possess, so that this can be but an inconsiderable Wrong to them.

Or if others with more Reason object, that it would lay the Burden upon
prudent, industrious Men. To these I would answer. That to advance Money to
support a rich Farmer in raising Victuals and Clothing to supply the common
Demand for Labor, or for the public Money to be improved to any such Purpose
or End, as to uphold a private producing for the common Market, would indeed be
a Burden and a Disadvantage to Men of Business that must advance the Money;
but for the Money to be proportionably advanced to the Support and Enlargement
of Schools, to the carrying on of any great and public Buildings, enabling Men
employed in public Service to build and furnish for themselves largely, as
becomes a public Station, does but make so much more Profit in the ordinary
Business of the Country, in the natural Tendency of it besides the public
(...) or End of the Business carried on. Therefore I say, that to undertake
largely in such public Affairs contributing liberally to carry on the same, is
no Hindrance to the Commonwealth but very necessary, under our Circumstances
of Business, to promote Principles of Industry, by enlarging the Demand for
Labor.

A stingy closehanded Disposition is not good for the Commonwealth; Men of
that Disposition may do much to supply the common Demand for Labor, drawing
others to stoop to them; but that which makes for the Common Wealth is for Men
to carry on Business industriously, and lay out and expend largely, making good
Business for others as well as for themselves, and thus by a generous and
friendly Commutation in Business, the Commonwealth may wax and flourish, and
this would encourage Men of Business to come in and settle among us, which with
the Advantage of an enlarged Commrece, and a suitable increasing Stock of Money
or Bills of Credit, to carry it out ably and freely, we might advance our
selves in the Interest of the Crown and Kingdom.

THE END.
THE Reader is desired to take notice of the following ERRATA. Which being well
observed in their Places, may serve to mend the Sense of the Expressions, and
render the Discourse more Intelligible.

The Errors are as follows;

Page 3 Lin.13 For Conformable, read Comfortable.

21 35 Money, Bills

23 27 Has been, there has been

40 Money, Silver Money.

37 33 Laid aside, Abated.

36 Bartering, Bantering.

38 5 Bartering, Bantering.

54 31 Two hundred, Five Hundred.

[Pag. 27. line 41 Blot out Public or Private]


