Mr. Barnard's SERMON, upon December 25. 1729. with an APPENDIX.

THE Certainty, TIME, and END OF THE BIRTH OF OUR Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST
with the Accomplishment of several of the Prophecys relating thereto. A SERMON,
at the Lecture, in Marblehead December 25. 1729.

To which is added, An APPENDIX, attempting more clearly to State, the true
Year of our Lords Nativity.

By John Barnard, V. D. M. of Marblehead.

BOSTON: Printed for S. Gerrish, at the lower end of Cornhill. 1731.

THE Certainty, Time and End, OF THE Birth of CHRIST.
LUKE II.10, 11. And the Angel said unto them, Fear not; for behold, I bring
you good Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all People: For unto you is
born this Day, in the City of David, a Savior, which is CHRIST the LORD.


AS the Time drew near for the Appearance of the great God, and our Savior, to
dwell with Men on the Earth, there was a wonderful Expectation, among almost
all Nations, of some great Personage, to be born into the World, who should be
remarkable, beyond any that had gone before him: To which the Prophet Haggai,
one of the last of the Prophets, under the Old Testament, refers, when he says,
Hag. II.7. The Desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this House
(meaning the Second Temple, then a building, and near finished,) with Glory;
that is, by the Presence of Him whom all Nations, Pluribus persuasio in^rat
antiquis Sacerdotum literis contineri, eo ipso Tempore ut valesceret Oriens,
praefectique Iud^a, rerum potirentur.

Tac. His. Lib. 5. Cluverus quotes a Passage out of Suidas, wherein he tells
us, that Augustus sent to the Pythian Oracle to enquire who should succeed him,
and received this Answer from Apollo.

Hebraeus Puer injungit, Divum Dominator, Hacce Domo fuger^ et rursum me
inferna ^u^i^e.

Ergo tace^s aris posthac discedite nostris.

Cl^^. His. 253.


and the Jews Hence is that in Math. XI, 3. Art thou He that should come? or
look we for another? And indeed their fond Expectation of the Messiah about
this Time (...) the Advantage to several Impostors, as Theudas, and Judas of
Gallile^ to deceive so many of them to their ruin. See Dr Owen Exe^. Heb. 125.
especially, desired and looked for. This Expectation, doubtless, had it is Rise
among the Nations, from the Jews, who were dispersed over Syria, Chaldea,
Persia, and Greece, at, and after their Captivity by Nebuchadnezzar. Their
Discourses about the promised Messiah, and the great Deliverance they looked
for from Him, and the Prophecys relating to His Coming, contained in their
canonical Books, very naturally led the learned among the Nations, who, we may
reasonably suppose, had some little Acquaintance with the Jewish Writings,
Doubtless the famous Sibilline Prophecys, were Originally some Scraps and
Fragments of the Jewish.
to expect some such mighty Person, as they spoke of. The Prophecy of Daniel,
Dan. IX.24.
while he resided in the Persian Court, had so plainly pointed out the Messiah,
the Prince, and the Time of His Appearance, that they could not be wholly
Ignorant of Him; and therefore, toward the Period of the Prefixed Time, were
looking and waiting for the Consolation of Israel.

The Angel Gabriel first makes known the Prophecy to Daniel, and about, 532
Daniel had the Revelation in the first Year of Cyaxeres, or Darius the Mede who
was Son of Ast^ages, otherwise called Ahasuerus; and about 80 Years before the
Decree was given forth, which he speaks of in his 9th chapter For the first of
Darius was an I. P. 4176. and the Decree was given an I. P. 4256. and Zac.
Vision was a P. I. 4708.
Years after, when the Time determined for the Messiah's Coming, was near at
Hand, God sends the same Gabriel, first to Zacharias, to acquaint him, that he
should have a Son, by his Wife Elisabeth, though they had gone Childless, till
they were both well stricken in Years, and that this their Son should be the
Forerunner of the Messiah Luke. I.13, 17.

According to Dr. Pride. Account; and therefore from Dan. to Zac Vision is 532
Years.


; and within a few Months after to the Virgin Mary, to notify to her, that she
should conceive and bear a Son, and call His Name JESUS Luke I.26, 31.
, who should be the Immanuel, or God with us.

At the Time of the Birth of this wondrous and holy Child Jesus, (perhaps,)
the same Gabriel is made the Joyful Messenger, of this glad Tidings, to the
Shepherds, who were watching over their Flock, by Night, near Bethlehem: Of
which we have an Account in my Context.

The Birth of Christ was attended with a strange Appearance in the Heavens, for
an unusual Light, or Star, shone over Bethlehem, the Place of His Nativity, at
the Time of it Luke II.9
: Which, (no doubt) was the same Star, that the Wise Men of the East, or
certain Magi in Persia, saw in their own Land, and were directed by to find out
the Place of our Lord's Nativity Ma^th. II.1, 2, 5.
.

This Light; or Star, the Shepherds, that were watching over their Flocks, near
the City of David, beheld, and were surprised at so uncommon an Appearance in
the Heavens. But the Angel appeared to them, and said, Fear not; for behold, I
bring you good Tidings of great Joy, which shall be unto all People; for unto
you is born, this Day, in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ, the
Lord. The Shepherds encouraged, and directed, by the Angel, went immediately to
Bethlehem, and there found it as the Angel had told them Luke 12* 16.
.

There are several things observable in the Words of my Text; but there are but
Two or Three, which I shall more particularly take Notice of, to discourse unto
you on, at this Time, and upon this Occasion. As,

I. The Birth, or Incarnation of JESUS CHRIST, the Son of GOD.

II. The Time of His Birth, or when it was.

III. The great End and Design of His Incarnation and Birth. I shall begin with
the first of these; and accordingly,

I. I am to consider the Birth, or Incarnation of JESUS CHRIST, the Son of GOD.
Unto you there is born, Christ the Lord. And here, there are several Things
worthy our Consideration, with respect to the Birth of Christ; as,

I. The Certainty of the Birth, and Incarnation of Christ the Son of GOD.

II. Of whom he was born, and

III. The Place of His Nativity, where he was born. I shall offer something to
each of these. And

I. I shall consider the Certainty of the Birth and Incarnation of JESUS
CHRIST, the Son of God.

And what can be more evident and certain than this is? What that we do not see
with our Eyes, is confirmed to us by so many, and various kinds of Witnesses?
The Angel published it to the Shepherds, assuring them, that unto you is born a
Savior, Christ the Lord: That is, the promised Messiah, the Son of God, and
Savior of the World. And this the Shepherds had full Proof and Evidence of,
when they went to Bethlehem, and according to what the Angel had told them,
found Mary the Mother, and Joseph, the reputed Father, and the Babe lying in a
Manger.

This was further confirmed by the Wise Men of the East. For they (concluding
the Strange Star they had seen in the Heavens, was an Indication of the Birth
of the great Prince, spoken of in the Jewish Writings, and which the World was
now earnestly looking for) after they had traveled some Hundreds of Miles from
Persia, to satisfy their Curiosity about this wonderful Phenomenon, at length
came to Jerusalem, the Metropolis of Judea, near to which the Star, or Light,
had been seen pendant or perhaps, moving from the East to the West, toward
Jerusalem; as Mr. Whiston supposes, Chron. p. 165.
, and enquire, where is He that is born King of the Jews? For we have seen His
Star in the East: And when they were informed, by the learned Men among the
Jews, that Bethlehem was to be the Place of the Nativity of the Messiah, they
traveled thither; and the Star, which they had seen in the East, appeared
again to them, and went before them, until it stood over the Place where the
young Child lay, and so directed them to the particular House, in this
miraculous manner, that they might not be imposed upon by any suppositions
Birth; and they came into the House, and saw the young Child with Mary His
Mother, and fell down and worshipped Him, -- and presented unto Him, Gold and
Frankincense, and Myrrh Matthew. 2.1. -- 11.
. Thus they confessed Him to be GOD, by the Adoration they paid to Him, at the
same Time that their Senses convinced them, that He was really MAN, partaking
of the same Flesh and Blood with themselves.

Besides there were many Witnesses at the Birth of Christ. For when Joseph and
Mary had traveled from Nazareth to Bethlehem, to be taxed, or enrolled The
Taxing spoken of in Luke II.1. was only an E^rollment of the People, in order
to be taxed; and the Tax was not levied upon them till several Years after,
when Cyrenius was Governor of Syria. v. 2* See Dr. Pride con. vol 4. p. 918,
919.
, that Decree of Augustus, which necessitated the Jews to retire to their own
City, to which they and their Families originally belonged, had brought a great
Concourse of People to Bethlehem, so that the Inn, where the Mother of our Lord
took up her Lodgings, was so full, that she could have no Convenience,
answerable to her Circumstances of falling into Travail, and therefore they
laid the Young Child in (...) Manger, because there was no room for the^ in the
Inn; which the Evangelist Luke tak^^ particular notice of, Chapter II. v. 7. From
whence it is plain, that, from the great Multitude of Travelers then present,
there could be no Fraud in this Birth, but Mary really brought forth her first
born Son.

And further, Herod the King, fearing the Loss of his Kingdom, from this Child,
who was styled the King of the Jews, by the Wise Men of the East, and slaying
all the Young Children in Bethlehem, from two Years old, and under, Matt. 2 16.
that he might prevent the Evil which he feared, adds Confirmation to the Truth
and Certainty of the Incarnation of our Lord.

This Child, thus born into the World, was no other than the Accomplishment of
the ancient Promise of the Messiah, the Son of God, appearing in the human
Nature: For it was the Divine Logos, the Eternal Son of God, that became Man,
and was born of a Woman. Hence our Lord said, Ioh III.16. God so loved the
World that he gave His only begotten Son. And thus at the Baptism of our
Savior, it was declared by an audible Voice from Heaven, Matt. III.17. This is
my beloved Son: And the Devils themselves confessed Him to be the Son of God,
saying, Matt. VIII.29. What have we to do with Thee, Jesus, thou Son of God. So
true is it, what the Apostle John tells us, Chapter I.14. The Word was made Flesh,
and dwel^ among us, and we be^eld His Glory, the Glory of the only begotten of
the Father, full of Grace and Truth. Thus God was manifest in Flesh.

2. I am in the next place to consider of whom Christ was born; namely, of a
Virgin the Virgin Mary. And therefore we are told of Mary, Luke II.7. That she
brought forth her first born Son, which is spoken of Christ. And that this Mary
was a pure Virgin, who had never known a Man, when she brought forth this her
first born Son, is evident from the Conference of the Angel with her. For we
are told, Luke I.17. That the Angel Gabriel was sent to a Virgin, espoused to a
Man whose Name was Joseph; and at v. 31. he tells her, that she should conceive
in her Womb, and bring forth a Son, and should call His Name Jesus. And when
the holy Virgin was surprised at his saying, as well she might be, and replied,
v. 34. How shall this be, seeing I know not a Man? The Angel explains the
Mystery to her, and lets her know, that the holy Child, which should be born of
her, should not originate in the Common Way of Generation, but by a Divine
Incubation, or the Almighty Power of God forming a Child in her Womb, without
the natural and ordinary Means therefore: v. 35. The Angel answered, and said
unto her, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the Power of the Highest
shall overshadow thee, therefore also that holy Thing, which shall be born of
thee, shall be called the Son of God. Such was the miraculous and immaculate
Conception of the Blessed Jesus!

This also the Gospel of St. Matthew takes notice of, and informs us, Matt.
I.18. That Mary was but espoused to Joseph; and that, before they came
together, she was found with Child by the Holy Ghost. This is further confirmed
by Ioseph's Carriage to her, upon this Affair; for he finding her to be with
Child, while she was contracted to him, and before their coming together,
concluded she had been guilty of Fornication (or rather Adultery, as being his
espoused Wife) and therefore intended to have put her away, and have nothing
further to do with her; till an Angel from God satisfied him of her Innocence,
that she was a pure Virgin, who had not been guilty of any criminal
Conversation with any Man, but was with Child by the Holy Ghost. See Matthew.
1.19, 20.


In all of this was but fulfilled what was anciently praedicted concerning the
Messiah. For the very first promise of the Messiah, seems to imply no less,
than that He should be born of a pure Virgin, without any carnal Concubinage;
and therefore He is called the Seed of the Woman, Genesis III.15. Where the Woman
only, and not Adam, the Man, is taken notice of, as from whom the Messiah
should proceed, who should bruise the Serpents Head. Genesis III.15.


But this was more plainly spoken of, by the Prophet Isaiah, Chapter VII.14. Behold
a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his Name Immanuel. I
know the latter Jews, and with them the Atheists and Deists of the present Age,
would fain persuade us, that by Virgin, here is meant, a Young Woman, in
general, whether married or unmarryed; and they suppose it no such mighty
matter for a Young Woman, especially if married, to bring forth a Son; and they
suppose further that the Woman intended is, the Prophets Wife, who should have
another Son, and before that Son, now to be born of her, should know to refuse
the Evil, and choose the Good, Ahaz should be delivered from the Enemies that
now encamped against him.

But to make this matter plain, I need only to observe, that as it was no such
great thing for a Woman to bear a Son; so a Woman, in the general, or a married
one in particular, bringing forth a Son, would not amount to the Nature of a
Sign, which is what the Prophet is evidently here speaking of. And besides the
learned in the Hebrew Language agree, that the Word (...) from (...) to hide,
or keep close. This Word is seven times used in the Old Testament, and in all
of them signifyes, an uncorrupted Virgin. See Dr. Owen, Exer. Heb. p. 220, 221.
translated Virgin, properly signifies an undefiled Virgin, one that has not
been married, nor ever known a Man; and so the Jews, who best knew their own
Language, understood it.

But then let us consider the Design of the Prophecy, and that will greatly
enlighten this matter. The evident Design of this Prophecy was to Comfort and
encourage Ahaz, who, with Jerusalem, was in great Fear, that the Combination of
Resin, King of Syria, and Pekah, King of Israel, now investing Jerusalem with
their united Forces, would carry all before them, and utterly destroy the Royal
Stock, the House of David* Ahaz, obstinately (or perhaps modes^^y) refused to
ask a Sign, as the Prophet proposed to him, and therefore the Prophet tells
him, the Lord himself shall give you a Sign Isa. VII.11.14.
. Now a Sign ever means something out of the ordinary Course, or beyond the
Power of merely natural Causes, and yet evident to our Senses; and what this
Sign should be, the Prophet tells him in the next Words, Behold, a Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son, and shall call His Name Immanuel. Though it be but
agreeable to the Course of Nature for a Woman to conceive, and bear a Son, yet
for a pure Virgin to do so, is beyond the Power of Second Causes; and it is
being something unheard of, and exceeding the ordinary Power of Nature, is that
which rendered it a Sign. Now this being but a Repetition, in other Words, and
in a strong^r Light, of the ancient Prophecy concerning the Messiah, who was to
be the Seed of the Woman, and of the Lineage of David, was therefore an
Assurance to Ahaz, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, that they should not be
utterly destroyed, because the Messiah was yet to come; so that they had no
need to be so terribly afraid of the threatened Destruction* for God will
certainly remember His Word, and make good His Promise to Abraham, to Isaac,
and Jacob, and to the House of His Servant David. And because this locked a
great Way off, and did not seem to carry in it that Encouragement which was
necessary to scatter their present Fears, the Prophet from God, further tells
Ahaz v 16.
, that before this Child, (meaning, and perhaps,) pointing to his young Son,
Shear-jashub, (whom God orders the Prophet to take with him v. 3.
, and who is no otherways concerned in this whole Affair, unless in this
particular Transaction,) before this Child shall know to refuse the Evil, and
choose the Good, the Land, which thou abhorrest, shall be forsaken of both her
Kings. That is, Resin, and Pekah, the two Tails of these Smoking Firebrarnds,
(as they are called ^ 4
should both of them be withdrawn from distressing Jerusalem, and be speedily
cut off; as it came to pass within a little while after: for Pekah was cut off
by Hoshea, II. Kin. xv.30.
, and Resin by the King of Assyria II. Kin. xvi.9.
; by which means Ahaz and Judah, were wholly delivered from the Desolation
threatened by these two combined Adversarys.

So that the Sign, which the Lord gave Ahaz by His Prophet, concerning a
Virgin's conceiving, and bearing a Son, was but a further Ratification of what
God had promised to His People of old, and therefore an Assurance to Ahaz, that
the House of David, and Judah should not be destroyed, because His Promise yet
remained to be made Good to them; which make the Words to be a clear
Praediction, of the Messiah's being born of a Virgin; and it was punctually
fulfilled in His Birth of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

3. The third thing I am to consider, relating to the Birth of Christ, is the
Place of it. And it is said, in my Text, to be in the City of David, that is,
Bethlehem, as the Evangelist tells us, at v. 4. Bethlehem was called, the City
of David, because he was born there, and there his Family had their chief Seat
I. Sam. XVI 1. and XVII 12.
. And we read, Mich V.2. But thou, Bethlehem Ephrata, though thou be little, (or
shall be Chief Dr. Pride. con. vol. IV p. 781.
among the Thousands of Judah; out of Thee, shall He come forth unto me, that
is to be Ruler in Israel. This the Jews ever understood to be a Prophecy, that
the Messiah should be born in Bethlehem; and therefore when Herod enquired of
the chief Priests and Scribes, where Christ should be born, they tell him, in
Bethlehem in Judea, and refer to this very Text, in Micah, for the Proof of it
Ma^t. II 4, 5* 6.
. The putting to Death all the Children that were in Bethlehem, is a sad
Testimony, which proves, that we did not invent the Answer which the Scribes
and Pharisees returned unto Herod; and that Answer likewise, is a certain
Evidence, that the Jews themselves were formerly of Opinion that this O^acle
concerned the Messiah only. Abb^d^ Vin. p. 502
,

To bring about the Fulfillment of this Prophecy, the Roman Emperor, Augustus,
about the Twenty fourth Year of his Reign, orders a general Survey to be made
of the whole Roman Empire, which Survey extended to the Provinces dependant
upon the Empire, as well as the Citizens of Rome; by which Enrollment, every
one was obliged to repair, to their own City, as the Evangelist Luke informs
us, to Luke II.3
; that is, the City where their Ancestors had their Original, there to have
their Names, Qualities and Possessions, entered upon Record Dr. Pride* con. vol.
IV p. 919.
; this necessitated Joseph and Mary his espoused Wife, some Years after, when
the Survey was come into the Province of Judea, to travel from Nazareth, where
they dwelt, to Bethlehem, as to their own City, from whence they derived, there
to have their Names and Circumstances enrolled; and while they were, upon this
Occasion, in Bethlehem, the Virgin Mary, was delivered of her first born Son.
And thus Christ was born in the City of David,

Now besides a literal Accomplishment of the Prophecy of Micah, concerning the
Place of the Messiah's Nativity, here was also a plain Proof, of His being of
the Royal Stock, of David, and so King of the Jews. For the Promise of the
Messiah, that was to come into the World, was firstly confined to the Lo^ns of
Abraham, afterward to the Tribe of Judah, and lastly to the Family of David,
and accordingly the Survey that led Joseph and Mary to Bethlehem, the City of
David, proves them both to be of the Line of David, and descended from his
Stock. Therefore the Evangelists, in drawing down the Line of Descent,
design^^ly show us, how Christ was the Son of David. Matthew Ma^t c^* I.
gives us the Line from David to Joseph, His supposed Father; and Luke Luke chapter
III.
the Line of His real Mother, which shows they were both descended from that
renowned King of Israel. For Heli, in Luke's Catalogue, was the Father Clark's
Annot.
of Mary, who was espoused to Joseph; and because the Jews made no reckoning,
in their Genealogies, by the Mother's side, therefore Joseph her espoused
Husband, and Son in Law to Heli, is mentioned in her Room ^is observable, that
St Luke, in drawing the Line of Descent, does not say, (...) the Son of Heli,
but only mentions the several Fathers successively, and as we put, [ as was
supposed] into a Parenthesis, in our Translation, let us enlarge the
Parenthesis to, [ as was supposed the Son of Ioseph] and the Catalogue runs
clear; Jesus began to be about 30 Years of Age, being of Heli of Matthat etc.
And He was of Heli, by his Daughter Mary, as the Jews well know, and therefore
say of him, Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary? Mark VI.3. and 400
Years after the Jews acknowledge this in their Jerusalem Ta^gum, as Dr. Ligh^f.
observes in his Hor. Heb. in Luke III.23.
.

Thus much may suffice to have spoken to the Birth of Christ, the Certainty of
it, the Person of whom, and the Place where. I shall now proceed to the Second
thing I proposed, namely,

II. To consider the Time of our Blessed Lord's Nativity, or when Christ was
born. And this I shall do, first more generally, and then more particularly.

I. I shall consider the Time of Christ's Birth more Generally. And there are
especially Two Prophecies, which I shall take Notice of, as pointing to the
Time of the Messiah's appearing in the World, both of which have had their full
Accomplishment in the Coming of Christ.

The First I shall mention is the famous Prophecy in Jacob's Blessing his Son
Judah, which is contained in Genesis XLIX.10. The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, until Shiloh come. By Shiloh is
meant the Messiah, as the Jews themselves before our Savior's Time ever
acknowledged. All the three Targums, Onkelos written before Christ^ Time, and
Ionathan's and the Jerusalem, written after it* agree in applying this to the
Messiah. Dr. Owen Exer. Heb p. 97.
The Design of the Prophecy is a general Assurance that the Sovereign Power
shall remain in the Tribe of Judah, unto the Time of Shiloh, or Christ, His
appearing in the World, after which all Sovereign Power should be lost from
among the Jewish Nation. And this has been very punctually fulfilled.

For it is very evident, that this foreign Power continued in the Tribe of
Judah, in a Line of Kings that descended from David, from his Time, down to the
Babylonish Captivity; and in the Time of that Captivity, though their State was
exceedingly broken, yet were they governed, in part, by Rulers of their own set
over them, in the Land of Judea, and chiefly, by their own Laws, and their own
Sanhedrim, or Council, which still preserved something of the Sovereign Power,
even in their Dispersions among the Babylonians; till at length the Persian
Emperor fully restored the Sovereign Power to them. And through all the
Disturbances which they afterward met with, from the Syrian, and Egyptian
Princes, yet still they had some of the Sovereignty among them, even to the
Birth of Christ. For at that Time, Herod who, we are told Dr. Pride. con. vol.
IV. p. 935.
, descended from a Family of the Jews, was King over them; however they were
governed chiefly by their own Laws, and had the Power of Life and Death, which
is the highest Act of Sovereignty, to be found among them. But* (...) the Time
of Christ's appearing, that Sovereign Power was wholly lost; and never more
recovered by them. For Herod, we are told Dr. Pride. con. ibid Though I rather
choose to suppose with Mr. Whiston in his Chron. that Herod lived but little
more than a Month after Christ's Nativity. See the Appendix.
, reigned one Year after Christ's Birth, and Archelaus, who succeeded him,
reigned Ten Years, and the very next Year, which was the Twelfth of our Lord's
Nativity, and the Year He first appeared in the Temple, manifesting something
of His Glory, in Disputing with the Doctors there, the Romans, having seized
Judea, by the Hands of Pub. Sul. Quirinius, whom Luke calls Cyrenius, annexed
it to their Empire, and placed a Roman Governor over it, and subjected it to
the Roman Laws. From this Time, the Scepter departed from Judah and Lawgiver
from between His Feet; and this was more plainly evident, when, not many Years
after, the Roman Army, under Titus, destroyed their City, and Nation, since
which Time they have had no Pretensions to Sovereign Power.

This therefore proves, that the Messiah, the promised Shiloh, was then come,
and that He came about the Time when Jesus Christ first appeared in the World,
and whatever the latter Jews pretend, yet the former readily confessed they had
lost their Sovereignty, when they said, Ioh. XVIII.31. It is not lawful for us
to put any Man to Death; and when they replied to Pilate, the Roman Governor,
(who brought forth Jesus to them, a little before His Crucifixion, and said,
Behold your King,) we have no King but Caesar, Ioh. XIX.15.

Secondly. The other Prophecy, I would take notice of, relating to the Time of
the Birth of the Messiah, is that remarkable one of the Prophet Daniel, Dan. IX
24* -- ^^.
, Seventy Weeks are determined upon thy People, and upon thy holy City, -- know
therefore, and understand, that from the going forth of the Commandment, to
restore and to build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah, the Prince shall be seven
Weeks, and threescore and two Weeks; (the Street shall be built again, and the
Wall, even in troublous Times:) and after threescore and two Weeks shall
Messiah be cut off. -- He shall confirm the Covenant with many for one Week;
and in the latter half of the Week He shall cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to
cease. -- The Seventy Weeks are allowed by all to mean Weeks of Years,
according to the Prophetic Style, that is, 490 Years. These Seventy Weeks are
divided into Three Periods, namely Seven Weeks, or 49 Years, to restore and to
build Jerusalem, Sixty two Weeks, or 434 Years, from thence to the appearing of
the Messiah the Prince. And one Week, or seven Years from thence, for the
confirming of the Covenant; which last Week seems to have a Sub-division
belonging to it, by the Expression, in the Dividing, or in the latter Part of
the Week, the Messiah the Prince shall be cut off, and finish Transgression,
and make an End of Sin; or put an End to all other Sacrifices for Sin by the
Sacrifice of Himself.

The main Difficulty here is, to understand, what Decree, or Commandment is
intended by the Prophecy, that we may know, from whence to Date the 70 Weeks,
or 490 Years: For there were several Decrees issued out, in Favor of the Jews,
by the Persian Emperors.

The first was in the First Year of Cyrus, of which we read, Ezra, I. begin:
But this could not be the Commandment spoken of by Daniel, which was to restore
and to build Jerusalem; because this Decree had its special Reference to the
Building of the Temple, and had no particular Regard to Jerusalem, nor was any
further concerned about it, than as the rebuilding the Temple necessarily
required their Inhabiting in some Place near to it, and no doubt but Cyrus was
influenced to make this Decree, for the Jews to return and rebuild their
Temple, in Honor to that God, who had, according to his ancient Prophecies
concerning him, raised him to his Grandeure, and so long before hand praedicted
his Birth, Name, and Reign Isa. XLIV.28.
; and therefore he praefaces his Decree, with this, as the Reason of it, The
Lord God of Heaven has given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and he has
charged me to build Him an House in Jerusalem, which is in Judah Ezra. I.2^
.

There was a Second Decree issued out from the Persian Court, about 18 Years
after the former, by Darius, the Son of Histaspis, which came to the Jews, at
Jerusalem, about the beginning of his fourth Year Dr. Pride. con. vol. I. p. ^^9.
; of which we have an Account, Ezra, VI.6. -- But neither does this seem to be
the Commandment spoken of by Daniel: for this was chiefly a Recital and
Confirmation of the former Decree made by Cyrus, and, as we may see in the Body
of the Decree, was confined to the Building the Temple, and the Service
thereof, only with this Addition, that the Samaritans, who endeavored all they
could to obstruct the Building of the Temple, were now obliged to pay the
King's Tribute to the Jews, to help bear the Charge of the Work.

But then, there was a Third Decree in Favor of the Jews, made in the Seventh
Year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, who is the Ahasuerus spoken of in the Book of
Esther; and doubtless it was by the Persuasion of his beloved Esther, whom the
King had taken to Wife in the Seventh Year of his Reign Est. II.16. Probably
the King ha^ before this r^cei^ed her, in her tu^n, with the other V^rgins and
she gai^ed his Love, though it was the Seventh Year before he s^t the royal Crown
upon her He^d
after the putting away of Vashti from being Queen, that the King was moved to
make such an ample Decree in Favor of the Jews. For this Decree granted first
to Ezra Ezra. VII.
and afterward renewed, in the Twentieth Year of his Reign, to Nehemiah Neh
II* init.
, was a full and ample restoring the Jews to all their Privileges and Powers;
for it not only established, and provided for the Service of the Temple, but
devolved the full Power of the Civil Government, and the inflicting any
Punishment, pecuniary* or Corporal, even to Banishment and (...), upon their
own Ruler (...) VII.1^.2^*
and so was a ^esto^ing and building Jerusalem, in the fullest Sense of the
Words, namely, a Complete Establishment of their Church and State.

This Decree then, it is most likely, from the Tenure of it, was that intended
by the Prophet Daniel, when he says, from the going forth of the Commandment,
to restore and build Jerusalem, etc. And from hence we are to begin the
Computation of the 70 Weeks, or 490 Years S^e ^^. Owen, ^. ver. Heb. p 19^.
(...)
and that we may be able* to discern the exact Accomplishment of the Prophecy,
we must observe;

That the Decree was made in the Seventh Year of Artaxerxes Longimanus.

That the Decree began to take Effect on the first Day of the Jewish Month
Nisan, which was their first Ecclesiastical Month, and answers to the Middle of
our March; for upon that Day, Ezra sets out from Babylon, to go up to
Jerusalem, with his la^^e Commission from the Ki^^ Ezra. VII.9
; and it is very probable that the (...) had been given him, but a few Days
(...), and that Ezra, who was gre^tly in (...), and was well (...) to receive,
(...) himself, in ordering Matters for this Journey, while the Commission was
making out for him.

The Seventh Year of Artaxerxes answered to the 4256, Year of the Julian Period.

Now the first Seven Weeks of Years, or 49 Years of Daniel's Prophecy,
commencing in the Seventh Year of Artaxerxes, were all of them spent in
restoring and building Jerusalem; that is, in the resettling the Church and
State of the Jews, first under the Government of Ezra, and then under Nehemiah,
who succeeded him, and completed that Settlement, in that last Act of his
Reformation, recorded, Neh. XIII.23. -- which seems to have been the last
Article recorded in the Old Testament; and falls in with A. I. P. 4305. See Dr.
Pride. Con. part. I Book VI. p. 609.


The Second Branch of the Prophecy, viz. 62 Weeks, or 434 Years, from thence to
Messiah the Prince, appearing to confirm the Covenant, had also its exact
Accomplishment; for just so many Years intervened, between that last Act of
Nehemiah's Reformation, and the first Appearance of John Baptist, the
Forerunner of our Lord, preaching Repentance, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
Hand. For John began his Ministry in the Fifteenth That is of Tiberius's
reigning in Copartnership with Augustus. Pride. v. IV p. 940.
of Tiberius Luke III.1.2, 3.
, which answered to the Julian Per. 4739. exactly 434 Years.

The last Branch of the Prophecy, One Week, or 7 Years, was for the Confirming
of the Covenant, to the Cutting off of the Messiah. And accordingly we find our
Lords Forerunner entering upon his Office in the 15th Year of Tiberius, as we
have said, and spending some Time, (as is generally though it,) Three Years and an
Half in Confirming the Covenant, and then our Lord Himself publicly entered
upon His Office, and spent three Years and an Half more, in the same Work,
which completed the Week of Years, or Seven Years, at the End of which He was
cut off, and by his Death, which was, not for Himself, but, a Sacrifice for our
Sin, He finished Transgression, and made an End of Sin, and caused the
Sacrifice and Oblation to cease.

Now the Death of Christ fell in the 19 of Tiberius's Reign, or his 22. from
his being admitted into Partnership with Augustus, and this was in the 4746
Year of the Julian Period, exactly 490 Years, or Seventy Prophetic Weeks, from
the going forth of the Commandment, in the 7th Year of Artaxexes Longimanus.
Our Blessed Lord upon the Cross at the Time of the Feast of the Jewish
Passover, which was about the Middle of their Month Nisan, and Ezra set out
from Babylon, with his Commission, the first Day of the Month Nisan, so that
from thence to the Death of Christ was 490 Years to a Month.

Now deducting the Time of our Lord's Life, (which Dr. Pridaeaux supposed to be
36 Years and an Half) from the Time of his Death, and it gives us His Birth in
the Year 4709. in the 33d, of Herod, about 4 Years after he had prepared the
Temple, by re-edifying and adorning it, for the Reception of the great Savior,
whose Presence there made it greatly to excel the Glory of the First House; and
in the 26th Year of the Reign of Augustus. See further in the Appendix, this
Account corrected.


All of which are made plain by the Labors of that great Man Dr. Pridaeaux.

Having thus considered the Time of our Savior's Birth, in the General, I pass

2. To a more Particular Consideration of it. And here it may be enquired.

1. What Month, and Day it was, on which Christ was born? And

2. Whether that Day ought to be kept, in Memorial of His Birth? I would offer
something to each of these briefly.

I. What Month, and Day, was it, in which our Blessed Savior, Jesus Christ,
was born? The Angel says, in my Text, This Day is born unto you, a Savior; and
doubtless, it was the very individual Day on which Christ was born, that he
said so. But what particular Day of the Month was that?

And in Answer to this Enquiry, it must be affirmed, that, so far as we are yet
acquainted with the History of those distant Times, no Man can certainly tell,
on what Day His Birth was. This I think is confessed by all that have labored
most in the Search after it. But then though the individual Day cannot be
particularly and positively determined, yet we may come pretty near the Time,
and be able to discover the Month of our Savior's Nativity, by observing some
things, which lie plain before us. As

First, We may observe what St. Luke tells us, Luke II.8. There were in the
same Country, (viz. Bethlehem) Shepherds, abiding in the Field, and keeping
watch over their Flocks by Night. Now it is well known, that Judea is a cold
Country, in the Winter Season When Herod in his War with Antigonus, had slain
Pappus his General and cut off most of the Army, and might by marching di^ectly
to Jerusalem, have mastered it, and put an entire End to the War. Dr Pr^d.
tells us, he was forced to neglect the Opportunity because of the Severity of
the Winte^, which now approached, the Soldiers not being able to ^ear lying
any longer abroad. con. vol. IV. p. 738.

And when most of the Flocks in Judea were consumed with the Drought, in the
13th Year of Herod, the Dr. mentions it as a great Act of charity in him to
take care to bring Wool eno' into the Land to provide Clothing for the
Inhabitants against Winter, to defend them from all the Severities of it con.
vol. IV p. 852.

And Mr. Whiston remarks, that this Time of the Year ( Dec. 25.) was unfit for
the traveling of the Jews to the Enrollment, for the Shepherds watching their
Fl^^ks by Night, as well as for the Lying-Inn of the blessed Virgin in ^
Stable. Hist. p. 164. and St. John* tells us, the day Christ suffered ( A^^.
^d,) the Servants made a Fire, (...) it was cold. Ioh. XVIII.18. How much more
then on Dec. 25.


, and the Frost and Snow not a great deal short of what they are sometimes,
among us: And therefore the dead of Winter can by no means be though it a proper
Season, for the Shepherds to be abroad, in the Field, watching their Flocks by
Night. So that it looks very unlikely, from this Circumstance that the Nativity
of Christ should be in the Depth of the Winter.

But then, Secondly, we know that our Lord entered upon His Public Ministry,
at, or about, the completing of his Thirtieth Year, which the Evangelist Luke
takes particular Notice of, Luke II.23. Jesus himself began to be about 30
Years of Age, that is, it was about the completing of His 30th Year. This
refers to the Time of His Baptism, and entrance, upon His Public Ministry; for
in His return from Jordan, He was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness, and
having there mastered the Temptations of the Devil, from that Time Jesus began
to preach, and to say, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at Hand; as we read
Matt. IV.17.

Now it is generally supposed that Christ continued His Public Ministry, for
the space of Three Years and an Half, Dr. Pride. Vol. IV. p. 94^.
, and then suffered and Dyed. For John Baptist, preached three Years and an
half, as the Forerunner of our Lord, and then Christ himself Three and an half
more, which makes the last Week, or Seven Years, spoken of by Daniel, for the
confirming the Covenant. So that there was evidently an odd Half Year in the
life of Christ. And it is very plain, that He was crucified at the Time of the
Jews Passover, as appears from, Ioh. XVIII.39. and XIX.14. which was upon the
15th Day of the Month Nisan, that is about the last of our March, or beginning
of our April Mr. Whiston fixes it to the 3d of April, Har. p 193.
. Deduct half a Year from this, and it carrys back the Birth of Christ to the
Jews Month Tisri, about the Feast of Tabernacles, which answers to the latter
end of our September, or beginning of October; at which Time, it may well eno'
be supposed, the Shepherds might lie out in the Field, watching their Flocks by
Night.

So that though we cannot find the very individual Day of Christ's Nativity, yet
it can be proved, almost to a Demonstration, that He was born in or near to
Tisri, sometime in September or October, about the Time of the Creation of the
World, and about the Four Thousandth Year from the Creation. But I am to
enquire,

2. Whether the Day of Christ's Nativity ought to be kept, in Memorial of His
Birth?

You all know, that a great Part of the Christian Church observe This very Day,
the Twenty Fifth of December, in Remembrance of the Day of the Nativity of our
Lord. But whether there be any Obligation lying upon us, as Christians, to keep
such a Day, will be seen by observing a few things.

First, It is to be observed, that no Church can keep the true Day, on which
Christ was born: Because it is not known to the World, as I have already
remarked. And it looks something odd, to select a Day, and keep it, in Memorial
of Christ's being born on that Day, when, at the same Time, they know it was
not the Day of His Nativity. And, by the Way, because the Day is not known in
the World, this is a very cogent Proof, that there was no such Custom in the
primitive Church as the keeping the Birth Day of Christ. For if there had been
any such Practice in Use in the first Ages of the Church, doubtless they would
have known the Particular Month better, if not the individual Day; because they
lived so near, to the Time of it, that it would have been no great Difficulty,
to have informed themselves thoroughly, if they had had any particular Regard to
that Day, above all the Days in the Year.

This Usage was firstly introduced by the Roman Church. For when Rome became
Christian, perhaps a Willingness to oblige the Pagans, as much as might be,
moved them to take their Festival Days, which they were so mightily fond of,
and convert them to a Christian Use; hoping, by this Means, the easier to gain
the remaining Pagans, to embrace the Christian Institution; and the Saturnalia
of Pagan Rome, being celebrated in the Month of December, Lit^. Dict.
, which was one of the most remarkable Times of Revelling among them, therefore
the Church of Rome, being ignorant of the true Time of the Nativity of Christ,
converted that Feast and Revelling to the Celebration of the Birth of the
Savior Mr. Whiston, after a Fruitless Search for any good Reason why the Birth
of Christ is commemorated upon the 25th of December, tells us, here^ys upon
this, as an uncommon Observation of a very great Man, ( viz.) That the
Christian Holy Days, or solemn Commemorations of our Savior and His Apostles
-- seem to have been first fixed by the Christian Church not on the Days of
their Births or Deaths, of which generally they were wholly Ignorant, but on
the Sun's Entrance into Signs, especially those that were the Equinox, and
Solstice Days, and on such Days as were noted among the Heathen, and were Days
of Riot and Idolatry; that so those pernicious Solemnities of the Heathen
Worship* and Remains of the Heathen Supertision, might, by Degrees, be
supplanted and worn off, by the holy and Spiritual Solemnities of the Christian
Religion. Thus because the Sun's ingress into Signs, in our Savior's Time,
generally happened on the 24th or 25th Days of each Month, we have upon Nine or
Ten of our Mon^^ a Christian Holy Day on one of those Days, even though (...) be
commonly scarce another in the whole Month. Thus St. Phillip and St. James are
commemorated May ^* because the F^oralia, a heathen and Idola^ious Sol^m^ity
(...) on the same Day before. And thus to wear out the Thoughts of the Heathen
Saturnalia, -- the p^^mitive Church th^'t si^ to observe the Annual Memori^^ of
our (...) Bir^h about the same Time. Whilst. View of (...) p 162 163.
. And I wish it were not generally observed, too much after the old Pagan
manner, in Revelling and Debauchery: The Observation of which alone, one would
think, should make a considerate Person very cautious, how he embraced a Custom
that is so vilely abused, when there is no plain Institution for it. For,

Secondly, It is to be observed, that there is no Divine Command for the
keeping such a Day. If the Particular Day were known, which it is not, yet it
is plain, there is no Injunction from Christ, or His Apostles, to observe it;
and much less to observe any other Day in Commemoration of it. The Weekly
Sabbath has a Divine Sanction for it, as a Day sacred to the Duties of
Religious Worship, Exodus XX.8, 9, 10.
, and as a Memorial of the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead Matt. XXVIII 1.
compare with Io^. XX 19, 26. and Act. XX.7. and Rev. I.10.
by which the great Work of Redemption, and End of Christ's Incarnation, was
accomplished. But no one that I know of, pretends to any Divine Command for the
keeping of Christmas, or a Day in Commemoration of the Birth of Christ. And
then,

Thirdly, It very much looks, as if God never intended there should be any such
Day observed; not only in that, He has not commanded it, but in that, He has
kept the Day Hid and Secret from the World. For had it seemed meet to the
Divine Wisdom, that such a Day should have been kept, in after Generations, in
Commemoration of the Birth of Christ, as a means to promote our Faith, and
Holiness, doubtless there would, at least, have been left some very plain
Footsteps, of that remarkable Day, if not some general Intimation of the
Observation of it. For otherwise, the hiding it from the World, would be a
designed keeping hid from us, one very proper means to promote our Faith and
Holiness, which is far from being consistent with the Divine Goodness, under
the full and clear Light of the Gospel. But though the Birth of the great Savior
was so remarkable a Time, from the miraculous Appearance of a Light, or Star,
over Bethlehem; the mighty Stir, which the Tidings of the Birth of the King of
the Jews, which soon reached Jerusalem, occasioned among the Jews; and from
Herod's having his Fears so much awakened, by the Report, as to slay all the
Male-Children in Bethlehem under two Years old; and from the wise Men of the
East, who had seen His Star, in the East, traveling a long Journey to
Jerusalem, and from thence to Bethlehem, to Worship the Child; yet,
notwithstanding all these remarkable Occurrents, the Day of Christ Nativity was
not so much taken Notice of, as to be left upon any certain Record. Nay it was
5^7. Years after the Birth of Christ, before the Christian Era was brought
into Use, by Dionisius Exiquus, a Roman Abbot Dr. Pride. prae^. to Con. p. 3.
: (which is a strong Praesumption, if not full Evidence, there was no keeping
of Christ-mass before that Time) all of which seems fairly to point to us, that
God, in His Wise Providence, has, in a most wonderful manner, hidden so
Remarkable a Day, which one would have though it could not have been lost, for this
very Purpose, that the Christian World might have no just Foundation to go
upon, in any Superstitious Regards to that Day; as He was pleased to hide the
Body of Moses, the great Lawgiver of the Jews, that they could never tell where
it was buried, to prevent their running into Superstition about it. *

Upon all which, I cannot see the least Room to suppose, that there is any
Obligation lying upon Christians, to observe any Day, in Commemoration of the
Birth of Christ, much less the Day that is kept as such.

But I pass to the Third, and last, thing I proposed to speak to, from these
Words, in which I shall use all convenient Brevity: viz.

III. To consider of the great End and Design of the Birth and Incarnation of
Jesus Christ. This is plainly pointed at in my Text; unto you is born a
Savior, Christ the Lord.

So that the main End of His Birth was, to be a SAVIOR unto the World.
Therefore it is that, That Word, which, the Apostle tells us, was in the
Beginning, and was with God, and was God, was made Flesh, and dwelt among us
Ioh. I 1, 14.
; that is, became Incarnate, and was born of a Woman, without which He could
not have been a Savior to us. For though he might have Taught, and Governed us,
without taking our Flesh upon Him; yet he could not have had a Body, to offer
as a Sacrifice for us, if He had not taken our Nature upon Him; and without
This there could have been no Salvation.

To this the ancient Types and Praedictions concerning Him looked; and this He
Himself assures us of, when He says, Ioh. III.17. God sent not His Son into the
World to condemn the World, but that the World, through Him, might be saved.

The Jews ever expected the promised Messiah would be a Savior. But then Jesus
Christ was not born into the World, to be such a Savior as they imagined and
looked for, only a Temporal Savior, to deliver that Nation from all their
Enemies, and erect a Temporal Kingdom, in greater Pomp, and Grandeure than had
ever yet been seen among them. No; He was born to be a Spiritual Savior, which
is by far the Greater; He became Incarnate to save his People from Sin, and
Death, from Guilt, and the Wrath and Curse of God, which that Guilt had exposed
them to. And accordingly the Evangelist Matthew informs us, Matt. I.21. He came
to save his People from their Sins, and therefore is His Name called Jesus. And
the Apostle, in his Epistle to the Galations, acquaints us, what was the End of
Christ's Incarnation, when he says, Gal. IV.4, 5. When the fullness of Time was
come, God sent forth His Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem
them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Jesus
Christ became Incarnate, to recover us from the Power and Dominion of Sin, and
the Devil over us, and the Sentence of Condemnation that was out against us,
and to restore us to the Favor and Friendship of God, and a Life of Obedience
to Him; to entitle us to the Dignity and Privileges of the Children of God,
and to regain that Heaven and Happiness for us which we had lost.

Thus he was born a Savior; and that not to the Jewish Nation only, but to the
Gentile World, even to all Nations of Men, who have the Grace of God appearing
to them in the Gospel of Jesus Christ our Lord; for He is given to be a Light
to lighten the Gentiles, as well as the Glory of His People Israel Luke II.32.
: And therefore we Gentiles walk in the Light of the glorious Gospel, and have
the Offers of Christ a Savior made to us. Thus unto us there is born a Savior.

And the two Names by which He is here described declare him to be so. He is
CHRIST, this is His Name, and peculiarly His. He went by the Name of Messiah,
under the old Testament Dispensation, which converted into Greek, is CHRISTOS,
being of the same meaning with the Hebrew Word MESHIAC, the anointed. For Him
has God the Father anointed and consecrated to the high Office of a Savior,
having constituted and separated Him Io^. X.36. and VI 27 and Act. X.38.
, to this very Work; that by His Life and Doctrine He might teach and instruct
the World of Mankind, and so rescue it from the Power and Tyranny of the Flesh,
the World, and the Devil; and that as our high Priest He might make Atonement
for us and reconcile us to God by His Blood, which He has offered, as a
Sacrifice well pleasing and acceptable, to His eternal Father. This shows Him
to be an authentic Savior, and gives Validity to His Actions, in that He was
anointed and consecrated to this very End and Purpose, and did not take this
Honor to Himself, but was called of God, as was Aaron, Heb. V.4.

And He is LORD, as well as CHRIST; this is His particular Style throughout the
New Testament; which shows him to be an able Savior Heb VII 25.
every Way equal to the Work He had undertaken, and that He has fully
accomplished it. He is Christ the Lord, as denoting His Supremacy and Dominion
over all things; the Style LORD, being appropriated to Him in the
New Testament, as JEHOVAH is the True GOD, in the Old, and as bearing some
Analogy with it, in the Design of it, which is to show us, that He is GOD, as
well as MAN, and therefore has all Power in Heaven and Earth: And in an
especial Manner, He is Lord over His Church Col. I.18.
, having the sole Power and Authority, to Rule it, to enact Laws, and change
it is Laws and Customs, as He pleases; to abolish the old Mosaic Poedagogy, and
institute the Christian Economy in the Room of it; that He only has Right to
give Law unto his Church, and His Laws only are to be observed, and not the
Tradition and Inventions of Men, in the Worship of GOD. As Lord, He subdues all
our Spiritual Enemies Col II.15
gives to us Repentance and Remission of Sins A^t. V.31.
, makes us victorious over the Flesh, the World and the Devil Romans VIII*^^.
, and conducts His Followers safe to the Glory and Happiness of the Heavenly
World Ioh. XIV.3.
. As Lord* He has the Keys of the Invisible World in His Keeping Rev. ^* ^8,
, and will open the Gates of the Grave, and fetch up the Prisoners from the
Bars of the Pit Ioh VI.40.
, enliven and animate them anew with their Glorified Souls, and present them
Immortal Bodies I. Cor. XV.53.
, before His Father, to inhabit the Heavenly Regions II. Cor. V.1.
, and dwell with Him forever in Glory I. These IV.17.
.

This was the great End of His Incarnation and Birth, thus to be a SAVIOR, and
therefore is He LORD and CHRIST.

There are some other things considerable in my Text; but I may not proceed any
further at this Time. Let the Use of what has been said, be,

USE I. To (...) us, to adore the Faithfulness of God, and be encouraged to
Believe, and Trust in His Word.

Let us adore the Faithfulness of God, in Fulfilling the Word He has spoken, in
the exact Accomplishment of so many of His ancient Prophecies, as we have seen,
and particularly that great one; on which the whole Welfare of Mankind
depended, His sending the Messiah, a SAVIOR, into the World. And since we see,
that God has so punctually made Good His Word, in so many Instances, let us
learn, never to Disbelieve, or Distrust the Word of God, but live in the full
Expectation of the exact Accomplishment of such of the Prophecies, as yet
remain to be fulfilled.

Let us learn hence, to Live in a quiet Dependence upon the Word of Promise,
which God has made unto His People; for though their Circumstances should be ^ver
so difficult, and the greatest Darkness should surround them, so that they can
see no possible Way left for their Escape, yet God is True, and in His own
Time, and Way, can, and will, appear for their Help, and grant Deliverance to
them out of all their Troubles.

And especially should we learn hence, to Trust God with the Fulfillment of His
Promises to us, relating to our future State, even the Hope of Eternal Life,
which God, that cannot lie, has promised, before the World began, upon our
Faith and Obedience to His Son; and be encouraged thereby to a constant
unwearied Abounding in all the Duties of the Christian Life, as knowing, we
shall certainly reap, if we faint not; for Faithful is He that has promised,
and will perform it Heb. X ^3.
.

II. Hence, since the Son of God is become Incarnate, let this serve to teach
us our Duty, and our Comfort.

Our Duty; that we be exceeding careful, not to debase that Nature, which the
eternal Son of God has taken into an Union to Himself. That therefore, we do
not allow our selves in any Sin whatever, but cleanse our selves from all
Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and perfect Holiness in the Fear of God;
because all Sin is a debasing of the Humane Nature, and brings a Stain and
Blemish upon it, and is therefore to cast Indignity upon the Son of God
Himself, who has highly exalted our Nature, in being united to our Flesh.

It speaks the Comfort of all true Believers also. For now we have a SAVIOR,
who partakes of the same Flesh and Blood with our selves, and therefore who
sincerely desires our Happiness, who has a Fellow-Feeling with us in all our
Sufferings, who knows our Temptations and Sorrows, and has a most tender
Compassion to us under all our Wants and Weakness, who will not suffer us to be
tempted above what we are able, but will, with the Temptation find out a Way
for our escape, that we may be able to bear it I. Cor. X.13^
.

Now the MAN JESUS, in Union to the SON of GOD, is exalted at the right Hand of
the Throne of the Majesty on High, who, having, the Dominion put into His
Hands, will certainly overruled, all things for the Welfare of His Church; will
gather in the whole Number of his Elect, and not suffer one of them to be lost;
will cause all things to work together for Good to them that Love God; and will
ransom their Bodies from Destruction, and bring them to dwell in His Presence
throughout Eternal Ages.

III. Lastly, Let us all then, make it our great Care, that this Savior be
Ours, that we are interested in Him, and share in His blessed Benefits.

This is the great Design of the whole Gospel of Christ, His Incarnation and
Life, His Doctrines and Example, and His Sufferings and Death, to prevail with
a guilty World, to secure an Interest in Him, that they may be saved by Him.
And if the wondrous Grace of God, in providing such a Savior for us, should
after all be slighted by us, and we refuse to accept of His offered Mercy, and
submit our selves to Him as our Lord, it will but greatly enhanse our Account,
and increase our Punishment, that God has sent His Son, to appear in our Flesh,
as a Savior for us, but we would not come unto Him, that we might have Life.

Let us all then, be persuaded to take this Jesus for our Savior, rejoicing in
the good Tidings, and praising the Grace of God that has provided Him for us,
saying, in the Doxology of the holy Angels, in my Context, Glory to God in the
highest, on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men!

Let us receive Him as the anointed of God, and firmly believe all that He has
done, and suffered for us, and spoken to us; and give up our selves to Him to
be saved by Him; and submit our selves entirely to His Government, as our LORD;
for He will not be our Savior, unless we know assuredly that He is LORD, as
well as CHRIST Act II 36*
.

Think not that this is eno' to entitle you to His Benefits, to call your
selves after His Name, or be very fond of keeping a Day in Commemoration of His
Birth, while, at the same time, you practically deny Him, by a^low^ng your
selves in such Courses of Intemperance, Injustice and Profanity, as are a
scandal to the Christian Profession, and would be a Reproach to a sober Heathen.

It Is indeed but a common Appendage to vain Superstition, to be mightily
concerned for the Outside, and regard the show only, while the Inward and vital
Part of Religion, pretended to be promoted thereby, is greatly neglected. This
we have a sad Instance of, in those that are so strongly set to keep a Day in
Commemoration of the Birth of Christ, (any Day rather than none;) that instead
of observing it in an Holy and Religious Manner, and improving it as a Means to
mortify Sin, and promote Holiness of Heart and Life, (as one would be ready to
suppose, in Remembrance of the Birth of the Holy Child Jesus;) it is more
generally, a Day separate to Vanity and Folly, to Sin and Debauchery, to
Revelling and Drunkenness, like the ancient Saturnalia of the Heathen. Would to
God that those, who think themselves obliged to keep such a Day, would, at
least, think themselves obliged also to act the Part of Christians, and not fly
in the Face of the Holy Savior, while they pretend to do him Honor. But I
hope you have not so learned Christ, as to imagine that you honor Him, while
you really sacrifice to Devils, in the Indulgence of your Lusts.

Let us then learn to Commemorate the Birth of Christ, every Day of our Lives,
by Living in the constant Remembrance, that to us the^e is born a Savior,
Christ the Lord; that Christ, a Savior from Sin, has appeared in our Nature,
has given us a most Holy Law, and set us a most bright Example, has dyed for
our Offenses, and risen again for our Justification; and as This Grace of God
teaches us, let us sincerely deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and live
soberly, righteously, and Godly, in this present World; presenting our Bodies,
and our Spirits, to Him, a living Sacrifice, holy and Acceptable, which is but
a reasonable Service.

Thus endeavor, by a truly virtuous and religious Walk, to live the Life of
Christ, and show forth the Praise of Him who has called you out of Darkness
into mavelous Light; then will the Incarnate Son of God be your Savior, and
his Birth will be unto you good Tidings of great Joy, and you may with Comfort
look for the Blessed Hope, and glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ, who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from
Iniquity, and purify us to Himself a peculiar People, zealous of Good Works:
For then will all the ^ure Mercies of this Son of David, and Son of God be your
Portion forever; then all things will be yours, whether the World, or Life or
Death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours; for you are
Christ's, and Christ is God's. Amen!

APPENDIX. An Attempt to State the true Year of the Birth of CHRIST.
I Readily, and thankfully, acknowledge the Assistance I have received, from
Dr. Prideaux's noble Connection of the Old Testament with the New, which I have
chiefly followed in the Chronology, and very much so in the Explanation of the
Prophecies in the foregoing Discourse; since the Composing of which, Mr.
Whiston's Chronology of the Old Testament, and Harmony of the New, has fallen
into my Hands, which I had not seen before; and the Difference I observed
between them, and my own Difficulty in reconciling either of their Accounts, to
what I though it the Evangelist Luke pointed to us, namely the Age of JESUS CHRIST,
when He was Baptized, (which would help to Direct us to the Time of His Birth,)
has led me to spend more Time, than the First Composing the Sermon would allow
me, in a diligent Enquiry into the True Year of the Birth of CHRIST. And though
it is very apparent that I now fix the Birth of CHRIST upon a Different Year
from that mentioned in the Foregoing Sermon, and go off from it also in some
other smaller Matters; yet, I suppose, it may well eno' be allowed me, in a
more general and common Discourse, to fall in with the Current of the best of
Writers, in a piece of Chronology, while in a more particular and labored one,
afterward, I see reason to fix upon other Periods of Time. For having, I
think, diligently surveyed, and compared, Dr. Prideaux, and Mr. Whiston; and
taking their Quotations upon Trust, as well I may, and not having the Authors
by me; I conclude I may, with good Reason, advance the following Proposition,
wherein I crave Leave to dissent from those two Great Men; viz.

That our Blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, was born, some Time in
October, Anno Iul. Per. 4711.

To make good this Proposition, which is so New, and different from what all
others, that I know of, have said upon this Subject; I shall first, state the
exact Time of our Lords Death, and then produce the Arguments, which sway with
me, to fix his Birth upon the Year mentioned.

I. Our Blessed Lord was crucified upon Friday, the 15th of Ni^an, in the Year
of the Iul. Per. 4746. It is evident, from all the Evangelists, that our Lord
was crucified upon the Jews Passover, Matt. XXVI, 17. Mark* XIV.12.16. Luke*
XXII. 1^. (...) III.28, 39.
which always was 14 Days after the New Mood, which began their Month Nisan,
their first Ecclesiastical Month; and it is further evident, from the same
Evangelists, that this 15th of Nisan, happened, that Year, upon a Friday, Matt.
XVII.62. XXVIII.1. (...) XV.4^. Luke XXIII 54. Ioh. XIX.31.
the Day before the Paschal Sabbath, which was an high Day.

Now Mr. Whiston makes it plain, to a Demonstration, by calculating the several
New Mons, that the 15th Day of Nisan, could fall upon a Friday, only in the
Year mentioned. For we are, by many other things, confined, in our Enquiry, to
three or four Years; and for several Years, both before and after the 4746th
Year of the Iul. Per. the Changes of the Moon would admit of no such
Conjunction, as Friday and the 15th of Nisan, but only upon that Year. So that
the Year of our Lord's Death, is fixed, and certain, and both Dr. Prideaux, and
Mr. Whiston, agree in it, that it was An. P. I. 4746. in the 19th Year of the
Reign of Tiberius alone, or his 22d, from his being taken into Partnership in
the Empire with Augustus.

II. The Time of our Savior's Death being thus fixed; the Arguments, that
prove His Birth to have been in the Year 4711. I. P. are, the Age of our
Savior at His Baptism, and Entrance upon His public Ministry; the Time of
Herod's Death; and Archelaus's Banishment; and the Baptist's Conception.

I. JESUS CHRIST, was Baptized, and entered upon His public Ministry, at 30
Years of Age, An. I. P. 4741. This appears from these Considerations.

I. It seems Evident* (as Mr. W. plainly proves, Harm. Chapter IX.
) that there were Five Passovers in the Time of our Lord's Ministry, upon the
last of which He died; which five Passovers include Four complete Years, and
brings us back, from 4746, to the Passover in 4742, as the first Passover in
our Lords Ministry, mentioned, Ioh. II.13.

II. At this First Passover, in the Beginning of the Year 4742, our Lord is
apparently in the Public Exercise of His Ministerial Office. His Whipping the
Buyers, and Sellers, out of the Temple: His having His Disciples about Him; His
Discourse of His Death, (taken Notice of, in John, Chapter II.) as well as His
public Baptizing, ( Ioh. III.26.) is an evident Proof of this, that JESUS
CHRIST was then in the Discharge of His public Ministry.

III. JESUS CHRIST was Baptized, and entered upon His public Ministry, some
Time before this first Passover. This appears from what the Disciples of John
say to him, Ioh. III.26. He that was with thee, beyond Jordan, to whom thou
bear Witness, etc. Plainly alluding to what St. Matthew tells us, Chapter III
13. Jesus comes from Galilee, to Jordan, unto John to be baptized of him: And
from the evident token of His being the promised Messiah, by the Spirits
descending and resting upon Him John, from that Time, bears Witness to Him,
Ioh. I.32, 33. And it is further Evident, both from St. Matthew, and St. Luke
Matt. Chapter IV. Luke Chapter IV.
that after His Baptism, our Lord underwent the Forty Days Fast, and
Temptation, in the Wilderness, returned from Jordan, to Gallilee, preached the
Gospel, called (at least some of) His Disciples, and wrought several Miracles
which were Acts of His public Ministry, and then came up to Jerusalem, to the
First Passover. Now less than Half a Year could not well suffice for all these
Transaction, and about Half a Year might well eno' give Time for these several
Occurrents; so that this brings us back from Nisan, the Jews first Month in An.
I. P. 4742, to about the Feast of Tabernacles, in the Month Tisri, their first
political Month, An. I. P. 4741; which Season of the Year has been supposed, by
most Expositors, to have been the Time of our Lord's Baptism, and allows Four
Years and an half for His Ministry, which Mr. W. himself fixes upon Harm. p.
140.
.

IV. JESUS CHRIST was Thirty Years old at His Baptism. This the Evangelist Luke
takes particular Notice of, Chapter III.23. Jesus Himself began to be about Thirty
Years of Age. Mr. W. Harm. p. 136.
supposes, and Endeavors to prove, that the Greek word, here rendered, began,
does not relate to the Age of CHRIST, but of His Ministry, and renders it,
Jesus was about 30 Years of Age when he began His Ministry. So that the
Evangelist does not mean the Beginning of CHRIST's Thirtieth Year, but rather
the Completing of it; that He was about 30 Years old, suppose a few Weeks, or
Days more or less. Now the Age of CHRIST, thus specified by the Evangelist, is
not connected with the 15th or 12th Year of Tiberius, when the Gospel of the
Kingdom first began to be preached, as Mr. W. seems to imagine, but it is
plainly connected with His Baptism, just before spoken of, Luke III.12. The
particular Remark, in the Beginning of the Chapter, of John Baptist, entering
upon his Office, in the 15th or 12th of Tiberius, was designed to measure out
the Prophet Daniel's last Week of Years; for it was exactly Seven Years from
that Time, to the Death of CHRIST: The Baptist, who began His Ministry at the
Paschal Feast, An. I. P. 4739. Dr. Pride. Con Vol IV. p. 940.
having confirmed the Covenant; ^y preaching Repentance, and the near Approach
of the Kingdom of Heaven, for the space of two Years and an half, and our
Blessed Lord Himself Four Years and an half more. And the Design of the
Evangelist, in mentioning the 30 Years of CHRIST's Age, in this Place, is to
inform us of the Time, (not when the Gospel was first preached by John, but)
when our Savior Himself entered upon His public Ministry, namely, when he was
Thirty Years old.

So that since our Lord's public Ministry* at the Time of His Baptism,
commenced Four Years and an half before His Death, (which certainly was in
Nisan, An. I. P. 474^) which leads us back to about the middle of the Jewish
Ecclesiastical Year or the Feast of Tabernacles in the Month Tisri, An. I. P.
4741. and since our Lord ha^ completed His Thirtieth Year, at the Time of His
Baptism, and entrance upon His Ministry, which carries us back Thirty Years
more; this strongly concludes that He was born An. I. P. 4711. sometime in the
Month Tisri, a Month famous for the sounding of the Trumpet of the Gospel of
Peace, and of God's Tabernacling with Men; which Tisri answers to Part of our
September, and Part of our October; and so we are brought to the Year, and near
the Month fixed upon in the Proposition: which will be further confirmed by
what follows.

II. Herod dyed the Latter End of the Year I. P. 4711. That JESUS CHRIST was
born before Herod's Death, is evident from the Gospel of Matthew, where we have
an Account of Herod's seeking the Life of CHRIST in His Infancy Matt. Chapter II.
; and yet the Birth of CHRIST was not long before the Death of Herod.

For the Wise Men go from Herod to Bethlehem, and find the Virgin and her Child
there, where, being very much of a Stranger, as appears by her Lodging, we
cannot suppose her to stay longer, than the Business of the Enrollment, or her
Childbirth necessitated; nor can it be supposed, that Herod, who was then at
Jerusalem, would wait (...) Days, for the return of the Wise Men from Bethlehem
(but about 6 or 7 Miles Distant, ever he would perceive himself deceived by
them, and fall into that Rage, which occasioned the horrid Slaughter of the
Young Children, at Bethlehem.

Besides Mary appears with the Child JESUS, at the Temple, at the End of Forty
Days, for her Purification; Luke II.22. Afte^ which they went down to Nazareth,
and dwelt there. So that the Flight to Egypt, and return from thence, was all
over before the Purification; and yet Herod was then dead Matt. II.20, 22.
all of which as Mr. W. H^rm p. 165.
argues, shows that the Birth of CHRIST could not be much above a Month before
the Death of Herod.

Mr. W. Harm. p. 150.
indeed fixes upon Nov. An. I. P. 4710, for the Time of Herod's Death; but though
it might happen some Time in that Month, yet I think it was in the following
Year.

For Herod is allowed by all, to have reigned 34 Years, (somewhat more or
less,) from the Death of Antigonus, the last of the Asmonoean Family, and not
from his usurping the Government 3 Years before. Mr. W. tells us Harm p. 152.
that Jerusalem was taken by Sosius, and Herod, after about half a Years Siege,
upon the Latter-End of June, An. I. P. 4677* and though he seems to suppose, the
taking of the City, and the Death of Antigonus, to have been at one and the
same Time, or within the Distance of Three or Four Days, yet there really was a
very considerable Space of Time between them. For, Dr. Prideaux informs us
Connec. Vol. IV. p 743.
that after the Caption of Jerusalem, and having kept Antigonus sometime in
Chains, Sosius, upon Antonies return out of Italy, and coming to Antioch, sent
this Captive King thither to him. Antony at first intended to have reserved him
for his Triumph. But Herod, not thinking himself safe in his Kingdom, as long
as this Remainder of the old royal Family continued alive, never left
soliciting Antony, till at length* by a great Sum of Money, he obtained that
this poor Prince was put to Death.

Now if we consider, that some Time was clapsed before Antony came to Antioch,
that then Antigonus is sent a Captive in Chains to Antioch, above 200 Miles
distance from Jerusalem, if I mistake not; and the Pains Herod is put to,
(which doubtless occasioned the Dispatch of Messengers backwards and forward
this 200 Miles,) before he could, overcome the Ambition of Antony, and compass
the Death of Antigonus: I say whoever considers this, will see it needful to
allow, Two, if not Three Months, from the taking of Jerusalem, to the Death of
Antigonus; and so his Death, and the Date of Herod's Reign, will fall in with
the latter End of August, or rather of September; to which if we add the 34
Years of Herod's Reign, it brings us down to the latter End of August, or
September, An. I. P. 4711*

Mr. W. himself says Harm p. 153.
, we must look for Herod's Death, as near as possible to July, A. I. P. 4711;
(I would rather say to September, in that Year) and yet he chooses to place it
in Nov. A. I. P. 4710, which certainly is further distant from the fixed July,
(much further from the real September) than Nov. A. I. P. 4711.

The Difficulty that attends this Matter, seems to arise, from the Uncertainty,
whether there were redundant, or defective Months, belonging to Herod's 34
Years; one or other of which appears certain, and yet no ancient Historian has
told us which. But though this is not handed down to us with Certainty, yet, from
what has been observed, we may reasonably conclude, that there were some few
Months, over and above 34 Years belonging to Herod's Reign.

For, it Herod's Reign commence from the Time of the taking of Jerusalem, in
the latter End of June, there must be full Seven Months deducted out of his 34
Years; but if his Reign Commence from the Death of Antigonus, as all Historians
agree it does, there must be at least Nine or rather Ten Months deducted, to
bring his Death to the Latter-End of Nov. An. I. P. 4710. And doubtless few
Historians would call that 34 Years, which really was but 33 Years and some few
Months.

But, on the other Hand; if Herod's Reign take its Date from the Caption of
Jerusalem, then there is scarce Five Months, but if, as is the Truth, from the
Death of Antigonus, then there remains not Three, or rather not Two Months more
than the 34 Years for his Reign, to bring his Death to Nov. An. I. P. 4711.
which also is the nearest Nov. to July, (rather to Sept.) An. I. P. 4711.

Now it seems much more likely, that Josephus, the Jewish Historian, should
omit taking Notice of Two or Three redundant Months, in assigning 34 Years to
Herod's Reign, than that he should include Nine or Ten defective ones, much the
bigger half of the Year, in the whole Sum of 34 Years, which he tells us Herod
reigned: and therefore I conclude that Herod dyed sometime in Nov. An. I. P.
4711. which will be further evident from the Reign and Banishment of Archelaus.
And if we suppose, the Transactions, from the taking of Jerusalem, to the Death
of Antigonus, took up 4 or 5 Months, which is not unreasona^^^ it is not to be
wondered at, that Josephus took no Notice of a few Weeks in the Reign of Herod.
Since therefore Herod's Death was in the latter part of the Year, I. P. 4711.
our Lords Birth, which praeceeded it but a few Weeks, doubtless was in the same
Year, and Month I have advanced in the Proposition.

III. Archelaus, Herod's Son, after little more than Nine Years Reign, was
Banished in the Year of the Julian Period 4720.

1. There is nothing more clear, (from the History of the Gospel, Matt. II.19,
20, 21, 22.) than that Archelaus immediately succeeded his Father Herod, in the
Government of Judea, without any considerable Space of Time intervening. For
Joseph was first informed, of the Death of Herod, by an Angel, while as yet the
common Report of it had not reached so far as Egypt, but about 70 or 80 Miles
off; upon which Information, he arises and travels to the Land of Israel, and
when he comes there, he learns that Archelaus reigned in Judea, in the Room of
his Father Herod: So that there could be no Interregnum, at most not of a Weeks
Length, if of a Days.

2. Archelaus's Reign consisted but of little more than Nine Years. Dr.
Prideaux Connec. Vol. IV. p 929,
assigned the whole Sum of Ten Years to the Reign of Archelaus; but this seems
to have been done to make the Length of his Reign comport with the Death of his
Father Herod, which he places in An. I. P. 4710. Whereas, in Reality,
Archelaus's Reign contained but little more than Nine Years in it; for Mr. W.
assures us, Harm. p. 155.
from Josephus, that Archelaus, the Successor of Herod, in Judea, reigned
somewhat above Nine Years, before his Banishment; which plainly speaks but
little more than Nine Years.

3. Archelaus's Banishment was in the 37th Year of the Egyptian Era. This
Egyptian Era had it is Rise from the Conquest of Egypt, by Octavianus,
afterward Augustus, and its Name from the Actiac Victory, which Octavianus
obtained over Antony, near Actium; and was therefore called the Era of the
Actiac Victory. Now Mr. W. informs us, Harm. p. 155.
from Josephus, that Archelaus was banished about the Beginning of the 37th
Year of the Actiac Victory. Dr. Prideaux Connec. Vol. IV p. 818.
acquaints us that this Victory was obtained upon Sept. 2d, An. I. P. 4683. but
then he also assures us, p. 833.
from Dion Cassius, that by a Decree of the Roman's, the Era of the Actiac
Victory did not commence, until the 29th of August, An. I. P. 4684. Almost a
full Year after, when Octavianus had entirely reduced Egypt under his
Obedience. So that the Era of the Actiac Victory being certainly fixed upon
Aug. 29. An. I. P. 4684, we must necessarily understand Josephus who wrote
about 148 Years after Josephus wrote his History 86 Years after Christ. i. e.
An. I. P. 4832.
to date his 37 Years from thence; or else we must suppose him to give us an
Era not known or used in the World, by any but himself; which is altogether
unreasonable.

Mr. W. from Dion Cassius, places the Banishment of Archelaus An. I. P. 4719.
but it is very evident, that though 37 Years from the Time of the Victory brings
us to 4719, yet not so from the Date of the Era. For 37 complete Years added
to Aug. 29. An. I. P. 4684. the true Era of the Actiac Victory, brings us down
to Aug. 29. An I. P. 4721. But because Josephus says Archelaus was banished in
the Beginning of the 37th Year, let us deduct 8 or 9 Months, from Aug. 29.
4721, and it leaves us in the Latter-End of Nov. or Dec. An. I. P. 4720, in the
Beginning of the 37th Year of the Actiac Victory. And accordingly, Dr. Prideaux
See his Chro^ological T^ble, at the End of his IV. Vol.
Ends the Reign of Archelaus in the Year, I. P. 4720. So that the Latter End of
the Year I. P. 4720. is undoubtedly fixed for the true Time of Archelaus's
Banishment. And from Dec. An. I. P. 4720. let us deduct the somewhat above Nine
Years of Archelaus's Reign, and it carries us back to Nov. An. I. P. 4711. for
the Commencing of his Reign, upon the Death of his Father Herod.

Thus the Reign and Banishment of Archelaus; confirms the Death of Herod, and
the Birth of CHRIST, to have been, An. I. P. 4711. as is asserted in the
Proposition.

4. The Conception of John Baptist, was sometime in August, An. I. P. 4710*
^vil^

1. It is well known, that the Jewish Priests were divided into, Twenty four
Courses, and that each Course served it is Week at the Temple: And we are
assured, that Zachariah, the Father of John, was of the Course of Abiah, (Luke
I.5.) which was the Eighth Course in Order. (I. Chron. XXIV.10.)

The Order of these Courses was restored after the Captivity, and whatever
Interruption was given to them, during the broken State of the Jews, before the
Time of the Maccabees, yet there was none after Judas Maccabeus restored them,
till the final Determination of them at the Siege of Jerusalem, by Titus, as
Scalliger observes. See W. Harm. p. 156.


Now Mr. W. informs us Harm. p. 157.
from the famous Jewish Chronicle, that when the Temple was burnt, by the
Romans, upon Aug. 4th An. I. P. 4783, it was the Course of Ioiarib, or the
first Course, and the Sabbath concluding that Weekly Course; which also he
shows, from the first Sabbath after the Restitution of the daily Sacrifice by
the Maccabees.

2. It is plain, that Zachariah's Course, and the Baptist's Conception, must be
more than a Year before the Birth of CHRIST. Without this Allowance, there
would not be Room for Elisabeth's Hiding herself Five Months, before the
Virgin's Conception, and for the Time of the holy Virgin's Praegnancy, to her
Deliverance.

3. Zachariah's Course went out upon Aug. 5th An. I. P. 4710. Having taken the
Pains to calculate the Courses of the Priests, from Ioiarib, the first,
finishing his Course upon Aug. 4th An. I. P. 4783. I find Zachariah's, or the
Eighth Course to go out, Aug. 5th An. I. P. 4710. which fixes the Time of the
Baptist's Conception to the Beginning of that August; and allows between Two
and Three Months more than a Year to the Birth of CHRIST, in October An. I. P.
4711.

Mr. Whiston, by a like Calculation, observes the Time of Zachariah's
Ministration to fall on the Beginning of Sept. as it truly does, An. I. P.
4709. and he Assigns October 25th the Year after, for the Time of the Birth of
CHRIST. But if he had more thoroughly reremarked the Times, I imagine, he would
have seen, that his fixing Zachariah's Course to the Beginning of Sept. An. I.
P. 4709. as he necessarily must, for that Year, would have destroyed his main
Design, of ascertaining the Birth of CHRIST upon Octo. 25. A. I. P. 4710,
instead of proving it.

For the Eighth Course, to which Zachariah belonged, finishing their
Ministration upon Sept. 3d, the Sabbath in the first Week of that Month, An. I.
P. 4709, we need only to allow Two Days, from thence, for Zachariah's return to
his House at Hebron, about 30 miles Distant from Jerusalem, and for his Wife
Elisabeth's Conception, which brings us to Sept. 5th. From thence we must allow
five Jewish Months, or 21 Weeks, and 3 Days, for the Time, in which Elisabeth
is said to hide herself, which brings to Feb. 2d, in the Beginning of the Year
I. P. 4710. We must, doubtless, allow another Week, at least, for the Propriety
of the Angel's Speech to Mary (Luke, I.36. This is the Sixth Month with her
that was called barren; which leads us to Feb. 9th; and the Nine Months, of the
Virgin's going with Child, will unavoidably bring us to Nov. 9th. So that by
this Reconing the Virgin must necessarily have brought forth her first born
Son, something more than a Fortnight before her full Time, which may, by no
means, be admitted. And therefore upon Mr. Whiston's own Principles, of
Zachariah's Ministration going out, in the Beginning of September, An. I. P.
4709. JESUS CHRIST cannot be supposed to be born, upon October 25. An. I.P.
4710. And if the Allowances should be made greater than I have proposed,
(smaller they cannot be) it will render it still but so much the more unlikely,
if not impossible.

But, on the other hand, Zachariah's Course going out upon the Fifth of August,
An. I. P. 4710, as I have observed, the Two Days Allowance for his Return to
his House, and for Elisabeth's Conception, makes Aug. 7th for the Time of John
the Baptist's Conception; from whence, the Five Months, or 21 Weeks and 3 Days,
of Elisabeth's Concealment; brings us to Ian. 4th the Beginning of the Julian
Year 4711; and a Weeks Entrance into the Sixth Month, as before, leads us to
the Eleventh of January, for the Time of the Virgin's Conception; and Nine
Months, from Ian. 11th to the Time of the Birth, carries us down to October
11th in the Year of the Julian Period 4711, the Year and Month proposed in the
Proposition. And no other Year but this will receive any Evidence, for the
Birth of CHRIST in October, from the Principle of Zachariah's Ministration,
calculated from Ioiarib's being the first Course, and finishing his
Ministration upon Aug. 4th An. I. P. 4783. but if the Principles are good, (and
they seem to me to be so) then we receive from them a very strong, and
conclusive Evidence, of the Birth of CHRIST, upon, or about the Eleventh of
October, An. I. P. 4711. And if the Fifteenth of Tisri, should have happened
upon the Third of our October, that Year, as the Fifteenth of Nisan did upon
the Third of our April, Thirty-four Years and an half after, when our Lord was
crucified, then the Birth of CHRIST, falling upon the 11th of our October* was
exactly upon the Eighth, that great and last Day, of the Feast of Tabernacles,
wherein they were to keep an holy Convocation to the Lord, and offer an
Offering made by Fire unto the Lord Levit. XXIII.34, 35, 36.
; for then the Son of God came to Tabernacle with Men, (and He did but
literally Tabernacle with them, at His Birth, in the Inn) in order to offer
Himself, to His Eternal Father, a Sacrifice made by Fire, by the Fire of the
Divine Anger falling upon Him, in the Day when he took our Infirmities, and
bore the Iniquities of us all.

Since therefore, there is such a wonderful Concurrence of all these
Circumstances, the Baptism of our Savior, at the Age of 30 Years; the Death of
Herod; and the Reign, and Banishment of Archelaus; and the Time of the
Baptist's Conception; all of them so evidently fixing us to the Year of the
Julian Period, 4711, and to the Month of October: I cannot but look upon it, as
more than a vain Conjecture, even, an established Proposition, That JESUS
CHRIST, our Blessed Savior, was born some Time in October, An. I. P. 4711: Two
Years, and two Months, and some Days, before the common Era.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. l. 6 r. Supposititious. p. 15. l. 4. for put). p. 18. l. 20. for
Foreign r. Sovereign. p. 19. l. 8. r. something. p. 20. l. 4. r. a Lawgiver. p.
26. l. 25. add, dyed.


