An ESSAY ON THE Merchandise OF Slaves and Souls of Men, Revel. XVIII. 13. WITH
AN Application thereof to the Church of Rome. To which is added, An
EXERCITATION on Numb. XXXII. 10, 11, 12. WITH An occasional MEDITATION on I.
Sam. XXIII. 11, 12.

By a GENTLEMAN.

Nahum iii. 5. I will show the Nations thy Wickedness, and the Kingdoms thy
Shame.

John ii. 16. Take these things hence, make not my Fathers House, an House of
Merchandise.

Revel. xviii. 2. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the
Habitation of Devils, the Hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every
unclean and hateful Bird.

Vivere qui Sancte cupitis, discedite Roma
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
King of Spain's Memorial to Pope Urban the VIII. BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B.
Green: Sold at the Booksellers Shops. MDCCXXXI.

TO the Reverend, Learned and Faithful Pastors of the Churches of CHRIST in
New England, the following ESSAY, with what accompanies it, as a Token of his
great Affection and Respect to them, is humbly DEDICATED by Paul Dudley The
AUTHOR.

THE Introduction.
I Am very sensible the greatest part of what is offered in the following
Essay, may be found in Treatises already Published, and accordingly I have
mentioned the Authors: and yet possibly the Reader may find some things
suggested, here and there, which he has not met with before. However it does
not fall to every ones share to have the Books cited; and some of them are
rarely to be seen in New England: besides, the Collating many things thus
together, will save both time and pains to such as have Libraries, and want
Leisure to search them.

If any should inquire what occasion there is at this time of the Day for an
Oration against Popery; is the Protestant Interest in any hazard from that
Quarter? I answer, the Church Militant will never be out of danger, and
therefore she has Watchmen set upon her Walls; Isa. 62.6.
And though our LORD JESUS CHRIST will certainly make good his great Promise;
That the Gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail against His Church, (Mat.
xvi. 18. and Dan. ii. 44.) Yet I know of no other Charter that any of the
Protestant Churches in particular have for their Security, than what runs with
a quam diu se been gesserint, or in the words of the Prophet Azariah, 2 Chronicles.
xv. 2. Hear ye me Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin, The LORD is with you (or
will be with you, for it may be translated in the future Tense) while you be
with Him. Besides which, the unsearchable Sovereignty of GOD in His
Dispensations of this Nature, is always to be remembered and adored. What became
of the seven famous Churches in Asia, those Golden Candlesticks among whom the
Son of GOD once walked? Where are the flourishing and numerous Christian
Churches that were sometime since in Bohemia, Hungaria and Piedmont? But Oh!
thou Enemy! what Desolations have thou wrought in our Days in France? The time
was Anno 1571. Quicks Dynodicon.
, when the Reformed could there count two thousand one hundred and fifty
Churches; in most of these two Ministers, in some five; the Church of Orleans
had seven thousand Communicants: But their Bodies now lie dead in the Street of
the great City, etc. Rev. xi. 7, 8. In the Year 1686. not a single Church left,
or a reformed Minister to be seen in all that Kingdom. As to Great Britain: He
must be a Stranger to the British History that does not know how frequently our
Holy Religion, together with the Civil Liberties of the Nation, has been in the
utmost danger from the Days of Queen Elisabeth; sometimes by secret Attempts,
at other times by open Violence, through the Influence of the Jesuits, with their
Associates, and other Emissarys of the Church of Rome. And though our British
Mountain, by the Divine Favor seems at present to stand strong, by the
Settlement of the Imperial Crown of Great Britain in the Princess SOPHIA, and
the Heirs of Her Body being Protestants; Yet where is the Seer, that dare say
to our Jerusalem, her Warfare is Accomplished? Who among us can tell how long
these Halcyon-days will last? Or, whether the Clouds may not return after the
Rain. A great and learned Divine Mr. How in his Sermon on the 5th. Nov. 1703.
speaking of the Romish Church has these words, The common Enemy is still in
Being, and has great Power in the World, and we know not what advantages our
too common Iniquities may from the Justice of a righteous GOD give him against
us, so that we have no reason to be Secure. And though the Man of Sin, from the
Days of the blessed Reformation especially, has been Consuming by the Breath of
CHRIST's Mouth, yet he will not be destroyed till the Brightness of His coming.
And it is the Opinion of many Judicious Divines, That immediately before the
final Ruin of Antichrist, there will be such a time (though a short one) for
Distress of Nations, and of Tribulation to the Church of GOD, as the Ages past
never saw.

How near these great and last Changes of the Church and World are, with the
exact time and order wherein they are to be Accomplished, are Matters too high
for our Prophetical Chronologers: Whatever they may pretend to, the Arrows are
beyond them: there is no fixing the certain Time for the Events of any Prophesy
before the Accomplishment: (at the End it shall Speak, Habak. ii. 3.)

And because we know not when these things, or the coming of the Son of Man
shall be, therefore the Churches, and all private Christians are solemnly
charged (and it is at their utmost Peril, if they neglect it) to Watch and
Pray, Mark xiii. 13. and ult. to be Sober and Vigilant, 1 Pet. v. 8. Diligent,
that they may be found of Him in Peace, without Spot and Blameless, 2 Pet. iii.
14. And not led away with the Error of the wicked. And to mention no more, it
is very Observable, that the Church of Philadelphia, who had a gracious Promise
of being kept from (or in) the hour of Temptation that should come upon all the
World, to try them that dwell on the Earth, is yet awfully Admonished in those
words, Behold I come quickly, hold fast that which thou have, that no Man (or
no one, (...)) take thy Crown, Rev. iii. 6, 10, 11.

I have done with the Preface when I have said, that the Reader must not expect
here to find any thing like a general Charge against the Romish Church, (such a
work would fill Volumns, and has actually so done:) The Design of the Essay
being only to open two Articles of her Indictment; and yet Ex Pede Herculem,
from a Foot by the rule of proportion we may make an Estimate of the Man of Sin.

An ESSAY to Explain that Passage in the Revelations, Chap. XVIII. v. 13. --
and Slaves and Souls of Men; with an Application thereof to the Church of Rome.
IT being a Matter of such mighty Consequence to the People of GOD in the
several Ages of the Church plainly to discover Antichrist, that so they might
not touch the unclean thing, but be separate; It Is not to be wondered at, that
the HOLY GHOST in giving the Character of Mystical Babylon, the Mother of
Harlots, etc. should descend to such Particulars as we meet with in this, and
the preceding Chapter. For here we find the Apostate Church described from her
Posture, Sitting, v. 3. I saw a Woman Sit, etc. thus old Babylond Sat as a
Queen: Her Garb and Attire, v. 4. she was arrayed with Purple, and decked with
Gold, and precious Stones, etc. Notice is also taken of her Complexion, and
Condition; She was Scarlet Colored, and drunk with blood; the blood of Saints
and Martyrs, as it follows in the 6. v. And the better to find this strange
Woman, her Residence, or Place of Abode, is pointed out; the great City which
Reigned over the Kings of the Earth, viz. ROME; which was famous for its seven
Mountains, and therefore called Civitas Septicollis. Virgil speaking of Rome
says, Septem quae una sibi muro circumdedit Arces: And the Ancient Romans had a
Feast called Festum Septimontium. And because great Cities are very much known
and distinguished by the Staple, or principal Wares they deal in; we have an
Account of the Trade drove to, and from this Mystical Babylon, by her Merchants
and Chapmen; and the very Commodities, as well those Imported as Exported, are
here Enumerated. The Invoice, which indeed is very particular, begins at the
12th. verse, with Gold and Silver, and ends in the 13th verse, with the Slaves
and Souls of Men, as our English Bible reads it. The Margin indeed has it
Bodies; The words in the Original, are (...); the true Meaning of which, I
shall now inquire into: And there being the least difficulty with the word
Souls, I shall begin with that, though the other stands first in the Text.

It must be acknowledged, that in Scripture, as well as in other Writings, the
word Soul, is often taken figuratively for the whole Person: yet on the other
hand, the sacred Historians, and other Writers use the word (...), and scarce
any other, when they speak of departed Spirits, or the Soul after it is
Separation from the Body; as might be proved from innumerable Instances, were
there occasion. Homer the Fountain of the Greek Language, for the most part, if
not always, uses the word (...), for the Ghosts or departed Spirits of the
Grecian Heroes (...). English;d by Mr. Pope:

That Wrath which hurled to Pluto's gloomy Reign,
The SOULS of mighty Chiefs untimely Slain.

But I need not labor this; our Protestant Expositors being generally agreed,
That by the word (...) in this place, we are to understand Souls departed.

I proceed therefore to Explain the word (...). Our famous Mr. Brightman reads
it Bodies: The French Bible renders the word Esclaves: Junius and Tremellius
translate it Mancipia; and so does the Vulgar Latin Bible, with many of the
Critics. It is probable, that which occasioned our Translators, together with
Junius and Tremellius, and the Latin, and French Bibles, to render the word
(...), Slaves, or Mancipia, is a passage in the Description which the Prophet
Ezekiel, Chap. xxvii. gives of the rich Trade and Supply of Tire, verse 13.
Javan, Tubal, and Meshec, they were thy Merchants; they traded the Persons of
Men, as our Bible reads it, and so does the French. The Latin has it Mancipia;
Junius and Tremellius, Hominibus: But the general Opinion of Expositors, is
that the Prophet Ezekiel intends Servants, or Slaves that were sold at Tire:
And without doubt the Allegorical description of Mystical Babylon in this
Chapter, is taken from that Prophecy in Ezekiel. But then as Mr. Brightman upon
the Place observes, these words in the Revelations have a far other Meaning
than those in Ezekiel: and upon the last words in the verse, viz. and Souls of
Men says, THE HOLY GHOST seems to have changed the Construction of the words of
set purpose, that He might note out the Difference between this Commodity, and
all the other, especially those of the Bodies; for these words and Souls, are
not put in the Genitive Case, as it is clear in the Greek text, but in the
Accusative, as we have translated it in the Latin; whereby it is signified that
there is a diverse, and distinct Consideration made in the Place, of Souls and
Bodies. Thus that Learned Man.

This remarkable Distinction makes it the more strange, that such of our
Protestant Expositors, as understand by the word (...). Spirits or separate
Souls, should render the preceding word (...) Slaves: For Slavery is Conditio
Personae, and takes in the whole Man, to wit, Soul and Body, Conjunctim;
whereas in the text they are plainly Enumerated as two distinct Species of
Merchandise.

Besides, I doubt upon Examination, even the Protestants will be found as much
concerned in the Merchandise of Slaves, as those of the Romish Religion, and so
it cannot be a Characteristic of the Apostate Church, which (as has been noted)
is the great Design of the Context.

I have already observed, That Mr. Brightman reads the word (...), in this
place, Bodies: but then he applies it to the Switzers, who are a Corpulent
People, and furnish the Pope with his standing Guards.

Some Learned Men have thought, that the wretched Subjection and Vassalage of
the Princes and People in Europe, to the Church of Rome, especially in the Ages
preceding the Reformation, when the Popes treated them like Slaves, is here
intended.

Others again are of Opinion, That by the word (...), we may very well
understand, the Merchandise made by the Romish Church of the Bodies of Men
while alive, in those Rigorous and unnatural Chastisings of the Body, by Shirts
of Mail, Haircloth, Whippings, and other Bodily Penances: which, though enjoined
and practiced under pretense of spiritual Mortification, and for the good of
the Soul; yet upon occasion may be dispensed with, and are commuted into Money,
or some other Emolument to the Church, and so turned into Merchandise. But
Veritas rei, and veritas loci, are two different things. The Question is not
what the word (...), in general signifies, or how it may be rendered in other
Places; but what the Meaning of it is in this Invoice of the Merchandise of
Mystical Babylon.

And with Reverence to our English Translators, and the other Venerable Authors
beforementioned, I am of Opinion, That by the word (...), in the Text, we
ought to understand the DEAD BODIES of Men: To support which, besides what has
been already mentioned tending that way, I would offer the following
Considerations.

1. First, It is well known, That the Romish Church for several Ages, has made
Merchandise as well of the Dead Bodies, as the separate Souls of Men: (as is
proved in the following Essay.) Now if we are to suppose the HOLY GHOST in this
Place, (as our Protestant Expositors grant) Designs by the word (...), the
Merchandise which the Church of Rome makes of separate Souls; certainly it is
as reasonable to think, That by the word (...), He should point out another
Branch of their vile Trade, viz. that of the Dead Bodies of Men.

2. Secondly, The manifest Distinction in the Original, and so between the two
Species of Merchandise observed by Mr. Brightman, will be most effectually
preserved by this Interpretation of the word (...): for the Soul and Body are
never so much Contradistinguished, as after they are separated. And therefore
Death is defined to be (...), Separatio Animae et Corporis.

3. Thirdly, And to mention no more, the word (...) is so rendered, not only by
the Greek Authors and Lexicons, but also by the Translators of the Bible in
many other Places. It Is likewise very observable, That the only words used in
the Septuagint and New Testament, for Servants and Bondmen, are (...) and
(...): And among the Ancient Grecians (...) was the Name of a Slave, or the
worst sort of Servants. Scapula, after he has rendered (...) Corpus, especially
Corpus hominis, takes notice that Plutarch, when speaking of burning the Dead
Bodies, expresses it in the Greek, by (...) And in another Place describing the
manner of Crucifying among the Romans, says, (...) And Homer beforementioned,
uses the word (...) for the dead Body in the xxiv. of his Odysses. One of the
Grecian Heroes in Hades is represented as bewailing, That in such a Battle he,
and others were slain, but their Bodies lay neglected; Corpora neglecta jacent;
in the Greek it is (...) etc. Schrevelius renders (...), Corpora, Servi.
Hedericus (...) Corpus, Ca^^, Mancipium. Scapula likewise, but it is with an
Item, allows the word (...), sometimes to signify Servus. So that Maneipium or
Servi are but a secondary Acceptance of the word. Corpus stands first, and
therefore ought to be looked upon as the most proper. The Learned Moosieus
L'enfane in his Notes upon Mat. xxvi. 26. This is my Body, says the word (...)
signifies properly a dead Body without Blood. And the Syriack Translation
renders the word (...) by another, signifying a dead Carcass.
The Septuagint in that remarkable passage of the young Prophet who was slain
by a Lion for his Disobedience, and his Carcass (or dead Body) cast in the way
renders it (...) seven times running, I. King. xiii. 14. and following verses A
great Number of Carcasses, (...), Nahum- iii. 3.
As to the New Testament; the word (...), very frequently stands for the dead
Body, and accordingly is so rendered. To instance in a few Places, Mat. xiv. 12.
His Disciples came and took up the Body, i. e. of John; (...) Mat. xxvii. 52.
Many Bodies of Saints which slept; (...) Verse 58. He went to Pilate and begged
the Body of JESUS; (...) Luke xxiv. 3. And they entered in, and found not the
Body of the LORD JESUS; (...) Acts ix. 40. And Peter turning him to the Body of
Tabitha, who was dead; (...) And to mention no more, I. Cor. xv. 44. It is sown
a natural Body; (...)

Having thus stated the Meaning of the word (...) I proceed to make good the
Charge exhibited against the Church of Rome, viz. making Merchandise of the
Bodies and Souls of Men. I begin with the BODIES.

Now the Trade or Merchandise carried on by the Church of Rome with the Dead
Bodies of Men, may be Comprehended under these two general Heads.

1. Mortuaries and Rights of Burial. 2. Relics and Pilgrimages.
First. MORTUARIES. Our English Law Books tell us, That the second best Beast
(if the Defunct left Cattle) was claimed for the Mortuary; if not, then a
certain Sum of Money. And Mr. Seldom in his Treaties of Tithes, says, The
Ancient Custom, according to the Church Canon, was to bring the Mortuary along
with the Corpse, when it came to be buried, and to offer it to the Church as a
Satisfaction for the supposed Negligence the Defunct had been Guilty of, in not
paying of his Personal Tithes; and from thence it was called a Corse Present;
(...); a Ransom for the Body.

This is certain, That upon Notice of the Death of any One, the Parish Priest,
Curate, or some spiritual Person came and demanded a certain Sum of Money, by
the Name of a Mortuary: and so Exorbitant at length these Ecclesiastics grew,
as to insist upon a Ninth, and sometimes even for a Third part of the dead Man's
Goods. This is taken Notice of in the Statute of the 26th of Henry the VIII. So
that at length the Parliament were obliged first to restrain, and at last to
abolish this ill Custom. Our Historians further tell us, That unless the
Mortuary was paid or secured to be paid by the Heir or Executor, the deceased
could not have Christian Buryal. And Dr. Eurnet (afterward Bishop of
Salisbury) in his History of the Reformation A work which deserved the uncommon
Honor it met with; the Rev. Author having the Thanks of the Parliament for it.
Lib. I. gives us a terrible Instance of their Cruelty in this very thing. One
RICHARD HUN, a Merchant in London, was sued by his Parish Priest for a Mortuary
in the Court of the Popes Legate: and because He brought a Praemunire against
the Priest in the Temporal Court, for bringing the Kings Subjects before a
Foreign and Illegal Court, he was Imprisoned in the Bishops Court for Heresy;
and because they could not find Matter sufficient to put him to death by Law,
he was Murdered in Prison.

Rites of BURIAL -- Many and Superstitious are the Ceremonies and Orders of the
Romish Church touching Burial, and of all which they take care to make their
Market. By some of their Canons, not only Heathens and Jews, but also Heretics
(under which term they always comprehend Protestants, and their Favorers) they
that don't confess their Sins once a Year, and all Excommunicated persons, etc.
are excluded from Ecclesiastical Burial. A flagrant Instance of this we have in
our own History in the Reign of King John. The Kingdom of ENGLAND, for six
Years and three Months, was under an Interdict from the Pope, during all which
time (enarrare Indignamur) all that died were buried like Dogs in ditches and
holes; only such as had purchased a License from the Pope. Among other Bulls of
the Romish Church D. A. Gavin in his Master-Key to Popery, Vol. I. Reckons the
Bull of the Dead so called, Bullo Defunctorum. No Body can be buried either
within or without the Church except they have this Bull on their Breast, in
token of their being Christians. The price of this Bull is two Reals of Plate:
this goes to the Treasure of the Church, and must needs amount to a prodigious
Sum every Year.

They have also taken Care to Appoint the Times, and Places for Burial --.
TIMES, -- not upon Festival days, unless necessity require it, and then after
Vespers are celebrated --. PLACES, -- some of the Ancient Canons restrain
Burials in Churches, and all absolutely forbid burying any Bodies whatsoever
near the Altar. But as sacred as the Canons or Rules abovementioned seem to
be, they have been frequently bought off, and are yet dispensed with, when ever
the Pope pleases.

2. Secondly, The Superstitious use of RELICS and the PILGRIMAGES Consequent
there-upon.

This being one of the most profitable Branches of Trade carried on at Mystical
Babylon; I shall be the larger upon it.

That the Church of Rome not only carries on this unlawful Trade, but openly
Justifies and Avows it, in Defiance of the Word of GOD, and the Canons of
several Ecclesiatical Councils to the contrary, is notorious and cannot be
denied. Bellarmine, one of their great Champions says in express words, That
the Relics of the Saints, viz. the Bones, Ashes, etc. are to be Adored: although,
not with the same kird of Worship, as the Spirits of Saints; yet with more than
Humane or Civil Worship, viz. with Religious Supplication, Rites,
Circumgestation, Thurification, etc. Petrie's Century's p. 45. And Father
Alezander, in his System of Divinity, according to the Council of Trent, under
the Title Relics, lays it down as a Thesis, that the honoring of Relics is
not Repugnant to the first Commandment.

It is true they Endeavor to avoid the charge of Idolatry by Alleging, That
in the Honor they pay to the Relics of Martyrs and Saints, they don't Adore
them, but GOD whose saints they are.

The Council of Trent stteles the matter thus; The Relics of Saints, that is,
their Bodies and Bones and Sepulchers where they are buried, are to be Adored
and Reverenced, though with less Honor somewhat, than the Saints themselves.
That filthy Lucre was at the bottom of all this, was long since observed and
lamented by Mantuan, who is celebrated by Bellarmine for a Learned and Godly
Poet.

Venalia nobis, Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria Sacra, Coronae, Ignis, Thura,
Preces: Caelum est venale, Deusque.

And Cornelius Agrippa, a Member of the Romish Church; a Doctor of Law,
Counselor and Historiographer to the Emperor Charles the V. (in the XVI.
Century) an unexceptionable Witness, is yet more express in the point, in his
Treatise de Vanit. Human. Scient. His words translated, are these, Covetous
Priests and greedy Men seeking matter of their Avarice, not by Wood and Stones
only, but by the Bones of the Dead also, and Relics of Martyrs have found
means of Covetousness: they open the Graves of the Confessors, they take out
the Relics of Saints, and do Sell a Touch, or Kiss of them. And Dr. John
Edwards, in his Introduction to the Rise and Progress of Popery, says, The
Priests greatest Profits arise from the Dead: These bring in more gain than the
Living. An Ingenious Traveller, to the same purpose observes, that in Italy the
Dead Maintain the Living. The vast Prosit arising to the several Popish
Churches and Fraternities by these Relics, have frequently occasioned long and
sharp Quarrels and Lawsuits between the Merchants of these Wares, as well for
the Property as the Possession of them These Contentions have been so fierce,
and the Parties concerned so Obstinate in their several claims, and often of
the self same Relics, that they have not only Mangled, but at length made
Monsters of these (...); some of their Saints having two Heads, others three
Arms, and the like: much of the same Nature with their vile abuse of the Cross,
concerning which Erasmus the Harbinges of the Reformation, say; That if all the
Fragments of Wood shown for the true Cross of CHRIST were gathered together,
they would load a Ship. Thus Mad are they upon their Idols.

It is a sorrowful thing, and even a Reproach to Christianity, to find by
Ecclesiastical History, the Primitive Fathers, many of them at least, advancing
so much toward this Superstition, by their Exoessive Veneration for the Memory
and Sepulthres of Martyrs and Saints, their too great Credulity of what was
reported of Miracles being wrought and Visions seen at their Graws: Even St.
Austin himself has these words, Who dare deny that GOD, by sacred Ashes, Bones,
and other Relics of the Saints, works the same sort of Miracles, as were
performed by Paul's Handkerchief, Elishas dead Body, etc. And Jerome, in the
Opinion of Erasmus, was very abusive to Vigilantius for opposing the Honor
paid to the Relics of the Saints. The Cloud indeed was then no bigger then a
Man's hand, but in a few Ages it covered the Heavens with blakness. One of the
first Steps to this Superstition, was the Consecrating the Places where the
Martyrs, or any eminent Saints were buried, calling them Altars. At these
Altars, the Christians kept their Vigils; thither in the day time, especially
on set days, they would repair to offer their Sacrifices, as they called them;
that is Prayers, making Vows, Oblations, and even Celebrating the Sacraments:
But this piece of Devotion being found chargeable and troublesome especially
for those who lived at a distance; they proceeded, to translate the Bodies of
Martyrs and Saints, at least such as they called so, to their Temples, or built
Churches for them. The Emperor Constantine, in his devout Zeal, began this
Practice: for Jerome tells us, that he transported the Bodies of Andrew, Luke
and Timothy to Constantinople: And the Empress Constantia, as Agrippa
before-named tells us, sent to Gregory the 1st. for the Head of St. Paul, or
some part of his Body, to be Interred at St. Paul's Church in Constantinople.
And the common People following these Examples, would not suffer the Bones of
the Primitive Saints to rest in their Graves, but took them up, and carried
them from Place to Place: and when they built and dedicated a Church to any of
the Apostles, primitive Bishops, or other Martyrs, if it were possible they
would get either the entire Body, or at least some Member to be there Interred
with great solemnity, whatever it cost them: for the Original Owners and
Possessors at length grew so Cunning, as to set a good Price upon these (...):
in particular, as Ecclesiastical History Informs us, St. Austins Body when
translated from Hippo to Sardinia, was purchased at a hundred Talents of
Silver, and a Talent of Gold, which makes 40375 Pounds Sterling Money This
among other innumerable Instances, is an Imitation of the Superstition of the
Ancient Romans, who frequently purchased and translated Foreign Gods to Rome.
The Statue of Apollo was purchased at l. 29062 10 s. Sterling. That of Mercury at
l 3229 3 s. 4 d. Arbuthnot's Tables of Ancient Coins.
.

This brought on those Superstitious PILGRIMAGES to Jerusalem, Rome,
Constantinople, and other Holy Places, as they called them. Dr. Burnet in his
History beforementioned tells us, That there were believed to be a hundred
thousand Pilgrims at one time on a Jubilce at the Tomb of Thomas Becket in
Canterbury.

The 5th Council of Carthage, Canon the 4th. appointed expressly, That no Altar
should be built, withous the Relics of some Martyr. And the Council of Trent,
did in express terms decree, Such Pilgrimages to the Sepulchers, and in Memory
of Saints, to ask and obtain their Help, are Godly and Religious, and to be
much used of Christians: and no wonder since it brought in so much Gain to the
Crafts-men, for they took care to manage these Pilgrimages to great Advantage
many ways, to mention but three.

First, the Offerings made to the Shrine, and in Honor of the (...) of the
Place were very Valuable. The Author but now named, in the same Book, acquaints
us, That the Annual Oblations at Beckets Tomb amounted to near a thousand
Pounds Sterling; and that King Lewis the seventh of France came over in
Pilgrimage to it, and offered a Stone reckoned to be the richest in Europe: So
that this Shrine grew to be of inestimable value; for when it came to be broken
by Henry the VIII. the Gold of it was so heavy that it filled two Chests, which
took eight Men a piece to carry them out of the Church.

Secondly, There being as has been observed upon these Solemnities, a great
Concourse of People, (supposed to come from a principle of Devotion) the
Priests had a fine Opportunity to put off their Purgatory Masses, and other
Popish Wares, and even sorced the deluded Votaries to buy them.

Thirdly, And to mention no more; upon these Occasions also these Sharpers
would ask Alms for the Poor, and then take it for themselves, under the Notion
of their own Vow of perpetual Poverty. For these Reasons this Superstition
became such a Noli me tangere, that Persons have been griev'ously persecuted,
and even to death, for only declaring against this Folly.

Mr. Fox in his Martyrology gives many instances of this kind. One William
Sweeting put to death, for saying to his Wise, That it would be better for her
to tarry at home, and attend upon her Business, than to go upon Pilgrimages.
Isabel Merwyn was also put to death for saying, She would go no more upon
Pilgrimages while she lived, for all Saints (says she) are in Heaven: with many
others, as I find'em cited by Willet in his Synopsis Papismi.

I my self being at Coruns in Spain in the year 1697. sam more than an hundred
Men and Women passing through that City on a Pilgrimage, to the Shrine of some
noted Romish Saint, at two or three hundred Miles distance from their own
Habitation.

There is scarce a Church of any note or figure in all the Romish Countries,
but pretends to have, and at proper seasons to expose the Relics of some
Saint; and the Council of Milan prescribe certain Rites to be observed in
showing those Relics, in order to excite the Faithful to the Veneration of
them.

We have already noted, that the pretense of Miracles wrought, and Visions seen
at the Sepulchers of the Saints, was one thing that gave rise to this
Superstition, and was alleged by, the Romish Church in their Justification:
But least these forged Miracles, or lying Wonders should Multiply too much, the
Council of Milan Enact, That there be no new Miracles Published or Admitted, no
new Relics received, without the Knowledge and Approbation of the Bishop; And
the Council of Lateran says, It must be with the Authority and Approbation of
the Roman Pontiff. That these Relics, or the most of them were Counterfeit and
Forged, is most certain, and numbers of them have been derected and found to be
the vilest of Impostures. This is a Fact so Notorious, that many learned well
disposed Men of their own Church, have been ashamed of it: And therefore Pope
Innocent the third, Decrees, That Prelates should not suffer those who come to
their Churches to Worship, to be deceived with false and feigned Relics, as
the Custom has been in diverse Places for Lucre sake. But alas! this Decree
signified little; for Dr. Burnet in his Travels tells us, That the Popes of the
two last Centuries have Sprung such a Mine of Relics in the CATAGOMBS of Rome,
as will supply that Church with an inexhaustible (...) of Bones.

And Mr. Monroe, who likewise was at Rome, and viewed those Mortuary Caves,
acquaints us, That some Authors especially the Advocates for Relics, will have
them made by the Primitive Christians; adding, That in the times of Persecution
they lived, held their Assemblies, and laid up the Bodies of Martyrs and
Confessors in them. This, says the same Author, is the Account that prevails at
Rome, and consequent to it there are Men kept constantly at work in them.

As soon as those Laborers discover a Repository, with any of the Marks of a
Saint about it, Intimation is given to the Cardinal Treasurer, who immediately
sends Men of Probity and Reputation to the Place. Where they find a Palm
Painted or Engraven, or the Cipher X. p. which is commonly read, Pro Christo,
or a small round Projection in the side of the Gallery a little below the
Repository; what is within it, is carried to the Palace (there to be disposed
of for the best advantage:) Many of these Projections we have seen open with
pieces of the Vials in them: the Glass indeed was tinctured, and it is pretended
that in these Vials was conserved the Blood of the Martyrs, which was thus laid
up nigh their Bodies toward their Heads, to distinguish them from those of the
others that were not called to the Honor of laying down their Lives for the
Faith of the Gospel. But this Opinion is learnedly and effectually refuted as
well by Dr. Burnet in his Travels beforementioned, as Mr. Monroe, by Arguments
and Authorities, too long to be inserted in this Essay.

And senior Bencini, a learned Bibliothecary at Rome, acknowledge to Mr.
Monroe, that the so famed Cipher X. p. pretended and insisted upon to be the
Marks of a Martyr, was in use among the Ancients long before Christianity began.

As to the Inscriptions of some Names at large, and Painting found in some of
the Repositories, a learned Antiquary confessed to Dr. Burnet, That the Names
were Modern, and the highest Antiquity that could be ascribed to the Painting
was 600 Years: So that both these learned Travelers agree, That there is no
proof, either of the Christians building these Catacombs, or of the Martyrs or
Confessors being buried there; and that if they were, it is impossible to know
and distinguish their Bones from others: And there-upon conclude, that these
Catacombs, were first the burying Places of the Ancient Romans, though afterward
some Christian Bodies might be also there laid up The famous Sir Isaac Newton
is of Opinion, That these Catacombs were the Caves and first Habitations of the
Aborigines of Italy.
So that in all Probability the Bones even of the Roman Slaves, or at least
those of the meaner Sort, are now set in Silver and Gold, with a great deal of
other costly Garniture, and sent over the World, to seed a Superstition that is
as Blind as it proves Expensive.

It is very natural to suppose, That even among these Superstitious Worshippers
themselves, some would be under a Concern least they should be mistaken in the
Object' of their Devotion: But for the Ease of such scrupulous Consciences, the
Council of Milan declares, That he is guilty of no Sin that Worships the Relick
of one Saint for another: And to complete the Matter they say, Though the Relics
Worshipped should appear to be no Saint at all, yet the Worshipper is innocent.
Thus at length was this Mystery of Iniquity finished. And thus Vile has Rome
Papal, that Mother of Harlots, made her self with the Dead Bodies of Men; and
her stately Temples, or Edifices, which ought to be Houses of Prayer for the
Reception and Entertainment of true and spiritual Worshippers, are like to
Painted Sepulchers, full of dead Men's Bones, and all Uncleanness, Mat. xxiii.
27.

I now proceed to the second part of the Indictment, viz.

The Merchandise made by this Idolatrous Church of SOULS separate from the
Body, (...).

This I shall comprehend under three heads, viz.

1. Canonization. 2. Vows. And 3. Masses for Souls in Purgatory.
1. First. CANONIZATION. The Canonizing of Saints is defined by Bellarmine, as
he is quoted by Mr. Willet, to be The public determination and sentence of the
Church, whereby Men that are Dead are judged to be Saints, and worthy of Honor
and Worship; as to be Prayed unto, Temples and Altars to be set up in their
Names, Holy days to be appointed for them, and their Relics to be Adored":
And the same Bellarmine says, That it appertains only to the Pope to Canonize a
Saint for the whole Church; and that none ought to be acknowledged for Saints,
but they that are so Canonized by him; and that herein the Pope is of so
Infallible a Judgment that he cannot Err in Canonizing of Saints, because that
ordinarily none are Canonized which have not been known to work Miracles. The
same Bellarmine acquaints us, That Leo III. was the first Pope that Canonized a
Saint. This blasphemous Power, notwithstanding what Bellarmine pretends, was so
abused at length, that some of the Vilest of Men were set up for Saints, and
Worshipped accordingly. Even Thomas Becket before-named, was Canonized by Pope
Alexander, under a pretense that some Miracles were wrought by him; and the
Name of the Cathedral Church at Canterbury, was altered from Christ's Church to
St. Thomas Becket's: And yet at the same time, the Sorbonists A University of
Divines at Paris.
maintained in their Public Disputes, He was justly Condemned for Rebellion:
and therefore his Shrine was put down in the Reign of Henry VIII. and his Bones
burnt by order of the Lord Cromwell. Agrippa before-named says, There are many
that held heretical Opinions who were counted in the Canon of Saints.
Bonnaventure, who was guilty of Blasphemy in Ascribing the work of Salvation to
the Virgin Mary, as may be seen in his Ladies Psalter, is one of the Popish
Saints. This with much more to the same purpose may be seen at large in the
Synopsis Papismi, beforementioned.

Nor is this Trade of making of Saints yet given over: No Century passes, but
several new Saints are added to the Popish Calender. And it is not to be
supposed, that the Roman Pontiff will make so valuable a Present as that of a
new Saint, to any of the Churches or Religious Orders for nothing: This like
the ancient Freedom among the Romans, must be purchased with a great Sum. At
the same time, the Popes Brokers don't stick at the Price; since they are sure
of making their Money again of the Shrine, with great Advantage; for as Dr.
Edwards in his Treatise of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome observes, a new
Saint at first, and so for a considerable time, gets the better of all the
rest. D. A. Gavin beforementioned says, The Sum settled by the Pope for the
making a Saint is One hundred thousand Crowns.

2. Secondly. A second Branch of the Merchandise made by the Church of Rome of
the Souls of Men, is the making and paying of VOWS to Saints, or such as are
Canonized by the Pope.

Having hinted at something of this Superstition already under the head of
Relics and Pilgrimages, I shall say the less here; not but that it very well
deserves to be Insisted on, and Exposed.

This piece of Idolatry is a Branch of that Adoration, which the Church of Rome
say is due to Saints in these words, VOWS may be made to Saints properly as
unto GOD, though not altogether in the same manner. And they are encouraged to
that Degree, that contrary to all Laws Divine and Humane; Husbands are deprived
of the Power of hindering their Wives from making them.

The Matter of these Vows is Various according to the Humor or Condition of
the Persons that make them. One will Vow to go a Pilgrimage to some Saint, or
Holy Place: Another to enter into such a Religious Society, or do such a piece
of Service, for the Honor of the Church: Others again, to Offer a Sum of
Money, or such a particular Present to this or that Saint, Image, Society, or
Pious use.

And as the Making these Vows, is very much recommended by the Doctors of the
Romish Church; so the Performance of them as rigidly Insisted on by the
Confessors, who to that end, diligently enquire, among other things, of the
Persons that come to be Confessed, What Vows they are under, and how they have
been complied with; and those of them that are not Originally for Money, may be
changed into a pecuniary Mulct, and so made Merchandise.

But we shall see a much greater Abomination than this, in the Chambers of the
Romish Imagery.

3. Thirdly. I proceed therefore to the third and last Branch of the
Merchandise made of Souls departed by the Church of Rome, which I proposed to
speak to, viz. the Redeeming Souls out of PURGATORY by the help of MASSES,
Prayers and Indulgencies.

This is generally reckoned to be the deepest Corruption, and the most
profitable Invention that ever that Church was guilty of; and so peculiar to
Rome Papal, That Mr. Willet observes, No other Church in Christendom, even the
most Erroneous has ever taken it up; And the Prophet's Charge against
Idolatrous Israel may be here fitly applied, They have separated themselves to
that Shame Hos. ix. 10.
.

The Popes PURGATORY, for so it may properly be called, is Defined by the
Romish Church, to be a certain Infernal Place in the Earth called Purgatory, in
the which, as in a Prison house, those who were not fully purged in this Life,
are fully cleansed and purged by fire, before they can be received into Heaven.

It is not to be wondered at, that this Monstre stuck so long in the Birth: for
though it was in a sort Conceived by the Monks between the Fourth and Sixth
Centuries, and in the following Ages, formed and fashioned by the Bishops and
Popes of Rome; yet it was not perfectly Delivered till the Year 1439; and then
this Damnable Doctrine was made an Article of Faith by the Council of Florence,
and He was Cursed to Hell, that did not believe it.

In the next Century the Council of Trent Established it yet further. The Words
of the 19th Article of the Trent Creed, I do Steadfastly Believe that there is a
Purgatory, and that the Souls therein detained are helped by the Prayers of the
Faithful.

The third Canon of the Council of Trent, Anathematizes all those who say, the
Sacrifice of the Mass profits only him that takes it, and that it ought not to
be offered for the Satisfaction of the Sins of the living and the dead.
Bellarmine indeed tells us, That this Doctrine must be understood only of
Venial Sins, and not such as are Mortal, for the latter he grants send Men to
Hell directly.

One great Point yet remained; and that was to make this wonderful Power of
delivering Souls out of Purgatory, a Prerogative or Peculiar to the Sea of
Rome, and fix it in the Pope, that so the Profits might all center with Him.
Thereupon the Canonists and great Doctors of that Church declare, That Bishops
and other Inseriour Priests cannot apply Indulgences to the Dead; it belongs
only to the Pope. Among others Johannes Angelus affirms, "The Souls in
Purgatory are under the Popes Jurisdiction"; and Father Alexander, in his 5th
Tome, Title Indulgences, says, Non Vivis Solum sed etiam defunctis prosunt
Indulgentioe e SUMMO PONTIFICE, pro illorum levamine concessoe illisque
speciatim applicatoe.

Thus the Romish Church at length Established the Doctrine of Purgatory in all
the several Articles of it. Having done this; The next thing was to set up a
Trade upon this Foundation, and to make Merchandise of it, for that was the
Main thing designed all along. Here-upon the Bishops, Priests and Religious of
all Orders, were set to work, to draw in the Superstitious People to Purchase
these Masses, Prayers, etc. at such Rates, as they were pleased to set upon
them, in order to redeem the Souls of their Ancestors, Children, and other
Friends, out of Purgatory. This work was soon accomplished, and the great Point
quickly gained, through the Craft and Delusion of the Popes Agents: for the World
in those Ages, as 'twas Prophesied, Wondered after the Beast, and being given
up, Sacro-sancta Dei Ira, to strong Delusions, they believed Lies. The
Merchants and Chapmen of Rome, like Locusts Swarmed all over the Christian
World, and with the greatest Impudence, though under the Cloak of Piety and
Compassion to Souls, bartered away these Commodities, for that which was much
better, Money, Lands, or any thing else of value they could get.

This wretched Trade was carried on with so much Fraud and Wickedness, for so
many Ages, that it is impossible, as Bishop Burnet observes, to read the Account
of it, without both Amazement and Indignation. And yet out of this very Eater
at length there came forth Meat; for the Infamous Sale of Indulgences from Pope
Leo the X in Saxony, was the very thing, which first disgusted LUTHER against
the Church of Rome, and happily engaged him in the GLORIOUS REFORMATION.

Our English Histories and Law Books furnish us with very Authentic Proofs and
Instances of the indefatigable Pains, insatiable Avarice, and vile Frauds of
these Purgatory Merchants. How they would Solicit, and even sometimes Force
Men and Women living or dying to devote or give away such a part of their
Estates for this Pious of Redeeming Souls out of Purgatory The Popish Synod
held at Dianper in India. Anno 1599 among other Decrees Enacts. That all such
as die worth 2000 Panoins. and have left nothing for a certain number of
Purgatory Masses, shall have so much taken out of their Estates before the
Division among the Heirs, to be applied for the use aforesaid. Dr. Geddes
History of that Synod. Tag. 160.
This at length as an Ingenious Man observes, inspired them with that Inhuman
Cruelty and Barbarity as made them desire the Death of all Men. This Remark
confirms that Latin Verse quoted by the Famous John Huss, in one of his
Sermons, speaking of the Avarice of the Priests, and the gain they make of
Purgatory Masses, De Morbo Medicus Gaudet, de Morte Sacerdos.

Nor were they kinder to one another; for at the Death of Clergymen, the Pope
challenged for himself All their Estates that were raised out of the Revenues
of the Church; so that a rich Clergyman could no sooner fall Sick, but the
Popes Collectors were gaping about him for his Goods, and set Guards presently
about his House: That by this, Bishops have been Deserted upon their Death
Beds, and Famished for want of Meat to Eat Peter de Moulin in his Treatise of
Popal Usurpations, Book. 4
.

The first thing these Spiritual Factors laid their hands on for Returns to
Rome, was the Money and Moveable Treasure of the Nation; but they could not
stop here, they had their Eye upon the Solid Estate of the Kingdom, in order to
make a Land Bank of these new Bills: This also (to the shame of our Ancestors
be it spoken) was soon effected, and a great part of the Terre of England,
bestowed upon Religious Houses, or for some Pious use, as it was called, upon
no other Consideration, than a certain Number of these Indulgences for the
Redemption of Souls out of Purgatory. This, Bishop Burnet in his Exposition of
the Articles of the Church of England No. 22, says, was expressed in the very
Deeds of the Land: And he further observes, that these Endowments through the
Profuseness the World was then wrought up to by the Subtilty and vile Practices
of the Romish Clergy, increased to so vast a Degree; that if the Parliament of
England had not by several Statutes of Mortmain restrained this crying Abuse,
the very Constitution of the Nation might in time have been subverted, and the
Temporalties wholly subjected to the Spirituality, and in time the People have
been all Tenants or Farmers to the Clergy. For which Reason he is clear in the
point; That the States and Princes of Christendom were at full Liberty upon the
Discovery of these Impostures, to void all the Endowments that had followed
upon them, and either to apply them to better Uses, or to restore 'em to the
Families from which they had been drawn, if that had been practicable, or to
convert them to any other Use. Thus that Learned Man.

This Rule was notably put in Practice by our King HENRY the VIIIth, with the
Advice and Assistance of those two famous Worthies, THOMAS CROMWELL Earl of
Essex, and Arch Bishop CRANMER.

It must be acknowledged, that through the tender Mercy of GOD, when the Day
spring from on high visited so many of the Nations at the Reformation, the
Riches of this Merchandise we are treating of, in one Hour, as the Prophetical
Phrase is, came to naught in the Protestant Countries; so that no Man, i. e. no
wise Man, no good Protestant would buy of it any more, Rev. xviii. 11. Yet
alas! there are Millions that continue, and it is to be feared willingly, to be
imposed on and cheated with these Wares, even to this Day: for this is an
Iniquity that will not be purged from the Romish Church till She dye.

A Modern Traveller, in a Book Entitled, The Frauds of Romish Monks and
Priests, Vol. I. Letter 5. informs us, that the Society of the Souls in
Purgatory is the most general Confraternity of all their Religious Orders, as
belonging to all Churches, and to all Priests as well Secular as Regular; and
that there is never a Village in Italy, how small and inconsiderable soever,
which has not a Confraternity for the Souls in Purgatory.

Among innumerable other Frauds committed by the Priests in the Sale of these
Masses to the People, recounted by this Author, I shall single out One, and so
draw to a close of the Dissertation. It Is a common Practice, he says, when any
one sends Money to a Convent for a Hundred Masses, they content themselves with
Singing One, with the Assistance of the Deacon and Subdeacon: ('it is the Prior
or Guardian of the College that Sings) They call this, a Mass Sung, a Solemn
Mass: and they maintain that One of these Masses is an Equivalent to a great
Number of Common ones. This Stratagem they call, making a Reduction: And though
Pope Innocent the XI discountenanced this Practice; yet he and his Successors
Indulged them in another that serves the turn as well, and that is Celebrating
a Mass or two, at a Privileged Altar, which as Infallibly delivers a Soul out
of Purgatory, as a Thousand at any other: (this no Protestant will deny) But
then these Privileged Altars are not obtained from the Pope, without great Sums
of Money. Thus indeed the Pope has outwitted the Priests; but the Cheat is
still the same to the People; for the Maxim of that Church is, Si Populus Vult
decipi, decipiatar.

Nor is this Merchandise of the Bodies and Souls of Men carried on only among
the Romish Countries in Europe; for the Merchants of Mystical Babylon are of
late opening a Trade with these wretched Commodities in India, China, and other
ends of the Earth See Dr. Geddes's History of the Church of Malabar. and Synod
of Diamper; and the curious and edifying Letters of the Jesuits from their
Foreign Missions, Published Anno 1707.
. How far they may succeed in their Missions, and deceive the Nations we know
not: but would hope better things for them, and things that accompany
Salvation; since GOD has of late Years stirred up the Spirit of some of the
Protestant Princes of Europe, particularly the late King of Denmark (to his
Immortal Honor) to Establish a Protestant Mission at Tranquebar, on the Coast
of Malabar in India, to bring those poor People to the Knowledge of the Truth,
and the Obedience of Faith, that so they may be Saved.

And though the first Worthies employed in this Pious Work, the Reverend and
Excellent ZIGENBALG and GRUNDLER, (Apostoli nostrorum temporum) are dead in the
LORD, and rest from their Labors; yet the Great LORD of the Harvest has thruft
forth other Laborers: And we understand by late Letters from thence, that the
Blessed Work is carrying on with great Hopes of Success.

Having now finished the Essay I proposed, I shall dismiss it with the
following REFLECTIONS.

And

1. First, The making Merchandise of the Souls and Bodies of Men, gives us a
Specimen of the Exquisite Policy of the Church of Rome. Merchandising has
always been esteemed a Mystery that required agreat deal of Wisdom to manage it
to Advantage: Accordingly we read of the Prince of Tyrus, that by Wisdom and
Understanding in Traffic, he got and increased his Riches, Ezekiel. xxviii. 4, 5.
There was scarce any Commodity then in the known World, but what the Merchants
of Tire (that great Emporium in her day) traded in, and enriched themselves by;
as we find at large in the Description of the Wealth and Trade of that City,
Chap. xxvii. of the same Prophet. But neither they, nor the wise Men of Ancient
Babylon, ever dreamt of making Merchandise of Ghosts and Dead Bodies: this was
a Reserve for Mystical Babylon, and is a Masterpiece of Popery.

The Princes and States of Europe, with all their Wisdom, find it difficult
enough to raise and keep up their Revenues, by Taxes on the Polls and Estates
of their Subjects while Living; but the Politicians of Rome The Italians value
themselves not a little upon their Refined Policy.
have found out Ways and Means for the raising incredible Sums of Money from
the Dead, sufficient to maintain the Pope with his Cardinals, and other
Ecclesiastics in a Grandeur and Luxury, equal, if not superior, to the
Richest Court in Europe Dr. The. Burnet, in his Treatise, De State Mortuorum et
Resurgentium. Chap. 4. speaking of the Profits, arising to the Romish Church by
the Doctrine of surgatory and Relics, calls it, Auri Fodina quavis Indin
ditior.
. But then,

2. Secondly, What an amazing Guilt must the Apostate Church lie under on the
account of this Merchandising the Bodies and Souls of Men? If it be a great
Impiety, as one observes, to abuse Dead Bodies, especially in those that
Believe and look for their Resurrection; how Aggravated must this Iniquity be,
when they are thus made the Instruments of Idolatry? An high Affront of the
Divine Majesty, much of the same nature with what we find Idolatrous Israel
charged in the days of Ezekiel, Chap. xliii. 7, 8. Son of Man, the Place of my
Throne, and even my Holy Name have they Defiled, with the Carcasses of their
Kings in their high Places.

This great Abomination of the Romish Church has been matter of Scandal to the
Christian Name and Religion, even among Infidels. A notable proof of this may
be found in the 1st Vol. of the curious Letters beforementioned, page 40.
Father A. Arnedo, a Spanish Jesuit, in his Letter from Sinoa, dated July 1700,
in the Account he gives of a Persecution raised upon the Christians in
Cochin-china, takes particular notice of the Treatment the King of that Country
gave their Relics (of which some were entire Bones:) The King taking these
into his hands and showing them to those of his Country. Behold (says he) how
far these Christians carry their Impiety, so as to disturb the Bones of the
Dead in their Graves, than which what can be more horrible? Nor is this all,
adds he, for having reduced them to Powder, they afterward mingle them with
Potions, or else make a Paste of them, which they give to the People, and by
this means Enchant them to such a degree as to run blindly after them, and
embrace their Doctrine.

And if we survey the Merchandising of Souls, what a Mass and Complication of
Wickedness do we find in it? Let it suffice here only to take notice of the
Fraud and Injustice that runs through the whole. Hence it is that in the Prophecy
of the Apostate Church, among other Crimes found at the Door of Mystical
Babylon; we read of her Thests, Rev. ix. 21. (...) in the Plural Number, to
signify not only the Multitude of them, but the many and various ways the
Romish Church has of defrauding and cheating the Nations. This particular
Charge of the HOLY GHOST, was doubtless designed to point out not only the open
Violence and Robbery of the Bishops and Popes of Rome, in the Plunders and
Depredations they have made on their Neighbors, both Princes and People, of
their Civil Rights and Properties; but likewise their Spiritual and Religious
Thests, if I may so call 'em; such as their Sacrilege and Simony, the Infamous
Sale of their Pardons and Indulgences, and in an aspecial manner this
Merchandising the Bodies and Souls of Men: Every Penny raised that way, being a
notorious Violation of the Eighth Commandment, and their Temples or Churches,
where this Traffic is in a great measure carried on, thereby rendered Dens of
Thieves --.

3. Thirdly, How clear and evident does this Merchandising the Bodies and Souls
of Men, among other Proofs, make it, that the Romish Church, with the Pope at
the Head of it, is That Man of Sin, that wicked one, that was to be revealed,
of whom the Apostle in his Frophecy of the great Apostasy of the Christian
Church gives so large and particular an Account in his ad. Epist. to the These.
ii. Chap. -- Our Protestant Divines are generally agreed, that by the Man of
Sin here spoken of, we are not to understand. as the Papists would have us
believe, a single Person, but a Compages of many, or a System of Men either
Existing together, or Succeeding one another. Now among other Signs or Indicia
of this Man of Sin or Antichrist, here set down by the Apostle, we are told,
That his coming should be with all Deceivableness of Unrighteousness (...),
Omni Fraud Injustitiae, as one of the Critics has it; Fraud omnis Generis,
all kind of Deceit, as another. Iniquitas sed Mystica, i.e. Pietatis nomine
Palliata; so the ordinary Gloss expounds the Place; an Iniquity indeed, but
Mystical cloaked with the name of Piety. Beza has it, Omni Seductione
Injustitiae, Injustice carried on with Subtilty; Unrighteousness covered over
with Art: or as the Apostle elsewhere expresses it, the hidden things of
Dishonesty, 2 Cor. iv. 2.

How exactly does the Practice of the Romish Church exposed in the Essay,
answer this Prophecy of the Apostle? Por though this Merchandising the Bodies and
Souls of Men be notoriously wicked, the Gain of it dishonest, and the Buyers
cheated and abused; yet it is all disguised and covered over with a pretense of
Piety, Religious Worship, and the saving of Souls.

1 Corollary. Hereupon we should never speak or think. of Popery without an
holy Indignation and Abhorrence If he that touched a Dead Body, by the
Levitical Law became unclean Seven days; how putid and loathsome must Mystical
Babylon be at this day, who for so many Ages has been defiling herself (in a
much worse sense) with the dead Bodies and Bones of Men? Again, If Truth and
Justice in Trade give Honor and Reputation to the Merchant, and on the other
hand Fraud and Couzenage in Dealing render Men Vile and Odious; how detestable
must Popery appear in the Eyes of all Just and Good Men, and the Apostate
Church be avoided as a common Cheat?

2 Corollary. With what Disdain should the Proposal of an Union between
Protestants and Papists be rejected on our Part? It is indeed very strange,
That ever any Protestants (if they may be called so,) and some of 'em Divines
too, should project such an Union, and argue for it, as a thing both Possible
and Lawful. Sure, if these Laodiceans had thoroughly considered the Nature of
that Idolatry, which the Romish Church stands Convicted of, and how absolutely
inconsistent with the Fundamental Truths of the Gospel her other damnable
Doctrines and Superstitions are; they had never thus fluctuated between the two
Religions, or as the sacred Phrase is, Halted between two Opinions. A Communion
of Light with Darkness, or a Concord between CHRIST and Belial, may as soon be
expected, as a Union between Protestants and Papists, so long as they adhere to
their respective Principles and Worship Occalampadius in his Letter to the
Waldenses, makes the same Parallel, and Enlarges upon it. Perrin's History of
the Old Waldenses.
Very awful and decisive are those Words of the third Angel, Rev. xiv. 9. and
following Verses, If any Man Worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his
Mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the
Wrath of GOD, and the Smoke of their Torment ascends up for ever and ever.
Upon which Place Mr. Durham, that judicious Expositor, lays down this
Assertion, That a Papist living and dying according to the Complex Principles
of the Doctrine and Worship that is followed in Popery, cannot be Saved, nor
expect Justification before GOD.

4. Fourthly, We hence learn, what brutish Folly and Infatuation, even Nations
may be Guilty of, if GOD leave 'em to Walk in their own Ways. It is indeed a
very Amazing thing, and what the Heavens may be astonished at, That not only
the Common People of so many Polite Nations, (as France, Spain, and Italy, with
a great Part of Germany, etc.) but their Princes and Nobles, their Wise Men and
Scholars, their Rich and Great Men, should for so many Ages, one after another,
suffer themselves to be thus grossly Gulled and Abused, and not see through the
Cheat to this day: or to use the Prophets Phrase (in the like case) that they
should so long feed of Ashes, and not be able to deliver their Soul, or say, Is
there not a lyeing, my right, hand, Isai xliv. 20. En! quo Delusio, ROMAE.
Gentes perduxit miseras! But the Apostle has accounted for this very thing, in
his Prophecy and Description of Antichrist, or the Man of Sin, 2 These. ii. 10,
11. Because they received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved,
and had Pleasure in Unrighteousness; for this cause GOD shall send them strong
Delusions that the should believe a Lie.

Corollary. How great and distinguishing then was the Mercy of GOD to those
Nations of Europe, who were delivered from the damnable Delusions of Popery, at
the time of the BLESSED REFORMATION. The everlasting Gospel indeed, according
to the Vision of John the Divine, Rev. Chap. xiv. was then preached by One
Angel after another By those ANGELS Mr Durham and many other Expositors
understand, Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon, Justus Jonas Corolastadius, etc who
fist began to preach up the Necessity of a Reformation: this Work was more
fully afterward jointly prosecuted by Calvin, Beza, Peter Martyr, Bucer,
Junius, and Others.
, to every Nation and Kindred, and Tongue, and People, that dwelt on the Earth,
( i. e. throughout all Christendom;) but, alas! they did not all obey the
Gospel, and come out of Babylon: BRITAIN, Holland, a great part of Germany and
Switzerland, with Geneva, Sweden, Denmark, and some other Countries were taken,
while France, Spain, Italy, with the greatest part of Germany, and many other
Nations were left to wallow in the Filth and Mire of Popery, and are perishing
in Antichristian darkness even to this Day. Doubtless, there were many things
in Providence that concurred with, and were subservient to this
Discriminination or Severance which the Gospel then made among the Nations; but
finally the Reason of it must be resolved into the good Pleasure and free Mercy
of GOD. How comes it, says a great Divine Dr. Owen, in a Sermon Entitled, A
Vision of Unchangeable free Mercy.
, That this Island, meaning Great Britain, glories in a Reformation, and Spain
sits still in Darkness? Is it, because we were better than they, or less
engaged in Antichristian Delusions? by no means: No Nation in the World drank
deeper of the Cup of Abominations than this; and therefore no other Account can
or ought to be given of this Dispensation than what our Blessed Savior
renders, for the hiding the Mysteries of Salvation from some, and revealing
them to others, Even so FATHER, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Mat. xi.
25, 26.

5. Fisthly, We may hence see something of the Glory of the Spirit of Prophecy,
and the Divine Original of the Apocalypse, in revealing this Mystery of
Iniquity (treated of in the Essay) so many hundred Years before ever it
appeared. The Pre-vision and Revealing of future Events, more especially the
Times and Changes that are to pass over the Church of GOD, and among the
Nations, long before they come on, is a Prerogative, which the Omniscient GOD
appropriates to Himself, in very awful terms, Isa, xli. 23. Show the things
that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods. Chap. xlvi. 9,
10. I am GOD, there is none like me, declaring the End from the Beginning, and
from ancient Times the things that are not yet done -- John's Banishment into
Patmos, is generally placed in the XIVth. Year of the Emperor Domitian, which
falls in with the Year of our Lord 96: And yet how plainly and expressly does
that SPIRIT who searches all things, yea the deep things of GOD, show unto his
Servant John this Merchandising the Souls and Bodies of Men, which as we have
observed, was not fully completed till the 15th Century: But a Thousand Years
are as a Day with the LORD, and accordingly the Event exactly answered the
Prophecy.

6. Sixthly, This Merchandising the Bodies and Souls of Men shows, Of what
absolute Necessity it is for Churches and Christians, to make the WORD of GOD,
the only Rule of Faith and Worship.

The early Degeneracy and after Apostasy of the Christian Church, has been all
along matter of Wonder, and is not easily accounted for. The Primitive Fathers
in the Writings they have left us, complain of Pride, Covetousness and
Ambition, especially in the Bishops and Pastors, as the great Cause of it: But
by the best Judgment I can make from the nature of the thing it self, and the
History of those times, no one thing proved of such fatal Consequence to the
pure Faith and Worship of the Primitive Christians, as their swerving or
declining from the SCRIPTURES, and not continuing steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine. Had the Churches been mindful of the Words spoken to them by the Holy
Prophets, and of the Commandment of the Apostles, and touched every new
Doctrine and Ritual, by the Law and the Testimony; they had not been so easily
imposed on by those false Teachers (that arose quickly after the Death of the
Apostles) Men that Corrupted the Word of GOD with their own Inventions and bold
Additions: and great stress was laid on Traditions, pretended to be from the
Apostles; so that at length the Church forsook the Guide of her Youth, and then
no wonder her House inclined to Death, and her Paths to the dead. A multitude
of Errors and Superstitions, one after another, (and among the rest, the Popish
Relics and Pilgrimages, with the cursed Doctrine of Purgatory treated of in
the Essay) crept in and destroyed the Purity and Power of that Faith and
Worship once delivered to the Saints.

These things were first introduced and managed more Covertly, by Men of
Subtilty and Design, that walked in Craftiness and handled the Word of GOD
deceitfully: But afterward the Bishops of Rome carried the work on more
openly, and with the utmost Impudence, assuming to themselves and their
Councils, the sole Power of Judging what, or which was Scripture, and
accordingly took upon them to alter and to amend the Scriptures; and determined
that the Scriptures were not sufficient without Tradition, and that Apostolical
Traditions were of equal Authority with the Writings of the Apostles: And yet
all this would not serve the turn, so long as the Fountain was kept open, and
Christians could have recourse to the BIBLE, and thereby discern the vile
Abuses put upon them. And therefore in order to complete the Ruin of the
Primitive Faith and Worship, the Romish Church at length took away the Key of
Knowledge, and forbid the Common People the Reading of the Scriptures, upon
this false Principle (among others) that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion
The Council of Toulouse, Anno 1 2 2 9. Strictly forbid the Laity the Use of any
Books of the Holy Scripture, except the Psalms, and they are forbidden in the
Vulgar Tongue. Howels View of the Pontificate, At this day in Spain, Portugal,
Italy, and some other Popish Countries, (where the Merchandise of Bodies and
Souls is principally carried on) a Layman cannot have a Bible in his House
without a License from the Bishop, or Parish Priest. In Spain, very few of the
Clergy have the Bible in their Houses; and in General, They call it, a Book of
Heresies. Gavin
.

This great Iniquity of the Church of Rome, has been matter of Offense to some,
even of their own Communion, Particularly the famous Father Quesnel, who in his
admirable Theses, published about twenty Years since, with great Earnestness,
declares against forbidding Christians the Reading of the Holy Scriptures,
especially the Gospel, or keeping it close and bound up in an unknown Tongue,
as a most heinous Sin. His Phrase in English is, That they who are Guilty of
it, do in effect shut the Mouth of CHRIST against the People. But this with
many other Orthodox and Pious Propositions were Condemned at Rome, by the Bull
Unigenitus, that makes such an Eclat in France, at this Day.

I shall now conclude the whole with this one Remark, That nothing Contributed
more to the Blessed Reformation from Popery, than the Translating and Printing
the Bible in the several Languages of the Nations Before the Invention of
Printing, which was about Anno 1 4 3 0. a Bible writ fair on Velum or Parchment
cost 400 Crowns; and upon the first Impression, they were Sold for Four Crowns
a piece, and at length for One. See the Philosophical Transactions, and
Brands's History of the Reformation in Holland.
and Restoring the free Use of the Scriptures to the People. And, as One of the
Main Bulwarks of the Protestant Churches, is their Declaring the Scriptures to
be not only a sufficient, but the only Rule of Faith and Worship; so we may
humbly Hope, That while they walk according to this Rule, under the Care and
Leading of the Great Shepherd, they will be kept from Falling, and preserved
Blameless to the coming of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, to whom be Glory for ever,
and ever, AMEN.

[To fill up the Page.]
The Emperor FREDERICK, about the Year 1 2 3 0, wrote to Pope Gregory the 9th,
who was infamous for his Murders, Avarice and Tyranny, these two following
Line;

ROMA diu titubans longis Erroribus acta
Corruet, et Mundi desinet esse Caput.
Beza's Epitaph upon LUTHER.
ROMA Orbem domuit, Romam sibi Papa subegit,
Viribus illa suis, Fraudibus iste suis:
Quanto isto major LUTHERUS, major et illa,
Illum illamque uno qui domuit Calamo!
I nunc, Alcidem memorato Grecia mendax,
LUTHERI ad Calamum ferrea Clava nihil.
AN ARGUMENT To Prove That MANY OTHERS, besides CALEB and JOSHUA Might enter
into Canaan Who were Twenty Years old at the Coming out of Egypt. OR, An
EXERCITATION On Numbers XIV from the 21 to the 30 V. and the Reference thereto,
in Chap. XXXII. 10, 11, 12. which runs thus; And the LORD's Anger was kindled
the same time, and he Swear, saying, Surely none of the Men that came up out of
Egypt, from Twenty Years old and upwards shall see the Land which I Swear to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, Because they have not wholly followed Me; save
CALEB, the Son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and JOSHUA, the Son of Nun, for they
have wholly followed the LORD.
THE common Opinion from these two Passages, and some other Places to the same
purpose is, That not a Single Man of the Children of Israel that came out of
Egypt, at Twenty Years of Age, (save JOSHUA and CALEB) were permitted to enter
into Canaan. This Opinion has prevailed so much and so long, that even some
Learned Men have received it, particularly the Author of the Chronological
Connection, in Monsieur Saurin's Dissertations, on the Pentateuch, Vol. I. p.
358. and Dr. W. Sherlock in his Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul: Though
with this Difference, That the latter says it only Obiter, or by the by;
Whereas the former, does it de Industria, of set purpose, and goes into a
Mistake (as I apprehend) concerning the Age of Eleazer the Priest. But of this,
I shall take Notice in the Conclusion of the Exercitation.

In order to Correct the general Opinion abovementioned, and to set that
matter in a full and clear light, there needs no more than a careful Comparing
the following Places, viz. Numbers the I, Chap. from the 44 to the 49 V; and
Numbers the XIV Chap. V. 29. and so on; Numbers XXVI Chap. V. 3, 51, 62, and so
on; II. Chap. of Deuterenomy, 14, 15, 16. V; Joshua V. 4 and 6 verses; By which
it will appear,

First, That in the two famous Musters of the Children of Israel from twenty
Years Old and upwards, the Levites or the Tribe of Levi, were not numbered.

As to the first Muster Recorded, Numbers Chap. I, They only, were to be
numbered, that were able to go forth to War: Now the Levites were never reckoned
as Part of the Militia; and verse 47, It is expressly said, the Levites were not
numbered among them; and the special Reason is given in the following verses.
This first Muster was made at Mount Sinai by Moses and Aaron, in the Second
Year after their coming out of Egypt, and referred to in Exodus XXXVIII Chap.
verse 26. And in the second Muster, which was made by Moses and Eleazer, in the
Plains of Moab, Thirty-eight Years afterward, we find the same Limitation and
Exception, Numbers XXVI. 2. and in the 62 verse. For they (i. e. the Levites)
were not numbered among the Children of Israel, because there was no Inheritance
given them among the Children of Israel: For they only were to be numbered of
the Congregation of the Children of Israel, to whom the Land of Canaan was to
be divided for an Inheritance, as in verse 53.

It is very plain from the Places before cited, That as in the terrible
Commination of Dying in the Wilderness, and being Excluded from Canaan,
recorded in the XIV Chap; so in the awful Execution of that Sentence recorded
in the XXVI Chapter, the two last verses, the Levites were not included.

To begin with the Sentence in the XIV Chapter; more especially those words in
the 29th verse, Your Carcasses shall fall in this Wilderness, and all that were
numbered of you according to your whole number from twenty Years old and upward,
which have Murmured against Me, shall not come into the Land, etc. Can any
thing be plainer, than that the Persons Convict and Condemned were only those
that were numbered from twenty Years old and upwards, ( viz. by Moses and
Aaron;) and was there One Levite amongst them?

And the matter is full as clear after the Sentence was executed, Chapter XXVI,
and the two last verses: But among these there was not a Man of them whom Moses
and Aaron the Priest numbered, when they numbered the Children of Israel in the
Wilderness of Sinai. For the LORD had said of THEM, they shall surely dye in
the Wilderness, and there was not left a Man of THEM, save CALER the Son of
Jephunneh, and JOSHUA the Son of Nun. Thus the Execution answered exactly the
Sentence; All those, and they only, were Executed that had been Condemned; For
the Judge of all the Earth will do right.

Here also may be subjoyned the before cited, Deuteronomy, Chap. II. verses 14,
15, 16. And the space in which we came from Kadesh Barnea, until we were come
over the Brook Zered, was thirty and eight Years, until all the Generation of
the MEN OF WAR, were wasted out from among the Host, as the LORD Swear unto
them; for indeed the Hand of the LORD was against them to destroy them from
among the Host until they were consumed: so it came to pass, when all the MEN
OF WAR were consumed and dead from among the People, etc. These words are so
plain in favor of the Levites, that they need no Commentary or Inference.

Upon the whole, it can by no means be maintained, That no other Men entered
Canaan that were twenty Years of Age at their coming out of Egypt, save JOSHUA
and CALEB, as the Learned Author of the Chronological Connection, etc. asserts.
All that can be safely said is, That of 603550 effective Men of the Age of
twenty Years and upwards, that were Polled at Mount Sinai by Moses and Aaron,
in the second Year after their coming out of Egypt, viz. of the Tribes of
Reuben, Simeon, Judah, Issachar, Zebulon, Ephraim, Manasseh, Renjamin, Dan,
Ashur Gad and Napthali, none of this mighty Host went into Canaan, but JOSHUA
and CALEB. The Carcasses of all the rest fell in the Wilderness.

As to the Tribe of LEVI, or the Levites, their Sum or Number, was taken twice.
In the First Poll, all the Males of a Month Old, and upward, were counted, in
order to make an Equivalent for all the first born in Israel: This first number
of Levites amounted to 22000; Numbers, Chap.III. The second Poll of this Tribe,
was of Men fit for the service of the Tabernacle, viz. between the Age of
Thirty and Fifty, and amounted to 8580, Chap. IV. These Numberings, for what
appears were Contemporary with the first General Numbering of the Children of
Israel: If so, we cannot allow less than 10000 Men of the Tribe of Levi, of the
Age of twenty Years and upward at the time of the fatal Sentence aforesaid; for
that was passed in the same Year the Children of Israel were first numbered; so
that it is not only consistent with the sacred History, but highly probable
that even Thousands of LEVITES of the Age of twenty Years and upwards, at the
time of the Children of Isreal's coming out of Egypt, went Triumphantly into
Canaan with JOSHUA and CALEB.

I shall now Consider, and Answer the two principal Places relied on, in favor
of the common Opinion.

I. The first is Numbers XIV. v. 2. ALL the Children of Israel Murmured against
Moses, etc. Verse 10. ALL the Congregation bad Stone them with Stones: And
verse 22. Because ALL these Men which have seen my Glory, etc, surely they
shall not see the Land, etc. From hence it is argued, That the Levites were
part of the Congregation, and of so among the Murmurers, and therefore came
under the Sentence of Exclusion as well as the reft.

To this it is Answered,

Sol. 1. That the whole Chapter being taken together (as it ought) 'twill
appear, who the Murmurers, or Mutineers were: For though in the 27th. verse it be
said, I have beard the Murmurings of the Children of Israel, Indefinitely; yet
in the 29th verse, we have plainly a Restriction; for the Words are, Your
Carcasses shall fall in this Wilderness, and ALL THAT WERE NUMBERED of you,
according to your whole number from twenty Years old and upward, which have
murmured against me, etc. So that if GOD himself, who was the Judge, charged
the Mutiny or Murmuring only upon those that were Numbered in the first Muster
by Moses and Aaron at Mount Sinai, viz. From twenty Years old and upwards; who
shall charge it upon the Levites, who were not in that Roll?

2. It is plain from the History, that the Evil Report brought of the Land of
Canaan by the Spies, or those Men that were sent by Moses to search out the
Land, was the next and great Occasion of that Murmuring and Mutiny of the
Children of Israel, which excluded them the promised Land: Now the Tribe of
Levi had no Representatine among those Spies, as may be seen at large in the
XIII Chap. of Numbers, where the Spies and the several Tribes they were
respectively taken from, are expressed by Name. And therefore, however it might
Fare with any particular Levite (if any such there were) concerned in that
Rebellion, yet the Tribe of LEVI, as a Tribe, could not in justice fall under
the terrible Sentence of Exclusion. In like manner, had the Tribes of Judah and
Ephraim distinguished themselves on this Occasion, and stood by the Report of
Caleb and Joshua, who were sent and instructed by them, it is probable they had
likewife been Exempted: but instead of that, the Principals of these Tribes,
viz. Judah and Ephraim, basely deserted them, and turned over to the other Ten
Spies, and therefore were justly involved in the same common ruin.

3. Besides which, it is very unlikely, that the Levites who had but a little
before, viz. in the Business of the Golden Calf, distinguished themselves from
the Rest of the Congregation, by appearing with Moses on the LORD's side; or as
the Expression is, Consecrated themselves that day unto the LORD, and thereby
obtained a Blessing; I say it is very unlikely, that they should so soon after
engage in this Mutiny, and be found among the Murmurers; especially if it be
considered, what Moses says of that Tribe in his last Blessing, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 9.
They have observed thy Word, and kept thy Covenant.

II. The other Place that is, or may be insisted upon, is Numbers XXXII. 10,
11, 12. And the LORD's Anger was kindled again the second time, and He Swear,
saying, etc.

Sol. 1. To this I Answer, That Moses here plainly Alludes to the XIV Chapter,
where the matter is Record at large, and where it is Evident, the Commination
was pointed only at those that were numbered in the first Muster, viz. at Mount
Sinai; and according to the Rule given to us by Divines, for the Interpretation
of Scripture, This Reference, or Abridgment must be explained and governed by
the Text and History at large in the XIV Chapter, and not that by this; so that
what has been said already on the XIVth Chapter, will serve for an Answer to
this.

2. Besides, If the 13 verse even of this Context be well considered, which
runs thus, And the LORD's Anger was kindled against Israel, and He made them
wander in the Wilderness forty Years, until all the Generation that had done
Evil in the sight of the LORD was Consumed; and compared with the other
parallel Places beforementioned; and especially that of Deuteronomy II. 14,
15, 16: It will appear that the Generation that did Evil in the sight of the
LORD, and were consumed, as noticed in the XXXII Chapter of Numbers, were the
Generation of the Men of War, against whom the Hand of the LORD was, and who
dyed, and were consumed, as the LORD Swear unto them: Thus Moses himself
explains it. And Joshua after the death of Moses, gives the same Account of
this Matter; Joshua V. 4 and 5. All the People, that came out of Egypt, that
were Males, even ALL THE MEN OF WAR. dyed in the Wilderness; and more fully in
the 6 verse; For the Children of Israel walked forty Years in the Wilderness,
till all the People that were Men of War which came out of Egypt were
consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the LORD: unto whom the LORD
swear that he would not show them the Land which the LORD swear unto their
Fathers that He would give us, a Land that sloweth with milk and honey.

I come now to take a brief Notice, of the Mistake I hinted at, touching the
AGE of ELEAZER the Priest.

The Author of the Chronological Connection, beforementioned, Affirms that
Eleazer and Ithamar Sons of Aaron could not be twenty Years old at the coming
out of Egypt. The truth of it is, He that will Assert, that every Man of the
Children of Israel that came out of Egypt at twenty Years of Age (save CALEB
and JOSHUA) dyed in the Wilderness; will be under a Necessity of saying, that
ELEAZER was under twenty Years, when he came out of Egypt: For it is most
certain, that be went into Canaan with Joshua. But let us a little Examine the
particular Case of ELEAZER.

The first mention that we find of him, is Exodus VI. 23, and 25. And ELEAZER
Aaron's Son took him one of the Daughters of Putiel to Wife, and she bove him
Phineas, etc. These are the HEADS of the FATHERS of the LEVITES, according to
their Families. Here first, ELEAZER is taken notice of, as one that had been
Married sometime, and also the Birth of his Son Phineas, that was so famous in
the Wilderness. Secondly; the Text reckons ELEAZER, among the Heads of the
Fathers of the Levites: and is it probable that all this while he should be
under the Age of Twenty? It cannot be. In the next place, I would have it
considered, that ELEAZER entered upon, and executed the Priests Office in the
Wilderness, in the Second Year after their coming out of Egypt: See Levit.
VIII. 9, 10. particularly Chap. X. verse 16 to the end. Now the Priests were
not to enter upon their Office till thirty Years of Age, Numbers IV. 1, 2, 3.
Moreover the Figure that Eleazer made in Egypt, and quickly after their coming
from thence, bespeaks him not only a Person of Gravity, but a Man of Years.
JOSHUA was forty-five Years old when the Children of Israel came out of Egypt,
and yet he is called a Young Man. These two famous Worthies JOSHUA and ELEAZER
entered into Canaan together; and by the History seemed to have dyed about the
same time. And it is very probable they might be near of an Age, as MOSES and
AARON their Prodecessors were. However that be, I submit it to the Learned,
Whether upon the whole it be probable, much less certain, that ELEAZER was
under Twenty Years of Age, when the Children of Israel came out of Egypt.

P. S. It was no small Satisfaction to me, after I had drawn up the Materials
of this Exercitation, and in a manner digested it, to find the Learned Monsieur
Saurin himself of the same Opinion, toward the end of his Vol.
beforementioned, viz. page 561. though he says nothing as to the case of Eleazer
in particular. Had I made any use of his Method or Arguments, I should readily
have acknowledged is.

The ORACLE OF The TRUE GOD Compared with those of the Heathen. IN An
OCCASIONAL MEDITATION On I. Samuel XXIII. 11, 12.
AMONG the various ways or diverse manners wherein GOD was pleased to speak to
the Fathers in times past, the Answers given from before the HOLY ORACLE was
one. This Method indeed was not used, upon ordinary Occasions, but pro re nata,
in cases of extraordinary Difficulty and Importance, especially when the Public
was concerned. How or in what manner these Oracular Responses were given, I
shall not here determine. The Learned cannot agree upon it. The Jews say the
Answer was understood and taken from the Luster with which the Stones in the
Breast Plate of the High Priest shone at that time. Some of the Learned are of
Opinion, that an Articulate Voice was heard from within the Sanctum Sanctorum.
And other, that it was by an extraordinary Impression upon the Mind of the High
Priest, who may be supposed at that time to be in such a frame of Spirit as was
suited to receive and infallibly to judge of the Revelation. That which seems
most probable to me is, That this Sacred and Mysterious Ordinance was under the
Direction and Management of the High Priest, or the Person who executed that
Office: And that accordingly He declared the Mind and Will of GOD upon the
matter. For this see Numbers XXVII. 21. I. Sam. XXX. 7, 8. Nehemiah VII. 65. In
imitation of this Oracle, the Nations that Corresponded with the Jews, and
especially the Grecians, in honor of their Gods, set up Oracles in their
Temples. But as the Portion of Jacob was not like those Dunghill Deities, so
neither were their Vanities and work of Errors to be compared with the Oracle
of the true and living GOD.

Here, among other things it might be observed, That Access to the Heathen
Oracles was difficult, and only to be had at set times. The Learned Dr. Potter
in his Grecian Antiquities, tells us, That the Time of Consulting the Oracle of
Delphos at first was only one Month in the Year, and the Seventh Day of that
Month; and in the latter Ages, Oracles used only to be given once every Month.
Whereas the Oracle of GOD stood continually open to the humble and true
Worshipper; agreeable to that of the Prophet Isaiah, LX. 11. Her Gates shall be
open coptinually, they shall not be shut Day nor Night.

And even at the Times appointed by those Heathen Oracles; the Oracle itself
was frequently Sullen and stood Mute: and for this Reason among others the
Scripture calls them Dumb Idols; as Hab. II. 18. I. Cor. XII. a. Thus when the
poor Worshippers of Baal cried aloud -- there was neither voice, nor hearing,
nor any that regarded, I. Kings XVIII. 28, 29. Even Alexander Himself who went
in Person to the Oracle, to enquire touching his Success in his Wars, had gone
away without any Answer, but that He drew she Priestess by force into the
Temple; where tired and overcome with struggling. She cried out, MY SON, THOU
ART INVINCIBLE, upon which Me Left Her, and took that for an Answer. Plutarch.
. And Augustus Caesar was refused an Answer from the Oracle of Delphos touching
his Successor, though He sent Legates for that Purpose. All that He could obtain
from the Oracle was what follows. --;

Me Puer Hebraeus superum Rex linquere Tecta,
Haec jubet et ditis caecas remeare sub Umbras;
Ergo silens Aris Tu nunc abscedito Nostris!
An Hebrew Child, King of the Heavens high,
To leave these Temples has commanded me,
And to be gone to Darkness and to Woe;
Thou therefore silent from our Altars go!
Durham. But the great Difference between the Divine Oracle and those of the
Gentiles, which I would observe from the Words under Consideration, is the
Nature or Property of the Responses given: For while the Answers of the Heathen
Oracles were dark and evasive, doubtful and precarious; those delivered by the
Oracle of JEHOVAH, were plain and concise, certam and sase, even to a Proverb,
as we learn from I. Sam. XVI. 23. And the Counsel of ACHITOPHEL was, as if a
Man bad enquired at the ORACLE of GOD. A very remarkable proof and instance of
this, we have here Recorded by the Prophet Samuel. David being in great
distress, and at a loss what to do, has recourse to the Oracle of GOD, and
humbly proposes two Questions. 1. Whether Saul would really come down after
him? 2. Whether the Men of Keilah (to whom he had been such a Protector) would
deliver him up to Saul? To these two short, but important Questions, David
receives a full, plain Answer: To the first SAUL will come down; to the second,
The Men of Keilah will deliver thee up. What a lively Oracle was here, and how
plain was David's way made before him? See also an Instance of the same nature,
in I. Sam. XXX. 6, 7, 8.

But now let us see what Treatment Idolaters were wont to meet with from their
wretched Oracles, when they resorted to them for Counsel in matters of the
greatest Importance. Their Responses were either so Dark and Uncertain, that
nothing at all could be made of them; or else the Words were so ambiguous, and
contrived with such a double entendre, that they might be interpreted both
ways, in the Affirmative or Negative, like that doubtful Sentence, Ibis redibis
nunquam per bella peribis; which has two Meanings, according as you refer the
Word Nunquam. And yet Plutarch, in his Treatise of the Pythian Oracle, makes an
Apology, such a one as it is, for the Obscurity and double Meaning of these
oracular Answers. Hence it often came to pass, That the Person concerned,
taking the Wrong, was Deceived and Ruined: Thus it happened to Pyrrhus of
Epyrus, when he engaged in a War with the Romans, who had this Answer from the
Oracle.

Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse;

Thus Englished by Dr. Potter; Go Pyrrhus, go, Engage with Warlike Rome,
Fate has decreed the Irrevocable Doom,
And You the valiant Romans shall 'orecome.
And that to Craesus, reported by Herodotus, If Crasus go to Fight against the
Persians, he shall disrobe a great Monarchy: and he lost his own Kingdom.
Apollo, one of the most famous Deities among the Heather, by reason of the
Uncertainty of his Oracles, was called (...) Crooked, or Winding; and his
Oracle at Delphos, which was the most celebrated among the Grecians, and
consulted en Dernier Resort The Person that delivered the Oracles of Apollo at
Delobor, was a Woman, whom they called PYTHIA, and the Septuagint calls the
Witch of Endor, PYTHONISSA.
was so remarkable for this way of answering Questions, That Ambiguous and
Delphic Answers signified at length the same thing. These obscure and equivocal
Responses, were doubtless owing to the Art and Subtilty, of those that managed
the Oracle; that so, as the Learned Dr. Potter in his Grecian Antiquities
observes, If the event happened contrary to any Man's Expectation, he might
rather find fault with his own Interpretation of the Oracles, than call in
Question either the Knowledge, or Veracity of Appollo.

It is generally believed from the best Authorities, both of Christian and
Heathen Writers, That these counterfeit Oracles, quickly after the coming of
CHRIST, and the setting up His Kingdom in the World, ceased, and came to naught.

As to the Oracle of GOD beforementioned, I suppose I need not inform those
that Read the Scriptures, and more especially the Epistle to the Hebrews, with
care and diligence, That as all the Ordinances of Divine Service under the
first Covenant, were but a Figure for that time of good thing, to come, and
therefore designed from the beginning but as a temporary Dispensation; so when
the Substance was come those Shadows fled away.

This is treated of, and proved at large by the Apostle in his Epistle to the
Hebrews, particularly in the VIII, IX, and Xth Chapters: And the Oracular
Answers above spoken of, being typical, and a branch of the Prophetical Office
of JESUS CHRIST, were superseded and laid aside when the SON OF GOD, (...) John
vii. 40.
, came into the World; according to that of the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap.
I. verse I. GOD who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in times past
unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days, spoken to us by His
SON; and given us a Commandment by a Voice from the excellent Glory to Hear
Him. Mat. xvii. (...)
And though He is ascended up on High, and entered into Heaven it self; yet
according to His blessed Promife, He has sent down the COMFORTER, the SPIRIT of
Truth, to guide His Church and People into all Truth, and show 'em things to
come. So that the only Oracles we are now humbly to Consult, are the facred
Writings of Moses and the Prophets, JESUS CHRIST and His Apostles: And in the
Judgment of the Apostle Peter, they are a safer Rule to go by, than even a
Voice from Heaven would be, II. Peter I. 19.

The Advantage which the Jews of old had above the Gentiles, lay chiefly in
this, That to them were committed the Oracles of GOD Romans iii. 1, 2.
. The case is much the same at this Day with the Christian Church, especially
those of the Reformed Religion a. And therefore we ought to give the more
earnest heed to the Things Spoken by the LORD, and Confirmed by them that heard
Him, Heb. II. 1.

The END:

