Mr. Chauncy's SERMON On the DEATH of Mrs. Sarah Byfield.

MAN's Life considered under the Similitude of a Vapor, that appears for a
little Time, and then vanishes away.

A SERMON on the Death of that HONORABLE and VIRTUOUS Gentlewoman Mrs. Sarah
Byfield, The amiable Consort of the Honorable NATHANAEL BYFIELD, Esquire Who died
December. 21 st. 1730. In the 58th Year of her Age.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, M.A. One of the Pastors of the first Church in BOSTON.

1 Chronicles. xxix. 15. -- Our days on earth are as a shadow, and there is none
abiding.

Psalm. xxxix. 4. LORD, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days
what it is: that I may know how frail I am.

BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. Green. MDCCXXXI.

To the Honorable Nathanael Byfield Esquire
Honored SIR,
WHEN I had fallen in with Your Desire to Print this Sermon, I could not
prevail with my self to let it go to the Press, without first paying Public
regards to so good a Friend: whom, I have Reason to love and reverence as a
Father.

The Sermon was Preached on the lamented Death of your dear and amiable
Consort. I though it it proper to take special Notice of such a Providence: and as
I endeavored to improve it for the Benefit of all my Hearers; so for Yours in
particular. In the Character I have given Madam Byfield, I have not affected
Niceness and Acuracy; yet have had a strict regard to Truth and Uprightness.
And I doubt not, but all that were acquainted with her, will judge, that her
Memory is worthy to be transmitted to Posterity, with more Honor, than I have
been able to do it.

I heartily join with You, Sir, in rendering Thanks to a good GOD, who directed
you to a Person, every way so agreeable: and that He continued her, so long a
Blessing and Comfort to you; the pleasant Companion of your Age; your Crown and
Ornament. It Is the same most Wise and Merciful GOD, that has taken her away
from you. And it is for your Good, He has thus afflicted you. This Correction of
your Heavenly Father, was necessary in that Chain of Events, by which, He had
ordained to bring you to Glory: which is the highest Motive to Patience and
Submission.

May this, and all other Divine Dispensations be Sanctified to You! and blessed
as a Means to make you still more meet for that World, where there is no Sin
nor Sorrow; where all Tears shall be wiped from your Eyes, and you shall be
completely happy in the Sight and Fruition of the blessed GOD. And may your
Children, (already Propagated to the fourth Generation, and) throughout all
Generations, follow you into the Heavenly State, and be an Eternal Spring of
Joy to You!

So Prays, Your much obliged and Affectionate Servant in CHRIST, Charles
Chauncy.

Man's Life considered under THE Similitude of a Vapor.
JAMES IV. 14. -- For what is your Life? It is even a Vapor, that appears
for a little time, and then vanishes away.


I Have made Choice of this Text, to lead you into some proper Meditations on
humane Frailty: a subject never unsuitable for dying Men to employ their Tho'ts
upon; and particularly seasonable, after any fresh, affecting Instance of
Mortality.

We are here presented with a very instructive Description of Life. It Is
considered under the Similitude of a Vapor, that appears for a little time,
and then vanishes away. A true and lively Representation of the State, of
Man's Life upon Earth! which is of but short Continuance, inconstant and
uncertain: The effect whereof should be, our living after the best and wisest
manner; to the purposes of another World, and so as to secure to our selves, an
Interest in that future and eternal Life, which the Gospel has revealed, and
promises to them, who, by patient continuance in well doing, seek for Glory,
Honor and Immortality.

And that we may be excited and quickened, in making such an Improvement of the
present Life, I shall beg your Attention, while I am discoursing to you, upon
the two following important Points; agreeable to the Scope of the Apostle in the
words, I have red to you.

I. I shall consider the Representation that is here given us of Man's Life.

II. I shall show, What Influence, such a Representation, ought, in all reason,
to have upon us.

I. I am to consider the Representation, that is here made of Man's Life. It is
even a Vapor, that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

I have no Design to pursue this Metaphor, in all the little Resemblances,
which one's Imagination might easily suggest: but shall confine my self to a
few Particulars; which lie open to common View, and were, no doubt, the things
intended by the Apostle. And they are such as these. 1. That Man's Life, upon
Earth, is Short. 2. Uncertain. 3. Inconstant. 4. Irrecoverable, when once gone.

I. Man's Life may be represented by a Vapor, to signify the exceeding
Shortness of it. A Vapor is of but short Continuance. It may for a while
"wander upon the Surface of the Earth or Water;" but is soon driven away by the
Wind: or spends it self, and vanishes away. Just the same thing may be said of
the Life of Man: which, whatever it is, and however active and buisie it may
for a while appear, is yet soon extinguished: or of it self languishes and
expires. The Scriptures are full of affecting Illustrations to this purpose.
They sometimes comprehend Man's Life, within the narrow compass of an
Hand-breadth; which is one of the most inconsiderable Measures. Psalm. 39.5.
Behold, thou have made my Days as an Hand-breadth. Sometimes they limit it to
the Time a Man takes in telling a Story; which soon passes away, and is gone.
Psalm. 90.9. For all our Days are passed away in thy Wrath: We spend our Days as
a Tale that is told. At other times, they measure Life, by some of the Swiftest
Motions; to signify how soon it arrives at it is determined Period. Our Days are
said to be swifter than a Weaver's Shuttle Job 7.6.
, which is no sooner thrown in at one side of the Web, but it is out at the
other; to pass away as the swift Ships, which with a brisk Gale, are quickly
carried out of Sight; to be swifter than a Post, who hurries along, with all
possible Speed: And the Eagle that makes toward her Prey, does not fly more
swiftly, than the Life of Man passes away: As these things are elegantly
expressed, Job 9.25, 26. Now my days are swifter than a Post: they flee away:
-- -- they are passed away as the swift Ships: as the Eagle that hastes to her
prey.

And there is a certain Justness and Propriety in these Scripture
Representations of Man's Life; though borrowed from things, some of which are but
of few Days, and others of but few Moments Continuance: and that, if at the
same Time, we should suppose it to reach the utmost Bounds of it is appointed
Duration. For what are threescore or fourscore Years? As the Psalmist's
Expression is, Psalm 90.10*
they are sooncut off, and we fly away. Indeed, when we look forward from Youth
or Childhood, to Old age; it appears at a vast Distance: and as though we should
scarce ever arrive at it. But by only changing the Situation of our selves,
how different will the Prospect appear! Let a Person look back from Age to
Youth, and it will seem but a very small Space: those Thirty or Forty Years,
which were judged by him in his Childhood unattainable, how short do they seem,
now he has passed through them! So true is that Observation, That a Day to come
shows longer to us than a Year that is gone. And it is the universal Sense of
all that are grown into Years concerning it. They are even surpised, when they
look back to find, how insensibly their Days are rolled away. If they extend
their View forty, fifty, or threescore Years backwards; they can scarce believe
they have Lived so long, it appears such a Moment of time. And generally
speaking, the longer Persons live, the shorter their past Days and Years seem
to them: And when they are in a serious turn of Though It, they more thoroughly
realize, what a small part of Duration, the Term of Humane Life contains.

And if the Life of Man appears thus short even to Men themselves, when set in
a due light: how much more inconsiderable must it seem in GOD'S Eye! with whom
there is no Beginning of Days, nor End of Years; and in whose Sight a thousand
Years are but as one Day. Surely in this View of Life, it must sink into the
smallest Point of Time. Yea, as the Psalmist phrases it, our Age is as nothing
before GOD. Psalm 39.9.
Nay, if our Lives, like Methusalah's, were protracted to near a Thousand
Years; in GOD's Account, and in compare with his Eternal Duration, they would
seem but as a single Moment. And yet, how many of our Ages go to make up a
Thousand Years! and yet further, how few live to what we call the full Age of a
Man! Perhaps the greatest part of Mankind die within the Space of the first
Seven Years. And were one arrives at the general Period affixed to Humane Life,
a thousand die in Youth or Middle age. Such a Justness and Propriety is there
in these Scripture Representations of Man's Life: like a Vapor, it appears but
for a little time, and then vanishes away.

If any should now feel themselves uneasy at this Representation of Life, and
be tempted to think hardly of GOD, for making the Limits of it so exceeding
narrow; it will at once satisfy all their Objections, to consider Life in the
true and proper Notion of it: as a Probation season for Eternity.

The GOD that gave us our Beings, designed them for an End worthy of Himself,
and those noble Powers, He has endowed us with. But this End is not to be
obtained in this World. There is nothing here, that can satisfy the Desires of
our Souls, or be a commensurate Happiness for them. We must look beyond the
Grave for this, to the unseen unutterable Glories of the Heavenly State. And if
we take a View of the present Life, as referring to this State, and a Trial for
our Entrance into it, it will sufficiently justify, both the Wisdom and
Goodness of GOD in the Shortness of it.

Especially, if we go on and consider, that the Time of Life is a Space full
long enough for the Business we were sent into the World upon; viz. to make
Preparation for Eternity. For through the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who has obeyed the
Law, and suffered the Penalty of it, for us and in our stead; the Terms of
Salvation are bro't down to our present fallen State: and nothing more is
absolutely required of us, but FAITH in JESUS CHRIST, as the SON of the living
GOD, including in it the Seeds and Principles of sincere Repentance, and a true
Gospel Obedience. And no sooner is such a Faith wrought in our Souls, but our
main Work is done, and the great Design of Life answered. And Persons not only
may, but often are, even in the beginning of Life, thus endowed with Faith. And
a little Time, if it be well improved, in the diligent Use of proper Means,
will serve for this purpose. And all that is afterward necessary, will be only
to give proof of our good Estate, to continue in the Faith of CHRIST; to grow
in Grace; to shine in the World by our good Examples; and in a word, to glorify
GOD by our holy Carriage of our selves under whatever Condition He shall please
to order out unto us. And when our Lives come to be thus employed, the shorter
they are the better; inasmuch as we shall hereby the sooner obtain the End of
our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls. And this is the Though It of all that are
truly wise. They would not willingly have the Term of Life set at a further
Distance, least the Trial of their Graces should be too heavy and tedious; and
the full Reward of their Faith and Good works too long detained from them.

And on the other hand, when Persons do pervert the grand Design of Life;
neglecting their Souls, and taking no Care to prepare themselves for the future
State; it is unreasonable to expect their Lives should be protracted, beyond
what the Lives of Men ordinarily are, that so they might have a longer Space of
Trial, before their Condition is unalterably determined. For if they should
live over the present Life, as bounded by GOD, tho'tless of Eternity, and
unconcerned to make Preparation for it; and instead hereof, should spend their
Days in Vanity, or the Gratification of their Fleshly Lusts, there would be but
little Hope of their Amendment and returning to a better Mind, if their Time
should be lengthned out to the longest Period: But on the contrary, great
reason to fear, that they would only grow more bold and obstinate in
Wickedness, and get still at a further Distance from GOD and Happiness.
Besides, the ordinary Duration of Man's Life, is full long enough for such
Persons to be continued Plagues to Mankind, by their evil Practices and bad
Examples. And it is in Mercy to the World in general, that the Time of their
Life is limited to threescore or fourscore Years.

But I must not enlarge here. To proceed,

II. By the Metaphor in the Text, we have represented to us, the utter
Uncertainty of Humane Life. What more uncertain than the Appearance of a
Vapor? It sometimes continues a longer, and sometimes a shorter Time: is
sometimes suddenly extinguished, and sometimes slowly and by degrees. Alike
uncertain is the Life of Man. It Is certain indeed, that all Men shall once die.
And there is no Man living but knows that he shall die. We know likewise, that
we are surrounded with an infinite Variety of Distempers, and every moment lie
exposed to innumerable Accidents, which may put a Period to our Days. So that
there is no Point of Time, in which we are free from Danger, and may be sure of
not falling by the Stroke of Death. Yet, the precise Time when, and particular
Means and manner how, remain, as to us, absolute Uncertainties. Man knows not
his Time Eccles. 9.12.
. This is the Sole Prerogative of the most high GOD. Nothing, to Him, is either
contingent or uncertain. And in a very particular manner, He is the Supreme
LORD of Life and Death. And as such, He has appointed the Day and Hour; nay,
the very Moment, when every Son and Daughter of Adam, shall undergo the Change
of Death. Job seems to have put this Matter beyond Dispute, Job 7.1. Is there
not an appointed time to Man upon Earth? Are not his Days also like the Days of
an Hireling? An Hireling, we all know, has his fixed Time of Service: and when
this is expired, he is discharged from his Labor. The same thing may be said
of Man: he has his determined Time of Duration; and whenever this comes, in a
moment he expires. This Matter is further illustrated, Chap. 14.5. Man's days
are determined, the Number of his Months are with thee: thou have appointed his
Bounds, that he cannot pass. So that, let our Character be what it will; if we
are never so desirable, or never so useful: or let our State be what it will;
be we prepared or unprepared, we must at such a particular Point of Time, which
GOD from Eternity, has pitched upon, be dismis'd from the Body. And He will so
order it in his Active Providence, that all necessary natural Causes shall
unitedly concur, to put a Period to our Life, not only At the very Time, but
after the same manner, that he has decreed.

GOD has not indeed allotted to all Men the same Number of Months and Years: nor
determined to accomplish his Decree upon them, by the same Means and after the
same manner; but has variously fixed the Periods of Life in different Persons,
and uses as great a Variety in the Means and manner of their Death. And upon
this Account it is, that both the Time and Means and manner of our going out of
the World, are, as to us, Matters of the greatest Uncertainty.

We know not when we shall die: whether in Infancy or Childhood, while our
Natures are weak and tender; before we are instructed in the Worth of Life, or
are capable of exerting ourselves to any valuable purposes? Or in Youth, our
Constitutions being strong and healthy; our Powers active and sprightly, and in
the best Capacity of serving the Ends of Life? Or whether we shall continue,
till the evil Days come, and the Years draw nigh, when we shall say, we have no
Pleasure in them?

We Know not Manner in which we shall die: Whether on a Sudden, or by slow and
leisurly Steps? in the Height of Prosperity, or Depth of Adversity? in a Throng
of worldly Business, or free from outward Cares and Incumberances? Death will
most certainly seize upon us: but where will it be? In the Closet, or the
Street? in the Shop, or the Field? at Sea, or on dry Land? -- These things are
Secrets in the Breast of GOD alone --.

In fine, We are absolutely ignorant by what Means GOD will take us out of the
World: whether by Disease, or Accident? according to Nature, or by Force and
Violence? He will doubtless make use of natural Causes: But what will they be?
A Fever, or a Frenzy? the Teeth of an Insect, or a blast of Wind? a Morsel of
Meat, or a Hair from our Heads? a fall from a Horse, or the hand of Malice? Or
will He suffer us to live, till Nature is Spent, and we die of ourselves? --

Thus Uncertain a thing is the Life of Man. -- And it is an Argument of great
Wisdom and Goodness in GOD, that it is so. For if we Knew the determinate Space
of Life, or that it would surely expire at such a particular Term, it would
have a very unhappy Influence upon us. For, on the one hand, if it was at a
considerable Distance, we should be in utmost Hazard of allowing our selves
Liberty, to live according to the Course of this World; fulfilling the desires
of the Flesh and Mind. And this we should be apt to do, till we came within the
near Prospect of our Dissolution: and then having so habituated ourselves to
Sin as to be hardened in it; it would be almost a Miracle, if we were ever
prevailed upon, to break off our Sins by Righteousness, and our Iniquities by
turning to GOD. For as the Prophet argues, Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change
his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? Then may ye also do good, that are
accustomed to do evil. And on the other hand, if the Time of Life was Short,
and to be terminated in the space of a few Years: though it might awaken our
Consideration, and put us on Endeavors to make our Peace with GOD, and secure
an Interest in Christ; yet how melancholy and uncomfortable, would it be like
to make our Abode upon Earth? We should enjoy no Pleasure in the World: neither
in Friends, nor Relatives; nor any of the good things, GOD has provided for our
present Happiness. Such would be our Concern and Fear; such our dark and gloomy
Apprehensions, as would not only unfit us to converse with one another; but
even to live in such a World, as GOD has made this to be.

But now that the Time remains Uncertain, both these Inconveniences are
avoided. Instead of being encouraged in a Course of Sin for the present, we
have one of the strongest Arguments to engage us in an immediate Care, about
the Business of Religion, and our Soul's Salvation; and at the same time, there
is room left for the Exercise of Hope, which lays a Foundation for the
Enjoyment of ourselves and the Comforts of Life.

We should therefore thankfully acknowledge and admire the Wisdom and Goodness
of GOD, in keeping us ignorant of the Time and Circumstances of our Death: the
Knowledge of which, could not be of any real Service to us; but very hurtful
upon many Accounts. We should be content to be in the dark, as to these
Futurites, and improve our Ignorance as a Motive to Zeal and Industry in
working out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

III. The Metaphor in the Text, signifies to us, the inconstant, unsettled
State of the present Life. A Vapor is an inconstant variable Meteor. One while
it extends it self far and wide, anon it dwindles away into Nothing. Now it
appears thick and dense, presently it becomes so thin and rarified as not to
fall within Reach of Observation. Just such an inconstant variable thing is the
Life of Man.

We seldom continue long in the same State; but are constantly passing under
innumerable Changes. This Moment we are well and in Health; the next we are
seized with some fatal Distemper. Now we abound in Riches and Plenty; on a
sudden we are reduced to Poverty and Penury. In the Morning we are in Honor
and Dignity; before Night, we wear the Character of Men of low Degree. To Day
we are respected and well spoken of; by to Morrow, we are hated, despised and
evil spoken against. This Week (...) are surrounded with Friends and
Acquaintance; the next we have reason to make that Complaint, Psalm. 88.18.
Lover and Friend, thou have put far from me, and mine Acquaintance into
Darkness. And so whatever our present State is, we quickly pass out of it into
another; that is sometimes better, and sometimes worse.

And it is in a sort necessary, the present State of Man's Life should be thus
variable. For so perverse and depraved are our Tempers, since our Fall from
GOD, that it would be scarce possible for us, to carry it suitably, under any
one invariable Condition of Life.

If, on the one hand, we were blessed with a constant Run of Prosperity; for a
long time together enjoying our Health and Friends, and all the Comforts and
good things of Life: ten to one, but it would be the Means of our being ruined
for ever. We could not bear such an uninterrupted Series of Worldly Happiness.
We should be apt to grow proud and insolent; forgetful of GOD and our own
Souls: and instead of being the more strongly engaged in His Love and Service,
it would be likely we should Kick against Him; contemn His Law, slight His
Goodness, and by our hard and impenitent Heart, treasure up to ourselves Wrath
against the day of Wrath. And on the other hand, if we were frowned upon in
Providence, and kept under poor, difficult and afflictive Circumstances; and
this was to be our Condition invariably; it would sink our Spirits, discourage
our Endeavors, and unfit us for every thing. We should have no Heart to engage
in any Affair, neither respecting our Souls nor Bodies: or if we had, we should
not be able to pursue it; with Zeal and Resolution.

It is therefore a Wise disposal of Providence, that our present State is
variable, that we are sometimes in one Condition and sometimes in another;
sometimes in Adversity and sometimes in Prosperity. Such a mixed inconstant
State is best suited to the present Frame of our Minds; and no doubt was
designed by GOD, as a Kindness to the World in general; as being a Means wisely
adapted, to serve the End of Life, which is the Glory of GOD, in such a Temper
and Behavior of ourselves, as He has made necessary, in order to our Future
and Eternal well being.

IV. The Metaphor in the Text represents to us, the Irrecoverableness of Man's
Life, when once gone. A Vapor when once vanished away, is irrecoverably gone.
The same must be said of Life: When once expired, it can never be recalled. The
Extinction of Life is therefore described, Psalm. 39. ult. As a going hence, and
being here no more. And Job speaking of Man's Death, expresses himself in such
Language as that, Job 14.12. Man lies down, and rises not till the Heavens be
no more: they shall not awake, nor rise out of their Sleep. And in the 14. v.
If a Man die, shall he live again? The Question does not infer a Doubt, whether
such as die, shall return back to live their Lives over again: But is the
strongest Negation. They shall not live again. They shall never return back to
any of the Employments or Enjoyments of the present Life. When Death has once
passed upon Men, their Probation season is over, and State made Unalterable for
Eternity. Eccl. 11.3. -- If the Tree fall toward the South, or toward the
North: in the Place where the Tree falls, there shall it be. An awful
Consideration! It should surely affect us to think, that as Death leaves us, so
Judgment will find us; that as soon as ever this frail Life of our's is ended,
our Condition from that Moment is for ever determined; our Place of Abode so
fixed, as that if we have misimprov'd the present season, we can never amend or
correct our Mistake. O how should our Attention be awakened at this! and our
Hearts animated with Zeal and Resolution in doing the work, we were sent into
the World upon! Beloved, seeing things are thus, What manner of Persons ought
we to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness? With what Diligence should we
labor, that we may be found of our Judge, in Peace, without spot, and
blameless. Which brings me to our next general Head of Discourse, viz.

II. To show what Influence, the Representation, the Text gives of Life, ought,
in all Reason to have upon us. And here that I might not Exceed the Limits of
my Hour, I must confine my self to only a few general Hints. As,

1. It should put us upon Weaning our Affections from the World, and Moderating
our Endeavors after it. And are there any, whose Hearts are too much set upon
the World, and that employ too much Pains in the Pursuit of it? It should seem
incredible, that Men, whom GOD has endowed with Reason and Understanding,
should be so little governed, by a sense of their own Frailty, the exceeding
Shortness and Uncertainty of the present Life. And yet alas! so it is. Yea, and
the Generality of Persons are so strangely fond of the World as to think, they
can never love it too well, nor endeavor too much after it. They will rise up
early, and sit up late; go through Difficulties and Hardships; expose themselves
to Hazards; run all Risques; submit to any thing, and do any thing, for the
Obtaining only of a few Scraps or Portions of it. If we were to judge by the
Temper and Behavior of some Men, we must suppose they imagined, that both
themselves and their Houses would continue for ever, and their Dwelling-places
to all Generations: When alas! Their Life, like a Vapor, appears but for a
little Time, and then vanishes away. How should this Though It beat down the Price
of the World in our Esteem, and check our Endeavors after it? For if at the
longest we must quickly leave the World; and may in a Moment, at any Time, be
snatched away from all the Enjoyments of it: Why should our Hearts be wedded to
it, and our whole Time and Souls employed about it! Is it not far more
reasonable to loosen our Affections from the Earth? to set light by the good
things of it? and spend no more Pains in the Pursuit of them, than is realy
necessary for our present Comfort?

Perhaps we look upon the World, as our only Place of Happiness: and entertain
in our Minds such exalted Apprehensions of the Value of outward Enjoyments, as
to desire and aim at nothing higher. But O! let us remember, we shall not always
have such Tho'ts of the World. We are hastening apace to the Grave. It will not be
long, however far we may put from us the evil Day, before we shall find
ourselves in the Agonies of Death. And when this comes to be our Case; what
think we, will our Apprehensions about the World be? As we shall View it in a
different Light, so will it certainly appear in quite different Colors. It
will seem altogether Vanity. We shall see nothing desirable in it: but shall be
amazed at our former Folly, in setting so high a Price on it, and making it the
chief Object of our sollicitous Concern. And at such a Time as this: of what
great Advantage will it be to us, if we have gained even as much of this World,
as we could possibly desire? Has our highest Ambition been gratified, in being
honored and perferr'd among Men? -- Our Honor must now be laid in the Dust;
all our Marks of Distinction dropped at the Mouth of the Grave: and when we
appear in the other World, it will be upon a Level with the most ignoble Slave.
-- Or have we indulged our selves in Ease and Pleasure? taking all the carnal
Delight we could wish for, or are capable of enjoying? -- It is now all over
and gone. And what remains, but cutting Reflections; restless Fears and
Convulsions of Soul? -- Or have we heaped up Riches; joining House to House,
and Field to Field, till we are placed alone in the midst of the Earth? -- Yet
let us consider, That Riches are not for ever; Prove. 27.24.
and that, of all our Possessions, we shall now need no more than will but
suffice to bury us. Silver and Gold are too heavy Laden, to be carried into
another World. And what is it to a dying Man, whether his Chamber be richly
furnished or not; whether he breath out his Soul in a Palace, or a Cottage Bp.
Hopkins's Works Sermon 2 d.
. In an Hour of Death, We shall not take Pleasure in summing up our Estates,
and counting how much we shall die worth, and how many Hundreds or Thousands we
shall leave behind us. Alas! the Concerns of dying Persons are usually of a
quite different Nature. The Necessities of our Souls will now crowd themselves
upon us. An accusing Conscience, and a fearful Expectation of approaching
Torments, will shake out of our Minds all Tho'ts of the World, and fill us with
the greatest Solicitude to obtain the Favor of GOD, the Pardon of Sin, Peace
of Conscience, and an Interest in the great SAVIOR of Sinners. And of what
Service will the World be to us, in these Respects? What Suitableness is there
in it to supply these Wants of our Souls? Food may satisfy Hunger, and Raiment
fence off the Injuries of the Weather: There is a Suitableness in them to do
so. But what will all worldly Enjoyments avail, toward appealing GOD's Anger,
or giving us a comfortable Hope of future Blessedness? What Suitableness is
there in a Bag of Gold, or a sumptuous Building, to satisfy a Man's Mind, when
perplexed with Fears of Wrath and Hell? You may as well seek to cure a Wound in
the Body, by applying a Plaster to the Garment, as seek to ease a wounded
Spirit, by all the Treasures, Pleasures and Enjoyments of this World. Bp.
Hopkins's Works. Sermon 1 ft.
Riches profit not in the Day of Wrath Prove. 11.4.
There is no Aptness in them to bring any true solace to the Soul. O let us not
then suffer the World to engross our Affections, and take off our Tho'ts and
Care from things of infinitely more Weight and Importance: But remembering, that
we are dying Creatures, and that our Life, Like a Vapor, will appear but for a
little Time; let us make no other use of the World, nor put a higher Value upon
it, then is reasonable for such kind of Creatures. The Apostle directs us,
after what manner to use this World; with whose words, I shall finish this Head
But this, I say Brethren, the Time is Short It remains, that both they that
have Wives, be as though they had none; and they that weep* as though they wept
not; and they that rejoice* as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as
though they possessed not; and they that use this World, as not abusing it: for
the Fashion of this World passes away, 1 Cor. 7.29 -- 31.

2. The Account, we have had of Life, should reconcile our Tho'ts to whatever
Condition, it shall please GOD to order out to us in the World; It is not a
Matter of much Concernment, what our outward Circumstances are: provided, we
make use of them, as a Means, to our better Preparation for Eternity. For
whatever our Condition is, if we are contented with it, and make it our Care to
glorify GOD under it, it will be no Hindrance to our future and everlasting
well-being. And in order to this, we should Meditate upon the present Life,
under the Representation, our Text gives of it. And the Influence of such
Meditations, should be to compose our Minds, and make us perfectly calm and
resigned to the Will Heaven.

Has it pleased GOD to allow us but a small Portion of this World's Goods. Why,
a little should content us for a little while: and it is (...) for a short Time,
we shall have our Abode here. Or are our Circumstances strait and difficult?
Are we hard put to it, and often suffering for want? It cannot last long. Our
Lives will soon come to their appointed Period. And this is a Consideration,
that should restrain Discontent, check all Misgivings of Heart, and silence our
Murmurings. Or does GOD call us to undergo great Trials and Afflictions? It
should make us easy, to think they shall Shortly have an End: when, if we have
behaved suitably under them, our Reward will be great, far beyond the
Proportion of our sufferings. In a word, however undesirable our present
Circumstances are, and what ever Troubles and Inconveniences we may meet with,
we should solace our selves with this, that if we despise not these Chastenings
of the Lord, nor faint when rebuked of him: but are patient, humble and
submissive; it will not be long, before we shall be delivered out of all our
Difficulties, and translated to a World that is free from all kind of Evil;
where we shall be completely happy, without Interruption for ever.

3. The Representation we have had of Life, should make us good Husbands of our
Time, and put us upon improving it to the wisest purposes. For since, like a
Vapor, it is so exceeding short and uncertain: we ought in all reason to
redeem our Time, and improve the whole of it to the best Advantage; in
mortifying our Lusts, restraining our Appetites, governing our Passions,
rectifying our Tempers; and in a word, accomplishing the great Work, for which
our Life is designed. We should improve all Opportunities of doing and getting
as much Good as we can; and should avoid all Occasions, either of doing Hurt to
others, or receiving any our selves. We should always employ ourselves about
something; and something that shall some how or other turn to a good Account.
We should beware of squandering away our Time in Idleness; unprofitable Chat;
too frequent Diversions and Visits: than which nothing more tends to wear off
that serious Temper of Mind, that becomes such dying Creatures. In a Word, we
should labor that our Life may be filled up with Work, and that it be such,
both as to Matter and Manner, as shall subserve the Interest of our Souls and
their eternal Salvation: and as that we may have Peace in our latter End. And
indeed what more comfortable in an Hour of Death, than to be able to look back
into a well spent Life; carefully employed to the Honor of GOD, the true
Service of ourselves, and the Benefit of our fellow Creatures? As on the
contrary, what more cutting and stinging, than to be forced to reflect upon a
useless and unprofitable Life? spent to no purpose at all: or worse than none,
in the Service of Sin and Satan? These Considerations, if there were no other,
make it highly worth Men's while, to husband their Time well and so improve it
to the best Advantage.

4. The Consideration of Life as a Vapor, that appears but for a little
Time, and then vanishes away, should put us upon frequent Examination into our
State. Serious Self-examination can never be an unsuitable Exercise for such
frail short lived Creatures as we are. And we should be often calling ourselves
to an Account; looking into our Hearts and Lives, and inquiring what would
become of us, if we should die within a few Days, and be called to give up our
Account. Suppose our Case to be like Hezekiah's, who received such a Message as
that from GOD, Isai. 38.1.
Thus says the LORD, set thine House in order, for thou shall die, and not
live. Or suppose GOD should say to us, as He did to the rich Fool in the
Gospel, Luke 12.20.
This Night, shall thy Soul be required of thee. What Provision have we made
for an amazing Eternity? Are we secure of the Friendship of GOD? Are we
interested in the Merits of the great REDEEMER? Is our Account ready for our
LORD and JUDGE? Or is GOD our Enemy, and CHRIST our Enemy? Are we wholly
unprepared to die? and unmeet for an Appearance before the SON of MAN? These
are very serious and solemn Inquiries. And whatever the loose and unthinking
Part of the World, may imagine; they are very proper and seasonable Inquiries,
for such to make, whose Lives, like a VAPOR, are exceeding short and
uncertain. And the Consideration that they are so, should put us upon frequent
questioning with our selves, after some such manner as this: What if my Life
should expire within a few Months, or Days? Yea, what if I should be seized
with Death, this very Day or Hour? Where would my poor Soul take up its
everlasting Abode? in Heaven or in Hell? O let none of us rest satisfied, till
we know, what our Condition is with respect to the eternal World, and how it
would fare with us forever, if GOD should speedily and suddenly call us hence!
Can we with Ease lie down to Sleep, and not know but we may awake in
everlasting Burnings! Surely we must be dreadfully stupify'd and hardened, if
we can live in Quiet, while Uncertain what our Eternal State is! --

5ly and finally, The Representation that has been given of Life, should put us
upon particular and immediate Endeavors to prepare for the Time of its
Expiration. And this is the best Improvement, we can make of it. And it is not a
Matter of Indifferency, whether we will make this Use of it, yea or no: but of
the nearest Concern: yea, of absolute Necessity. Our well being forever depends
upon it. For the present is the only State, wherein we can make Provision for
Eternity. And if we are negligent in an Affair of such infinite Importance, and
leave it undone; we shall perish without any Remedy.

And the sooner we set about this great Work the better: because when we have
in any good Measure accomplished it, we shall at once have freed ourselves,
from that Spirit of Bondage, which otherwise we might, all our Days, have been
subject to, by reason of continual Fears of Death. Besides, the sooner we begin
upon this Work, the more fit we shall be to engage in it, the better disposed
to it, and the easier we shall find it. But above all, the utter Uncertainty of
Life discovers the Wisdom of a speedy Preparation for Death.

O let us not then Procrastinate in a Work of such infinite and everlasting
Moment! but immediately set about it, and in GOD's Strength pursue it with the
utmost Vigor and Resolution; giving ourselves no Rest, till we are in a fair
way of going through with it.

But Perhaps we imagine Death to be afar off, and that it is Time eno'uh
hereafter to think of dying, and in earnest to set about getting ready for it.
Multitudes have though it thus, and have acted under the Power of such a vain
Imagination, to their eternal Undoing. GOD grant this may not be the Case of
any of us! There is infinite Danger of it, while we put off the Tho'ts of
Death. And yet alas! how apt are we all to do so! We can, but few of us, bear
the Prospect of dying; and because we are inclined to live a great while; we
hope we shall; and so live and act, as though we certainly should. What Madness
is this! At what a dreadful Hazard, do we put our Soul's Salvation! Is it not
altogether Uncertain, how long we shall live? Are we sure of living another
Day? Yea, can any particular Person say, that he shall go alive out of this
Assembly? And shall we then run Ventures in a Case, where our everlasting well
being is dependant! Is not this infinite and amazing Folly! Do we manage thus
in the common Affairs of Life? Should we not be condemned for Fools and Madmen
if we did? And shall we act after this manner, only in that Case, wherein if we
are surpised in our Folly by Death, it will be too late to repent of it for
ever! Surely we an't (...) the desperate Folly we bewray! If we were duly
sensible of it, we could not be easy with ourselves; but should, being filled
with Agony of Soul, immediately betake ourselves to GOD, and pierce even Heaven
it self with ardent Cries for pardoning Mercy --.

Or it may be we think a few of our latest Days are enough, to be employed
about the Work of preparing ourselves for another World: and that, if we have
Time, upon a Deathbed, to cry to GOD for Mercy, it will be Sufficient for our
Admission into Heaven.

To expose the Folly of this Pretense, I dare not say, as some have done, that
a Deathbed Repentance is impossible; and that, if Persons ever obtain
Salvation in such a Case, it must be through the Uncovenanted Mercy of GOD. Such
an Opinion as this; as it seems contrary to the Tenure of the Bible, so it very
much lessens the Riches and Glory of free Grace --.

There is no truly humble Penitent, but is a qualified Object of pardoning
Mercy; and shall, according to the Gospel Covenant, certainly obtain it. And
though a Person, who has been no ways concerned about his Soul, till he comes to
lie upon a Deathbed, is very unfit for the Work of Salvation, and has but
little reason, comparatively speaking, to expect the Aids of Divine Grace: Yet,
who can say, but GOD may dissolve such a Sinner into Grief and Shame; give him
a true sight and sense of his Sins, and cause him to repent in Dust and Ashes:
and so pluck him, as a Firebrand out of the Fire.

This is what the most merciful GOD may do, if He should so please. Yea, and He
has encouraged us to hope, this is what He will do; if we have not out sinned
the Day of His Grace, and are not wanting to our selves. And no Sinner, though he
may have rolled away his Days in Vanity, and is now just dropping into
Eternity, has reason to despair of Divine Mercy. The Case of the Penitent Thief
on the Cross, seems to have been recorded as an Encouragement to such Sinners
--. And it must be constantly affirmed, that the Grace of GOD, is not confined
to any particular Age or Time of Life. He may bestow his Grace, as upon
whomsoever, so whenever He pleases. And it is past doubt, many have experienced
the Loving Kindness of GOD in CHRIST, in some of their last Moments; and
instead of going away into Everlasting Punishment, have inherited Eternal Life.

But let no Sinner encourage himself from the Mercy of GOD, to continue in his
evil Courses, and put off the Business of Religion, till a dying Hour. What can
be more base and disingenuous than this? To live in Sin all our Days,
dishonouring and offending GOD, because He is so merciful and compassionate, as
to accept even our latest Repentance, rather than we should perish forever;
wherein could we discover a more vile ungenerous Temper of Mind! Surely this
Goodness of GOD should work upon our Ingenuity, lead us to Repentance, and
immediately engage us in the Divine Love and Service. This ought to be the
Influence of such wonderful Grace and Mercy: Nor unless it is, shall we be able
to free ourselves from the Charge of the greatest Baseness, the blackest
Ingratitude.

Or if there was nothing of Disingenuity in such a Proceedure: Yet how
infinitely unreasonable is it* "What strange Tho'ts must Men have of GOD and
Heaven, and what extravagant Conceits of the little Evil of Sin, and the great
Easiness of Repentance, that can impose upon themselves at this rate?" And how
shall we be able to apply our selves to GOD now, when we have scarce ever had a
serious Though It of Him all our Lives? Can we have the Face to bespeak Him in this
manner? LORD, now the World and my Lusts have left me, and I feel my self ready
to sink into eternal Perdition, I lay hold upon thy Mercy to deliver my Soul
from going down into the Pit. I have heard strange things of thy Goodness, and
that thou art merciful even to a Miracle. This is that which I always trusted
to, that after a long Life of Sin and Vanity thou would at last be satisfied
with a few penitent Words and Sighs at the Hour of Death. Let me not, I pray
thee, be disappointed of this Hope, and put to Confusion. Is this an Address
fit to be made to a wise Man, much less to the all-wise and just Judge of the
World? and yet this seems to be the plain Interpretation of the late and forced
Application of a great and habitual Sinner to Almighty GOD in his last
Extremity, and when he is just giving up the Ghost and going to appear before
his dreadful Tribunal Dr. Tillitson, Vol. 1. Ser. 54.
.

Besides, is a Time of Sickness and Death the most fit season, in which to make
Preparation for Eternity, that we put it off till then? Certainly, if we have
had Occasion to visit sick Chambers, and have taken a View of the Circumstances
of dying Persons, we can never imagine thus! they have now enough to graple
with their Illness. The whole strength of their Nature is laid out in
sustaining the Infirmities of it. And they have little or no Heart to think of
their Souls, or make Provision for their future Happiness. Or if they have,
they are less fit for this now, than they ever were before. For either their
Senses are stupify'd, their Tho'ts confused and shattered, their Frame
discomposed: Or else their Pains are so extreme, or their Bodies so very weak
and faint, as to incapacitate them for the Work of getting ready to go out of
the World. And O! how many, when upon a Deathbed, have, with Tears in their
Eyes, most bitterly lamented their Folly, in deferring to make their Peace with
GOD till then; they have now found so many Difficulties and Inconveniences in
the way, beyond what they would have done, if they had engaged in this Business
sooner, and in a more proper Time of Life.

Furthermore, there is nothing more precarious than a Deathbed Preparation for
another World. Sinners indeed, at such a time, are often in great Consternation
of Mind; their Cries for Mercy serious and affecting, and their Vows and
Promises particular and solemn. -- Yet, it is to be feared their Concern about
their State most frequently arises, only from an awakened Sense of what a
fearful thing it is to fall into the Hands of the living GOD. They cannot bear
to think of going away, to dwell with devouring Fire, and to inhabit
everlasting Burnings. And because they are in Distress and Agony of Soul, they
themselves, and perhaps their Friends too, are ready to hope for the best, and
willing to believe that their Sorrows are the Sorrows of a Repentance unto
Life: When alas! it may be, they are no ways troubled, that they have offended
GOD and rejected CHRIST and acted all their Days unworthy of themselves, and
below the Glory of their Natures; but are filled with Horror at the Prospect,
of what is like to be the Consequence of their evil doings. Many while under
Apprehensions of Death approaching, have been as much terrified and as heartily
troubled; and have made as fair pretenses and as solemn Promises: and yet, when
GOD has ransomed their Lives from Destruction, they have forgot the Anguish of
Spirit they were in, and returned to their former Folly and Wickedness: Yea,
they have made themselves sevenfold more the Children of the Devil: whereby
they have evidently discovered it to the World, that their Repentance was not
sincere; and that if they had died, they would have perished forever. And no
doubt, this is the Case of many, whose Lives were not spared to them. If they
had been raised up again, their Repentance would have proved it self to have
been, nothing more than the Terrors of a guilty Conscience. In a word, it is a
Matter of the greatest Niceness and Difficulty, to determine concerning any
Deathbed Repentance in particular, whether it be sincere and such as GOD will
accept: And after all that can be said, it must and will remain very precarious
and uncertain.

Moreover, when we come to lie upon a Sick bed, we shall not find the Business of
getting ready for Death and Judgment such an easy thing, as at present we may
imagine it to be. I doubt not, but most Sinners have slight Tho'ts of the Work
of Repentance and Salvation. They suppose it is but confessing their Sins with
external signs of Sorrow, and putting up a a few Prayers to GOD for Mercy, and
so an Entrance shall be ministered unto them abundantly into the everlasting
Kingdom of our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST: and they imagine they can do this
as well, just at the Point of Death, as at any Time, and so put it off till
then. But O! what amazing Folly is this! and how dreadfully do we impose upon
ourselves in a Matter of the highest Moment! Is the Work of Salvation such an
easy one, and so dependant on our own Pleasure, that we may thus dally with
it? Alas! if GOD ever give us a true Sight and Sense of things, we shall have
quite different Tho'ts of it, and find that we were miserably mistaken. Heaven
is not so easily obtained. It Is a great and difficult work to prepare ourselves
for it, and we shall certainly find it to be so. And to convince us of this
Truth, I though it now to have gone on to tell you, what is included in that
Preparation for Death, that I have been thus long urging upon you. But I see
the Time will allow me only to observe in General,

That there is a two fold Preparation for Death, the one habitual, the other
actual. The Ingredients that constitute the former, are true Faith in CHRIST,
an inward rooted Aversion to all Sin, and a prevailing Disposition to universal
Holiness: in order to which, generally Speaking, it is necessary, that we take
a great deal of Pains in the use of Prayer, Meditation, reading and hearig
GOD's Word, etc. which are the ways, in which He ordinarily makes known the
exceeding Greatness of his Power, in putting Persons into a State of Salvation.
But besides this, there is an actual Preparation; which, though not of absolute
Necessity, yet is highly requisite, as tending to a peaceful and comfortable
Death. And the best way in order to our obtaining this, is to familiarize to
ourselves the Tho'ts of Death; to keep a constant sense of our own Frailty upon
our Minds; to mortify our Affections to the World, and place them upon those
things that are above: and in a word, to look upon every Day of our Lives, as
not Knowing but it may be our Last; and to live and act every Day, as though we
were certain, before the next, our eternal State would be determined.

I have now done with my Text: and shall only add a few Words on the mournful
Occasion of my discoursing to you upon such a Subject at this Time, viz. the
Lamented Death of that Honorable and virtuous Gentlewoman, Mrs. SARAH BYFIELD,
whom, last Week, we followed to the Grave.

For her Character, I think my self, in Justice to her Memory, obliged to say,
-- That as she was honored by her Birth; being Daughter to a renowned FATHER
Gov. LEVERETT.
of this Country, who, for several Years, with universal Love and Reverence,
sat in the FIRST CHAIR of Government over it; so that her Temper and Conduct
were every way worthy of such a distinguished Parentage.

She had naturally a weak and tender Body; but a strong and noble Soul: which,
being cultivated and enriched by a good Education and great Industry, rendered
her truly amiable and desirable; and fitted her to be a Blessing in the Station
Providence had assigned her.

Her Temper was lively and cheerful; yet far from light and vain: being well
ballast by a singular Discretion. In her most pleasant Hours, She was never
unfit to enter upon a Serious Subject, and always treated it with a becoming
Gravity and Reverence.

She had a good Taste in Conversation, and was excellently well turned for it:
having a ready Wit; a sprightly Genius; an easy smooth way of expressing
herself; and being able, without Stiffness or Ostentation, to be both
entertaining and profitable.

She was a Person of great Sincerity and Plainheartedness; meek and humble;
patient and resigned: which she had frequent Opportunites of discovering, by
reason of those many Indispositions, that were inseparable from so brittle a
Constitution.

In a Word, She was an Honor to her Sex, in her exemplary Deportment under all
the various Characters and Relations of Life: As a Neighbor, Kind and Pitisul:
As a Friend, true and hearty; without Disguise and abhorrent to Flattery and
Deceit: As a Wife, tender and dutiful; engaging in her Carriage; reverent and
respectful: As Mistress in a Family, discreet in her Management; a Lover of
good Order; neat and cleanly; tho'tful of all under her Care; indulgent and
compassionate to her Servants: especially concerned about their Souls, and
frequent in teaching them the good Knowledge of the LORD; in her Treatment of
Strangers, hospitable; courteous, pleasant, obliging and edifying to those that
came to visit her.

But her chief Excellency, and what most recommended to all that knew her, was
her undissembled Piety. She had an habitual prevailing Awe and Reverence of GOD
upon her Heart: which early discovered it self, and all along through the Course
of her Life, not only in an utter Abhorrence of every thing that savored of
Prophanness and Irreverence; but in a due Treatment of those things, wherein
the Divine Honor is nearly concerned. She loved the House, and Sanctified the
Day of God; gave her constant devout Attendance on the Public Worship, and all
Gospel Ordinances; paid a singular Regard to the Holy Scriptures; valued the
Ministers of Religion; and had an universal Regard to all good Men. But above
all, CHRIST was the Object of her Love, her Faith, her Hope. It was in her
Account a faithful saying, and she esteemed it worthy of all Acceptance, that
CHRIST JESUS was come into the World to save Sinners. HIM therefore she
embraced as the alone REDEEMER of Souls; HIM she trusted with the great Affair
of her Eternal Salvation; HIM she loved with her whole Heart; HIM she made it
her Care to please in all things; HIS Image she was Adorned with; and the
Graces of HIS SPIRIT she lived in the daily Exercise of: And we charitably
believe she is gone to be with CHRIST, which is best of all.

I doubt not, but the Mourning Friends and Relatives have often refreshed their
Souls, by looking back to her past Conversation in CHRIST; and then by turning
theiy View forward to those unutterable Glories, she is now possessed of, in
the Place GOD has ordained for the Spirits of Believers, in their separate
State. And while by Faith, they are beholding her, as in the Bosom of JESUS, I
may well suppose, they grieve not for her; but rather rejoice, that she is got
beyond the Reach of Sorrow, the Power of Temptation and the Possibility of
Sinning; and that she is entered upon the Reward of Righteousness, which is Joy
and Peace, Quietness and Assurance for ever:, Yet upon their own Accounts, they
may have Reason to Mourn, and stand in need of Consolation.

We heartily wish, for all the Relatives, Divine Support under this Trial of
their Faith; the comforting Presence of the Holy GHOST; and the sanctifying
Influences of supernatural Grace, whereby they may be enabled so to behave
themselves, as that GOD may be honored their own Holiness increased and their
future and eternal Weight of Glory inhanced.

And particularly, we would sympathize with that Aged and Honorable Servant of
GOD, who was most nearly related to the Person deceased. You little though it to
appear in mourning for one, you expected and desired should follow you to the
Grave. Yet so the Sovereign GOD has ordered it! He has taken from you the
pleasant Companion of your Age, who might have been the Helper of it is Griefs,
and rendered it far more easy and desirable to you! But be dumb with Silence;
-- meekly bear this Chastening of the LORD; -- take a realizing View of it, as
coming from your Covenant GOD and FATHER, who never afflicts willingly, nor
grieves his Children: -- Adore the Sovereignty, the Wisdom, the Righteousness
and Holiness of this Providence. -- Let it be your chief Care so to carry your
self under it, as to give a bright Example of Subjection to the Father of
Spirits; of Humility, Patience, Resignation -- And may it serve to make you a
Partaker of the Divine Nature in still greater Measures, and so advance you yet
further in your Preparedness for that Eternal happy State, you hope and long
for, and are arrived at the Confines of! -- We heartily pray GOD to be the
Staff of your Age, your Joy and Comfort through the remaining part of your Life;
your Guide through Death, and when your Flesh and Heart fails, the Strength of
your Heart and your GOD forever.

To Conclude: The Death even of Women of so distinguished a Character is a
public Loss: and we should resent it as such; -- and be importunate in our
Cries to the GOD of all Grace, that as He removes them away by Death, so that
He would raise up others of the same excellent Spirit to supply their Place,
and make good their Ground -- -- We should all lay the Deaths of such Persons
to Heart. -- Particularly our Women should do so, and labor to imitate them in
those things that were virtuous and praiseworthy. And it is to be wished for
all our Women, that they may be well reported of for good Works 1. Tim. 5.10.
being in Behavior as becomes Godliness; not false Accusers; not given to
much Wine: Teachers of good things; Sober, Lovers of their Husbands; Lovers of
their Children; discreet; chaste; Keepers at Home; good; obedient to their own
Husbands, that the Word of GOD be not blasphemed. Titus 2.3, -- 6.
In like manner also, that they adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with
shame-facedness and Sobriety; -- and (which becomes Women professing
Godliness) with good Works. 1. Tim. 2.9, 10.


AMEN.
An APPENDIX. From the Weekly News-Letter, No. 1405. Containing an Account of
the Deceased. BOSTON, December 29. 1730.
YEsterday were Buried here the Remains of that truly honorable and devout
Gentlewoman, Mrs. SARAH BYFIELD, amidst the affectionate Respects and
Lamentations of a numerous Concourse. -- Before carrying out the Corpse a
Funeral Prayer was made, by One of the Pastors of the Old Church, to whose
Communion she belonged: Which, though a Custom in the Country-Towns, is a
singular Instance in this place, but it is wished may prove a leading Example to
the general Practice of so christian and decent a Custom. -- The Pall was held
up by the honorable the late Lieut. Gov. DUMMER, with other Gentlemen of His
Majesty's Council. Among the mourning Relatives went his Excellency Governor
BELCHER, and his Honor Lieut. Gov. TAILER: followed by a long Train of Persons
of public Distinction and private Character; paying their last Offices to the
Dead, and uniting their sincere Condolences with the Living.

This Gentlewoman was distinguished by her Birth and Family; being youngest
Daughter to the late excellent Gov. LEVERETT, whose Name is still had in Honor
among us, and will be always venerable to those that know the Story of
New England. -- She was honorable also by her Marriage; being Consort to the
worthy aged Nathanael Byfield, Esquire sometimes Senior Counselor for this
Province, and now Judge of the Vice-Admiralty; to whom she was married April
17. 1718. The Companion of his advanced Years, the dear Partner of his Griefs
and Joys, and very much his Delight and Ornament.

But She was most of all distinguished by her personal Merits; which those have
a singular Sense of, that were most intimately acquainted with her: and this is
one of the surest Tests of true Worth. She inherited much of the excellent
Spirit and Principles, which embalm the Memory of her incomparable Father and
Mother, who were some of the fairest Ornaments of their Age. She had a
conspicuous Share of that good Sense, so natural to the Family, and was much
improved in the most useful Knowledge. In Conjunction with a sprightly Wit, She
had a thoughtful Genius; and her fervent Temper was governed and adorned by a
rare Discretion: which peculiarly accomplished her to shine in that superior
Rank where Divine Providence placed her. She honored the several States of
Virginity and Marriage; and filled up the various Characters and Relations she
sustained, with the Duties belonging to them. While she affected not
Appearances, but declined Show and Noise, a primitive Simplicity, Humility and
Modesty reflected a Luster on all her other Graces and Accomplishments: and she
shone with Eminence in the several Virtues of the Domestic Life, the proper
Distinctions of her Sex. And here the Prudence of her Economy, joined with a
hospitable Management, her Civility and Courteousness to Visitants, her grave
and cheerful Conversation, her reverent and engaging Carriage to her honorable
Consort, and wise Deportment among his Children; these things have merited for
her the Privilege and Honor of Solomon's virtuous Woman: Her Children arise up
and call her Blessed; her Husband also, and he praises her.

But above all her Memory is respected for that serious Piety, and Spirit of
Devotion, which brightened her early Years, and continued with her to the End.
She was favored with a religious as well as ingenuous Education; and agreably
(in Addition to the Gentlewoman) she had much of the Christian, which is a
Distinction that will last, when all others are buried in Silence. She was a
lover of sacred Retirements; lived upon her Bible, and gave her self to Prayer.
An equal Friend she was to Family-Devotions: and the public Assemblies could
witness her diligent Attendance on all public Ordinances. She was a strict
Observer of the LORD's DAY, and took Care to sanctify the Sabbath in her
Conduct at home, as well as at the House of GOD. She took a great deal of
commendable Pains in Catechizing and instructing the Servants committed to her
Charge: Opening her Mouth with Wisdom, and in her Tongue was the Law of
Kindness. In her you might see the condescending and faithful Mistress, the
affectionate Mother, the virtuous and prudent Wife, the constant Friend, and
the obliging Neighbor. And surely the World will not envy these just Honors
to the Memory of so valuable a Person.

She was born July 13. 1673. -- and died after a short Illness, Dec. 21. 1730.
Leaving behind her that good Name, which is better than precious Ointment, and
the day of Death was better to her (we trust) than the day of her Birth. -- May
we all be found Followers of them who through Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises.


