Mr. Foxcroft's SERMON At the ORDINATION Of a DEACON.

The Divine Right of Deacons.

A SERMON PREACHED On Occasion of the ORDINATION OF Mr. Zechariah Thayer, To
the Office of a DEACON in the Old or First gathered Church in Boston, LORD'S
DAY, May 23. 1731.

By THOMAS FOXCROFT, M. A. One of the Pastors of the said Church.

BOSTON, New England: Printed by B. Green, for D. Henchman and J. Phillips, and
Sold at their Shops. 1731.

A SERMON Preached at the Ordination of a DEACON.
1 Timothy iii. 10, and 13. AND let these also first be proved; then let them use
the Office of a Deacon, being found blameless. -- For they that have used the
Office of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree, and great
boldness in the Faith, which is in Christ Jesus.


THIS Epistle may not unfitly be entitled Paul's CHARGE to Timothy. The
professed design of it is to give him Instructions for a right Conduct in the
Church of GOD. The Apostle seeing occasion to go into Macedonia, besought
Timothy to abide still at Ephesus: to the end he might confirm the Souls of the
Disciples, and establish them in the faith and order of the Gospel; preserve
the purity of Christian Doctrine and Worship in the Church there, and propagate
it in places round about. For the same Cause doubtless left he Timothy at
Ephesus, as Titus at Crete; that he might set in order the things which were
wanting, fill up the several Offices of Christ's appointment with Persons duly
qualified for the execution of them, and settle things referring to Divine
Worship, Government and Discipline in the House of GOD, in a just conformity to
the Rule of Christ's revealed Will.

In the Chapter before us we have the two Orders of public Officers, Bishops
and Deacons, treated of. The Apostle commends them, saying, He that desires the
Office of a Bishop, desires a good Work; and they that have used the Office of
a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree. -- He also gives the
distinct Qualifications for these Offices, in order to direct the Choice of
proper Persons for the Administration of them. He first lays down the necessary
Properties of a Bishop or Pastor, from ver. 2, to 7. And then draws the Deacons
Character, ver. 8, and onwards. Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not
double-tongued, etc. -- He would have Candidates tried by these Rules, and
being approved, would have them use the Office, ver. 10. -- And in ver. 13. he
encourages both Timothy to ordain meet Persons unto, and such to accept of, the
Office of a Deacon, from this Consideration, that they who use it well, do
purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the Faith which is
in Christ Jesus.

What is necessary for the Explanation of the Words, may be offered in speaking
to these Observations from them, which are to be the Arguments of the following
Discourse.

1. The Service of Deacons in the Church of Christ is a standing Office,
belonging to a distinct Order of Men.

2. Persons are to be first proved, and then to use this Office, being found
blameless.

3. The Consideration, that such as use the Office of a Deacon well, do
purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the Faith which is
in Christ Jesus, affords encouragement both to the Calling and Ordaining of
meet Persons unto this Office, and their engaging in it.

These Propositions lie plainly in the Text, or are very fairly deduced from it.

DOCT. I. The Service of Deacons in the Church of Christ is a standing Office,
belonging to a distinct Order of Men: or thus, Deacons are a distinct Order of
Ecclesiastical Officers, separated to a special Ministration, and appointed by
Christ to continue in his Church through all Ages.

The Prosecution of this Point will open to your View the principal Grounds of
the Sacred Transaction before us this Day: some Account of which I apprehend it
necessary to preface this Solemnity with; as our Practice in the Ordination of
Deacons is become now almost singular, and as an Account of such public
Actions seems a Debt justly owing to GOD and our Neighbors.

Here let it be observed,

1. It Is not to be disputed but that there was such an Office, as this of
Deacons, instituted and received in the first days of the Gospel.

By Office, I mean a special Calling, appropriate to a particular Order of Men,
and not common to other Members of the Community.

By Deacons, I mean those Ecclesiastical Officers, who have the Care of the
public Stock for pious and charitable Uses committed to them. Indeed the Word
(...) I acknowledge, literally Signifies no more than Ministers or Servants,
and is often used according to its general and primary meaning Matthew. 22.13. 1
Cor. 3 5. Rom 13 4 Heb. 1.14. Romans 15 8.
. However the word is not always used in that Latitude; but manifestly
sometimes with Restriction, for a particular kind of Officer in the Church of
Christ. As (...) admits a restrained, as well as large Sense; literally and
firstly meaning any Overseer, but yet sometimes intending a particular Church
Officer: So the Word (...), though it strictly signifies any Minister or Servant,
yet has a limited sense, and is in its Ecclesiastical Application generally the
name of a particular Officer in the Church, whose special business is to
receive and distribute what is offered from time to time by the Church for
works of Piety and Charity. The word in our Text is judged by all Expositors to
be a Title of Office; and that particular sort of Officer, just now described,
the generality judge is thereby denoted.

Most evident it is that there was such a kind of Officer of Divine
Appointment. We have an Account of the Institution of the Officer, we judge
denoted by the Term or Name of Deacon, in the 6th Chap. of Acts; where we may
see the Occasion of their Appointment, and the Scope of their Calling, which
was to serve Tables, (...), to be Deacons to Tables, as one expresses it.

We are told here, there arose a Murmuring among the Hellenistical Jews, that
their Widows (under which are comprehended the Fatherless and Poor) were not so
well attended and provided for, as the Poor of the native Hebrews, in the daily
Ministration. To explain this we must note, the Church at Jerusalem had by a
common Agreement made a public Fund or Stock, which was to supply every one's
daily occasions; and especially the Ministers of the Word and the indigent
Members of the Church were to have their Maintenance out of it. See Act. 2.44,
45. and chap. 4.34, -- 37.

The Apostles for a while took the care of the Church-Stock, and superintended
the daily Ministration to the Saints. They had opportunity for this, since at
first they made Jerusalem the place of their usual Residence: Antiquity (if I
remember right) says, they did so for about 12 Years. And being Persons of an
established Reputation, as well as superior Dignity by their excelling
Accomplishments, and so peculiarly worthy of Trust and Confidence; the
Disciples, when they brought the Prices of their Goods and Possessions sold, in
order to have all things in common, thought fit to lay them down at the
Apostles Feet: doubtless (as in another Case, 2 Cor. 8.4) Praying them with
much Entreaty, that they would receive the Gifts into their Disposition, and
take upon them the Fellowship of the Ministering to the Saints.

Accordingly the Apostles submitted to take the Charge of this Fund for the
present, receiving and paying out the Moneys collected; and perhaps the
Distribution might at first be personally performed by them: but the number of
Disciples increasing, and so Cares multiplying on the Apostles hands, it is
likely they took in the Assistance of others (and those probably such as were
called by way of distinction Hebrews, being Natives of Judea, and so might be
under a Temptation to Partiality) who by general Orders from them helped to
manage this Affair. And upon occasion of some imprudent unequal Conduct, either
real or supposed, there arose among the Hellenistical Disciples a Complaint
that their Widows or Poor were neglected in the daily Ministration. -- It Is too
commonly the fault of poor People to imagine they are slighted; and instead of
being thankful for what is given them by charitable Persons, they often grow
querulous, and murmur that more is not given. And where any lie under some
peculiar Disadvantages, as the Hellenists did in Compare with the Native Jews,
they are apt to be jealous, in case of general Distributions, that Things are
managed with Partiality, and a criminal Respect of Persons; when really there
is no just foundation for any such Censures. -- Or, if the Apostles employed
any of the Hebrews under them, these might be really faulty in not giving a due
Proportion of Supplies to the Grecian Widows. For though in Christ Jesus there be
neither Jew nor Greek; no Distinction of Hebrew or Hellenist: Yet it seems they
that were united in the Christian Profession, had not quite laid aside their
former Prejudices, but still retained something of the old Leven. There were
mutual Envyings and Jealousies still subsisting among them: and their first
Contention was about a Money-matter.

Now upon consideration of these Difficulties, the Apostles were disposed to
excuse themselves from any further attendance to the charitable Ministration:
and being directed thereto by the Holy Ghost, as we cannot doubt, since in all
Affairs of Importance to the Kingdom of Christ, the Apostles acted under a
Divine Inspiration, they moved it to the Church, That a Select Number of the
Brethren should be appointed on purpose to look after the distribution of the
Church's Money. -- ver. 2, 3, and 4. It follows, ver. 5, and 6. And the Saying
pleased the whole Multitude, both Jews and Greeks: and they chose Seven Men;
whom they set before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their
Hands upon them, Ordaining them Stewards and Dispensers of the collected
Charities.

Under a Divine direction they did this; as Moses in a somewhat like case,
appointed inferior Officers in the Jewish Commonwealth, Deuteronomy. 1. Upon which
one observes, Moses had no Regal or Arbitrary Authority at all: but was only
GOD'S Secretary, to write his Mind; and GOD'S Instrument, to publish and
execute his Laws. And look, what Moses was to the Jews, that were the Apostles
unto the Christian Church, the Revealers and Interpreters of GOD'S Law, and
GOD'S Vicegerents, who in his Name and according to his Will, settled the
Ecclesiastical Policy under the Gospel Dispensation. Hence, doubtless they
might use that Form of Expression in this, as in other Cases, It seems good
to the HOLY GHOST, as well as to us.

Now we have reason to look on what they did upon this Occasion, as the
Instituting and establishing of a distinct public Office in the Christian
Church.

It Is plain, the Attending upon Tables was now made a special Ministry in the
Church; an Office divided from that of Teachers. For the Apostles secluded
themselves from that Service, and procured others to be devoted to that
particular Charge: And their whole Management and Language upon this Occasion
were such as imported the Specification of a Calling peculiar and distinct from
the other Officers and Members. Ver. 2, 3, 4. It is not Reason, that we should
leave the Word of GOD, and serve Tables. Wherefore look ye out among you seven
Men, whom we may appoint over this Business. But we will give ourselves
continually to Prayer and to the Ministry of the Word. The serving of Tables is
here manifestly separated from the Office of Teachers, and made a particular
Ministry in the Church, the discretive and proper Charge of Deacons. Hence the
Apostle Paul, in his Writings, several times mentions Deacons, as Officers
distinguished from Bishops or Teachers. That it is a distinct public Office
(says one of our venerable Divines Hooker, Survey, Part 2. page 34.
) is apparent, because the Seven were elected in a solemn manner thereto, and
received a solemn Institution from the Apostles, and so far from Christ for the
undertaking of that Service.

While the Apostles attended the Ministration to the Saints, they only did it
in a way of Charity: Whereas the Persons afterward appointed over this
Business, were to do it in a way of Office, as a Work particularly theirs by a
Divine Assignment.

The Deaconship from this time became an appropriate Office, and was no more
left at large, or imposed on Teachers of the Word: Though indeed upon some
special Occasions the Apostles and Evangelists, as they traveled from place to
place, we find carrying extraordinary Charities.

We may observe here,

It seems to have been but fitting, that such an Office should be appointed,
and lodged in the Hands of a special Order of Men. 'Twas requisite, in the
nature of things, that the serving of Tables should be made a particular Trust,
and assigned to certain Selected Persons. For if it lay in Common, it would be
seen, that what is every Man's Work would be often neglected, as no Body's
Concern. And 'twas already found by Experience inconvenient for Teachers of the
Word to sustain and manage this Trust; as unavoidably inferring too great a
Diversion from their proper Employ, which is of a more spiritual and noble
design, and exposing them to the Censures of envious discontented People; and
by Consequence tending to hinder the Gospel.

The Nature of the Deacons Trust was such as required some Gifts and
Qualifications, that were not to be found in every one: And the Difficulties,
Cares and Labors attending the faithful Discharge of it, such as made it
unsuitable for Teachers of the Word to be concerned therein. 'Twas a most wise
and reasonable thing then to commit this Office to some other Persons, chosen
by the Church, and approved by the Apostles, as meet for it.

And now, the inspired Apostles concurring in the solemn Appointment of those,
whom the Church elected, unto the Business of ministering to the Saints, this (I
say) speaks the Office of Deacons to be as really the Institution of Christ, as
the Office of Teachers. It is not to be looked on as owing to mere human
Contrivance and Agreement, but as taking it is Rise from the Institution and
revealed Will of Christ. Nor is it to be blended with the Ministry of the Word,
but preserved separate; as having its own distinct Divine Original and
Foundation.

I shall only add, in the Words of a Learned Man Whitby on Act. 6.
: If Deacons were not instituted here by the Apostles, I desire to know when,
where, and by whom they were instituted; and what other Record we have left us
of the Institution of them. Against this (says he) it is objected, That these
Seven are never called Deacons in the whole History of the Acts of the
Apostles. But (he answers) this objection can be of no strength against the
Suffrage of all Antiquity, which has still given them the Name of Deacons. He
further observes, In the whole Book of the Acts, neither are they ever called
Ministers of Tables, though here they are said to be appointed for that Work.

Enough, I think, has been offered to clear the Divine Right of the Deacons
Office, and to prove it separate from that of Teachers, according to the
express Intent of it is primitive Institution.

We pass now to show,

2. It was designed to be a standing Office, and the Institution is of lasting,
universal Obligation to the Churches of Christ.

It Is very manifest, the Apostles instituted this Office with a view to the
Benefit of all the Churches, and intended it for a perpetual Duration. The
original Institution neither limited it in regard of Place, nor Time. This is
generally acknowledged by all Parties: yet, because there are some Objectors, I
will a little labor the Confirmation of the Point; and show,

1. In regard of Place, 'twas besure not limited to the Church of Jerusalem.

Indeed on immediate Reason of the Institution of the Deacons Office was a
particular Occasion rising in the Church there: And we don't read of the same
Reason for that Office elsewhere; I mean, a Community of Goods, and daily
Ministration. But yet it is Fact that elsewhere we find the same Office set up,
in one Church and another. The Apostle writing to the Church at Philippi,
mentions in his Superscription, the Bishops and Deacons. It Is manifest, the two
Orders here mentioned, intend Officers belonging to that Church and dwelling at
Philippi See this matter argued by Dr Whitby in his Notes on the Place. As also
in Sober Remarks, Edit. 2. p 91.
. So then, the Church there had Deacons, as well as Bishops. This shows
plainly, the Appointment of those Persons at Jerusalem to serve Tables, was not
a Topical thing, but designed as exemplary and obligatory to other Churches.

We have the Consent of all Antiquity, that the Deacons here spoken of, are
that kind of Officers instituted in Act. 6. whose business was to serve Tables:
And we have good Reason to judge, this particular kind of Officers is denoted
by that Term in this place. As one observes Pierce, Letters, I. page 35.
, The Name, when appropriated to Officers in the Christian Church, does fully
agree with the Business and the first Occasion of those whom we understand by
it. And as the distributing the Church's Charity was called by the Name (...),
and the Seven were set over this Business, it seems that hence came the Name of
(...) to be used to signify such Officers.

Some Episcopal Writers indeed would pretend the Deacons here spoken of, to be
Presbyters* or Gospel Ministers. -- But as Bishops and Deacons are here
mentioned together by way of Distinction, it is plain, the Deacons in this place
intend those Church Officers who were instituted for the serving of Tables, and
not the Ministry of the Word. For there are but these two standing Orders, of
Divine Institution. The Opinion that makes these Deacons to be Gospel Ministers
or Teachers, is founded in another Mistake, as if there were two Orders or
unequal Ranks of Gospel-Teachers, Bishops and Presbyters: But it labors of
this unhappy Dfficulty (which I know not how any can rationally salve) That
they are able to produce a Divine Commission for but One only; and by
Consequence the pretended Distinction and Imparity of Bishops and Presbyters
must be exploded, as unscriptural, if we would manifest a sincere Attachment to
the Word of Christ, as our governing Rule in Matters Divine. Whereas, for
Bishops and Deacons according to our Notion and Application of those Terms, we
are able to point out a distinct Institution for each, in the holy Scriptures.

And here we find both Orders mentioned by the Apostle, together and by way of
Distinction, as being in the Church at Philippi.

And now upon this I cannot refrain observing, That I doubt not the Contenders
for Prelacy would have triumphed in it, as an unanswerable Argument in favor
of their Opinion, had the Text run, [ with the Bishops and PRESBYTERS] and they
would have urged it as a most plausible Support of the Distinction they put
between them. But since the Passage stands otherwise, they have invented a
forced Construction of one of the Names (not to take any Notice of their
Descants upon the other) and would make Deacons intend Presbyters, contrary to
the generally received Notion of the Term, when used to signify a
Church Officer, and contrary to the evident Sense of the Word as used by the
same Apostle in his Epistle to Timothy; which any unbias'd Person must be
convinced of, by this single Consideration, That the Description there given of
Deacons altogether omits one of the fundamental Articles in the Character of
Presbyters, viz. An Aptness to teach.

And Dr. Hammond, a celebrated Episcopal Annotator, is fully of opinion, that
as by Bishops, in the Scripture-use of the Word, are to be understood the
Pastors of particular Churches, so by the Deacons are to be understood in this
place, being joined to Bishops, those that attend on them in every Church, and
were then next to them; there being not then any middle sort of Church Officers
Such as are now called Presbyters, in the Church of England.
instituted betwixt the Bishops and them. And the same (says he) is certainly
the Notion of the Word, in that other place, 1 Timothy 3.8, 12. where the Rules
are given for the qualifying them that are ordained to that Office.

This suggests a further Argument to establish the Point we are upon, viz, That
the Office instituted Acts 6. was not a thing local in its design, I mean, not
intended to be confined to the Church at Jerusalem: For Timothy was instructed
in the Qualifications of Deacons, to the same End, that he was also in the
Qualifications of Bishops, namely, for his Direction in the Appointment of such
Officers in the Churches, wherever as an Evangelist he traveled to set in order
the things that were wanting.

Agreeably the Apostle writing to the Corinthians, takes Notice (1 Epist. Chap.
12.) That God has set in his Church HELPS: which Expression is generally
understood to denote a particular kind of Officer, and is both by Episcopal and
Presbyterian Writers applied to Deacons, as most naturally referring to them Dr
Whitby on the place observes (...). from whence comes the word rendered Helps,
signifies to take care of others.
. These the Apostle tells us, GOD has set in his Church.

Now upon the whole, let it be observed; If the Churches in a Variety of places
had Deacons constituted in them by Apostolical Direction, it argues the Office
was not under a Limitation (either actual or intentional) to the City of
Jerusalem; although the Institution took place there first of all. And then if
the Churches in general at that day, when reduced to a settled State and the
Order, in which they were to continue, had Deacons appointed in them, this
surely affords a strong presumtive Argument, that these Officers were designed
also for an unlimited Continuance in the Churches, as being of universal
Advantage and perpetual Use. For the primitive Churches in an organized State,
as at Philippi, at Ephesus, etc. were intended Patterns, for the Constitution,
Government and Order of the Churches in all successive Generations.

But this leads me to the other Head. --

2. In regard of Time, this Office of Deacons was not limited to the
Apostolical Age.

As it was not topical, so neither temporal, in its first Design. To confirm
this, a few Arguments may be distinctly offered. As

1. The primitive Institution has never been repealed: which is a
Consideration, that I think sufficiently infers the perpetual Continuance of
the Office.

The Scriptures, which were given by Inspiration of GOD, are our supreme
Directory in Church Affairs, and by them we are to learn and judge what
Officers Christ has set in his Church. The Sovereignty of the Lord Jesus, as
Head of the Church, is to be acknowledged by taking our Directions from his
Word in all Ecclesiastical Concerns. It Is an unsufferable Encroachment on his
Prerogative, to set up any Office in the Church, without the Authority of a
Divine Appointment: And on the other hand, it is daring Presumption to reject
any of his Sacred Appointments, without the Authority of a Divine Repeal.

Now, the Office of Deaconship, as it is by universal Consent originally an
Institution of Christ; so it stands, by the clearest Evidence, yet unrevok'd.
If a Revocation be supposed, it must be either virtual and implicit, or formal
and express. A virtual Repeal there would have been, in case the Reasons of the
Institution, or Qualifications of the Persons, had been altogether
extraordinary and temporary: but, as I shall have Occasion to show under some
ensuing Heads, this was not the Case. And if there be not an implicit Repeal,
it seems the grossest Absurdity, and a Reflection on the Wisdom of Christ in
the original Appointment, to imagine there was or could be an express
Abrogation.

And agreeably, if we search the Scriptures, we shall find that in fact there
has never been any formal and explicit Repeal of this Evangelic Institution.
The whole New Testament is silent on this Head: which, though a negative
Consideration, yet taken in its Circumstances carries Force and Weight with it,
as a good presumptive Argument for the Stability of the Ordinance, and may help
to silence the Cavils of those who reject it as obsolete.

2. The general Reason of the Institution remains through all Ages: There was
nothing in the Nature of the Office of Deacons, that required it to be
temporary.

Though it might be with a more particular View to a transient Occasion, I mean
the Community of Goods and daily Ministration at Jerusalem, that this Office
was originally appointed; yet that must be acknowledged to conclude nothing
against the Permanence of the Institution: unless at the same time you will
grant (as you must by parity of Reason) that the extraordinary Purposes of the
Apostolical Commission do afford a just Objection against a standing Ministry,
or the Office of ordinary Teachers. But who, except Deists and Quakers, can see
any force of Argument, or will acknowledge the Consequence, in this Case?

We look on the Apostolic Commission (in Matthew. 28.) by the justest and
fairest deduction, to institute a settled Ministry in the Church for a perpetual
Succession; the Ministry of uninspir'd Teachers, for the edifying of the Body
of Christ, the preserving and building up of the Church already founded. And
yet it is certain, that this Commission was given primarily and immediately to
the Apostles, who were inspired Persons: and that more especially for Ends of
an extraordinary and temporary Nature; the witnessing to Christ's Resurrection,
the revealing of his Doctrine and completing the Canon of Sacred Scripture, the
carrying of his Gospel to the Gentiles, modelling a new Church State, etc.
which prime and extraordinary purposes determined with the Apostolic Age.
However, this notwithstanding, it is acknowledged by all, that the Apostolical
Commission founded a standing Ministry, for purposes of a more ordinary and
durable nature, to continue through all Ages: which is sufficiently evident
from that single Consideration, the Promise annexed to the Commission, Lo! I am
with you always to the end of the World.

"Hence (as one observes) Ministers now, duly called, are upon the same Divine
Foundation with the Apostles, and their Ministrations under the same Divine
Warrant and Benediction. The Ministry is not a Superannuated Institution. Since
there are Ends and Grounds of an ordinary nature, which require a standing
Ministry, it argues this must be intended in the Apostolic Commission. These
Grounds and Designs of the Ministry abiding still, therefore so does the
Ordinance that is founded on them".

Now, with equal Reason, it may be said, Neither is the Office of Deacons to be
reckoned an Antiquated Institution, a thing out of Date. For there being
certain Ends and Grounds of this Office, which abide still, therefore so does
the Institution in full force and virtue. Though some of the first Purposes of
it might be occasional and temporary; yet there being others, of a more
ordinary and standing Nature, and universal Concernment, we may from hence
justly infer its lasting Obligation. As long as there is proper Business for
the Deacon, the Office ought to take place, be received and maintained: And as
long as there are Tables to be served, there must and will be Business proper
for this Officer. Now as long as Christ has a visible Church and People in the
World, there will be Tables to be served.

If it was originally one Care of the Deacons to make the necessary Provision
for the Lord's Table, and be Servitours or Waiters at the Holy Supper, to
distribute the consecrated Bread and Wine among the Communicants; This is a
Business that continues still: and the Decency and Propriety of stated Persons
to attend on this Business, are such as afford an Argument for the Continuance
of the Order of Deacons unto that End.

Again, if it was originally the Deacons particular Care to see to the
comfortable Support of the Teaching Officers, that they which preach the Gospel
may live of the Gospel, be provided with what is comely, and have secured to
'em the double Honor, which all confess is their just Wages, that they may
attend on the Lord without Distraction; This also is a standing Care: and the
Expediency of the Church's having stated Persons to regard this as their proper
Concern, still bespeaks the Subsisting of the Office of Deacons.

In fine, If it was originally one Design and Work of the Deacons, in behalf of
the Church, to take Care of the Poor Saints, the Stranger, the Widow and
Fatherless, the Sick and Impotent; This likewise being a Duty of perpetual
obligation on the Church of Christ, and the Convenience, the Importance of
having stated known Persons to attend continually on this very Thing, being so
evident, it necessarily results from hence also, that the Office of Deacons is
of perpetual Continuance by Divine Institution.

Upon this Argument I would a little enlarge, and say for the obviating a
common Objection; I am humbly of Opinion, The Business of a Deacon is no such
circumstantial thing, as to be left precarious, and liable to be superseded by
any Provision, which civil Communities may make for their poor Members. For
such Communities, as Civil, must and will equally respect their Poor, without a
Distinction of any for their Christian Character. Whereas now the Lord Christ
expects of his professing People, that they particularly regard the poor
Saints; Doing good to all Men, but especially to them which are of the
Household of Faith, (Gal. 6.10.) And promises Divine Rewards only unto
Charities given to Disciples in the name of Disciples, Matthew. 10.42. Our
Savior has observed to us, Matthew. 26.11. The Poor ye have ALWAYS with you, to
furnish out Occasions and call you to the Exercise of Charity. And ye remember
the Words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give, than to
receive, (Act. 20.35.) especially to give to the poor Saints. This our Lord
mentions as the grand Test in the great Day, Matthew. 25.40. Inasmuch as ye have
done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me --.
And this Charity is the Duty of every Church of Christ; collectively
considered, as well as separately in particular persons. The Apostle commends
the Churches of Macedonia for the Riches of their Liberality; who to their
Power (he bears Record) yea, and beyond their Power, were willing to
communicate, 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3. -- And to the Church at Corinth he writes (1
Epist. 16.1.) Now concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have given
Order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye. -- But perhaps it may be
objected, This Text relates to an extraordinary Case in those Times of
Persecution. I will then produce another Scripture, wherein we have a Rule,
evidently (it may be, as any of the inspired Apostolic Canons) of standing
Obligation; it is that in 1 Timothy 5.16. If any Man or Woman, that believes, have
Widows (i. e. near Relations poor and necessitous) let them (if they be able)
relieve them: and let not the CHURCH be charged, (put to unnecessary Expense in
that Regard) That it may relieve them that are Widows INDEED, i. e. as in ver.
5. Widows that are Desolate, truly destitute, not only poor and unable to
provide for themselves, but without Friends or Relatives able to help them.

Now as it is thus a Duty incumbent on Church-Societies (as such) to relieve the
Poor, so it is highly expedient for the better performing of this Ecclesiastical
Duty, that they do not leave the Affair at a loose Rate, but manage it in some
way of Method and Order; and therefore that (pursuant to the primitive Pattern)
they look out from among themselves some particular Persons, Men of suitable
Qualifications, whom we may appoint over this Business of serving Tables; who
shall make it their Work to search out the poor Saints, and if need be report
to the Church the Occcasions for Charity, and stir them up to their Duty; shall
receive the Church's Alms, and faithfully distribute the same, as may best
answer the Ends of Christian Charity. So then it is a true Saying, If a Man
desire the Office of a Deacon, he desires a good Work; good and profitable unto
Men, and not of little Importance to the Churches of the Saints.

And thus I have shown that the fundamental Reasons of the Institution of
Deacons being such as have an Aspect upon all Ages, and remain even unto this
Day, by just Consequence the Office ought still to be acknowledged and
supported.

But, before I proceed to my next Argument, it may gratify some to take Notice
of another Objection against the Necessity of a distinct Order of Deacons, for
Works of Charity, Viz. That however the Apostles, being in itinerant
Circumstances, might need such Helps, in ministering to the Saints; yet now the
Ministers of the Word are in a quiet, settled State, they can do the Work as
well themselves, without such Assistants --. To which it is sufficient to
reply, That these Helps were designed not for the Relief of the Apostles only,
but of all Teachers of the Word, though fixed in particular Charges: and
therefore are spoken of as found in Churches, that had fixed Pastors, and
Gospel Order fully established in them. Besides, had the Apostles looked on it
their proper Province to take Care of the Poor (otherwise than as in Common
with all Christian Professors, by way of Charity) what need was there when they
wanted Helps, in serving of Tables, to take these from among the Laity or
Populace; since there was such an abundant Supply of Ministers in that day of
Inspiration! Supposing the Apostles itinerant unsettled Condition might very
much hinder them from personally performing this good Work; yet since there was
a Plenty of other Ministers, in that Day, why should any of the Fraternity be
chosen to this Work, and have one (supposed) Branch of the Apostolic Office
formally seated in them; and not rather some in the Ministry be appointed to
attend and assist the Apostles! -- So that the Objection seems to hold equally
against the first Institution, as the Propagation and Continuance of the Office
of a Deacon, considered in Distinction from the Ministry of the Word.

But I will offer two Hints further here, Viz. That all Ministers of the Word
seem to have the same general Objection, as the Apostles, lying against their
concerning themselves with the Deacons Business, at least so far as it may be
any Burden or Impediment to them: and may justly say, as in Acts 6. It is not
Reason that we should leave the Word of God, and serve Tables --. And then,
although there be not exactly the same Service, and an equal degree of Care and
Labor for Deacons to attend in these Days, as when they were first instituted;
yet this will not justify the throwing Contempt on a Divine Appointment, as if
it were therefore altogether needless. Let it be considered (what the Apostle
observes, 2 Cor. 12.) The Body is not one Member, but many. And the Eye cannot
say unto the Hand, I have no need of thee; nor again even the Head to the Feet,
I have no need of you. Nay, those Members of the Body, which seem to be more
feeble, are necessary. Now ye are the Body of Christ, and Members in
particular. And God has set some in the Church, HELPS; and not Teachers only.

But I proceed to observe --,

3. The Qualifications required of a Deacon, are in their Nature ordinary or
common; and imply nothing peculiar to the Apostolic Age, that should argue the
Office to be temporary.

I confess, if the Deacons Qualifications had been altogether extraordinary,
and such as were confined to the Times of Inspiration, it would have afforded a
probable Argument, that the Office was not intended for any longer Continuance:
And (as hinted before) the Ceasing of those Supernatural Gifts and Powers might
be justly looked on as in Effect a Repeal of the Institution. But the Case is
manifestly far otherwise.

For, as the Nature of the Office does not tell us there was any Occasion for
extraordinary inspired Gifts, to qualify Men for it; so neither do I apprehend,
the Qualifications laid down by the Apostle in our Context, are any more than
common Seize; whether the Character he gives of approved Deacons, be
considered in its intellectual or moral view. The Furniture here required to
make Persons meet Recipients of this Office, consists of these Particulars;
namely, Gravity, Sincerity, Temperance, Generosity and Openness of heart,
Soundness in the Faith, and a pure Conscience* and if in the married State,
being agreeably Matched, exercising conjugal Fidelity, good Parental
Government, and a Care of Family-Order; and in the general, a blameless Life.
Now these are the Fruit of the Spirit in his common and ordinary Influences,
and imply nothing of extraordinary and special Inspiration.

Indeed, whereas in the Description of the Men to be chosen into this Office at
its original Institution, besides that it is required they be Men of honest
Report and good Discretion, it is one Requisite mentioned, that they be full of
the Holy Ghost; some are of Opinion, this respects the extraordinary Gifts of
the Spirit.

Now, if this should be conceded to, yet the Want of these miraculous Gifts is
no more a just argument against the Continuance of the Deacons Office, than it
is against a standing Order of Teachers; since these Gifts were in those
primitive Times at least equally requisite to the Office of public Teachers.
Nevertheless in the Case of Teachers, this Defect is not allowed to pass for a
sufficient Objection against the Continuance of their Office: and therefore it
is notorious Partiality to plead it against the Continuance of the Order of
Deacons.

But then I see no Necessity of such a Concession; because this being full of
the Holy Ghost may with equal Reason be understood of the Graces of the Spirit,
and particularly those of Christian Courage, Faith, Hope and Joy: since the
Phrase is elsewhere used in this common Sense. It Is said of Barnabas, while yet
he seems not to have possessed the inspired Gifts of an Apostle, Act. 11.24. He
was a good Man, and full of the Holy Ghost, and of Faith. GOD had not given him
the Spirit of Fear, but of Power, and of Love, and of a sound Mind. He had a
holy Courage, the Result of a lively Faith and Hope toward God, and boldly
professed the Gospel of Christ. So it is said of Peter, Act. 4.8. Then Peter,
filled with the Holy Ghost, said, Ye Rulers, etc. (...) follows, Ver. 13. Now
when they saw the Boldness of ^^ter and John, and perceived they were unlearned
and ignorant Men (by Education) they marvelled. We read also in Ver. 31. They
were all filled with the holy Ghost, and they spoke the Word of God with
Boldness. It follows, in Ver. 52. And the Disciples were filled with Joy, and
with the holy Ghost:

These Texts may serve to explain the Qualification required of Deacons, that
they be full of the holy Ghost; i. e. They should be not only such as have
experienced the Renewing of the holy Ghost, but who have the Graces of the
Spirit appearing in them with some distinguishing Luster; Men full of Faith and
Love, and Hope, and holy Zeal, bold in their God to profess the Gospel, to
adhere constantly to the Cause of Christ, to attend and assist his Ministers,
and cheerfully to succor his Poor, in the midst of all Temptations,
Oppositions and Discouragements: Which is a Character remarkably suited to the
Circumstances of primitive Times; but not unagreable to the most settled and
prosperous State of Things in the Church of God.

It is always requisite, that the Officers of the Church, whether Elders or
Deacons, should be Men full of the Holy Ghost, in his ordinary Gifts, Graces
and Comforts.

Thus it appears, that the prescribed Qualifications for the Deacons Office
imply nothing in their Nature extraordinary, or peculiar to the Apostolic Age.
And this is one just Ground of Presumption, that it was intended for a longer
Duration, and to be perpetuated among Christians.

But I come now to the concluding Argument, --

4. The Spirit of God has given express Orders and Instructions unto the
Ministers and Churches of Christ, to govern them in the Election and
Appointment of this particular Church Officer; which are of indispensable
universal Obligation: And consequently the Institution must be designed for a
perpetual Subsistence.

There are certain Rules given by a Divinely inspired Apostle, long after the
primitive Institution, and that without any particular Reference to Jerusalem,
or Limitation to the first Ages of the Gospel, relating to the Choice and
Constitution of Deacons: Which Rules are on Scripture-Record, and to be
entertained as Apostolic Canons, indisputably authentic, of universal
Concernment, and of lasting Force and Obligation; as much as any other Precepts
or Institutes in the sacred Context.

These Epistles of Paul to his Son Timothy, he wrote as an Apostle of Jesus
Christ, by the Commandment of God our Savior, with a special View to the
instructing him how he ought to behave himself in the Church of God;
particularly in the Affairs of Divine Worship, Preaching, Discipline and
Ordination. The Counsels and Charges given to Timothy, under these several
Heads, were never yet by any Expositors (that I know of) looked upon as merely
Personal, or terminating in him alone: but have always been considered and made
use of, as having a general Aspect, and applicable by parity of Reason, to
others sustaining the Ministerial Character, in every succeeding Age. They
truly exhibit to us a noble Plan of Gospel Order, and (...) most fully
instructive as to Church Officers. Particularly in this third Chapter of his
first Epistle, the inspired Doctor of the Gentiles gives us distinctly the
Qualifications, first of Bishops, and then of Deacons. Now his Directions under
the former Head have ever been received, as of standing Use and immutable
Obligation: And why the Directions in the latter Case should not be allowed the
same Consideration, I cannot see any Shadow of Argument.

Surely that Word, Let them use the Office of a Deacon, being first proved, is
a sacred Injunction, that respects all future Ages; and so is a loud Testimony
to the perpetual Continuance of the Institution: For it implies a Command that
some shall use this Office, and be separated to it. This shows that the
Apostles (and they could not be mistaken) were beyond all Controversy of
Opinion, that the Deacons Office was to continue in the Church. Why else should
they not only ordain some unto it themselves; but leave a standing Rule for the
ordaining of others still? This shows the Office is not left Discretional.

And when the Apostle, after giving the proper Directions for the choosing and
appointing of Bishops and Deacons, presently adds, These things write I unto
thee, -- that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house
of God; as it looks back to what he had said in the Case of Bishops, so
likewise to what he had spoken in Reference to Deacons. And as he did not
confine his Views to the single Person of Timothy, in his Directions under the
former Head, so neither under the latter: but designed the Rules he gave to be
of permanent Force and Use in both Cases through every successive Age. And that
he had this extensive View appears (as from other Passages in his Epistles, so
in particular) from that in his 2 d Epist. 2 d Chap. The Things which thou have
heard of me, (and the Things he had heard from him relating to Bishops and
Deacons, may well be understood as included here) the same commit thou to
faithful Men, who shall be able to teach others also. And thus, he hoped, the
Purity and Integrity of Gospel-Doctrine, Worship and Order, would be preserved
and propagated, to the Honor of Christ, the Security of Religion, and
Flourishing of the Churches from one Generation to another.

Upon the whole, to sum up what has been argued: Since the Office of a Deacon
is evidently of a Divine Original; Since the primitive Institution remains
uncancel'd, and without any Repeal, direct or indirect; Since the general
Reason of it ever continues, and the proper Business and the Qualifications of
this Order were nothing peculiar to the first Times of the Gospel; And since
there are Apostolic Canons directing to the Choice and Appointment of this
Officer in the Churches of the Gentiles, as well as Jews, which Rules are to be
understood as retaining still their complete Virtue and Efficacy, and not to be
rejected as either originally Superfluous, or now out of Date: -- from these
Reflections, taken in a conjunct View, it must necessarily result, by the
clearest and most rational Deduction, that the Office of Deacons was not a
Thing temporary in its first Intention, and limited to the Days of the
Apostles, but designed for an interminable Continuance, and to be upheld in the
Churches through all following Times, to the End of the World.

Accordingly now let us acknowledge and honor this Office, as under a Divine
Sanction, and carrying the venerable Stamp of an Apostolic Constitution. Let
us take a suitable Notice of the Authority of Christ in the primitive
Appointment: and beware how we reflect on his Wisdom therein, by pleading for
the Abolition or Discontinuance of it. We may observe, when the Apostles first
proposed the Setting up of this Office, it is reported, (Act. 6.5. The saying
pleased the whole Multitude. And shall it not be pleasing also to us, to have
it continued in the Church!

Let us see our blessed LORD herein expressing a gracious Care for the Bodies
(as in other Respects for the Souls) of Men, and a tender Compassion to the
Poor of the Flock, as well as Regard to the Ease and Accommodation of the
Ministers of his Word: and let us not deny Him the Glory due to his Name on
these Accounts. --

Further, such as are called to this Office in the Church at any time, should
take Heed how they throw Contempt on a Divine Institution, in shifting it off
by trifling Excuses, and undervaluing it as an inferior Station.

In fine, Let such as are engaged in this Office among us, consider from whence
they derive their Commission, and to whom they must give an Account of their
Stewardship, even the Lord JESUS CHRIST, their Master that is in Heaven: --
Which Reflections will have an excellent Influence, by the Grace of God, to
direct and animate them in all their pious and charitable Ministrations, Cares
and Attendences.

But thus much for the first Doctrine. I have been carried out, in the
Discussion of this Argument, to a Length abundantly beyond my Prospect or
Intention when I entered on the Subject: and am therefore obliged to reduce
what I have to say on the Heads remaining, to a shorter Compass.

We proceed now to another Observation. --

DOCT. II. Persons are to be first Proved, and then to use this Office of a
Deacon, being found blameless.

This is the express Letter of the Text. Now the Word (...) implies both
Probation and Approbation. Agreably I shall say,

1. There must be a Probation or Trial of Persons Qualifications, previous to
their Admission into this Office.

If Church Members are to be first proved, much more Church Officers. To what
End are their proper Qualifications stated in Scripture, if without any Regard
to them Elections may be made at all Adventures! Certainly the Rules of common
Prudence require, that such a public Trust be not reposed in any, till they be
first proved, whether they have competent Abilities for the Discharge of it,
and possess that good Character, which may speak them worthy of the Confidence
that must be put in such as are admitted this Office. To appoint Men over this
Business, without examining whether they have the requisite Fitness for it,
would be sinful Rashness: Which the Holy Ghost enters that solemn Caution
against, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no Man; whether for the Office of a
Bishop, or a Deacon. The Apostle had been treating of both: and I doubt not,
refers to both in this Caution against laying on hands suddenly.

I shall here offer only this one Remark further; That the Trial intended by
the Apostle seems to be antecedent to Men's using the Office, and means a
serious impartial comparing their Abilities, Tempers and Deportments, with the
Characters of one meet for such an Office, which he had before laid down. For
it is plain, in the 6th Chap. of the Acts, they were directed to examine and
look into the Qualifications and Fitness of the Persons to be chosen for
Deacons, before they made Choice of them Sermon at an Ordination of a Deacon,
etc. page 12. By N. C. -- London.
. Which necessarily infers, --

2. There must be an Approbation of them, as Persons fit and suitable for such a
Trust.

The Apostle here requires, that upon Examination they be found blameless,
before they be admitted to use the Office. Agreably in the Acts, it is
prescribed, that they be Men of honest Report: Having given Proof of their
Capacity and Fidelity in other places of special Trust, or in the Commerce and
Business of common Life; and without any just Exception lying against them,
either as to Soundness in the Faith, Purity of Manners, or Powers of
Understanding and Judgment.

Now this Approbation is to be considered primarily as the Act of the Church;
unto whom belongs the Election, or Nomination of the Persons. 1 Cor. 16.3.
Whomsoever you shall approve, them I will send to bring your Liberality. Even
at their first Institution the Holy Ghost did not immediately interpose in the
Designation of the Persons: but the inspired Apostles referred it to the
Brethren (who are, without Dispute, competent Judges, in the Case of Deacons;
whatever they be in that of Elders) to make the Election, according to their
best Judgment; only reserving to themselves the Power of Ordination, Act. 6.3.

A late Episcopal Author An Original Draught of the Primitive Church, in Answer
to an Enquiry into the Constitution, etc. 3 d. Edit. page 159, 160.
makes the following Concessions, --

As to the Case of the seven Deacons (says he) they were left to the Inquiry,
Choice, and Nomination of the Brethren, there is no Doubt of it. -- It Is plain,
the Apostles referring the Nomination of them to the Brethren was upon that
single Score of finding out Persons They would entrust with the Contributions
of the Church, for the Daily Ministrations, and for the serving of Tables: For
that was the only thing in open Agitation, and the holy Apostles assigned that
special Part to them: Look you out Men etc. whom we may appoint over this
Business.

So that these Deacons (he adds) so far as it was needful they should be
faithful and trusty Stewards of the Contributions and Treasure of the Church,
were ordered to be chosen and recommended by the Members of it, whose Stock and
Treasure they were to be entrusted withal; and for the like Reason (no doubt of
it) that another Apostle gives us upon the like Occasion, namely, To avoid
this, that no Man should blame us (says S. Paul) in this Abundance which is
administered by us: For such sort of Censures might the Apostles have been
liable to, had they assumed the Nomination of the persons to themselves; but by
the Course they took, they provided for honest things, not only in the sight of
the Lord, but also in the sight of Men, 2 Cor. 8.20, 21.

I will add then I think we have here a plain Precedent for the People's Right
of Suffrages in Ecclesiastical Affairs; and such as goes far toward
establishing a standing Right and Authority in all Christian Congregations, to
choose their own Officers for themselves, and besure the Deacons at least. A
stated Right in the People of Election, Nomination, or Approbation (call it
which you please) in the present Case, not only seems evidently founded in
Reason, but also has the Warrant of Scripture-Example. It Is of original
Institution from the holy Apostles: and therefore it is no Usurpation in the
Churches, which exercise it: but they have a Divine Charter to justify their
Claim of so apparent a fundamental Right of Church-Societies.

Yet, inasmuch as it lies with the Pastors to ordain, This of Consequence
necessarily draws with it a Power in them of judging and consenting. So that
the Elders have a secondary Right in this Affair: and the just Order of
proceeding demands, that the Church's Election of Persons to any Office be
confirmed by the Approbation of the Eldership, if any there is in Being among
them!

It may be added,

3. This Approbation is to be followed with a public Separation of the Persons
unto their Office; which indeed is a practical Approbation.

The Apostle says, Let these be first proved; THEN let them use the Office of a
Deacon: Yet this doubtless not without a solemn Introduction or Investiture;
for that must needs be implied: which truly is but agreeable to the excellent
Nature and Importance of this Ecclesiastical Trust; and requisite to give
Persons the current Repute of Officers in the Church, to preserve the proper
Distinction between the Officers and the other Members of the sacred Community,
and to engage them by a mutual Covenant to be faithful in performing the
respective Duties they owe to one another.

Persons cannot in civil Societies sustain any public Character without a
proper Investiture. A Man cannot be a Justice of Peace without having a
Commission from the civil Authority, and being sworn: nor act as a Constable,
or in almost any other inferior Office, but he must take the proper Oaths. And
there is no body but owns these to be very wise Constitutions. Now if they are
so in the State, methinks they cannot be otherwise in the Church.

The Reason of the Thing strongly infers an Obligation, that where the sacred
Depositum of an Ecclesiastical Stock for Uses of Piety and Charity (be it more
or less) which cannot be embezzl'd or alienated without the Guilt of horrible
Sacrilege, is committed to any, the Party so entrusted should come under a
solemn Oath of Fidelity; the administering of which (though without the special
Formalities used in civil Cases) is, according to the View I have of the Thing,
one grand Design of Ordination.

Moreover* Apostolical Example, which with all impartial Inquirers must needs
have the Force of a Precept in the Case of Deacons, as much as in that of
Elders, very plainly directs to this point of Order in the Admission of any to
the Office of a Deacon; that there be a solemn Investiture, or public
Separation of them hereunto: and points out the proper Methods in doing it,
Prayer and Laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Thus at the primitive
Institution, Acts 6.6. Whom they set before the Apostles: and when they had
prayed, they laid their hands on them. Here Is as clear and unexceptionable a
Precedent for the Ordination of Deacons, to the Office of serving Tables, as is
any where to be found throughout the whole Story of the Acts for the ordaining
of Elders or Bishops, unto the Ministry of the Word. Sure I am, the Mind and
Will of Christ may be learnt from Apostolical Example, as well in one Case, as
in the other; That these Ecclesiastics should be initiated into their
respective Offices in solemn Form, by public Prayer, with Imposition of the
Hands of the Presbytery Many moderate Episcopal Men will allow Presbyters to
ordain Deacons, that will not allow them to ordain Presbyters. -- Baxter's
Christian Concord def. p. 9.
. And the neglect of this, if it be not a Deficiency in point of Order, if it
be not an unjustifiable Omission, against the Reason of Things, and against the
Authority of Scripture-Pattern, in the Case of Deacons, when any are solemnly
chosen to this Office; I know not at present upon what defensible Grounds the
same Omission can be censured in the Case of Elders. Indeed one Officer is of
greater Importance than the other: and so are some Ordinances than others.
However, the revealed Will of Christ is to be regarded in every Instance, though
of the minutest Consideration. We must observe all things, whatsoever he has
commanded us, and beware of breaking one of these least Commandments. A
conscientious Niceness in Matters of Divine Institution is truly laudable: and
it reflects an eminent Beauty and Glory on the Churches, when the Rules of
Gospel Order are exactly and uniformly observed in them. 1 Cor. 11.2. Now I
praise you, Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
ordinances, as I delivered them to you. Col. 2.5. For though I be absent in the
flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your order, and
the stedfastness of your faith in Christ.

For a Conclusion of this Head, let me recite to you the Words of a late
learned Presbyterian Writer, who makes the following ingenuous Confession. --
Here (says he) it may be objected, against the Deacons among the Presbyterians,
that they are not ordained: And I grant, what is objected is true; but freely
acknowledge that it OUGHT TO BE OTHERWISE, and that they ought to be ordained
by the Laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, as were the first Seven: For
GOD'S written Word is the only Rule of Christians; from which, in one Jot, they
ought not to swerve, but ought earnestly to study and follow it Jameson's Sum
of Episcop. Controv. p. 86.
.

But we must hasten to the last Observation.

DOCT. III. This Consideration, that such as have used the Office of a Deacon
well, do purchase to themselves a good Degree, etc. -- is what affords
Encouragement both to an Engaging in this Office, and the Ordaining of meet
Persons unto it.

This is agreeable to the Tenor and Design of our Text. The Apostle having
given that Direction, Let these also first be proved; then let them use the
Office of a Deacon: presently subjoyns, by way of Argument to enforce the
preceding Direction, FOR they that have used the Office of a Deacon well,
purchase to themselves a good Degree, etc.

Here,

1. I thought distinctly to have considered the DUTY of Persons in the Deacon's
Office; and to have shown what is implied in using the same well.

But the Time will permit me only a few Hints.

In general, if they would use their Office well, they must in all their
Administrations constantly make the Word of Christ their governing Rule, and
his Glory their prevailing Design; whatsoever they do, doing all in the Name of
Christ, whose Stewards they are, to receive, keep, and dispose of his Goods.

They must act in their Office with Sincerity: as the Servants of Christ, doing
the Will of God from the Heart; having their Souls engaged in doing Service, as
to the Lord, and not to Men. That Is usually applied to Deacons, Romans 12.8. He
that gives, let him do it with Simplicity.

They must act in their Office with Integrity and Fidelity: exercising all the
Powers of their Office, and attending to all the parts of Duty incumbent upon
them, with Constancy, Care and Zeal; and applying the public Moneys, to those
Evangelical Ends, for which they were given, without Fraud, or needless Delay.
They should be like those, of whom we are told, Neh. 13.13. They were counted
faithful, and their Office was to distribute unto their Brethren. Agreably the
Apostle observes, 1 Cor. 4.2. It is required in Stewards, that a Man be found
faithful.

In order to Faithfulness, it should seem, Diligence is requisite: and this the
Apostle commends in one, whom the Church employed in ministering to the Saints,
2 Cor. 8 22. Our Brother, whom we have oftentimes proved diligent in many
things, but now much more diligent; -- Suppose, in collecting Charities, and
distributing of them.

Moreover, They must act in their Office with Prudence. All public Offices are
more or less attended with Difficulty, and peculiarly expose to Censure. They,
whose Business it is to serve Tables, had Need be Wise as well as faithful
Stewards, if they would use their Office well; Avoiding this that no Man blame
them. Agreably 'twas one of the fundamental Requisites in the Character of the
primitive Deacons, Act. 6.3. Full of Wisdom. They must be wise, to shun all
appearances of Evil, and provide Things Honest in the fight of all Men. They
must be wise, to espy and improve all Advantages for promoting the good Ends of
their pious and charitable Function. They must labor to be understanding in
the Times, knowing of Men and Things; and prudently endeavor, by personal
Applications, to put others upon doing their Duty, in giving proportionably to
uses of Piety and Charity. They must wisely conduct themselves in regard of the
Ministers of the Word, whose Tables are one proper part of their pious Care;
that the Labourer, who is worthy of his Hire, be not defrauded and discouraged.
They must also consider the Poor; watching for suitable Occasions of Charity,
making the reasonable and necessary Distinctions between one Case and another,
timing well and adjusting their Distributions to the Necessities of the Saints,
and laboring to manage all their Affairs with due Thought and Discretion.

Further, if they would use their Office well, they must do nothing by
Partiality: but serve the Tables committed to their Care in the most equal
manner, without a carnal and unjust preferring one before another. An
Apprehension of this criminal Partiality in the daily Ministration, while under
the Apostles Management, was the Reason of the Grecians murmuring against the
Hebrews: and this Emergence was the immediate Occasion of setting up the Office
of Deacons; as the best Method to suppress the present Jealousies, and provide
for an equal and satisfactory Ministration for the future.

Again, They must act in their Office with a willing and generous Mind. Romans
12.8. He that shows Mercy, let him do it with cheerfulness. They must put on
Bowels of Mercy; be pitiful, be courteous, open-hearted; and give, not
grudgingly, but with a tender Sympathy of Spirit and Liberality of Hand. They
must deal out the Alms of the Church, as a matter of Bounty, and not of
Covetousness --. Besure they must take heed they be not governed by Selfish
Respects, nor use their Office for a Cloak of Covetousness. As they must not be
Prodigals, given to much Wine, and wasting their Lord's Goods in riotous
Living: So neither Misers, given to filthy Lucre, and having Hearts exercised
with covetous Practices. It was the Sin of Judas, who had the Bag, and bare
what was put therein, that while he pretended to care for the Poor, he was a
Thief, and his Heart went after his Covetousness. It Is eminently a Scandal in
Deacons, and loudly contradicts the Ends of their Office, to show a narrow
niggardly, self-seeking Disposition. They should above all things put on
Charity; that Charity, which is kind, which envieth not, which seeks not her
own: but is the Principle of a noble Self-denial, Bountifulness, and Largeness
of Heart. However still their Liberality must be guided by Prudence, and
guarded by wise and just Limitations. Frugality and Generosity should appear
with a happy mixture in all their Managements.

It may be added,

They should endeavor to conduct all their charitable Administrations after a
godly sort; and will do well to accompany their Visits and Reliefs to the
Bodies of Men, with some pious Advices for the good of their Souls; the common
Duty of Christian Brethren; according to that of the Apostle, (1 Thessalonians. 5.14.)
Warn the unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak. And they will do
well sometimes, as there may be Occasion, also to help together by Prayer. Thus
they will show themselves full of all Goodness, and signalize their Character
as HELPS to the Ministry. And thus the Poor will experience a double Charity.

Yet it must be subjoyned here;

They that would use the Office of a Deacon well, must keep within the proper
Limits of their Station, and not stretch themselves beyond their Line, to
invade the peculiar Province of Bishops or Pastors of the Church. The serving
of Tables, the outward Business of the House of GOD, was the business over
which the primitive Deacons were appointed, by inspired Apostles, who thought
it not Reason that Ministers should leave the Word, to serve Tables: Herein
manifestly putting a Distinction between these two, as Offices widely
different, and incompatible to one and the same Person, as to the stated
Exexcise of them. Some indeed think, the Seven were Preachers of the Gospel:
But that is very improbable, from the whole Tenor of the sacred Story, and from
this particular Consideration, That they must leave the Word, if they undertook
to serve Tables: which was a thing they could not in Reason do; as being under
the same Obligations with the Apostles, to give themselves continually to the
Word and Prayer --. As to what we read afterward concerning Two of the Seven,
neither can any Argument be collected from thence to support the Pretenses of
baptizing and preaching Deacons. "Stephen only disputes in the Schools; and
pleads, when accused, at the Bar". His Apology appears merely occasional, and
becoming any Christian Confessor. As for Philip indeed we find him preaching
and baptizing: yet not as a Deacon, but as an Evangelist. This Title is
expressly given him, Acts 21.8. Now the Work of an Evangelist was not to serve
Tables, but to preach the Word: and whereas the Deacon was a fixed Resident,
the Evangelist was an unsettled Itinerant. Hence we have just Grounds to
conclude that when Philip was called to be a Preacher, he put off the Deacon,
as inconsistent. Besure, attending on the daily Ministration at Jerusalem could
not very well consist with his going abroad to preach the Gospel. The occasion
of Philip's going forth to this Work, and quitting his Station at Jerusalem,
seems to be the great Persecution, that arose upon Stephen's Death; whereby the
Church there was broken up and scattered abroad. THEN Philip went down to
Samaria, and preached Christ unto them, Act. 8.5. And from thenceforth he gave
himself to the Work of an Evangelist; being either ordained to it by the
Apostles, or immediately called by the Holy Ghost --. There Is nothing then of
an Example in Philip or Stephen, to countenance Deacons in public Preaching or
Baptizing, by virtue of their Diaconal Ordination. But in doing either, they
must certainly transgress the just Bounds of their Office; the original Design
of which evidently was to serve Tables, in Contradistinction to the Ministry of
the Word.

I shall only add,

Those in the Deacons Office, that would use it well, must study to adorn their
Character, by a shining Example of good Works, and of a sober, discreet, and
useful Conversation. Likewise the Deacons must be grave, etc. As
Church Officers, they are in a distinguished Post: and should make it their
Care to set a laudable Pattern of Temperance, Solidity, Probity, Purity,
Charity and Devotion; that others seeing their good Works, may glorify GOD, by
admiring the Grace of Christ bestowed upon them, and by imitating their bright
Example.

Thus I Have shown how they must behave, if they would use their Office well. And
let it now be briefly suggested.

2. If they thus use their Office well, they purchase to themselves a good
Degree and great Boldness in the Faith which is in Christ Jesus. Upon this I
find a Variety of Glosses made by Expositors.

By a good Degree, there are that understand a Seat of some Eminence in the
public Assembly. But this seems too low a Sense.

Others say, it means, they acquire to themselves a good Degree above the
Vulgar; a good standing in the Church, whereby they may boldly administer their
Office, and bear some Authority and Influence.

Others again interpret it; They are in a hopeful way toward Preferment, and
acquire to themselves a just Title thereto. Philip is an Instance of this
Advancement. Some think, anciently the Pastors were often elected from among
the Deacons: That they were a kind of Seminary or Nursery, out of which the
Church was for the most part furnished with meet Persons for the Ministry of
the Word; that they having in their lower Station given sufficient Evidence of
their Orthodoxy, Piety and Prudence, and gained some Experience in
Christianity, were reckoned the proper Candidates for promotion to the Pastoral
Care.

In fine, By purchasing to themselves a good Degree may be intended their
acquiring a valuable Reputation, Esteem and Honor among the People of GOD;
which gives them singular Advantages to be useful, and serves to embolden them
in asserting and promoting the Cause of Christ. Stephen (one of the first
Deacons) was the very first Martyr, and brought great Glory to Christ and the
Gospel by his Boldness in the Faith. So he purchased to himself a good Degree,
and his Memory is Blessed. It may be added, Such obtain Honor from GOD in a
better World, distinguishing Rewards in the Church Triumphant.

But it remains to say, --

3. These Considerations are just Incentives unto the Churches and Ministers of
Christ, to elect and separate meet Persons to the Deacons Office, and unto such
to engage in it, and be careful to use it well.

The Apostle might have all these Views, in our Text.

He designed to press on Timothy (and in him on all succeeding Ministers) a
Care to promote the Settlement of this Officer in the Churches every where, and
to see to it that only Persons of an approved Character were admitted thereto.
Let these be first proved; then let them use the Office of a Deacon, being
found blameless: -- FOR they that use the Office of a Deacon well, do purchase
to themselves a good Degree.

He might herein also intend to lay matter of Encouragement before the
Churches, to proceed to the Choice of such Officers among them, where they were
wanting, and to continue and honor the Office where it was already set up.

In a word, He might have this further View (seeing it is the natural Tendency
of what he has said) to offer a Motive unto such as should be chosen, to accept
of a Call to this Office; neither afraid of it as above them, nor shy of it as
beneath them: and to continue therein with all Fidelity, and Care to use their
Office well; without which they would purchase to themselves Shame and
Reproach, rather than a good Degree. These, I think, lie plainly in the Text as
collateral or consequential Truths, natively falling in with the Scope of the
Apostle, without any Stretch upon the Words.

But I have no Room for any Enlargement on these Things, and therefore shall
now draw to a Close, with something by way of APPLICATION.

And here, --

USE 1. I shall address my self, in a serious Exhortation, to such as sustain
the Deacons Office among us.

Let it be your solicitous Care to use your Office well, acting therein with
Sincerity, Faithfulness, Diligence, Constancy; and laboring to conduct all
your Affairs with Prudence, according to the Wisdom that God gives you. In so
doing, you will purchase to your selves a good Degree; if not Preferment to a
superior Station in the Church of Christ, yet a valuable Reputation and
Respect; Esteem among Men, and Honor from God.

There Is a particular Dignity in your Office: and your wise Deportment therein
will reflect a Luster on your selves. The blessed Angels delight in this
honorable Employ, to minister unto the Saints that are in the Earth: Which
serves to magnify your Office. -- Let it be your Ambition to imitate those
generous and noble Spirits, in being zealous of good Works, ready to do all
kind and christian Offices that lie in your Power, as there may be Occasion:
being Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame, and Fathers to the Poor; causing
the Widows Heart to sing for Joy: so the Blessing of them that are ready to
perish, will come upon you. This Angelick Temper of Soul, displaying it self in
your charitable Ministration, will spread a Glory upon your Character, and make
you shine in the Eyes of God, Angels, and Men. The Ear that hears of you, will
bless you: and every Eye, when it sees you, will give Witness to you, and be
ready to think of holy Stephen; concerning whom it is said, They looking
steadfastly on him, saw his Face as it had been the face of an Angel.

Let it be a further encouraging Reflection, that the Office you are engaged
in, is what Christ has set in his Church: -- not a mere human Prudential, the
Creature of Ecclesiastical Policy, but the Result of Divine Wisdom, an
Institution of Infinite Sovereignty, In using this Office well, you will serve
the Lord Christ. He has put you into it, and you may hope for his Presence with
you in the Discharge of it; whose Grace is sufficient for you. Let a sense of
this fortify you against all Discouragements. Faithful is he that has called
you, who also will do it.

And let the Prospect of that Account you must one day give up to Him, whose
Stewards you are, make a powerful Impression on your Hearts, and have a suitable
Influence into the universal Conduct of your Lives. Remember you are
responsible to your Lord: and the Time is hastening on, when He will call you to
a Reckoning; will summon you before him, and require an Account of your
Stewardship. Let this be a stimulating Motive with you continually unto a Care
of all good Fidelity; that when your transitory Service on Earth is ended, you
may with holy Stephen fall asleep in Jesus, and in the last Day hear that
joyful approving Sentence pronounced upon you, WELL DONE, good and faithful
Servant; Thou have been faithful over a few Things: I will make thee Ruler over
many. Behold, he comes quickly, and his Reward is with Him. Be you faithful
unto the Death, that when He shall appear, you may have Confidence, and not be
ashamed before him at his coming. Look to it you use your Office well; that you
may have Boldness in the Day of Judgment. And you will then be found to have
purchased to your selves a good Degree indeed. For that glorious Lord, who is
very bountiful to those which serve him, will then assign you a dignified
Station and a distinguishing Recompense. Then all your own personal Alms,
whereby you have often refreshed the Bowels of the Saints, and all your official
Charities, which you have in a sort made your own by a compassionate and
cheerful Dispensation, shall be openly applauded and rewarded. It will appear
then, how you have made to yourselves friends of the Mammon of this World, and
laid up in Store a good Foundation against the time to come.

These Considerations should excite such as are called unto the Office of a
Deacon, to engage in it with a ready Mind: and you that are in it to act
therein with a holy Pleasure and Satisfaction, to be steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the Work of the Lord; as knowing that GOD is not
unrighteous, to forget your Work of Faith, and Labor of Love, showed to his
Name, in ministering to the Saints. But now,

USE 2. I address my self to this Church and Congregation in a few Words.

And we beseech you, Brethren, Know them which labor among you in this pious
and charitable Office of serving Tables. 1 Cor. 16.15 -- Ye know the House of
Stephanas, that they have addicted themselves to the Ministry of the Saints; I
beseech you, Brethren, that ye submit your selves unto such; -- Acknowledge ye
them that are such. You owe Honor to the Institution of Christ, by virtue of
which they hold Office in the Church: and to them, Respect and Love for their
Work-sake. It Is a worthy Ministration they attend upon. They are useful
Servants of their Generation, while they discharge their Office well; and
deserve a particular Esteem among the People of GOD.

Will you remember them in your Addresses to the Throne of Grace! They are at
their Ordination recommended to GOD by solemn Prayer: and methinks they should
not afterward be forgotten in your Intercessions. Sure I am, they desire your
affectionate Remembrance of them.

And let me also commend it to you, that a just Care be taken at all times, to
enable them to answer the Ends of their Office, by filling their Hands for a
Distribution to charitable and pious Uses.

This Officer stands in the House of GOD a constant Monitor to the Assembly, of
their Duty to honor the Lord with their Substance. And the Church, that elect
him, do hereby practically contract with him, that they will own him in the
Execution of his Office, find him suitable Employment in his Station, and supply
him (as they are able) for a liberal Distribution to the Necessities of Saints.
I cannot but look on it a gross Incongruity (not to say, a trifling Formality
and Mockery of a Divine Institution) to put Men, by a solemn Church-Vote in the
Name of God, under the Character of Deacons, and yet not appoint them over
their proper Business, nor take the necessary Methods to furnish them for an
using their Office well. -- Whether a Church-Stock be of essential Consequence
in the affair of a Deacon's Call, and "of the vital Constitution of his
Function", as some think, I shall not now stand to dispute. However I freely
show my Opinion, that it is the incumbent Duty of every Church-Society to
endeavor, by one wise Method and another, the raising and preserving among
them something of a FUND, for charitable, pious, and evangelic Designs; the
Relief of the Poor, the Support of the Ministry, and Propagation of
Christianity. Every one zealous of good Works, I think, cannot but highly
approve and wish success to such a Proposal.

And if the Churches did their Duty, concerning the Collection for the Saints,
every one contributing as God has prosper'd them; there would be a Sufficiency
of Work for the Officers, that Christ has instituted to serve Tables. None
methinks could then with any Color of Reason scruple the Propriety of a solemn
Ordination of them. And as for them, how would it encourage their Hearts, to
see the Churches they respectively serve, taking a proper Care, that they may
be thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, for the House of their God, and for
the Offices thereof! How gladly would they receive the Gift, and take upon them
the Fellowship of the ministering unto the Saints! When they see you with a
perfect heart offering willingly to the Lord, as a matter of Bounty, and not of
Covetousness, their Souls will bless you: Yea, and the Lord your God will bless
you; He will smell in the solemn Assembly the sweet Odor of your Offerings,
and will cause his Blessing to rest in your Houses.

Put on therefore, as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, Bowels of Mercies,
Kindness, -- and Charity, which is the bond of Perfection. Let brotherly Love
continue and abound more and more. Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers.
Remember them which are in Bonds, as bound with them, and those that suffer
Adversity, as being your selves also in the Body. Remember likewise them which
have the Rule over you (so the Apostle exhorts) and let him that is taught in
the Word, communicate to him that teaches, in all good things. Be not
deceived: God is not mocked --. Let your Conversation be without Covetousness;
for we have here no continuing City: and as you would evidence your truly
seeking one to come, -- to do Good, and to communicate (unto all the mentioned
purposes) forget not. For with such Sacrifices God is well pleased: and what
you lend to the Lord, He will repay with glorious Increase; very probable in
this World, but most certainly and most perfectly in the next.

I conclude now with two remarkable Texts: one in the Old Testament, the other
in the New. Mal. 3.10. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there
may be meat in mine House, and prove me now herewith, says the LORD of hosts,
if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that
there shall not be room enough to receive it. And 2 Cor. 9.8 -- 12. God is able
to make all grace abound toward you; that ye always having all sufficiency in
all things, may abound to every good work: (As it is written, He has dispersed
abroad; he has given to the poor: his righteousness remains for ever. Now he
that ministers seed to the sower, both minister bread for your food, and
multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness) Being
enriched in every thing to all bountifulness, which causes through us
thanksgiving to God.

AMEN.
The CHARGE.
AFter the proper Antecedents, a solemn Appeal was made to the Party Elect, in
the following words, --

And now, Dear Brother, You do willingly renew your Acceptance of the Call
given you by this Church; and you do sincerely in the presence of God and of
this Assembly resign your self unto the Lord, for his Work, in the Office of a
Deacon: Promising by the help of Divine Grace to be a faithful Steward in his
House, in all Matters that concern you, relating to the Business of serving
Tables. --

To which an agreeable Answer being returned; the CHARGE was given, with the
Laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery, as follows, --

BELOVED BROTHER,

YOU having now publicly dedicated your self, upon the Call of this Church,
unto the Office of a Deacon, We apprehend you called and separated thereto by
our Lord Jesus Christ, and (...) challenge for you the public Character and
Repute of a Deacon, among the People of God, as one duly appointed over this
Business, according to Gospel Order.

In behalf of the Fraternity, we commit to you the Inspection and Care of those
Tables, which are to be provided for among us: at the same time acknowledging
our Obligations to furnish you with what is necessary to that purpose, and
resolving every Man to dispense, as of the Ability which God gives.

And we do further, as Ministers of Christ, in his Name and by his Authority,
lay a solemn Charge upon you; requiring and exhorting you, before God, Angels,
and Men, that you labor to perform the Vows, which are now upon you, and give
your self with a willing Mind to the Work of the Lord; ever looking to the
Throne of Grace for the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Study to show your self approved unto God, and to commend your self to every
Man's Conscience in the sight of the Lord, by maintaining the Dispositions and
Deportments suited to your christian Character and Office-Relation.

Let a sense of the Distinction put upon you in the Church of Christ, only
serve to promote your Humility, and Self-Abasement. -- And any Difficulties you
may be under the Apprehension of, let them not discourage, but rather inflame
your Zeal, and quicken your Application.

Make it your Solicitude to be a faithful and wise Steward; giving to every one
their respective Portions in due season, without Partiality and without
Hypocrisy. Watch in all things, to discharge the Trust reposed in you: and let
none of the Tables committed to your Care, be neglected. In particular let the
poor Saints be seasonably ministered unto, and in just Proportions. Be pitiful;
be courteous; use Hospitality without grudging. As you shall receive the Gift,
so minister the same, as a good Steward of the manifold Grace of God.

Make Conscience thus duly to attend your Office: and study to adorn it at all
times by your good Conversation in Christ; being exemplarily grave, sober, and
temperate in all things; meek, patient, and self-denying; kind, generous and
charitable; true and honest; pious and devout; holding the Mystery of the Faith
in a pure Conscience, and ruling well your own House. Let no Man despise you:
but be a Pattern of good Works.

We give you Charge before GOD, and the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and the Elect Angels
(who stand by as Witnesses to this solemnity) that you observe these things;
studying in every Regard to use your Office well, and to walk worthy of your
holy Vocation.

And if you thus do, know and believe it, you will purchase to your self a good
Degree: and when Christ, who once came, not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, shall appear the second time, revealed from Heaven, with his mighty
Angels, to be glorified in his Saints; you shall appear with him in Glory, and
receive the unperishable Crown of Life, which our Lord has promised to his
faithful Servants.

That it may be thus, we shall now commend you to the Grace of God, for the
work unto which He has called you. --

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 8. line 32. read, one --.

P. 13. l. 12 r. the confirming of his Gospel by Miracles.

P. 29. l. 28. r. wisely consider --.

P. 33. l. 29. r. Office --.


