Money the Sinews of Trade.

The State of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay Considered, with respect to
its Trade for want of a Medium of Exchange wherewith to manage it.

Recommended to the serious Consideration of the Trading part in general, more
especially to the Merchants and Traders in the Town of Boston.

By a Lover of his Country.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in Queen Street. 1731.

Money the Sinews of Trade.
THE distress and perplexity attending the Trade of the Province in general,
but more especially this Town, in which is carried on so much Business, is now
become the common talk of all People: and if something be not done to supply
the Place with a Medium to pass from man to man in the way of Commerce, in a
little time the Trade will be all a Bartar, or exchanging one Commodity for
another, and it is easy to foresee the vast Inconveniences and Mischiefs such
a Trade will be attended with. Men will live by preying upon one another; like
the Fish in the Sea, the greater will devour the less; the whole Trade will get
into a few Hands in a short time, and the middling sort of People who are the
chief Support of any Place, will soon come (many of 'em) to Poverty, and
instead of Supporting Church and State, will become a burden to both. It will
appear very plain to any who will but look back a few Years, that our Province
Bills issued out by the Government from time to time, have been very servicable
to the Trade, and have kept it alive, and saved many Families from Ruin;
whilst others by their Industry, and by the help of that Medium (how
contemptuously soever they may now talk of it) have arrived to very
considerable Estates, such as never were known in this Country before it was
projected. But now His Excellency the GOVERNOR is forbid to Emit any more
Bills except for the bare Support of the Government from year to year, and that
to be drawn in again in a very short time by a Tax, that it can be little or no
Service to the Trade; and there being no prospect of our having a Silver Medium
to pass among us, and it being impossible for the People to subsist without
some sort of Money, if it were only to purchase the Necessaries of Life from
day to day; surely it is high time for us to contrive something to answer the
Ends of Money: Several ways have been proposed to bring in Silver, but all
Attempts that way have proved fruitless, and through the diversity of Opinions in
men, none of those Schemes have yet been put in practice: All Men seem to be
agreed in the main Point; that something ought to be done speedily, but the way
how, is the grand Question before us.

Well then, if this be the Case, none surely will blame any Man, who endeavors
to save his Country from the Ruin which threatens it; for be his Performance
never so weak, Charity obliges ^s to cast a vail on the Imperfections of
others, and to put the most favorable Constructions on their Actions. I am not
insensible that what I am about to propose, will meet with Opposition from, and
perhaps be Ridiculed by some, who are out of Trade, and so don't feel the want
of Money so much as others: But Merchants and Traders who are daily complaining
of the Difficulties they meet with to carry on their Affairs, are the Men, who
I hope and expect will countenance and encourage this Projection, if they think
the thing practicable; if not, I shall never think the worse of any man for
differing from me in opinion, provided he who disapproves hereof, do but
project something else to answer the End proposed. I confess, I think we do not
act like rational Creatures, to lie down and dye, when the means is in our own
hands to save our selves and our Posterity from Ruin. And therefore I have
adventured to make the following Proposal, and leave it to the Consideration of
my Friends and Neighbors, being firmly persuaded, that all Essays made to
bring in Silver sufficient to answer the Ends of a Medium of Exchange, will
prove ineffectual; and that we shall never have Silver pass again in Payments,
until by going more into Manufactures among our selves, we come to live more
Independent of others; and that must be the Work of succeeding Generations. I
would then propose as follows, Viz.

1. That a Number of Merchants and Traders, enter into Copartnership for the
Issuing out Bills or Notes to circulate in lieu of Money as a Medium of
Exchange, and oblige themselves to give the same Credit to the said Bills or
Notes, as they now do to the Bills Issued out by the Government.

2. In order to gain the said Notes Credit with others, what if the Partners
concerned should oblige themselves not to deal with or buy of any (no more than
was absolutely necessary) who will not accept the said Bills or Notes in
Payment on equal terms with the Province Bills? This will doubtless gain the
Bills a Universal Credit, and make 'em as Current as the Province Bills in a
very short time: For if but One Hundred Men of Trade, and any considerable
Business in this Town, should engage in such a manner, it is impossible for any
Man in the Place to carry on his Affairs without being concerned with some of
those Partners.

3. That the Medium so issued out be improved at Interest and no otherways.
This has been formerly objected against a private Bank, that the Bankers will
monopolize particular Commodities, and so hurt their Neighbors in their Trade;
though I confess I never could see any weight in that Argument: but by this
Article I think that Objection is answered.

4. That no Money or Bills be let out by the Bank but on a sufficient Security.
Now nothing can be safer than a Land Security: The Earth endures for ever: all
other things are more uncertain, more liable to casualties and accidents: And
indeed had we Gold and Silver among us, which we have not, there would be more
danger of their falling in value, than there is of our Lands falling in value:
But had we Gold and Silver, there would not be occasion for a Land Bank, or any
other at present; but it is the want of such a Medium, obliges us to this
Method; and no doubt whoever are the Directors and Managers, will take care the
Lands which are put in for Securities are not over-valued.

5. That for the ease and safety of Trade, and to prevent Counterfeits, People
may keep their Cash at the Bank, and may have Credit in the Books, for what
they leave there, and so may draw Notes on the Bank for whatever is due to
them, payable on demand, to whomsoever they are Indebted. And certainly nothing
can be so short; easy, and safe, as this way of Negotiating Payments by the
Bank; and this makes all the World fond of them: (for 1.) If a man has Stock
in the Bank, he may Sell and Transfer his Stock to his Creditor, and buy again
of others who want to Sell, whenever he is minded to be concerned; for this
will soon become as common as to Buy and Sell any Merchandise. (2.) If a man
receive a Note of hand from his Debtor, payable in two or three Months, if his
present occasions call for the Money, it is but going to the Bank and Indorsing
his Note, and they will let him have the Money, allowing the Discount, and when
it becomes due, they will send the Note to the Drawer and receive it; if he
refuse to pay it, it is carried to the Indorser, and he pays it; what a mighty
advantage and convenience is here. The Drawer has paid his Debt to his
Creditor, the present occasions of him who received the Note is answered; the
Bank gains the Interest of the Money, and is safe, having both the Drawer and
Indorser of the Note for Security, it shortens Credit, makes every body easy,
and who that has such a Note, would not allow the Interest of the Money to
have the improvement thereof; and thus it will be with respect to foreign
Bills; as soon as a man has got his Bill accepted, if he wants the Money, he
will go and leave it Indorst with the Bank, and take his Money, allowing the
Discount, and he may have his Money to answer his present occasions. (3.) It
will be a means to shorten Credit, which is a burden the Trade at present
groans under, and which will ever attend a Truck Trade: Men are kept out of
their Money unreasonably; the pretense in the mouths of every body being, there
is no Money stirring, and by this pretense they weary out their Creditors, and
even oblige them to draw Notes on them to their great disadvantage; and this
puts it in the power, and I wish their Debtors do not too often make use of
such opportunities to opress their Neighbors in their payments; but this
Method of a Bank will take away that pretense, and it will soon appear who
trade with their own, and who with the Estates of others. (4.) By a man's
keeping his Cash at the Bank, he saves the Risque of Fire and Thieves, and yet
it is as ready to answer his occasions, as if it were in his own house; this is
a common Custom in London, if a man be going a Journey into the Country but for
a fortnight, he will carry his Cash to the Bank, and take a Receipt for it,
accounting it safer than in his own House, and a^ ^eady to answer his
occasions. (5.) If a man be bound a Voyage to Sea, and have Money he don't
improve with him, he cannot leave it no where so safe as in the Bank, he may at
his Return receive it at a days warning, or if he send an Order for it from
abroad, at will be always ready on demand; whereas if he leave it in the hands
of private persons, he may meet with many lets and hindrances in his way to
obtain it, either by the death of the person he left it with, or by their
having met with Misfortunes, and being thereby rendered incapable to pay.

6. That what losses may happen by ill people counterfeiting the Bills or
Notes, shall be made good to the sufferers out of the Profits; this will make
the Bank Bills preferred before the Province Bills, for all men seek to improve
their Estates in such ways, which they apprehend least Risque, and the Risque
men run of receiving Counterfeits I am of opinion, has been a means of sinking
the value of our Province Bills: This is a common complaint among even
Merchants, who are most conversant amongst them, that they know not but great
part of them may be Counterfeits, and therefore are desirous to be rid of them
again, as soon as they can conveniently, least there should happen a loss on
them; but if there be any inconveniences attending our Province Bills in this
respect, how great is it with respect to the Bills of other Provinces; our own
Bills are signed by Gentlemen well known to us, and our Neighbors to whom we
can instantly apply our selves, on the least suspicion of any Bill to know
whether they signed it or no; but if we receive Counterfeits of the Bills of
the other Provinces, the Signers live so Remote, that we cannot come at them,
and this makes our own Bills preferred by us before theirs, and were there a
sufficiency of our own to carry on the Trade, I question whether men would
receive the others in payment; but the necessity of the times is such, that men
are glad to catch at any thing that has but the name of Money, if it will but
pass away again, and so answer their present occasions in buying, or to pay
their Debts; but here the Bank obliging themselves to make good the
Counterfeits, the Receivers of the Bills will be easy, because safe on that
head, and this will certainly make the Bank Bills esteemed and valued above the
Province Bills. I believe all men will join with me in this, That if a Bank of
One hunded Thousand Pounds be made in this way, the Province is so much the
richer for it: whereas all Bills issued out by the Government are a Debt due
from 'em, and must terminate sooner or later: and therefore the Province is not
one farthing the richer for them; indeed the Profits arising by such a Bank
will come to the Founders of the Bank, and such others as in time may come to
be concerned therein; yet I say the Province is the Richer, because there is so
much the more Money in it, and the Province not Indebted any thing for it,
neither is any private man hurt who borrows of the Bank, any more than he is by
borrowing Money of any private person, since the Bank Bills answer his
occasions in all respects as much as the other; and as to the Bankers, if any
begrutch 'em the profit, it must proceed from Envy, for no man is hurt by it,
Trade is eased, every man served, and the Province in general, as well as
private men served, and gain by it.

And here I cannot but observe how tho'tless and Indolent we are about our
Trade, on the flourishing whereof our worldly happiness so much depends: How
have our Neighbors at Rhode Island, a small Government, a handful of people,
if compared with us, eat us out of it. It is but a few years since they were
supplied from hence with almost every thing, but we by burthening Trade with
heavy Duties, drove it away to them and other places; they wisely saw it, and
cherisht their Trade, by making every thing easy to the Importer, and continue
so to do, and now supply us with many things they used to buy of us; nay, to
our shame be it spoken, we are supplied by them with great, if not the greatest
part of the Medium of Exchange now passing among us; and they now talk of
Emitting a large Sum more, whilst we sit idle and unconcerned, every man's
tho'ts being taken up, how he shall advance his own private Interest, none
seeking the common good of the Community; were we not both dependant
Governments, Subjects to one and the same Prince, they would soon become the
Head, and we the Tail, and as they find us Money, would give us Laws also.
Surely no man can think but the Method here proposed, will be much safer and
better for us than their Bills, or the Bills of any of the other Governments:
That the Rhode Island Bills should be accepted by us in payment seems strange,
when we know that many of 'em are counterfeits, and that no Bills but our own
will answer for Specialties, or in any public payments; but the necessity of
the Times is such, that for want of a sufficient Medium of our own to buy with,
theirs are become as current as ours, and will buy any thing on equal terms
with our Province Bills; would any people but we, suffer our selves to be thus
used; what can be more dishonorable to us, and how easy is it for us to put a
stop to this Evil; it is but for us to unite among our selves, and refuse to
take their Bills, the business is done at once, and the Bank here proposed may
supply its place. And now I am upon this head, let me mention another Evil we
are falling into, which will in the end prove more pernicious to us than any
thing that has ye^ befallen us; those People now let out their Money at
Interest to our People of this Proince, and pay 'em in the Bills of their
Province, and take their Bonds to pay again in the Bills of our Province, and
an exorbitant Interest also, and avoid as much as may be the receiving their
own Bills in payment for the Goods they sell us, choosing as any wise men would,
to lay up our Province Bills: Who can be so blind as not to see their drift in
this matter; they know that nothing but our Province Bills, will answer for the
Bonds and Mortgages made to the Government, nor indeed for those made to
private persons, if the Mortgagee will insist on it; and I presume no body
thinks there are near enough of our Province Bills abroad to discharge those
Bonds and Mortgages: Well then, our only Remedy is, we must go to Rhode Island,
and give those people what advance they are pleased to ask, for our Province
Bills to answer those Occasions. But suppose the Rhode-Islanders should come
into a private Bank, as they begin to talk they will, if their Government do not
supply 'em in a public way, and suppose that their Bills should gain a
currency among us, as they doubtless will in a very little time; for men's
necessities will bring 'em to take 'em; what then will be the consequence, in a
few years great part of this Government will be Mortgaged to them; which puts
me in mind of what I have heard some of 'em say in a way of derision, if you will
find us good Security, you shall not want Money; may I not then very properly
say, we are selling our selves to Rhode Island, and shall see our Error, and
repent when it is too late to remedy it; it is certain that we by giving a
currency to their Bills, have made them Rich in a few Years. But some will
answer me, that if we refuse their Bills, they will do the same by our's. To
that I answer, Did we stand in the same need of them that they do of us, there
would be some weight in that Objection; but the Case is quite otherwise: What
would they do with all their Molosses, Sugar, Logwood, and other Goods they
purchase abroad, if it were not for our Market. How many Thousands of Pounds in
Money do they carry from hence to Rhode Island every year for these
Commodities; do they not order their Ships abroad, to come direct to this Port,
for want of a Market for them in their own Government: and yet we tamely suffer
'em to make Bills, and supply the Trading Men therewith, and they pay 'em into
the Treasury, as I am informed, Ten per Cent. for Ten Years, that satisfies
both for Principal and Interest. With this Money they fitted out at least
Thirty Sail of Vessels for Martineco, Surranam, Jamaica, and our Leward
Islands, bring their Molosses, Sugar, and other Goods from those Places direct
hither. Here they fell them for ready Money, and carry it away to Rhode Island;
this keeps their Trade going to the best advantage, while for want of that
Money our Trade languishes, and labors under the greatest difficulties;
whereas if we had not given their Bills a Currency, but had made a private Bank
among our selves, the advantages they have reapt by the Trade abovementioned,
would have fallen mostly into our own Hands. Thus for want of a good harmony
and agreement among our selves, we have given the Bread out of our own mouths
and enriched them; who now despise us for so doing. And indeed, all indefferent
Men will condemn us for our ill Conduct in suffering our selves to be thus
bubbled by them. I am well informed, that they are now designing to Emit One
Hundred Thousand Pounds more, with which they design to go upon the Cod and
Whale Fishery, and upon Manufacturing their own Wool; and those who will
improve it in these ways, it is proposed shall have the Money, giving Security
in Lands for what they receive, to pay it into their Treasury in Twenty Years,
viz. Five per Cent. per Annum in Siver at 15 s. per Ounce, and that is to
satisfy for the Principal and Interest; if this will not awaken us out of the
Lethargy we seem to be fallen into, and make us bestir our selves, surely
nothing will.

But some men are of Opinion that we in this Province shall refuse accepting
those Bills, and so their Project will sink, as indeed it certainly will if we
refuse to accept them in Payments: But I cannot see any reason why we should
refuse those Bills any more than what they have now out, they will be as good
as what they have now passing, and that day they make their new Emission, they
will certainly be received by us, as freely as the others; the necessities of
the times will even force men to take 'em; and I can see no way to prevent it
but by making a Bank among ourselves. But it is the opinion of many that this
will be opposed by some among us who have Bonds and Mortgages, which must be
redeemed they will say with our Province Bills, or in Silver at Seventeen penny
weight for six shillings, and they see that it will be impossible to get our
Bills, to answer those Occasions, and consequently that their Neighbors
Estates will fall into their hands for much less than the value of them. But
will any man who calls himself a Christian be so cruel and unjust to take that
advantage, and allowing that there are some such People who would take such an
advantage of their Neighbors, which I would charitably suppose, very few
would; can it be imagined that the Government will suffer such an ill use to be
made of what was designed by them for a common good, in making those Bills, and
letting 'em out to the people in order to save them from Ruin; No, such men,
(if any such there be) will most certainly be disappointed in their
Expectations, and the Government will contrive some way to prevent such a piece
of Oppression.

Most certainly if something be not done, and that without delay, many People
will be Ruined, for those who have their Estates Mortgaged are gathering up the
Bills of this Province to Redeem them, and indeed the time is so near expired
in which they are to pay their Money into the Treasury, that it highly concerns
'em to prepare for it. And as I hinted before the Rhode-Islanders are hoarding
'em up, in order to make a Prey of us. These things in a little time will leave
us few or none of our own Province Bills abroad. Surely then these
Considerations should unite us, and make us join heart and hand in bringing
forward this, or contriving something else which may extricate us out of our
Difficulties.

I cannot conclude without saying this word, if something be not done, what
will become of the Rising Generation? how is it possible that they entering upon
the Stage of Action, unexperienced should carry on a truck Trade, unless they
have very large Stocks to begin with, which very few have, (for what have the
best men in the place to boast of that was left 'em by their Fathers: Their
Estates were small to what their Children have attained to, and every man of
any considerable Interest among us, his Estate has been got by himself or
Father since the Paper Medium was projected;) and again, every Young man has
not a head turned to manage a truck Trade; It requires a plodding head,
application, diligence, and industry, and great caution and circumspection,
that they are not over-reacht by the Crafty; he that has his Money or Bills to
buy with, has a far better chance by going and trying the Market every where;
whereas he that deals but in a few Commodities, is obliged to buy of them, and
them only, who want the Commodities he deals in; and in such a case the Seller
always has the advantage of the man who comes to buy of him, and it is very
much in his power to set the price of his Chap-mans Goods as well as his own;
surely this Consideration ought to have its weight with us, for we are but
Stewards for our Children, and must in a little time go off the Stage, and it
is our duty as far as we are able, to leave things so circumstanced, that they
may be able to improve what by the blessing of Heaven we leave them.

If what I have offered may be of Service, or if others are led into more just
and proper tho'ts, I shall be very glad, for I would not be though it fond of my
own notions, but am very desirous to see something put on foot, which may give
us a prospect of things coming to Rights again in the days of our Children, for
I see little prospect of it in our days.

FINIS.

