Mr. Sewall's DISCOURSE Occasioned by the DEATH OF HIS FATHER.

THE Orphan's best Legacy: OR, GOD's Parental Care OF Bereaved Children: A
DISCOURSE Occasioned By the DEATH of the HONORABLE Samuel Sewall Es;q Who
departed this Life, Jan. 1. 1729, 30 Aetatis 78.

By His Son, Joseph Sewall, Pastor of the South Church in Boston.

Isai. xlix. 15. Can a woman forget (...) child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget
thee. Chap. lxiii. 16. Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou O LORD, art our father, our
redeemer, thy name is from everlasting. BOSTON: Printed by B. Green: Sold by S.
Gerrish and D. Henchman, at their Shops. 1730.

The Orphans best Legacy.
PSALM XXVII. 10. WHEN my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the LORD will
take me up.
THE Title of this Psalm informs us who was the inspired Penman, King David: In
it he encourages himself in the LORD under his extreme dangers from his
Enemies, and especially from Saul. v. 1. The Lord is my light, the author of my
joy, and my salvation, whom shall I fear --: And also offers to GOD his earnest
requests for help and succor, as in the verse before my Text. Hide not thy
face far from me -- leave me not --. And these words may be brought in as an
argument to enforce his Petition from the consideration of his present state,
That of an Orphan, who stood in great need of help; or for the encouragement of
his faith, to trust in that GOD with whom the Fatherless find Mercy.

In the words we have, 1. A sorrowful case supposed, When my Father --. (...)
reads it, Because my Father -- so it is an argument to enforce his Petition,
that GOD would not leave him, nor forsake him. Piscator and Mollerus read it,
Although --. Our reading is, When: and thus Calvin.

2. We have his relief under this sorrow, Then the LORD will take me up:
Receive, or gather me. Now we don't read that David's Parents did ever desert
him, though we find them so unable to help him, and so unfit to attend his
Marches, that David desires of the King of Moab, that they might be with him
till he should know what GOD would do for him, 1 Samuel 22.3. Accordingly, some
Expositors take the words as signifying all humane helps under the Name of
Parents, by which we may understand all Councils and Helps for safety. Or, as
others suppose, His Parents had departed this life; in which sense I would now
consider the words. However it was, David was now like an Orphan, in an
helpless condition as to humane views and means, and accordingly he by faith
realizeth GOD's Parental care and love, who, as He is ever able to help His
People, so has the bowels of a Father yerning toward them under their
distresses; yea, more than the compassions of the tender Mother. Then the LORD,
the Name given to GOD here is JEHOVAH, which signifies GOD's Eternal
Self-existence, and His giving Being to all Creatures. The fathers of our flesh
are Mortal, and must in a little time forsake us, if we are not taken from them
first; but GOD the Everlasting Father lives for ever to take care of His
People. Shall take me up, or gather me. When Parents are removed, the Family is
ordinarily scattered and broken up; but then GOD will gather the Children of
His People, and be a dwelling place to them.

DOCT. It is the great Privilege of the Children of GOD, that when their best
Friends and Helpers on Earth, their Fathers and Mothers forsake them, He will
take them up.
I. Our Fathers and Mothers must forsake us. II. It is the Privilege of GOD's
Children, that He will then take them up.
Prop. I. Our best Friends on Earth, our Fathers and our Mothers must forsake
us.
GOD alone can say to us and fulfill that His word, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. Our choicest friends here are, as we, frail, mortal Creatures.
For what is your life? it is even a vapor that appears for a little time,
and then vanishes away. Your Fathers where are they? -- Zech. 1.5. They are no
more in this World; they are gone to their long home, to the house appointed
for all living; and the Places which once knew them shall know them no more.
Accordingly, when the godly depart this life, they are said to be gathered to
their People. Thus Abraham died in a good old Age, and was gathered to his
People, Genesis 2^.8. When the Saints die out of this World, they are born into
the other. Their bodies indeed are left behind; however, the condition of these
is such when the Spirits that animated them are gone, that we must bury them
out of sight. And as their bodies rest in their Graves, so their Spirits return
to GOD who gave them. When they leave our Society on Earth they go to the
heavenly Jerusalem, to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant. Here a little to confirm and illustrate this
Head, I may say, 1. All Men are subject to the law of Mortality, and must be
removed out of this World by Death. 2. According to the course of Nature
Parents forsake their Children, and leave them behind in this World, when they
depart out of it by Death.

1. All Men are subject to the law of Mortality, and must be removed out of
this World by Death. There is a Statute of Heaven for it, Heb. 9.27. -- It is
appointed unto Men once to die --. Indeed the LORD of Life has made, and will
make exceptions to this general rule. Thus Enoch and Elijah under the old
Testament, were translated, that they should not see death. (And surely it was
a great favor of GOD to the departed Spirits of the Saints, so early to give
them an Example of the glorious beauty and perfection which their bodies should
be advanced to at the Resurrection Enoch was translated, A. M. 987. B. Usuer.
.) And the Apostle informs us that the People of GOD, who shall be found alive
at our Savior's coming to raise the dead, Shall not sleep, (i.e. die) but be
changed, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. However this is the common lot. Psalm. 89.48. What
man is he that lives, and shall not see death? No sooner had Man sinned but
Death had power over him, and began to work toward a dissolution of this
earthly frame. Genesis 2.17. -- In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
die. And it is plain from Scripture that this Threatening Extends to Adam's
Posterity: Romans 5.12. Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the World, and
death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Men
are various ways distinguished in the World into high and low, rich and poor,
young and old, etc; but in this respect they are all upon a level, equally
subject to death. And this the Experience of all Ages teaches. One Generation
passes away, and another comes; -- Eccl. 1.4. Romans 5.14. -- Death reigned
from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of
Adam's transgression --. As infants who have not been guilty of Actual
transgression committed in their own persons, and yet the sentence of the law
takes hold of them, an undediable evidence that Adam's first sin is imputed to
them; and that we all bring a corrupt Nature into the World with us. It is
true, the Children of GOD are delivered from the sting and curse of death by
JESUS CHRIST, who by dying has conquered this last Enemy; so that they shall
all Triumph, and say, O death, where is thy sling? O grave, where is thy
victory? 1 Cor. 15.55. However, GOD will have them also taste of this bitter
cup as a testimony of His displeasure against their sin, and as a means of
purging away the remains of it, that they may be presented without spot before
Him. They must pass through this Jordan before they obtain Rest in the heavenly
Canaan. Their Faith in JESUS CHRIST, and other Graces may help them to die
well; but will not exempt them from the stroke of death: Heb. 11.13. These all
died in faith --. They must this way, through the valley of the shadow of death,
follow the Captain of their Salvation to Glory. They must be bro't down to the
dust in order to their being exalted to sit with Him on Thrones in His Fathers
Kingdom. Their warfare is not accomplished till they have encountered this
Enemy, nor can they say, It is finished, until, with our Savior, They give up
the Ghost. Thus died Moses the Servant of the LORD. Thus David after he had
served his generation according to the will of GOD, fell a sleep, and was laid
to his Fathers --. The matter of Fact which the Jews alleged was true, though
misapplied, Joh. 8.52. -- Abraham is dead, and the Prophets --. Accordingly,
when our Savior asserts, If any man keep my saying, he shall never see death,
v. 51. He must be understood of the second death, which is eternal,
comprehending the destruction of Soul and Body in Hell. Now, by death we are
remove'd out of this World, agreably death is called a departure, 2 Timothy 4. 6.
-- The time of my departure is at hand. The Soul goes forth out of the Body,
the vital union between them being dissolvd'd. Genesis 35.18. -- As her soul was
in departing, for she died --. And the Body is then carried to the Grave, the
House appointed for all the living. Death dissolveth the Union, and breaks off
the Society there was between the nearest Relations; they are separated forever
as to what concerns this life, which leads me to say,

2. According to the Course of Nature Parents forsake their Children, and leave
them behind in this World; when they depart out of it by death. Indeed, it is
no uncommon thing to have this order of Nature inverted. We read that of old,
Haran died before his Father Terah, i. e. "In his sight and presence, he being
yet alive, Genesis 11. 28. Thus Aaron, Job, David, etc. survived to bewail the
loss of Children. And alas! how common is this in our day? Upon this account
among others the land of darkness may be said to be without order, Job 10. 22.
The young and strong have the precedence oftentimes, and go to the Grave before
the aged and infirm. The lamp of life is not seldom blown out. Diseases and
Accidents, as we call them, though all under the government of GOD's Providence,
often put a period to lives which might endure much longer. We die sooner or
later according to the will of the Sovereign GOD, who has determined our Days
on Earth in His Decree, and appointed our bounds which we cannot pass. Job
14.5. Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee,
thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. However, according to the
course of Nature, as Parents are born into the World first, so they die out of
it before their Children. The decays of Nature and infirmities of Age gradually
grow upon them; we see them decline and wear away under the fatigues and
burdens of life, until, as the Candle burns down and goes out, so the vital
heat and moisture being consumed, they expire. Psalm. 90.10. The days of our
years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of strength they be
fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow: for it is soon cut
off, and we fly away. This has been accounted the Age of Man since Moses's
time. Here also we may observe, That it is no strange thing for Parents to be
taken away in their full strength, yea, even before middle Age, and so to leave
their Children Young, sometimes not capable of understanding the greatness of
their loss; but then, others by the favor of GOD continue till their Children
are grown up, and after that they have for some time experienced the great
benefit of their Presence, Counsels and Prayers, the Parents die and leave them
to lament their loss. And the pious Parent may when leaving this World, say to
survivours, something as our Savior to the daughters of Jerusalem; -- Weep not
for me, but for your selves Luck 23, 28.
. For when such depart, they go to be with CHRIST, which is far better; they go
out of a World of sin and sorrow to that better Country, which is an heavenly,
where they are comforted in the glorious Presence of the Lamb, having all tears
wiped from their Eyes, and being made perfect in holiness. The Day of their
death is better to them than the day of their birth. But then, by such a
bereaving Providence, GOD calls us to lament and mourn; for they are gone from
us, and that not to return again to converse with us here. We see their faces
no more; we behold their exemplary Conversation no more, receive their
Instructions and help no more. And therefore such a Bereavement ought to be
lamented, even though our Parents should live to a good old Age: When their hoary
heads which were a Crown of Glory, being found in the way of righteousness, are
laid in the dust, We may well take up a lamentation, and say, the Crown is
fallen -- for the glory of children are their fathers, Prove. 17.6. However, the
Children of GOD have this Consolation when exercised with such Bereavements,
that though their Fathers are not, yet the GOD of their Fathers lives to take
care of them, and fulfill the promises of His Everlasting Covenant: Which brings
me to,

Prop. II. It is the great Privilege of GOD's Children, that when their Fathers
and Mothers forsake them, He will take them up.
GOD is the everlasting Father, and in CHRIST JESUS the Father of Mercies, and
the GOD of all Consolations to His Vovenant People. They that receive the
eternal Son of GOD by faith, have power to become the sons of GOD Joh. 1. 12.
"They are received into this happy number, and have a right to the precious
Privileges of such: They have the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry, Abba
Father, and GOD pitieth them, as a father pitieth his Children. Yea, GOD has
more than the compassions of the tender Mother: Isai. 49.5. Can a woman forget
her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb?
Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. The love of the Mother, the
more tender Sex toward her Offspring, is a strong and constant affection
indeed, especially while the child hangs at her Breast; yet such are the moral
and natural infirmities of humane Nature since the Fall, that even she may
forget -- but GOD remembers His Children with an everlasting Love, and is
accordingly always ready to succor them under their sorrows, with the most
tender compassion. Isai. 66.13. As one whom his Mother comfort, so will I
comfort you --. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST was with His Disciples as the Father of
the Family while on Earth, and when the time of His departure drew nigh, one of
the good words He spoke to them was that, Joh. 14.18. I will not leave you
comfortless --: In the Original it is, Orphans, bereaved ones: When about to
leave this World, as to His bodily presence, He committed them to the care and
protection of their heavenly Father. Joh. 17.11. Holy Father keep through thine
own Name, those whom thou have given me --. And to speak more directly of
earthly Parents and Ancestors; the People of GOD comfort themselves from this
consideration: Isai. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou O LORD, art our father, our
redeemer, thy name is from everlasting. Upon which a worthy Expositor
observes, "That they own themselves Fatherless, if He be not their Father, and
so cast themselves upon Him with whom the Fatherless finds mercy, Hos. 14.3.
It was the honor of their Nation that they had Abraham to their Father, Mat.
3.9. who was the friend of GOD; and Israel, who was a Prince with GOD; but what
the better were they for that, unless they had GOD Himself for their Father;
for Abraham and Israel cannot help them, they have not the power that GOD has,
they are dead long since, and are ignorant of us, and acknowledge us not, they
know not what our case is, nor what our wants are, and therefore know not which
way to do us a kindness --. But thou O LORD art our Father still. The fathers
of our flesh may call themselves Ever Loving, but not Ever Living; it is GOD
only that is the immortal Father, that always knows us, and is never at a
distance from us, and therefore our Redeemer, from everlasting is thy Name, the
Name by which we will know and own thee, it is the Name by which from of old
thou have been known; Thy People have always looked upon thee as the GOD to
whom they might appeal to right them, and plead their cause" Henry


I would here very briefly speak to a few particulars, further to show the
Privilege of the Children of GOD contained in that good word, The LORD will
take me up: which word in the Original is observed to be used of taking up and
bringing home a stray sheep: Deuteronomy. 22.1, 2.

1. When Father and Mother forsake, GOD will as a tender Father take up his
People, own them as of His Family, and treat them as his Children. GOD will
take them up, and receive them under His Roof. Children are wont to gather to
their Fathers House, while their Parents live to enjoy their Company, take
their Advice, and receive their blessing, etc. Accordingly, when their Parents
are removed by death, the LORD who is a dwelling place to His People in all
Generations, will grant them Rest and Shelter by His gracious Presence with
them, and the care of His good Providence over them. They shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty, and that not solitary, but having Him as a tender
Father ready to assist and comfort them. GOD will not cast them off at such a
time, No! but will fulfill that word to them, Heb. 13.5. I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee. The Scripture referred to is supposed to be GOD's word
to Joshua after Moses's death, Josh. 1.5. I will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee. With this David encouraged his Son Solomon, when the time of his
departure drew nigh, 1 Chronicles. 28.20. And David said to Solomon his son, Be
strong, and of good courage, and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed, for the LORD
GOD, even my GOD, will be with thee, he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee --
When this trouble is near, GOD will not stand afar off, but will be found their
present help. He will say to them, Fear not, for I am with thee, be not
dismayed, for I am thy GOD, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I
will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness Isai 41.10.
. They shall have freedom of access to GOD, and may pour out their Complaints
before Him with the liberty of Children; and GOD will hear them when bemoaning
themselves as Ephraim, under His correcting hand, and give that gracious
answer, Jer. 31.20. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I
spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are
troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, says the LORD. This the
word of GOD further declares to us, that through the patience and comfort of the
Scriptures we might have hope: Psalm. 103 13 -- 18. Like as a father pitieth his
children: so the LORD pitieth them that fear him. For he knows our frame: he
remembers that we are dust. As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower the
field, so be flourishes. For the wind passes over it, and it is gone; and the
place thereof shall know it no more. But the mercy of the LORD is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him: and his righteousness unto
childrens children. To such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember
his commandments to do them. Now, GOD's owning and treating His People as
Children may comprehend the particulars which follow, however, I shall
distinctly consider them.

2. GOD will take them up, direct and conduct them in the ways which shall be
pleasing to Him, and profitable for them. One great advantage we receive from
wise and good Parents is their Advice and Counsel. "Some of the Ancients say,
that the word Pupil, which is from the Latin, signifies, One without sight, or
wanting the apple or pupil of his Eyes; because being deprived of his Parents,
he wants the light of counsel and direction, to carry him on in his course
through this World. What Moses spoke to Hobab his father in law, is a truth of
all good Parents to their Children, "They are to them in stead of eyes, Numb.
10.31" Caryl. on Job 6. 27.
But now, when their eyes are closed by death, and their thoughts perish, GOD
will direct His People, and guide them by His counsel. He who is the Father of
Lights with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning, will enlighten
their darkness, and guide them with His Eye. When Children are thus bereaved,
they are often in great perplexity, not knowing what to do: Jer. 10.23. -- The
way of man is not in himself: it is not in man to direct his steps. The People
of GOD are convinced of this truth, and accordingly obey that command, Psalm.
37.5. Commit thy way unto the Lord: -- And find by happy experience that it is
a command with promise. Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he
shall direct thy paths. When thus forsaken, the Spirit of Adoption moves them
to cry to the Eternal GOD, as, Jer. 3.4. My Father, Thou art the guide of my
Youth. And GOD's ear is open to their cry. He will by the care of His watchful
Providence, and by the influence of His Word and Spirit effectually say to
them, This is the way, walk ye in it, when they may be ready to turn to the
right hand or to the left; so that they shall make no fatal mistakes, nor be
lost in that path which leads to destruction. As to what concerns their Souls
welfare, which is the One thing needful, GOD will guide them with his counsel,
and afterward receive them to glory Psalm. 73
. And as to what concerns their temporal Affairs, GOD will enable them to guide
these with discretion, or so overruled even their mistakes, as that all things
shall work together for their good Psalm. 112.5. Rom 8 28.
.

3. GOD will take them up to help, defend and provide for them. Parents are a
great help and protection to their Children, however, when GOD's People are
bereaved of those earthly helpers, they shall not be left naked and exposed.
No. Psalm. 115.11. The Lord is their help and their shield. Psalm. 10.14. -- The
poor commits himself unto thee, thou art the helper of the fatherless. GOD
will be their guardian and protector, so that they may boldly say, Heb. 13.6.
The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me. When
Children are forsaken of their Parents, the Men of the World many times take
the advantage to oppress them. Job complains, Ye overwhelm the fatherless,
chap. 6.27. But now, GOD will stand on their side, and if any injure them, He
will resent and avenge it. Jer. 2.3. -- All that devour him, shall offend: --
says the LORD. GOD has forbidden us to afflict any Widow, or fatherless Child
whatsoever, Exodus 22.22. And assures us that if they cry to Him under such
affliction, He will hear their cry, v. 23. How much rather will He hear when
His Covenant-Children cry to Him under such oppression, and fulfill the
threatening which follows: v. 24. My wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you
with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.
GOD is their Judge, and He will do them right. Psalm. 10.18. To judge the
fatherless, and the oppressed, that the man of the earth may no more oppress.
It is one of His Titles as it were, whereby He makes Himself known to us, Psalm.
146.9. The Lord relieveth the fatherless and widow. When they may be most
destitute of humane aid, then will GOD be nigh to them, and incompass them with
His favor as with a shield. Now they may sing as Psalm. 121.5. The Lord is thy
keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. v. 7. The Lord shall
preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul. Yea, they shall not
only be defended from evil; but be well provided for and supplied with that
good which GOD shall see most needful and suitable for them: their heavenly
Father, who knows that they have need of these things, will give them bread
to eat, and raiment to put on, until they are brought to His House which is
eternal in the Heavens. David says, Psalm. 37.25. I have been young, and now am
old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. He
had not, it may be, observed the pious Children of godly Parents brought to
begging; and though it is not uncommon now for GOD's Children to be poor in this
World, yet they are not forsaken when brought thus low; no, GOD has often
given remarkable instances of His fatherly care of such as have had scarce any
visible means of support. He that hears the Ravens when they cry, and feeds
them, will not suffer His Covenant People to want the good things of this life
which are proper for them; when they pray, as directed by their Lord and
Savior, Give us this day our daily bread. How strongly does the Apostle argue,
Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Let the bereaved be left
in ever such poor and distressed circumstances, GOD's promise must be
fulfilled, Psalm. 84.11. The LORD God is a fun and shield: the LORD will give
grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

4. GOD will take them up, and Comfort them under such a Bereavement. Pious
Parents are dear to such Children, and their loss in them is in a manner
irreparable as to the Creature: who will, who can do for us as our Fathers that
begat us, and our Mothers that bear us? GOD has implanted in them a strong and
almost invincible affection toward the Offspring of their bodies, themselves
multiplied; so that they scarce think any thing too much to do or suffer for
them: And their removal by death is often attended with peculiar difficulties.
Agreably, we have that expression of distressing sorrow, Psalm. 35.14. I bowed
down heavily, as one that mourns for his Mother. But when they are in this
mournful state, desolate and forsaken, GOD will visit them, and speak
comfortably to them; He will sit as One that comfort the Mourners. Our Lord
JESUS CHRIST who knows how to speak a word in season to them that are weary,
and has been anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows, will give
unto these mourners in Zion, beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning
Psalm. 45.7. Isai. 61.3.
There are many good words spoken to His People in the Scriptures, by which He
revives the spirits of these mourners, when He pleases. Psalm. 68.5. A father
of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation.
Joh. 11.25. -- I am the resurrection, and the life. Matt. 9.2. -- Son, be of
good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. Joh. 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you: not as the world gives, give I unto you. Let not your
heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. 1 These. 4.13, 14. Heb. 13.5. I
will never leave thee --. And by His good Spirit, the Comforter, He makes His
word a word of life and comfort to their Souls.

5. GOD will take them up, and Sanctify such Bereavement to them for saving
good. How grievous soever the Chastening may be for the present, yet shall it
yield to them the peaceable fruit of righteousness. When GOD chastises them it
is in measure, as a Father His Children. And by such afflictions GOD humbles
and proves them and does them good for their latter end; so that they have
reason to say with him, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted --. Their iniquity is purged, their faith and patience are tried and
improved, and they grow in the experience of GOD's fatherly care and pity
toward them, which must be for their great profit and advantage.

6. GOD will give them the Inheritance of Children, and take them up to dwell
with Him for ever in Heaven. Romans 8.17. If children, then heirs; heirs of God,
and joynt-heirs with Christ. GOD Himself will be their Portion, and fulfill the
precious Promises of the New Covenant to them: Psalm. 16.5. The LORD is the
portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot. They have
chosen Him as their Portion, and GOD has given Himself to them as their GOD
and Father in CHRIST, and will accordingly bless them with all spiritual
Blessings in heavenly things; yea, GOD will bless them indeed, even in the good
things of this life, which their earthly Parents leave them; for He gives these
things to His chosen People, being mindful of His Covenant; and hence it is
that a little which a righteous man has, is better than the riches of many
wicked, Psalm. 37.16. In a word, GOD will not leave them, until he has done
that which he has spoken to them of Genesis 28.15.
; and put them into the full possession of all that good which is contained in
the Promises of which they are the Heirs. GOD will be their guide to death, and
when they fail here will receive them to the everlasting Habitations which He
has prepared for them in Heaven, where they shall have a perfect deliverance
from all evil, and the possession of all good in the full and everlasting
enjoyment of GOD the chief good; where they shall meet their godly Parents gone
before never to part again, and have every dark Providence cleared up to their
abundant satisfaction. Joh. 14.2, 3. In my fathers house are many mansions; if
it were not so, I would have told you: I go to prepare a place for you. And if
I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my
self, that where I am, there ye may be also. As Children, they shall dwell in
in the House of the LORD for ever, and there will GOD make the sullest
manifestations of His fatherly love to them. Agreably, in our Version of the
singing Psalms, the words are thus rendered. Yet will JEHOVAH gathering, unto
Himself me take. And surely they need no more to complete their happiness: Ever
to be with the LORD, is to be eternally blessed.

APPLICATION
USE I. Must our Fathers and Mothers forsake us, see here what an evil and
bitter thing sin is, by the fruit of it. It is a root of bitterness bearing
wormwood and gall. It kills even them that were most dear to us, and separates
the nearest Relations; it puts lover and friend far from us, and our
Acquaintance into darkness. It is sin that has brought misery and death into
the World. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. O let us then turn from all
sin as the abominable thing which our souls hate: Let us under such
Bereavements, mourn for our (...) with that godly sorrow which works
Repentance, and so fly from them unto JESUS CHRIST, who saves his People from
their sins: Blessed are they who thus mourn; for they shall be comforted.

II. Must our Fathers and Mothers forsake us; Then we should prize them and do
our Duty toward them while we enjoy them; and humble our selves under GOD's
correcting Hand, when they are taken from us. We are very much obliged to our
Parents: In them GOD has made a wife and gracious provision for our
continuance and comfort in the World; Indeed earthly Fathers are but the
fathers of our flesh, which is also GOD's Creature; GOD is the Father of
Spirits, He forms the Spirit of Man within him; however, they are instruments
in GOD's hand, of our being and well being here. What creature so helpless as
Man in his Infant state? In answer to which, we have the tender love and care
of our Parents: Thus did GOD make us to hope when we were upon our Mother's
breasts, who must have perished if left to our selves. Many and great are the
benefits which we receive from our Parents, especially from pious Parents both
relating to this and a better life, in our comfortable Subsistence, early
Dedication to GOD, Education, etc. Certainly then, we should highly esteem and
dearly love them; we should honor and obey them in the LORD, as the fifth
Commandment requires, which is the first Commandment "with a special Promise
of life and prosperity" annexed to it. Ephesians. 6. (...) Honor thy father and
mother, (which is the first commandment with promise) That it may be well with
thee, and thou may live long on the earth. And if they live to stand in need
of our help through the infirmities of age, or upon other accounts, We should
show piety at home, and requite our Parents: for that is good and acceptable
before God, 1 Timothy 5.4. And when GOD removes them from us by death, we should
see His hand stretched out against us, and humble our selves under it; we
should neither despise the Chastisement of the LORD, nor yet saint when rebuked
of Him; but be in subjection to the Father of Spirits that we may live, and
enjoy His presence with us when our earthly Parents forsake us. And therefore,
as it has pleased GOD to take my aged and honored Father from my head, whose
memory will ever be precious to me; I beseech you, Brethren, that ye strive
together with me in your Prayers to GOD for me; that I may be enabled so to
attend these Duties, as to give glory to GOD, and to be an Ensample to the
Flock. I acknowledge my self unworthy of the honor and privilege I enjoyed in
such a Parent, and would abase my self before the LORD, that I made no better
improvement of my advantages, especially on spiritual accounts: And while I cry
after him, my Father, my Father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen
thereof I would earnestly seek to GOD our heavenly Father, that the Spirit
which was on him may be given unto me, that I may exalt (...) Father's GOD, and
follow His Servant as he followed JESUS CHRIST. May the LORD be the GOD and
Judge of the Widow; may He take up the Fatherless into the Arms of His
everlasting Mercy, and bless them with the Blessings of His well ordered and
sure Covenant: And may we all be followers of them who through faith and patience
inherit the promises.

III. We should be above all things concerned to make sure of this, that the
everlasting Father is our GOD and Father in CHRIST JESUS. Our earthly Parents
are mortal, and must be taken from us by death; but GOD is the same and His
years fail not; He lives for ever the Hope of His Israel and the savior
thereof in all times of trouble: Let us then return to Him from whom we have
departed by the Apostasy, confessing we have sinned in His Sight, and are
unworthy to be called His Children; let us cry to Him to extend His fatherly
pity and mercy to us in and by His beloved Son, whom in the fullness of time He
sent forth made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under
the law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.4, 5. Let us by His
Grace heartily consent to receive JESUS CHRIST according to the New Covenent,
then His Father will be our Father, and His GOD our GOD Joh 20. 17.
Let us ask of GOD His Holy Spirit, that being born again, not of corruptible
Seed, but of incorruptible by the word of GOD which lives and abides for
ever, we may bear His Image, and bring forth that fruit whereby our heavenly
Father shall be glorified. Let us reverence and honor, obey and submit to Him
in all things, and be followers of Him as dear Children: Then we may rejoice in
Him under all sorrowful Bereavements, and say, The LORD lives, and blessed be
my Rock. We may comfort ourselves with these words, and be assured that what
ever is taken from us, GOD Himself who is all in all, will never forsake us. He
will come unto us, and make His abode with us while in this World, and when we
shall be here no more, will receive us to His House which is eternal in the
Heavens, where we shall be for ever comforted in His Presence, in whose
Presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for
ever more.

IV. I would close the subject with a word of Exhortation, directed to Parents
and Children.

I. To Parents, in a few particulars.

1. Be Exhorted, Early to Pray for your Children, and in this way commend them
to be Care and Blessing of the Everlasting Father.

It is one great Privilege which belongs to the Relation of Parents in Covenant
with GOD, bless their Children in the Name of the LORD, by asking His Blessing
for them. And surely the consideration of your Mortality should quicken you to
begin this Duty so soon as you know they begin to live, and to continue instant
in it with all perseverance; for when you are removed, you will not be
acquainted with their condition as now you are, and if faithful, will be taken
up from them to Praise GOD in His Temple above. Now then, lay up a stock of
Prayers for them which may come down in Blessings upon them, even after your
decease. You have been instrumental of conveying sin and death to them. Psalm.
51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. O
cry to GOD then that they may experience the power of the New Birth, and that
being cleansed from their sins by the Blood and Spirit of CHRIST, they may live
to GOD here, and be prepared to follow you to Heaven, Thus David prayed for
Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 29.19. Give unto Solomon my son a perfect heart to keep thy
commandments --. Seeing you know not the day of your death, how soon and
suddenly it may come upon you; attend this Duty daily, in secret, and in your
families; yea, take them with you sometimes in your Retirements, and let them
see your concern for them in your servent Prayers to GOD on their behalf. Thus
to attend your duty will be one likely way of enjoying them as Blessings of GOD
to you while you live; and in this way, you may with the more comfortable
assurance commit them to the care of the ever-living GOD, when you leave them
at death.

2. Give them up to GOD in Baptism, and thus do your endeavor to bring them
under the wing and blessing of the everlasting Covenant established with GOD's
People, and their Seed in CHRIST JESUS.

As Children are virtually in their Parents before they are begotten and born
into the World, so it has pleased GOD to include Parents together with their
Children in the Covenant. Thus it was under the first Covenant, the Covenant of
Works made with Adam, "not for himself only, but for his Posterity". And thus
it is under the New Covenant, the Covenant of Grace. GOD promised Abraham, Genesis
17.7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after
thee, in their generations for an everlasting covenant; to be a God unto thee,
and to thy seed after thee. Which blessing is come on the believing Gentiles
through JESUS CHRIST, Gal. 3.14. Let Parents then under the realizing view of the
frailty of this life, make have to lay hold of GOD's Covenant, and to give up
themselves and their Seed to Him as their GOD, and that with their whole
hearts; that whatever changes pass over your Houses, you may rejoice with
David, 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made with
me in everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure: for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow. In this way,
devote them to GOD, that He may own them as His Children, and take them up when
you forsake them: In this way, bring them to CHRIST for His blessing, who said,
Suffer little Children, and forbid them not to come unto me: for of such is the
kingdom of heaven, Mat. 19.14. In this way, seek to GOD that they may be Saved
by the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. Indeed, we
cannot say that all who are visibly in Covenant obtain the invisible Grace and
saving Blessings of the Covenant: For they are not all Israel, which are of
Israel, Romans 9.6. Sad experience teaches us that not a few have with profane
Esau despised the Birthright. However, this is one of the means of Grace which
that GOD has appointed who alone can command the Blessing; and the
consideration of the uncertainty of our own lives as well as the lives of our
Children, should make us speedy and very serious in this Covenant transaction
with GOD on their behalf, that we may in faith plead the Promises of GOD's
Covenant for them, when we are about to be taken from them.

3. Teach them the Will of GOD, and call upon them to Choose that good Part
which cannot be taken away.

All flesh is as grass, -- but the word of the LORD endures for ever 1 Pet
1.24, 25.
. O do your utmost then that they may know the Scriptures from their childhood,
and have the laws of GOD written upon their hearts. Labor to instill the
principles of Religion into them, and teach them early how they must fear and
serve the LORD, while you look to GOD to fulfill His promise: Isai. 54.13. All
thy children shall be taught of the LORD --. Show them their sin and misery by
the Fall, and the only remedy provided in JESUS CHRIST, the only Name given
among Men whereby we can be saved. Call upon them to know the GOD of their
Fathers, and to choose Him as their GOD. Urge them to make sure of an Interest
in CHRIST, and the Blessings of the Covenant; to Repent of their Sins, and make
haste to keep GOD's Commandments; that He may never leave them, and that in Him
the unchangable GOD, they may have an unfailing Friend and everlasting Portion.
You know not how soon you may be silent in the Grave: O do not delay then to
speak to them about the concerns of their Souls, and to teach them the good
knowledge of the LORD, that they may be wise for Eternity and to Salvation!

4. Go before them, while GOD continues you with them, in an holy Exemplary
Conversation.

Walk before GOD within your house with a perfect heart, and before them, in a
perfect way; for it is natural and common for Children to imitate their
Parents. It is true, they stand in need of supernatural Grace, to enable them
to follow your pious Examples; however, the duty is yours, and you must
discharge it, looking to GOD to turn their feet to His Testimonies. Be exhorted
then to set the great and weighty matters of GOD's law before your Children,
not only in verbal Instructions, but in a living Pattern; that they may be
encouraged to follow your faith, considering the end of your conversation. It
may be you have but a little time to be with them, O endeavor then to do much,
by living much to the honor of GOD, the little time that remains! Take heed
you do not lay a stumbling block before them by living in the Omission of Duty,
of Family Prayer, of the strict Observation of the Lord's Day, of a devout
Attendance on the Lord's Table, etc. Or, in the Commission of Sin, of
profaness, of intemperance, lying, dishonesty in dealing, etc. left they fall
after your Example, and GOD visit the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
Children. O do not walk in that broad way which leads to destruction, left they
follow you, and you have a dreadful meeting in Hell; but in that narrow way
which leads to life, that you may have a joyful meeting in Heaven.

5. Endeavor to leave your Children with GOD, when you forsake them; and do
what you can that they may live in Peace among themselves.

The great work we have to do when we come to die, is to commit our departing
Spirits into the Hands of JESUS CHRIST, and so to resign our lives to GOD by
Him as a free will Offering; but this is not all, we should also commit our
dear Relatives, and in particular our Children, to the care of the living GOD,
when we are leaving them. If you understand that word as an exhortation and
promise to GOD's People, it may be fitly applied here, Jer 49.11. Leave thy
fatherless children, I will preserve them alive, and let thy widows trust in
me. Now then commend them to GOD in a solemn manner, and if GOD give you the
opportunity, Charge them to keep His Covenant, that they may happily find that
GOD is the GOD of His People, and of their Seed in their Generations. And in
order to their obtaining the gracious Presence of GOD with them, you should do
what you can that they may dwell together in Unity; for thus runs the promise,
2 Cor 13.11. -- Live in Peace: and the God of love and peace shall be with you.
And here it may not be amiss to say, prudently and seasonably settle your
Affairs, that there may be no occasion of unhappy division and alienation upon
temporal accounts.

In a word, Whatever your hand finds to do for the welfare of your Children, do
it with your might; for there is no work nor knowledge in the Grave whither you
are going. If there be any Commands or Charges needful for you to give, and
them to receive, delay them not, left you be prevented by Death. If you are
middle Aged, you may not presume you have time enough before you; for not a few
die in their full strength: And if GOD has spared you to old Age, you had need
make haste to attend your duty in these and other respects, that when Death
comes, you may take leave of your Children with a comfortable hope that GOD
will take them up and bless them, as He did Isaac after his Father's death,
Genesis 25. 11. And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed
his son Isaac; and that you shall have a Seed to serve GOD on earth, when you
are called up to Praise Him in Heaven.

II. Let the Exhortation be directed, to Children.

1. Be thankful to GOD if He continues your Parents to you after you are grown
up.

It is the sorrowful case of many, that their Parents forsake them while very
young: If it be otherwise with you, humbly bless GOD, and consider how you may
best show your grateful sense of such a benefit, and improve it to the honor
of GOD, and your own advantage. And remember, you are in an especial. manner
obliged thus to express your thankfulness, if your Parents have not only some
external resemblance of GOD upon them, who is the Father of all, in the
authority this Relation gives them over you; but also his moral Image in them,
which is created in righteousness and true holiness: The presence of such
Parents who have GOD graciously present with them, is a great savor indeed.
Happy, thrice happy the Children! who are thus favored of the LORD, know their
Privilege, and wisely improve it.

2. Do your utmost that you may be Blessings and Comforts to them, while they
live.

Although you are grown to years capable of choosing and acting for your selves,
and removed into distinct Families, yet your obligation to honor your Fathers
and Mothers abides with the Relation; though indeed the authority of Parents and
obedience of Children are to be exercised after a different manner: Do you then
express your filial duty in a manner becoming your riper Age, and labor to be
helpful to your Parents, even when you are removed from under their immediate
care. Now endeavor to be under GOD their Staff, when they decline through age;
and do what you can to sweeten and brighten the evil days which are come upon
them, by your good carriage. O despise them not when they are old; but succor
them under their infirmities, and let them now have some good fruit of their
unwearied care and pains with you. Heavenly Father! forgive our sinful defects
for Thy Son's sake, with whose perfect Obedience Thou wast ever well pleased.

3. When your Parents forsake you, Look to GOD to take you up.

Prepare for such a dark hour by taking care to give up your selves to the
living GOD, as your GOD and Father, by receiving all the good you can from your
Parents, and doing all the good you can to them, while you are continued to
each other. Live under the realizing view of their and your own Mortality. Let
their commands, and especially their dying charges have great weight with you.
And when they are taken from you, go to GOD in the Name of CHRIST, and depend
on Him for all that light and grace, direction and help which you need. Thus
you shall find Him the Father of Mercies to you; He will take you up, and make
up your loss in Himself, and in His CHRTST.

FINIS
To fill up this vacant Page, the following HYMNS are added from the excellent
Mr. WATTS.

Children devoted to GOD. Genesis 17.7, 10. Acts 16.14, 15, 33.
1
THus says the Mercy of the Lord,
I Will be a God to thee;
I Will bless thy numerous Race, and they
Shall be a Seed for me.
2
Abraham believed the promised Grace,
And gave his Sons to God;
But Water seals the Blessing now,
That once was sealed with Blood.
3
Thus Lydia sanctified her House
When she received the Word;
Thus the believing Jailer gave
His Household to the Lord,
4
Thus later Saints, Eternal King,
Thine ancient Truth embrace;
To thee their Infant-Offspring bring,
And humbly claim the Grace.
Hope in the Covenant; or, GOD's Promise and Truth unchangeable, Heb. 6.17, --
19.
1
HOW often have Sin and Satan strove
To rend my Soul from thee, my God?
But everlasting is thy Love,
And JESUS seals it with his Blood.
2
The Oath and Promise of the Lord
Join to confirm the wondrous Grace;
Eternal Power performs the Word,
And fills all Heaven with endless Praise.
3
Amidst Temptations sharp and long
My Soul to this dear Refuge flies:
Hope is my Anchor, firm and strong,
While Tempests blow and Billows rise.
4
The Gospel bears my Spirits up;
A faithful and unchanging God
Lays the Foundation for my Hope
In Oaths, and Promises, and Blood.

