THE Two Interests RECONCILED: OCCASIONED By two late Pamphlets, CALLED The
Interest of the Country AND The Interest of City and Country.

NEW YORK, Sold by I. Peter Zenger, 1726. ( pr. 6 d.)

THE Two Interests RECONCILED:
IT is not a common Thing to meet with an Answerer without ill Nature or ill
Manners, and that entirely confines himself to his Subject: But the Author of
The Interest of the Country, has had the good Fortune to find such a one, in
the Writer of The Interest of City and Country. The Public may therefore,
reasonably, expect some Information from these two Papers, by comparing them
together, and following that which seems to carry most Reason with it. And
because every Body has not Leisure enough to do this, with much Attention, I
thought it would be of Use to take that Trouble for them: And that I may not
have Occasion to repeat the whole Title at every Turn, I shall, for Brevity's
sake, call the first Writer The Countryman, and the second The Citizen. What
will make my Labor still shorter, is the Agreement of these Writers in several
Points, which I must first consider, before I take Notice of what they differ
in. And if this Method was taken, in most Disputes, about which People are used
to be very Warm, they would very often be ended, almost as soon as begun.

The Writers then agree, That the Government ought to be Supported; that it is
for the Benefit of the Province that it should be so; and that every Body is,
as they hope, of the same mind. It is the End they both propose to themselves,
though they differ about some of the Means, that this should be effected, with
the least burden to the People, and with the least Prejudice to Trade and
Industry.

The Country-Man's first Maxim, That we should avoid, as much as possible, to
add any Charge to the Trade, Industry or Labor of the People, is likewise the
Citizen's main Assertion, which his whole Discourse is writ on purpose to prove.

The Country-Man's second Maxim, That the Support of Government should be laid
on Vice, etc. would not meet with any Opposition from the Citizen, if he
thought it practicable: He agrees that Vice should be prevented, but then he
thinks The Government will be but little Supported, by such a contrivance: As
for Instance, in the Duty of Rum; if the Duty is laid on to prevent Drinking,
then little Duty will be paid whenever there is but little Drinking; but if
there is much Duty paid, there must still be much Drinking: So that one Way or
the other, he thinks, it will not Answer. But it must be allowed That Vice
cannot be totally suppressed at once; and where that is attempted, it often
increases out of mere Contradiction: And so it would be in Case of a total
Prohibition of Rum, it would then be imported clandestinely, and drunk out of
Spite; whereas a moderate Duty checks the Importation in some Degree, and makes
it self be felt in the Pocket of the excessive Consumer; which may be a
likelier Means to reclaim him than severer Methods. There was a remarkable
Instance of this Kind in England, when it was attempted to suppress the
Dissenters by Penal Laws; the Effect was, That the Meetings increased, and the
Churches grew empty: But on the contrary, when the Toleration was granted, The
Dissenters decreased, and the Churches filled. The mere Inconvenience of
contributing to maintain two Ministers, insensibly brought about, in a great
Measure, that Union which Severity had set at a greater Distance.

So that as to the second Maxim, I think, what the Countryman and Citizen have
said, may be easily reconciled.

The Country-Man's third Maxim, That Trade had better be taxed than the Labor
or Manufactures of the People, seems, at first sight, to be very opposite to
the Citizen's Way of Thinking. But if we observe, on one Hand, that the Citizen
is not for taxing Labor or Manufacture any more than the other; and that his
chief Reason for not burdening Trade neither, is, Because he thinks he has
found a more equal Way of raising Money, without taxing any of them: And on the
other Hand, that the Countryman only chooses to tax Trade, rather than Labor,
because he had not thought of Any probable Way to avoid them both. We shall
find that these Authors would easily be agreed, if the Citizen's Expedient can
be made practicable: Nay more, the Countryman ought to come into it, in
consequence of his Maxim To discourage Vice; for Laziness and Covetousness are
certainly Vices; and these the Citizen is for discouraging in the Engrossers of
great Tracts of Land, who neither Sell nor Improve them; which he thinks a
Wrong to both King and Country. This he proposes to do by A general Tax to be
laid upon the true Value of Men's Estates, whether in Land or Money: By which
the Poor would certainly pay very little, and the Industrious not near so much
as they who may sit at Home with their Hands in their Pockets, and be daily
growing richer by the Industry of others. These Persons are of two sorts, some
who have Money, and others who have Lands. They who have Money, may enjoy a
very high Interest for it from those who must work hard, from one End of the
Year to the other, to pay it, and very often go to Jayl before they can repay
the Principal. While Interest is at so high a Rate, Trade can never flourish,
because the Profit must be very great to make it do. In Spain, where Interest
is at Ten per Cent. they have, by that Means, suffered all their Trade to fall
into the Hands of the English and Dutch, who are much better able to carry it
on, because Money is but at the Interest of Three or four per Cent. among them.
Nothing therefore can be plainer, than That Persons who have Money out at
Interest can much better afford to be Taxed than any to whom they lend it.

They who have Lands which they will neither Sell nor Improve sufficiently, are
another sort who may well pay Taxes, according to the value for which those
Lands might be Sold; for this value rises continually, as fast as Money does by
Interest; and all this, by means of the Industry of their Neighbors, and the
increase of People in the Province, who would add still more to the Produce of
the Country, if they could purchase Land at reasonable Rates. So that these
Engrossers of Land, are more hurtful to the Public, than the Lenders of Money
at high Interest; because the latter, make some circulation of their Estate,
though at an immoderate Profit; but the former, have a dead Treasure lying by
them, which they cannot spend, and which is not only of no use to the Public,
but of manifest Hindrance to the Peopling and Improving of the Province: And
for this Reason it is, that so many Families remove into Neighboring Provinces
to buy Land, by which we are yearly losing great Sums of Money, and great
Numbers of our People.

Now, what has been said, is enough to show, that the Citizen's Scheme is
highly reasonable; let us next consider whether it is Practicable. I am afraid
that the Reason which he gives for it, will rather prove an Objection; it is,
that the Burden will not fall heavy on the Poor, for they that have little,
will pay little. he might have added, that the Day Labourer and Tradesman will
often pay nothing at all; for as they generally live merely from Hand to Mouth,
and commonly spend before they get, their Estate is nothing. Now I would ask
the Citizen, in what Country he ever heard, that the whole Burden was taken
off the Poor, and laid on the Rich: Is it not generally the Rich that lay
Taxes, and do they not constantly take care not to Overburthen themselves? It
is true they are often Chosen by the Poor, but have they not always found out
ways to keep them Dependent, either by their Hopes or their Fears? so that they
are in effect, at the Command of the Rich, though they may think themselves ever
so much at their own Disposal. But it may be said, all that make Laws are not
remarkable for being great Moneyed or great Landed Men; there are many that
Improve their own Farms, and live comfortably, but have neither heaps of Cash
by them, nor vast Tracts of Land that lie unimproved, so that it would be their
Interest, rather to have a Tax levied in the Manner now proposed, than as it
commonly has been. This I am ready to grant, but are these honest industrious
Countrymen, so practiced in the Arts of Persuasion, as those whose time is
less innocently employed? Can they expect to be proof against the deep Designs
of Men that have all the leisure to contrive, and whose Interest is so highly
concerned to avoid a heavy Load themselves, and to shuffle it off upon others
that are not so sharpsighted? Such Men will leave no Stone unturned, to draw in
others to be their Tools, even against their own Interest, which may be so
disguised, as not to be discerned till the Jobb is over, and then it will be
too late to cry, who would have thought that they were imposing upon us all the
while? Methought all they said was Reason! and then, they were so kind and so
great with us, one would have Swore we had been Brothers! we never lived so
merrily in all our Lives, we thought they were Treating us at free Cost, but
now we are like to pay for it: Well! they shall never catch us again. Such
after-thoughts are all the Satisfaction, that generally Well-meaning deluded
People have upon such Occasions.

But suppose it were possible to obtain such a Tax, how would it be raised?
Would Men generally give in a true Account of their Estates in Cash? I fear the
Temptation would be too strong to the contrary: They have found it so in
England in the Customs, great Numbers of Commodities used to be valued
according to the Oath of the Importer, and then Rated according to that Value:
But the Frauds were so common, that a Custom-House Oath grew into a Proverb.
And lately, as I am informed, the Parliament has thought fit to put a certain
Value upon all these Merchandises, as the only Remedy to such a general
Corruption.

As to Estates in Lands, they might be more easily Assessed, because the
Neighborhood can judge of the Price they would yield: But then, how often do
they know the quantity? How many Thousand Acres may they be mistaken in! the
Patents will frequently be no guide to them, it being a common thing to Possess
Ten or twenty Times as much as is expressed in them. These difficulties in
Collecting, besides the little probability of obtaining such a Tax, have made
me lay aside all Expectation that the Citizen's Proposal will take: And since
the Countryman is willing to go along with him, as far as he can make his
Words good, it is but fair on the other side, that, if he fails in the Success
of his own Project, he should take the Country-Man's Scheme once again into
Consideration, and see if he cannot take up with it, for want of a better.

And indeed, they are already agreed in some of the chief Points, for as the
Citizen has little to say against the Duties on Wine, and Negroes imported, and
Cocoa; so the Countryman will, no doubt, upon his own Principles, give up the
Duty upon Goods imported from the Neighboring Plantations, since it certainly
hinders the Exportation of our own Produce, to Neighboring Colonies, and is
not of any prejudice to the Trade of Great Britain in general; for it is all
one to which of the Colonies Goods are sent, if they must be had from thence.

The Duty on Salt has been given up by the Countryman already. And as for
Molassus, he is not so positive in justifying that Duty, but that if a better
could be offered in its Room, he would give it up. And the Citizen own's, that
the Pole-Tax on Negroes is by no means to be laid; and yet that is all that has
been proposed in the room of the other Duties. So that, till something better
is found, the Duty on Molassus has more to be said for than against it. I may
add another Duty, which has not been mentioned by either of them, which ought
certainly to be taken off, because it is a Discouragement to our own
Manufacture, and that is, the Duty on Spirits Distilled from Molassus, etc. in
this Province.

So that now at last, we find the main Dispute, about particular Duties,
between the two Authors, to be only about the Rum and the Tonnage.

As to the Rum, the Citizen insists, That the Country will have it, cheap or
dear; which is at once an Answer to his Apprehension, That the Duty will spoil
our Trade with the West Indies: And indeed, it never has, for, on the contrary,
the Merchants have imported so much, ever since there has been a Duty on it,
that they complain, It has not bore so good a Price as before; and therefore
they allege, That they, and not the Country, have always paid the Duty.
Whether this be so or not, is no great Matter; for if the Merchant pays it,
then the Country are entirely eased: And if the Country pays it for what Part
they take off, they pay it so by little and little, that it is not felt; and
the idle drunken Sort pay by much the greater Share.

It is very true, that We cannot expect to be paid for all our Produce, in
Money, in the West Indies; but we had better be paid for it in other
Commodities than in Rum; and they would as willingly pay us in any other: For
Rum grows daily in greater Demand in England, and the Price of it, for that
Reason, keeps up in the West Indies; and so they might send most of their Rum
thither, and give us Bills of Exchange upon England for the Value, which will
suit them and us, just as well as to bring it hither.

I have already shown, That it is more for our Advantage, to import Molassus to
be Distilled here: And I may add, That we should likewise choose to import
Sugar, Cotton, Indigo, Cocoa and Logwood, which are all proper for to make
Returns to England; and so we should save so much Money which must otherwise be
sent thither: And this is all one with bringing Money for our Produce from the
Islands, and then sending it to Great Britain.

Thus, I think, we may see, that the Country-Man's Arguments for the Duty on
Rum remain yet unanswered; and that the Citizen ought in all Reason to give up
that Point to him.

As to the Tunnage, the Citizen makes one great Concession to the Countryman,
which is, That when that Duty is taken off* the Ship-Carpenters, Smiths and
other Tradesmen, concerned in Ship-Building, will be Sufferers by it; and the
Consequence of that is, That many others, who are now gainers by these
Tradesmen, will likewise Suffer; and so, by Degrees, we shall find the Loss to
be general: Besides, that taking away any one Considerable Sort of Employment,
lessens the Demand for People, and so is a Hindrance to the Province's being
well inhabited.

The Countryman spoke improperly in calling Bermudians Strangers, and their
Vessels Foreign Vessels: But, I believe, he does not much mistake in the
Argument, though he may in the Expression: For, I fancy every Inhabitant in this
Province, would rather contribute to make New York rich and flourishing than
Bermudas. So that if he has shown, that the Bermudians will run away with a
great Deal of our Money for Freight, which would otherwise remain in the Hands
of Owners living here, I think he has done enough.

And here it may be proper to consider what is offered by the Citizen, on the
other side; That taking off this Duty, will encourage the Exportation of our
Produce; and that in that Case many more Vessels will frequent this Port; for
if this is true, it is a very strong Argument: But it must not be forgot, That
the West Indies is not an increasing Market for our Produce: It has for many
Years past, taken off about the same Quantity of Flour, Bread, Pork, Bacon,
Butter, etc. and these Commodities are generally at a low Price there: So that
it is plain, That the Shipping we now have is enough to carry on that Trade;
and therefore it is certain, beyond Contradiction, that all that is carried on
by other Vessels must be so much Employment taken away from our own; and so
consequently it is a mere Amusement to tell the People, That more of their
Produce will be carried off, by making the Port open: For no Body will be so
weak, as to carry off more than will sell in the West Indies. And what they
bring from thence must, for the same Reason, hinder our own Vessels from
bringing away so much as they otherwise would: Because we can take off but such
a Quantity of Rum, Mollassus, Cocoa, etc. that is to say, as much as we pay for
by our Produce, and no more.

It is true, if we traded frequently to Spain and Portugal, there might be an
Advantage, in admitting any Vessels that would sail cheap, to carry our Produce
thither; because those are vast Markets, and could not easily be overstocked
with Wheat: And for this Reason, it might be proper to take off the Tunnage
from all Vessels built in Great Britain, from which Parts soever they come;
because they would generally find that a Freight from hence to Lisbon or Cadiz,
with Wheat, would be worth their while; having, by that Means, the Opportunity
of making another Freight from thence homewards; which must answer better to
Owners living in England than to us here; because we run the Risque of coming
back empty from Europe to this Place, as it often happens even in the direct
Trade to Great Britain.

The Citizen mentions one Instance of a Ship last Year, that went from hence to
Amboy, for to avoid the Duty of Tunnage: But he ought to have owned, that it
was likewise to avoid the Duty on Salt, which would have come to more than the
Tonnage; and which Duty is agreed on all Hands to be taken off. Besides, as
this was A British built Ship, the taking off the Tunnage of all those
Vessels, will answer that Objection fully: For we don't find that the
Bermudians, who are the only other Vessels who bring Salt, ever go to Amboy,
notwithstanding the Duty on Salt and Tunnage both: And they often come for a
Freight ^ither, even under all these Disadvantages. But (...) this Duty has
been so very pernicious, how comes the Citizen to bring but One Instance of a
Vessel going to another Port? Nay! how come we not to hear of These many
Vessels that used to freqent this Port formerly, before the Tunnage was laid
on? I believe, that Sort of Proof, which would be only to the Purpose, will be
very difficult: And this is the Reason of our hearing nothing of it. And till
that is made appear, we may take it for granted That really no more Vessels
used to be employed here, than now; But indeed of those that were so, That
fewer were our own, and more belonging to other Provinces. And if that should
be the Case again, and that People should throw up their Vessels, finding that
Bermudians run away with all the Freight, what would follow? Why* Bermudas
would be Master of our Trade, and might manage us to their Advantage, and
disappoint us as (...) as they would, and even put a (...) our Trade if they
pleased.

The Citizen says, That neighboring Provinces laugh at us, and get our Trade
from us, by Reason of these Duties. That ouht indeed to put us doubly into ill
Humor; to be Losers and Laughed at too, is insufferable. By this Account we
should be growing daily poorer, while they are thriving and flourishing. But is
this the Case? Is it not well known to be otherwise? Does not our Exchange with
England hold upon the same Foot, it has been upon for several Years? And are
not Boston, Carolina and even Pennsilvania in a different Case? Is not this a
Sign, That Specie is more plenty here than in any of those Places? And is not
the same thing likewise evident, by the Quantity of Gold, that is here often
taken in Payments? Whereas there is very sesdom such a Thing to be seen among
our Neighbors.

The only Colonies where the Exchange is better to England than from hence, are
Virginia and Maryland; and there the Government is supported entirely by Duties
on Tobacco. Every one, that pretends to talk of Trade, should know that the
Rate of Exchange is a sure Way of judging of the flourishing or declining State
of it, in any place; because that Country that falls in Debt to the other, must
be continually paying the Balance in Money; and that makes a Demand for Specie
or Bills of Exchange to be sent off, to pay that Debt. And therefore when
Boston, whose Money was made at the Proclamation-value, pays for a Bill of
Exchange of One Hundred Pounds Sterling, Three Hundred Pounds of their own
Currency, and Carolina five or six Hundred Pounds; and Philadelphia as much, at
least, in Proclamation-Money, as we do in Money at Eight Shillings per Ounce,
which is but One Hundred and Sixty five per Cent, it is plain that we have the
Advantage of them all: And therefore, I think the Countryman may here turn the
Argument fairly upon the Other, and say, You see what comes of Land-Taxes in
other Provinces! You see that they hurt Trade more, by discouraging Industry,
than Duties themselves! And that we act more prudently than our Neighbors, in
easing the Industrious and the Labourious, and laying the Burden upon the Idle
and the Lazy, and the Expensive. I fancy those will laugh with the best Grace
that laugh last. And as long as this Province continues to gain upon her
Neighbors, I think she is pretty sure of carrying The Laugh at the long run.

It is reasonable indeed that the Duties should only be paid upon so much as is
consumed in the Province, and that the Merchant should have the Duty, or the
greatest Part of it, paid back to him, when he ships off his Goods for another
Province; which is called the Drawback: This will certainly encourage our Trade
and enable us to supply our Neighbors, as cheap as they can supply themselves:
Which will entirely answer all the Citizen's Fears, That while we pay Duties,
and they none, that they will run away with the Trade from us. This is the
Method taken in Great Britain; and by this Means, while they discourage
extravagant Consumption at Home, they contrive to have all Manner of
Merchandise pass through them; and in their own Ships to supply all other
Nations.

There have indeed many Cheats been practiced, under Pretense of these
Drawbacks; which will require great Care in wording the Acts, and faithful
Officers to Execute them. The Countryman proposed to do this by Storehouses,
which seems a good Way to prevent Frauds; but perhaps would not be so much to
the Merchant's Ease and Satisfaction, as this Method of Drawback; and this has
been already practiced here in Cocoa; and would be fit to be renewed on that,
as well as granted on other Commodities.

If this Method be taken, then all the Duties will come to be laid to the same
End as an Excise; which is only a Tax upon Expense: And this is the Duty by
which that wise Nation the Dutch, raise the greatest Part of their Income. One
cannot eat a Dish of Fish, in Holland, before it has paid to several Branches
of the Excise. And if they who live only by Trade, think it fittest to lay a
Duty in this Manner, can we have any Pretense That it will hurt Trade? The
Dutch do it certainly to discourage their People from all needless and
excessive Expense; and they are become a vastly Rich People, as much by their
Savings as by their Gains. We in this Colony, chiefly, owe our Advantanges
above our Neighbors, to the Frugality of the first Settlers which they brought
from Holland with them; it was their living hard, and pinching their Bellies,
That enabled them to leave good Houses and well-stockt Farms to their
Posterity. And shall we depart from the sure Maxims of our Ancestors, and run
into a course of Luxury and Debauchery, till we lose our Senses and our
Estates, merely to please a few People who set us a bad Example, and will reap
all the Profit of our Folly!

What is then the design of those who are most Zealous to take off the Duties?
Why, it is to be feared, whatever they may pretend, that it is to weaken the
Government, to discourage Justice, and to have all the Power in their own
Hands: For necessarily, if the poorer Sort have no Refuge to fly to, no Justice
to be obtained, they must be entirely at the Discretion of the Rich, and lie
wholly at their Mercy. Whereas Courts of Justice, and the Power of the
Government to see the Laws put in Execution, keep Things in a just Balance and
maintain the Public Peace.

It is very true, that Governors may likewise abuse their Power: But when they
do, we know that the Door is open to all just Complaints, and when there is any
Reason for them, they ought to be made in the most public Manner; and under so
Gracious a KING, who rules over so free a Country as Great Britain, we need
never doubt of Redress.

But supposing this Design to distress the Government should prevail again, as
it did, not many Years ago, what will be the Consequence? Why! the Mischief of
it will soon be found out, the Country will be sensible That they have been
abused and deceived, that they cannot have their Property secured to them
without the Protection of the Government; and that they have been drawn in to
contract a great, but a necessary Debt, which will come upon them at once to be
paid, in the haviest manner, as it lately was. So that to avoid a few Duties
for the Present, which they do not feel, they will entail heavy Land Taxes upon
themselves, which neither they, nor perhaps their Children, will have any Hopes
to see an End of.

We may see how unreasonable the common way of laying Taxes upon the Income
only, is thought to be, by the sharp Remonstrances from the People of France to
their King, against a Tax of this kind of Two per Cent. only, which have been
published in our Newspapers: We see their Fears, that the Industry of the
People will be Discouraged, and their Trade ruined by it. If then a Nation
under so Absolute a Power as the French are, feel it so sensibly, as to venture
to Complain, in the strongest Manner, though they are sure to Smart for it, under
the heavy Displeasure of their Monarch: How much more may we expect, that such
Taxes will become Odious among a free People, when they come to find the
Difference between them and Duties upon Merchandise!

In fine, I hope all that has been said by the Countryman and Citizen will be
duly Considered, and if I have been of Service, in putting their Reasons into a
plainer Light, for the use of my Neighbors and of the whole Country, of which
the City is a part, I shall think my Pains well bestowed.

And whatever wrong Measures might have prevailed by Surprise, yet now that
there has been time given, to examine into the Matter at leisure, it is very
unlikely, that private Views, and secret Artifices will get the better of the
true Interest of the Country.

FINIS.

