SOLOMON's Caution against the Cup. A SERMON Delivered at Cainhoy, in the
Province of South Carolina. March 30. 1729.

By Josiah Smith, M. A.

Genesis ix. 21. And he drank of the wine, and was drunken.

Luke xxi. 34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed for D. HENCHMAN, in Cornhill, MDCCXXX.

SOLOMON's Caution against the CUP.
PROVE. XXIII. 31, 32. Look not thou upon the Wine when it is red, when it
gives his color in the Cup, when it moves it self aright, at the last it
biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder.


THEY are the Words of King Solomon, and his celebrated Wisdom should give them
the greater weight with us.

It Is observable, that among all the Sins and Lusts of the flesh, the Royal
Preacher takes the most notice of Whoredom and Drunkenness. He begins with the
Whore in my Context, and describes her by a deep ditch, and a narrow pit, that
lies in wait, as for a prey, and increases the Transgressors among Men. To
this, he subjoins the words of my Text. -- Look not thou upon the wine, when it
is red, when it gives his color in the cup, when it moves it self aright. --
Why not? Has God made any thing in vain? Is not Wine ordained to cheer the
heart of Man? to help his Stomach, and his often Infirmities? yes: every
Creature of God is good, sanctified by Prayer, and received with Thanksgiving;
but it may not be abused, to feast our Luxury, and to quench our Drunken and
Excessive thirst. The abuse is here forbidden, the Wine wherein is Excess;
where Reason is dethroned, and Passion become absolute; where Men have lost the
command of their Appetites, and drink at irregular hours, and to an excessive
degree. -- Then they must not look upon it, when it is red etc. But guard
against it, and keep their distance. -- Because, at the last, it biteth like a
Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. (i. e.) It Is of pernicious consequence to
the Drunkard.

In the Prosecution therefore of the Subject, I shall Consider.

I. The Character and Consequences of Wine, or any other Liqour, drank to
Excess. II. The Reasons, why we should abstain, and keep our distance from it.
I. The Character and Consequences of Wine, or any other Liquor, drank to
Excess.

1. It Is of pernicious Consequence to the Purse.

Be not amongst Wine-bibbers, amongst riotous Eaters of Flesh; for the
Drunkard, and the Glutton shall come to Poverty. What is said of the Whore, is
applicable enough to the Cup, that by Means thereof, a Man is brought to a
piece of Bread. How often has this Observation been verified in our Eyes? How
usual a Thing is it for Persons addicted to Liquor, to set out in the World,
with a good, improveable Interest, and to be reduced, by excessive Drinking, to
Penury and Want; to see them naked and hungry, living on their Neighbors
Charity, or spending their Days in Goals and Prisons: Of this we have, not one
or two, but many Instances. Men that have brought themselves, and (which is
more affecting) their innocent Families, to shameful Beggary: -- Nor can it
morally speaking, be otherwise.

(1.) When the Liquor they swallow is so Expensive. When their Expenses run up
to Hundreds, if not Thousands in the year. Men need plentiful Estates, a large
Fund, and great Incomes, to Balance the Expense of superfluous Liquors,
abstract from the Necessaries of Life. (2.) As their Liquor is Expensive, so
their Time is Consumed. When they should be at Home, then they are abroad at a
Tavern, and drinking, when they should attend their Business and Callings; and
it is well, if their Cups have not the larger half of their Time: It Is
notoriously so in too many Instances; who Work one day, and, perhaps, Drink out
two. (3.) They not only consume their Time, but lose their disposition for
Business. The Drunkard daily contracts slothful Habits, and a growing Aversion
to his Work and Calling. He is unfit for Labor, and in his soberest Hours,
cannot so well project his Schemes, or dispose his Affairs.

(4.) I might add, under the Head of Penury, how exposed he stands to the
Impositions of Knaves and Cheats.
How often do they take the advantage of his Cups, and sleeping Reason? to
entice him into Contracts and Bargains that are injurious to his Interest; and
sometimes to subscribe Papers to his ruin and destruction? I am persuaded, I
need not help your Memories here, nor Recollect for you. These several ways,
among others, does the Drunkard come to Poverty. An Argument, I have the longer
insisted upon, because it draws its force, from the inconsistency of the Sin,
with the Riches and Profits of this World, which is most apt to affect the
Minds of such, as look not at the Things, which are unseen and Eternal. Nor is
Poverty the only pernicious consequence of the Cup. For,

2. It strikes the Reputation and Character.

Men act below their Honor, and expose themselves in their Wine, sometimes by
foolish, impertinent Questions and Answers, inconsistent with their sober
tho'ts and discretion; and sometimes, by unbecoming, if not immodest Actions;
as Noah drank of the Wine, and was uncovered in his Tent. When Micah saw David
dance before the Ark, though out of a religious respect and gladness, she
despised him in her Heart, and said scoffing, How glorious did the King of
Israel look to day, in the Eyes of his Servants and Maidens! -- Methinks, the
Irony may more naturally, and with a more visible Justice, be applied to the
Drunkards. How glorious do they look in the Eyes of sober Men! staggering over
the Plains; wandering out of their Way; their Mouths full of Bitterness and
Cursing, and beastly Communication; their Eyes dim and drowsy; their Reason
drowned, and the Man a Brute, in a different Shape. If this be an honorable
Stroke in a Man's Character, the Drunkard may be sure of Honor enough. And
next to a Man's Life and Health, and before his Interest, is his Character. A
good Name is as precious Ointment, but the Drunkard, is a dead Fly, which makes
it stink in the Nostrils of Fame.

3. Drunkenness is a leading Iniquity, a capital Crime, and draws a
Complication of Sins after it.

(1.) It Is direct Tendency is to all Uncleanness. The wise Man therefore
connects them, and assigns impure Desires, as the effect of the Cup. Thine Eyes
shall behold strange Women. Reason is then deposed, and Passion, absolute
enough before, receives an Incentive from Liquor, and burns up to an impure
Fire: Witness Lot's Incest with his two Daughters, after he had drank of the
Wine. These two Adepts in Wickedness, knew of no other Method, to reach their
cursed Ends, but to make their Father drink Wine. I will not offend a modest
Audience, in descending too much into Particulars; I will only say, that Men
(and why should I leave out Women?) run to such extravagant lengths of
Uncleanness, in their Cups, as would make them blush, at the very mention, when
their sober Tho'ts and Reason return.

(2.) It directly leads to open Profaneness. It corrupts the Language, and
debauches the Tongue, which is then a Fire, set on Fire of Hell and Liquor, in
union. What profane Speeches, enough to make a sober Ear tremble, drop from
the Drunkards Mouth: Language, perhaps, he was never accustomed to. How are all
the Bonds of Profession, and the Power of the strictest Education, forgot in a
Tavern. Those that pass for Saints, and Men of Religion, if captivated by the
Cup, when it gives his Color, are as loose and profane, as the greatest
Practitioners.

(3.) It often runs into Murder it self. A thousand unhappy Proofs we have of
this, and some very modern. Liquor inflames the Passions; then arises
Contention, Heat and Blood; then Duelling, or private Attempts, and sometimes
the open Act of Murder. This is often the Issue with Men: And how often have we
known the other Sex, first in their Cups, then prompted to Uncleanness, then to
stifle their Conception, or to imbrew their Hands in the Blood of their
Infants? The same Persons the Instruments of their Being and Death. These three
Sins, Drunkenness leads us to, by a natural and direct Tendency; and in a
remoter Sense, it is the Occasion of all Sin. Our Savior exhorts us, to watch
and pray, lest we enter into Temptation; but a Man in Drink, is unfit for both.
Therefore, when the Apostle Peter would commend Vigilance, he first exhorts to
Sobriety. Be Sober, be Vigilant, for your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring
Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour. All our Vigilance and
Strength, are little enough to guard us against him. What must become of us
then, when Wine has thrown us upon our Backs, and lulled us into a spiritual
Lethargy! There is no Sin so unnatural, but a Drunkard may commit it; though it
be to murder his Father, and to defile his Mother.


4. The Sin of Drunkenness wounds the Conscience.

What bitter Reflections follow the Cup! At the last it biteth like a Serpent,
and stingeth like an Adder. Nothing remains but Remorse of Conscience, and like
John's prophetic Book, the Wine that was sweet in the Mouth, becomes bitter in
the Belly. Or, if the Drunkard be without this consequent Remorse, when his
Reason returns, his Case is yet worse, and more to be pitied; it is an awful
sign his Conscience is seared, and instead of warning, shall only awake to tear
him in Hell, where the Worm dies not.

5. Drunkenness unfits us for all public Services.

How may Persons, distinguished by Nature, and otherwise qualified for Posts of
Honor, and the highest Stations in the civil Government, render themselves
incapable of such important Trusts, only by indulging a brutish Appetite after
the Cup. I say, incapable. For Men of Rule, and Justice, must be Men of
Temperance, and Sobriety: It Is not for Kings to drink Wine, nor for Princes
strong Drink; lest they drink and forget the Law, and pervert the Judgment of
the afflicted. And the same holds good in sacred Government. The Priest, and
the Prophet have erred through strong Drink; they are swallowed up of Wine, they
are out of the Way, through strong Drink; they err in Vision, they stumble in
Judgment. When Persons at the Helm of any Government reel themselves, how can
we expect that Government should be steady, or the Administrations of it
Regular? So that the Sot, is at best, but an insignificant Cipher in human
Society, and of all Men, is the most unfit, to serve his Generation.

6. It incapacitates Men for Church Communion, and the Enjoyment of Special
Ordinances.

We cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils. What fellowship
has Christ with Drunkards? How dare we drink the Consecrated Wine, and be
filled with that wherein is Excess! To admit such to the Table of the Lord, is
to give that which is Holy unto Dogs; which we dare not do, at our utmost
Perils: And, if there be any Drunkards of our Communion, I solemnly Charge
them, either to Repent or Absent.

7. Drunkenness is an Enemy to the Life of Men.

How frequently is it attended with Surfeits? And how does it impair the
Constitution, and often become the Original of Mortal Distempers? And who has
Woe? who has Sorrow? who has Contention? who has Wounds without cause? who
has redness of Eyes! They that tarry long at the Wine, they that go to seek
mixed Wine. Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow
Strong Drink; that continue until night, until Wine inflame them: Woe unto them,
that are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of strength, to mingle Strong Drink. How
many Accidents are they exposed to! They sometimes fall from their Horses, in
returning from the Tavern, and sometimes stumble on the dark Mountains, and
break and bruise their Limbs, when they escape with their Lives. They are
Objects of contempt and scorn, to their Company, and subject to the insults of
their Enemies. Elah was drinking himself Drunk, in the house of Arka, when
Zimri smote and killed him. Benhadad also was drinking himself Drunk, in the
Pavilion, when Israel came and slew the Syrians. So, when Destruction was
determined against Nabal, his heart was merry within him, for he was very
Drunken. And, says Solomon, describing the Drunkards security, in the most
imminent Dangers, Thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst of the Sea,
or as he that lies upon the Top of a Mast; They have stricken me, shall thou
say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not.

8. Drunkenness destroys the Soul.

The Drunkard drinks at infinite Expense; he parts with his Soul, to please his
Palate; and will rather cast his whole Body into Hell, then pluck out his right
Eye. It Is a Sin that drowns Men in Perdition: For be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Drunkards, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. The works of the
Flesh are manifest, viz. Drunkenness, etc. and such like, of the which I tell
you before, as I have also told you in times past, that they which do such
things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Awake, therefore ye Drunkards,
and weep and howl, all ye drinkers of Wine: Take heed to your selves, lest at
any time your hearts be overcharged with Drunkenness, and the Day of the Lord
come upon you unawares, and you drink of the wine of the Wrath of God, which is
poured forth without mixture, into the Cup of His Indignation: for in the Hand
of the Lord, is a Cup, and the Wine is red, and the Dregs thereof all the
Wicked of the Earth shall drink.

From the Character and Effects of excessive Drinking, I pass

II. To observe the Reasons, why we should abstain and keep at the utmost
Distance from the Cup. Or in the Words of my Text, not look upon the Wine when
it is red. And here,

1. The Consequences of it are to be considered.

It Is a good Reason, which is subjoined to the Precept. Who would be fond of
the Adder's Sting? Or would not avoid the Bite of the Serpent? Drunkenness is
the Serpent and the Adder; the Consequences of it makes it so: They are very
Pernicious; Pernicious as I have described it, to the Purse, reducing Men and
their Families to Want and Poverty; Pernicious to their Reputation and
Character; it is a leading iniquity, attended with the complicated Crimes of
Lust, Profaneness and Murder, and giving the Enemy every Advantage over us; a
Sin, that wounds the Conscience, fills it with Remorse, or makes it Stupid and
Useless; that unfits for public Service, both in Church and State; and that
incapacitates us for Communion with Christ, or a Right to his Ordinances; an
Enemy to the Health and Life of Man, and in the Issue, destructive to his Soul.
What greater Consideration can we have, to keep our Distance and Guard? The
Argument is fetched from both Worlds; from Body and Soul; Self and Neighbor,
and Family; Reputation, Life and Interest. If Men have no Regard to these, what
can prevail with them!

2. Because Temptations to Drunkenness, will never excuse the Sin.

When we are surpised by Temptation, the Sin is so far extenuated, and of less
Aggravation in the Circumstance, but not wholly excuseable; the Authority of
God prohibiting, being infinitely Superior to the Power of the Creature,
tempting. But when we run into Temptation, I cannot see how the Power of it
will, either excuse, or extenuate a Fault. It will be no Plea for the Drunkard
in the Day of Judgment, that he was tempted by the Cup. God may then ask him,
What was the Rule of your Practice? Your own Appetite, or my Precept? Which
ought to have had the first Influence upon you? The Authority of my Law, or the
Persuasions of the Creature? Was I to be contemned? Was my Law to be
undervalu'd? My Threatenings despised? And my Grace slighted? And my Son
rejected? for a contemptible Cup, and a brutish Gratification? Or, if the
Temptations of Liquor were so powerful, and the Charms of the Cup so
irresistible, why did you Venture upon it? When your Experience told you, once
and again, your own Weakness and Insufficiency, why did you not take the
Warning? Why would you run again, among sottish Companions to Taverns and
Houses of Perdition? If you could not forbear, nor moderate your Draught, you
should not have gone, nor have looked upon the Wine when it was red, when it
gave his Color in the Cup. Such Questions as these will strike the Drunkard
Speechless.

3. We should keep our Distance from the Cup, because we are so often conquered
by it.

Simply considered, it can be no Crime, to look upon the Wine when it is red,
nor to drink it in Moderation. This Timothy himself might do; but the
Consequences of it make it Dangerous and Criminal. The Line of Division between
Virtue and Vice, Good and Evil, is very narrow, and soon stepped over; and to
venture, in some Cases, to the Extremity of what is Lawful, is almost venturing
upon what is otherwise. A Man that would not fall, must not go too near the
Precipice. A Man that will run into a public House, is in Danger of looking
upon the Wine; and he that looks upon the Wine, is in danger of Drinking, and
he that Drinks in danger of drinking to Excess. I appeal to the Experience of
some Drunkards, whether they have not flattered themselves, at first, with the
Tho'ts of Moderation, and been sufficiently guarded, in their own Conceit,
against all Excesses, and yet been insensibly tempted, and drank away their
Reason and Senses: If we expect to be delivered from Evil, we must not be led
into Temptation. This stands first in the Lord's Prayer.

Thus have I shown the pernicious Consequences of Drunkenness; and the Reasons,
why we should avoid the most distant Temptations to it? I will not deny, but
both the Propositions are directly, and designedly, levelled against Taverns;
not against Taverns in their original Design, when first set up to accommodate
Strangers, and to provide against their Intrusion into private Families: But
against Taverns degenerated from their first Design, and debauched and filled
with sottish Neighbors. To such Houses we owe all the forementioned Effects of
Drunkenness. Here it is, that the Wine looks red, and moves it self aright;
Here it is that Nature and Art unite, and tempt the Palate, with agreeable
Mixtures: These are the Houses, that make Men Beggars, that destroy the Funds
of Charity, and rob Families of their just and proper Livelihoods. These are
the Houses, that wound our Character and Reputation; that lead into Acts of
Uncleanness, Hostility, Murder and Profaneness; that waste and stupify our
Consciences; make us unfit for public Service and Church Privileges: These are
the Houses, that strike at Men's Lives, Health and Constitution; that make
Merchandise of their Souls; and in a Word, destroy us for both Worlds. What a
heavy Charge is this upon those that keep them! Thousands may curse them in
this World, and the Blood of Thousands will cry against them in the next. If we
are come to Hell, say they, You, you we may thank, in a great measure for it.
Our Ministers faithfully warned us against the Sin of Drunkenness, and plainly
told us the Consequences of it; but you have tempted us into it; you first
tempted us to your Houses, and when you saw us drink to Excess, you never put
the Knife to our Throat, nor denied us Liquor, nor confined us to proper Hours;
the longer we staid, and the more we drank, the greater was your Profit from
us, and you valued your Purse more than our Souls. Now, we curse the Day, when
we knew you; we curse the Time, when we stepped over your Threshold, and the
unhappy Hours we consumed in Drinking at your Houses. I know Tavern-keepers
think little of this; and plead, Not Guilty, to the whole Charge. We never, say
they, forced any Man; every one had his Liberty to go or stay. But what Mockery
is this! If they never forced, it was because they could not: To tempt was all
they could do, and this they did with all imaginable Art; and the Devil himself
is excused, by the same Argument, for he can only tempt, and has Power to force
no Man: But if those who keep such Houses regard not what I say, yet I expect
some Regard from you, that hear me, and now solemnly warn you against Taverns.

1. I beseech and charge you this Day, to exercise your Parental Affection,
Authority, and Endeavors, to keep your Children from such Houses of Hell and
Perdition.

They are young, and passionate, and more easily tempted, than Age and
Experience. Remember what hopeful Youths, have been deceived, and ruined by
Taverns; Ruined I say, for Body and Soul, for Time and Eternity: And your
Children are but Children of the same common nature and weakness with others,
and it must be your Parental Care, and the Exercise of your Authority over
them, under God, if they escape the Snare, and fall not into the same Ditch.
Had not the Parents in this Place, been too Remiss in this great Duty, so many
of our Youth, it is probable, had not been so Vicious, as they are. -- Let this
negligence, be never again reproved in you. If you have any regard to the
interest of your Children in this World; If you value their Repute and
Character; if you would preserve a good Conscience in them: If you have any
compassion for their Souls or Bodies. If you would have them dedicated to God,
and devoted to His Service here, or dwell with Him hereafter; And (I will say)
if the interests of this Church, or that Religion, in general, which is pure
and undefiled, have any weight with you; Keep them; Keep them from Taverns;
Keep them at remotest distance; Let them not go by the door of such Houses, nor
be found in such Company, however civil and obliging, as would lead them there.
Keep them, therefore, as much as may be, at Home, under the inspection of your
own Eye; for better follow your Children to their Graves, than see them run
into Taverns.

2. With the same Solemnity, and Earnestness, I beseech and charge you to
absent your selves.

If you are not so easily tempted as your Children, yet the Consequences of
your going are great, and you have no just Plea for it. Neither from the
Command of your Passions; nor from the necessity of your Business.

1. It is no just plea for a Man to say, I am so well fortifyed by the Grace of
God, and have my Passions in so just a subjection to my Reason, that for the
sake of agreeable Company, I may innocently enough frequent a Tavern. This I
say, is not a just Plea. For, 1. You stand by the Grace of God, and not by your
own natural power. This you confess, and therefore ought to take heed, lest you
fall: If God withdraw His Grace, you will as soon lose the command of your
Passions, as another, and drink with the Drunken. 2. You tempt God, by going to
withdraw His Grace. God's Grace never supersedes Man's endeavors; they always
act in concurrence; and when Grace is thus abused to wantonness, and pleaded as
an argument for Public Houses, it is a Sovereign wonder, if it be not
withdrawn. 3. Supposing, God should continue His Grace, and you should have the
command of your own Passions; yet your example may embolden others, who
perhaps, have not your Grace. They think it is enough to justify them for ever,
when they can say, such and such a Man, an eminent Professor, and a reputed
Christian, frequents the Tavern as well as we; and they will profanely improve
your very Sobriety as a further Argument in favor of their Practice. Why say
they, do our Preachers thunder out their Anathema's, and pretend such a
necessary Connection betwixt Taverns and Drunkenness, when we see so many
return from them sober as they went? And so you destroy the Soul of your
Brother for whom Christ dyed. 4. You Countenance the thing it self, and
practically plead in vindication of those, who keep such Houses, more than a
Score, of the Profane Character. They will too naturally think, that
Tavernkeeping (in the very sense which I intend) is not a Crime, when Men of
Virtue and Profession thus encourage it. 5. You give needless occasion of
offense to them that are without. If you frequent a Tavern, behave your selves
with the utmost Guard and Caution you can; malicious Tongues will make it a
cover for their Slanders, and wound the Church of God through your sides.

6. It Is strange and wonderful, how a Tavern should afford agreeable Company to
a Christian, unless Cursing, Swearing, and vain Babbling can be agreeable to
Sobriety, Modesty, and Piety. And the Truth is, when a Man runs to a Tavern for
Company, it is a sign, he has little of the Saint in him. So that an Argument
from this Character, and the command of our Passions, will not bear the Test.
Nor


2. Will it answer better, to plead our Business. For, it is hard to conceive,
why Taverns should be made the Stage of Business. An improper place it is, I Am
sure for any Transactions of though it, and consequence; amidst Clamor, Drinking,
Gaming, and all imaginable confusions. So that Business is a mere pretense.
Thus have I endeavored to expose the vile and pernicious Sin of Drunkenness,
and warned you faithfully against the Taverns. I have delivered my own Soul,
and if you will not take the Warning, your Blood, and your Childrens Blood be
upon your own Head.

FINIS.

