The temporal safety of the Lord's People, until they forsake Him.

Considered with particular Respect to GOD's dealing with his People IN
NEW ENGLAND, IN their Settlement and Prosperity, and in the distressing Wars
that have attended them.

Preached at Weymouth, July 30. 1732.

On the Occasion of the Treaty with the Indians, at the Eastward.

By THOMAS PAIN, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Weymouth.

Printed at the Desire of many of the Hearers.

Joel 1, 2, 3. Hear this ye old Men, and give ear all ye Inhabitants of the
Land; -- Tell ye your Children of it, and let your Children tell their
Children, and their Children another generation. Psalm. 78. 4. Showing to the
generation to come, the Praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his
wonderful works that he has done. Ezekiel. 2. 7. And thou shall speak my words
unto them, whether they will hear or whether they will forbear. BOSTON: N. E.
Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN for S. GERRISH in Cornhil 1732

The temporal Safety of the Lord's People, until they forsake him.
ISAIAH xiv. 32. What shall one then answer the Messengers of the Nation? That
the Lord has founded Zion and the Poor of his People shall trust in it.
IT is no small Part of the Duty of Zion's Watchmen to observe, and lead their
People with them into a religious Improvement of Particular Providence. And
since these Days are very remarkable, -- wherein the Heads of our Country are
gone forth in solemn Form to receive and entertain the Messengers of the Nation
in a Treaty with them on the very important Articles of Peace, and of their
receiving the glorious Gospel of Salvation; I have turned my Thoughts on this
Subject as a proper Means of leading up our moved Affections to the pious
Exercises that are proper on this great Occasion: Here every one, who
considering the already distressed State of the Land, and the many Evils that
would attend a bloody War with the deceitful Heathen on our Borders shall
eagerly ask the important Question, What shall one then answer the Messengers
of the Nation? Is furnished with an answer of Divine certainty, That the Lord
has founded Zion: and the Poor of his People shall trust in it. The Prophet
Isaiah was sent and continued by God to the backsliding Jews a very great
while, Isa. 1. 1. and the Subject of his large and excellent Prophesy, besides
that of it which relates to the Coming of Christ and Spreading of his Gospel,
is chiefly a Representing to the Jews the great and dreadful Calamities which
God would bring upon them for their Sins, and that by the Assyrians, Chaldeans,
etc. And also his Restoring them to Favor after a longtime; And punishing
their Enemies in a most fearful manner. God had nourished up and increased the
Tribes of Israel and Judah to be his own peculiar People, but they at length
basely forsook the God of their Fathers, therefore he stired up against them
the Heathen that were round about them, and made them the Rod of his Anger, to
punish that hypocritical Nation; But they, as is common in such Cases, went
beyond their Commission as Executioners and lavished their own Rage and
barbarous Cruelties upon the miserable People that were put into their Hands to
be chastised, (which temper it is likely made David avoid falling into the
Hands of Men, 2 Samuel 24 14.) Therefore God would not leave them unpunished, but
by this Prophet foretold their destruction too. And among these Heathen Enemies
of the Lord's People, they who made no small Figure were the Chaldeans on the
North, whose borders were vastly extended, and their Metropolis was Babylon;
And the Philistians on the South-west, and the Desolation of these two is
foretold in the 13 and 14 Chapters: And from the 28 verse of this chapter to
that which I have named for my Text, is particularly exhibited the utter
Downfall of the Philistians, who were such near and bad Neighbors and often
such very cruel Enemies to the Jews. And it is very likely that they with the
other neighboring Nations might at that time look upon the Poverty of the Jews
with Disdain and enquire of them occasionally and tauntingly too, how they
would escape being an easy Prey to their Enemies if there should be a War with
them? And at the Conclusion of these Predictions, comes in my Text, which is an
heroic Strain of the Prophet's Acknowlegement and Praise to the Sovereign
Author of Juda's Salvations, and a very pious Direction, showing how the Lord's
defended People should improve such Favors. What shall one then answer the
Messengers of the Nation. Or, And what shall, or, What shall therefore be
answered by any one, to the Messengers of the Nation? The Ambassadors of any
People or Nation that should be sent to the Jews on any Occasion whatsoever:
And of such Messengers there is great and frequent Occasion in the Affairs of
every Nation or People, to treat with one another on the important Business of
Peace and War; to settle the limits of Trade and Commerce: Or to congratulate
or condole with one another in particular Circumstances, and the like. And some
would have it understood of any Strangers that should occasionally repair to
the Jews. And the Answer is, That God has founded or established and secured
Zion: and the poor of his People shall trust in it. Zion was the City of David,
the Metropolis of the Jews: And that Name is often used to signify the Church
or People of God; such as are called by his Name, are careful of his Worship
and Ordinances, and do depend upon his Protection. And in this latter sense, at
least in Conjunction with the former, I suppose the Word to be used here: And
so I shall further discourse of my Text under these two general Heads,

Doct. 1. That God has so established his Church in the World, as that his
People in their greatest Poverty and Distress, may safely trust therein for
Protection from their Enemies.

Doct. 2. That it is the Duty of the Lord's People carefully to let others, and
especially the Heathen round about them know what their Dependence is.

Doct. 1. That God has so established his Church in the World, as that his
People in their greatest Poverty and Distress, may safely trust therein for
Protection from their Enemies. And here I shall show,

1. What is intended by Men's trusting in Zion, or the Church of God for Safety
and Protection from their Enemies. 2. The Truth of the Doctrine -- And 3. The
Reason of the Doctrine as it relates to Men's Practice: Or the natural
Connection that there is between Religion and temporal Safety To show,

1. What is intended by Men's trusting in Zion or the Church of God for Safety
and Protection from their Enemies.

It supposes their constant and industrious care in the ordinary Methods of
Defense, hoping in and waiting for the fulfillment of Gospel Promises in a way
of careful and sincere Obedience to the Rules of it. Such as expect the special
Appearances of Providence to the obtaining for or securing to them any Favor,
must carefully employ all their own Powers in a regular way of obtaining that
end for themselves, or else they expect that Favor in an unreasonable way; for
how can Men look that God should do any thing for them while they are either
too lazy or too wilful to do what they can for themselves? And this Argument
will appear in the most convincing Light, if we consider such Indolence,
Wilfulness and Negligence, to be as they really are, a very great degree of
disobedience to and contempt of God, who has given them their Powers to be
always used in a rational Way. The impotent Man must strive to stretch forth
his hand at Christ's bidding, or else he could have had no hope of a Cure, Mat.
12. 13. And Gideon with his little Army must go forth in Warlike Form against
Midian, although God had determined to destroy those Enemies miraculously, Judge.
7. 15, etc.

And having applied their own Care and Labor, they must humbly look to God for
the fulfillment of his Promises to them: And this naturally supposes their pious
Care to evidence, That they are indeed his People, for why else do they come to
him? It must be allowed by all, That they who expect the Favors of God's
Church, must be within its Walls, and this cannot be without obeying its Rules
and Ordinances. And that Church or People who as a Body do yield a careful and
sincere Obedience to the Rules of the Gospel, do thereby discover themselves to
be the Subjects and Servants of God, and may lay just claim to his Patronage
and Protection, Isa. 33 20, 22. And where this Obedience is wanting, they are
the Enemies of God and may expect to be treated accordingly, what ever
distinguishing names of Virtue or Religion they may take to themselves. While
the Jews continued a pure Church, they always had large experience of the
Divine Honors and Protections so bestowed on them, as that they knew it to be
because they were the Lord's People, and this mightily confirmed their
Confidence and Joy in God, Psalm. 62. 8. But at length they vainly run over to a
carnal Confidence in the external part of their Church Privileges, while they
sadly neglected the Spirit and Power of Godliness. And God reproaches them for
it, and professes his design to cast them off, although they were called by his
Name, Jer. 7. begin to ver. 15. The Sum of all this is plainly shown in the
Terms of that Covenant stipulation, Jer. 7. 23. Obey my Voice and I will be
your God, and ye shall be my People, and walk ye in all the Ways that I have
commanded you, that it may be well unto you Thus Obedience is the only Evidence
of our Subjection to God; and this Subjection is our only Title to Safety.
Jotham's Parable in Judge. 9. 15. instructs us here.

And then I come to show,

2. The Truth of the Doctrine. And to render it plain and easy, I Premise,

1. Respecting the Circumstances of the People to be defended: That their
greatest Distress and Poverty, is no bar or difficulty in the way of their
Protection, unless they have forfeited this by their disobedience. So the
Lord's People in the greatest Distress and Poverty, are to trust in him, with
whom it is equal to save by many or by few, by strong or weak means. It was a
time of sore Affliction and Poverty in Israel, which well might, and it is
likely did make beholders wonder, and enquire how they should be secured from
becoming an easy prey to their neighboring Enemies, unto which the Answer in
my Text refers, That the Lord has founded Zion and the poor of his people
shall trust in it. And

2. Respecting the extent of the temporal Protection of the Lord's People,
exhibited in my Text and Doctrine: That although this is confirmed to them in the
way of a Covenant, As 2 Chronicles. 33. 7, 8. Jer. 7. 23, and elsewhere; Obedience
and Trust being the terms on their part, and Protection and Safety the terms on
God's part; and therefore this is justly to be looked upon as the determined
and ordinary way in which God will deal with his People, and they may safely
depend upon it always: yet why may he not in his absolute Sovereignty sometimes
go out of this ordinary way, if he pleases? But then it shall always be for
their extraordinary good: As in the case of Job. Thus it is a Scripture Rule,
that all Men shall dye: yet God sometimes goes out of this ordinary way, by
virtue of his own Royal Sovereignty: But then it is always better for them that
are so treated, then if they were dealt with in the ordinary way: As in the
Instances of Enoch and Elijah. And with constant respect to these things
premised. I now proceed to show,

The Truth of the Doctrine: That God has so established his Church in the
World, as that his people in their greatest Poverty and Distress, may safely
trust therein for Protection from their Enemies. And this appears,

1. From the Promises that God has made to his people, that it shall be so. As
Psalm. 132. 13, 14, and 18. And God repeats His Promises of this kind to them in
the Form of a Covenant, as Jer. 7. 23. And it is justly reckoned among the
grievous Aggravations of Manasseh's sins, that he so basely forfeited and
despised those temporal Favors that were so plainly made over to him in case
of his Obedience, 2 Chronicles. 33. 7, 8 And here I observe; That though these
Promises were made directly to the Jews, yet being made to them as the Lord's
People, they are to be applied to all those, to the end of the World, who can
lay a just claim to the Character of the Lord's People. Thus when the great
charge and business of conducting Israel into the land of Canaan was laid upon
Joshua, the Almighty to support and encourage him under that burden, made this
Promise to him, Deuteronomy. 31. 8. And the Lord he it is that goes before, he will
be with thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: Fear not -- Which is
applied to all Christians as an argument against Coveteousness, and to promote
our trust and dependence on Providence, in the way of our Duty, Heb. 13. 5. 6.
-- For he has said, (he said it to Joshua,) I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee, so that we, we Christians, unto the end of the World may boldly
say; The Lord is my helper: And I will not fear what Man shall do unto me. And
the Truth of the Doctrine appears.

2. From Scripture History, wherein we see promised deliverance from their
Enemies, constantly fulfilled for the Lord's People, while they exercised their
dependence on him for it, evidenced by their obedience. I might here mention a
vast series of great Salvations bestowed on Israel on this score, because they
were the Lord's People; and consider with what awful Terror and divine Majesty
God himself was wont to come down to fight their Battles for them. This is
frequently described in a style and language most august and divinely
Magnificent, as in Psalm 18. also in the Song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. and of Deborah
and Barak, Judge. 5. And the Prayer of Habakkuk, Chap. 3. which I might read to
you, with many other such like Historical Passages in sacred Scripture: But I
must leave them to your Perusal.

And I further remark to you, how carefully God Almighty informs us in his
Word, of the reason why the Lord's People were from time to time delivered over
to their Enemies, viz. Because they forsook their God first: And then He
forsook them. Read the whole 78 Psalm and many other places. And it is very
wonderful to see God himself condescending to expostulate this case with us
after the manner of Men, as if he was grieved at our folly in forsaking his
temporal Protection Psalm. 81. 13 to the end. O that my people had hearkened unto
me, and Israel had walked in my ways: I should soon have subdued their Enemies
and turned my hand against their adversaries. The haters of the Lord should
have submitted themselves unto him: But their Time should have endured for
ever. He should have fed them also with the finest of the Wheat; and with Honey
out of the Rock should I have satisfied thee. And I add,

3. The Experience that we have had of God's Protecting his own People in this
Land while they were obedient to him. And here I shall offer many things which
are very remarkable, and a pious Remembrance and Consideration of them will
strongly urge our Reformation, by a most careful Obedience to and strong
Dependence on God, who was peculiarly our Father's God, and who will be with us
while we are with him. And in recollecting them I will view the Land in its
Prosperous, and in its Calamitous State, respecting its Enemies.

And First, In the series of New England's Prosperity.

And here it is always to be considered, That the principal Business and Aim of
these very pious and worthy Men who first settled New England Anno 1620.
was, that they might freely enjoy the pure Dispensation of Gospel Ordinances
themselves; And promote them also among the Heathen. This! This was their noble
Design when they first planted this Wilderness and brought the Gospel hither,
when the Land was full of miserable and cruel Wretches, whose God was the
Devil, and their Religion, Morals and Happiness too, were agreeable with what
might be expected in the Servants of such a Prince.

And God remarkably directed their Course; for who can name any thing but even
the miraculous Favors of Heaven that protected their Settlements when they
came, full indeed of Faith and Good Works, but with their very small Numbers
and very feeble Strength, into this vast and cold Wilderness, full of the
fierce Subjects of Satan, who gnashed their Teeth and gaped upon them like
voracious Dragons, and would have swallowed them up alive as the Grave, and
whole as those that go down into the Pit: But the Lord blowed upon their
frequent Attempts, and confounded their Counsels when he remembered his Covenant
for his Obedient People, who followed him into this desert Land: And he was not
a Wilderness to them, or Land of Darkness, but gave them great Occasion to say
as Hab. 3. 12. Thou did march through the Land in Indignation, thou did
thresh the Heathen in Anger. And so visible was the hand of God in this Matter
as to put that into their Mouth, Psalm. 18. 29. For by thee I have run through a
Troop. And Deuteronomy. 32. 30 How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten
thousand to flight. -- Here we may ennumerate the frequent and fierce Sallies
which the Heathen with their cruel Multitudes made on them, but to their own
shame and damage, in the very early settling of the Country: And particularly
the first War which they formally made upon them, The Pequot War Anno 1637.
which though it was by the most powerful, warlike, fierce and cruel of all the
Tribes in the Land, who had of long time been a Terror to their neighboring
heathen Nations, and were then resolved to blot out the New English Name in the
Earth: Then the Sword of the Lord did so visibly pursue them, as to finish that
War in a very few Months, and that with little Damage to the English, without
the loss (I think) of one Life: But such fatal Destruction of the aggressing
Enemy, as has scarce left the Name and Memory of them in the whole Earth. Hab.
3. 13. Thou wentest forth for the Salvation of thy People, even for Salvation
with thine Anointed. Thou woundest the Head out of the House of the Wicked, by
discovering the Foundation unto the Neck. Selah.

And further, But bare Justice to those our Ancestors obliges me to remark when
I mention them in this Case: And I would now do it also to stir up our
Reformation and devout Care to keep very close to the Worship and Ordinances of
God: That there never was one considerable Breach made upon this Land by its
Enemies I mean since the Settlement began at Plymouth, Anno 1620. and have no
Reference to the several Settlements of any part of New England before that: As
about Sagadehoc-River, which was Settled by Sir John Popham in 1606, and broken
up in about two Years: And was again Settled by the French, who were driven off
by the Inhabitants of Virginia in 1613. And again it was Settled by the English
in 1615, and soon broken up: And Settled by them again in 1619, but very soon
left. See Mr. Hubbard's Narrative, Part 2. page 5, 6, 7.
until the first Generation were gone off, and the standing Inhabitants of the
Country had very openly forsaken that Interest which was the professed design
of their Fathers in coming hither: Which I will next consider.

And alas! as it is natural to the Children of Men to despise that which they
easily possess; so here, the pure Ordinances of the Gospel, most, freely
enjoyed, appeared, in the next Generation, to grow cheap in their Eyes, which
they plainly discovered by a parcimonious Treatment of it, as to its Support
Magn. Christi. Lib. 7. P. 5.
; and this strangely gained upon the Land from a levelling Spirit [a destroying
Spirit;] which then unhappily prevailed N. E. Memorial, Ed. 2. Page 228.
(a natural Effect of a People's passing from a state of Oppression to
desirable Freedom (for unless there be the utmost Guard against it, they in
that Case imitate a Pendulum which drawn from the Center and let loose, swings
violently as far into the contrary Extreme, as it was forced from the true
Center before) 'till at length the whole Land was perverted, for Rulers and
People became guilty together, when the Government allowed their People even to
Settle many Towns without the Ordinances of the Gospel among them, and that on
the beautiful Seashore in the eastern parts of the Province for about an
hundred Miles together, which were eminently among the Heathen: And in many
other Places the Gospel was almost starved out: And then a sad Crisis indeed
was formed and dreadfully perfected in the distempered Country; for any one
might most plainly see that the People had forsaken the Design and Covenant
Obligation of their Fathers that first came hither: Alas! how had they left
their first Love? For their Practice did then proclaim aloud that it was not a
thing of necessary Importance with them whether the Gospel was carefully
promoted or not. And I suppose that the saving of so considerable a Charge was
the gilded Bait that allured the blinded People into that fatal Snare that
Satan had so craftily, and alas how successfully laid for them! And no doubt
but the Dragons of the Infernal Pit prided themselves in this Advantage they
had gotten against New England, knowing how God would deal with a favorite
People in such a Case; As Isa 57 17. For the Iniquity of his Covetousness was I
wroth and smote him.

And secondly, Here begins the very calamitous state of New England, with
respect to her Enemies, which I propose next to consider.

And I believe that no serious thinker, who considers that whole case, can do
other than judge that that plain and great Apostasy must needs be very
grievously provoking to God, that had marvellously nourished up and defended
his People here, to advance the known ends of their Settling the Country, which
that Generation had then so far deserted: And He alarmed them with two notable
Earthquakes On Jan. 26 and 28. 1662, 3.
which should have stired up the Inhabitants to consideration and amendment,
but if that were the design of them, they failed of their end, and left the
ungrateful Land sadly open to God's Judgments, which covered and impoverished
it in a few Years: Deuteronomy. 32. 20, 21. -- And He said, I will hide my face from
them, I will see what their end shall be: For they are a very froward
generation, children in whom is no faith They have moved me to jealousy -- they
have provoked me to anger -- And I will move them to jealousy with those which
are not a People, I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation. For the
Heathen Nations round about them being made the Rod of God's Anger, did gather
themselves to Battle, and broke in upon the People with barbarous Murders and
open War On June 24. 1675.
which reached in the space of twenty days about 240 Miles, i. e. From Mount
Hope, now Bristol to Pemaquid.
from the most southerly borders of this Province, to the most northerly and
easterly Limits of all the English Settlements. And that was a most heavy War:
It continued with, often but short, and always very precarious Cessations for a
great many Years And in it the rage of the Heathen proceeded with great
success: They gloried in their Victories when they had burnt up all the Towns
in a fair and beautiful Country on the Seashore about an hundred Miles,
dismantled and destroyed all their strong Forts and Garrisons, left their
pleasant Fields to become a Wilderness, and were the proud Owners of the
Multitude of their Inhabitants, and of their Wealth: Yea, they infested the
very Bowels of our Country, and drew nigh and threatened the Metropolis itself;
and with what amazement and horror was the Land then filled? Laborers were cut
off in the Meadows and Fields, strong Men fell down wounded in the Streets; and
Men of War ambushed, and slain in their going forth, as by the Leopards of the
desert that lurk privily for their Prey; so that our Highways were untroden,
and the Dwellings in the borders of the Towns forsaken, as in Israel in the
days of Shamgar and Jael, Jud. 5. And every one justly feared the Alder in the
path, and the noise of the Archers in the places of drawing water. And how loud
and bitter were the incessant Cries, with which bereived Multitudes lamented
their Friends, either Slain, or carried away Captive, and many of them,
especially Female Children retained to be either Paganized by their barbarous
Owners, or Sold to be cloystered up in Nurserys of Impiety, where some of them
yet remain; a heavy burden to their distressed Parents and Friends? How many
Children berieved of their Parents, and gray headed mourning for the Sons of
their Old Age; Widows crying out for the Husband and Guide of their Youth; and
Rachels weeping for their Children? And among the residue of the People, how
many halted with their Wounds? And there are some now alive, that were cast
down wounded by them, and left among the Slain in a most forlorn state, who yet
escaped with the skin of their Teeth, while their mossy Heads do always mind
them of their Hairy Scalp plucked off, and carried away in triumph, to witness
for the Numbers they had slain. Well might the Inhabitants then shake and
tremble, through Fear and dreadful Expectation, when they were thus beset with a
fierce People that were armed against them on every side, and flushed with
Victories: And a People dark and cruel like the Infernal Regions; of a
stammering speech also, that they could not understand, and their Numbers
covered the Mountains And where they prevailed on Towns or Families, their
Behavior was often most inhuman: They regarded not the face of old Men; and
tender and delicate Women they carried into a most difficult, long and perilous
Captivity, and the flower of our Youth, they trod as in a Wine Press; nor had
they any pity on the fruit of the Womb, they dashed the little Children in
pieces; and Tears of Blood are an Emblem low enough to lament the unheard of
Cruelties often devised for the Tormenting of them that fell into the hands of
those worse than Lybian Tigers, when they had leisure for it, the rehearsing of
whose Actions, would make us believe, that among the very Devils or open
Persecutors of Christ and his Members, who are their near kindred, one of a
large Capacity must be picked to vie with them. Lam. 3. 42, to 47. and Chap. 4.
18, 19 We have Transgressed and have rebelled, thou have not pardoned, thou
have covered with Anger and persecuted us: Thou have slain, thou have not
pitied. All our Enemies have opened their mouths against us. Fear and a snare
is come upon us, desolation and destruction They hunt our steps that we cannot
go in our streets. -- Our Persecutors are swifter than the Eagles of the
Heaven: They pursued us upon the Mountains, they laid wait for us in the
Wilderness.

And upon such great Calamities it is natural and pious too to ask with
Modesty, what the provoking Cause of them is; for God does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men, Lam. 3. 33, 34. And although as to
his Judgments, Clouds and Darkness are often round about him, and his Paths are
in the great Waters; Yet he does commonly some way discover to Men a sufficient
Reason of the very calamitous things that befall them. So the provoking Cause of
drowning the old World, is carefully preserved, Genesis 6. 11, 12. and of the
destruction of Sodom and her Sisters, Genesis 19. 13. and the like in other
Places. And it is wonderful to see that even profane and common as well as
sacred Historians, do usually if not always, make the same Remarks; which must
arise from some notable Appearances to all thoughtful and inquiring Observers
in such Cases. This is confirmed by the great Mr. Ray, who says We shall find
it noted by Historians, that before any great public Calamity, or utter
Excission of a Nation, the People were become universally vicious, etc. See his
Physico-Theol. P. 271.

And it is very certain, that though every Town in the Land shared very deeply in
those Calamities, yet the Manner in which they were then dispensed to this
Province, was very peculiar and very strange.

First, The most if not all of those Towns in it, were singled out, which were
Settled without the Gospel, and (unless I mistake the History of the Country
which I have diligently searched) every one of them was broken up and utterly
destroyed If any object here, the Towns in a neighboring Province, which have
sometimes been all of the most of them without the settled Ordinances of the
Gospel: It may be answered, That all those erroneous Towns may be thought to
have had the Gospel preached to them at that Day in a way which they supposed
to be regular: And the erroneous in Religion are not to be reckoned in the Case
before us, with such as in a Land of Light do cast off the Form of Godliness.
Moreover the Sin of this Province was against its own professed Design as well
as Principles: And that Province was not settled for the same Reason that this
was which is of much wait here. Upon all which accounts we might not expect so
much Plainness and Severity in the Treatment of them as of us. Amos 3. 2.
, although some of them were strengthened with many Inhabitants and Soldiers,
and with very strong Forts and Garrisons, such as were found in but very few
other Places in all New England. We may say of some of them for their great
Strength, as the Prophet in Lam. 4 12. The Kings of the Earth and all the
Inhabitants of the World would not have believed that the Adversary and the
Enemy should have entered into the Gates. --

And again, It is constantly affirmed by all the Accounts that ever I could
meet with, which speak distinctly of these particular Settlements, That not one
of all the many small and feeble Towns where the Ordinances of the Gospel were
settled, was destroyed by them; The only Objection I ever met with against this
Observation, is the Case of Groton, whose Inhabitants thought it best to draw
off, and stay till the War was over, which they did with their Goods, except
one Garrison which was kept there and never taken. And that no such Town was
ever quite broken up by the Enemy, is constantly affirmed, and has been often
published by grave observing Men, who lived in the midst of those Wars, and
wrote of them, professedly remarking and admiring at this difference; As the
Reverend Mr. BRECK in his Righteousness exalts a Nation; and Mr PINHALLOW in
the Introduction to his History of the Wars of N. E.
though great Numbers of these were as much exposed as any one of the other,
and some of these though very weak in Fortification and Inhabitants too,
withstood more numerous, resolute, and violent Assaults of the Enemy than what
any one of the other Towns ever met with: And yet these were preserved and the
other given up by the wonderful Providence of God; both far beyond what might
be expected. This was very surprising to beholders then and should still be
mavelous in our Eyes.

AND NOW; What more legible Tokens to discover the Designs of Providence in
those fierce and dreadful Judgments could we have devised unless we waited for
the Fingers of a Man's Hand that wrote upon the Plaster of Belshazzar's Wall;
or proposed to see them written in the plainest Lines of our own Language, and
with Sunbeams in the Air?

These things I have observed with great Admiration and Awe, in reading the
Histories of our Country; and I think it a pious Care to collect and set them
in order for the Observation of others; I am sure it will stir up the
Admiration of every considerate and the Care of every pious Mind. Psalm. 78.
begin. And I am now to show,

3. The Reason of the Doctrine as it relates to Men's Practice: Or, The natural
connection there is between Religion and Safety. And here I observe, that all
human Actions in this Life run into these two Channels; the service of God, or
of the Devil, for into these two sorts all mankind are divided; the Children
and Servants of God, and of the Devil; and there is no middle State, Romans 6 16.

And as it is easy for every one to see how the Service of the Devil, naturally
tends to make Men like him, deceitful, unjust, cruel, contentious, and very
miserable; for he would fain make all his followers like himself, both in Sin
and Torment if he could; Hence some of them we see grow very near like him in
many of his bad Qualities. From such as are then in his Service also, come all
the Lies, Injustice, Treachery and Quarrels which are often nourished up to
fierce and cruel Words, Bloodshed and War. Jan. 4 begin.

So on the other hand, The Service of God marvelously tends to destroy this
Image and work of the Devil, and to beautify Men with the likeness of the most
glorious and excellent Being: It makes them knowing, wise, just, kind, holy and
happy; for Holiness and Happiness will certainly go together. It is a sure
Truth and plain to human Reason if contemplated, that Virtue and Vice have
their natural effect in Happiness and Misery by the eternal and unchangeable
reason of things, and it is impossible it should be otherwise. And it would be
a pleasant task, were there time now, to show in particulars, how and wherein
the Rules of the Gospel do all of them naturally tend by promoting every virtue
to advance the temporal Peace and Happiness of every one that observes them,
and that in a plain and easy method: For besides the more spiritual Duties of
Virtue and Godliness, which the World cannot so well see into, they learn Men to
live soberly and righteously, Tit. 2. 12. which if complied with, would take
away all occasion of injury, contention and figthing. Let any one view the most
difficult cases that are ever mentioned as the cause of War, and see if a
compliance in both parties with that Justice, neighbourly Kindness and Charity,
which the Gospel requires, would not speedily cure all, and confirm their Peace
and Friendship.

And if an unrighteous People should seek occasion of War against their
Neighbors when they had none justly, yet if the injured party would be so
politic, as well as happy, as to treat them in every Article according to the
temper of the Gospel, they would thereby bring such a visible and acknowledged
guilt upon their aggressing Adversaries as would certainly render them self
condemned, though they were the darkest Heathen, Romans 2. 15. And condemned in the
Eyes of the rest of the World; and how natural and great an effect this would
have in disheartning them and encouraging and securing the other party, let any
one judge.

And add to this, The regular claim that Innocence, Virtue and Religion enable
Men to lay to the special Protection of that Providence which overrules all
things.

And finally, The Covenant which God has made with his People, exhibited in
the plain and explicit Promises of the Gospel, that their Obedience to, and
trust in him, shall entitle them to his Favor and Protection, do sufficiently
evidence the reason of my first Doctrine, while they not only determine these
to be the People of the Lord; But also, if they behave as herein before
described, that their Enemies are the Enemies of the Lord too; and then it is
easy to see their End. And so I pass to consider,

Doct. 2. That it is the Duty of the Lord's People, very carefully to let
others, and especially the Heathen round about them know what their Dependence
is.

1. This discovers their Humility and Desire of giving to God the Glory and
Praise of his Goodness unto them in their Preservation. Both these are very
necessary Christian Duties, and of near Relation to each other, for it is only
the humble Man that can find in his Heart to give unto the Lord the Glory due
unto his Name. And the contrary to this is a Sin very provoking to God and very
pleasing to proud Man; He would fain think much of himself; and even good Men
are sadly apt to be guilty this Way. This was doubtless the sin of that great
and good King Hezekiah, Isa. 39 beg. He should have told those Messengers of
the King of Babylon, how God had brought his People Israel into a strange Land,
and driven out the Heathen to make Room for them, that they might be his
peculiar People; and that if they did continue close in their obedience to him,
he would always defend them from their Enemies; and that this was their
Strength, Refuge and Defense in Dangers. Such a show might have stirred up
those Ambassadors to enquire after Israel's God, and come by degrees into Terms
of Obedience to him, for the sake of his Protection; at least it would have
created great Thoughts of Jehovah in the Mind of the King of Babylon and of his
Servants: But instead of this, the King showed them that which might make
himself and his People appear Honorable, Magnificent and Terrible in their own
Strength and Grandeur; such as his Buildings, Wealth, Armor, and c. And God
was angry at it and sent the Prophet to reprove him for it, and to assure him
that all those things which he had gloried in should be so far from defending
him, as that they should be carried away into Babylon, verse 5, and c.

2. This would have a natural tendency to bring others especially the Heathen,
unto the same methods of Piety, and glorifying God. To see a flourishing People
very careful and diligent in the observance of all Religious Duties, and openly
professing that they did this in Obedience to that God who had exceedingly
favored them even in the eye of the World, and would certainly appear for
their safety and defense at all times, unless they forsook him; would put
others upon observing them; and if they found such grave and serious Profession
and steady Practice of pious Obedience constantly persisted in, accompanied
also with signal outward Favors beyond others, it must needs provoke them to
seek terms of Communion with this God too. And this would especially prevail on
the Heathen who are wont to serve Gods that are deceitful, false and cruel to
them, leading them into perplexities and straits, and often destroying their
own most obedient Servants.

3. This method would powerfully tend to make good Neighbors of the most dark
and barbarous Heathen. If they could once be learned to obey the Gospel, it
would be safe living by them. And they who will spend their time, strength and
labor, to effect this great Work, will gloriously in(...)tate the Redeemer,
who at his own expense and labor bro't that Salvation to a dark and wretched
World, which the Lord's People have all their dependence upon.

And now to apply these things. Let us be put upon the utmost care and
diligence to maintain the Character of the Lord's People, as the only, and a
very sure way of safety here and hereafter.

Bear in mind always, that the very Foundation of the Country, stands upon our
carefully observing and promoting the pure Ordinances of the Gospel. For this
being so great a part of the avowed design of the first Settlers, and by them
pleaded with God as a reason of his Protecting them. And so wonderfully
answered in the Divine Favors more eminently bestowed on them, than on any
other People did virtually establish it into a Covenant, as Jer. 7. 23. We are
therefore more obliged to observe, encourage and promote the Gospel, than any
People living; which I beseech you always to remember, For it is not a vain
thing for you: because it is your Life; and through this thing ye shall prolong
your days in the land -- Deuteronomy. 32. 47. And can we think that the jealous God
will bear long with us, if we forsake this trust? Would Men bear to be so
created? Mal. 1 8 Offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with
thee, or accept thy person? says the Lord of Hosts.

And it is often a profitable Duty in the Lord's People, to look back and see
how God treated their Fathers when they broke Covenant with him. The Song of
Moses, Deuteronomy. (...)2. seems to be penned partly to direct such a service. Let us
do so now. And remembering the Gall and the Wormwood that New England has drank,
probably for such a reason; Let us be admonished by it. Mal. 1 9 And now I pray
you, beseech God, that he will be gracious unto us.

Consider the dreadful effects that will follow our despi(...)ing and
neglecting the Gospel. Dr. Prideaux speaking of Preaching the Gospel; and with
respect to Old England, says, -- And it is not to be doubted, but that if this
method were once droped among us, the generality of the People, whatever else
might be done to obviate it, would in seven years time, relapse into as bad a
state of barbarity as was ever in Practice among the worst of our Saxon and
Danish Ancestors In his Connection of History, etc. Vol. 2. P. 52. Ed. 10.
And besides the common Observations of the advanced and growing Licentiousness
of our Towns that forsook the Gospel, a grave Writer says It has been
observed of many of those scattering Plantations in our borders, that many were
contented to live without, yea, to shake off all yoke of Government both sacred
and civil, and so transforming themselves as much as well they could, into the
manners of the Indians they lived among, and are some of them therefore most
deservedly (as to Divine Justice) left to be put under the yoke and power of
the Indians themselves: And hence it is, that in many parts, the People void of
Counsel and common Prudence as well as Courage, have so frightfully deserted or
cowardly delivered up several Places of strength (terrible enough of
themselves) into the hands of contemptible Enemies, and so like ripe Figs upon
the first shaking of the Tree have been ready to fall into the Mouth of the
Eater, as the Prophet speaks, as has been too sadly verified in some of the
southern, and all the Eastern Parts. Mr. Hubbard's Narrative, etc. Part 2. P.
78.
And what may we think would have been the Religion, Morals, and ordinary
Customs of the Country if God had continued the growth of it in their own way
until this time? But he prevented it then by those Wars: a severe remedy
indeed: and such is needed in stubborn diseases Amos 3. 2.

And let us cheerfully do what belongs to each one in his own sphere to promote
the Gospel among the Indians on the Eastward of our Settlements. And in that
our Rulers in their present Treaty are making this offer to them; let us follow
it with our Prayers for success. And to conclude all

Let us ever keep our Eye fixed on both the Duties and Privileges of our
Covenant with GOD. Psalm. 80. 14, etc. Return we beseech thee, O God of Hosts:
Look down from Heaven, and behold, and visit this vine, and the vineyard which
thy Right Hand has planted, and the branch that thou mades(...) strong for
thyself -- so will not we go back from thee; quicken us and we will call upon
thy Name. Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we
shall be saved.

FINIS.

