Mr. Edwards's Sermon,

On Hebrews IX.27. -- It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
Judgment. At a General Assembly Holden at Hartford May 11th. 1732,
Ordered by this Assembly, THAT Roger Wolcott, Esquire and Capt. Samuel Mather,
Return the Thanks of this Assembly to the Reverend Mr. Timothy Edwards of
Windsor, for his Sermon Preached before this Assembly on the Eleventh of May
Instant, and Desire he give a Copy thereof that it may be Printed.

Hez. Wyllys Secr.

All the Living must surely Die, and go to Judgment.
A Sermon (With some little, and but little Enlargement in a ^ew Particulars)
Preached before the General Assembly OF THE Colony of Connecticut at Hartford,
on the day of Election There, On May 11 th. 1732.

By Timothy Edwards M.A. Pastor of a Church in Windsor.

Eccl. ix.5. -- The Living know that they shall Die. 2 Cor. v.10 -- We must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST. Published by Order of the General
Assembly.

N. LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, Printer to the Gov. and Company, 1732.

All the Living must surely die, and go to Judgment.
HEBREWS IX.27. -- It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
Judgment.
GOD is the Supreme Lord and Ruler of the world, and Governs it according to
his own eternal Counsels, wherein he is absolutely free and Sovereign, and
though in all his decrees and dispensations he acts in infinite Wisdom, and
according to the spotl^ss Purity, and glorious Holiness of his own most blessed
Nature, and the Rules of the most perfect Equity and Righteousness, yet in some
of them he is not only to high for the most soaring thou^hts of the w^^^st and
most knowing men, and too deep for the reach of the longest line of humane
Understanding, but also very cross and contrary to the natural inclinations of
men; especially while in their fallen and depraved State, And in particular he
is so in the things mentioned in our Text For the opening of which several
things may be observed.

1. An Appointment or Decree of God, in these words, It is appointed, that is
by God: He is the author of this decree; this is implied here, and abundantly
expressed elsewhere in the holy Scripture.

2. The Objects of this decree, and they are Men. It is appointed for men.

3. The Extent of this decree with respect to the Objects of it, and that is
noted by this word All. It extends to all men; the decree with respect to the
Object of it is of universal extent.

4. The things contained in this decree or appointment of God, and they are
two, viz, Death and Judgment.

(1) Death It is appointed for all men to die. And here we may observe the
Limitation of this, namely of men's dying, by the Divine decree as to time; as
God has appointed that all men must die, so he has Limited their dying to one
time, they must die but once. There have been two men since the world began
that never died, viz. Enoch and Elijah And they also that will be alive when
Christ comes to Judge the world (as seems plain from Scripture will not die;
And some of the lead that were raised to life by Christ and his Apostles, and
by some of the Prophets, might (for ought that we know) die a second time; but
in all Ages and Generations of men (those mentioned only excepted) we have
reason to conclude that all have died and must die, and that but once. This
seems to be the decree of Heaven: this is the appointment of the great
Sovereign of the world concerning men.

(2) The second thing mentioned in the decree of God concerning men is, that
they shall go to Judgment. Now men are favored with a time of Patience and a
day of Grace; but a day of Judgment is coming, wherein they must receive a
Judicial Sentence from God their Judge, and be disposed of by him acccording to
the Rules of strict Justice.

5. The last thing I shall Observe in the Text, is, the time of this Judgment,
and that is, after Death. It is appointed for all men once to die, and after
this the Judgment. What is further needful for the Opening of the words, may be
left to the Explication of the Doctrine, which is this, viz.

DOCT. The Time is coming when all Persons now Living, must surely Die and go
to Judgment.

In many things men in this life do greatly differ, and that both in temporal
and spiritual respects, but there is one thing wherein they all agree: Men of
all ranks and degrees, of all kinds and qualifications do agree in this, that
they are mortal and must die.

And as men greatly differ in their state and condition during this present
life (I mean especially while health is continued to 'em) so they do in the
manner of their dying. Thus it is both as to godly and wicked men. Some that
have lived a truly godly life say but little when they come to die; others say
much, and that to the great comfort of their friends about them* Some godly
persons die with but a supporting hope, others die with a triumphant joy; and
some of the dear children of God have (without doubt) died in the dark.

The death of wicked men also is attended with very differing circumstances;
some of them die in the same carnal security and senseless stupidity in which
they all along lived, Job 21.23 Others die as with a guilty, so with an
awakenend and accusing Conscience. Some die under delusions and with false
hopes, and in others their hope is as the giving up of the ghost. Job 11.20.
Terrors are upon them, yea they take hold of them as waters. Job 27.20. They
are in great distress upon their deathbeds, they die in the bitterness of
their souls, Job 21 25. Yea, it has been the doleful case of some that have
lived wicked lives to go out of the world despairing of mercy. Thus greatly do
some men differ from others in the circumstances that their death is attended
with and that both of the godly and of the wicked, but in this they all agree,
that they come to their end, their breath goes forth, they return to their
dust, their souls go into Eternity, their bodies go to the grave, to the house
appointed for all living, they enter into the state of the dead, and there they
take up their lodging, lying and sleeping in silence in the dark chambers of
death, and have no more a portion for ever in any thing done under the Sun.

And as there is a great difference between some men and others at their death,
or in the manner of their dying, so there is still a far greater difference in
their state after death.

Men don't all go to heaven when they die, neither do they all go to hell: some
go one way and some another. Some go to everlasting rest joy and glory, others
to endless despair, woe and misery: but in this they agree that they all go to
Judgment.

The Doctrinal handling of this truth may come under these particulars.

1 There is a time coming when all the living must surely die. 2. God has made
it to be the duty of men, to spend their appointed time in the world in the
service and to the glory of their Maker. 3. God has appointed a time, wherein
he will call men to an account how they have acted in their places, and how
they have spent their time in the world.

I. There is a time coming when all the living must surely die. All the living
have sinned against God, the God that created them and all the world, and
therefore they must die. God at first made man in a state of innocence and
integrity, and had he continued in that state during the time of his probation,
God would have settled and confirmed him in a happy Immortality; but our first
Father, the first man that God created, by disobedience to his Maker, fell from
his first estate, and being constituted by God to be the public Head and
Representative of all that should by ordinary Generation descend from him, all
mankind sinned in him.

And then again, All are sinners by their own inherent corruption, Ps. 51.5
Behold, I was shapen in sin, and in iniquity did my mother conceive me Job
25.4. How can man be justified with God, or how can he be clean that is born of
a woman? And all that live to be capable of it, are sinners by actual
transgression, Eccl. 7.20. There is not a just man upon earth that does good
and sins not. And therefore all the living must die. Man has made himself a
sinful creature, and therefore God has justly made him a mortal dying
creature, Rom 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and
so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. The wicked must die,
because they are under the curse of the Law, of which death is a considerable
part: and though Christ has delivered the Righteous from it, having born the
curse for them, yet for great and weighty reasons they must die also.

Should men upon their Conversion be presently made immortal, several great
inconveniences (as might easily be showed) would follow upon it, and therefore
God has wisely ordered it otherwise.

And then the death of the Righteous is an occasion of some great and excellent
things, which would never have been without it, things that are much to the
glory of God, and honor of our Redeemer. I shall very briefly mention some of
them, Namely, a humble Submission and Resignation to the Will of God, in the
most trying case, in their willingness to die, and so to leave all that is dear
to them in the world and to part with life it self because God will have it to
be so, Numb. 33 38. And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the
commandment of the Lord and died there, etc.

And hence Patience has its perfect work, in the dying Saint's bearing the
pains of his Sickness, yea sometimes of a long and sore sickness, and the very
pangs and bitter agonies off death it self, as the hand of a Sovereign God upon
him, with a humble, holy silence and quietness of spirit, without any
discontent or murmuring And hence Faith also is exercised in some of the most
noble acts of it, in leaving Children, and others very dear, with God, and in
the departing souls venturing it felt for Eternity, in the hands, and under the
care of Jesus Christ, and in trusting in him, for a glorious Resurrection of
its now dying body, from the Dead to Life again.

The dying of the righteous is also an occasion of one of the highest and most
glorious acts of divine Love, in that they esteem the vision and fruition of
God, and their being with Christ in heaven in a stare of perfect holiness, to
be things worth dying for, and therefore are willing for the sake of these
things to leave all earthly things and that for ever, and that their bodies
that have been so dear to them, should during God's pleasure dwell in a state
of darkness and silence, and be the subjects of loathsome corruption in the
noison purifying Grave.

Hence also will arise great honor and glory to the Son of God, in raising not
only the wicked, but the righteous too, and so all the dead of all ages and
generations to life again. The Resurrectin of the Dead is a work inexpressibly
great and wonderful, and this work will be done by Jesus Christ, Joh 5 25, --
28,29 The hour cameth when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God...
The hour is coming in the which all that are in their graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth. etc.

And herein the mighty Power, and infinite Understanding of Christ will
gloriously shine forth, and he will appear to be a person truly Divine.
Considering these things, the Righteous as well as the Wicked, and so all
persons living must die.

II God has made it the duty of men to spend their appointed time in the
world, in his Service and to his Glory, And indeed it is most just and
reasonable that it should be so; for God is a Being of infinite Dignity and
Excellency, and all men have received their life and being from Him, and he
sustains them day and night and keeps them every moment: He is the Fountain of
all that good that they enjoy or hope for. Upon God men have an absolute and
entire dependence for all that they have, and for all that they need, and that
both for time and eternity; and to Him they are under the highest Obligations:
And therefore by the very law of their Creation, and by all the laws and rules
of Reason and equity, of Gratitude Piety, Prudence and Self-interest, they are
bound to serve and glorify God. And indeed that men should spend their whole
time, and improve all their opportunities and talents for that God who is a
Being of all possible Perfection, whose Creatures they are, and whose Service
and Glory is the very end of their being, and of all that they are and have, is
a duty so reasonable, that there can be no just Objection against it, nor any
good Excuse made for the neglect of it. Deuteronomy. 10.12. And now, Israel, what does
the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in
his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God, with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul?

III. GOD has appointed a Time wherein he will call men to an Account how they
have acted in their Places, and how they have spent their time in the world.
Divines tell us that immediately after death, God passes a particular Judgment
upon men; and the Scripture seems plainly to favor this, and to guide us to
such a conclusion, Eccl. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, as it
was, and the spirit to God who gave it. Not to God to enjoy Him as their
Portion; this cannot be the meaning of it, for it speaks of all departed Souls
and wicked fouls in their separate state will be far from that: therefore it
must mean that when men die, their spirits or souls shall return to God as
their Judge, to be settled by his Judicial Sentence in their Eternal State. The
word of God also informs us, that the souls of some presently after their death
are fixed by God in a happy state, and the souls of others in a state of two
and misery, Luke 16.22, 23. And the beggar died and was carried by angels into
Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died and was buried, and in hell he lift up
his eyes being in torment, etc.

It is also clear from God's word, that this present life is men's only time to
prepare for Judgment in. When that is at an end their day of grace is past and
over for ever, and they are immediately set by God under a dispensation of
Judgment, 2 Cor. 6.2 Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day
of salvation.

God has also appointed a day or time of general Judgment, wherein all the
inhabitants of the world, of all Nations and Ages must appear before Him, and
receive Judgment from Him. This may well be called (as it sometimes is) the
great Day of Judgment, wherein God who is infinitely the highest Majesty, the
most awful and tremendous of all Beings, will appear in amazing Glory, as King
and Judge of the world (God in his Second Person, our Lord Jesus Christ, I
mean, who is God the Son) when the Monarchs of the world, with the Meanest of
the People, such as are now Judges in their Robes, with them that are Prisoners
in their Chains; they that speak in the Name of the Lord, with them that hear
them; yea, all mankind from the highest to the lowest, from the throne to the
footstool, must stand at Christ's Bar, on whom He will with the most solemn
form, and in the most open and public manner, pass that final and definitive
Sentence, that will unalterably settle them in their Everlasting State,
according to what they have done in their state of Mortality here in the world.
Rev. 20 11, -- And I saw great white throne, and him that sat upon it.... And I
saw the dead small and great stand before God and the books were opened, and
the dead were judged out of those things that were written in the books, every
man according to their works This is also very clear from what we have in
Matthew 25.31 to the end.

All mankind shall be Judged by Christ in this solemn and most open manner,
that so all his faithful Servants may appear with him in glory, and be by Him
absolved, acquitted, owned and highly honored, and by his Sentence have a most
glorious Reward assigned them before all the world. And that all the wicked
being condeamed by Christ to their deserved Punishment, may stand ashamed,
amazed and confounded, before GOD, Angels and Men.

It is a very suitable thing, and most wisely ordered by God, that there should
be a day of Judgment held in this most public, open and s;olemn manner, that
soan innumerable company of Angels with many millions of Mankind, may be
witnesses to the transactions of that day and of Christ's management of the
grand affairs of it, that so the grace, truth, justice and holiness of God may
gloriously appear in the view of all, and that the glorious Dignity and Majesty
of Christ may be fully manifested in this His most Exalted State, and that his
Divine and Godlike Excellencies may in the sight of all the World shine forth
in the Brightness and Glory of them.

I am now come to the proper place of the Application of this Doctrine. I have
had thot's of Improving is something largely.

USE, I. Of Enquiry, That seeing the time will surely come that all that are
now living must die and go to Judgment, Whence is it that many persons live
with so little though it and care about their Death and that Judgment which follows
death, and that though they live under the Gospel?

USE, II. Of Reflection, To put us upon Reflecting with serious and solemn
tho'ts upon our selves, with respect to these two great and awful things, our
Dying, and appearing before God our Judge in another world, to be by His
Sentence settled in an eternal state of Happiness or Misery, as we well or ill
behave our selves in our Places, and spend the time of this present life,
Whether we have seriosly though it of these things, which are of such moment and
concernment to us, and are through grace prepared for them; Whether we are ready
to Die and go to Judgment? It Is of highest importance to every one of us to be
able to give a comfortable Answer to so great and solemn a Question. But to
prevent (what well I can) my being too prolix, I shall disimiss both these
Uses, with thus little more than naming them, and shall Improve the truth
before us only in

USE, III. Of Exhortation, in several Branches

I. The First shall be to the Honorable Gentlemen that Sit Chief in our Civil
State: But before I come to it, I shall premise (as briefly as may be) several
things as the proper Qualifications of, and much to be desired in a Christian
Magistrate.

1. Knowledge. If the Understanding be the eye of the Soul, Knowledge is the
light of that eye, whereby it clearly sees its proper Objects Knowledge is as a
lamp to a Rulers feet, to show him the way, both of his duty and safety, and
gives him boldness in it, without which he would be but a blind Guide, and
sadly expose himself with them that are under his conduct.

Therefore God in his word directs a People to choose able men for Rulers, men
that understand the work and business that they are called to Exodus I8 22
Moreover, thou shall provide out of all the people, able men,... and place such
over them to be rulers. 1 Chronicles. 12.32 -- As are men that have understanding of
the times, to know what Israel ought to do.

2. Righteousness. This is a great, and indeed an essential Qualification of a
Ruler; for Magistrates are appointed to be ministers of Justice, and therein
ministers of God to a People for good, Rom 13 4. They should therefore be men
of great Integrity; they should set themselves with all possible impartiality
to administer Justice to all that come for it, yea, to all to whom it is due.
This was one great thing that made Job appear so bright and amiable, and with
such a comely and venerable majesty in the eyes of his people Job 39 7, -- When
I went out to the gate through the city, when I prepared my seat in the streets,
the young men saw me and hid themselves, and the aged arose and stood up; the
princes refrained talking and laid their hand on their mouth; the nobles held
their peace, etc. And in the 11 th. and 14 th. Verses we have these words, viz.
When the ear heard me it blessed me, and when the eye saw me it gave witness to
me; I put on righteousness and it clothed me, and my judgment was as a robe
and a diadem This graces and adorns a Judge more than a sword of State, a
scarlet Robe with a chain of Gold.

3. A merciful compassionate spirit. A civil Ruler is to be considered, not
only as one clothed with the Authority, acted and influenced by the spirit of
a strictly Just and Righteous Judge, and girt with the Sword of Justice, as one
resolved and ready to Execute the Law without respect to Persons, and so as a
Terror to Evildoers; but also as one vested with Power, furnished with Ability
and Advantage, and qualified with a Disposition to right the Injured, relieve
the Oppressed, do good to the Poor and Needy and afford help to the Afflicted;
And such a Ruler was that eminent Person mentioned but now, Job 29, 12, 13 I
delivered the poor that cried, the fatherless, and him that had none to help
him: the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused
the widows heart to sing for joy. And in the 15 th and 16 th. Verses, it
follows thus, I was eyes to the blind and feet to the lame: I was a father to
the poor. And Chap 30.25. Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? Was not
my soul grieved for the poor? Of such a spirit should every Ruler be especially
in a Christian Government.

4. Courage This is exceeding needful for a Ruler, that so his Authority may
not be trampled upon, and himself treated with contempt by proud and insolent
men, and that he may not tear to draw the Sword of Justice against the most
bold and daring Transgressors. Hence Rulers in Scripture are exhosted to be men
of courage. 1 King 2 1 Now the days of David drew nigh that he should die, and
he charged his son Solomon, saying, I go the way of all the earth; be thou
strong therefore and show thyself a man. Deuteronomy. 31 7. And Moses called unto
Joshua and said unto him in the sight of Israel, Be strong and of a good
courage. And after the same manner God himself speaks to him, Josh 1.1, 6, 7.
And it came to pass that the Lord spoke unto Joshua the son of Nun, saying,
etc. -- Be strong and of a good courage; Only be thou very courageous. --

5. Gravity This is very becoming the Elders of the Land and our Public and
P^l^^^cal Fathers. It is necessary to maintain their Authority, that so they
may be duly regarded in their Places; the want of which and especially; with
much of the contrary, makes a Ruler light and cheap in the esteem of others,
and Exposes him to contempt. This is so necessary that Government cannot be well
maintained even in the least Societies without it: And therefore God requires
it in Heads of Families. 1 Timothy 3.4. One that rules well his own house, having
his children in subjection with all gravity. It is very needful in all Heads
and Governors of Societies; but especially in Public Rulers.

6. Prudence. The work of a Ruler, especially one of Superior Rank, is a great
work, and in many cases is attended with great difficulty, and requires an
uncommon measure of Wisdom to a right management of the concerns on it. And
hence King Solomon did so earnestly seek it of God. King 3 9 Give therefore thy
servant an understanding heart, to judge thy people And this was one main thing
that made him so great in the eyes of the People. 1 Chronicles. 29 25. And the Lord
magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel. 1 King 3 28 And all
Israel heard of the judgment that the king had judged and they feared the king,
for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to do judgment. Now Prudence is
an eminent branch of Wisdom: it is very much of the practical part of if. Prove.
I4 I5 The prudent man looks well to his going. This is so needful for a
Ruler, that the want of it but in some particular actions may not a little hurt
the Reputation of men in power, though esteemed wise men, vea men of excitting
Abilities for the main Eccl 10 1. Dead flies cause the ointment of the
apothecary to send forth a stinking savor, so does a little folly him that is
in reputation for wisdom and honor. Such as are in chief Rule over a People,
should not only be men of knowledge and understanding, but also men of great
Judgment and Discretion Eccl. 8 5. A wise man's heart discerns both time and
judgment.

7. Fortitude. This is a Virtue consisting of courage and patience; it is that
whereby a man not only dares to engage in a just and honest Cause, but also
bears up under the Difficulties that it is attended with without fainting;
continuing with an invincible Patience, Strength and firmness of mind to pursue
the matter, waiting in the use of proper means for the desired End. That great
and renowned Magistrate in Israel, Moses (the supreme Ruler under God of that
people) had a great and eminent measure of this Virtue: and yet there was a
time when he seemed to want more of it, as we may see in Numb. 11 14, 15 I am
not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy for me. And if
thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee out of hand, if I have found
favor in thy fight; and let me not see my wretchedness. So very needful (as we
may see by this great instance of it) is the virtue of Fortitude in a civil
Ruler.

8. A Public spirit. It is not eno' for men to serve a People in a public
Capacity, except they do it also with a public Spirit. The chief Rulers of a
People are in Scripture styled their great Men, their Nobles and their Princes;
and they should be men of a great, noble and princely Spirit God has set them
in a public and eminent Place, and they should be men eminently of a public
Spirit. A public Spirit is very becoming, and the contrary extremely
unbecoming public Rulers, and that which they should abhor, according to that
stroke in the Character of good Rulers, in Exodus 18.21. Namely, hating
Covetousness. It Is said of Mordecai, Est 10 3. That he fought the wealth of his
People. This is the duty, and should be the practice and delight of civil
Rulers.

9. Piety, or true Godliness. Rulers in a Christian CommonWealth, should not
only be men of Probity and moral Honesty, but also of true Piety This is so
needful that a Ruler cannot be completely qualified for his Place without it. 1 Samuel 23.3 The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, He that rules
over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Rulers should be men of a
hearty spirit for Religion, and of holy Zeal for God Love and Anger should act
together for God, in them, and in God's cause, upon just occasion, put them
into a holy flame. Thus it was with Phineas of old, and God took it exceeding
well from him, and he therein proved a great blessing to the People. Numb.
25.11, 13. Phineas -- has turned away my wrath from the children of Israel,
while he was zealous for my sake among them: Wherefore I give him my covenant
of peace, the covenant of an everlasting priesthood because he was zealous for
his God.

The Rulers of Christian People should heartily and affectionately Espouse the
cause and interest of Christ; They should for Christ's sake be men of a
Ministerial spirit, yea they should excel and shine therein. They should not
suffer the Ministers of Christ to be in any respect wronged, or hardly dealt
with, if they can help it: They should every way that they can strengthen their
hands and encourage their hearts in the work of the Lord They should have, and
suitably manifest a great love to the House of God; They should be great
Instances and thining Examples of a free, forward, liberal Bountiful spirit, in
promoting and maintaining the Wor^^^p of God* ^ike that great Ruler in and over
Israel, King David; they should set their Affection to the House of their God;
and like him with great readiness of mind, honorably do their part, that God's
House, and all thing relating to it, may appear in their proper state; and by
their Influence and Example (as he did) they should stir up others to do so
also. It should be very much their care that they may be able to say to God in
their la^^ Prayers, in the words of that excellent Magistrate Nehemiah, Neh
13.14 Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds
that I have done for the house of my God, and for the offices thereof. And from
the love they have to the Habitation of God's house, they should be constant
come's to it and from Love to God, and a holy Zeal for the Honor and glory of
His Name they should with great Reverence with upon him in the duties of his
Worship, being therein patterns of Piety to the whole Congregation According to
Psalm 95 60 come let us worship and how down; let us kneel before the Lord our
maker, etc. And Psalm 29 1, 2. Give unto the Lord, O ye Mighty, give unto the
Lord the glory due to his name: Worship the Lord is the beauty of holiness

In a word, Christian Magistrates should be every way men of a Christian
spirit, and in all the Piety and Virtue of an exemplary and excellent Life,
they should walk before God, and shine in the sight of all the People.

1. Then let me now by way of Exhortation, more particulary direct my Speech to
the Honorable the G0VERNOUR, the DEPUTYGOVERNOUR, with the Worshipful
Gentlemen of His Majesty's Council. Honorable and much Honored Sirs, I am
called this day faithfully from the Word of God to lay before you your Duty in
the several parts and branches of it; let me now therefore as the Messenger of
the Lord of Hosts (though very unworthy) Exhort you as GOD's Servants, and
Entreat you as our Fathers, that you would by Prayer and Watchfulness, with a
careful Conscientious Improvement of God's holy Word, Labor to be more and
more men of such a Character as I have now given on a Christian Magistrate, and
let it be your earned desire and true endeavor to shine brightly in every
stroke of it.

And Consider, That as you are Prosessed Christian, it is your great Duty to
Adorn your Profession with all the amiable Virtues ot Christianity: and that as
you are Christian Magistrates, it is still more your duty so to do, and in
particular to Excel in the things that I have now mentioned; and allow me to
offer this to your serious Consideration, That whatsoever is unbecoming in
ordinary Christians, as such, will be much more so in men of your Exal^ed
station N^h. 6 11. And I said, Should such a man as I flee? And who being as I
am would go into the temple to save his life? I will not go in Such men as you
should from a tru'y great and divinely noble Spirit, scorn and abhor to do as
some other men do; yea, some that make a Profession of God lives, and are
accepted by the People of God as worthy to sit with them at the Lord's table.
Such men as you should Out shine the Common sort of other Christians, as the
bright Planets do the lesser Stars.

Consider farther, That the more you do so in the particulars mentioned, the
more you are like to be the Strength, Beauty, Praise and Crown of our Political
State. And if the Virtues that I have this day named, be to a high degree found
with you, they will as so many Orient Gems and Jewels adorn that Crown. This
will be greatly to the comfort and honor, not only of this People, but of your
selves also, and which is still more, it will be greatly to the honor of that
GOD, who is the great King of kings whose Stewards and Servants you are and to
whom you must shortly give up your Account.

And Consider again, That the more you are men of this Character, the more
prepared and ready will you be for Death and Judgment, and the more Peace and
Comfort are you like to have upon your Deathbeds, and in your dying hours; and
the more Embalmed will your Names, and the more dear and precious will your
Memories be with them that survive you after you are dead and gone. A great
Instance we have of this in 2 Chronicles 35.24, 25 And all Judah and Jerusalem
mourned for Josiah, and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah; and all the singing-men
and the singing women speak of Josiah in their lamentations to this day. And
the more these things are found with you, the more will you be filled with Joy,
and the more will you shine in Glory, when you meet your Lord and Judge at the
great Day of his Appearing; yea, the more bright and massey will be your Crown,
the more rich and glorious will be your Reward for ever in the heavenly World.

2. To the Ministers of CHRIST. Reverend Sirs, let us consider that we are
Mortal as well as other men. and must surely Die, and go to Judgment as well as
our Neighbors. Let it therefore b^ our great care so to Live, as that we may
Die comfortably, and so that the day of Judgment may not be to us a dreadful,
but a glorious joyful blessed Day: Let us therefore see that we be faithful and
thorough in our Work. And that we may be so, let us be diligent, painful and
laborious Servants of CHRIST: Let us take heed that we be not too general,
overly, smooth and easy in our Ministry. Let us labor in a very particular,
convincing and awakening manner to Dispense the Word of God; so to speak as
tends most to reach and pierce the Hearts and Consciences, and humble the Souls
of them that hear us, aiming therein at the glory of God, the interest and
honor of our blessed Master, the spiritual and eternal Good of them that fit
under our Ministry.

Let it be very much our care that we may be able to say with the great
Apostle, 1 These. 2.3, 4, 5. For our exhortation was not of deceit, nor in
guile; but as we were allowed of God, to be put in trust with the gospel, even
so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God which tries our hearts: for neither
at any time used we flattering words, or a cloak of covetousness, God is
witness; nor of men sought we glory, etc. And as in Act. 20.20,-27. And I have
kept back nothing that was profitable unto you: Wherefore I take you to record
this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men, for I have not shunned to
declare to you the whole counsel of God. Whatever trouble or self devil this
may cost us while we live, yet to be able solemnly to say thus in the sight of
God, will be a great comfort to our deputing souls when we come to die.

Let us faithfully do our part that the People of our Charge may be preserved
from all corrupt and pernicious Opinions; and in particular, from the
prevailing Errors of the present Day; and that they may be established in the
Truth, and hold forth the Faith once delivered to the saints.

Let it be our earnest Prayer that God would abundantly bless the College, and
grant that from generation to generation, it may be a flourishing Nursery of
Learning, Piety and Virtue; and that it may always be kept clear and incorrupt;
and that from that Fountain, not only now, but in Ages to come, may issue forth
pure Streams of Truth and Light, as may greatly comfort and refresh the
Churches of Christ, and make glad the City of God.

And that have may not hurt Religion, wound the Cause and Interest of Christ,
and hinder the Salvation of Souls (which are things that should be more dear
and precious to us than our own lives) let us be exceeding Watchful and
Circumspect in our Walk; Let us labor so to walk, that we may adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior in all things; Let us therefore be as tender of our
Conversation as of the apple of our Eye. Let us also take heed of all
Mis-understandings among our selves, and of whatsoever leads thereunto such
things would give great advantage to our common Enemy, and tend much to hurt
and weaken us in the work of our Ministry; Let us rather join heart and hand
and afford one another all the help and strength we can in that great and
difficult work we have to do for Christ and the Souls of men. And to awaken us
to great watchfulness in our walk, seriousness and diligence in our work, with
the exercise of due care to avoid all hindrances, and to improve all advantages
therein, Let us consider the shortness of our Time; for we cannot continue long
by reason of Death. 1 Cor 7 29 But this I say, brethren, the time is short. We
should often think of the great Account we have shortly to give up to our Great
Master and Judge; for we are to watch for Souls, precious and immortal Souls,
and that for eternity, as they that must give an account, Heb 13.17.

Let us also consider the solemn Charge that God has given us in his Word,
together with the repeated solemn Calls he has lately given us in his
Providence, to be Faithful in our work, and so to prepare to die and go to
Judgment, by the Removal of so many of his Ministers in this Government by
death, So that the last Year may well be called the dying Year of the Ministers
of Connecticut; and in that respect it has been such a Year, as I suppose
neither the People of this Colony, nor any part of New England ever saw before.
Herein God has given an awakening Alarm to those of our Order that do survive;
and with an uplifted and awful Hand and Voice, called and knocked at our door,
with that solemn Warning, Mat. 24 44 Be ye also ready Let us take the warning,
that so when we die, we may depart in peace and meet our glorious Lord with joy
at His coming; and hear him say to us, Well done, good and faithful Servant
enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord; and receive from Him as the gift of His
rich Grace, a Crown of life and glory that will never fade away.

3. To the Gentlemen that now appear as the Representative Body of this
Government. Let me also in God's Name desire and exhort you, Sirs, That you
would labor to act in all things in your Places as men that Fear God; and
remember that you are Mortal and must shortly die, and give up your Account to
God the great Judge in another World. Consider that you are God's, and your
Country's Stewards; and that it is required of Stewards that a man be found
faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2. See therefore that you well improve your Time; and don't
allow your selves to be often and needlessly absent from the Business that you
came to attend, for you must give an Account of your Stewardship.

See that it be your great and main care to please and honor God, and to
advance the true interest and welfare of his People in your present Station.
Consider you come hither to serve GOD, the King and your Country; set therefore
pleasing your friends, the esteem and good will of men, saving charge, your own
private secular interest in every branch of it, stand by, and give place to
That as the main thing: with a steady, noble Resolution, pursue that as your
great design This is the way for you to act the part of faithful Servants to
God and the King and of true Friends to your Country. See therefore that all
private views, all sinister and self ends, be little, poor, despicable things
with you, compared with the favor and honor of God, the good of the
Commonwealth, your fidelity in your Places, a clear Conference now, inward
Peace upon your Deathbeds, and giving up your Account with Comfort and Joy to
God your Judge, when you Die, and as the great Day.

4. To the whole General Assembly.

Honorable, and Honored Gentlemen, Let me exhort and entreat you to Labor in
the Business that is now before you, to act under the influence of this awful
truth, That the time is coming when you must surely Die and go to Judgment. Do
therefore what service you can for God and his People now. Now it is a time
wherein there is great need that you should mightily stir up, and exert your
selves, for the suppressing of Sin, bearing down of prevailing Vice and
Wickedness, and for the Reformation of things that are amiss among us.

God has filled the Land with Men, and men have filled the Land with Sin
against the Holy One of Israel, according to Psalm. 105.24. And he increased his
people greatly, and made them stronger than their enemies; compared with Hos.
4.7. As they were increased, so they sinned against me. God has plentifully
bestowed upon us the blessings of his goodness; and we have made him returns,
not in Love, Praise and Obedience, as we ought to have done, but (many of us at
least) in Aggravated Sins and Provocations.

We have great reason to bless God that we have not them that hate us to Rule
over us; That our Seats of Justice are filled with our Friends and not with our
Enemies; That we yet enjoy our precious Civil Liberties, our Charter
Privileges; That yet we have our Anniversary days of Election, the choice of
our own Rulers, that our Nobles are of our Selves, and our Governor is not a
stranger and a foreigner, but one that proceeds from the (...) of us, and that
our Laws are of our own making.

In these things we are highly favored of God, and He has in them given us a
portion above our Brethren: And while we are under these distinguishing smiles
of the Divine Benignity, we have a price in our hands, which if it were well
Improved, might greatly tend to make us a happy People. And it must be
acknowledged, that you that now sit at the Helm of our civil State, may, with
the help and blessing of God, contribute much to our Felicity And truly Sirs,
It Is much to be desired, that from holy Zeal for God, and from a Paternal
tender Affection to this People now under your care, you would set your selves
in good earnest, to do all that you well can for their welfare, and therefore
for the Reformation of the God-provoking evils, that are to be found among us.

And there are two things that I shall now mention, which if they were duly put
in exercise, might prove a great and happy means of our Reformation; and they
are Consideration and Resolution. Let this Honorable Assembly be Entreated
thoro'ly to make trial of them both.

[I.] Try what Consideration may do And in the first place, consider whether
such things may not be done more than has yet been done for the Reformation of
known evils, things that have been mentioned, faithfully and solemnly Testfied
against, by those Messengers of the Lord, that have from year to year spoken to
us in His Name on such days as this, as Drunkenness, Unrighteousness and other
Immoralities, vicious and profane Practices; and among others, that of
Profanation of the Sabbath; concerning which I shall now briefly Observe
something, and that only in one branch of it, and that is persons commonly and
without any just cause Absenting themselves from the Public Worship of God on
the Sabbath Day (I speak not of Quakers and other Sectaries, but of them that
make the same Profession that we generally do) I cannot but fear that many in
this Government are very guilty of this great Neglect and sinful Omission of
their Duty. And it may truly be said of them that are thus guilty, that they
live much in the Violation of the Fourth Commandment, which is, Remember the
Sabbath Day to keep it holy; and in the Neglect of a principal means of putting
visible Honor upon God, and of doing their part to maintain and keep up
Religion in the Places where they dwell, and are guilty of putting an open
slight upon Christ, the Offers and Tenders of the Gospel, and all the glorious
things contained in it, and of (...) much in the neglect of the great and
principal means of their own Salvation. All these Evils they do at once, and
live in them, that commonly neglect the Public Worship of God. Surely this
practice in which so many great Evils are contained, can be no little Sin.

It may well be though it that every Member of this Assembly will readily own, that
all ought to be done that can be done, in the great duty of turning from Sin to
God: Now therefore let it be seriously Considered, whither that has been done
for the Reformation of this Evil?

Again, Consider whether there be not some way of Sin, not only yet unpurged,
but also too little discovered, and less considered. It would be a sad thing
indeed, if Iniquity (so hateful to God) should in any one Branch of it have a
free course among us. If there should be any thing common with us, whereby men
are injured, and God is offended and dishonored, and yet we should be under
such a cloud of darkness, and some way or other such an evil influence, that
little Testimony is bor'n against it, even by them that are esteemed some of
our best men. Surely this would call for lamentation and mourning. Yet its
possible that it may be thus even among a Prosessing People, as the Word of
God, and Experience itself do too fully prove.

Therefore, Sirs, pray Consider whether there be no Instance of this nature to
befound in this Government: and let me Desire and Exhort every one to be
Serious in thinking of it. Consider how it has been of late Years, and how it
is now, with a hearty willingness, and with an unfeigned earnest desire to see
wherein we have sinned, according to Job 6.24 Cause me to understand wherein I
have erred. And Chap. 34.32 that which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done
iniquity I will do no more.

Search for Iniquity as with Candles, as a man searches for something which he
earnestly desires to find, which otherwise may prove hurtful, if not fatal to
him. Let Sin be thus inquired after, and searched out.

And here I shall offer two things to your Consideration, which though they cannot
be said to be things in all respects of a secret and hidden nature, yet are
things that have not been mentioned, that I remember on such occasions, and it
may be not so much though it of, as many other things that are amiss among us.

(1) The excessive number of Lawsuits that are Commenced in this County.
Considering what Information I have bad of it, I cannot doubt but that in this
thing, there has been, and still is a great Excess. I am very apt to think (if
I have been righly informed) there are more Lawsuits sometimes (if not
commonly) commenced at one of our Inferior Courts, than there was informer
Years (yea long since my remembrance) in all the Courts of the Government for a
whole Year. As there seems to be a very exorbitant Excess in this thing, so the
inconveniences and ill-effects of it we may well conclude are very great; for
it must needs consume much of our Wealth and Substance, and that every Year.
Its easy to see that it leads to Idleness, neglect of Business, vain
Company-keeping, excessive Drinking, the consumption, waste and loss of much
precious Time, to the great hurt of many particular Persons and Families, in
bringing them to Poverty and Want, which is a great and sore Affliction, in
which are infolded and wrapped up many Sorrows.

This thing may well be accounted to be one of our Calamities. It is an
evidence of much Iniquity, and an occasion of a great deal more; and how much
sin and sorrow may be the evil and bitter fruit of it, and that from Year to
Year? God only knows. I therefore would now offer it to the serious
Consideration of this Honorable Assembly, whether something may not be done to
Restrain this Excess, and bring and keep this thing within some narrower Bounds?

(2) Another thing that I would desire the Assembly's serious Though It of, is,
viz. Whether since the great dis-count of our Bills of Credit, and from thence
the great advance of the Price, both of the Conveniences and Necessaries of
Life, and so of the Charge of Housekeeping, great Wrong has not been done to
some Persons from Year to Year, in the Payment of what has been due to them,
and that by reckoning what has been Paid to them, not according to the Value
of it in former Years, but very much by the present Name and Sound of it. My
meaning is, That though the same Sum will not now go near half so far in
defraying or answering the Charge of the Expenses of a Family, as it would in
Years past, yet to some Persons there is no just Allowance made on that
account. This has been much talked of, and condemned in the Country and that
by wise and good men, both by such as have suffered by it, and by them also
that have not. It has been Testified against in Print, by Gentlemen of Note,
both of Civil and Sacred Order, as that which is very unfair and unjust. Now I
entreat the General Assembly to Consider, whether or no it has not been thus,
not only in other parts of New England, but also in this Government, and if so,
whether this be according to that Divine Precept? Deuteronomy. 16.20. That which is
altogether just shall thou follow. Yea, whether there be not Iniquity in it,
and that which is Evil in the sight of the Lord, and whether this Evil, this
Iniquity has not had too free a course, and passed too current among us? And
whether it be not Iniquity attended with some great Aggravations? And if upon a
serious and impartial Enquiry, is be found that not only such a Practice as I
have now mentioned, has been common, among us, but that also it is not right
in the sight of God, I desire it may be seriously Considered by them, yea all
of 'em whom it principally concerns, whether they ought not to do all that they
can in Obedience to God, and in Faithfulness to their Trust, that it may be
Reformed?

There is certainly a spirit in every truly godly man, from a gracious respect
to God, universally to love truth and righteousness; and to hate, abhor and
bear Testimony against all Iniquity: and this is unquestionably the duty of
every Christian, and especially of Christian Magistrates and the Ministers of
God's Word; yea of all that act in a Public Capacity among us. Let all such
therefore seriously think of their Duty, and take heed that they don't in any
case contract guilt before God by the neglect of it. Thus for the first means
of Reformation, namely, Serious Consideration.

[2] The second means of it is Resolution. A sincere, godly and firm Resolution
in Rulers is very needful for, and a great help to the thorough Reformation of
a People. Let me therefore say to every Member of this Honorable Assembly, If
upon a due exerciese of your tho'ts (acting therein with that seriouseness and
uprightness of heart that the importance of so great a Case requires) you find
any thing among us that may well be though it to be a prevailing, God-provoking
evil, don't say of it thus, or after this manner; This is not right, it is not
as it should be, it should be otherwise, and so pass it over after a gentle
slight and easy manner: but rather when the thing will bear it, and the matter
requires it, say thus of it, This is Iniquity, it is an evil and wicked thing;
it is displeasing, and without doubt provoking to the holy One of Israel, it is
one of the abominable things that God hates; and therefore it must not be
winked at: Such things are not to be endured in Christian Commonwealth, and by
such Rulers as make a profession of Godliness, and therefore it must (if
possible) be reformed: Let me therefore as I would keep my Soul clear of Guilt,
and answer it with Comfort to God my Judge at the Great Day, do my true
endeavor, as he may in his Providence afford me Opportunity, that it may be so.

Let our Honorable Rulers, with every Member of this Assembly, be now
intrested, and in God's Name and Presence, Solemnly advised and earnestly
Exhorted to set them;selves in their several Places and Capacities, with all
their might, to endeavor the Reformation of whatsoever is not right in the
sight of God among us; according to that holy Resolution expressed in Psalm. 1:9
106 I have Sworn, and I will Perform it, that I will keep all thy Righteous
Judgments. And agreeable also to what we have in 2 King. 23.25, (wherein we
have an account of the holy Zeal and Fervor that King Josiah acted with, in
the work of Reformation) it is ^^ert said, That he turned to the Lord and
labored also that his People might so do) for that is manifestly employed in
it) with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might,
according to all the Law of Moses.

And would it please the God of the spirits of all flesh, (in whose hand are
the hearts of Kings and of the Rulers of his People) so to move upon the hearts
of the General Assembly, in both Houses, as that they might thus exercise their
Piety toward God, and their Christian Love to the People, now under their
Care; it would be a happy token of his Presence with them, a gracious smile of
his Providence upon us, and a comfortable sign of his still being with us, and
that he will not yet leave nor forsake us.

5. To the Gentlemen that commonly appear in our Courts of Justice, at the Bar,
as Counselors or Attorneys at Law. Be You exhorted from this Doctrine, Sirs,
to act in your Places as men that know they must die, and seriously think of
it, and as men, that believe and consider that after Death comes Judgment. Your
Employment is needful, and if you are faithful in it, you may be very useful
and profitable, not only to yourselves, and to some particular Persons you
serve in it, but also to the Commonwealth. See therefore that you act in it in
the fear of God, and with a due regard to Truth and Justice; and therein labor
to do your part that Iniquity may be bor'n down, and that not wrong but right
may take place in our Courts, and that Righteousness may prevail in the midst
of us.

Let it therefore be very much your care in every Case you undertake the
management of, to be on the right side. Never dare to plead or defend a Cause
that you know to be unjust; and consider when men go about to defend an unjust
cause that they know to be so, (wherein two parties are concerned as opposite
one to another) they plead for Iniquity, they set themselves against
Righteousness, and against God the Father and Fountain of it. They go about to
wrong the Truth, to wrong their Neighbor, to wrong their Maker, and to wrong
their own Souls all at once. They forsake God, and labor to lead the Court and
Jury to do so also, and do not only greatly Sin themselves, but more than that,
like wicked Ahab of old, take a course to make Israel to Sin.

Such men join with Satan against God, and endeavor to draw others to their
Party. It may be said to men that knowingly plead a corrupt and bad cause, as
in Judge. 6.31. Will ye plead for Baal? Will ye plead for Satan? Will ye plead
for the Devil and against God too? what a horrid and dreadful thing is that!
Concerning such men therefore say in your hearts, O my Soul, come not thou into
their secret, to their Assembly (...) honor be not thou united. It Is a wicked
and dangerous thing for a man to be against God; this is not the way to have
inward Peace upon a Deathbed, which is infinitely better to a dying man, than
the richest Fee, than the greatest Gain is or can be to any man. As therefore
you would be blessings in your places while you live, have peace in your own
minds, and not the accusations of a guilty Conscience when you die; as you
would go the right way and not the wrong when you go out of the World and into
Eternity, and as you would be on the side, the right hand of Christ I mean, and
not on the left when he comes to judge the World, and as you would then receive
the Sentence and reward of the Righteous, and not the fearful doom of the
workers of Iniquity, Let no money hire you to oppose Truth and Righteousness,
and so to set your selves against God and your Conseiences in pleading and
defending a cause that you know to be unjust. There are two texts of Scripture
which I shall leave with your serious tho'ts, namely, Phil 4.8 Finally,
brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, etc. think on these things. And Prove. 17.15. He that
justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are an
abomination to the Lord.

6. To the Freemen of this Government. As you desire inward peace upon your
Deathbeds, Sins, in your last and dying hours, when you are just stepping into
Eternity, and going to give up your Account to God your Judge in another World,
See that you be faithful in your Places. Make conscience therefore of choosing
such for Rulers, as are hopefully truly godly men, and in other respects well
qualified for Government; men that will maintain the honor of their Places and
of our Civil State, that will be heartily concerned for the Glory of God, the
Honor and Interest of Christ, and seek the Good of the People, and that every
way. Men thus qualified are like to be strong Rods for Scepters to Rule, great
and rich Blessings in their day and generation: Men that the Poor and the
Needy, the Widow and the Fatherless, the Ministers of Christ, with all that
love the peace of Sion, and desire the prosperity of our Jerusalem, yea this
whole People will have great reason to rejoice in, and bless God for. Prove.
29.2. When the righteous are in authority the People rejoice.

It is a great trust that God has committed to you, in that the Election of
the chief of them that Rule over us in Civil Power is from year to year put
into your hands; that so therefore you may bring Glory to God, be Instruments
of Good to his People, among whom you dwell, and for whom you act in your
present capacity, and therein act like Christians, yea becoming the Freemen and
priviledg'd Members of a Christian Commonwealth, See that as you have been now
exhorted, you be herein true to your Trust. This is your great Duty, and if
from time to time you act in it under the power and influence of God's fear,
and with a truly faithful spirit, your so doing may prove a means not only of
our comfort and welfare, but also of your own, and that in Death and Judgment,
and for Time and Eternity.

7. To Young People, Though you are Young, and may feel your selves well, and in
a good firm state of Health, yet consider you are mortal as well as others.
Remember therefore your Creator in the days of your youth, Eccl. 12.1. Seek
unto God betimes, make your supplication to your Judge while you are yet young;
seek a saving Interest in Christ in your early days. Christ calls you into his
vineyard now early in the morning, see that you obey his calls. If you would
have the seed you have to sow for Eternity in this li^e prosper and spring up
in a harvest of Joy and Glory in the Life to come see that you sow it in the
pleasant Spring of your Life in the bright morning of your Day, the time of
your Youth, I mean, to allude to that in Eccl. 11.6. In the morning sow thy
Seed.

If you would act wisely, set out in your Journey for Heaven in the morning. If
you would get well through your great work before the night comes, begin in the
morning.

The time of Youth is the best time, no time in the whole life of man like the
time of Childhood and Youth for the work of your Souls. See therefore that you
improve it Take head that you don't lose these golden morning hours of the Day
of Life and Grace the precious time of Youth I mean.

And consider again, That the time of Youth may be your only Time for that
which is your great concern; for the children of men often die in Youth. We end
in, Luk 7.12. of one that was carried out of the doors of his mothers house
send, that was a young man. And indeed this is a common case Job 36.14 They die
in youth. And its very possible that it may prove your case Keep this in mind,
think of it, hear it upon your hearts when you are in Company one with another
in times of Mirth and Rejoicing. In particular this day, If you take liberty to
divert your selves one with another, and to be merry together, see that you be
innocently so. Consider the (...) of your Judge is upon you. In the fear of God
therefore, and with solemn tho'ts of Death, Judgment and Eternity, see that you
avoid whatsoever may be criminal in your Conversation.

You have through the great mercy of God, lived to see another day of Election,
and consider, if you should live to see the end of this day, that another day
will surely follow it, and that win be your dying-day. This is a pleasant day,
that will be a solemn day; on that day your Souls must go into Eternity, and
appear before God the great Judge in the other World. That solemn and awful
Day, will certainly follow this pleasant and joyful Day, and God only knows the
time when, or how soon. See therefore that you so spend your time now, that
your dying day may not prove a dark and doleful day to you. There are therefore
two Scriptures that I would now, leave with you to think of, that in Deuteronomy. 32
29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end. And that in Eccl. 11.9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and
let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou that for all these things
God will bring thee to judgment.

8 and Lastly To us all. Let us make it our great care to prepare for Death and
Judgment; and the best way, yea the only right way for us so to do, is to set
our selves to the practice of our duty in every branch of it. Let us therefore
have a universal respect to the Commandments of God, and to the Rules and
Precepts of Christ, and let us take heed of whatsoever is contrary thereunto.
And particularly, Let us not dare rasbly to censure and reproach them that God
has set over us in the capacity of Rulers, and Fathers in our Civil State. As
it should be their care to give (...) cause of complaint, so it should be ours
that we don't complain without cause. Rulers may errand do amiss as well as
other men: They may so err as not to give cause of Complaint, because their
errors may be from such humane frailty, as is unavoidable by the best of men;
and they may so err as to give great cause of Complaint Eccl. 3.16. Moreover, I
saw under the sun the place of judgment, that wickedness was there; and the
place of righteousness, that iniquity was there, Isai 5.7. And he looked for
judgment, but behold oppression, and for righteousness but behold a cry. But
yet let us be very careful that we don't unjustly and injuriously complain,
lest we prove some of them mentioned in the 14, 15, and I6 verses of the
Epistle of Jude, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his saints, to
execute judgment upon all, and to convince all of their ungodly deeds, and of
their hard speeches, -- these are murmurers, complainers, walking after their
own lusts, etc.

Let us give them that faithfully serve us in the management of our public
concerns all due respect and honor. Romans 13.7 Render therefore to all their
dues, tribute to whom tribute, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor is due.
Good Rulers are a great blessing to a People, and they chat are so certainly
deserve to be much respected, and will rewarded. Take heed that you do nothing
to weaken the hands, discourage or grieve the hearts of such men: Let us all be
much in prayer to God for them; the weight and difficulty of their work calls
for it, and so does our own interest.

And if you would be every way obedient to Christ, pray also for your
Ministers; their Work is very great, and they greatly need the help of the
prayers of all their Christian friends; and consider, in praying for them, you
pray for your selves and for your children, and blessed will you and yours be
for ever, if you pray for them as you ought to do, and God hear your prayers.

And as you desire to be ready for Death and Judgment, See that you do no wrong
to any Person either in Name or Estate. See that you don't wrong any one for
want of consideration; and consider you ought to weigh your actions, and ponder
the paths of your feet, and mind what you do and say.

Take heed that you do no wrong from the inordinate love of Gain; or because
you hope you have obtained mercy, and therefore shall not die for it; or
because you think you can do it without much hurting your Name or Credit among
men; or because you hope you shall live to repent of it, or upon any
consideration whatsoever.

And more particularly be careful in these things following, which I shall but
just mention, viz. See that you do no wrong in not justly and honestly paying
your debts; in selling Corn or other things in a time of great scarcity and
want; in selling Ministers, maintaining the worship of God; in stating
sala-ries for Schoolmasters and others that serve the Public, putting out
Money to Interest, taking up large tracts of Land in new Plantations. I readily
grant, that this is a thing that may be regularly and well done, and it may
also be so done, as greatly to hurt poor men, cramp and cripple new Towns, and
prejudice the weal Public. If any of you err or may be engaged in
controversies or differences about the place of setting MeetingHouses, or in
any matter of Church Discipline, or in opposing Singing by Rule, or in the new
Way as it is commonly called, or in or about any other thing, take heed that
under a pretense of standing for equity and righteousness, you ben't influenced
rather by a proud wilful spirit, and a regard to your own carnal interest, than
by the fear of God, love to that which is just and right, or any true
tenderness of Conscience. When it is thus (as doubtless it too often is) men
act with Guile and Hypocrisy, and so do that which is aborminable to God, and
also bring their Souls under Guilt in his fight, which should be dreadful to
them. Let every one therefore look well to his own heart, and consirder that
the great and holy God, who loves and requires the truth in the inward parts,
and hates and abhors the contrary, sees and searches men's hearts, considers and
weighs their spirits in such cases; see therefore that in all things wherein
you differ and dis-agree, you act as in his sight.

Also in the work of our Office as Civil or Ecclesiastical Rulers, or whatever
our Post or Station be, and in all our ways and dealings one with another, Let
us see that we be undefiled in the way, and such as do no iniquity; that we be
not ruled or governed by some filthy lust or corrupt affection: And that we may
not be so, let us think of such passages of God's Word as are proper to keep us
in awe, and work a dread in us of doing any thing in our dealings with men that
is evil in the sight of the Lord, viz. such as these, Psalm. 125.5. As for such
as turn aside to their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the
workers of iniquity. 1 Cor. 6.8, 9. Nay you do wrong; know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; Luke 13.27. Depart from me,
all ye workers of Iniquity. Job. 31.14. What shall I do when God rises up, and
when he visits, what shall I answer him?

Let us also be much in serious Consideration, and Solemn Self-reflection with
respect to the particulars but now mentioned, and others that we may think of,
thus, or after this manner, Am not I Influenced and Acted much in this thing,
by the Pride of my heart, Love of filthy Lucre, or some Lust or other, hateful
to God, that now bears Sway in me? Do I act herein according to that excellent
Rule of Christ, wherein I am required to do by my Nei'bour, as I desire in the
like ease, he would do by me? Can I appeal to the All-seeing, Heart-searching
God, concerning the uprightness of my heart in this thing? Will my acting or
doing as I now do, give me Peace in my dying Hour? Will this stand at the Day
of Judgment? Will it bear the strict Examination and Trial of that Great and
most Awful Judge, before whom I must shortly appear? Thus let us all be careful
to avoid doing that which is not right in the sight of God, in all our Dealings
and Concerns with men. Let us also all do our Part to promote and set forward
the great Duty of Reformation

Let our Honored Magistrates, the Reverend Ministers of Christ, the Gentlemen
that Represent the several Towns in the Government agree in it, and as one man
set their shoulders to this great Work: Let Inferior Officers with Heads or
Families, do their part in it; and let our Young People come into it; Let us
all join in it, and with a united Strength list together at it. Let every one
Consider what is amiss in himself, and set himself in the fear of God to reform
it, and also do his part in his place in helping forward a General Reformation.
And let us Consider that the more active we are herein, the more ready and
prepared are we like to be, to die and to give up our account to God. And let
all wicked and ungodly Person, a]l Unconverted Sinners in this Assembly, be
exhorted also to do their part in this great duty of preparing for Death and
Judgment.

Consider, Sins, You must die and go into Eternity, and your eternal state must
after your Death, be settled by the Judgment of God; and what a dreadful thing
would it be if you should die as you are! For then you must certainly go from
your Death beds to the Pit of Hell, to the place of eternal Torment, Rev. 6.8.
And I looked and saw a pale Horse and his name that sat upon him was Death, and
Hell followed with him. Rev. 14.11. And the smoke of their Torment ascends up
for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night. Therefore that you may
not, when you die, go to Hell, and there be in Despair, Horror and Torment
forever, that you may not by the righteous Judgment of God be Condemned in the
other World, to a state of endless Woe and Misery, if it be possible get a
saving Interest in Christ, by Faith get your Hearts renewed, and your Lives
reformed, turn from your sins to God by true Repentance, that so your Peace may
be made with your Judge before Death comes. Be therefore in haft about it, see
that you make no delay in this great Concern; for you to you for ever, if it be
not done before you die: And Consider, God is angry with the wicked every day.
Remember that awful Text, Job 36.18. Because there is Wrath beware left he take
thee away with his stroke, then a great Ransom cannot deliver thee.

And to awaken us all, to prepare for Death and Judgment, and so to this great
duty of Reformation Let Two or Three Things be seriously Considered.

1. Let us Consider the Frowns of providence, and Tokens of Divine Anger, that
we have of late been under, and are so at this Day. A few years ago, God did as
it were from time to time say to us (in his Providence) Moses my Servant is
dead. And now Death in repeated Instances of it is come into the House of
Aaron. Not long since the hand of God was very remarkable in the Removal of
many of our Magistraces, and that in a short time; several of whom were the
strongest Pillars of the Commonwealth; And the last Year it was no left, but
much more so, in the Death of so many of our Ministers; several of whom were
the Pillars of our Churches: And such an one was that faithful Servant of
Christ, that some Months since died in this Town, The Reverend Mr, THOMAS
BUCKINGHAM.
whose Pleasant Countenance, Grave and Comely Presence, were wont from Year to
Year, on our Days of Election, to Grace and Adorn this Pulpit; but he is gone,
and much of our Strength, Light and Glory are gone with him: He was truly a man
of a bright Character, being one of superior Abilities, one of the Chief of
our Ministers, one had in Reputation among us, one of our Pillars and Principal
men: He was of a Conversation becoming a Minister of Christ, one that in his
Life and Walk imitated and honored his Blessed Master, being very blameless
and of exemplary Piery, Gifts and Graces, a pleasant Temper, an affable
obliging and engaging Carriage, and indeed many excellent things, a whole
Cluster of amiable? adorning and endearing Virtues did meet in him We have all
Cause to mourn that we shall see his face no more: So qualified was he for his
Work and Place, that without question, he would have been highly prized by any
Orthodox Judicious Christian Congregation in the Land, not ore excepted. And as
the death of such a man, and our great loss in it, may well be matter of Grief
and Sorrow to us, and that in no low degree, so our Affections may be allowed
to rise the higher, and our Tears to flow the more in expressions of
Lamentation and Mourning. Considering how many Choice men, and of great worth,
of the same Order, it has pleased God to take from us by death but a little
before him. And also Considering the final departure of The Reverend Mr.
TIMOTHY WOODBRIDGE
Him that so soon followed him, I mean that aged and eminent Servant of Christ
who died in this Town this last week, who was one of the principal men of his
Order in the Land; Him, (...) that were his Contemporaries in the Sacred work
ot the Evangelical Ministry in the Towns about him, generally Considered as one
much our Senior and Superior; and in Cases of Weight and Difficulty, advised
with, and hearkened to him as our Head and Guide, yea very much as to a Father
who was indeed one of the chief of the Fathers of that Tribe in Israel, which
he by Office as a Minister of Christ, stood especially related to.

As I have not pretended to give you the full Character of him had first
mentioned of these Reverend Persons, so neither shall I now attempt it
concerning him I am now more especially speaking of; but shall only briefly
mention several things wherewith it pleased God, the Giver of every perfect
Gift, the Author and Fountain of all Goodness and Virtue, to qualify and adorn
him. And I may truly say of him, that Considering; the goodness of his natural
Temper, the gravity, greatness and superiority that appeared in his
Countenance, his bodily Presence being so far from being Mean and Contemptible,
that it was great, much above what is ordinary; his proper Stature (he being
Taller than the Common Size) with his Comely and Majestic Aspect, being such
as Commanded Reverence; and Considering how Wise and Judicious he was, with his
great Prudence, his entertaining Freedom, obliging Courtesy and Affability, his
superior Learning, Reading and Knowledge, his Liberal, Bountiful, Generous and
Public Spirit (in which he did much excel) his great Ability for, and
Readiness in giving Counsel in difficult and important Cases, and how much the
Care of the Churches, and of the College lay upon him and what a Blessing he
was to them both; and what a singular Gift, and how happy a hand he had in
managing of Controversies and Differences, and what Influence, Sway and
Auhority he had both with Ministers and People, vea with men of all Ranks,
Degrees and Orders, and how much he has been a Healer of Breaches, Strife and
Divisions among us; and how from place to place he carried the blessing of
Peace with him, and how ready and willing he was with Love to serve men, and do
good to all, and how he delighted in it; and Considering his Orthodoxy and
foundness in the Christian Faith, I mean in the Articles and Principles of our
holy Religion, and how much he favored of a gracious Spirit, and particularly
in his great love to our Lord Jesus Christ his blessed Master; his holy Zeal
for God, and against Sin, his humble submission and resignation to divine
Sovereignty, his great Mortification to the World; and Considering also for how
many Years, and how well he (...) the Pulpit, and (in our Counsels and
associations) the Moderators Chair, and with how amiable a Conversation he
adorned his Profession, and how brightly the Graces and Virtues of a Christian,
and of a Minister of Christ shined forth in his Life. And Considering how great
and good he was in the eyes both of Ministers and People, and that both at home
and abroad, and how much good he did in his Day, and how extensively useful and
serviceable, and what a Blessing he was in his Generation, and how becoming a
Christian and a Minister he carried himself both living and dying: I say
Considering these things (besides others of the same kind that might be added
to them) which I have thus briefly mentioned concerning this eminent Person, it
may doubtless be truly said of him, that he was one of the Choicest and
Greatest Men, that have ever appeared among us in these parts of the Country.

The First and Chief of our Colleges has had the Honor of the Education of
some great men, and is must be acknowledged that he was one of them. In his
Death a very bright and precious Jewel is fallen from our Crown, and much of
the Glory is departed from our Israel.

And the Truth is, it may be said of the Reverend Ministers of Christ that
lately died in this Town, that they had both of them such adorning Gifts and
Virtues, and such bright Marks and Characters of true Piery, and so many
excellent things in them, that it is but paying the Tribute justly due to their
Name and Memory (which are deservedly dear and precious to us) to say of them
that they were Choice and Excellent men, and that they were worthy of that high
esteem we had of them, while they lived, and of that general Lamentation and
Mourning that attended their Death, and with which they have been followed to
their Graves, and has been continued since they died, as an acknowledgment of
their great worth, and our great loss, in their final departure from us.

When such men die, we may well weep over them, as the King of Israel wept over
the holy Prophet, 2 King. 13 14. O my Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel
and the horsemen thereof. And indeed it will be a great and high Favor of God,
if their Places be ever filled up, which Considering the All sufficiency of God
our Savior, the glorious Head and King of the Church, we must not despair of,
but with instant and earnest Prayer wait for at the Throne of Grace with hope.

God by putting out so many of our Lights, yea of our brightest Lights, one
after another, and in so there a time, has bro't us under an awful and very
dark Dispensation. It is now a cloudy and dark Day with us, and in particular
it may be said as in Joel 2.2. It is a day of Darkness and Gloominess, and of
Clouds and thick Darkness with this Town. I Conclude it has never seen such a
Day as this before. And the truth is, a dark Cloud is spread over us all in
general, the awful hand of God upon us calls for our serious and solemn Tho'ts.
God's Voice to us now, is as as of old to his ancient PeopIe, Hag 5.7. Now
therefore, thus faith the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways. Seeing God has of
late plucked up some of the strongest Stakes in our Hedge, removed some of the
firmest, and most polished Stones in our Wall, and thereby made great Gaps and
Breaches in one part and another of it: Taken away by Death, so many of our
Moses's and of our Aarons, of our Judges and of our Prophets, and therein from
Year to Year been hewing down our Pillars, both in Church and State, and taking
from us the Chosen Men of our lsrael, and by Mortal Distempers, and by other
adverse Dispensations been manifesting himself displeased and angry with us; I
say Considering these dark and awful Frowns of Heavens displeasure thus
appearing against us, in the face of Providence, surely we have reason to say
as in Psalm 119.120. My flesh tremblesh for fear of Thee, and Iam afraid of thy
Judgments. And in Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again
unto the Lord.

2. Let us Consider, what if any of us should die, and be called to the Bar of
our judge Unprepared? If any of us that now sit at the Table of the Lord,
should be found at last to have been false Professors, and among the foolish
Virgins; If when God in his Providence shall say to us, behold thy days are
Numbered and Finished, any of us be them found to have been unfaithful in our
Places, and if after all our Profession, Esteem and Name on Earth, with our
hopes of Heaven, we should meet with that from our Judge in the other World in
Rev 3.2. I have not found thy Works Perfect before God. Or that in Dan 5.27.
Thou art weighed in the Balance, and art found Wanting. O how dreadful would
it be! How amazing! How Confounding! How may the tho'ts of such a thing, put us
in mind of the words of the Prophet, Hab 3.16. When I heard my Belly trembled;
my Lips quivered at the voice, I trembled in my self. And as for you that are
now secure in your sins, and careless of your Souls, that pass your time
pleasantly and merrily away, walking after the fight of your eyes, and the
lusts of your hearts; that live in the Neglect and Contempt of Christ, and his
great Salvation, and in daily Disobedience to God and the Gospel, what will you
do in the end thereof? What will you do in the day of Visitation? When God
rises up, what will you answer him? To whom will you flee for help? What will
you that are now Christ-despisers and rejecters, do when you are dying, and
just slepping into Eternity? When the Judge of the World comes to Call you to
an Account, how will you do to stand before him? How will you answer that awful
Voice, that solemn Call of the Archangel with the Trump of God, and in the
Name of the great Judge in these Words, or something equivalent to them, Arise
ve Dead and Come to Judgment

And what will you do when Judgment is passed upon you, if that should be your
Doom (which God in mercy to your Souls forbid) Matthew 2.5.41. Depart from me, ye
Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And if
that should be your case, Mat 25.46. And these shall go away into everlasting
Punishment. Sirs, Seriously Consider these things, and say in your hearts, O
how can I bear the Torments of eternal Fire! How can I dwell with everlasting
Burnings! O my Soul while thou have yet time in the world, improve it, and if
possible get into a state of Grace and Salvation that thou may be ready for
thy departure hence and for eternal Judgment, that thou may not be
Condemned, Lost and Damned forever in the other World.

3. And Lastly, Let us Consider the great Uncertainty of our Time in this
world. Whatever we have to do in our Public or Private Capacities, for Body or
Soul for Time or Eternity, must be done while this present Life lasts, and who
knows how short that may be? Who can tell what the events of Providence may be
in the Course of the present Year? Who knows where any that are now in
Authority, or of the Ministers of the Gospel here present, or any of us now
within these Walls may be before another Day of Election?

Let us all Consider in how short a time the Sovereign Lord of life and Time,
and holy Judge of the World, may make a great Change in our present Place and
State: How soon may be take our Son's from our Bodies, and lay our Bodies in
the cold and dark Grave, and set our Souls at his most awful Bar, and by his
definitive and irreversible Sentence, setle us in our eternal State? How should
this affect the hearts of those of us, that are in public Place, both of Civil
and Sacred Order, Considering how great our work is, and what a great account
we have to give up to God, and that it infinitely Concerns us to be ready for
it?

And with what serious and solemn Tho'ts, should all unconverted Sinners think
of this, that have their Peace yet to make with their Judge, and who, if they
die, as they have hitherto lived, are sure to receive from him a Sentence of
Condemnation, a most fearful Doom of eternal Damnation with Devils in Hell.

And as this terrible Sentence, this dismal Damning Doom will surely be passed
by God upon all Christless and Impenitent Sinners, at the great Day: So it will
most certainly be Executed upon them in their future State (to which they are
daily hastening) and that without the least Pity or Mercy, except by Faith in
Christ and true Repentance they turn from their Sins to God, before Death
comes, which is daily coming, and is (doubtless) very near to some of them, and
God only knows who they are. Let all therefore here present before God, whose
case this is, be advised and persuaded without the least longer delay in the
diligent use of God's appointed means, with fear and trembling, arising from a
Sense of their present danger, to seek the Lord and wait upon him for his Mercy
and Salvation by Jesus Christ, while yet there may be hope. Before I Conclude,
I shall only further say,

We are never like to meet all together again in this World, it being very
probable that our next General Meeting will be at the Bar of Christ, and before
the Judgment Seat of God, in our Immortal and Eternal State. Now seeing the
Case stands thus with us, Let us make it our great Care so to spend the
remaining Part of our present, short, uncertain Life, in the work of our
General and Particular Callings I mean as we are Christians, and with respect
to the Places wherein we stand, that we may then appear in Glory at the Right
Hand of Christ, and give up our account to the acceptance of our Judge, and
with Joy unspeakable and Glorious in our own Souls. I shall Close all with two
Texts of Scripture agreeable to the two solemn Things which have been so much
the Subject matter of this whole Discourse, I mean Death and Judgment viz.
Eccl. 9.10 Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there
is no work nor devise nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave, whether thou
go. Rom 14, 10, 11, 12. We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of
Christ. For it is written, As I Live faith the Lord every knee shall bow to me,
etc. So then every one of us, shall give an account of himself to God.

FINIS.

