THE NATURE OF RICHES, Showed From the Natural Reasons of the Use and Effects
thereof: Together with some Improvements made upon the Considerations of the
Nature and Effect of Riches.

By Joseph Morgan.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN, 1732.

THE NATURE OF RICHES.
RICHES is commonly taken for a Plenty of the Necessaries for the Support of
Human Life: And if every Man would seek the Good of others, as truly and
sincerely, as men ought to seek their own; there would be no Occasion for any
Man to have his Riches or Estate to himself. For every Man would labor
sincerely, in his calling, for the Good of the Whole, the Husbandman, the
Tradesman, the Merchant, the Sailor, the Ruler, the Teacher, and all other
needful Employs. And all that is produced, would be for every one as he needs.
And what People raise in one Country more than they need, would be carried to
another Country that needs it. And what they of the other Country have to
spare, would be brought back to the Country that needs it. And no Price would
be talked of; but every man would labor faithfully in his calling to raise all
he can; and the Merchants deal out, receive and transport; the Carpenters build
for such as need etc. Thus all Men would have Plenty, and Contentions would
cease, and most of the Miseries of this World would be taken away.

It is an approved Way, Acts IV, 32. Sin is the only Hinderance: For now, since
men love none but themselves, such a thing would be vain to talk of; few men
would labor faithfully, and all things would come short, so that there is a
Necessity that each man be the proper Owner of what his Industry raises. And
Covetousness (which is Idolatry) must be the Support of the World, and the
Misery of it both. Each man coveting to make himself rich, carries on the
Public Good: For Men cannot gain Riches and use 'em, except they help others
by it. Thus God in his Wisdom and Mercy turns our Wickedness to public
Benefit, or the World could not stand.

Riches are given for Public Good, and it is not in the Skill of the most
covetous and envious Man to make it otherwise. It must be put to the use it was
made for. He cannot swallow it all into his own Belly. Others must have part
with him, or he cannot gain or keep his Riches. And he can have but his
necessary Food and Raiment out of it, (for God has given him no more, and
nothing more will do him good) and if Coveteousness do not hinder, the poorest
Man has that as well as he. He pleases himself, that he will leave his Riches
to his Children. But how commonly does this prove their Undoing for ever (as
the gaining of it was to their Father) while Poor Men's Children by honest
Industry prove happy in this Life and the next.

A rich Man is a Slave to others: while he thinks others are Slaves to him. He
is a great Friend to the Public, while he aims at nothing but serving himself.
God will have us live by helping one another; and since Love will not do it,
Covetousness shall.

The Merchant cannot gain his Riches, except he bring the Goods from other
Lands, which they there have no need to keep, and give 'em in exchange what
they need more, and bring to us what we need, or think we need; and take off
from our hands for it, the Produce which we have no need to keep. He slaves and
breaks his Rest to do this: and (if he deal honestly) they that deal with him
have the Benefit, and he has the Beholding of it with his eyes, for his Reward.
Eccl. V, 11.12. And if he deal knavishly, they that deal with him are wronged,
and he must answer for it in the great Day. And while he is here, he cannot eat
nor wear with the more Comfort.

What the Husbandman raises more than he can eat and wear, is to feed others,
or he is never the better for it. Thus while men covet All for themselves, they
do others more good then they do themselves; but no Thanks to their good
Intention.

The like of the Tradesman, if he deal honestly.

But the Userer does no body good. He did not make the Money. He did not dig it
out of the Ground: He did not bring it into the Country in Exchange for other
Produce more needed in another Country. The Money had been in the Country, if
he had never been. He has his Heart's desire, to live for no body but himself.
So the Landlord who lives upon his Rents: He did not make the Land, nor bring
it into order for Improvement. What good has he done in the World for his Money?

But that we may view the Truth on both Sides of it; lest we take up a wrong
Idea of it (the Neglect whereof is the Cause of all Errors) If he that gets his
Money so easily, improve it and his Time in doing good, we have the less to say
against him.

And he that builds Houses, and rents 'em out, does public good for his Money.

And if a Man borrow Money to make himself an Estate, by carrying on some
profitable Design; his Money has done Public Good: And it is just that the
Owner of it should have a Reward from him that has made his Gain by it. But if
a Man be in necessity, He that has it is bound to give or lend it for nothing,
Exodus XX, 25. Deuteronomy. XV, 7.8.9.10.11. Ezekiel. XVIII, 8.13.17. etc.

We are not made to live for our selves only. And though Sin has brought the
Necessity that every Man ought to know his own Property, and God will punish
him that invades another's Property without his Consent: Yet God is the proper
Owner of all, and we are but Stewards entrusted, and must give an Account to
him, how we use all that we are entrusted with, and must part with it as he
pleases.

So we may not lawfully withold from such as are in necessity. Yet they may not
meddle with it without our Leave: that we may have the Honor and Reward of
giving it with a free Heart, or be punished if we refuse it. And therefore
there must be needy People to do good to. Deuteronomy. XV, 10.11.

So the Lawyer is often times so far from getting his Money by doing good, that
he gets it by doing Harm, in helping People to undo each other. The like of the
Physician, if he take Money where he can do no good, or take extravagantly
where he really does good.

But let a Man come by his Goods justly or unjustly, the more he has, the
greater Slave he is, and the greater is his Uneasiness of Life here, and
Difficulty in preparing for another Life.

And if he come by any part unjustly, except he make Restitution to the utmost
of his Power, he is utterly debarred from all Treasure in the next Life: and
must surely be punished for all his Injustice. Psalm. LXII, last. Levit. VI,
4.5.6.7. Number. V, 7.8.

The Ruler or Teacher, if they receive so much as to support' em in their Work
and Office, so as to be able to perform it well, it is as well as the Merchant,
Husbandman or Tradesman who deal honestly. But if they or the Merchant,
Husbandman or Tradesman take more (except there be plenty enough to afford it)
it is no better than the Usurer or Landlord, (which are useless ways of getting
a Livelihood) whereas the World cannot be supported without the other.

What a Man gains to himself, by doing the Public as much good as he does
himself, and wronging no Man by doing it, is honestly and lawfully gotten, and
nothing else that I can think of. And I think this may pass for an universal
Rule. The Needy helped I do not call Gain: except by God's Blessing to the
Giver. The Provision raised by the Husbandman make so much the more in the
Country, (yea in the World): So the Work of a Tradesman: So Fish and wild
Beasts taken, and the like. So the Merchant exporting and importing, to the
Benefit of both Countries. So a Physician when he cures a Disease, does good to
the Public, by saving the Life or Health of a Member of the Commonwealth Some
body has the Benefit more than he that gets Money by it. So a Lawyer, when he
defeats the Design of a Knave. A Ruler or Teacher, who is worthy of his Office,
does the Public much more good, than what he receives of the Public. And if
his faithful Endeavors fail, he is no more to blame than the Merchant, who
loses his Goods at Sea, and so can (...) the Public no good by them.

What ever is gotten by making another the poorer, (not helping him to
something better for him, in the Room of it) is unjustly gotten: The Public
has no Benefit by it. And he that does it, presumes to take into his own Hands,
what God has betrusted another with: which is a Rejecting of God's Authority,
and Injuring the Person so made poorer.

For these Reasons Theft and Robbery are unlawful, and accounted so intolerable
as to be punished with Death. And he that over reaches or cheats a Man, does
him as much wrong as he that steals from him, and therefore it is as much a Sin
against God. He that takes the Advantage of another Ignorance or Necessity, to
make his Gain from him, is a Thief before God, though he hold his Nose ever so
high: And except he make Restitution, he can no more be saved than a Thief that
is hanged for Stealing, and never repented, 1 Cor. VI, 10. 1 Thessalonians. IV, 6.

The like it is of him that puts his Neighbor to unnecessary Charges at Law,
or otherwise damnifies him, although he get nothing by it himself. Psalm. XV, 3.
The like of him that runs in debt, when he sees no way to pay it. And the like
of such as promise and take no care to perform, nor to give seasonable Notice,
if it fall out impossible for 'em to perform.

Alas, how many go to Hell on this Score! although they now pass for Topping
Christians. Ephesians. V, 5. A Man in Necessity has a Right to as easy dealing as a
Man in no Necessity; because every Man has a Right to every good Thing that may
be had without doing wrong to another. So if my Neighbor be in Necessity, and
I can help him without wrong to myself or another, he has a Right to my Help
from God. And I wrong him of what God has given him, if I deny it. And if I
make my Advantage of his Necessity, I may as well steal out of his Pocket. The
like if I deceive him, to make the more gainful Bargain with him, to his Loss:
For then should I act the part of a False Devil, and not the part of a Man who
loves his Neighbor as himself: nor of a man who has one Spark of Honor in
him, nor of one that is worthy to be accounted a Man among those that deserve
to be called men. Thus for his deceit, which unmans a Man, and beside he is a
scandalous Thief who does it: And such can never be saved without a
brokenhearted Repentance. Rev. XXI, last. Beside so much other Wickedness
which abounds in the Land, and the many other ways of unjust Dealing, which God
will take Vengeance of, (as Reason alone must testify.) These ways now
mentioned are known to be so common, that the Devil seeing so plentiful a
Harvest continually flowing in upon him, he would surely be content, if he were
not like a Rich Man, who is never satisfied, but the more he has, the more he
desires. When Men trade to the Advantage of both Parties, it is lawful: but not
when the one designs it to the Loss of the other.

These Rules, and many more relating to them, men might easily see, if they
would but consider: They are so plain. But if men will not look, how shall they
see? And so O how many go blindfold to Hell!

But now let us consider what Men get for their Souls, when they sell them for
worldly Gain.

A Rich Man has a miserable Life: for he is always full of Fear and Care: And
the more he has, the more he wants. And if he lose any part of his Riches, the
Grief of his Loss is far more than the Pleasure of calling it His was while he
had it. And he can eat no more, nor wear with more comfort than a Man who has
but sufficient from Hand to Mouth. Whereas a Man that has but Food and Raiment
with honest Labor, is free from these Fears and Cares, and is not in danger of
such Grief for his Losses: And has the Comfort, that if Sickness disable him
from Labor, the Rich must give him Food and Raiment: which is the highest they
can enjoy themselves.

If a Man have so much that he need not labor with his Hands, he must have a
harder Labor with his Mind, and must break his Rest. While a poor laboring
Man, who has no Expectation of rising higher, labors and rests, and eats and
drinks with Comfort, and sleeps with a cheerful mind, Eccl. V, 12. Indeed if a
Man overdo his Strength by Labor, he is as bad of it as the Rich. He might
better lose what he labors for. For more means to live, and more Honor of
Strength, (the Honor of a Beast, and yet we need it) may be got when more
Health cannot, nor the other if Health be lost. Rest after moderate Labor is a
Pleasure, which those that labor not cannot have: As Eating is made a Pleasure
by Hunger. And indeed, what Pleasure have we in this World (since Sin (...)
spoiled it) but the Removal of Trouble.

If a Man live upon his Rents (a useless Life) and so be free from these Cares;
he has a far worse Life yet, except he take to some profitable Employ suiting
his Station. For men's Thoughts cannot be idle: he must be studying something
to satisfy his mind. If he seek it in Pleasure and Sports, it leaves him
unsatisfied, and his mind worse disquieted than before. He must go to it again,
to ease his uneasy mind, and what does it help in the End? It cannot give the
Contentment which the performance of some profitable Work would give: And being
still discontent, he seeks to please his mind with other Pleasures (...) in
vain. And thus he is laid (...) the worst Lusts that are in his Nature.

And if he seek to satisfy himself with pleasurable Eating and Drinking (the
Happiness of a Beast) he soon suffocates his Appetite and spoils it. So that a
poor unpampered Man has much more Pleasure in his course Food and a Draught of
cold Water, than these can have in all their Dainties.

Yea our Cattle and Hogs and unpampered Horses and Dogs have much more Pleasure
in Eating and Drinking than the best of us have; as appears in the earnestness
for it, and Signs of Pleasure in taking it. So that a Man, whose Portion is in
this Life, is far worse of it, even in this Life, than a Beast: and especially
those that lead a useless Life and live for Pleasure. Beside they are incident
to an hundred Sorrows of Mind which Brutes are not capable of. Thus when Men
brutify themselves, they make themselves much more unhappy than Brutes. Nothing
so honorable, nothing so happy in this World as a useful Life. Eccl. III, 12.

It is a mean fordid Spirit that would live only for himself, (or worse, an
idolatrous Spirit) yet such will be honored, O ridiculous! when there is no
Honor in them. As God is Owner, so he will call us to an Account, not only how
we come by what we have, but how we use it. The rich Man, Luke II.16, 19, 20.
got his Goods honestly, manuring his Land, so there was so much the more in the
Country: but was condemned because he sought no higher use to make of it than
to take his Ease, eat, drink and be merry. This also concerns such as spend
their Plenty (uselesly come by) in chargeable Retinues, and in pampering Horses
and Dogs, and employ and take up the Time of men for their scandalous Honor,
who might be employed in profitable Labor.

Thus it were better for the most of People to be poor, than to be born rich.
For such have, in general, really a more comfortable Life here, and far less
danger as to the next Life. But as Sin is always a Snare to the Sinner; Men who
live not for God, but for themselves, gather Estates for their Children to send
'em to Hell!

Some are of a more manly noble Temper, and it is too mean for them to seek to
satisfy themselves with brutish Pleasures: but seek after Honor, when the
Public Good does not call for it. And these often times work their own Ruin by
it.

But if a Man grow Rich, by honest Industry, it is a great Benefit to the
Public, though he make himself a Slave to do it.

If a Man be poor through Idleness or Extravagance, he is a public Waster, and
brings upon himself Trouble enough in this World: Beside the Account he must
give of every Penny misspent, and of every Hour misspent. And the Land were
better quit of him. But of all men the moderate Laboring Man has the best Life
as to comfort here, and least Obstructions in his Preparations for a better;
Prove. XXX, 8. Except one of these Things befall him: If his Mind be a Torment
to him, (as it is to many, both Rich and Poor, and is the greatest and most
hurtful Trouble Mankind are incident to.) If his Pride be not satisfied in his
low Estate: Or if an unbelieving Distrust of Gods Providence put him into a
sinful disquieted (...) Matthew. VI.32, 33. O (...) and have not wherewith (...)
and fall into the Hands (...) unmerciful Men, who love none but (...) selves,
and make Riches and Revenge their God.

It is a great Benefit to a Country where there are many Rich Men, especially
rich Merchants (but not rich Landlords nor Usurers:) For without these, Goods
cannot so well be exchanged from Country to Country. The People, who pretend
not to the Riches, have the Benefit, and the Merchants the Slavery. Indeed, who
that is wise would desire to be Rich, except it be for Conscience sake? that he
might do the good he sees needed in the Land. I suppose the most will readily
dream this to be their Motive: But how few do show it in their Practice! But
God's Kindness to Men, who are not so kind to one another, makes covetous men
by seeking to gratify their Idol Lust, to do the good they least desired.

He that gains Riches must employ others, who can eat and wear of it as
comfortable as he can himself; which some are too coveteous to allow, and yet
can eat and wear never the better themselves. And perhaps some (especially such
as know not the getting of it) are as profuse for their Dogs and Horses. O what
a Creature is Man!

But what am I doing? If this discourage People from seeking after Riches, it
would be a great Detriment to the Public, if not the undoing of the World. Yet
I have no fear of hurting two Sorts of People by it. Those that make Riches
their God, will not be dissuaded. For a Man will part with any thing, yea every
thing rather than forsake his God. (As it is likewise with those that make some
Faction their God.) And those that make Riches their God, are so very numerous
among us; that I have little Fear of doing Harm in this matter. And as little
Hope of doing such Men good. For as the Eye fixed on a certain thing, is
thereby hindered from the Sight of other things. So the Mind and Heart fixed
upon Riches, can see no Argument against them, nor against the covetous
Interest.

And those that make the Glory of God in doing good, their Motive and Delight,
will not be hindered by it, from a dutiful Industry. So I have no Fear of doing
Harm to these two Sorts of People. But my Fear is of spoiling those that are
good for nothing already: by their taking excuse from it to be idle. Which is
in it self sinful, and renders the idle Person unworthy to eat. 2 Thessalonians.
III.10, 11.

Industrious Labor keeps men's Tho'ts from studying Mischief, is healthy for
the Body, and naturally gives a pleasant Mind, and fit for religious good.
Whereas Want of Employ brings all the contrary Evils. God has not made us to
spend our Time for nothing.

These Things considered, it follows: 1. We need to pity and love Rich Men. To
pity them because of the Troubles and Temptations they undergo. And to love
them, because of the public Benefit we receive by them. Provided they be
merciful Men, and do not make others poorer to make themselves richer: Nor by
their Example in wasting Good on Foppish Pride, tempt Fools to fall to Poverty.

2. Appropriating any public Benefit to particular Men, except full Amends be
made by it to the Public, is unlawful.

3. A selfish Spirit, which rules in almost every one, is a great wrong to
themselves, and every one beside. When there is a public Benefit proposed, if
men cannot find it will be a Benefit to themselves, and no body else, they will
hardly stir in it. And if they see it to be for the good of All, and are
willing to be Sharer in it, they would gladly have others be at the Charge: So
that they will do so little for their part, that it must fall to nothing, and
they that have expended nobly must lose it, and the Public suffer the Want.
How many a noble Design both for Religion and for Temporal Benefits is thus
utterly lost! What Benefit will this be to ME? is all the Argument they can see
into.

4. Of all Men public spirited Men are the only Men worthy of Honor. For no
other Men have any true Honor in them. Yet narrow spirited Creatures who love
none but themselves, do neither regard love or honor 'em the more for it: but
if they can make their own Gain by them they will not leave it. And this their
Thanks!

5. If it were not for coveting Riches, and limiting Industry for private
Advantage, and cherishing foppish Pride, all men might live with much more
Plenty, less Slavery, less Contention, and less undoing one another by the Law.

6. It is the greatest Folly (not to speak of the Wickedness) to seek Riches by
depriving others. Our Life here is like a Journey, and we know not every day,
but that we are come to the End of it. Our temporal Goods are the Food we carry
with us, to live upon in our Journey: which we have no use for at the End of
our Journey. Now the more we carry, the heavyer Load we have: and all the
Company must eat of it (for in this case we cannot eat alone, as aforesaid.)
Now will Men in such a Case pull the Burden from another Shoulders against
his Will? and will men contend who shall carry the heaviest Burden? What Folly
were it for men to contend, who shall have the most Trouble! Yet this men
literally do, Ps. XXXIX, 6. Sin is a Punishment to it self, Psalm. IX, 16. Well
does Solomon so often call wicked men Fools.

7. Here see the Folly, Wickedness and Madness of those who neglect their Souls
for the sake of worldly Gain; to gain more Riches, that is to say, more Trouble
in the World* See Matthew. VI, 24. to the end.

Riches, Honors and Pleasures, with which the Devil baits his Hook (according
to the Temper of those he fishes for) appear to be excellent Food, till they
have it in their Mouth, and then finding a bitter Tang in it, they still hold
the Bait fast (thinking the Fault to be in something else) till the Devil gets
his Hook fast in their Iaws. The Fish taken has no Benefit by the Bait: and
the Soul taken has Trouble by the Bait. Our Soul is of such noble Make, that no
created thing can give it full Satisfaction: and by seeking it in Things
beneath us, men miss of the true Happiness, and are ever turmoiling, and never
can be satisfied. Our Cattle can have Pleasure and Nourishment in their Grass
and Hay, which would choke us to eat, and hinder place in our Stomach for our
proper nourishing Food. But men of a mean sordid selfish beastly Spirit unman
themselves, and will not consider these things, Isai. XLVI, 8. They bring their
Spirits down into the Earth* where their Heart is, and have Reason as if they
had it not: because they will not use it. Oh shameful! 1 John II.28.

8. Riches do not make a Man's Life happy, nor want of Riches, make it unhappy,
Luke XII, 15. A cheerful Mind is the best Comfort upon Earth: And if Grace go
with it, it is the best Happiness upon Earth, 1 Timothy VI.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And a
troubled disquieted Mind is the greatest Misery. Prove. XVIII, 14 And People
punish themselves for their Sins by the Sinfulness of it. A discontented Mind
is very displeasing to God. It was the Sin our first Parents began with: It is
the Root of all Sin, and Cause of all Trouble.

God in his Providence usually shows his Displeasure at it in a particular
manner; and People of a Fretful unthankful disquieted Behavior have usually
many Troubles, Psalm. XVIII, 26.

It is observable that such Families as quarrel and contend much among
themselves, usually come to Poverty or other Ruin, sooner or later. The more
People give way to a discontented Mind, the worse they make it: and by being
troubled for a small Cause, they usually make a great Cause, and by being
troubled without Cause, they make Cause. Thus to ease their Minds of Anger,
they make, cause, and increase it, in themselves and others. To ease their
longing after Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Revenge, or the like; they striving
to obtain it increase the Desire, which makes the Torment the greater: And if
they obtain it, the Desire is so far by this Time increased, that they are no
better satisfied than before. And the Effects are almost all the Miseries that
befall Mankind.

All the Troubles we are incident to in this World, are either in our Body,
such as Sickness, Wounds, Pains, Hunger, Heat and Cold; or in a disquieted
uneasy Mind: Which is no Trouble at all, except the Mind make it so. This is
far more unsupportable than bodily Trouble, and makes bodily Trouble much worse
than it would otherwise be, by suppressing the Spirits etc. Prove. XVIII, 14. (
aforesaid.)

The Mind can make a great Trouble of that which is in it self little or none.
And a thankful Submission to Gods Will can make great Troubles easy; yea make
them no Trouble.

There are these Ways to cure an uneasy Mind: 1. A Stupid Carelessness: but
this would make the Remedy worse than the Disease. 2ly, Faith in Christ, (who
attoned for Sin, that we might be healed) put in Exercise, etc.

A dutiful Industry to divert the Mind, may give some Relief. He that has a
cheerful Mind is a Rich Man.

A Mind disturbed by Desire, Fear, or Anger, deprives men so far of the free
Use of their Reason; and makes 'em act often times to their own Destruction. A
troubled Mind, when sinfully yielded to, wounds the Stomach, Spleen, Vitals, or
Brain: according to the Constitution of the Person; it falls upon the weakest
part. If it fall upon the Stomach, it wounds every part of the Body by it. If
upon the Spleen, it breeds a multitude of melancholy Fancies, imagining the
greatest Trouble where there are none, and makes Mountains of Mole-hills, and
breeds every Distemper in Fancy, and makes the very Anguish of it. And the
Sorrow increases the Disease continually. If it fall on the Vitals, it often
proves mortal. (As some have dyed of Grief, Love, Joy, etc.) If it fall
directly on the Brain, it makes the Person distracted.

It is observable, that many Children, who were promising to be very witty,
being often blamed and faulted, have been discouraged, and their young Brains
were dulled, till they became little better than Dunces all their Life after.
This is the Fruit of an uneasy Mind in their Tutors! Others of a more hardy
Mind, being so often blamed, become hardened to it, till they care not what
mischief they do.

One thing is lawful to be grieved for, and that is, that we have sinned
against God. But while we have the Offer of Christ, it is not lawful to be
discouraged. But Sin leads to all Extremes at once: to be grieved or angry
where we ought not, and to be easy minded where we ought not.

How lovingly, happily and safely might People live in this World, were it not
for that dreadful Judgment for Sin, A discontented or angry Mind! Whence come
Contentions, Thefts, Robberies and Oppressions? but from a discontent at the
State God has set us in, or at the Means he has appointed us to help ourselves
by.

9. When a Man, not moved with Pity nor Conscience, will sue (and with
Law-Charges, undo) men, because they are not able to pay: and the Grief of it
brings upon some of 'em a melancholy Distemper, which (being began, grows upon
'em, and so) makes 'em miserable all their Life after. What is such an Enemy
the better? Can he eat or wear the better? And does he think that God will not
take Vengeance on him for it?

He will say that for Want of the Money he cannot carry on his Designs; which
would be for Public Good. But is it for Public Good to undo men? And was this
his Motive to do it? Was it not rather a Sacrifice to his Idol God Riches? Let
him read his Portion Matthew. XVIII. later end. Will he think to be saved by
Christ, when he will not obey him? When he was so dealt by himself, did he
think it well done? Luke VI, 31. So if I afterward find that I have overdone my
Neighbor in a Bargain. I must make him Amends, if I will be saved by Christ.

And if a Man ow me Money, when I had traded with him with Expectation of
Profit, what Justice is it that a Bondsman, who never had any Thing for it,
should pay it, more than that he shall pay a Husbandman that loses his Crop or
Cattle, or a Merchant that loses his Goods at Sea?

POSTSCRIPT.
FOR a Help against some of these Things (if it may be done without Offense) I
would humbly suggest to our honorable Legislators, the Enacting (some things
which are in Force in some other Places) That he that troubles another with a
Lawsuit without necessary Cause, or puts him to more Charge than needs, shall
pay for his Time and all the other Damages accrued thereby. And if it be made
appear, that he that sues might have had his Money as well without suing; it
shall be deemed that he had sued without Cause. And that he that sued before he
have given timely Warning to prepare the Money (except it were a transient
Person, or there were apparent Danger of his conveying himself or Goods out of
the way) shall be deemed to have sued without cause. And to make Men careful,
not to trust such as cannot pay 'em, That the oldest Debt shall be first paid;
let who will have sued. Unless some such Acts be made, the Country is like to
be undone by Law, (Conscience is so little used) And the Rulers that do it,
will be a Blessing to the Land.

It is impossible for the Laws to provide against all Knavery. If that could
be, there would be no room to know the Difference between honest Men and
Knaves. Therefore it cannot be just to take all we can hold by Law. Yet Men
designed for Damnation look no further. Psalm. XCIV, 20.

If we were so restrained that we could not sin at all, there had been no Room
for a Reward for the Obedient.

But since there are many who prefer their own Imaginary Benefit above Gods
Law, God has appointed the Temporal Legislature to restrain them, so that
honest Men may be able to live: but has not made it possible for such as have
Power of making or executing Laws to prevent all Sin, (lest the End of God's
Law be made void) But it is their necessary Duty to prevent it all they can,
(as they will answer it before God) lest they be found guilty of supporting the
Wickedness, which the only End of their Office is to suppress. Romans XIII, 4.

Note well. The Author when he writ this Discourse, had no Thought that ever
himself should be tormented with the Law Troubles he here declaims against: But
as if an invisible Enemy seeks Revenge, such as never knew of it, do now,
before this comes out, seek to bring upon him all the Law-Miseries he here
labors against.

FINIS.

