ADVICE and CAUTION FROM Our Monthly Meeting AT PHILADELPHIA.
Held the 25th Day of the Sixth Month, 1732, Concerning Children and Servants.

IT is an obvious and known Truth, that next to the Vigilance we ought to have
over our own Conduct, so as to stand accepted in the Sight of God, and to
behave inoffensively and exemplarily toward Men, is the comely and necessary
Care for Posterity, and over our Children.

THIS Care is highly prudent, and an incumbent Duty, in Families, in Schools,
and in Societies; for in general it may be said and expected, That the Morals
and Principles which are first imprinted will be of Duration, and if good, of
great Advantage, since in the Course of Providence, the Children of this Age
are to be the People of the next.

REMARKABLE and grievous is the Depravity of Manners so observable in our
Streets; sorrowful enough is it to see the great Increase of Profaneness and
Lewdness, too generally among the People of late Years, much owing to the
Importation of great Numbers of the vicious and scandalous Refuse of other
Countries. But it is yet more to be lamented by every honest Mind who wish
well, and would contribute all in their Power to the Reputation, Sobriety, and
future Happiness of the Province, and are truly concerned for the Honor of
God, and true Religion, to observe the rude Behavior and vile Language, used
and propogated among the Children almost as soon as they can speak.

AS this is become so public and conspicuous an Evil, it is to be hoped, and
earnestly desired, that the well-minded and sober Inhabitants of all
Persuasions, may use all Diligence, and think of proper Means to redress it,
for the more general the Purpose and Endeavors are, the more easily will the
good End be obtained.

A Concern having been for some Time on the Minds of several Friends, on this
Occasion, this Meeting finds it highly necessary, to make some Essay toward a
Reformation of the Evil. And considering, that it chiefly, and almost entirely
will lie upon the Heads of Families, Parents and Tutors, we recommend the Case
generally to them, and earnestly press and entreat, that they will enter more
deeply and closely into the Thoughts of their Duty, and at proper Times of
Retirement, humbly and earnestly implore the Divine Assistance, and then
diligently and constantly pursue what they find to be such, without Weariness
or Discouragement at the Difficulties or Disappointments they may meet with:
And although much must be left to the Vigilance and Care of those, as Occasion
may call and excite them, yet on the Part of our Community, we for the present
recommend and advise some Methods, which we hope may contribute toward the
desired Effect, and prevent much of the Disorder among our own.

1st, That Parents do not suffer an indiscreet and partial (and as it may prove
ruinous) Fondness, to misguide their Judgments, by hearkening to, and taking
Part with their Children, against the due Correction which their Schoolmasters
or School-Mistresses may use, or the Reproofs and Complaints of them, or other
Friends, for their vicious or evil Behavior, but, that Parents hear with
Temper and Moderation, and where there appears just Cause, join their Authority
for the Reproof or Correction of their Children, avoiding to vindicate or
support them with Resentment; but if they should find any Degree of Vindication
or Excuse to be just, that they do it with Calmness and Prudence, and (unless
the contrary be really necessary) out of the Hearing of their Children.

2d, That Children be kept punctually to the Hours of School, and that at
breaking up, they go directly to their respective Homes: It is desired, that
both Parents, Schoolmasters and School-Mistresses join their Authority and
strict Care in this Respect, which may prevent in good Measure, their falling
into bad Company, and evil Conversation.

3d, That Parents be very cautious and watchful in the Liberties they give
their Children, for Play or Recreation, limitting and obliging them as much as
possible, to Punctuality, as to Time, Place and Company; accustoming them in an
easy free Manner, to render true Accounts thereof; which they will be brought
to do, and to receive Advice and Direction, if managed mildly, and in Love,
without Brow-beating, or striking Terror; unless it be on extraordinary and
proper Occasions.

4th, That Schoolmasters and School-Mistresses do seriously consider the
Calling they undertake, which consists as much in the well forming the Morals
of their Pupils, inculcating Obedience to their Parents and Superiors, and
generally a decent and becoming Behavior, as in a just Care to forward and
improve them in the Literature they profess to teach: Also, that they cause the
Children under their Care, to come to Meetings, and there attend with them,
ordering them at all Times, when there is Room, to sit together conveniently,
so as they may observe their Behavior, taking proper Times in their Schools,
to commend and encourage such as behave soberly and orderly, and to reprimand
and admonish those who behave otherwise.

5th, The great Error of giving Correction rather from their own Passion, than
the Import or Consequence of the Fault, should be carefully avoided both by
Parents and Tutors: Few Things, very few in some Children, require bodily
Correction; willful and habitual Lying, and obstinate Disobedience, seem to be
the main Faults to which that should be applied; to inculcate a Sense of Shame
and Disrepute on the one hand, and a laudable Emulation on the other, is a
beneficial Art in the Instructor.

6th, And whereas it is apparent, that much of the Disorder complained of, is
owing to the great Neglect in wellgoverning and restraining of Apprentices and
Servants, as well as Children; and probably more so, by the unreasonable
Liberties they take, and the ill Example they show to Children: It is therefore
desired and urgently pressed, that such of our Friends as are Masters and
Mistresses, do also consider well their Duty in that Station, especially
toward Apprentices, over whom they, in a manner, stand in the Place of Parents
during their Contract; and both by Example and Precept, earnestly endeavor to
conduct them right in a Sense of Religion, and a sober and orderly Behavior,
which, it may be hoped, will make durable Impressions on them, highly
beneficial in their grown State, and cause them to remember you, and the Time
of their Service with Pleasure and Gratitude.

Let Apprentices and Servants therefore, as well as Children be encouraged to
go to Meetings, especially on First Days, and there to sit soberly and orderly,
and stay the Time; for its observed with Grief, the Liberty taken by those to
ramble and stroll about Streets, and the adjacent Parts of the Town, or gather
into Companies at idle or rude Sports or Games, on the first Days of the Week,
and at other Times when they are not held to Labor or Business, to the great
Reproach of the Place, and highly scandalous to Sobriety and good order; and as
the Magistrates of the City have sometimes used Means to prevent those and the
like Disorders, with a Degree of Success; the resolute Continuance of their
Endeavors is hoped, and it is earnestly desired of all our Friends who are
concerned therein, as Magistrates, Constables, or otherwise, that they
contribute all in their Power, in their respective Stations, to a Reformation
so necessary and laudable; which will make the Care and Endeavors of the Heads
of Families much more easy and effectual.

Signed on Behalf, and by Order of said Meeting, By Israel Pemberton, Clerk


